APOLLO


CLIO


THALIA


TERPSICHORE


POLYMNIA


TUNAIKEION: or, NINE BOOKS of Various History. Concerning Women; Inscribed
by ye names of ye Nine Muses.

Written by Thom: Heywoode.

Aut prodesse solent aut delectare LONDON. Printed by ADAM ISLIP. 1624.

EVTERPE


MELPOMENE


ERATO


URANIA


CALLIOPE
Aut prodesse solent, aut delectare --





TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND MOST NOBLE, EDWARD SOMERSET, Earl of Worcester,
Baron Herbert of Ragland, Lord Chepstowe, Strigull, and Gower, Lord Privy
Seal, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's
Privy Council.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
AFter so long a discontinuance, and neglect of a most acknowledged duty, I
durst not assume that boldness, nor dare I now (without blushing) to appear
before you at this present, did I not bring the Nine Muses, with an Army of
Goddesses and Women, to mediate in my behalf. In these few sheets, I have
lodged to the number of three thousand; who (could they speak) would
undoubtedly inform you, that they were acquired and sought out for no other
reason, than to be exposed to your noble view and most judicial censure. All
which I have charmed with such art, that the fairest amongst them you may admit
into your Bedchamber without suspicion, and the most clamorous into your
Closet, without noise. Amongst the illustrious Queens, your Lordship may read
those whom you have as zealously honored, as you have been by them royally
favored, Q. Elizabeth, and Q. Anne. Amongst the Noble Ladies, memorated for
their incomparable Beauties, or commended to posterity for their admirable
Virtues; think (my Lord) you behold all the unparalleled accomplishments of the
excellent Ladies your Daughters, intended and comprehended: And to whom more
pertinently may I commend the patronage of good women, than to your Honor, who
has been the happy Husband and fortunate Father of such. If you happen of
others in this Tractat contrarily disposed, they are but as Foyles to set off
the luster of the former; for Virtue and Vice, Beauty and Deformity
discovered together, makes the horrid aspect of the one more odible, and the
imitable glory of the other more eminent. Therefore Minerua still thought her
self fairest, when Medusa's Head was present, which was of all others the
foulest. If your Lordship, from your more weighty designs of State, and
grauer Employments, can spare any retired hours, and in them to vouchsafe the
perusal of these few imperfect histories, I shall not only hold my travail
well undertaken, but liberally rewarded. I was (my Lord) your creature, and
(amongst other of your servants) you bestowed me upon the excellent Princess
Q. Anne (to whose memory I have celebrated in these Papers the zeal of a
subject and a servant) but by her lamented death your Gift (my Lord) is
returned again into your hands, being still yours, either to keep unto your
self, or to confer where your noble disposition shall best please.
Howsoever, as I have ever been an admirer of your Virtues, so my prayers still
are, they may not only continue you a lasting Honor here upon Earth, but
purchase you an everlasting Glory, reserved for you in Heaven.

Your poor, yet faithful servant, THO. HEYWOOD.

TO THE READER.
GEnerous Reader, I have exposed to thy most judicial view a Discourse of
Women: wherein expect not, that I should either enuiously carpe at the
particular manners or actions of any living, nor injuriously detract from the
Sepulchers of the dead; the first I could never affect, the last I did always
detest. I only present thee with a Collection of Histories, which touch the
generality of Women, such as have either been illustrated for their Virtues,
and Noble Actions, or contrarily branded for their Vices, and baser Conditions;
in all which, I have not exceeded the bounds and limits of good and sufficient
Authority. Here thou may read of all degrees, from the Scepter in the
Court, to the Sheepe-hooke in the Cottage: of all Times, from the first
Rainebow, to the last blazing Star: of all known Nations, from the North to
the Meridian, and from the East to the Septentrion: of all Faiths; Jews,
Pagans, or Christians: of all Callings; Virgins, Wives, or Widows: of the
Fair and Foul, Chaste and Wanton, of each of these something: Briefly, of all
Estates, Conditions, and Qualities whatsoever. In the Goddesses, and other
Poetical Fictions (which to some Readers may appear fabulously impossible)
you shall find their mystical senses made perspicuous and plain, with the
true intent of the Poets, which was not (as some have dreamed) merely to
transfer Worship and Honor upon Natural Causes, thereby to debar the true
and everliving Creator of his divine Adoration, but rather including in dark
and aenigmaticall Histories, Precepts of Wisdom and Knowledge, least they
should be made too popular, and therefore subject to contempt. The like
Illustrations you shall find in the Nymphs, Graces, Oreades, Driades,
Hamadriades, etc. No seeming Fable being here remembered (though never so
intricate and obscure) which is not made plain and easy. In the Muses, you
shall meet with the first Inuentresses of all good Arts, and Disciplines; in
the Sybills, their divine Prophesies set down at large; in the Vestalls, the
honor due to Chastity; in Queens, how such should bear themselves in their
power, and other Noble Ladies in their obedience. Wives may read here of chaste
Virgins, to pattern their Daughters by, and how to demean themselves in all
Conjugal love toward their Husbands: Widows may find what may best become
their solitude, and Matrons those accomplishments that most dignifie their
gravity: and so of the rest. Now if any ask, Why I have shut up and contruded
within a narrow room, many large Histories, not delating them with every
plenarie circumstance? I answer, That therein I have imitated Aelianus de Var.
Hist. and Valor. Maxim. who epitomized great and memorable acts, reducing and
contracting into a compendious Method wide and loose Histories, giving them
notwithstanding their full weight, in few words. Some also may cavil, that I
have not introduced them in order, neither Alphabetically, nor according to
custom or president; which I thus excuse: The most cunning and curious Music,
is that which is made out of Discords; and Ovid preferres a blunt Carriage and
a neglected Habit above all sprucenesse and formalitie. It may be likewise
objected, Why amongst sad and grave Histories, I have here and there inserted
fabulous Ieasts and Tales, sauouring of Lightness? I answer, I have therein
imitated our Historical and Comicall Poets, that write to the Stage; who least
the Auditorie should be dulled with serious courses (which are merely weighty
and material) in every Act present some Zanie with his Mimick action, to
breed in the less capable, mirth and laughter: For they that write to all,
must strive to please all. And as such fashion themselves to a multitude,
consisting of spectators severally addicted; so I, to an universality of
Readers, diversely disposed. I may be further questioned, Why I have in the
Front of my Book no Encomiasticks, or commendatorie Verses from my friends, to
usher in the Work (especially being so much and so long conversant amongst the
Poets) which is able to discourage a Book, wanting their approbation and
countenance? Let that (I entreat) be no prejudice to my Labors, since I did
not communicate them unto any: And how can any man truly commend what he has
not advisedly perused? Neither do I think I am so little known, or ill
beloved amongst them, that any one would have denied me so small a courtesy.
But being only a matter of form, and neither help nor hinderance to that
which has already past the Press; I expose it naked to the free view, and
unguarded with any such faction of friends; either by the worth thereof to be
commended, and so live; or by the weakness to be disparaged, and so perish.
And these are all the difficulties of which I am now to expostulate, desiring
thee to excuse a sudden Business, which began with the Press, kept it still
going, and ended some few days before it. These things well considered, may in
any generous spirit prevent all Cavil and Criticisme: and to such only I
submit my self.

Thine, who for thy sake desires to be still industrious, T. H.

AN INDEX, OR TABLE, of Nine Books of Various History, only concerning
Women, inscribed by the Names of the Nine MUSES.
The Contents of the first Book, entitled Clio: Treating of the Goddesses
Celestial, Terrestrial, Marine, and Infernal, etc.
A Proeme of the several opinions of all the ancient Philosophers, concerning
the Deity. Fol. 1 Of the Goddesses Celestial, and first of Juno. 5 Of Sybil.
7 Of Venus. 8 Of Minerua. 10 Of Diana. 15 Of Ceres. 16 Of Proserpina. 18 Of
Nemesis. 19 Of Latona. 20 Of Fortune. 22 Of the Goddesses called Selecta. 25 Of
the Goddess Rhaea. 29 Of Isis, or Io. 30 Of Ate. 31 Of Pandora. 32 Of the
Marine Goddesses. 33 Of Amphetrite. ibid. Of Thesis, or Tethies. 34 Of the
Nereides. 36 Of the daughters of Triton. 37 Of the wives and daughters of
Proteus. 38 Of the daughters of Phoreis. 39 Of Scilla and Charibdis. 40 The
Goddesses of Hills, Woods, Grou^s, and Trees, etc. 42 Of the Oreades. 43 The
Driades, and Hamadriades. 44 Of the Goddesses Infernal. 45 Of the Furiae, or
Eumenides. 46 An abstract of all the Fables in the fifteen books of Ouids
Metamorphosis, as they follow in the Poem. 48
The Contents of the second Book, inscribed Euterpe: Treating of the Muses,
Sybils, Vestals, Prophetesses, Hesperides, the Graces, etc.
A Discourse concerning the Muses. 57 Of Clio. 61 Of Euterpe. 63 Of Thalia. 65
Of Melpomene. 66 Of Terpsichore. 68 Of Erato. 70 Of Polymnia, or Polyhimnia. 71
Of Urania. 73 Of Calliope. 74 A discourse of the Sybils. 76 Sybilla Perfica,
and her Prophesies. 79 Sybilla Lybica, and her Prophesies. 81 Sybilla Delphica,
and her Prophesies. 82 Sybilla Cumaea, and her Prophesies. 83 Sybilla Samia,
and her Prophesies. 85 Sybilla Cumana, and her Prophesies. 86 Sybilla
Hellespontiaca, and her Prophesies. 88 Sybilla Phrygia, and her Prophesies. 89
Sybilla Europaea, and her Prophesies. 90 Sybilla Tiburtina, and her Prophesies.
91 Sybilla Aegyptia, and her Prophesies. 93 Sybilla Erithraea, and her
Prophesies. 94 A discourse of the Virgin Vestals. 95 Of Oppia, Cla^dia,
Fonteia, Martia, etc. 97 Of the Prophetesses. 99 The History of a great
Magician. 101 Of the Hesperides. 103 The Pleiades, or Hyades: and why of the
seven Stars but six appear at once. 105, 106 Of the Graces. 106 Of the
Hours. 108 Of Aurora, or the Morning. 109 Of the Night. 112 Of Sleep. 114 Of
Death. ibid.
The Contents of the third Book, inscribed Thalia: Treating of Illustrious
Queens, famous Wives, Mothers, Daughters, etc.
A Discourse concerning Illustrious Women. 118 How kissing first came up. ibid.
Of three gentlemen and their wives. 121 Of Illustrious Queens. 122 A Funeral
Ode upon the death of Anna Panareta. 123 Of diverse Ladies famous for their
Modesty. 125 The wife of Fuluius. 127 Of Aretaphila. 128 Of Pieria, Aspasia,
etc. 130 The memorable History of Odatis. 133 Of Aristomache, Hyppo, and
Chi^mara, etc. 135 Of Tertia, Aemilia, Turia, Sulpitia, Iulia, and Portia. 136
Of Horestilla, Artimesia, and Hormisda. 137 Of Queen Ada and Zenocrita. 138 Of
the wife of Pythes. 139 Of the wife of Nausimenes. 140 Of Ciano, Medullina, and
Erixo. 141 A woman of the city Pergamus. 142 Of Stratonica, Valeria, and
Claelia. 143 Of Olimpias, and the Troades. 144 Of the Phocides, and women of
Chios. 145 Of the Persides, Celtae, Melitae, and Tyrrhaenae. 147 Examples of
Modesty and Magnanimity. 148 Of Dido, Caesara, Gumilda, and Ethelburga. 152
Of Policrita. 154 Of Queens and other Ladies, for diverse Virtues memorable.
155 Of women remarkable for their love to their husbands. 159
The Contents of the fourth Book, inscribed Melpomene: Of Women Incestuous,
Adulteresses, and such as have come by strange deaths.
A Discourse persuading to good life. 163 Of women incestuous, and first of
Queen Semiramis. 165 Of Tagenna, a woman of seventy Cubits high. 167 Of
Pa^iphae. ibid. Of Canace, Canusia, and Valeria Tusculana. 169 Of Iulia the
Empress. ibid. The sisters of Cambises. 170 Of Liuia, Horestilla, Lollia
Paulina, Cesonia, etc. 171 Of Iocasta. ibid. Of Crythaeis, the mother of Homer.
173 An Epitaph upon Homer, Prince of Poets. 175 A strange Incest. 176 Of
Cyborea, mother to Judas Iscariot. 177 Of Veronica. 178 A discourse concerning
Adulteresses. ibid. Of many great Ladies branded with Adultery amongst the
Romans. 181 A country fellow and his mistress. ibid. The water of a chaste
woman excellent for the eyesight. 182 Of Laodice, an unnatural wife. 183 The
birth of Antoninus Commodus. 184 Of Phedima, and a notable Impostor. ibid. Of
Begum, Queen of Persia. 186 Of Queen Olimpias, and the birth of Alexander.
188 The death of Olimpias. 189 Of Romilda, with rare examples of Chastity. 190
Of Ethelburga, with her Epitaph. 191 A merry accident concerning a
Adulteress. ibid. A true modern History of an Adulteress. 192 The wife of
Gengulphus, and diverse others. 196 The History of Elphritha. 198 Of Gunnora,
with other intermixture of History. 200 Of women that have come by strange
deaths. 202 Women that died golden deaths. ibid. Women that died in
Childbirth. 203 Women that suffered Martyrdom. 204 The strange death of
Aristoclaea, Democrita, etc. 206, 207 The Hostlers Tale. 213
The Contents of the fifth Book, inscribed Terpsichore: Entreating of Amazons,
and other women, famous either for Valor or Beauty.
A Discourse whether Valor or Beauty may claim prioritie. 215 Of the Amazons,
their original, etc. 218, 220 Of other warlike women, and those of masculine
Virtue. 224 Examples of Fear. 225 Of Helerna, Camilla, Maria Puteolana, and
others. 226 The race of Hyppomanes and Atlanta. 229 Of other warlike Ladies.
230 A description of the Messagets. 231 Of Zantippe and Mirh^. 233 Of a Sheep
and a Shrow. 234 A trick of an English Skould, etc. 235 Of English Virago's,
and of Joan de Pucil. 236 A discourse of Fair women. 240 Of Fair women. 245
The fair Mistress of Pisistratus. 248 Of Nit^tis. 249 Of Bersa^e. 250 Of the
wife of Candaules. 251 Rowan and Estrilda. 252 The fair Lady of Norwich. 253
Of Calirrhoe, daughter to Boethius. 256 Of the wives of Cabbas and Phaillus,
etc. 257 The daughters of Danaus, and the sons of Aegyptus. 259 Of Manto. 260
The wife of Agetas, etc. 261 A Vicars daughter. 262 A fair witty Wench. ibid.
Of women deformed. 264
The Contents of the sixth Book, inscribed Erato: Treating of Chaste women, and
Wantons.
A Discourse concerning Chastity and Wantonness. 267 Of Mary the blessed
Virgin. 271 Of Petronilla, the daughter of S. Peter, and other chaste Virgins.
273 Of chaste Wives, and first of Penelope. 276 The History of a woman of Casa
Noua. 280 Of Edeltrudis, Editha, and others. 282 Of Wantons. 284 Of common
Strumpets, Concubines, and private Mistresses. 285 Of such as merited the name
of Honest Whores. 286 Of Lais. 289 Of Glicerium, alias Glicera, and others. 293
Of Agathoclea. 295 Of Cleophis. 296 Callipigae, Alogunes, Cosmartidenes, Audia,
etc. 297 Iulia, the daughter of Augustus Caesar. 298 Harlotta, the mother to
William the Conqueror. 300 Of diverse Wantons, belonging to sundry famous men,
Poets and others. 301 Of famous Wantons. 304 Of Mista, and others. 308 Of
Wantons converted. 312
The Contents of the seventh Book, inscribed Polihymnia, or Memory:
Entreating of the Piety of Daughters, Mothers, Sisters, and Wives.
A Discourse concerning Lies, Ieasts, and witty Sayings. 313 Of Pious
Daughters. 319 The love of Mothers to their Children. 321 Friendship betwixt
women. 323 The love of Sisters toward their Brothers. 324 Of Matrimony and
Conjugal love. 327 Times forbidden in Marriage. 328 Ceremonies before
Marriage. 329 Of Contracts. 330 Of Nuptial Dowers. ibid. Of Nuptial Gifts, or
Presents. ibid. Of Nuptial Ornaments, Pomp, Feasts, and Epithalamions, etc.
332 A description of the Bride coming from her Chamber. 333 The Bridegroomes
first appearing. 334 The Nuptial Offering. ibid. The Nuptial Song. 335 The
entrance into their Bedchamber. ibid. Sacred Auguries, and Nuptial Expiations.
337 The Conjugal Love of Women to their Husbands. 339 Of Bawds. 343 Of Age.
345 Of women addicted to Gluttony, or Drunkenness. 346 Of women beloved of
diverse creatures. 349 Of women excellent in Painting, Weauing, etc. 350 Of
women contentious and bloody. 353 Of women strangely preserved from death, and
such as have unwillingly bin the deaths of their Parents. 358 Of Clamorous
women, commonly called Skoulds. 360 Of Tullia, and her sister. 362 Examples of
Patience in women. 363 Variety of discourse concerning women. 364 The
daughters of Apollo. ibid. The Sirens. ibid. Women that have dissembled their
shape to good purposes, or to bad. 365 Women that have changed their Sex. 366
The Contents of the eight Book, inscribed Urania: Entreating of Women every
way Learned: Of Poetresses and Witches.
A Discourse of Astrology. 369 Of famous Astrologians. 370 Of women Orators,
that have pleaded their own Causes, or others. 373 Of women studious in
Divinity. 375 Of women excellent in Philosophy, and other Learning. 377 A
discourse of Poetry. 383 Of women excellent in Poetry. 384 Of Minerua, and
others. 387 Of Sapho. 388 Of Cleobule, Lindia, and other Poetesses. 394 Of
Telesilla Poetria. 396 Of Perhilla, etc. ibid. A discourse of Witches. 399 How
the Devil rewards his servants. 400 The wretched ends of sundry Magicians.
ibid. Several sorts of superstitious Iugling. 401 Of Cyrce, Medea, and other
Witches remembered by the Poets. 403 Of Witches transported from one place to
another by the Devil. 406 Of Witches that have either changed their own
shapes, or transformed others. 409 Lycantropia. 410 A Piper transformed into an
Ass. 411 Other miraculous transformations. ibid. Of she Devils. 412 A Witch
of Amsterdam. 414 A Witch of Geneua. 415 Examples of strange kinds of
Witchcraft. 416 Witches called Extasists. 417 Diverse things to be observed in
Witches. 419
The Contents of the ninth Book, inscribed Calliope: Entreating of Women in
general, with the Punishments of the Vicious, and Rewards due to the Virtuous;
interlaced with sundry Histories.
A Discourse of Death. 419 Of women ravished. 421 Of Handmaids, Nurses,
Midwiues, and Stepdames. 424 The punishment of Incest in the sister of
Leucippus. 429 The punishment of Adultery. 432 Sisters that have murdered
their Brothers. 434 The punishment of Fratricides. 435 Of Mothers that have
slain their Children, and Wives their Husbands. ibid. Punishment due to
Regicides. 436 Punishment of unjust Divorce. 437 Whoredom punished. 438
Loquacitie punished. 439 Lying punished. ibid. Perjury punished. 440
Prodigality and Excess punished. 441 Witchcraft punished. 444 Honor and
Reward due to Fortitude. 449 Honor and Reward due to Temperance. 450 Reward due
to Fertility, or many Children, illustrated in diverse Histories. 451 Of
Beauty, and the Reward thereof. 453 A Conuertite rewarded. 458 Of Cura, or
Care. 462 Rewards due to women Philosophers, Orators, or Poetesses. 463
FINIS TABVLAE.
NINE BOOKS OF VARIOVS HISTORY, ONLY concerning Women: Inscribed by the
names of the nine Muses.
The first book which is CLIO, treating of the Goddesses Celestial,
Terrestrial, Marine, and Infernal.
BEFORE we enter into a particular tractate of these Goddesses, it shall not
be amiss to speak something of the opinions settled in sundry Nations,
concerning them: Who were their first Adorers and Worshippers; the
multiplicitie of their gods; and what several rights, and customs,
observations and Ceremonies they used in their Oblations and Sacrifices. The
Aethiopians are said to be the most ancient, and the first beginners of Divine
adoration, as Diodorus is of opinion; Imagining in themselves, and verily
believing some of their gods to be everlasting, and others to participate of a
mortal and corruptible nature. The Phoenicians, they delivered admirable and
strange things concerning their gods, and the first beginning and Creation of
things; above all others having in Divine worship Dagona and Chamas. The
Atlantides (a people of Africa) they are confident that the generation of the
gods proceeded from them, and the first that reigned amongst them they called
Coelum, which is heaven. The Augitae another nation (in the Affricke Continent)
acknowledged no other deityes than the Ghosts of such noble persons as were
deceased, to whose sepulchers they usually repaired to demand answers of all
such things wherein they doubted. The Theology of the Phrygians was not much
different from theirs. The Persians neither erected Statues nor Altars, they
worshipped the Heaven, which they called Jupiter; the Sun, by the name of
Mithra; the Moon, Venus; the Fire, the Earth, the Winds, and the Water.
Isiodorus says, the Graecians first honored Cecrops, whom they styled
Jupiter, and were the first deuisers of Images, erecters of Altars, and
offerers of sacrifice. The Jews, as Cornelius Tacitus relates, apprehended but
one divine power, and that only they acknowledged. The Germans of old (as the
same author affirms) were of opinion, That the gods could not be comprehended
within walls, nor have any humane shape appropriated unto them, measuring
their incomprehensible power by the magnitude of the heavens. Now concerning
the diverse opinions of men, what this supreme deity should be; some held it
the universe or the gloabe of the world: of which opinion was Origines in his
fifth book against Celsus. The Stoics held it to be the first world; the
Platonists, a second world; and diverse other Sectists of Greece to be a third
world. Thales Milesius called God, a Mind, that fashioned all creatures out of
the water, that knew no beginning, and was not capable of end. Anaxmiander he
ascribed a deity to the stars and the planets, and these celestial bodies,
attributing no honor to that Mind, of which Thales dreamed. Anaximenes, thought
it to be the Infinite air, to which he attributed the Original of all
causes, and derived the birth of the gods from thence; for so Saint Augustine
and Cicero affirms. Democritus Abderites (as Cicero and Arnobius testify of
him) was of opinion, that it was a Mind of fire, and the soul of the world.
Plutarch in the life of Nu^^, sets down Pythagoras his opinion concerning this
godhead, and thus defines it: A Mind still traveling, never out of motion,
but dispersed and diffused through all the parts of the world, and things
natural; from which all creatures whatsoever that are borne take life. Lysis
and Philolaus, call it an unspeakable number, or a summity of the greatest or
smallest number, for so Origines faith. Archelaus Physicus would have all
things to be created of earth, and (as Epiphanius testates of him) the
beginning of all things to proceed from thence. Pherecidas taught that the
earth was before all other things, and therefore to that he appropriated a
divinity, Heraclius Ephesius, contested the gods to be made of Fire; so Varro
writes of him: of the same belief was Hippasus Metapontinus (witness
Simplicius.) Anaxagoras Clazomen called his god Homoeomeria, that is, Likeness
of parts; and that a divine thought was the producter of all things whatsoever:
So Augustine reports of him; others, that he held an infinite Mind to be the
first moouer. Prodicus Coeus, as Epihanius tells us, placed his god in the four
Elements: likewise in the Sun and the Moon; in which two planets there existed
a living virtue. Diogenes Apollonaites derived his god from the Air, as the
matter from whence all things had their reality, as likewise that it did
participate of divine reason, without which nothing could be created. Cleanthes
Assius would have his god of the Firmament, as diverse other of the Stoics.
And as Arnobius witnesses of him, sometimes he called him the Will: now the
Mind: then that part of the air which is above the fire: and sometimes again
the Reason. Straton made Nature his summum bonum. Antisthenes Atheniensis, he
taught that there were many popular gods, but one only Architector of the
fabric of the world. Chrysippus Silix the Stoicke, he taught that god was a
natural power endued with divine reason; and then again, he called him a
Divine necessity. Zeno Citteieus, called him a divine and natural Law; and
sometimes the Firmament. Zenophanes Colophonius called him, Whatsoever was
infinite in a conjoined mind, or one universal and every thing that (as
Theophrastus says of him) he imagined to be god. Parmenides Eliates, called
him fantasme, or an apprehension of an Imaginary thing, something resembling a
crown; which the greeks call Stephanos, containing within it a fiery light, an
orb, or girdle which compasses and embraces the heavens: adhearing to his
fantasy were Cicero and Simplicius. Empedocles Agrigentinus, he would have
four natures of which all things should subsist, and these he taught to be
divine: as also, that they had birth, and should see end; for so Cicero writes
in his book de natura deorum. Theodorus and Epiphanius speak of one Theodorus
surnamed Atheos, the Atheist: He affirmed the gods to be mere toys, and not
worthy of divine honors that would persuade men by their examples to theft,
perjury, and rapine. Protagoras Abderita was of opinion, That it was not
lawful to inquire concerning the gods, whether they were or were not, or of
what nature and quality. Xenocrates Chalcedonius made eight gods, in the
wandering stars the number of five, in the whole number of the planets one, a
seventh in the Sun, an eight in the moon. Plato Atheniensis went more
divinely to work; who taught that it is neither the air, nor reason, nor
nature, but that there is one only God by whom alone the world was fashioned,
and made persect, and miraculous. Zenophon Socraticus held argument, That the
form of the true God, was not visible, and therefore his essence not lawful
to be sought into. Ariston the Stoicke affirmed, that God might be comprehended
within his own substance. Aristotle proposed, That one Mind governed the whole
world, and that it was the prime and principal cause of all things. Speucippus
constituted a natural living power, by which all things were governed, and
that he styled a deity, for so Arnob. in his eighth book reports. Alcmaeon
Crotoniates did attribute a deity, to the Sun, the Moon, and the rest of
the Planets; in his ignorance (as Cicero speaks of him) giving immortality to
things merely mortal. Ecphantus Siracusanus, as Erigines relates of him,
imagined the divinity to exist in the mind and soul. Brachmanae, (who were
the Indian wise men, or Sophoi) called it the Light; but not as the splendor
of the Sun, or Air, but the light of reason; by which wise and understanding
men might enquire i^to the dark and mystical secrets of nature. Lactantius
and Cicero, say that it was the opinion of the Stoics, for the most part, That
this isntrumental power was a divine substance, intelligeable and ayerie, but
wanting form; yet to be transhapt, or made like to whatsoever it best pleased
it self. The same Philosophers attributed a god-hood to the stars and all
other celestial bodies. Heraclides Ponticus, thought the World and the Mind,
both divine, and was of opinion that this form of the deity was mutable,
reducing the earth and the heavens within the compass of Godhead. Epicurus
Atheniensis, he made him gods of Atoms of Moates, allowing them bodies
differing from men, but bearing human form. M. Terentius Varro, supposed him
to be the soul of the world, and the world it self to be god. Cicero defines
him thus, a certain pure and free mind separate from all mortal commixtion,
ever moving, and all things knowing; and Origines adhering to the opinion of
Exilneus, concludes, that the gods are ever during, not subject to corruption,
and yet altogether without providence. But least I should grow tedious in the
search of so many diverse opinions, which to some may appear impertinent to
the tractate in hand, yet not altogether unnecessary to such who have not
traveled in the search of these Antiquities; I will come nearer to the matter,
and to speak of the goddesses, as we promised. Hesiod has left to memory,
that there are no less than thirty thousand gods within the compass of the
world, and every one have several predominance over men, beasts, fish, fowls,
and all other creatures vegetative and sensatiue. Tertullian he speaks of
three hundred Jove's or Jupiters counted by M. Varro. Therefore it was not
permitted amongst the Romans, to adore any other gods or goddesses than such
as were approved and allowed by the Senate. In the books of the high Priest it
was thus written, Let no man bring in an innovation of any new gods, or aliens,
to be privately adored, unless they be publicly approved: only such as have
from antiquity been held Celestial, and unto whom Temples and Alters have
been consecrated: let none else have divine worship. The Heathen of old
amongst their goddesses, counted these, P^dicitia, Concordia, Men's, Spes,
Honor, Clementia, and Fides: that is, Bashfulnesse, Concord, the Mind, Hope,
Honor, Clemency, and Faith. Pliny writes of a Temple in Rome, dedicated to
Honor. Certain living creatures and other things were in the old time
reverenced as gods. The Trogloditae (as the same author testifies) worshipped
a Tortoise. The Egyptians had in honor, ga^licke, and onyons; they have the
Crocodile likewise in divine adoration, to whom they offer sacrifice, but the
Ombytae chiefly a people of that country, by whom he is held most sacred; and
if it so happen that their children be by him devoured, the parents rejoice,
imaginiug they are specially beloved of the gods, that are thought worthy to
beget food to please their appetits. Serpents are honored by the Phoenicians.
In Gade^a a city of Spain, two Temples were erected; the one to Age, the
other to Death: to one as the mistress of Experience: to the other, as a quiet
harbor or cessation from all miseries and calamities. In other cities were the
like instituted to Poverty, and to Fortune: lest the one should afflict them,
and that the other should favor them. Floods likewise and rivers were esteemed
as deities, some portraide in the figure of men, and others in the semblance of
beasts. Amongst the Lacaedemonians as Plutarch relates, Temples were edified,
one to Fear, another to Laughter, a third to Death. The Aeyptians worshipped
the Sun and Moon, the Goddess Ibis, a cat, an eagle, and a goat. The
Syrians adored a dove: the Romans a goose, by reason that by cackling of geese
the Capital was preserved from the sack. Amongst the Thessalians it was held
an offense Capital to kill a Storke. Those that inhabit the Island Syrene,
honor the fish called Pharos: those that dwell in Moeotis, the fish Oxiringus:
In Ambracia, a Lioness, because in times past a Lioness ceased upon a Tyrant
and tore him to pieces; by which they were restored to their ancient liberties.
Those that live by Delphos, a Wolf, who by scraping up the earth discovered a
great quantity of gold buried, and till then concealed. The men of Samos, a
Sheep; the Argiues a Serpent; the Islanders of Tenedos, a Cow with calfe;
after whose conception they tender her as much service, as to a woman young
with child. A Dragon in Alba (a grove iuft opposite against Iunoes Temple) was
honored by the Spartane virgins: to which at certain times they went, and
fed him from their hands. The Aeyptians had Aspes likewise in great worship,
which they fostered and brought up together with their children. The Thebanes
honored a Sea-Lamprey. There were gods called Medioxum dei, or middle gods: of
which Plautus in his Cistellaria makes mention, Ita me dij deoeque superi, et
inferi and mediorum; as the gods and goddesses supernall or infernal, or those
betwixt them both, etc. He speaks likewise of Dij potellarij, such as had
power over the dishes that were used in sacrifices: to which Ovid has
reference in this verse, Fert. Missos Vestae pura patella cibos: The clean
platter presents those cates sent to Vesta. And Plautus in another place, Dij
me omnes, magni, minuti, and patellarij, etc. There be others called Semones;
who have domination over as much as lies open from the middle region of the
air to the earth, and they are called by us semi-dei or halfe-gods: Fulgentius
calls those Semones, that for the poverty of their desert are not worthy a
place in the heavens: Amongst whom he reckons Priapus, Hippo, and Vertumnus. In
Italy there were diverse others called Dij municipates, as belonging to private
men in cities, not called into any public office; as amongst the
Crustuminians, Delventinus; amongst the Narnienses, Viridiarius; amongst the
Astrulanians, Ancharia; amongst the Volcinienses, Nortia. But now of the
Goddesses in order.

Of the Goddesses, Celestial: and first of IVNO.
IVNO is the daughter of Saturn, the Queen of the gods, and chief of those
that are called Celestial. The wife and sister of Jupiter, Goddess of Power
and Riches, and soueraignesse of marriage, and all conjugal contracts. The
Festiualls kept in her honor, were called Herea, which was a n^me appropriated
to her own person: so Enneus says, as Cicero cites him in his first book of
offices, Vos ne velit an me regnare Hera? Will the mistress have you to reign,
or me? where some take Hera for fortune. One of her Priests, as Virgill
testates, was Calibe, of whom he thus speaks.

Fit Calibe Iunonis anus templique sacerdos.
The old woman Calibe was priest in Iunoes Temple. Ovid in his 2. book
Metamorph. nominates Alcinoe.

Ante tamen cunctos Iunonis templa colebat,
Proque viro (quinullus er at) veniebat ad Aras.
Alcinoe before the rest did Iunoes Temple grace:
And for a man (for men were none) had at her altar place.
She was honored most in the City of Carthage, the chief city of Africa:
of which Virgill in his first book Aeneiad. thus speaks: Quam Juno fertur
terris magis omnibus vnam
Post habita Coluisse, Samo --.


Which only (says he) Juno is reported to prefer before all other countries,
even Samos it self. Statius in his first book Theb. says that she was much
honored in the city called Prosimna: but in Samos (an Island compast in with
the Icarian sea) she was chiefly celebrated, as said to be there nourced in
her infancy. In Argos and Micene, two chief cities of Achaia she was
likewise much honored, as their Queen and Patroness, for so Horace affirms
lib. 1. Carmin. Ovid in his 6 book De fastis says, that the people called
Phalisci, have her in great adoration, calling them Iunonicol^, as those that
honor Juno. Of her chastity, majesty, her brawling and chiding with Jupiter,
her revenge upon his strumpets and bastards, diverse things have been diuersely
commented, of which I will insist upon some few. Juno having in suspicion
Semele the daughter of Cadmus and Hermione to have been often prostituted by
Jupiter, she changed her self into the shape of her nource Beroe, persuading
her that she should beg of him, That he would grace her so much as to lie with
her in the same state and majesty, with which he bedded Juno* that as his
power and potencie was great above all, so her embracings and wantonnings might
be remarkable above others: which he unwillingly granting, and she as
unfortunately obtaining, was the occasion that she with her palace were both
consumed in his fires and thunders.

It is related of Juno further, that when she and her husband being reconciled
and pleasantly discoursing, held argument betwixt themselves, Whether in the
act of generation men or women took the greatest delight? and that by joint
consent their controversy was to be determined by Tyresias (one that had been
of both sects:) Tyresias giving up his censure, That women were by nature the
most wanton; her sport turned into spleen, and her mirth into such madness,
that she instantly bereaved him of his sight, and struck him blind: to
recompense which loss, Jupiter inspired him with the spirit of Divination and
Prophecy; to which, her continnued anger further added, That howsoever he
truly prophesied, yet his presages should never be believed.

Alcmena too, growing great of Hercules, and ready to be delivered, she
taking on her the shape of a beldame, sat her down before her own altar with
her knees crossed, and her hands clutched, by which charm she stopped the
passage of her childbirth; which Gallantis espying, and aprehending (as it was
indeed) that to be the occasion why her lady could not be delivered, she
bethought her of a craft to prevent the others cunning; for leaving Alcmena in
the midst of her throws, she assumes a counterfeit joy, and with a glad
countenance approaches the altar to thank the gods for her Ladies safe
delivery: Which Juno no sooner heard, but up she rises and casts her arms
abroad; her knees were no sooner vncrost and her fingers open, but Alcmena was
eased, and Hercules found free passage into the world. Gallantis at this
laughing, and Juno chasing to be thus deluded, she afflicted her with an
unheard off punishment by transhaping her into a Weesill, whose nature is to
kindle at the mouth; that from the same jaws with which she had lied to the
gods about Alcmenaes childbearing she should ever after bring forth her young.

No less was her hatred to all the posterity of Cadmus: for when Agaue had
lost Penthaus; and Antinoe, Acteon; and Semele had been consumed by Jove's
thunders; and there remained only two, Athames and Ino, she possessed them both
with such madness, that he being on hunting, transpierst his son Learchus,
mistaking him for the game he chased; and Ino snacht up young Melicertes and
with him cast her self down headlong into the Sea, from the top of an high
promontorie. But at the intercession of Venus, who was borne of the waves,
Neptune was pleased to rank them in the number of the Seagods, so that
Melicertes is called Palemon; and Ino, Leucothoe. I could further relate of
many other poetical Fables, as of Ixion, who entertained and feasted by
Jupiter, attempted to strumpet Juno, and adulterat the bed of Jupiter; which to
prevent, and shun the violence of a rape, she fashioned a Clowd into her own
similitude and semblance, which Ixion mistaking for Juno, of that begot the
Centaures. As also, the birth of her son Vulcane, and her daughter Echo; he
lame, and she so deformed, that being ashamed to show her self or appear to
the eyes of any, she has so conceald her self in thick woods and hollow
vaults and cauernes, that never any part of her could ever yet be discovered
more than her voice.

Yet to show that in all these seeming fables golden meanings were intended, I
will briefly thus illustrate them: Juno was therefore called the daughter of
Saturn, because the world was created by God, the great worke-master of
Nature. Then, in his course was Time borne; from thence, Either, which is,
whatsoever is above the Element of Fire, the Firmament, or the Sky; and next
that, the Elements: The highest next Jupiter is Aer, namely Juno, the
moderatresse of the life of man, by whom the treasures of rain and hail are
disposed and governed: of the Air waxing hot, are generated creatures, trees
and plants, etc. whose temperature has an influence in the bodies and minds
of reasonable creatures: therefore when from water Aer is next begot, she is
said to be nourisht by Oceanus and Thetis; when the force of the Element works
with the Aer in the procreation of creatures, she is then said to be the wife
of Jupiter: when she is changed into fire, then she brings forth Vulcan: when
the benignity of the air has cooperation with such things as are generated,
she is then styled the goddess of marriage. So likewise it is said of Ixion,
that for attempting the bed of Jupiter he was from heaven cast down into hell;
which some would bring within the compass of history: But that he is there
tortured upon a wheel incessantly turning round, must needs include morality.
Most probable it is that Ixion disgraced and banished from the court of that
king whose wife he had sought to adulterat, was thereby made of all men the
most wretched and miserable, as one excruciated with perpetual ambition and
envy: for such as under the imaginary Idea of virtue apprehend the realitie
of vain glory, they can attempt nothing good, nothing sincere or lawdable,
but all their actions are criminal, irregular and merely absurd; importing
thus much, That their estates can have no continuance, that by sinister and
indirect courses seek to clime to the height and crown of glory.

CYBELE.
SHe is the wife of Saturn, and is called the mother of the gods. Her Chariot
is drawn with Lions. To her, Ida and Dindimus (two mountains of Phrygia) wear
sacred, whereupon Virgill says, Alma parens, Idaea deum cui Dindima sacer.


From that place she is called Dindimene, by Martial.

Non per mistica sacra Dindimenes.
Not by the mystical oblations of Cibele.
In Phrygia the ministers of this goddess, called Galli, kept certain feast
days in her honor, after the manner of Fencers or Gladiators, contending
amongst themselves even to the shedding of much blood; which when they saw to
flow plentifully about their heads and faces, they ran to a certain flood
not far thence, sacred to the goddess, and in that washed both their wounds
and weapons: the like did the Romans in Almo, a river near to Rome, the
eleauenth of the Calends of April, which Valerius Flaceus remembers: Sic vbi
Migdonios Planctus sacer abluit Almo:
Letaque iam Cybile --
Where Almo, the Migdonian knockes laues off,
And Cybele now rejoices --


Reate (as Sylius says) a city in Vmbria, is sacred to her, so is Berecinthus
a mountain in Phrygia, of whom she takes the name of Berecinth^a. Apuleius,
lib. 11. calls her Pesinuntica of Pesinuntium a city amongst the Phrygians.
Ovid in his Metamorp. amongst her priests, reckons up Alphitus: and Virgill in
his 11 book, Choreus. Melissa was a woman priest, of whom all that succeeded
her were called Melissae. Plutarch in Mar. nominats one Barthabaces, Per ea
tempora, etc. About those times came Barthabaces priest to the great mother of
the gods, saying she had spoken to him in her Temple, and predicted victory.
This Cibele is likewise called Vesta, and Rea. The rights of her sacrifices
performed in her honor Ovid in his Fastis thus expresses: Of old with
tincling sounds, did Ida ring,
But weakly, as young Infants cry or sing.
Some beat their Bucklers, some their empty caskes;
(For this, of Cibeles Priests, the labor asks)
The mysteri's conceald: yes still remains
An imitation of those ancient Strains.
Cimbals for Helmes; for Targets, Timbrils play,
The Phrigian Pipe still sounds, as at that day.


Her priests were called Curetes, and Coribantes; as also Idaei Dactili, who
like madmen wagging their heads and playing on Cimbals ran about the streets,
provoking others to do the like: They came from Ida in Phrygia into Creete, in
which Island they called a hill by the name of Ida.

The Poets (who in their Fables hid all the mysteries of learning, as the
Egyptians in their Hierogliphicks) by the mother of the gods, would have us
thus much understand, That when they meant to signify to our apprehensions,
that the earth, as the stabilitie of the world, and firmament of all natural
bodies, from whence all things borne had beginning; they therefore call Cybele
or Vesta the mother of the gods, and to her sacrifices brought all the first
fruits of the earth as due to her. Further to express the nature of the earth,
many things have from antiquity been remembered touching her: for Rhea
signifies the force or strength of the earth who passes and shifteth, piercing
into the generation of things.

VENUS.
SOme report her to be borne of the Nymphe Dione, daughter to Oceanus and
Thetis: Others, that she was borne of the foame or froath of the Sea. She is
the goddess of Love, the wife of Vulcan, the sweet heart of Mars, the mother
of Cupid and the Graces; She goes armed with Torches, and bound about with a
marriage girdle. Her chariot is drawn by Swannes, as Iunoes with Peacockes, as
Ovid in his tenth book Metamorph.

-- Iunctisque per Era Cignis
Carpit itur --.
With yoaked swannes she travels through the air.
The like witnesses Horace, Statius, Siluius, and others. The places to her
most sacred, were Amathus, an Isle in the Sea Aegeum, of which she took the
name of Amathusa or Amathusis. She was honored in Cyprus; and especially in
Paphos, a city of that Isle: likewise in Memphis where she had a Temple: of
Cyprus she had the denomination of Cypria, Cypris, and Cyprigena: of Paphos,
Paphia; of Gnydos, Gyndia. Pliny reports that Praxitiles was nobilitated for
his grauing of Marble, but especially for the Statue of Gnidian. Venus. The
Idalian woods, the Ciclides, and the hill Cythera were to her sacred. Of Erix a
mountain in Sicilia she was called Erecina: as Horrac. Carmin. lib. 1.

Sieve tu mauis Erecina ridens.
Concerning her love to Mars, and his mutual affection to her, it is frequent
amongst the Poets: only I will introduce Ovid in his second book de art
Amandi: Fabula narratur toto notissima Coelo,
Mulciberi capti Marsque, Venusque dolis, etc.
This Tale is known to all and spoken still,
Of Mars and Venus took by Vulcans skill:
The god of war does in his browe discover,
No more a frowning soldier, but a lover.
To his demands what could the Queen oppose?
Cruel, or hard? alas, she is none of those.
How often the wanton would deride his trade!
Polt-foot; and hard-hand, black with Cole-dust made.
He Is pleased to see her imitate his pace:
What ere she does, her beauty seems to grace.
At first their meetings they concealed with shame,
None to their bashful sins could scarce give name.
The tell-tale Sun (who can deceive his sight?)
Sees, and to Vulcane does of all give light.
Oh Sun, what bad example have thou lent?
Ask her a bribe; she has to give content,
So thou will secret be. Vulcane down sits,
And his obscure wyres to the place he fits:
The work so fine, that it beguiles the eye,
About their bed, he placed them, low, and hye.
He makes as if to Lemnos he would scour,
The lovers keep appointment just at th'houre;
And caught together in his wierie snare,
Naked and fast bound Mars and Venus are.
He calls the gods to witness, they are spide;
Soft hearted Venus scarce her tears can hide:
Their hands to veil their cheeks they cannot git,
Or shodow that which to behold's unfit.
One of the gods said smiling, If they be
Tedious, good Mars* bestow thy bonds on me.
Scarce at thy prayers, oh Neptune, they are untied;
Mars hasts to Creete, to Phaos Venus hi'de:
What by this cott'st thou Vulcane? what they two
Before with shame did, now they boldly do.
Their lusts it did encourage, not assuage;
And thou have since repenced of thy rage.


Of her love to Adonis, the incestuous issue of Mirrha and her father Cyniras;
how he was slain of the boar, and how his blood was turned into a purple
flower by the power of the goddess: her doting upon Anchises, the father of
Aeneas; it might appear superfluous to insist upon. Therefore to avoid all
prolixitie, I will briefly come to the mysteries included.

Because some creatures are borne of corruption, Moral.
and others by copulation, the Poets by Venus would illustrat what is requisite
and convenient to both: To those which are bred of corruption, the mediocritie
of heat, and clemency of the heaven is very necessary to their breeding.
Again, to those that are begot by conjunction, male with female, most
convenient is the temperature of the air, for the matter of generation being
of the most subtle part of the blood, it acquires a moderat heat, which is
chiefly helped by the Spring: for the temperature of the Spring is called the
baude to all procreation: and therefore the ancient writers, to express the
matter of the seed, and moderation of the air (both necessarily to meet in
the appetite of generation) have fabulated, That Venus was borne of the
generatiue parts of Heaven, as also of the Sea: For these parts, are the
mediocritie of heat by motion, which is useful and necessitous in the
begetting of all creatures whatsoever.

MINERVA.
SHe is likewise called Pallas, borne of the brain of Jupiter; she is the
goddess of Wisdom, Discipline, and Arms, and therefore called Bellona; and
therefore translated into the number of the gods, because the invention of
arts and sciences are attributed to her. The places celebrated to her deity,
were Ithinas a hill near to Athens, where she had a Temple errected; the
mountain Pireas, in Attica; in Aracinthus, a place in Aetolia, from which (as
Statius writes) she was called Aracinthia. Pliny says that Nea, one of the
Islands called Ciclades, was peculiar to her. But Athens was her place of most
honor, which city she is said to have built: From thence she has the name of
Athnaea, Attica, Cecropia, and Mosopia: Horace Carm. lib. 1. The great city
called Alcomeneum, situate in Boetia, has likewise by the testament of the
first founder submitted it self to her patronage. Of Scira, a prophet of
Elusina, she was called Sciras. The solemnisation of her feastiuals were
called Panathenea. There were certain wreastling contentions, which Theseus in
Athens first instituted to this goddess, as Plutarch has delivered. She had
likewise her Quinquatria yearly celebrated, which were kept sacred five days
after the black day, (and therefore so called) the black day was immediately
after the Ides. In her sacrifices it was their custom to offer a Goat, because
as Pliny has left recorded, The biting of the goat is prejudicial to the
Olive tree, whose fruit Minerua best loves; the very licking of the rind
with their tongues makes it barren. She slew the beast Alcida, a monster that
from his mouth and nosthrils breathed fire. Aelianus writes, that when
Alexander brought his army against Thebes (amongst many other prodigies) that
the image of Minerua, surnamed Atalcomineides was burnt by a voluntary flame,
no fire being near it. At Assessum she had two Temples: from that place she
was called Minerua Assessia. From other places where she was worshipped, she
took the name of Pallenides and Pedasia: Alea from her temple amongst the
Tegeates. Tutelaris she was called by the inhabitants of Chios, and honored as
an Oracle amongst the Egyptians; she had only a porch amongst the Seians. In
some places her statues were covered with gold, in others they were of plain
stone. She had a Temple in Sigeum: three others, Sciradis, Aegis, and Crastiae:
she was by some called Minerua Vrbana, and Minerua ^sliadi. Herodotus writes
that when Xerxes transported his army into Greece, passing by Troy and being
perusing the antiquities thereof; upon his departure thence, at the altar of
Minerua, he sacrificed a thousand oxen in one day. Many things are fabled of
her by Poets, as of her contention in weauing, with Arachne, which I purposely
refer to her story as it falls in course. She is the Hierogliphick of
Wisdom, and therefore the Poet Martianus writes that she was borne without a
mother, because that in women there is scarce any wisdom to be found. In a
Hymn upon Pallas he is thus read: Hanc de patre ferunt, sine matris saedere
natam;
Prouida consilia, quod nescit curia matrum.
Of father therefore, without mother borne;
Because learned courts, the women's counsel scorn.


The Maclies and the Auses, are two nations that border upon the spacious Fenne
Tritonides: Their virgins in the yearly feast of Minerua, in celebrations of
their rights to the goddess, divide themselves into two armies, and fight one
part against the other, with stones, clubs, and other weapons of hostility:
such as perish in the conflict, they hold to be no true and perfect Virgins,
because not protected by the goddess: But she that has borne herself the
most valiant in the conflict, is by common consent of the rest, richly adorned,
and beautified with the best armor, according to the manner of the Greeks,
her head beautified with a Corinthian crest or plume, and seated in a Chariot
drawn through the Tritonian Fenne. They have it by tradition, that Minerua was
the daughter of Neptune and the Fenne before named, and being reproved by her
father, she took it in such scorn, that she utterly rejected him and gave
her self to Jupiter, who adopted her his daughter. Zale^cus when he commended
his laws to the ^ocrenses, to make them the better observed by the people,
told them, Minerua had appeared to him, and did dictate and propose to him
whatsoever he had delivered to them. The most famous of Poets, Homer, he made
Minerua a companion with Ulysses in all his travels; in whom he personated the
most wise man amongst the Grecians, who freed him from all dangers, labors,
and ship-wreckes, and brought him in safety to his Country, Parents, Queen,
Son, and Subjects: thereby intimating, That by Wisdom and Knowledge all
difficult things may be easily undergone. This is that winged horse Pegasus, by
which Perseus subdued so many monsters. This is that shield of Pallas, to
which the Gorgons head being fastened, turns the beholders to stone, amazing
the ignorant and unlearned. Agreeable to this is Homers first book of his
Odissa, the argument I give you thus in English: Odissa. lib. 1.
Pallas by Jove's command from heaven discends,
And of the Paphian Mentor takes the shape,
In which she to Telemachus commends?
Such Greeks as from revenging Hellens rape
Were home returned, Nestor amongst the rest,
And Menelaus; urging him to inquire
Of them, who in the wars at Troy did best?
And whose heroic acts did most aspire,
But of Ulysses, chiefly to learn news,
What course he takes, or what attempt pursues.


Again in the second book. Perioch. 2.


Unknown to fierce Antinous and his mates,
Telemachus from court in secret steals,
On him Jove's daughter, bright Minerua, waits,
And taking Mentors shape her self conceales.
He by the goddess Vrgence, straight prepares
For such a voyage, instantly providing
All needful helps, apt for such great affairs.
Their ship made ready: unto Pallas guiding
He trusts himself: by help of sail and care,
They put to sea, and loose the sight of shore.
Perioch. 6.
Ulysses suffering ship-wrecke, and cast naked upon the shore of Pheacus, he
was assisted further by her, as follows in the sixth and seventh arguments.

The wearied Greek, all naked steps on shore,
Whether Nausiaca discends to play,
With other Virgins, as it was before
Their custom: up the Greek starts spying day,
With a fair flock of Ladies him beside;
Up by the roots he tears the herbs, and grass,
Thinking with them his nakedness to hide;
And so proceeds unto the queenelike less.
Pallas his patroness, moves her to pity,
She gives him both her chariot and attire,
So to Mineruas Temple, near the city,
He Is proudly drawn, guarded by many a squire:
Thus in her altars sight, being lodged that night
He strives with insence Pallas to requite.
Minerua takes a Virgins shape upon her,
Perioch. 7.
And to the city first Ulysses brings.
But after, to aspire him to more honor,
Into the Palace (the ancient seat of kings.)
Arete, wife to Alicinous, first demands,
Where he received those garments, and what fate
Brought him that way? the Princess understands
The utmost that Ulysses can relate.
Therefore the Queen accepts him as her guest,
The night persuades, they part to several rest.
In all his negotiations and travels, Pallas was still his assistant, for
Wisdom never forsakes any man in necessities: in so much, that after he had
freed his court of his wives unruly suitors, having slain them all, and was now
peaceably possessed of his kingdom, she was still constant to him in all his
extremities. Which I will conclude with the four and twentieth argument of
Homers Odisse, and the last book.

Tartaream vocat in sedem Cillenius vmbras.
The mutinous Ghosts of the sad wooers slain:
Mercury forces to the vaults below,
What Time th'heroick spirits, thronging complain,
That Agamemnon should be murdered so,
These being young men of chief beauty, and age,
Why they so press in heaps demand the cause:
And are resolved, amongst whom Ulysses sage,
And chaste Penelope, gain much applause;
Especially from Agamemnons ghost,
Who had to him a fate much contrary;
Yet whom in life he had respected most.
Mean time Ulysses (that much longed to see
His father^ old Laertes) freely tells
His fortunes, dangers, trauells, misery,
Both foreign and domesticke; what strange spells,
Witchcrafts, and ship-wracks, had so long detein'd him
From his grave Father, and his constant Queen,
And to what dyrefull exegents constrein'd him;
In what strange coasts and climats he had been.
By this, the Fathers of the Suitors dead,
(Grieuing their Sons should so untimely fall)
Take counsel, and against th'Ithacan make head:
These he opposes, and repells them all;
But gathering new supplies, by Jove's command,
Pallas from heaven descends t'attone these iarres,
To free all foreign forces from the land,
And by her wisdom compromise these wars.
By his decrees, and her own wisdom guided,
Arms are surceast, all difference is decided.
Pallas has been often inuocated by the Poets, but amongst infinite I will
only instance one, and that for the elegancie. Homer in his long
peregrination through Greece and other countries, sometimes by sea, and
sometimes by land, and by the reason of his blindness groaping his way, he
happened to pass by a place where Potters were at work, and setting such
things as they had newly molded, into their furnace: who finding by his harp
(for he seldom traveled without it, being one of the best means he had to
get his living) that he had some skill in Music, entreated him that he
would play them a fit of Mirth, and sing them a fine song; which if he would
do, they would give him so many small pots and necessary drinking cups for
his labor, vayles that belonged to their trade. The conditions were accepted;
and he presently to his harp sung this extemperoll dittie, called Caminus, or
Fornax.

Oh Potters, if you will give to me that hyre
Which you have promised, thus to you I Will sing:
Descend, o Pallas, and their brains inspire,
And to their trade thy best assistance bring,
That their soft chalices may harden well,
And their moist cups of clay wax brown and dry;
This being done, they may with profit sell,
And customers from all parts come to buy,
Not to the market only, but even here
Where they be forged and burnt: so shall it be
When I am pleased, and you have sold them dear,
Profit to you, and covenant with me.
But if you mock me, and my meede deny,
All hydeous mischiefs to this furnace throng,
May those gross plagues that thicken in the sky,
Meet at this forge, to witness this my wrong.
Hither rush Smaragus, and with him bring
Asbetes and Sabactes: quench their fire,
Oh Pallas, 'bout their rooms their models fling,
On Oven, shop, and furnace vent thine Ire:
Else let Omodomas with too much heat
Crack all their vessels, and their art confound,
Pash all their works to mammocks, I entreat;
Pull furnace, forge, harth, house, and all to ground,
That they may bruise together in their fall,
(Whilst all the Potters quake) with such a ruin,
As when huge masts are split and cracks withal,
The warring winds, the sea-mans wrack pursuing.
In such a tempest let the chimneyes shatter,
And the vast frame within his basses sink:
Whilst 'bout their ears the tyles and rafters clatter,
That all their pipkins, steanes, and pots for drink,
And other uses, may be crasht to powder;
And so convert again into that mire
Whence they were forged. Or if a horror louder
May be devised, here vent thy worst of Ire.
Else let that Circe.
Witch that calls Apollo father,
Who can from hell the blackest furies call,
All her infectious drugs and poisons gather,
And sprinkle them on worke-men, work and all.
Let Chiron to this forge his Centaurs bring,
(All that suruiued the battle, against Jove's son)
That they these pots against the walls may ding,
And all their labor into ruin run,
Till what they see, be nothing; and these hear
Spectators of this wrack, may howl and yell,
And their great loss lament with many a tear,
Whilst I may laugh alooofe, and say 'twas well.
And to conclude, That he that next aspires
But to come near the furnace where they stand,
May be the fuel to these raging fires,
And be consumed to ashes out of hand:
So may the rest that shall escape this danger,
Be warned by these, how to deride a stranger,
That the former writers might demonstrate unto us, That humane actions are not
altogether so governed by the force celestial, but that there is some place
left open for man's prudence, and wisdom; and besides, to deliver unto us how
acceptable the knowledge of good things is to him who is the giver of all
graces: they therefore left this expression to posterity, that Wisdom was
the daughter of Jupiter, and borne without a mother, since God is only wise,
and men not so, but meerelie in a similitude or shadow. Therefore to manifest
the power of Wisdom, they feigned her to come into the world armed, because
the wise man respects not the injuries of Fortune, nor puts his trust in any
worldly felicity, further than by counsel and patience to subdue the one,
and moderate the other; still placing his hopes in that fountain from whence
she first proceeded. Next, because the fear of the Lord is the beginning of
Wisdom, she is said to have co^batted Giants, the sons of the earth: such
as in that great Gigomantichia, would have plucked Jupiter out of his throane:
by which are intended the presumptions of nature, and the insolences of men;
who, all service and adoration to the divine powers neglected, are not affraide
to make insurrection against heaven it self. I may therefore conclude, that
all humane wisdom different against the divine will, is vain and
contemptible, since the good man is only wise, and in the grace and favor of
his maker.

DIANA.
SHe is the daughter of Jupiter and Latona, the goddess of Virginity and
Chastity. In the heaven she is called Luna, the Moon; in the Earth, Diana;
in Hell or amongst the Infernalls, Proserpina: of which threefold power, she
is called Triformis, and Triula. The places sacred to her, were (as Valerius
Flaccus affirms) Parthenius, a flood of Paphlagonia. She with her brother
Apollo, was borne in Cinthus, a mountain hanging over Delos; of whom Statius
says, they are both called Cinthij. In Ephesus, a city of Ionia, or Lydia,
she had a magnificent Temple numbered amongst the seven wonders of the world.
In Bauron, a city of Attica, she was likewise honored. And as Lucan
testates, in Taurus, a mountain in Sicilie: and as Virgil, in Delos, Notior vt
canibus non iam sit Delia nostris.
Not Delia to our dogs is better known.


Horace reports her to have two mountains in Italy dedicated to her deity,
Auentinus and Algidus. In her sacrifices, a Heart was still offered at her
Altar; and dogs or hounds, as Ovid writes: Exta canum Triuia vidi mactare
Sabaeos:
Et quicunque tuas accolit Haeme Nyues.


The Sabaeans and the Thessalians inhabiting the snowie mountain Haemus, used
dogs in their oblations. Of her Temple at Ephesus, it shall not be amiss to
speak a word or two by the way. Plutarch in his book De vitando Aere alieno,
says that the Temple of Diana was a Sanctuary, wherein all debtors were safe
from their creditours. As the Vestalls of Rome had the time of their service
distinguished into three parts, in the first to learn the mysteries of Vesta;
in the second to do the ceremonies; and in the third, to instruct others that
were ignorant: so amongst the Priests of Diana in Ephesus, the first order of
them gave them the name of Melieres, that is, to be capable of the Priesthood,
but not admitted; the second was Hieres, that was in present office; the third
Parieres, that was dead from the service. This stately and magnificent
structure was first erected by the Amazons, so beautiful and sacred, that when
Xerxes had with sword and fire wasted and demolisht all the Temples of Asia, he
spared only that, as the richest jewel of the world. It is reported of one
Herostratus, a wicked and debosht fellow, who finding in himself nothing good
to preserve his memory, and willing that his name should live to posterity,
set this Temple on fire, for no other purpose, but that he would be talked on:
the Ephesians understanding this his malicious ambition, they made it death
once to name him. Cornelius Nepos writes that the same night that this famous
structure was ruined and defaced by fire, Alexander was borne in Pella, in the
three hundred and eighth year after the building of Rome: so that at the
extinguishing of one light of the world, another was kindled. It being demanded
of one of Dianaes priests, Why Diana being a goddess, would suffer her Temple
to be utterly destroyed? and what she was doing the while? It was answered
again, That it was done unawares to the goddess, for she was that night at
the labor of Olimpias, and busied about bringing Alexander into the world.
Notwithstanding this great ruin, the people of Ephesus caused it to be
re-erected, and made both richer and more beautiful than before: of which
work Dinocrates an Architectour of Macedonia was chief. Diana (as Plutarch in
his Simposaicon says) is called Elitheia, Lib. de Solert. animal.
or Lucina, as also Locheia, as goddess of childbirth: she is called also
Dictinna. And in his Solertia animalium, that Apollo would be called Lycoconos;
and Diana, Multicida Elaphibolos: The one for killing so many Wolves; the
other, Hearts. Amongst the Egyptians she is called Bubastis: she is celebrated
(witness Herodotus) amongst the Thressae, and the Peloniates: amongst the
Bizantians she has the name of Diana Orthosia.

The Poets feign that she is continually exercised in hunting: for no other
reason but to instruct and encourage all such as prophesse virginity to shun
sloth and idleness: so Ovid, Otia si tollas periere cupidinis arcus.
Take sloth away, and Cupids bow vnbends:
His brands extinguish, and his false fire spends.


Diana and Phoebus, were therefore said to be the children of Latona, because
in that, the ancient Poets would signify the beginning of the world: for when
the matter whereof it was made, was a mere confused Mass, and without shape,
because all things were obscure and hid: that darkness is signified in Latona;
and whereas they make Jupiter their Father, it imports as much as if they
should fetch Jupiter out of this darkness, called the Sun and the Moon. More
plainly, the Spirit of the Lord said, Let there be light; of which Light,
Apollo and Diana, the one by day, and the other by night, are the greatest: by
this inferring, that the generation of the world began first from Light.

CERES.
THe Goddess of fruits and grain, and daughter to Saturn and Ops, a
Lawgiver to the Sicilians: therefore by Virgill called Segifera. In Eleusis, a
city of Attica, she had divine worship; because she there taught plantation
and agriculture; and of that place had the name of Elusina: she was honored in
the mount Aetna: in Aenna and Catana, two cities of Cicilie, From whence, as
Claudian relates, she had the name of Aetnaea, Aennaea, and Catanensi^: the
like does Selius, etc. Lactantius reports, that into these her Temples erected
in these cities, it was not lawful for any man to enter. The manner of the
rights among the Phigalenses were, that no Sacrifices should be slain, only
the fruits of planted trees, Hony-combs, and new shorn wool, were laid upon
the Altar, and sprinkled with sweet oil, and were set a fire, burnt and
offered: these Customs were privately and publikelie observed yearly, as
Pausanias left recorded. The Argiues sacrifice to this goddess by the name of
Ceres Clithonia, upon certain set days in the Summer, after this manner:
Their Sacrificiall pomp is attended by the chief Magistrates of the city:
after which company, the women and children next followed, the boys all in
white roabes with chaplets about their brows of Hiacinthes interwouen: and in
the lagge end of the same troop were driven a certain number of fair and
goodly oxen, but bound in strict bands, and dragged toward the Temple: being
thither come, one of these beasts with his cords loosed was driven in, the rest
of the people standing without the gates, and looking on; who, no sooner see
him entered, but shut the gates upon him: within the Temple, are four old
women priests with hatchets and knives, by whom he is slain, and one of them
has by lot the office to cut off the head of the sacrifice. This done, the
doors are again set open, and the rest, one by one forced in, and so in order
by the same women slain and offered. In a book of the situation of Sicilie,
composed by Cl. Marius Aretius, a Patritian, and of Syracusa: Entitled
Chorographia Siciliae; In the city Aenna, says he (as Strabo consenting with
him) were borne Ceres, and her daughter Libera, whom some call Proserpina; From
which place she was raped, and therefore is this city to her sacred. Near
to this city is a river of an infinite depth, whose mouth lies toward the
North, from whence it is said Dis, or Pluto, with his chariot made ascent, and
harrieng the virgin thence, to have penetrated the earth again not far from
Syracusa. This is that most ancient Ceres whom not Sicilia only, but all other
nations whatsoever celebrated. Most certain it is, that she was Queen of the
Sicilians, and gave them laws, taught them the use of tillage and husbandry;
and that her daughter Libera was transported thence by Orcus, or Dis, king of
the Molossians. In her Temple (part of which, not many years since was
standing) were two statues of Marble; one sacred to her, another to Proserpina;
another of brass, beautiful and fair, but wondrous ancient. At the entrance
into the Church in an open place without, were two other fair portraitures;
one of her, another of Triptolemus, large and of exquisite workmanship: In
Ceres right hand was the image of Victory most curiously forged. This
History with many other, is with much nimble and dextrous wit fabulated by
Ovid: to whose Metamorphesis I refer you.

In Ceres is figured to us, Moral.
an exhortation to all men to be careful in the manuring and tilling of the
Earth, since Ceres is taken for the Earth, the treasuresse of all riches
whatsoever; and just is that usury and commendable which arriseth from thence:
for the fertility that grows that way, is begot by the temperature of the
weather, and the industry of man's labors. She is therefore said to wander
round about the earth, and over the spacious Universe, because of the
obliquitie of the signe-bearing circle, and the progress of the Sun beneath
that, by which Summer is in some parts of the world at all seasons of the
year, and elsewhere when not here. Besides from hence this morality may be
collected, No man unpunished can despise the gods: for miseries are the
hand-maides of dishonestie, therefore of force a wicked and irreligious man is
subject and incident to fall into many distresses and casualties: therefore
Piety toward heaven, Wisdom in managing our affairs, and Thriftinesse in
the disposing of our private fortunes are all requisite in an honest, religious,
a parsimonious, and well disposed man.

PROSERPINA.
THe daughter of Jupiter and Ceres, she was honored in Cicilie, of which
Province she was called Cicula, of whom Seneca thus speaks, Vidisti Siculae
regna Proserpinae?
Have thou seen the kingdoms of Sicilian Proserpine?


She is likewise called by Lucan, Ennaea, of the city Enna.

Elo^uar immenso terrae sub pondere, quae te
Cintineant Ennaea dapes? --
Shall I, oh Ennaea, discover on what dainties thou feedest
Beneath the huge weight of the Massy earth?
Many fables of Proserpina have bin introduced for our better instruction, by
the ancient Poets; which is only to express to us the nature of the seeds,
and plants; for Proserpina, by whom is signified the Moon, shining to us one
half of the month, and lying the other half in the arms of her husband
Pluto, that is, being half the year in Heaven and the other in Hell, six
months beneath the earth, and as many above: so is it with the virtue of
plants, whose sap for six months space, is by reason of the subterren cold,
forced and diffused upward into the boughs and branches: again, by the
extreamitie of the Winters upper cold, it is compulsiuely driven back
downward into the root, beneath the earth: for so does nature impart her
power and virtue to all creatures and natural bodies whatsoever, that they
many observe a mutualitie (if I may term it so) in their cooperation. After
the like manner is the day sorted out for our labors and affairs, the night
for our rest and repose. So likewise in explicating the power of Luna, or the
Moon: some call her the daughter of Hiperion or the Sun, because she being
Corpus diaphanes, that is a body cristaline, like reflectiue glass,
transferres the light received from her father, upon the earth to us; for which
cause she is called also the sister of the Sun: by the swiftness of her
course her proper motions are declared. To express her nature always
appearing to us greater, or lesser, is to signify her strength and
multiplicitie of working, therefore they alot her a garment of diverse and
sundry colors. In attributing to her the double sexes of male and female (as
some have commented) the reason is, in that as she is woman, she infuseth an
humor necessary and profitable to the nutriment of all creatures: in respect
of her virile nature she allows a moderate and sensible heat, much auailable
to increase, for without this heat, in vain were her opperation, which is
easily proved in all creatures that are pregnant and bringing forth:
therefore, she is called Lucina, as the goddess that brings creatures to
light. She is likewise operative to corruption, which is the reason that sick
men and such as are troubled with any grievous malady, are most in danger of
death in the critical days of the Moon.

NEMESIS.
She is the goddess of Revenge and Wrath, and punisher of the proud and
vaineglorious. She had a Temple in Ramnus, a town in Attica, from which she
took the name of Rhamnusia. Aristotle by the passion of Indignation, and
affection of Commiseration, says Nemesis is figured; and both of these took
in the better part: Indignation when good men are troubled and vexed to see bad
men use good things ill: Commiseration, to see honest and just men crossed with
the disasters of the world. Plutarch in his book de capienda ex hostibus
vtilitate, speaking how ridiculous it is for any man to reprove another of
that vice of which he is himself guilty, or taint any man for the least
deformity unto which he is subject himself, brings in Leo Bizantius a
crooked backed fellow, gybing at him, because he had a weakness and an
infirmity fallen into his eyes: to him he thus answered, Why do thou mock me
for this mischance by fortune, when thou thy self carriest Nemesis upon thy
back by nature. Of what power this Nemesis was, and how honored, many
Authors as well amongst the Greeks as the Latins, have labored industriously
to make manifest, I will insist on few: Ausonius from the Greek interpreted
this Epigram: Me lapidem quondam Persae advexore trophaeum,
Vt fierem bello: nunc Ego sum Nemesis.
Ac sicut Graecis victoribus asto trophaeum
Punio sic Persas vaniloquos Nemesis.
The Persians took me hence long since,
From Greece a stone: and vow
To make me a warres-Trophy stand,
But Nemesis I am now.
But as I to the victor Greeks
A Trophy now appear,
The prating Persians Nemesis
I punish with my fear.


The History from which both Epigrams are derived, Pausanias recites much
after this manner: From Marathon (says he) some threescore leagues distant is
Rhamnus, a city bordering upon the Sea, just in the way to Oroxus: by which
stands the Temple of Nemesis, a goddess, who is the inevitable revenger of
such men as are haughty, proud, and contumelious. It seems the barbarous
Perseans under the name of Nemesis do comprehend Indignatio: for coming
toward Marathon, and despising the Athenians, as not able to interpose their
incur^ions. They took a stone of white Marble, as if they had already
obtained the victory: of which stone Phidias (the excellent statuarie) made
the portraiture of Nemesis: A fair crown upon her head, with forest hearts
carved about it, and many small Imageries pourtraieng Victory, in her right
hand a golden cup, in which the Aethiopians were figured. Some think her the
daughter of Oceanus, some of Jupiter, others of Justice. Ammianus Marcellinus
in his book of the deeds of the Emperor Gallus, speaks to this effect:
These and such like things (says he) Adrastia (under whose name by a double
signification, we understand Nemesis) often times works in us, being a certain
sublime law of some High power effectual in the opinions of men, and placed,
or having residence about the Lunarie circle, who suppresseth the lofty necks
of the proud, and from the lowest of despair erects the minds of the humble.
For when the wise and understanding men would illustrate to us, nothing to be
more acceptable to heaven, or more commodious to the life of man, than a
moderation of the mind, as well in prosperity as adversity; they devised many
fables, to exhort men nobly to endure the miseries and afflictions of this
life, with constant sufferance and resolved patience. And because many had by
such examples yielded their submisse shoulders to the burden of disasters, but
in prosperity, and in the superabundance both of Wealth and Honor knew not
how well to behave themselves; they therefore introduc't Nemesis the daughter
of Justice (a most grave and severe goddess) to see punishment inflicted upon
such, that in the excess of their felicity, and height of their authority
prove over other men Tyrants, and therefore intolerable.

LATONA.
SHe was honored in Delos, as there being delivered of Apollo and Diana, to
illustrat whose history the better I will give you a taste out of Lucians
dialogues, Luc^an. in Dial. superior.
the interloquutors are Juno and Latona. You have brought to Jupiter two
beautiful children says Juno. To whom she replyde, We cannot all, we can not
all, indeed, be the mothers of such sweet babes as Vulcan. Juno replies,
Though he be lame, as falling from the upper region down to the earth, by the
negligence of his father, yet is he profitable and useful both to gods and
men; for Jupiter, he prouides thunders; for men, armor and weapons: when on
the contrary, thy daughter Diana imployes her self only in hunting and
unnecessary pastime, an extrauagant huntresse, never satiate with the blood of
innocent beasts: Thy beautiful son pretending to know all things, to be an
exquisite Archer, a cunning Musician, a Poet, a Physician, and a Prophet; and
not of these alone the professor, but the Patron. To this purpose has he set
up Temples and Oracles, here in Delphos, there in Claros, and Didimus: by his
dilemmaes and oblique answers to questions demanded (such as which way soever
they be taken, must necessarily fall out true) deluding and mocking all such
as come rather to be resolved of their doubts and fears, or to know things
future: by these illusions raising an infinite gain and riches to himself, to
the loss and discommoditie of others; his foreknowledge meerelie consisting of
legerdemaine and iugling. Nor is it concealed from the wise, how in his
predictions, he dictates false things as often as true. For could he exactlie
and punctuallie presage all things to come, why did he not foresee the death of
his Minion, and know before that he was to perish by his own hand? why did he
not predict, that his ^oue Daphne (so fair hair'd and beautiful) should fly
and shun him as a monster hated and scorned? these with infinite others
considered^ I see no reason thou should think thy self more happy in thy
children than the most unfortunate Niobe. To whom Latona replied: I well
perceive (great goddess) wherein this many killing and much gadding daughter,
and this lying and false prophesieing son of mine offends you, namely, that
they are still in your eye glorious, numbered amongst the gods, and of them
esteemed the most beautiful: yet can you not deny but that he is most
skillful in the Voice and the Harp, exceeding whatsoever can be upon the
earth, and equalling, if not preceading, that of the Spheres in heaven. I
cannot choose but smile says Juno: Is it possible his skill in music should
beget the least admiration? when poor Marsias (had the Muses not bin partial,
but judged indifferently of his side) had gained of him prioritie: but he alas
by their unjust sentence, lost not only his honor in being best, but being
vanquished, he most tyranously had his skin stead off for his ambition: and
this your fair Daughter and Virgin, is of such absolute feature and beauty,
that being espied naked by Acteon (bathing her self in the fountain) she
transformed him into a Heart, and caused him by his own dogs to be torn in
pieces, least the young man should survive to blabbe her deformities. Besides,
I see no reason why to women in labor and travel in childbirth, she should
show herself so careful and common a midwife every where, and to all, if
she were as she still pretends to be, a Virgin. With her Latona thus
concluded: You are therefore of this haughty and arrogant spirit, because you
are the sister and wife of Jupiter, and reign with him together, which makes
you to us your inferiors so contumelious and harsh: but I fear I shall see
you shortly again weeping, when your husband leaving the heavens for the
earth, in the shape of a Bull, an Eagle, a Golden shower, or such like, shall
pursue his adulterate pleasures. Ovid in his sixth book Metamor. and his third
fable says, That Niobe the daughter of Tantalus, borne in Sypile, a city of
Lidia, having by Amphion six brave sons and as many daughters, though she
were forewarned by the daughter of Tyresias to be present with the Thebans at
their sacrifice to Latona and her children, yet she contemptuously denied it,
preferring her self in power and majesty before the goddess; and her own
beautiful issue, before the others: at which contempt the goddess much
enraged complained to Appollo and Diana, in whose revenge, he slew all the
young men, and she the virgins: with grief whereof Amphion slew himself, and
Niobe burst her heart with sorrow. Latona is by interpretation Chaos, Moral.
it was believed that all natural bodies seeds of things, mixed and confused,
lay buried in darkness. Some take Latona for the earth, and therefore Juno did
oppose the birth of the Sun and Moon, by reason of the frequent fogges and
damps arising, by which the sight of these two glorious planets, are shadowed
and kept from our eyes; for when by the thickenesse and tenebrositie of the
clouds, the Sun is weakened and made of less force, often times there proceeds
a pestilent air, with many pests and diseases prejudicial both to sensible
creatures and to plants: but when the Sun resumes his virtue and vigor, then
by the purifying of the air all these infections are dispersed and scattered,
unless they have proceeded so far as to contagion. And so much for Latona.

FORTVNA.
ANtium a city of the Latins, bordering upon the Sea, had Fortune in great
reverence, to whom they erected a magnificent Temple. Wherefore Horace thus
speaks: Oh Diuae gratum quae regis Antium.


So Rhamnus or Rhamnis, a town in Attica, where Nemesis and Fortune were held
in equal reverence; and from hence rather called Ramnusia. In Praeneste a
city of Italy, Sorts and Fortuna were held in like adoration, of which they
were called Praenestine. Petrus Crinitus in his first book of honest
discipline and the sixth chapter, concerning this goddess, rehearses these
verses from Pacuuius: Fortunam insanam esse, and Brutam perhibent
Philosophi:
Saxique ad instar globosi praedicant esse,
Volabilem.
Quia quo saxum Impulerit Fors, Ea Cadere
Fortunam autumant:
Caecam ob eam rem esse vocant quia nil
Cernant quo sese applicet.
Insanam autem aiunt quia atrox incerta
Instabilisque sit
Brutam quia dignum aut indignum,
Nequeat ignocere.


Which I thus English.

The Philosophers tell us that Fortune is both mad
and brutish:
They preach to us, that like a round rolling
Stone, she is voluble:
Intimating, that wheresoever chance shall force,
Fortune shall incline.
Therefore they make her blind, because she can
discern nothing to which she can apply her self,
They term her mad, because she is cruel without
Pity: uncertain and unstable.
Brutish; because she cannot distinguish betwixt
what is right and injury.
Hitherto Pacuvius, whose verses M. Cicero commemorates. Pliny to Vespasian
speaks thus, concerning the power of Fortune: Through the whole world (says
he) and in all places, at all hours, and by all tongues, Fortune is still
inuokated, and she alone; she is only nominated, she alone is accused, alone
made guilty, solely thought upon, solely commended: solely reproved, and with
her reproaches adored; of many she is held mutable and blind: she is
wandering, inconstant, incertaine, diverse, and a favorer of the unworthy, at
her shrine are all things expended, to her are all things acceptable, offered;
she altogether swayes, guides, and directs the reason of mortal men. Amongst
the Scythians she is painted without feet; she had only hands, and feathers.
Amongst the Smyrnians, with her head she supported heaven, bearing in one of
her hands the horn of Amalthea, that is, of Plenty. She is described by
Pausanias, in the statue of a Buffe or wild Ox: but amongst all her figures
and attributes, Liu. lib. 2.
let me not forget that of ingenious master Owens, the Epigramatist, speaking
of Fortune: Spem dat pauperibus diuitibusque metum.
She is the Poor man's hope, and the Rich man's fear.


Liuie, Lib 8.
Dyonisius Halicarnasseus, Lactantius, Plutarch, and others, affirm that the
statue of Fortune which stands in the Latin way, Lib. 2. cap. 8.
with the Temple, was dedicated at the same time that Coriolanus by his mothers
intercession, withdrewe his forces from the sack and spoil of Rome. Which
image was heard to speak these words, Rite me matronae vidistis, riteque
dedicastis.


So superstitious they were in the days of old that they attributed all their
intents, actions, and events of things, to the guidance and will of Fortune,
nay that she had a power in their very birthdaies, and days of death: as of
Euripides the most famous Tragic Poet, he was borne on the same day that
before Salamine, the Greeks and the Meades fought that famous Sea-battel, and
died upon the birth day of Dyonisius senior, the tyrant of Sicily. When as (
Timaeus says) at one instant, Fortune took away the imitator of Tragic
calamities, and brought in their true actor and performer. Ascribed it is to
Fortune, that Alexander the Conqueror, and Dyogenes the Cynick, should die both
on a day: and, that king Attalus left the world, the same day of the year that
he entered into the world. The like was read of Pompey the great, the same day
of the month that he was borne in Rome, the same (or as some will have it the
day after) he was beheaded in Egypt. Pyndarus the Greek Poet, borne in
Pithea, consecrated many divine Hymns to Appollo, patron of the place. Florus
remembers Carniades in the celebration of Platos birth day, whom he calls a
stout champion of the Accademie, observing that they were both borne on the
feast day of Appollo, Plato in Athens, where the Thargetia were acted; and
Carniades in Cyrene, where the Carnia were celebrated; both these feasts
falling upon the seventh day, on which his priests say Appollo himself was
borne, and therefore they call him Septimanatus, and Hebdomagenus, as much as
to say, the seventh day borne. Those therefore that call Plato the son of
Appollo (as Plutarch says) have done the god no indignity or dishonor, he
having succeeded him in the Oracles of divine philosophy, of whom Tindarus
Lacedemonius has left this character: Non hic creditus est mortali de patre
natus
esse: Deo genitore satus --
Derived from mortal parents he was not:
No, 'twas some Deity that him begot.


Plutarch in his quest. Romans the 64. question, demands why Seruius Tullius
dedicated a Temple to little Fortune, or Short? (for so the Latin words imply,
being Paruae and Breui) because says he, that in the beginning from baseness
and obscurity (as being borne of a captive mother) by the benefit of Fortune
he was exalted to the principality of Rome: or does this change not rather
show her power than her poverty, that she is a giant, and no dwarf? Of all
the other Deities, Seruius was known to celebrate her with the most Divine
honors, and to inscribe her in all his actions: for he not only built Temples
to Fortuna bonae spei, of good hope; Auerruncae, to turn away her anger;
Blandae, to her smiling; Primogeniae, as to the eldest child of Inheritance;
Virili, as she was manly: but he erected one also to his own proper fortune.
He gave her also the denominations of Conuertentis, turning, or turning
toward; Been sperantis, of well hoping; and Fortunae virginis, Fortune the
Virgin; likewise Viscosae, as catching and clinging to us in all our attempts
and actions. May it not therefore be observed, that this Temple, and these
rights and ceremonies were celebrated to Little Fortune, that she may assist
and much avail us even in things of the smallest moment? Teaching us, that in
all occurrents and events we ought to intermit no occation or opportunity that
may avail us, for the smalnesse in show or sleightnesse in appearance. But to
apply these things to our better use, and show that all these Divine attributes
bestowed on this goddess were heathenish, and absurd, I hold opinion with
Plutarch, lib. de Fortuna, That Wisdom guides the life and actions of man,
not Fortune. Was it by Fortune (says he) that Aristides lived in poverty,
when it was in his own power to purchase wealth? or that Scipio having taken
Carthage, neither saw the prey, nor took part of the spoil? That Philocrates
having received so many Talents of Alexanders, spent them upon strumpets, and
Fishes. That Lasthenes and Euthycrates, by proposing to themselves no other
felicity than the throat and belly, lost Olynthus? If these things be
attributed to Fortune, we may as well say, Cats, Goats, and Apes, are by
chance given to voracitie, lust, and squirilitie. If all things be attributed
to fortune, what can be devised? what learnt? what cities government could
subsist? or what Kings counsel be managed without providence, and wisdom to
direct it? did Fortune sway all? Many brute beasts are better furnished in
their nature and condition than man; some are armed with horns, some with
teeth, some with prickles, not so much as the Porcupine, nay the Hedge-hogge,
but as Empedocles says: Dorsum horret spinis and spicula torquet acuta.


Some of their feet are armed with horn, most of their backs clothed with
hair; Man only, as Plato says, is left by nature naked and unarmed, without
shoe or garment.

Vnum sed hec largita, emollit omnia.
She has yet bestowed one thing upon him, which makes good all the rest, The
use of Reason, Industry, and Providence: nothiug more wild, or more swift than
the horse, yet he runs to man's use: The dog is a beast, fierce and cruel,
yet his servant and keeper: with the Forests beast, the Ayers foul, and the
Seas Fishhe feeds and banquets: what beast is greater than the Elephant? or to
behold, what more terrible? yet to him he is a spectacle of pleasure, like a
play in a public Theater? Anaxagoras says, That bruit beasts excel man in
all things, yet whatsoever they have, man applies to his own use; he gathers
the honey from the Be, and draws milk from the Cow, yet in all this, Fortune
has no hand, only Counsel and Providence. Look but into crafts, arts, and
sciences, we see mettalls tried, houses built, statues carved, yet not any of
these by chance or accident; for the arts crafts (as we call them) acknowledge
Ergana, that is, Minerua (not Fortune) for their goddess and Patroness. It is
recorded of a Painter, that having drawn a horse in all his liniaments,
colors, shape, and every thing in their true posture, only the foame forced
from the horses mouth by the curb or bit of the bridle he had not done to his
mind; which often blotting out, and again seeking to make perfect, but in
vain, in a great vexation and anger, he cast his pencell (being then full of
the same color) against the table, which hitting in the same place gave so
fortunat a dash, that what art could not do, mere chance and accident made
complete and perfect: and this is the only masterpiece of Fortune that I
have read off. In all sciences, Artificers use their rules, squares, lines,
plummets, measures, numbers, least any particle of their cunning should be
conferd upon hap or accident. There is a providence even in tuning of an
instrument, in slackning or stretching the string; in the kitchen to season
meat to the pallat: nor does any man that has bought cloth to suite
himself, kneel down and make his orisons to Fortune, to make them up and fit
them to his body. He that has gathered together abundance of treasure and
riches, has many captives about him, and servants to attend him, dwells in a
Palace with many porches and gates, sees it furnished with costly hangings,
sumptuous beds and tables, without true wisdom to manage all these,
apprehends no true felicity or happiness of life. Therefore one asking
Iphicrates, why having arms, and bows, and weapons, and other military
ornaments, What kind of man he was that professed not any? he answered, he was
that man that had dominion over all these, and power to use them at his
pleasure. Therefore wisdom is neither gold, nor silver, nor glory, nor
health, nor riches, nor strength, nor beauty; it is only that which by
knowing how to use them well, makes them laudable and profitable, without which
they are meerelie vain, barren, yea, and often times damnable, and to him that
inioyes them brings trouble and shame. I will conclude this tractate with the
saying of the Poet, Vires exiguae sunt mortalium
Sed calliditate multiplici,
Belluas Maris and Terrestria,
Et sub Coelo volitantia omnia homo domas.
Small is the Strength of mortal man,
Yet full of craft and skill:
Sea and land monsters he can tame,
And bring birds to his will.


Of the Goddesses called Selectae.
THese Goddesses were honored amongst the Gentiles. Canina, Leuana, Edulica,
Potina, and Statana; these, as they are opiniated, have the government of
children in their infancy, till they find their feet, and can stand, or begin
to go. Canina looks to them in their swathing bands, whilst they are bound up
and mantled. Leuana lifts them from the earth when they chance to fall, and
keeps them from breaking or spoiling their faces. Edulica and Potina, have the
charge of the meat and drink by the nurses provided for them: Fabulana teaches
them when they begin to prattle; and Vagitana to still them, least they should
spoil themselves by too forcible crying. Libentina, is a ^audie goddess, and
an ouerseer of their lusts and pleasures. There are likewise Aldonea, Albeona,
Voluna, Pellonia, all diligent and circumspect about men. Pellonia, she keeps
off and beats back their enemies. Then there is Agenoria, Strenua, and
Stimula, which stirs up men, and accites them to some action or other.
Numeria, to help them in numbers, and to make even their accounts. Augerona,
she is in stead of a Physician to ease their Maladies, and to prevent or help
against diseases. Febris, which is the Ague, was made a goddess, and had a
chapel allowed her in the palace. Postuerta and Orbona were two others.
Prosa directed the tongue in the voluble speaking of Prose. Sentia, had
predominance over quick and witty sentences. In marriages, child-births, and
funerals, they used the invocation of others, as Deneuerra, I^tercidones,
Domiduca, Manturna, Virginenses, Lucina, Prema, Parrunda, Populonia, Mena,
Tellumone, Rusona, Naenia. For corn and grain were Tutulina, Nodinum,
Volutina, Patalena, Hostilina, Florae, Lactucina, Natura, Auerrunca, and
Runcia. Against thieves they had Spineo^is: and to preserve their fruits from
blasting, and that they might ripen in time convenient, Fructesa. Rurina was
goddess for the country, Mountains, and Promontories. Empanda, over the
Plowefeasts, and country pastimes. To these were added Tanagraea, Antenorta,
Larunda, Moneta, Larentia, Maiesta, Ventilia, and infinite others. Those which
they called the select goddesses, were in number eight, Tellus, Ceres, Lucina,
Juno, Diana, Minerua, Venus, and Vesta.

Anaitis. She was a goddess that was particularly adored by the Lydians, and
not known to any other nation: to her service were selected the choice and
picked damsells out of the chief and principal of the Nobility. These had no
sooner been in her ministry and admitted to serve at her Altar, but all
modesty and shamefastnes set apart, they exposed their bodies to public
prostitution; by this means to be made more capable of husbands, and better
practiced against marriage.

Angerona. She was a goddess honored by the Romans, when the whole city
labored of a disease called the squinancie, which is an inflammation or fiery
heat of the Jaws, breeding a tumor in the throat, which suddenly (if not
prevented) suffocates and stoppes the passage of the breath: In this extremity
they offered many sacrifices to her. Her Sacreds and Festiualls were called
Angeronalia. Her image was, with her finger laid upon her lips. Pliny in his
second book thus speaks of her: Angerona, to whom the Romans use to
sacrifice, the thirteenth of the Calends of January, has her effigies in her
Temple, with the mouth cloased or sealed up.

Strabo.
Atergatis. A goddess honored by the Syrians, so says Strabo, That beyond
Euphrates is the great city Bambice (whom some call Edessa, others Hierapolis)
in which Atergatis the Syrian goddess has divine reverence.

Drias, or Bona dea, was adored by the Roman Matrons, as also by the ordinary
women of less state and quality: Tibul. lib. 1.
to whose sacrifices, no man could be at any time admitted: of her Tibullus
speaks, Sacra bonae maribus non adeunda deae.


Her name was Drias, the daughter, or (as some will have it) the wife of
Fannus, who was of that modest Temperance and Continency, that she so much
retired her self from the sight of all men, that she never walked abroad, nor
was at any time seen in public. A great aspertion and calumny still lives
upon the Sepulcher of Pub. Claudius, a noble man of Rome, in that he was so
impudent and irreligious, as to violate her rights and ceremonies; For in her
Temple (as Iuuenall amongst others remember of him) he adulterated Pompeia, the
daughter of Quintus Pompeius, and niece to Sylla.

-- Nota bonae secreta deae --
Bubona and Carna is the goddess of oxen, and herds of cattle, all such she
takes to her charge: but Carna was called Dea Cordinis, The goddess of the
henge or hook, on which the door or gate hangs or moves. Ovid in his
first book de Fastis, thus writes: Prima dies tibi Carna datur dea cardinis
haec est,
Numine clausa aperit claudit aperta suo.
The first days Carnaes; She of doors,
The goddess is and guide:
She by her power, ope's closed gates,
And shuts such as stand wide.


The Ancient writers affirm, that she was held to have predominance over the
intrails, and all the interior parts of man or woman: to whom they made their
orisons, that she would keep and preserve their hearts, liver, lungs, and
bowels, free from anguish and the disease of consumption. To her Brutus erected
a Temple.

Dice, and Deuerra. Dice was one that had power over the Tribunal, or seat of
judgment: she had employment in taking up quarrels, ending strifes,
compounding law-cases, and deciding all contentions whatsoever. Her ministers
were called Dioastae, quasi litem diremptores, as much in our english tongue as
if we should call them Peacemakers. Deuerra was a goddess too, and held in
reverence, for no other reason than that she preserved them from ominous
nightbirds called Scopae.

Empanda. She had the charge of all such things as were negligentlie left open;
where she took the charge, it was held to be more safe than under lock and
key.

Feronia. She is a goddess of the wods memorated by Virgill in these words, --
Et viridi gaudens Feronia luco,
Feronia rejoicing, and taking pleasure in the green groaues.


Flora. She was first a strumpet in Rome, of extraordinary fame, state, and
beauty, who by her prostitution attained to such an infinite wealth, that she
at her own proper charge, not only repaired, but new built a great part of
the walls of Rome. After her death, she constituted the people of Rome for her
heir: for which bounty they caused her to be deified, and offered unto her
divine honors. Her feasts were called Floralia. Of her Ovid thus speaks in
his fifth book Fastorum: Hunc men's impleuit generoso Flore maritus,
Atque ait arbitrium tu dea Floris eris.


Tro and Thor. These are the names of a goddess and a god, Saxo Gramat.
spoken of in the history of Saxo Gramatic^s.

Furina. Is the goddess of thieves; her sacrifices are kept in the night, as
best affecting deeds of darkness. The Etruscians call her the goddess of
lots, such as are drawn for the taking up of controversies.

Iuuen. Satyr. 8.
Hippona, She has the government and protection of Horses, whom hostlers and
grooms of stables have in great adoration, her picture is still in the place
where their horses stand: of her Iuuenall speaks in his eighth Satyr.

Horchia, is a goddess worshipped in the city of Etruria, as the genius of
the same place. From her the village by, called Horchianus, takes name.

Lauerna. She is over thieves, who make supplication to her for good and rich
booties, as that she would charm the household with sleep, keep the dogs
from barking, and the door h^nges from creeking, to defend them from shame,
Horac. epist. lib. 1.
and keep them from the gallows. Horace in his first book of Epistles, --
Pulchra Lauerna
Da mihi fallere, da sanctum iustumque videri.


Viz. Oh fair Lauerna, grant me that I may cosine and deceive: but grant me
withal that I may appear to the world, a just man, and an holy.

Mania was a goddess, and mother of the Lares, or household gods, to whom
children were used to be offered in sacrifice, for the safety of their
familiar friends that were in travel by land or sea, or in any fear of
danger. But Iunius Brutus in his consullship altered the property of that
oblation, and changed the innocent lives and blood of infants, into the heads
of garlic and poppie, which served in the stead thereof.

Medetrina, Mellonia, Mena, Murcea, etc.

Medetrina, she was the medicinal goddess, and was called so a Medendo, she
had power in the ministering of Physic, her solemnities were called
Medittinatia. So likewise Mellonia was thought to be goddess and chief
Patroness of honey. Mena had predominance of some secrets belonging to women.
Murcea, was she that was worshipped by such as were lazy, idle, and sloathfull.

Nundina. She was a goddess amongst the Romans, taking her denomination of the
ninth day, Macrobius.
called ^ies Lustricus. In that day children had their names given them, as
Macrobius relates, the males on the ninth day, the females on the eight day
after their birth.

Pecunia likewise was numbered among their goddesses.

Pitho, Razenna, Robigo, Rumilia.

Pitho was thought to be the goddess of eloquence: the Latins called her
Suada.

Razenna, was one amongst the Etruscians, who was to rule in wedlock, and
marriages.

Robigo and Robigus were a two sex deity, of whom the Romans were opinionated,
that they could preserve their sheaues and vnthresht corn from being mustie or
mouldie. Their festiualls were called Robigalia.

Rumilia, was the the protectresse of sucking infants, as ancient writers are
of opinion: for Ruma signifies mamma, a dugge, and therefore sucking lambs are
called Subrumi.

Runcina belongs to the gardens, and is said to be the goddess of weeding;
her, the poor women weeders have in great reverence.

Seia, Segesta, Tutilina, etc.

Seia, the ancients report to be the goddess of sowing; and Segesta had her
name from the binding up of the sheaues: both these had their Temples in Rome
in the time of Pliny.

Tutilina and Tutanus were gods, so called of Tutando, preserving, or keeping
safe. Ennius calls them Aeuilernos and Aeuilogros, as much as, Ever lived, and
ever in the perfectnes and strength of their age: because it was in full power
and vigor, not subject to mutabilitie or capable of alteration. In naming of
gods, we may as well use the feminine as the masculine, and the masculine as
the feminine gender, as Virgill speaking of Venus.

Discendo and ducente deo Flammam inter and hosts,
Expedior.
Down come I, and the god my guide, I make no stay,
But boldly through the enemy and fire I force my way.
Vacunadea, was Lady and Gouernesse over those that were vacant and without
business; especially had in reverence by swains and husbandmen, who after
the gathering of their harvest had a cessation from labor.

Vallonia was held to be the goddess of vallyes.

Vitula Dea, had predominance over youthful mirth and blandishments: For
Vitulari was by the ancient grammarians taken for gaudere, to be glad or
rejoice.

Volupta is held to be the goddess of Pleasure.

Rhaea. This goddess has by the Poets allowed her a chariot drawn by four
Lions, a Crown upon her head of Cities, Castles, and Towers; and in her hand
a golden Scepter. Priests could not offer at her Altar before they were
guelded, which order was strictly observed in memory of A^yos a beautiful
Phrygian youth, and much beloved of Ceres, but would no ways yield to her
desires: because (as he excused himself) he had past a vow of perpetual
chastity; but after, not mindful of his promise (as Dorytheus Corinthius in
his histories relates) he comprest and defloured the nymph Sagaritides, of whom
he begat Lydus and Tyrhenus. Lydus gave name to Lydia, as Tyrhenus to Tyrhena.
For this, the enraged goddess stroke him with such furor and madness that he
guelded himself, and after would have cut his own throat, had not she
commiserating his penitence, transformed him to a Pine tree, or as others will
have it, restored him to his senses, and made him one of her Eunuch priests.
Nicander in Alexipharm. says, her sacrifices were observed every new Moon
with much tinckling of brass, sound of Timbrels, and strange vociferation and
clamours. Some fable, that Jupiter being asleep, and dreaming, let that fall
to the earth which may be called Filius ante patrem; of which the earth
conceiving, produced a genius in an humane shape, but of a doubtful sex, male
and female, called Agdiste; the gods cut off all that belonged to the masculine
sex, and casting it away, out of that first grew the Almond tree, whose fruit
the daughter of the flood Sangatius first tasting, and hiding part thereof in
her bosom, as they wasted there and vanished, so she began to conceive, and in
time grew great, and brought forth a Called Attis.
Son, whom laying out in the wood, he was nurced by a goat, and fostred till he
was able to shift for himself. As he grew in years, so he did in beauty, in
so much that he exceeded the ordinary feature of man: of him was Agdistes
wondrously inamored, who when he should have married with the daughter of the
king of Pessinuntium, by the inter-comming of Agdiste, such a madness possessed
them both, that not only Attes, but his father in law likewise, caused their
parts of generation to be cut quite away. Pausonias in Achaicis says, that
(for his rare beauties sake) Rhea selected Attes into her service, and made him
her Priest. Those of that order were called Matragyrte, as either begging
publicly, or going from house to house to demand things necessary for her
Offerings: For the Greek word Meter signifies Matter or Mother, and Agartes,
Prefigiator or Mendicus, a Iugler or Beggar. She was called by diverse names, as
Proserpina, Isis, Cibile, Idaea, Berecinthia, Tellus, Rhaea, Vesta, Pandora,
Phrigia, Pylena, Dindymena, and Pessinuntia; sometimes of the places, sometimes
of the causes. Rhaea bearing young Jupiter in her womb, and ready to be
delivered: knowing the predicted cruelty of Saturn, who commanded him to be
slain, retired her self to Thaumasius a mountain in Arcadia, fortified by
Hoptodamus and his fellow giants, least Saturn should come with any forcible
hostility to oppress her: this mountain was not far distant from the hill
Molossus, in a part of Lysia, where Jupiter was borne and Saturn there
deluded; into which place it is not lawful for any man to enter, only women.
Lucian in Nigrino says, that the Phrygian pipe was only sufficient to yield
music to her sacrifices, for that was no sooner heard but they fell into a
divine rapture resembling madness: neither was the Pine only sacred to her,
but the Oak, De dijs lib. 3.
as witnesses Apollodorus. Euphorion attributes to her the Vine, because out
of that wood her Effigies was always cut. Argon. lib. 1.
Appollonius left recorded, that the Milesian priests accustomed first to
sacrifice to Taetia, and Cilaenus, and after to Rhaea, the mother of the gods,
whose altars were decked and adorned with Oaken bows. By Rhaea is maent the
earth, or that strength of the earth which is most pertinent and auailable in
the generation of things: She is drawn in a chariot, because the globe of the
earth hangs in the middle of the air, without supporture, neither inclining or
declining to one part or another, and that by nature. About her chariot are
wild beasts, the reason is, she is the producter and nourisher of all
creatures whatsoever. Deservedly she wears a crown of Towers and Turrets,
being the queen and mistress of so many Towns, Castles, and Cities. By the
noise of music and clamours at her sacrifices, is observed the whistling and
blustering of the winds, who are necessary in all the affairs of nature,
especially in heat and cold, bearing the showers and tempests too and fro upon
their wings, to make foul weather in one place, and a clear sky in another.
Her chariot is drawn with four Lions, which imports those four brothers
which blow from the Orient, the Australl, the Occident, and the Septentrion;
these, are said to be her coach-steeds and hurrie her from place to place,
because in generation they are much auailing: therefore as all things, as from
a fountain derive their original and beginning from her, she is most
pertinently called Rhaea, a fluendo of flowing.

Isis or Io. She was the daughter of the flood Inachus: and as Andraetas
Tinedius left written, was no better than a strumpet, who by sorcerie and
witchcraft sought to attract the love of Jupiter, in which business she used
the assistance of Iynx the daughter of Pan and Echo, or (as some will have it)
of Suadela: this being discovered to Juno, she changed her into a bird which
still bears her name, Iynx, which is frequently used amongst witches in their
sorceries and incantations: who because she moves her tail so much and so
often, is by the Latins called A Wagtaile.
Motasilla: from the intrailes of this bird, with other ingredients, was made a
confection which (they say) Jason gave to Medaea to inamourat her, in that
expedition which he made to Colchos: this Ione or Io by the cunning of Iynx,
lay with Jupiter in a cloud, and after to conceal her from Juno, he
transhapt her into a cow: but this iugling being discovered by Juno, she begd
her as a gift and gave her in custody to Argus the son of Aristor, whose
hundred eyes Mercury (by the commandment of Jupiter) having charmed
asleep, he cut off his head and so slew him. In these destractions, she past
the Ionian sea, which from her bears the name (though Theopompus and
Archidamus rather are of opinion, that that Sea took his denomination from
Ionius, an eminent man of Illyria;) from thence she came to Haemus, and
transwafted thence to a gulf of Thracia, which by her was called Bosphorus:
There were two Bosphori, the one called Cimnerius, the other Thracius (so much
Prometheus speaks in his Escilus) she past thence into Scythia, and traiecting
many seas, that divide, and run by Europe and Asia, came at length into Egypt,
and by the banks of Nilus reassumed her humane shape: and this happened near
the city Iaxe, so called of Io, after which she brought forth Epaphus (as
Strabo writes) in a cauerne or den Lib. 10.
in Eubaea by the Aegean sea shore, which place is to this day called The
Cow-house.
Aula Bouis. That she past all these Seas in the shape of a Cow, the meaning
is, that the ship wherein she sailed, had the image of a Cow carved upon the
stern, and therefore was so called. By Argus with so many eyes, was intended
Argus a wise and provident king of the Argiues, whom Mercury having slain,
released her from his servitude. After all her transmarine nauigations (being
the most beautiful of her time) she was espoused to Apis, king of the
Egyptians: and by reason she taught them in that country the profitable
usury arising from agriculture, was esteemed by them a goddess, whose statue
her son Aepaphus (after he had builded Memphis the great city) caused to be
erected. Some more ingeniouslie and diuinelie withal, say that Isca, by which
name the first woman and wife of Adam was called, imports no more than Isis,
whom the Egyptians honored as the great and most ancient goddess and mother
of mankind: for the Latins and Greeks corrupt the pronuntiation and
aetimologie of the word, speaking Isis for Issa or Isca. Therefore as Isca is
the wife of our great grandfather Adam, so by the ancient tradition of the
Egyptians Isis was the wife of Offidis whom the Latins call Osirides,
transferring the Egyptian Euphony, to their own Idioma or proper form of
speech.

Ate. Ate whom some call Laesio, is the goddess of Discord or Contention, and
by Homer termed the daughter of Jupiter: Ate prisca proles quae le serit omnes
Mortales.
Ate the ancient offspring that has hurt and harmed all
Mankind.


He calls her a certain woman that to all men has been obnoxious and perilous
alluding (no doubt) to the parent of us all Eve that first transgressed, and by
some relics of truth with which he was enlightened, for he says, Filia prima
Iouis quaeque omnes perdidit Ate
Perniciosa --


As much to say, Pernicious Ate the eldest daughter of Jupiter, who has lost
us all. In another fable he alludes to the same purpose, where he says,
Jupiter notwithstanding he was the most wise of all mortals, yet was in days
of old tempted and deceived by his wife Juno. And this Homer has plainly
delivered, that the beginning of evil came first from a woman, and by her the
wisest of men was beguiled. Hesiod. (in his book of Weeks and Days) is of
the same opinion, and writes to the same purpose: but in another kind of fable,
from the old tradition. For says he, From Pandora, a woman of all creatures
the fairest, and first created by the gods, all mischiefs whatsoever were
dispersed through the face of the whole earth. And though Palephatus in his
fabulous narrations, and Pleiades Fulgentius in his Mythologicis otherwise
interpret Pandora, yet Hesiodus is still constant in the same opinion, as may
appear in these verses: Namque prius vixere Homines, verum absque labor,
Absque malis morboque grani tristique senecta:
At mulier, rapto de poclo tegmine sparsit
Omne mali genus, and morbos curasque molestas.


Which I thus interpret.

Man lived at first from tedious labors free,
Not knowing ill, or grievous malady,
Nor weak and sad old age: till woman mad
Snatched from the pot the cover which it had,
Sprinkling thereby on mankind, every ill,
Trouble, disease, and care, which haunts us still.
Therefore the same author in his Theogonia (as Cyrillus testifies in his
third book against Julian, and in the beginning of the book) calls women
Pulchrum malum, The fair evil.

Pandora. Of her thus briefly (the better to illustrat the former) Hesiod
tells us: that Promaetheus upon a time offered two oxen to Jupiter, and having
separated the flesh of either from the bones; in one of the skins including
all the flesh without bones, in the other all the bones without any part of the
flesh; and artificially making them up again, bad Jupiter make choice of
these, which he would have employed in his sacrifices, who chused that with the
bones; and taking it in great rage to be thus deluded, he to be revenged, took
away all fire from the earth, thereby to inflict the greater punishment upon
mankind: But Prometheus by the assistance of Minerua, ascended heaven, and with
a dried cane or reed, Carm. lib. 1.
kindled at the chariot of the sun (unknown to Jupiter) brought fire down
again upon the earth, which Horace expresses in these words.

Audax Iapeti Genus,
Ignem fraud mala gentibus intulit.
The bold issue of Iapetus,
By his bad fraud brought fire again among the Nations.
This when Jupiter understood, he instantly commanded Vulcan to fashion a
woman out of clay, who being the most subtle and best furnished with all kind of
arts (so endued by the gods) was therefore called Pandora. Pausonias terms
her the first created of that sex; In At ticis.
she was by Jupiter sent to Prometheus with all the mischiefs that are,
included in a box; which he denying, she gave it to Epimetheus; who taking off
the cover or lid, and perceiving all these evils and disasters to rush out at
once, he scarce had time to shut it again, and keep in Hope, which was lowest
and in the bottom. The purpose of the Poets in this, as I can guess, is, that
since Pandora, signifies all arts, all sciences, all gifts, it imports thus
much for our better understanding, That there is no mischief or evil happens
to man, which proceeds not from a voluptuous life, which has all the arts to
her ministers and servants: for from them kings were first instituted and
raised to their honors, by them were plots, stratagems, supplantations, and
dangerous innouations attempted; with them grew emulation and envy, discord
and contention, thefts, spoils, wars, slaughters, with all the troubles,
cares, vexations, and inconveniences belonging and heriditarie to mankind.

Of the Marine Goddesses.
IN these as in the former I will study to avoid all prolixitie, because I am
yet but at the start of the race, and measure in my thoughts, the tediousness
of the way I am to run before I can attain the goal intended; and therefore
thus desperately from the Earth, I leap into the Sea, direct me o ye marine
goddesses, and Ampehitrite first.

AMPHITRITE.
IVpiter having expelled Saturn from his kingdom, by the help of his
brothers, Neptune and Pluto, and having cast lotts for the tripartite Empire;
the Heaven fell to Jupiter, Hell to Pluto, and the Sea with all isles adjacent
to Neptune, who solicited the love of Amphitrite, but she not willing to
condescend to his amorous purpose, he employed a Dolphin to negotiate in his
behalf, who dealt so well in the business, that they were not only
reconsiled, but soon after married. For which, in the perpetual memory of so
great and good an office done to him, he placed him amongst the stars, not
far from Capricorn, as Higinus has left remembered in his Fables, and Aratus
in his Astronomicks: others contend that Venilia was the wife of Neptune: but
notwithstanding his love to, and marriage with Amphitrite, he had many children
by other Nymphs, Goddesses, and wantons. Of Lyba he begot Phaenix, Betus, and
Agenor: of Cataeno, Cataenus: of Amimone, Nauplius; of Pylanes, (of whom a
city of Lacoonia bears name) Auadne, and Aone, from whom the province of Aonia
takes his denominatio^; Phaenix that gave the name to Phaenicia; and Athon, of
whom the Mountain is so called: as also Pheaces, from whence Pheacia (now
called Corcyrus) is derived; Dorus, that gives name to the Dorij; and of
Laides, the daughter of Otus, Althepus; by Astipataea he had Periclimenus, and
Erginus; by Alceone the daughter of Atlas, Anathamus, Anthas, and Hyperetes; by
whom certain cities amongst the Trezenians were erected, and from them took
their name. Of Arne he had Boeotus: of Alope the daughter of Certion,
Hippothous: of Ceclusa, Asopus: of Brilles, Orion. He begot the Tritons, one of
Celaene, the other of Amphitrite: of Tyrbo, Palaemon and Neleus: of Molio,
Creatus, and Eurithus; of Crisigone, the daughter of Almus, Minya; of Melantho,
Delphus: of Calirhoe, Minius; of Venus, Erix: of Alistra, Ogigus: of Hippothoe,
Taphius: he had one Cygnus by Caces; another by Scamandrodices, by Tritogenia,
the daughter of Aeolus; Minyas of the Nymph Midaea: Aspledones of Cleodora:
Pernasus of Mecio^tica (to whom, as Asclepeades relates, he granted a Boon
that she should walk as firmly and steadfastly upon the water as the land)
Euripilus, and Euphemus: Besides these he had another Euphemus that was
steersman in the Argo, when all the brave Heroes of Greece made their
expedition for the golden fleece. As also Amicis, Albion, Aello, Antheus,
Amphimanus, Aethusa, Aon, Alebius, Dercilus, Neleus, Peleus, and Astraeus, who
ignorantly having been incestious with his sister Alcyppa, and the next day
their neerenesse of blood and affinity being known to him by a ring, he cast
himself headlong into a river and was drowned; which river as Leo Bizantius
writes, was first from him called Astraeus; Lib. 3. de Fluminib.
and after, Caius, of Caicus the son of Mercury and Ocirhoe: moreover these
were his children, Actorion, Borgeon, Brontes, Busyris, Certion, Crocon,
Cromos, Crysaos, Cencreus, Chrisogenaea, Chius, Dorus, Euphemus, Ircaeus,
Lelex, Lamia the Prophetess, and Sibilla, Hallerhoitius, Laestrigone,
Megaraeus, Mesapus, Ephialtes, Nictaeus, Melion, Nausithous, Othus, Occipite,
Poliphemus, Piracmon, Phorcus, Pelasgus, Phaeax, Pegasus, Phocus, Onchestus,
Peratus, Siculus, Sicanus, Steropes, Farus, Theseus, Hiretus, and others
infinite, besides fourscore whose names are remembered: there are others scarce
to be numbered, for as Zetzes says in his History, Elatos animo enim omnes,
and omnes strenuos,
Hist. 51. chil. 2.
Filios and amicos dicunt and amatos a Neptuno.


All that are high minded, and strong men, were esteemed as the sons and
friends and beloved of Neptune. Amphitrite, signifies nothing else, but the
body and matter of all that moist humor which is earth above, below, or
within the earth, and for that cause she is called the wife of Neptune:
Euripides in Ciclope, In Ciclop. In Agronaut.
takes her for the substance of water it self, Orpheus calls her Glauca and
Piscosa, that is blew and full of fish, being attributes belonging solely to
the goddess of the Sea. And by the Dolphines soliciting the love of Neptune to
Amphitrite, and reconciling them, is meant nothing else but to illustrate to
us, That of all the fishes that belong to the sea he is the swiftest, the most
active, and apprehensiue.

THETIS or TETHIES.
In Theog.
HEsiod calls her the wife of Oceanus, who is styled the father of all the
floods, creatures, and gods: because (as Orpheus, Thales, and others are of
opinion) all things that are bred and borne, have need of humor, without which
nothing can be begot or made corruptible. Isacius has left recorded, that
besides her he had two wives, Partenope, and Pampholige; by Partenope he had
two daughters, Asia, and Libia: by Pampholige, Europa, and Thracia: and besides
them, three thousand other children, for so many Hesiod numbers in his
Theogonia. This Thetis was the daughter of the earth and heaven, and therefore
as Oceanus is called the father of the gods, so is she esteemed as the mother
of the goddesses. Epicharmus calls one Thetis the daughter of Chiron the
Centaure: and Homer in his hymn to Apollo, In Hebes nupt. In Anax.
the child of Nereus, which Rhodius confirms, as also Euripides in Iphigenia
and in Aulide: she was the wife of Peleus, and of all women living the most
beautiful, of whom Apollodorus thus speaks, They say Jupiter and Neptune
contended about her nuptials, but she not willing to incline to Jupiter,
because she was educated by Juno, therefore he in his rage allotted her to be
the bride of a mortal man. Homer writes that she was angerie, being a marine
goddess to be the wife of a man, therefore to avoid his embraces, she shifted
her self into sundry shapes and figures: but Peleus being advised by Chiron,
notwithstanding all her transformations (as into fire, into a Lion, and others)
never to let go his hold till she returned into her own natural form, in
which he vitiated her, and of her begot Achilles: the last shape she took upon
her was of a Sepia, which is a fish called a Cuttle, whose blood is as black
as ynke, now because this was done in Magnesia, a city of Thessaly, the place
(as Zertzes in his history records) is called Sepias: Hist. 46. Chil. 2. In
prin. rer. Aeginitarum.
Pithenatus and others say that she was not compelled or forced to the marriage
of Pelius, but that it was solemnised in the mountain Pelius with her full and
free consent, where all the gods and goddesses, saving Discord, were present,
and offered at the wedding, for such has been the custom from antiquity;
Pluto gave a rich Smaragd, Neptune two gallant steeds, Xanthus and Ballia;
Vulcan a knife with an haft richly carved, and some one thing some another. By
Peleus she had more sons than Achilles, which every night she used to hide
beneath the fire, that what was mortal in them might be consumed: by which
they all died save Achilles, who was preserved by being in the daytime
anointed with Ambrosia: therefore (as Amestor in his Epithalamium upon Thetis
espousals relates) he was called Piresous, as preserved from the fire, additur
hinc nomen Pireso^s. She was the sister of Titan, and brought forth Ephire
(who was after married to Epimetheus) and Pleione, Lib. 5.
who as Ovid relates in his book de Fastis, was the wife of Atlas. These are
likewise numbered amongst the daughters of Oceanus and Thetis, Acaste, Admete,
Asia (that gave name to a part of the world, till now called Asia) Climene,
Idyia, Ephire, Eudora, Eurinome, Ianira, Liriope, Melobois, Metis, Plexame,
Prinino, Rhodia, Thea, Thoe, Tiche, Xanthe, Ze^xo, Clitie, who was beloved of
Apollo, but being jealous of his affection to Leucothoe, she had discovered it
to her father Orchamus; Apollo therefore left her: in grief of which she vowed
an abstinence from all sustenance whatsoever, only with fixed eyes still gazing
upon the course of the Sun; which the gods commiserating, changed her into an
Heliotropian, which is called the Suns flower, which still inclines to what
part soever he makes his progress. But whether she be Tethies or Thetis she
is no other than the reputed goddess of the Sea: her name importing that huge
mass of water or element (as Virgill in his Pollio says) necessary to the
generation of all creatures whatsoever. Toward the East she is called Indica,
toward the West Atlantica, where she diuides Spain and Mauritania: toward
the North Pontica and Glaciatis, as likewise Rubra, and Aethopica, for so
Strabo relates, as also Rhianus in the navigations of Hanno the Carthagenian.
Stiphilus in his book de Thessalia has bequeathed to memory, That Chiron a
wise and skillful Astrologian, to make Peleus the more famous, consulted with
the daughter of Acloris and Mirmid^n, and betwixt them published abroad that he
by the consent of Jupiter, She was called Philomela.
should match with the goddess Thetis, to whose nuptials all the gods came in
great showers and tempests (for he had observed a time when he knew great store
of rain would fall) and from that the rumor first grew, That Peleus had married
Thetis. But Dailochus and Pherceides report, that Peleus having purged himself
of the murder of his brother Phochus, murdered Antigone: others say that he
first took Antigone, and after her death, Thetis; and that Chiron being an
excellent Chyrurgeon, was so called for the lightness and dexterity of hand
(which is an exellent gift in the searching and dressing of wounds, in any of
that profession.) Apollodorus says, that Thetis after many windings, turnings,
and transhapes, to prese^ue her virginity, was at length comprest by Jupiter.
The Nymphs called Dorides were her ministers and handmaides.

NEREIDES.
THey were the daughters of Nereus and Doris; he is said by Hesiod. to be the
son of Oceanus and Thetis, he is styled a prophet or south-sayer, who as
Horace tells, did predict to Paris all the calamities that were to succeed at
Troy. Apollonius tells us that his chief mansion or place of residence is in
the Aegean sea. The fame is, that Hercules being sent to fetch the golden
apples of the Hesperides, and not knowing where abouts they grew, went to the
nymphs that dwell by the banks of Eridamus, to be resolved by them: they sent
him to demand of Nereus who thinking to delude him by shifting himself into
sundry shapes, was notwithstanding held so fast by Hercules, that he was
forced to assume his own form again, and tell him; for so Orpheus in his
Argonauticis informs us. He is said to have a principality in the Sea, to be
delighted in the company of nymphs and damosells; as also to be the beginning
and end of waters; of whom Orpheus in one of his hymns thus sings: Tu fundamen
aquae tu terrae Finis, and Idem
Principium es cunctis.


Euripides in one of his Tragedies, says he was educated and nourced by the
waters, and calls him the father of the Nereides. He had daughters by Doris,
the nymphs Halia, Spio, Pasitaea, and Lygaea; Hesiod in his Theogonia reckons
of them to the number of fifty. Doris was the sister of Nereus; Horace and
others describe her with green hair. Theocritus in Thessalijs, says that the
birds called Halciones were to them most grateful: some say that they use to
dance and revel in the waters, and play about the chariot of Triton, as
nimbly as fishes. Homer in his Iliades reckons of that rank, Glauce, Thalia,
Cymodoce, Nesea, Spio, Thoe, Halie, Cymothoe, Actae, Melite, Agane, Amphithoe,
Iaere, Doto, Proto, Pherusa, Dinamione, Doris, Amphinome, Panope, Callianira,
Dexamine, Galataea, Amathaea, Callianassa, Climine, Ianira, Ianassa, Mera,
Orithia. Hesiod besides these reckons up Eucrate, Sao, Eudore, Galene, Glauce,
Pasithaea, Erato, Eunice, Doro, Pherusa, Nesaee, Protomedeae, Doris, Panope,
Hyppothoe, Hypponoe, Cymatolege, Cimo, Eione, Halimeda, Glanconome, Panto,
Pautopenia, Liagore, Euagore, Laomedala, Polinome, Antonoe, Lasianassa, Euarne,
Psamathe, Menippe, Neso, Eupompe, Themito, Pronoe, Nemertes. Apollodorus
Atheniensis adds to these, Glaneothoe, Nonsithoe, Halia, Pione, Plesrure,
Calipso, Cranto, Neomeris, Deianeira, Polinoe, Melie, Dione, Isaea, Dero,
Eumolpe, Ione, Ceto, Limnoraea, and all these are held to be most beautiful: it
is therefore thus fabled, That Cassiope wife to Cepheus king of Aethiopia,
gloried so much in her beauty that she held herself to be the fairest woman in
the world; and did not only compare, but prefer herself before the nymphs
called Nereides: for which, their indignation was kindled against her, and in
that high measure, that they sent into those seas a Whale of an incredible
greatness; the people consulting with the Oracle, how to appease the goddesses
and free themselves from the monster; answer was returned, That it could not
be done, but by exposing their only daughter Andromeda, fast bound to a rock
that ouerlooked the sea, to be a prey to the sea Whale; but she was thence
released by the virtue of Perseus: and Cassiope by his means (as a perpetual
example that all such rashenesse ought to be avoided) translated amongst the
stars, for so much Arataeus has left to memory in certain verses
interpreted by Cicero.

This Nerius is for no other reason said to be the son of Oceanus and Tethis,
than to denote unto us the counsel, judgment, and cunning, in guiding and
directing ships by sea; and therefore to have many daughters, which are nothing
but inventions, new devises, stratagems, and changes belonging to navigations.
He is therefore said to be a Prophet, because in all arts and disciplines,
there is a kind of knowledge, by which we foresee and divine of things to come:
for he is held no skillful nauigator, that cannot foretell by the weather, the
changes of winds, and certain signs of tempests, thereby to use prevention
against them before they suddenly come. He is also said to change himself
into many figures, to give us to understand, that it is the part of a knowing
and understanding man to arm himself against all chances and variety of
things whatsoever. It is therefore required of such a man, to use providence
and care in all his affairs and actions, and not to accuse the gods if any
thing sinisterlie happen unto him through his own temeritie and rashness; since
with a prudent and well governed man, their help and assistance is always
present.

The daughters of TRITON.
A Cesander calls Triton the son of Neptune. Numenius in his book de
piscatoribus, deriues him from Oceanus and Tethis. Lycaphron in those verses
wherein he tells of a cup presented unto him by Medea, calls him the son of
Nereus. The Poets ascribe to him the invention of the trumpet, and that it was
first used in the Gigomantichia, the great battle betwixt the gods and the
giants: for in the midst of the skirmish, when the event of the battle grew
doubtful, Triton blew so shrill a blast, that the giants thinking it had been
the voice of foam dreadful and unknown monster that undertook the party of
the gods, turned their backs and fled; by which accident they obtained a more
sudden and safe victory. Pausonias calls Tritia the daughter of Triton, who
was at first one of Mineruaes priests, who being comprest by Mars, brought
forth Menalippus, but that he had more than her, I have not read.

Ino. She was the daughter of Cadmus and Harmonia, who with her son
Melicerta, were entertained into the number of the Sea-gods; he, by the name of
Palaemon; she, of Leucothea: both these are said to have predominance over
sailors, and power in navigations. That she cast her self headlong into the
Sea, I have before related in the tractat of Juno. She was a stepmother, and so
prosecuted the children of Nephetes, that she would have sacrificed one of them
to the gods; for which (as Polizelus says) her husband Athanas did prosecute
her with such rage, that flying to Gerania (a mountain amongst the Megarenses)
from a rock called Maturides she cast her self with her son into the sea; and
of the same opinion is Pausonias: some think it happened at the same time that
the Nereides were dancing there, and that his body was transported by the
waves to Sisiphus, from Exhaenuntia where the Ithnian pastimes were first
celebrated to his remembrance. They of the city Megera affirm, her body to
be cast upon their shore, and by Cleso and Tauropolis, the daughters of Cleson,
took up and buried. She was afterward called Matuta, as Cicero in his Tuscal.
disputations says, Ino the daughter of Cadmus, Is she not called by the
Greeks Leucotoe, and by us Latins Matuta. And that she is taken for the
morning, is manifest by Lucretius, lib. 5. Pausan in his Messanaicis says,
that she was first named Leucotoe in a small village not far from the city
Corone, and that she had clemency in the securing and preserving of ships, and
pacifying the violent and troubled billows of the Ocean- Palaemon is also
called Portunus, or the Key-carrier (as one that keeps a key of all the ports
and havens, to exclude and keep out all foreign enemies) and the son of
Matuta, or the Morning; in that time commonly the winds begin to breath and
rise with the departing of night, and because that from the land they rush upon
the waters, they are therefore said to cast themselves headlong into the sea;
for the morning is the most certain interpreter either of succeeding winds and
tempests, or of the countenance of a sereane sky and fair weather. Strabo
calls Glaucus the son of Anthedon, a Boeotian; but Theophrastus will have him
the issue of Polybus the son of Mercury and Euboea: Promathidas Heraclaeota,
deriues him from Phorbus and the nymph Pampaea, borne in Anthedon, a famous
city of Boetia: Thelytus Methimnaeus in his Bacchik numbers, brings his
progeny from Nopaeus. Epicus in one of his Hymns, from Euanthes the son of
Neptune and Maedis. He is said to have ravished Syma, the daughter of Iclemis
and Doris, and to have transported her into Asia: and was after married to
Hidua, the daughter of Sydnus Scioneus, one that used to diue and fetch things
up from the bottom. But of his issue there is nothing left remembered. It is
commented of him, that being a fisherman, and having taken more fishes that he
could carry upon his back with ease, and laying down his burden to rest him
by the shore, there grew an herb which the dead fishes no sooner touched or
tasted, but they instantly recovered life, and one by one leapt into the sea:
he by tasting the same herb to prove the virtue thereof, was forced to
leap after them, and so was made a Sea-god. Others are of opinion, that
wearied with the tediousness of his age, he willing lie drowned himself.

The wives and daughters of PROTEVS.
ZEtzes in his four and fortith history, calls Proteus, the son of Neptune
and the nymph Phenica; who traveling from Egypt into Phlegra, there took to
wife Torone, by whom he had three sons, Toronus, Timilus, and Telegonus, all
wicked and bloody minded men, who for their cruelty perished by the hands of
Hercules. Aeuripides speaks of one Psamethes, a second wife, by whom he had
Theonoe and Theolymenus. He had moreover these daughters, Cauera, Rhetia, and
Idothaea. This was she that when Menelaus doubted of his return into his
country (having soiourned somewhat long in Egypt) counseled him to apparel
himself and his followers in the fresh skins of Porposes, and counterfeit
themselves to sleep amongst these Sea-cattle, and that about the heat of the
day, at what time Proteus used to come out of the deepes upon the dry land, and
there take a nappe with his Porposes, then to catch fast hold on him sleeping:
and notwithstanding all his changeable shapes and figures, not to dismiss him,
till he had reduced himself to his own natural form, and then he would
predict to him whatsoever was to come. This counsel given by Idothaea, Homer
excellently expresses in his fourth book of his Odissaea. It is said of him
that he could change himself sometimes into water, and again to fire, to wild
beasts, birds, trees, or serpents, etc. Neither did this mutabilitie of shape
belong to him only; for we read the like of Thetis and Mestra, or Meter the
daughter of Ereficthon the Thessalian. Periclimenus the son of Neleus and
Polymela, and brother of Nestor, obtained the same gift of Neptune: of him
Euphorion and Hesiod speaks more at large. Empusa is remembered by Aristophanes
to have the same faculty and dexterity in changing her shape: so likewise
Epicharmus.

Empusa planta, bos fit, atque vipera,
Lapisque musca, pulchra and illa femina:
Quicquid cupit vel denique ille conferat.
Empusa is made a plant, an ox, a viper,
A stone, a fly, and a fair woman too:
What she desires, that she does still resemble.
The Poets (in these changing of shapes, and turning themselves into so many
sundry sorts of creatures) importing nothing else, but the wisdom of such
persons who have searched into the hidden mysteries of Philosophy, and acquired
the natures and properties of water, fire, herbs, trees, and plants, beasts,
birds, and serpents; in which being perfect, they may be (and not altogether
improperly) said to change themselves into the similitudes of so many
creatures.

The daughters of PHORCIS.
THis Phorcis, whom the Latins call Phorcus, was the son of Terra and
Pontus, the Earth and the Sea, as Hesiod in his Theogonia makes him: But Varro
will have him to be the issue of Neptune, and the Nymph Thosea. He had besides
those daughters begot one Ceto, the Phorcidae, namely, the Gorgons; and
Thoosa, who lay with Neptune and brought forth the Ciclops Poliphemus, as Homer
witnesses. He is called also the father of the serpent that kept the Hesperides,
by Hesiod. But I will forbear the rest, to speak something of his daughter
Medusa.

Medusa. She for her lust and immoderate appetite to inchastitie, incurred the
ire of the gods, being so impudent, as to suffer the embraces of Neptune in the
Temple of Minerua. There were diverse of that name, one the daughter of Priam,
another of Sthenelus and Nicippe. Pausanias in Corinthiacis calls her the
daughter of Phorbus; others, of a sea monster, which I take to be Phorcus
before mentioned. Minerua, for the profanation of her Temple being grieuouslie
incenst, thought to punish her in those hairs which a little before were so
wondrous pleasing to Neptune, and turned them into hissing and crawling snakes;
giving her this power, that whosoever gased upon her face, should be in the
instant converted into stone. Isacius is of opinion, that that was not the
cause of her calamity, but relates it another way; That Medusa was of Pisidia,
and the fairest of all women, who glorying in her feature, but especially the
beauty of her hair, dared to contend with Pallas; which arrogant impudency
the goddess heinouslie taking, her hair (in which she so ambitiouslie
gloried) she changed into filthy and terrible snakes, and then gave her that
killing look before mentioned; but pitying at length so general a mischief,
incident to mortal men by that means, she sent Perseus the son of Jupiter
and Danae (or rather as some will have it, he was employed by Polydectes, king
of the Seriphians) to cut off her head: who having before received a hooked
skeyne called Harp, from Mercury, and a shield from Pallas, came to the fenne
called Tritonides, amongst whose inhabitants she exercised her mischief; and
first approaching Pephredo and Aenio, two of the Phorcidae and of the Gorgonian
sisterhood, who were old and wrinckled croanes from their nativity, they had
betwixt them but one eye and one tooth, which they did use by turns; and when
they went abroad, or when they had no occasion to employ them, laid them up in
a casket, for so Ascilus relates. He borrowed of them that eye and tooth:
neither of which he would restore till they had brought him to the nymphs with
winged shoes, which taking from them, and being armed with the Helmet of
Pluto, the sword of Mercury, and the mirror of Pallas, he fled to Tartessus, a
city of Iberiae where the Gorgons then inhabited; whose heads crawled with
adders, whose teeth were like the tuskes of a boar, their hands of brass, and
their wings of gold; and there arriving, found them asleep, and spying her
head in Mineruaes glass, in which he still looked, it directed him so, that at
one blow he cut it off, out of whose blood Pegasus sprung forth. The other two
sisters, Sthumo and Aeuryale, awaking, and this seeing, with the loud hissing
of these innumerable snakes, made a noise most dreadful and horrible: From
whence Pallas first devised the pipe with many heads. The form and shape of
these Phorcidae, In Scuto.
Hesiod elegantlie describes. Crisaor and Pegasus were begot of the blood
dropping from Medusaes head, as Apollonius Rhodius writes in his building of
Alexandria. The Gorgons were called Graee, as Zetzes explicates in his twenty
two history. Chil. 2.
Menander in his book de Misterijs, numbers Scilla amongst these Gorgons, and
that they inhabited the Doracian Islands, situate in the Aethiopick sea, which
some call Gorgades, of whom they took the names of Gorgones. Nimphodorus in
his third book of Histories, and Theopompus in his seventeenth, affirm their
guirdles to be of wreathed vipers: so likewise Polemo in his book to Adaeus
and Antigonus. The occasion of these fictions are next to be inquired after. By
these Graee the daughters of Sea monsters is apprehended, Knowledge, and such
Wisdom as is attained too by Experience. They are said to have but one eye,
which they used when they went abroad, because Prudence is not so altogether
necessary to those that stay within, and solely apply themselves to domesticke
affairs; as to such as look into the world, and search after difficulties. Of
this Wisdom, or these Graee (not impertinentlie called the sisters of the
Gorgons) is meant the pleasures and vain blandishments of the world, with the
dangers that appertain to the life of man: from either of which, no man
without the counsel of Wisdom can acquit himself: Therefore is Perseus said
to overcome the Gorgons, not without the Helmet of Pluto, the eye of the Graee,
the sword of Mercury, and the mirror of Pallas; all which who shall use aright,
shall prove himself to be Perseus, the friend and son of Jupiter.

SCILLA and CHARIBDIS.
A Cusilaus and Appollonius, both nominate Scilla to be the daugther of Phorcia
and Hecate: Char. in Cathen.
but Homer, that her mothers name was Crataeis. Chariclides calls her the issue
of Phorbantes and Hecate: Stesichorus, of Lamia: Tymeus terms her the
daughter of the flood Cratus. Histor. lib. 21.
Pausanias in Atticis, and Strabo in lib. 8. agree that this Scilla was the
daughter of Nysus, King of the Megarenses, who surprised with the love of King
Mynos, stole from her fathers head that purple lock in which consisted the
safety of his own life and kingdom. The Athenians having invaded his
dominion, and ceised many of his towns, and wasted the greatest part of his
country by their fierce and bloody incursions, they at length besieged him in
the city Nysaea. Some are of opinion that Nisus incensed with the foulenes of
that treason, caused her to be cast into the sea, where she was turned into a
sea monster. Pausanias auers, that she was neither changed into a bird, nor a
monster of the sea, nor betrayde her father, nor was married to Nisus, as he
had before promised her; but that having surprised Nisaea, he caused her to be
precipitated into the sea, whose body tossed too and fro by the waves of the
Ocean, till it was transported as far as the Promontorie called Scylaea,
where her body lay so long upon the continent unburied, till it was devoured
by the sea-fowles: this gave place to that fable in Ovid: Filia purpureum Nisi
furata capillum,
Puppe cadens nauis facta refertur auis.
It Is said, the daughter having stolen her fathers purple Hair,
Falls from the hin-decke of the ship, and thence sores through the Air.


Zenodorus says, that she was hanged at the stearne of Minos his ship, and so
dragged through the waters till she dyed: and that Scylla the daughter of
Phorcus was a damsel of imcomparable beauty, and vitiated by Neptune, which
known to Amphitrite, she cast such an inuenomous confection into the fountain
where she accustomed to bath her self, that it cast her into such a madness
that she drowned her self. Of his mind is Miro Prianaeus in his first book
Rerum Messanicarum. Others imagine, that she had mutual consocietie with
Glaucus the sea god, which Circe (who was before inamoured of him)
understanding, she sprinkled the well wherein she use to laue her self with
such venomous juice, that from her wast downwards she was translated into
diverse monstrous shapes; which as Zenodotus Cyrenaeus says, was the occasion
of the fable commented upon her. Isacius thus describes her deformity; She had
six heads, the one of a canker-worme, the other of a dog, a third of a Lion,
a fourth of a Gorgon, a fifth of a whirle-poole or a whale, the sixth of a woman.
Homer in his Odissaees describes her with six heads, and twelve feet, every
head having three order of teeth. Virgill in Sileno says, that all ships were
wrackt and devoured by those dugges that grew beneath her navel.

Charibdis. She was likewise a most devouring woman, who having stolen many
oxen from Hercules, which he before had taken from Gerion, was by Jupiter
stroke with a thunderbolt, and so transformed into that monster of the sea;
others contest, that she was slain by Hercules, and after so transhapt: of
these diverse are diversely opinionated. Strabo says, that Homer imagined the
vehement flux and reflux of that sea about the concaues of those rocks made so
terrible a noise, that therefore the Poets fabulated, that in her sides, and
about her interior parts were the barkings of dogs continually heard. Isacius
writes, that Scilla is a proeminent promontorie over against Rhegium in
Sicilie, hanging over the sea, under which are many huge and massy stones
hollowed by the billows, in whose concauities many sea monsters inhabit, and
when there is shipping in those parts amongst those rocks and shelues, they
are either swallowed by Charibdis or Scylla. Charibdis being situate directly
against Messana, and Scilla against Rhegium: they are therefore said to be
women, because a far off these promontories appear as it were in a feminine
shape, what fleet soever by the tides and tempests was forced upon Charibdis,
were there shipwrackt, and such as by Charibdis were tossed on the rocks of
Scilla were there swallowed. In which fable is included the nature of Virtue
and Vice. No man but in the progress of his life sails betwixt these two
quickfands: if he incline to one hand more than the other, he is either
swallowed by Scilla, or devoured by Charibdis. What else does this signify,
but that which Aristotle in his Aethicks illustrates, Virtue, which is the
medium betwixt two extremes? both which are to be avoided, and the middle,
wherein is safety to be embraced: for man's life is nothing else but a
continual navigations betwixt diverse molestations of one hand, and tempting and
unlawful pleasures on the other; both which are comprehended in these Syrtes,
or places of certain destruction. For Scilla is so called a spoliando, or
repando; of spoiling or grieuing; And Charibdis of sucking up and swallowing;
betwixt which two dangerous, and almost inevitable gulfes, a virtuous and pious
man shall in the greatest storms and tempests (neither inclining to the right,
nor the left) securely, and with great safety attain unto his wished
harbor. Moreover, where Scilla is said to be transhapt into this monster, by
Circe, being so fair and beautiful a creature, What is it but to demonstrate
unto us, that all such as digress from reason, and the true institution of
good life and manners, do withal put on a bestiall and brutish shape, since
Circe imports nothing else than a wanton tillation, inciting us to immoderate
and unlawful lusts and pleasures: and so much I guess was intended by the
Poets in these fables of Scilla and Charibdis.

The Goddesses of the Hills, Woods, Groves, and Trees.
Hydriades, Nimphs belonging to the rivers and wells.
IT is commemorated by Plato, in certain of his verses, that the Hydriades and
Hamadriades much delighted in the music of Pan, who was the god of
sheapheards, and that they used to dance about him; the first beginning of the
harmony which came from the pipe being invented by him and made from his love
the nymph Syrinx, by Ladon changed into a reed, the manner was thus as Ovid
manifests: Lib. 1. Metam.
Syrinx one of Diana's train,
The tale of Pan and Syrinx
Chacing with her ore the plain:
Armed alike with shafe and bow,
Each from other would you know?
Which is which cannot be told,
Save ones was horn the the other gold.
Pan he sees, himself makes fine:
In his cap he pricks a pine,
Now grows careless of his heard,
Sits by brooks to pr^^e his beard,
Meets her and has mind to w^^,
Much be speaks, but more would do.
Still his profers, she denies,
He pursues, and Syrinx flies.
Past her kness her coat up flew,
Pan would feign see something new,
By the leg and knee he guest
('t seems) the beauty of the rest:
Wings it adds unto his pace,
Now the goal he has in chase.
She adds further to his speed,
Now it is no more than need,
Almost caught, Alas (she cries)
Some chaste god my shape disguise.
A River of Arcadia compassing in the Fenne where the reeds first grew.
Ladon hears, and girtes her round,
Spies a reed to make sweet sound,
Such is Syrinx: wondering Pan
Puts it to his pipe anon:
Syrinx thou art mine he said,
So of her his first pipe made.


Isaciu^ says that the nymph Echo was beloved of him, and that by her he had
a daughter called Iringes, she that to Medea brought the love potion which she
presented to Jason: but of Pan and Syrinx Ovid thus speaks, Panaquae came
preusam sibi iam Syringa put^ret
Corpore pro nymphae calamos tennisse palustres.
Pan (flying Syrinx) when he thought
To have caught about the wast,
Steed of the nymphs fair body, he
The fennie reeds embraced.


Which reeds being shaken by the wind, making a kind of melody, of these he
made his first pipe, which he called after her name. Of the Satyrs, Silaeni,
Fauni, and Siluani, memorable things have been recorded, but all being
masculine, they belong not to this history in hand: therefore I purposely omit
them and and proceed to our Terrene goddesses, and of them briefly.

OREADES.
THese because they were bread upon the Hills and Mountains were said to have
a dominion and divine government over them. Strabo calls them the daughters of
Phoroneus and Hecataea, but Horace in his Iliades, will have them the issue of
Jupiter and Oristrade: some hold them to be but five in number, but Virgill
numbers them to be many, and companions with Diana in her hunting.

-- Quam mill secutae
Hinc atque hinc glomerantur Oreades.
Viz. Such as attend Diana over the banks of Eurora, and over the mountains of
Cinthus, a thousand of the Oreades in her company hear and there shining:
M^asaea Patarentis has bequeathed to memory, that these were the first that
observed absteined from eating flesh, contenting themselves with Chesnuttes and
Akornes and the fruits of trees. One of them, called Melissa, first found and
tasted honey in Pelloponesus, with whose taste the Greeks were so pleased that
they call all Bees Melissae, after her name: From hence it came that in the
sacreds of Ceres and in all nations the Priests derived their names from her.
These nymphs were supposed to have the charge of hills and mountains, and
sometimes of such wild beasts as they pursued in the company of Diana: but the
protection of private herds or domesticke flocks was not conferd upon them;
so religious were the people of old, that neither public place, nor private,
was destitute of some peculiar and divine power: so likewise every element,
herb, root, and tree, or whatsoever simple was useful and medicinable, or
obnoxious and hurtful to the life of man. Those of the mountains were Oreades
or Orestiades.

The Driades and Hamadriades.
THe Dryades had predominance over the woods and groaues, as Pomona over the
orchards and gardens. The Hamadriades were the genij of every particular tree;
and as Calimachus in a Hymn to Delos witnesses of them, they begin with their
first plantation, grow with them, and consume and perish as they rot and
wither: their number is not agreed upon. Pausonias in Phocicis calls one of
them Tythorera; in Arcadicis, a second, Erato; and a third, Phigalia.
Claudianus in la^dibus Stiliconis, reckons them seven. Charon Lampsacenus
produces one Rhaecus, who in the country of Assyria having a goodly fair
oak, whose earth shrinking form the root, and being ready to fall; as he was
propping and supporting the tree, and supplieng the decayed mould about it, the
nymph or genius of that tree, which was to perish with it, appeared to him, and
after thanks for so great a courtesy, bid him demand of her whatsoever, and
it should be granted, since by the repayring of that plant she was still to
live: He taken with her beauty, demanded liberty freely to embrace her to
his own fill and appetite, to which she instantly yielded. Appollonius in his
Argonaut. tells of the father of one Paraebius, who going to cut down an
ancient fair oak that had stood many years, a nymph in like manner appeared
to him, humbly petitioning, that he would spare the tree for her sake, since
the age of it, and her, and the lives of both, were limited alike: which he
refusing, so enraged the other of her fellows, that many afflictions befell
both himself and his posterity. Mnesimachus says that they are called
Dryades, because in the oaks their lives are included; and Hamadriades,
because they are borne with them; and Isacius the interpreter of Appollo,
because they perish with them. I will conclude these with one tale recited by
Charon Lampsacenus: Archus (says he) the son of Jupiter and Calisto, being
chacing in the forests, incountred one of the Hamadriades, who told him how
near she was to ruin, in regard that the river running by had eaten away the
earth from the root of such a goodly oak (to which she pointed) and that by
saving that, he should preserve her: at her entreaty, he turned the stream
another way, and supplied the root with earth; for which this nymph, whose
name was Prospetia, granted him her free embraces: of whom he begot Philatus
and Aphidantes. Whether these relations were true or false, is not much to be
disputed on; if false, they were for no other causes devised, but by the
superstition of the people of ancient days, who left nothing vnmeditated that
might stir up men to the adoration of the divine powers, since in every
thing they demonstrated a deity. If they were spoken as truths, I rather
believe them to be the mere illusions of devils and spirits themselves, than
the genij of plants and trees, that made such apparitions.

Of the Goddesses Infernal.
IT lies with much conuenience in our way to make discourse of Pluto, the third
brother of Saturn; of the river Acheron, and the properties thereof; Of Styx,
a flood terrible to the gods themselves, and by which they use to swear; of
Cocitus, of Caron, of Cerberus, of the three infernal judges, Minos, Aeacus,
and Rhadamant, of Tartarus, with diverse others out of all which many excellent
fables, pleasant to read, and profitable to make both morrall and divine use
of, might be collected: but I skip them of purpose, since I am enjoined to it
by promise, for but women only I have now to deal with: It therefore thus
follows.

Of the Parcae.
OF Proserpina we have treated already amongst the supernall goddesses above,
and therefore must necessarily spare her here amongst these below. The Parcae
(or fatal goddesses) are three, Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos. Ceselius Vindex
he gives them three other names, Nona, Decima, and Morta; and cites this verse
of Liuius, a most ancient Poet, Quando dies venit quam praesata morta est.
When the day comes that Morta has presaged.


Some calls them the daughters of Demogorgon: others (as Cicero) of Herebus,
and Nox, Hell and Night; by another name, they are called Fata, the Fates, as
Seneca, Multa ad Fata venere suum dum fata timeant.


As much to say, Many come to their death whilst they fear it. They are said
moreover to measure the life of man with a spindle and thread which they spinne
from their distaffe; from which they are called Lanificae by the Poets,
Lanificas nulli tres exorare puellas
Contigit: obseruant quem statuere diem.
The three wol-weauing sisters none can pray
To change their time, they fix a constant day.


They are said to be inexorable, and by no prayers or intreates to be moved to
alter the limit of the fixed time, or prorogue the life of man one minute after
the date be expired which was proposed at our birthes; therefore Seneca: Nulli
iusso cessare licet:
Nulli scriptum proferre diem.


The Poets thus distinguish their offices: one begins the life of man, and
pluckes the towe from the distaffe; the second, makes the thread, and continues
it; the third cuts it off and so ends it. The first is Clotho, whom Statius
calls Ferrea, or hard hearted; Seneca, Grandaena, or extremely aged; Pontanus,
Improba, and Sedula, obstinate and yet careful and dilligent. The second,
Lachesis, called by Ovid, Dura, hard; by Marciall, Inuida, envious; by
Claudian, Ferrea, obdure and rude. The third Attropos, of whom Statius, -- Hos
ferrea, neuerat annos
Atropos --


Some number Illithia amongst the Parcae.

Plutarch speaking of the face that is visible within the Orb of the Moon,
says some are of opinion that the souls of men are resolved into the Moon,
as their bodies into the Earth: Aliquanto post tempore eas quoque animas in se
recepit Luna atquae composuit. 1. After some time the Moon receives into her
self those souls which she had before framed, restoring their minds before
lost: (for they are all in a dream, like the soul of Endimion) and by
coadiuting with the Seminary and vital powers of the Sun, makes them as new
souls. The Tetra, that is the number of Four supplying the body: for she
gives nothing after death, who receives toward generation. The Sun takes
nothing from, but receives again the mind which he gives; the Moon both
receives and gives, and composeth or makes, and diuides; when she makes, she
is called Lucina; when she deuides, Diana. So of the three Parcae, Atropos is
placed about the Sun, as the beginning of this new birth; Clotho is carried
about the Sun, to collect and mingle; Lachesis the last, her office is upon
the Earth: but these are riddles rather to trouble the brain than profit the
understanding. Parcae the mother of these three sisters, is said to be the
daughter of Necessity: doubtless the Ethick writers held these to be most
powerful goddesses, because all things borne, or that had subsistence, were
thought to be under their jurisdiction and power, and therefore they were
imagined by some to be the daughters of Jupiter and Themis, because (as the
Pithagorians taught) Jove gave to every one a body and form suitable to the
merits or misdeeds of their former life; or else because the divine Wisdom
allotted to every soul rewards or punishments, as their good deeds or badde
deserved, the cause of which division the ancient writers not truly
understanding, appropriated all to Fate, and the Parcae.

FVRIAE or the EVMEMIDES.
THose whom the Poets call Furiae, Virgill terms the daughters of Night and
Acheron. Therefore Galtreus in his twelfth book de Alexand. calls them by a
fit Epithet, Noctiginae, Ego si dea sum, qua nulla potentior, inter
Noctigenus, si me vestram been nost is alumnam?
If I a goddess be, of whom
Amongst the night-borne, none
More potent is, it is well you knew
Me for your nurce alone.


By the same law Mantuan calls them Achecontiginae, as borne of Acheron: they
are called by Lucan amongst the infernals, Canes, dogs: -- Stigiasquae Canes,
in luce superna, Destiluana.
In the upper light, I will forsake the Stigian dogs;
meaning the sisters. Amongst mortals they are called Furiae, because they
stir up and spur on rage and malice in the hearts of men. They are called
also Eumenides by an Antiphrasis, in a contrary sense, for Eumenis signifies
Benevolens or well wishing, therefore Ovid, Eumenides tenuere faces de funere
raptas.


Their temples and foreheads, in steed of hair are said to crawle with snakes
and serpents, as witnesses Catullus, Statius, Mantuanus, in Appollon. and
others. By Virgill they are called Dirae.

Vltricesque sedent in Limine dirae.
Lactantius in his sixth book de Vero Cul^u writes after this manner: There be
three affections or passions, which precipitate men into all violent and
facinerous actions, therefore Poets calls them Furies: Ire, which couets
revenge; Covetousness, which desires riches; and Lust, whose itching appetite
is after all unlawful pleasure. The first of these Furies is called Alecto,
discovered by Virgill, where he terms her Luctifica, as making strife, and
contention: The second is Tesiphone or Tisiphone, the daughter of Acheron, whom
Ovid thus deliniates, Nec mora Tesiphone madefactam sanguine sumit,
Importuna facem, fluidoque cruore madentem:
Induitur pallam tortoquae incingiter angue.
Egrediturquae domo, luctus comitatur cuntem.
Et pauor, and terror, trepidoque insaniae vultu.
Importunate Tesiphone, without delay makes speed
And snatcheth up a smoking brand, which burning seems to bleed,
A garment on her back she throws
All gore, about her wast
A gyrdle of a wreathed snake,
In curled knots she makes fast.
So forth she goes; sad Mourning she
Attends her at the gate:
Upon her steps, grim Terror, Fear,
And troubled Madness wait.


Claudian in his book of the praises of Stilico, calls the third daughter of
Acheron and Night, Megaera: so likewise Mantuan de Calam temporum, lib. 2. The
sacreds that were made to these, were by such as having escaped any dangerous
desease, or pestilent sickness, had bin spared by the Fates; and their
sacrifices were only done with a sad silence. The priests were called
Hesichidae, of a Hero called Hesicho, to whom, before the solemnity, a Ram
was still offered, as Polemo witnesses in that work he writ to Eratosthenes:
It was held a profanation (says he) for any of the meaner sort of people to
have access to these ceremonies, only to these Hesichides, whose family was
only acceptable to these severe goddesses, and in all their oblations had the
principal prime place and precedence. Their chapel is near to Cidonium by
the Nine ports. All such as sacrificed to them, were in black vestures; and
they were always celebrated in the night season, as it is manifest by
Apollonius.

Indutam obscuram per noctem vestibus atris
By night their sable habits they put on.
To them was slain and offered a cole-blacke ewe, and great with young ready
to yeane: neither was there any wine used in their sacrifices, which were
called Nephalia. Now because no man should have hope to hide and conceal his
own guilt and wickedness, to the three severe judges of Hell, were given these
three ministers; which some call by the name of Erinnae, which signifies the
pricks and stings of Conscience (the parents of which they were borne,
importing so much) for there is no greater torture or deeper piercing, than a
man's own sentence against himself. And (compendiously to shut up all) the
ancient writers would by these signify unto us, That to a good and just man
only, all things are safe; and that innocence and integrity alone, make men
feareles and constant against all the mutabilities of fortune, since the like
torments of Mind, and troubles of Conscience still attend on all such as are
impure and dishonest. Thus having past over the goddesses Celestial, Marine,
and Infernal, the goddesses Selectae, Terrestrial, and others; least my
discourse might grow too tedious by appearing dull and heavy, and besides, in
regard that my purpose is aimed at many, or most of that sex, of what estate
and condition soever, to make my work more succinct and compendious, and to
spare you some reading, and my self more labor, I will deliver you a
multiplicitie of histories and tales in few, namely, in a short Epitome give
you the arguments of all the Fables in Ouids Metamorphosis, which for your
better content I shall express to you in verse, and with that conclude my
first book called Clio.

An abstract of all the Fables in the fifteen books of Ouids Metamorphosis,
as they follow in the Poem.
CHaos into four elements divided,
Lib. 1.
Each one into their several place is guided.
And for their sundry creatures, Roomth prepare,
The Inhabitants of The Earth, Sea, Heavens, and Air.
Of earth and water man is first begot,
And the four ages next succeed by lot.
Gold, Silver next, third Brass, the fourth of iron:
In last of which, the Giants seed inuiron
The spacious earth, and are become the head
Of Nations: of their spilt blood man's bred.
This wicked generation, Jove (instated
In high Olimpus, having first translated
Lycaon to the shape of woolfe) destroies
In a deep deluge. Pirrha sole inioyes
The earth, with her Deucalion: these at last,
By several stones behind their shoulders cast,
Repair man's generation: other creatures,
From heat and moisture breed their several features.
Amongst these, the serpent Python is begot.
Him, with an arrow, bright Apollo shot;
In memory of which, Pithaean plays
Are celebrated, even to Caesar's days.
Yet was no Laurel known on earth to be,
Till Daphne was transformed into that tree.
Her father grown disconsolate and sad,
The floods (that of his sorrow notice had)
Come to his comfort: Inachus alone.
To Poeneus ( Daphnes father) tells his name:
Whose beauteous daughter Io (heaven knows how)
Jove, after, Rape, transformes into a cow.
Argus that had a hundred eyes, her kept,
Whom Mercury so charmed, that he slept:
And after Syrinx transformation hard,
His sleepie head, he from his shoulders pared.
His hundred eyes, whose sights begin to waine,
Juno disposed into her peacocks train.
Io restored unto her first shape, bears
Young Epaphus; who being grown to years,
To Phaeton objects, That he was bred
Of mortal strain, and not diuinelie spread.
The Aspiring lad, his mother Climen' leaves: Lib. 2.

And of his father Phoebus he receives
An ominous boon: he, for three days, has won
The guidance of the chariot of the sun:
By which, the universal gloabe is fired,
Jove's thunder strikes the lad that so aspired;
And as a token of that general wrack,
The sunburned Aethiops, have since then bin black.
Now whilst the sisters of young Phaeton,
With Cignus for his death Lament and moan,
The Fates (that all our mortal actions skanne)
Change these to trees, and him into a swanne.
Now Jove surueighs the universe, restored
To pristine beauty: saw, and seeing adored
The bright Calisto, whom he made a rape,
And vitiated in Dianaes shape.
For which, the wrathful Juno changes cheer,
And in her rage, transhapes her to a Bear;
Whom as young Archus chaceth 'ore the plain,
(Her son) and with his arrow had nigh slain,
Jove by his power determinates their iarres,
Changing both mother and the son to stars.
And now the enraged Juno having long
Complained to old Oceanus her wrong,
Is borne to heaven upon her peacocks train,
Stuck with the eyes of Argus lately slain.
Next must the Crow her snow-white hew forgo,
For she despised the shape of Cornix, who
Tells her own transformation: having mourned
For fair Nictimine to'a night crow turned;
She notwithstanding, to Apollo prates,
And how Coronis played him false, relates.
Wrathful Apollo having rashly slain
His beauteous love, turns to the Crow again,
Condemns his babbling, and in deep despite,
To cole-blacke feathers turns his silver white.
Of her and Phoebus, Esculapius came,
Whose fortunes whilst Ocirrhoe does proclaim;
The gods (that of propheticke spells have care)
Transmute her to th'equinall shape of Mare.
Apollo, that but late the Suns coach steard,
Leaving the heavens to keep Admetus heard,
His oxen straie: Battus to Hermes lies,
Whose faith the god in double habit tries:
And finding him, his falsenesse, he so hated,
That to a Tutch-stone Battus is translated.
Thence to the Attick Regions having past,
King Cecrops daughter he inioyes at last,
Hearse the fair, whose envious sister hight
Aglaurus; her, the god for her despite
Turns into stone. Great Jove, Europa spies,
And for her love he leaves th'Olimpicke skies.
Commanding Mercury, whom Maia boar,
To drive Aegenors cattle to the shore.
Thither Europa comes, sweet flowers to cull,
Her, Jove transports to Creete in shape of Bull.
Lib. 3.
Cadmus her brother, by Aegenor charged
To see his sister by some means enlarged,
In his long search a monsterous Dragon slew;
From whose sown teeth, men ready armed grew:
With these, he founded Thebes; after, laments
Actaeons fall, borne to such strange events,
Who by Diana to a Heart transformed,
Was woorried by his hounds. Then Cadmus stormed
At his near kinsmans death. This, Juno joys,
Who in her hate fair Semele destroies;
The shape of her nurse Beroe she assumes,
By whose bad counsel, Semele presumes
To ask her own death. Now some few days after,
Jove with his Queen disposed to mirth and laughter,
Dispute of Venus, and desire to find,
Which sex to pleasure should be most inclined.
Tiresius (who before both sexes proved)
Judges the cause on Jove's side. Juno moved,
Depriues him sight: to recompense his eyes,
Jove fills him with the spirit of prophesies.
His augurie Narcissus first made good,
Who against all women's loves opposed stood;
Among whom the fair nymph Echo by her sorrow
Lost all save voice, which she from voice does borrow:
He, pining with self-love, was the same hour
(Loosing his form) transhap't into a flower.
Pentheus, the sage Tiresius does deri'd,
Though he before the truth had prophesied:
For when god Bacchus rights were celebrated,
One of his Priests (who had before related
Of sailors turned to fishes) he keeps bound,
Receiving from the Bachides many a wound.
This makes the wine gods Orgyes of more fame,
Alcathoe with her sisters mock the same. Lib. 4.

And at their distaffes many tales they tell,
First, what unto the blacked Moors befell:
Of Phoebus to Eurinome transuerst,
By which all lets and troubles are dispersed,
That he may freely with Leucothoe lie,
For which the jealous Clytie seems to die;
But turns into a Turnsole: they relate
Hermophraditus next (by wondrous fate)
And Salmacis, both in one body mixed.
This done, the sisters in their madness fixed,
Convert to batts, their spindles change to Vines,
Their webbes to leaves, made by the god of wines.
At which whilst Agaue reioic't, her glee
Is turned to discontent, for she may see
Ino and Athamas of great renown,
Run headlong to ^rock and thence leap down,
These being made sea-gods; whilst the Theban dames
Lament their new change, and inuoke their names,
Amid'st their sorrows and sad funeral mones,
Part are made birds, and part are turned to stones.
Cadmus with these calamities distressed,
Leaves Thebes, and in Illiria he seeks rest.
Where with his wife debating midst the brakes
They soon may see each other turned to snakes.
Alone Acrifius still remains instated,
Of all that Bacchus and his Oryges hated.
Perseus his graund-child, of fair Danae bred,
With crooked harp cuts off Gorgones head.
Whose purple drops as to the earth they fall
Turn into serpents and before him crawle.
Atlas he changes into a mountain hye,
And all those shackles that Andronia tie,
Are into stones converted: many a bold guest
Intends to interrupt his bridal feast.
Where Phineus, Pretus, and their furious band
Are changed to Marble, and before him stand.
Pallas (till now the noble Perseus guide) Lib. 5.

Leaves him, and through the air does gently glide
To Helicon, there does the goddess mean
To view the famous Well called Hippocrene.
The nine-Muse sisters of the Pyrens tell,
And what to the Pyerides befell.
How they contending with the Muses were
Transformd to Pyes, still chattering every where.
Lib. 6.
By whose example Pallas soon puts on
A Beldams shape, transports her self anon
To Ariachne, who with her compares,
And having after strife, wrought sundry chares,
Pallas transhapes her to a spider, leaving
Her ancient Art, to take delight in weauing.
This mooues not Niobe, who late had lost
Her children, and in diverse turmoyles tossed,
Is changed to stone. Now when the people knew
This portent, they the memory renew
Of the base Lysian rustickes turned to Frogs,
And by Diana doomed to live in bogges.
They Marsias likewise can remember still,
Who ranks his music with Apolloes quill:
But he that against the gods, sought praise to win,
In this contention lost both lawd, and skin.
When all the neighboring cities came to cheer
Distressed Thebes, the Athenians absent were;
And to their sorrows can no comfort bring,
Being at home awde by a tyrant king.
Tereus, who the fair Philomel' deflowring,
Turns to a Lapwing, in the air still towering,
As Philomel' into a Nightingale,
And Progne to a Swallow. This sad tale
Unto Pandion told, he dies with grief:
In whose sad king dome next succeedes as chief,
Ericteus: Orithea the fair
His daughter, Boreas to his kingdom bare.
Of her, he Calain and Zethus got:
Amongst the Argonauts these took their lot.
There Jason the whit^ teeth off serpents sew,
Of which, men armed in complete harness grew.
The waking dragon made to sleep: the Fleece
Of gold from Phasis after brought to Greece.
Medea he bears thence; She by her art
Lib. 7.
Makes young, old Aeson, promising to impart
Like good to Peleus; to his daughters showing,
From a decrepit Ram, a young lamb growing:
But slew him by her fraud. Transported thence,
She with Aegeus makes her residence:
Against whom Minos wars, having collected
Men from all places, by his skill directed:
As some from Paros, which long time before,
Arne betrayed, for which she ever were
The shape of Daw. King Aeacus supplies
With Mirmidons, that did from pismires rise,
King Minos: Cephalus these forces led,
Who seeing to adulterat his own bed,
Preuailes with Procris: whilst his dogs in chase
Of a wild fox, both in the self same place
Are changed to stone^ Minos, Alchathoe woone.
Nisus and Scilla are in shape foredoone,
He to a Hawke, she to a Lark is shifted, Lib. 8.

And through the air with their light feather lifted.
Thence he returns to Creete, all sad and dull,
Where lived the Minotaure half Man half Bull;
Him Theseus slew, and after does beguile
Fair Ariadne left in Naxos Isle.
With her god Bacchus enters amorous wars,
And places on her head a crown of stars.
Young Icarus with his old father flies,
And down into the sea drops from the skies.
His death, whilst Daedalus laments: his sees
The Partridge new transformed. Now by degrees
Theseus winnes fame, scarce spoken of before,
Being called to hunt the Calidonian Boore;
Which Meleager slew, and died by the hand
Of his own mother, in the fatal brand.
His sisters with loud shreekes his death proclaim,
Being all changed into Birds called Meleagrides.
birds that bear his name.
He visits Achelous in his way,
And all these Islands that but the other day
Were Nymphs and: Naides which appeared true,
Since the like transformation Lelex knew,
In Baucis and Philemon, whom he sees
Growing before him in the shape of trees.
Their cottage made a Temple for their sakes,
The village where they dwelt, all standing lakes.
Achelous adds to these the transformations
Of Proteus and of Mestra, with the fashions
That he himself appeared in, when he proved
His strength against Hercules: both dearly loved
Fair Deianeira; who having understood
Her husbands scapes, dipped in the Centaures blood
A fatal shirt. Alcides does expire, Lib. 9.

Being after made a star: Lychas her squire,
Is sixth a sea-rocke: whilst Alcmena hyes
To Iole, and as they two devise,
She tells her of Galantis, before made
A monstrous Weasill: the other shows the gl^de,
In which at that time she might growing see
Her elder sister, now grown to a tree.
To them comes Iolaus, in the way
(Made young by Hebe^) Jove himself can say
And instance Aeacus, this to be true,
From him Miletus fled, and thence withdrew
Himself to Asia, from whom descended
Caunus, and Biblis, whose not love extended
To her own brother (as the stories tell)
And weeping, was desolu'd into a well.
This had appeared more strange, were it not known
Young Iphis on her marriage day was grown
To be a compl^at man; these nuptials saw
Hymen: and thence he does himself withdraw
Lib. 10.
To Orpheus spousalls, but his bright robes di'd
In funeral black: Euridice the bride
Expires upon her marriage day, being stung
In the anckle by a snake, when Orpheus sung
His various transformations to the Lyre,
The trees to hear him from all parts desire,
Amongst whom came the Cypress and the Vine,
The one clasp's Cyparissus in her twine,
The other Atis; every Thrasian fro,
That in his death had hand, besides them grow,
Lib. 11.
And are made trees. Bacchus departs from Thrace,
And because Midas gave Silenus place,
With entertainments due, to quittance this,
He guerdons Midas with his golden wish:
Who after wearied with his rauishing dreams,
Was made to wash him in Pactolus streams.
They since that time their golden tincture keep
Still glistring when the Sun shines on the deep.
Pans music and Apollos, Midas hears,
And by false sentence gains him Asses ears.
Phoebus (this done) an humane shape puts on,
And build's Troyes walls, to be excelled by none.
This city, great Alcides having rac't:
With Pirams Hesion.
sister, he the valor graced
Of Ajax Telamon, who in these bralls
Was first set foot upon the Dardan walls.
Peleus wedds Thetis, though against her will,
For though she by her godhead had the skill
To shift in sundry shapes, yet was comprest,
And Peleus lodged upon her yuorie breast.
To Ceix he past thence (one of his blood)
Where he part saw and partly understood
Dedalion take on him a goshawkes shape,
And Woolfe made stone, that flying thought to escape.
Soon after this, Alcinoe in her bed
Dreaming she saw her lord shipwrecks and dead,
And from the shore his liuelesse body floting,
Both were made birds; which some spectators noting,
Straight call to mind, how Esacus the son of Priam.
Aesacus before
Was changed into a Sea-gull: him deplore,
Priam, and all his sons as lost and dead,
Excepting Paris, who to Greece was sped,
And brought thence Hellen: him the Greek^s pursue
At Aulis Gulf they anchor: where in view
Of the whole fleet, a Dragon they epsy
Obdur'd to stone. To Troy-ward thence they hye,
Where Cygnus, on whose skin no steel could bite,
Was by the great Achilles bruised in fight:
And at the instant made a silver Swan,
So Coenis once a woman, now a man,
Was after likewise to a bird converted.
This tale'mongst others Nestor had inserted.
Periclimenes change to her repeates.
Neptune mean time the other gods intreates
About Achilles death, being much offended
At his late loss: he dead, Ajax contended Lib. 12.

With slye Ulysses, for his arms and shield:
Ajax disgraced expires, and in the field:
Where his blood dropped a purple Hicinth grew,
In memory that Ajax, Ajax slew.
Troy sact by the Argiues, Hecuba the Queen
Turns to a she dog, keeping still her spleen:
Her sad distaster all the gods lament,
Aurora sheddes most tears, still discontent
For Memnons death. Aeneas leaving Troy
To Anius comes, a prince deprived all joy,
Because his daughters were made house-doues, sad,
That he of them no greater comfort had.
Thence past he diverse shores and sundry nations,
With wonders filled, and various transformations.
Till piercing Italy (yet free from scar)
With the bold Turnus he begins new war.
He sends to importune Diomedes aid
By Venulus: whose fellows were all made Lib. 13.

Light feathered birds: th'imbassador denied,
And back returning by a rivers side
Spies a wild Olive, which before had bin
A lovely sheapheard, but now changed for sin.
Aeneas ships are in the haven burned,
But pitied by the gods, to sea-nymphes turned;
Ardea to a bird more strange than these,
Himself into a god called Indiges.
Him, other kings succeed, and amongst the rest
Lived under Proca (that fair nymph who best
Can skill of Gardens) unto whom resorted
The fresh Vertumnus, and Pomona courted:
He in an old wives shape to her relates
The tale of Anaxarites, how the fates
For her obdurenesse turned her into stone.
Pomona listening (and they both alone)
He to his youthful shape again retires,
And in the Garden quensht his amorous fires.
In process under Numitor the king,
Where carst cold waters slid, now warm bathes spring.
Him Romulus succeeding, is created
The god Quirinus, and his wife instated
The goddess Ora'. Him Numa next insues
Who of the birth of Croton asking news:
He chanced on pebles, who in all men's sight
Once being black, were changed to perfect white.
He likewise heard Pythagoras declame
All the transhapes beneath the heavenly steame.
Aegaeria next king Numaes death deploring,
Not comforted at all with thy restoring^
Hippolitus, nor yet to hear thee tell
Thy change; she wept her self into a well.
Nor is this to be wondered, since we see
Thy Lance (oh Romulus) a flourishing tree.
And Cyppus to wear horns: (having gone so far)
We end with Julius Caesar made a star.
Explicit lib. primus. Inscripus CLIO

THE SECOND BOOK inscribed EVTERPE.
Of the Muses, the Sybells, the Vestalls, the Prophetesses, the Hesperides, the
Graces, etc.
THE bodies of all reasonable creatures (as Ficinus says) are naturally
pregnant, as having in them the seeds of issue, so likewise is the mind; both,
still procreating and bringing forth: as we see at such a time the heir
appears; after, the teeth break forth of the gummes; at such an age, the
beard grows upon the chinne, and in time alters and changes color; and still
the natural faculties are in action. If then the body be so fertile, how much
more is the nobler part of man, the Soul and the Mind, plentifully furnished
with these seeds, that long for production? as the instinct of manners, of
arts, of disciplines, and such like, which are generated in the breast, and in
their fit and due time have their seasonable birth. For no sooner are we past
the cradle, but we begin to affect few things good, honest, or profitable: but
none at that age acquires after things unknown. It is therefore a consequent,
that there is borne with us and bread in us, certain notions of those outward
things, the forms of which we apprehend, and their practice study to imitate.
This every man, if he will but observe, may by experience find in himself.
For if we recollect our selves to apprehend any problem or mystical doubt,
which is not within the compass of our present capacity; after deep
consideration and mature deliberation, all the bars and rubbes of our
fantasy and senses being removed, we retire our selves into a more private
and inward contemplation, and then most subtillie reasoning with our selves, we
shall by degrees perceive the clowd to vanish, and the truth appear in full
glory and splendor. Therefore, when we present our selves unto
schoolmasters: the brain fashioneth in it self many Ideas, without rule or
example, which like a rank and well manured field, has in it the seeds and
grounds of many fruitful sciences; these if a skillful man take in hand, bring
often times a croppe above expectation. Thus much Plato expressed in many places,
but in his Theage most plainly, No man (says he) has of me learnt any
thing, though from me, many a one has gone the more learned. And as Socrates
says, Me t^m exhortan^e tum bono demone suggerente, By my exhortations, and
the good Angels suggestion. With this short preparation, we come now to the
Muses, of these innate seeds, the glorius and euer-during fruit. Hesiod
pronounces them to be the daughters of Jupiter and Memory, in his Theogonia.
From hence it seems, the men of Gnydos had a custom to select sixty grave
and understanding men, out of the prime of the nobility, Plutarch in Graecis
petit.
and to commit unto them the affairs of the Commonwealth, and such they
called Amnemodes, or remembrancers. Alcmaeon and some few others, call them the
daughters of Earth and Heaven. Pindarus in one of his Hymns thus speaks to
one of them, Incipe vero Coeli filia. Aristarcus and Mimnerca (if we may
believe Eustathius) determine, that the Muses were before Jupiter, interpreting
the word Musa, the knowledge of the soul, which is a thing no less divine
than the soul it self. To him Homer assents, calling it, The celeritie of
knowledge. Plato in Cratilo deriues it from diligent search and inquisition, to
whom Pharnutus in his book entitled, Of the nature of the gods, subscribes.
Of the same opinion is Suidas. They are therefore (says he) derived from
Inquiry, being the originalls and causes of all sciences and disciplines:
others, as Cassiodorus, because they contain in them a conueniencie and
concordance of arts: or (to conclude) as Diodorus writes, They were therefore
called Musae, because they comprehend the art of modulation or tuning, with a
consent or agreeing of all other disciplines. Diverse authors much differ about
their number, Varro, as Seruius witnesses of him, allows only three, Ina,
which is bred by the motion of the water; a second, begot by the sprinkling of
the air; a third, meerelie arising from the sound of the voice. Augustine
speaks of a city, which Gyraldus names Sicion, the primates of which, of
three several famous worke-men bespake three effigies or images of the Muses,
to bestow as a gift upon the Temple of Apollo; and which of them could express
the greatest art and most exquisite workmanship, he to be the best paid for
his pains. It so happened, that their three labors were equally beautiful,
and so esteemed, in so much that all the nine pieces pleasing generally, they
were all bought and dedicated to the Temple. To every of which, the Poet Hesiod
after gave a several Emblem or Motto: Not (says he) because Jupiter had
begot nine Muses, but that three artificers had forged three apeece: and
therefore the number of three; because it is easy to observe, that every
sound which begets any material thing concerning music, is tripartite by
nature: either it proceeds from the voice simply, as to those that sing
without an instrument; or with the breath, as the Trumpet, Cornet, or Sackbut;
or by the strokes, as the Lute, Harp or Gitterne. The names of these
statue-makers, Augustine says, were Cephisodotus, Strongilio, and
Olimpiosthines. Pausonias relates, that in times of old there were acknowledged
no more than three, (by Oto and Ephialtes the sons of Aloeus) called
Meditation, Memory, and Song or Music. Archestratus the Poet, affirms as
much; as also, that these two were the first that offered divine sacrifice to
the Muses, and imposed these names upon them in Hellicon. Some authors will
approve but two; others will make them up four, for the excellency of the
number, which the Pythagorists held to be so sacred, that by that (as Plutarch
replies) they used to swear, Per quaternionem sacrum, qui animae nostrae
tradi^ naturam aeternam, etc. By the holy number of four, which lends to the
soul an eternal nature, etc. Some have raised them to five; others to seven;
Pierius Macedo, he increased their number to nine. Some are of opinion, that
the names of the nine daughters of Pierius were imposed upon the Muses: these
are charactered by Hesiod in his Theogonia. Lucan in his third dialogue of the
supernall gods, calls the Muses virgins, and such as are contented with their
native color and beauty: he likewise terms them invulnerable, as not to be
touched or wounded with the wanton darts of Cupid. They were crowned diverse
ways by diverse nations: some bestow Coronets of the palm tree upon them,
some-lawrell, others chaplets of roses: to which Sapho seems to allude, most
elegantlie taunting an unlearned woman, -- Mortua Iacebis
Nec enim hortulum habes rosarum ex Pi^ria,
-- Thou shall lie dead
Without Pierian roses 'bout thy head.


Cornutus in a book entitled De natura Deorum, says, that there were first
only three, according to that number which is attributed to the deity, as
the most simple and perfect of all others. Those that made four, as Cicero, or
five, had reference to the ancient instruments of music then in use, and
which yielded no more several sounds. Those that approved seven, to the
seven liberal arts alluded the seven Muses. But there are nine received and
allowed amongst us, and that for diverse reasons; as first because the number
of nine is held to be vertuall and perfect; being an even four, arising from a
first odd; and then odlie to an odd: it is likewise divided and distinguished
into three equal odds, then it consists of Triangulors, etc. Besides
Mnemosi^e, who is said to be the mother of the Muses, her name consists of nine
letters. Fulgentius says, that the nine Muses, with their brother Apollo,
import nothing else than the ten modulations of man's voice, therefore is
Apolloes harp represented with ten strings: so in the Scripture we read of
the Decachord or Psalterie: others moralize it to be the four former teeth,
against which the tongue strikes: the two lips which are the Cymbals or
Instruments to fashion the words: the tongue and the string of the tongue: the
palate, whose concauitie begets a sound: the windpipe which is the passage of
the breath; and the lungs, which like a pair of bellows, gives and takes
back the air or spirit. Virgill of the Muses writes thus: Clio gesta canens
transact is tempora reddit,
Melpomene tragico proclamat maesta boat^.
Comica lasciuo gaudet sermon Thalia,
Dulciloqui calamos Euterpe flatibus vrget.
Terpsichore affectus Cytharis mouet, imperat, auget,
Plectra gerens Erato saltat pede, carmine, vultu.
Carmina Calliope libris heroica mandat.
Urania poli motus scrutatur and Astra:
Signat cuncta man^ loquiturque Polimnia gestu,
Mentis Apolliniae vis has mouet vndique Musas,
In medio residens complectitur omnia Phoebus.
Clio past acts to after ages sings,
Melpomine, with tragic buskin, she
In bellowing breath proclaims disasterous things.
Comic Thalia affects wanton lie
To speak and write. The eloquent man's quill
Euterpe undertakes to inspire
With her learned breath. Terpsichore is still
Busied about the music of the Lyre,
The Affections to command, to move, and sway.
But Erato a Rebeck bears, and knows
To tread to it: of Verse she can the way,
And how to frame the gesture. Number flows,
In straynes Heroic, from Calliop's pen;
Which she to books commits. The stars and spheres,
Urania searches, and instructs men
In their true motion. Polihimnia steares
Action and language, by her hand directed,
Which by her help, an orator much graceth.
By Phoebus thus the Muses live protected,
He in the midest, the Nine about him places.


It may now lastly be demanded by those that are studious of antiquities, Why
the Virtues, the Disciplines, the Muses, the Deuisers and Patrons of all good
arts, with diverse of the like nature, should rather be comprehended under the
faeminine sex, by the names of Virgins and women, as also their pictures
drawn to the portraitures of damosells, than either by masculine nomination,
or according to the effigies of men; the rather since not only the Ethnickes
and Morrall men, but even Christians and Theologists themselves, in all their
books and writings which they commit to posterity continue them under the
same gender? for who is ignorant that Sophia, which signifies Wisdom, was not
from the beginning, and before the world; who is said to be the mother of the
three Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, and these represented as
Women? why should the seven liberal Arts, be expressed in Women's shapes? why
the nine Muses be the daughters of Jupiter; as all writers agree? Why is
Wisdom called the Daughter of the highest, and not rather the Son, as
witnesses the book of Wisdom? why Pallas, otherwise called Minerua, not the
Son, but the Daughter of Jove, (of whose brain she was borne?) and why the
most curious and diligent inquisiters into these curiosities figure the liberal
Arts and Disciplines like women and not rather like men? or by what reason the
Muses should be personated rather like Damosells than young men, strenuous and
excelling in masculine Virtue? To all these objections, it is briefly answered
by Lilius Gregorius, as likewise by Cornutus whom some call Pharnutus; That by
the symbol or semblance of such women, much science is begot, and besides much
fruit arises from the judgment of the soul: besides it was a custom of old
for Virgins to play and dance in companies, which excellently fitted the
coupling and sisterhood of the sciences: these coherences are called by
Martianus Capella, Ciclicae; from whence Vitruuius grounded his Euciclium:
besides, the Greeks Euciclopaedia is frequent with Pliny, Plutarch and the
rest: likewise in Beroaldus commentaries upon the Golden Ass, he adds this one
thing worthy observation, to the great honor and commendation of the feminine
sex: the four parts of the world have their denominations from women. Asia was
so called of the nymph Asia, from whom and Iaphethus, Prometheus descended;
Europe, of Europa the daughter of Aegenor; Lybia, which is Africa, of Lybia the
daughter of Epaphus; in like manner America (since discovered) bears the like
female figure: which (as Beroaldus says) if the women of our age did fully
apprehend and truly understand, how insolently would they boast of their worth
and dignity? how would they glory in vain boasts and ostentations, how much
vncontinuall chidings would they vpbrayde their husbands, still casting in
their dishes their own vetues and goodness; still commemorating and urging,
that women bear the names of all the four parts of the divided world; that
wisdom and the theological virtues are personated under the sex of women;
that the Arts, the Disciplines, the Muses, the Graces, and almost whatsoever is
good, are deciphered both by the names and in the persons of women: therefore
(I fear) this had been better kept as secret as mysteries in Sanctuaries, and
not to have been published to them in their own mothers tongue, in which they
are so nimble and voluble; least calling a Counsel about this argument, it may
add to their insolences, who have too great an opinion of their own worths
already.

I will only speak briefly from what places they took their general
denominations, and so proceed to every particular person: They were called
Pierides, of the mountain Pieris, or as some will have it of Picrius, who had
nine daughters: Likewise Camoenae a Canendo, of singing; Heleconiades of the
fountain called Helicon, that flowed from a mountain in Boetia; Pernassides,
of the hill Pernassus, situate in the Region of Phocis; Aonides, of the Aonian
mountain; Pegasides, from a spring or well so called, first discovered by the
hooffe of Pegasus, the horse of Perseus; Cithereides, of Citheron, a hill near
to Thebes; Libethrides, from a fountain in Magnesia; Pimplaeades, from a place
in Macedonia; Ilisstades, from a flood by Athens; Thespiades, from the
Thespians; Ligyae, of a people of Larissina, who aided Xerxes against the
Greeks; Castalides, of the fountain so called; Corycides, of a hill, or
rather a cave amongst the Delphians; Pat^ides, of a well in Macedonia;
Olimpiades, of the mount Olimpus; Ardalides, of Ardalus the son of Vulcan: of
these you may further read in Varro, Herodotus, Terentianus, Plutarchus,
Pompeius, Pausonias, Solinus, Seruius, Macrobius, Sidonius, Placiades, Lilius,
Gregorius, Picus Mirandula, and others.

CLIO.
HEsiodus in his Theogonia says, that Clio is the daughter of Jupiter and
Memoria, and is the eldest of those Muses which he was nine nights a getting:
she is called Clio, apo tou kleno, which is Laudo, to praise: or of apo to^
cleous, for glory which learned men acquire; or that glory which is conferred
on eminent and great men, by the encomiasticks of Poets, so says Diodorus: But
Placidus deriues the Etimologie of her name from the cogitation and
inuestigation of arts and sciences. Some say, that she has the pre-eminence
and government over histories, as Apollonius in his Commentaries relates (and
therefore at this time I am to invoke her aid and assistance in the
prosecutition and perfecting of this work in hand.) She is moreover taken for
the mother of Or Ialemus.
Hyalemus and Hymenaeus, the god of marriage; who are therefore called the
sons of Clio, because of their knowledge in History, for so Johannes
Gramm^ticus is of opinion: the first, the Author of sad and mourning
Madrigalls: the other of pleasant and joyful Epithalamions and nuptial songs:
the first in melancholy Elegeicks: The last, in lofty Iambicks. Apollodorus
in his first book of the Original of the gods, says, that Clio was besotted
with the love of Pierius, the son of Magne^is: (by the incensed wrath of
Venus, because she reproved her for too much dotage on Adonis) and that by
Pierius, she had the boy Hyacinthus: But that it is she by whom all men are
accited and spurred on to the purchase of honor and glory, whence else came
that magnanimous and bold enterprise of Hercules in that great Centauromachia
against the sons of Ixion? to call to combat all the rebustious pirates at sea,
and robbers and spoylers on earth? Tyrants and evil doers to tame? and horrid
and dreadful labors to overcome? the invulnerable Lion of Cytharon to tear
in pieces? The many headed monster Hydra to suffocate and strangle? the
Eremanthian boar to slaughter, and the golden horned heart to overcome? The
ravenous Stimphalides to repel? and all the monsters and terrors of the earth
in single monomachy to overcome? but to attain to the Apex and height of fame
and glory, What moved Theseus (the second Hercules) to remove the rocks, and
pluck thence and bear away the enchanted sword? the Minotaure to kill? the
tedious way to Athens to travel? the streights and passages in his journey to
clear and free? Corineta, with his own proper mace to ruin? Pitiocamptes
Sinis, the son of Polypones, to oppress? and many other enterprises of no
less danger to acquire and accomplish? What encouraged the Captains and
Generals of the Grecian and Roman Empire to such noble atchieuements, save
only the spur of glory to immortalise their names to all perpetuity? So
did his Poetry illustrate Homer; his eloquence, Demosthenes; and his
integrity, Aristydes. In like manner, others by other means have celebrated
their names to posterity, to whom this Encomium may be justly given, Such as
have virtue in prise and estimation, they tread the illustrious path: for every
man's proper action does nobilitate his own name. Such therefore as desire to
be eternised, it behooues them auspiciously to begin with some act either of
consequence or danger. For so says Pindarus in his sixth Hymn Olimp. In the
beginning of an enterprise a courageous and an undaunted countenance is
behoouefull. For virtues are senseless of dangers. And Hesiod says, Virtutem
posuere dij sudore parandum,
The gods have placed virtue, not to be arrived too without sweat and travel.


But it is next to be inquired what the ancient Poets chiefly intimated in this
Nymph Clio: She is called the daughter of Jupiter, and signifies Glory. If it
be lawful therefore to acquire glory, and to leave the memory of your noble
actions to posterity, far be it we should seek the daughter but from the
father, or court her without his consent: who from the memory and
contemplation of a deed well done, deriues to us a fame, in no age not to be
celebrated. She is called Prima cogitation, i. The first thought of seeking
knowledge: and because no man's meditations are about that by which he has not
a purpose to enlarge the dignity of his own name, therefore she is called the
first of the Muses. Plutarch in his Simposaicon, diuides the nine Muses into
two halfes: the one to govern and have dominion over pastimes and pleasures,
least any man should foolishlie and unadvised fall upon actions dishonest or
uncomely, stirring him up with songs, dances, and sweet sounding instruments,
to virtuous exercises; and reteining and keeping him back from lusts, both
unlawful and pernicious: the other division incourages us, to actions
difficult, to affairs serious and of import; and these are Clio, Calliope, and
Thalia: for all things ought to be done in that Symmetria and due proportion of
mediocritie, that in our sports we slide not into lusts, and in things serious
westumble not at the morositie and peevishness of age. She had two sons,
Ialmus and Himenaeus, men of two sundry lots and conditions; the one in no
place, but where there was ejulation and mourning; the other where there was
ever sport, mirth, banquets, and nuptial joys. And as Athenaeus observes from
Aristophanes, In Luctu Ialmus, in nuptijs Himenaeus. Nothing else is apprehended
by these two brothers of such contrary dispositions, but that all such as
seek after glory and the immortality of their names, are sometimes with
cross and sinister accidents oppressed, and sometimes with fair and
prosperous successes encouraged and puffed up; singing sometimes the joyful
songs of Hymeneus, and forced at other times to be subject to the sad and
melancholy howlings of Ialmus. And so much of Clio.

EVTERPE.
EVery man has his pleasures and delights, as well wise men as fools: there
is no man of so severe a gravity or austere a condition (no not Timon him
self) whose nature is not mollified, and made more tractable with the delight
of some one thing or other. One is much pleased with horses of good stomach,
another with dogs of excellent sent or swiftness, some with wealth, others
with honor, and so of the rest; and thus we pass through the pilgrimage of a
life full of infelicities and calamities, with the greater content and ease by
pondering some such things in our minds, in which we take the greatest pleasure
and comfort. Neither are the wise men without this alacrity, being sometimes
extaside in the contemplation of things sublime and high. Plato in Philebis
(says he) As the imtemperat man takes pleasure, so does the temperat man in
his temperance; As the fool is delighted in his foolish opinions and vain
hopes, so is the wise man in his wisdom and constant purposes; but that their
contents are different and of contrary qualities, no man makes question. The
wise man therefore and the unwise have both their pleasures, but so far
pre-excelling is the one, as the other is vile, abject, and contemptible: for
the one is gorged and surfetted with his delicacies, even to loathing and
vomit; the other, inebriated or rather quickened and inspired with the sprightly
nectar of contemplation, flies into the celcitude and majesty of things
inscrutable: neither conteines he himself within the narrow and straight
empire of this universe, but acquires things above capacity, and transcending
nature; for incited with the deep study of metaphysicall philosophy, he
strives even to trace the steps of the infinite majesty, though it be confessed
that this ambition of his is both foolish and arrogant, yet is it daring, and
noble, that not satisfied with the knowledge of humble and terrhene things,
pierces deeper, and aymeth higher, till it attain that perfection of height,
that the mind or understanding being filled, may stop at the farthest, as
there having fixed non vltra. But this small digression, being of Euterpe, which
word implies nothing else but true delectation or delight, I hope has not been
much impertinent. Hesiod calls her the second Muse in order, and the daughter of
Jupiter and Memory. Neanthes in his book entitled Rerum Graecarum, calls her
the mother of Themistocles but Amphicrates in his tractat of illustrious men,
Lib. 3.
contraries that, and affirms the strumpet Abrotonum to be his mother. Euterpe
is called the goddess of pleasantnes and iollitie, said to be delighted in all
sorts of pipes and wind instruments, and to be both their inuentresse and
guidresse; therefore it is not probable or credible, that Themistocles should
be her son, when at a solemn banquet, as M. Tullius witnesses, he refused
the harp, for which he was accused in that assembly of rudeness and
discourtesie, or else of want of skill, which was a kind of aspertion in those
days and places. Lib. Sherap.
Galenus says, that the Lyre or harp (the pipe of which Euterpe was the first
deviser) were held in great estimation and honor: these be his words, As in
times of old to play upon the harp at meetings and banquets, or the like
instruments, was held laudable and honest; so either to deny it, or have no
skill in it, was an opprobry and scandal. Lycurgus, though he instituted most
hard and severe laws over the Lacedaemonians, yet the practice of music he
did both allow and highly commend, as a sollace by which the troublesome burden
of labor and travel might be the easilier transmitted. Fauius says, that
songs cheer the gally-slaue at his oar, and the pipe though not exquisitelie
played upon, yet the modulation is comfortable to such as are ouertrauelled. The
first use of pipes amongst the Greeks was after certain great victories
achieved, where they were in great opinion of themselves; but they were after
relinquisht in Athens, either because they were held as inciters to wanton
meetings, or because they raised a kind of uncomeliness and deformity in the
faces of such as played upon them. Of these pipes there were diverse kinds, That
which was made of the Lote-tree, was called Plagiauton; that of the Box tree,
Elimon; that of the Laurel tree, Hippophorbon; Monantus was likewise made of
the Lote-tree, and most used at nuptials, which was called also Pholingia. The
pipe named Libis, called by some Matroa, was that which was solelie attributed
to the invention of Euterpe, though some bestow it on the mother of the gods.
The Tyrhenes used pipes of horn; the Thebanes made theirs of the shankebones
of Hynd calfes; the Celtae, of reeds; the Islanders of the Ocean (as the
Scithae, the Antropagi, and Armaspians) of the leg bones of Eagles and
Vultures; the Egyptians pipe called Polypthongos, is composed of the stalks
of Barlie. There be as several sorts of this kind of instrument, as it is used
amongst sundry nations and places. Certain it is, though her invention was
but poor and wretched at the beginning, yet it increased miraculouslie: for
almost no nation but sung their songs, oades, ditties and hymns, to several
sorts of wind instruments; but especially amongst the Germans in Europe they
were in the most frequent use, from whom they had the name of Tybiae. The
interpreters of Appollonius and Rhodius affirm that she first invented the
Mathemata, or disciplines: others, that she was much practiced in Logic. To
speak in one word what the Poets materiallie intended by Euterpe, Lib. 9.
Plutarch best expresses in his Simposaicon, All attribute to Euterpe, the
contemplation of the truth of nature, esteeming no delectations to be more
pure, or recreations more fair, than such as have their birth from her. This
therefore is the consequence and coherence betwixt Clio and Euterpe, according
to Fulgentius: we first in Clio acquire sciences, and arts, and enterprises,
and by them honor and glory: that obtained, in Euterpe we find pleasure and
delectations in all such things as we sought and attained: which agree with
Plutarchs words from Crysippus, I take something to my self which is
appropriate to Euterpe, that she has in her that which instructs men in
civility and decency. For Euterpe imports to us nothing else, but the joy and
pleasure which we conceive in following the Muses, and truly apprehending the
mysteries of discipline and science. Therefore with Oppianus in his Halieuticis
I conclude, Laboreum sequitur gaudium. i. Joy still follows labor. And so
much of Euterpe.

THALIA.
IT is a position, That the lawful Platouicke banquet does refresh both the
body and the mind: such a one expressed Athenaeus in his Dipnosophistae; which
signifies Cenaesapientum, A supper or feast of Wise men, which is a discourse
at table, both of pleasure and profit; and of such is the Muse Thalia lady and
mistress. For there is nothing that does better delight the body, refresh the
mind, or make cheerful the countenance, than a banquet of that condition and
purpose. Aristotle says, That man is composed of a body (which is an earthie
mass consisting of spirit humor) and of a mind which includes two things,
namely Sense and Reason, from which all honest pleasure does arise and flow,
if it be temperatelie and moderately governed. And Galen says, That in a
modest and well disposed banquet, all these occur and meet: For who knows
not, but by such means the members are nourisht, the humors renewed, the
spirit refresht, and the reason after a sort watered? By this we have a
cessation from labor, a retyrement from care; for the body, sollace; for the
brain, encouragement. Take away the hillarities and mirth of feasting and
banqueting; the nutriment of love, the community of friendship, and the
sollace of life, is by such a restraint oppressed, and by degrees adnichilate:
for the communion and society of life, is the scope at which moderate banquets
aim, and not the lavish inuitation to healthing and intemperate drinking:
which Plutarch in Symposiacis seems to approve in these words, speaking of
the Muse Thalia: For that which belongs to surplusage of meat, and
superfluity of drink, concerns not Thalia, who makes a man sociable in his
banquets, who otherwise of his own condition is churlish and froward.
Therefore is Thalia derived of Caliazein, which as the Greeks give the
etimologie is Conuenire, to meet according to appointment, well and
contentedlie to please the pallat, and satisfy the appetite, and not to
gormondise and exceed in surfeit. Therefore the counsel of Varro is, that all
such banquetters be either musical or learned, and not to exceed the number
of the Graces, or the Muses at most. From such a feast are to be excluded all
such as are full of spleen, or prone to anger: but such whose affability is
smoth, and apt for the time and place, void of all loquacitie, and superfluous
language, that rather sweeten than distaste the company; let such be welcome
guests to her table: but the gluttenous and fat dishes of Sardanapalus, let
them be as hateful as cates saust with poison, and such belly gods appear to
thee as dogs and serpents. Fulgentius and Epicharmus Comicus says, that this
Muse is the most of all the rest favorable and gracious to Poets, because they
love to meet familiarlie and fare daintilie, to expel sorrow as they would
do shame, and melancholy as they would do madness: and this they do with
an Antipharmacum, composed of neat and brisk wine, which does smooth and
enlighten a wrinkled and clowdie countenance; for Thalia will at no time suffer
a Poet to droupe in spirit, or his fame to wither, Eclog. 6.
as Virgill says: Nostra nec erubuit siluas habitare Thalia.
Our Thalia blushed not to dwell even in the woods amongst us.


She is the third in rank, who has a denomination of a Virescendo
dallein, that is, Still springing and growing green. Cornutus says, That
from that denomination she renewes and re-inspires the decayed life of a Poet:
or else because at their free and jouiall meetings, she persuades them to
friendly and honest conversation, without brawles or riot; or lastly (as
others will have it) in regard the Poets fame once deservedly got, shall
outlast time and live with eternity. Many bestow on her the invention of the
Comedy; some make her the first teacher of Agriculture; and others, to be the
mother of Palephatus, who writ much concerning plantation and inoculating,
besides five books Incredibilium, or things past belief. Therefore, the
papers of Palephatus grew into an adage or proverb, because his books had no
credit given unto them. Much is spoken of him by Coelius in his Antiquae
Lection: Lib. 30. cap. 34.
But of her there is nothing left save this to speak, That whosoever shall
embrace the Muses, shall purchase to themselves immortality. Therefore
Pindarus in Olimpijs calls Poems, The purchases of divine fame and glory
immortal. Plutarch in Quest. 14. and in Symposiac, lib. 9. will have Thalia,
Calliope, and Clio to be conversant in things serious, grave, and
philosophical; in divine things to have speculation; and lastly to measure
all things justly, and weigh them in an even balance equally: He that can
do this, is not only worthy to be reckoned amongst the best of men, but to
be numbered even in the catalogue of the gods, of whose memory no age shall
ever be silent.

MELPOMENE.
BY sweet modulation, all things are moved. Plato in his dialogue de Furore,
calls her the daughter of Jupiter, and voice of Appollo; nor without merit, if
we but retire our selves and look back into the original of things. Her name
derived from the Greek dialect, importing Ca^ere, to sing; and Concentum
facere, to make consent or concord: which includes the temperature and
modulation of the whole world. For what is better moderated or kept within a
more due proportion than melody: For as the many limbs and members of the
body, though they have diverse place and motion, and have sundry gifts and
offices, yet all their faculties are directed to one business, as having one
scope and aim: so the variety that arises from diverse voices or strings, all
agree and meet to make one melody, which as Plutarch writes in his book de
Musica, signifies a Melos.
member of the body. And that every creature living is delighted with harmony,
Plato does gather, because celestial spirit from which the world first took
life, had his first lively being and existence from music. Strabo writes that
the elephants are made gentle, by the voice and the beating of the timbrell, or
the tabor. And Plutarch in Symposiac, That many bruit beasts are much affected
to, and delighted in music: Nam video, etc. For I see (says he) creatures
wanting reason are much pleased with harmony; as the Heart with the pipe, and
the Dolphin with the harp and voice: Of which Pindarus and Virgill are
manifest witnesses: -- Inter Delphinus Arion --


Which Arion, Plutarch in his Conuiuium thus elegantlie describes.

Quod mare nonnomit? quis nescit Ariona tell us?
Carmine currentes ille tenebat aquas,
Sepe sequens Agnam, etc.
Which I thus english.

What sea, what earth, does not Arion know?
Whose verse could make the waters ebb or flow;
His voice has called the woolfe back from pursuit
Of the mild lamb, and made his howlings mute.
Often at his voice, the silly lamb has staid,
Whilst on his life the fierce wolf might have praid.
Often in one shade the hare and hound has line,
Both listening to a music so divine.
The Lioness, and Ewe together are
Attentive both: but neither fierce, nor jar.
The prating crow to Pallas owl is ny,
And quarrels not: the dove, the hawke sits by.
Often Cinthia has he set thine heart on fire,
And made thee swear, his, was thy brothers Lyre
All the Sicilian cities are at ones,
And Italy is rapt with thy Lyrick tones.
Bound homewards good Arion shipping takes,
With all the store his art, or music makes.
He feared to see the wind and waters rise;
But there more comfort than a shipbord lies.
Behold the captain with his sword in hand,
With all that guilty crew at his command,
Inguirt him round: he (well nigh dead with fear)
Intreates them their rude violence to forbear:
Or if so madlie they his death desire,
He first may take some comfort of his Lyre.
They grant him leave, and smile at his delay:
He takes his chaplet of the still-greene Bay,
A chaplet which even Phoebus might have tryde,
Then don's a roabe in Tyrian purple did:
And as the swanne that dying sweetly sings,
So he betakes him to his voice and strings:
And from th'inuiron of these marine knaves,
Down suddenly he slips into the waves.
The crooked Dolphin takes him on her back,
To save Arion from the present wrack.
She swimmes, he sits and plays upon his Lyre,
And pays with music the swift Dolphins hyre.
But to leave to speak of unreasonable creatures. In man there is a peculiar
reason above the rest, by which his mind is made pliant and tractable to this
modulation, for it insinuates into his bosom soonest. For none is of so rude
and rough hewne a disposition, that yields not an attention to melody, and is
not captiuated and surprised with the rauishing sounds of Melpomene. In the
monuments of ancient writers there are observed five several sorts of songs:
Five several sorts of songs
the first Suphronistiche, such were the songs that were used to be relisht
in the ears of Clitemnestra; and all such singers are called Sophronistai,
according to the Greeks; the second were Encomiastice, Laudatory; in which the
praises of the most excellent men were celebrated; and such were soong by
Achittas: the third, Drinetiche, or Cantus Lugubris, the mournful song; the
fourth, Orchematiche, or Saltatoria, the dancing dyttie; the fifth, Pianiche,
such as is in Homers Isliads, and is called Po^ean, or Po^an; such were Hymns
to Apollo, not only in a plague time, that the Pest should cease, but for the
cessation of war, or any other present mischeife then immediate whatsoever.
Melpomene is likewise the chief, and has the prime precedencie in the
Tragedy: as Virgill in the verse before remembered. Melpomene, tragico, etc.
Therefore it was the custom in all the Tragedyes of old, to annexe to the end
of every act, a Chorus, with some sad and mournful song: and the nearer they
grew to the catastrophe or conclusion, the songs were set to the more
passionate tunes, and soong with the more sorrowful accent, expressing an
augmentation of grief both in countenance and gesture. Some of the great
Authors confer upon her the invention of Rhetoric, of which opinion was
Pharnutus, who does etimologise Melpomene, from Molpe, which signifies the
Sweetness of the voice: for one of the chiefest ornaments in an Orator is
first Action, then a constancy in Voice, Motion, and Gesture beseeming and
comely. Most certain it is, that all these things commented of Melpomene,
either concerning the deriuation of her name, or her invention of arts, meet
in this one center (to which so many lines aim) to signify to us a well
spoken, learned, and eloguent man, from whose lips issue all foecunditie and
sweetenes: And that he may attain to this elegancie which so much graceth an
Orator, behooues him take counsel of M. Cicero, that is, to join Wisdom with
his Eloquence, and substance and matter to his pronuntiation and phrase; by
which practice, he may prove to the Commonwealth a most necessary and
profitable member. Lastly Fulgentius teaches, that by this Muse is meant a
maid given to meditation: as first, Clio begets a will; secondly, Euterpe a
desire to prosecute that which the will is bent unto; thirdly, Thalia to be
delighted in that which we have acquired; fourthly Melpomene, to meditate upon
that in which we are delighted. And so much for meditation, or the fourth of
the Muses.

TERPSICHORE.
IN the fifth place succeedes Terpsichore, whose name is derived a (...).
delecto, and (...), tripudium, that is, delighting in dancing: This Muse has
no less reference to Music than Melpomene her elder sister; the one gouerns
the voice, and has predominance over songs, the other over dancing and
measures. They are by the great writers much commended, who therefore make the
Muse the inuentresse of them, being the daughter of Jupiter: the original of
dancing they derive from the high heavens, from the order of the stars and
planets, from their motion, their going forward and return backward; which
even at the first creation began in an harmonaicall measure of the celestial
bodies.

Of Daunces there be sundry kinds; some took name from the song, and such
was called Emmeleia, that was held to be Tragical: a second, was called Cordax
Comica, or a country dance; of such Arriamnus in his Indian commentaries
remembers us: some bestow the invention of such upon the Satires, others
affirm that Bacchus by his Orgyan leapings or daunces, brought the Tyrhenians,
the Indians and Lidians, all warlike nations, to his subjection: Therefore
those that were called Siccinastae, they confer on him or some of his
fellows and adherents, though the Sicinni were the people of Creete, amongst
whom that kind of measure was most celebrated. In what estimation these were of
old, may be easily imagined, when no sacrifice was offered at Delos, but
daunces were the chief in all their superstitious ceremonies. The Brachmani, a
people of India, morning and evening in their adoration of the Sun,
frequently use them. Amongst the Aechiopians, the Thratians, the Egyptians,
the Scythians, their sacreds are not solemnised without them, as first
instituted by Orpheus and Musaeus. Some daunc't in the honor of Mars. The
Lacedaemonians had them in continual practice, so likewise the Thessalians: in
so much that the most wise Socrates after he was grown in years practiced to
dance, and not only gave such exercises an extraordinary character of
commendations, but numbered them amongst the best sciences. These daunces were
not in custom without music, especially in their feastiualls and sacrifices;
for the boys or young men went in the first place, some playing upon harps and
pipes, and others selected for the daunces: whose custom was, as they tripped
and skipped about the altar, they first proceeded so, that from the left hand
they might incline to the right, to observe the course of the Zodiac; and
again from the right hand turn to the left, to imitate the motion of the
Primum mobile. Pindarus calls Apollo, Orcheste, that is, Salcator, a dauncer.
Plato in his first book de Legam latione, says that the first ground of
learning proceeded from the works of Apollo and the Muses; holding that man
vntutered and ignorant that was not practiced in the measures of the Muses, and
him accomplished and best instructed that could tread them with the best
agilitie and cunning. By which it may be concluded, that these Choreae were
begot by music, and fetched from the very intrails of number used in verse
(which some of Rithmus, call Rhyme) and from other Ethick observations: therefore
some attribute to her the invention of that which we call Humanitatis
Disciplina, wihch signifies, The discipline of humanity. By the son of
Achelous she had the Syrenes (though Fulgentius calls them the daughters of
Caliope) and by Mars, Bistone, of whom the country is called Bistonia: she is
therefore rankt in the fifth place, and said, Chorcis delectari, because it is a
pleasure and delight to the Auditors, for the benefits they received by hearing
the mysteries of learning and knowledge manifested and laid open unto them: as
if we should say Terpsichore, is a delight in instruction; or, to take a
felicity to be instructed. Fulgentius will have Polimnia to take place before
her, his reason is, because after invention or much memory (which is
Polihimnia) it is then necessary to judge and determine of that which was
before devised and invented. Cornutus says that good men transmit the best and
greatest part of their lives in delectation and joy; or else that they bring
pleasure and content to all such with whom they shall converse: of which
delight this Muse is the patroness. Others think she was so called, because
she was so pleasing to the society of the rest of her sisters: but whence
soever she had that name bestowed upon her, it was neither idle nor
vnmomentarie; the fable of this Muse thus much insinuating, That part of the
Muses are intentive only upon serious and sollid matters, as Philosophy, the
Mathematics, and the like: the rest upon recreation, sports, and pastimes. By
which the ancients would teach us, That it is not possible, but he that has
spent most of his age and study upon Calliope and Urania, but shall in that
knowledge be most joyful, and filled with all manner of delectation: which
pleasure and content they signified by daunces, music, and banquets.

ERATO.
IN Platos Sanctuaries it is left recorded, that Amor, which is love, in Greek
called Erota, which is the name of the Muse of whom we are now to speak (and
by him called the voice of Venus) is known to be nothing else by such as
truly understand, than the desire of beauty; of which Plotinus makes a
threefold distinction, it is either in the Mind, begot by virtue, and that is
called Venustas, which may extend to a graceful pleasantnes in speech, or
delectable utterance; or in the Body, of the lineaments and color meeting in
the greatest congruitie, and that is called Decus, which is comeliness or a
sweetness of proportion; the last is the concordance and pleasantness of
sounds, which comprehends in it an excellent, though invisible fairness or
pulchritude.

This threefold beauty has three senses subseruient or agreeing; The interior
eye of the Mind; The sight of the Body; and the Ear, accommodated and apt for
the entertaining of sounds. Banished therefore from the integrity and
perfection of Platos love are all the inflammations of fiery lust, and
titillations of unlawful pleasure. Even Socrates, who by the Delphick Oracle
was judged the wisest of his time, professed himself a servant of this love. In
Athens as often as any sacreds were made to Pallas, so often were they to the
statue of Love, which was placed in the same Temple. In the popular ceremonies,
Love was honored of all men. The Lacedaemonians (before they affronted or
encountered the forteine enemy) made their oblations to Love, as if he had
the power to give them both safety and victory. The band or company, which
among the Thebans was called Sacred, consisted on Lovers, and such as were
beloved. They had besides, a school or an Accademie dedicated to Love. Plato
in Phedra, proclaimed Love to be a god, and miraculous both with gods and men,
as it is in his Simposi. Love is a great god, and wonderful both to men and
gods; and besides many other things, especially for his generation and birth.

Hesiod speaking in his Theogonia, says that Chaos was first made, then Earth
and Hell next created, and immediately after them, Love; this is to be
understood in an allegorical sense, and mystical and obscured: for he does
not by Love understand the son of Venus, for how can he be borne when his
mother was not yet come into the world. We must understand another Love more
ancient, which is significant in the name of this Muse called Erato; therefore
Hesiod defines him borne of Chaos and the Earth. Of the same opinion is Diuus
Dionisius Arreopagita, Lib. de Diuinis nominibus.
for thus he says, Love, whether you term it divine or angellicall or
spiritual, lively, according to creatures, or natural; you must understand an
inherent and commixt virtue which does insinuate or entice the superior things
to the inferior, which does reconcile things equal amongst themselves; making
them sociable, and equally communicating, and lastly does pleasantly provoke
such things as are infinite, to be converted to matters more sublime and
greatlier to be desired; that like things combustible added to fire already
kindled, may make them sparkle and burn afresh. Worthy he is no doubt, who
is commended of all men, not only for the nobility of his birth, but the
antiquity of his house, as is observed from Plato; but great must he needs be
of force, to whose Empire both gods and men are subjected.

He is besides to be wondered at for his shape and feature, because every man
admires that beauty which he best loves. Lastly, he is to be commended, and
Encomiastickes to be sung in his praise, for the utility and profit that
arises from him. Therefore from those before us, for his nobility: from these
present with us, for his magnitude and potencie: and from those that shall
succeed and come afer us, for the expected utility, this Love is to be held
in great honor and adoration. But the opinion of Ovid does no way assent with
the words of Hesiod, who says, Nunc Erato and tu nomen amoris habes; deriuing
the son of Venus from the foresaid antiquity; by which he would make him
much more elder than his mother. But to speak according to the Greeks, it is
delivered unto us by them, that Erato was the mother of Thamira, she that was
the first Inuentresse of the Amatorious poem (or love verses.) The Arcadians
will not allow Erato in the number of the Muses, only they give her the
character of a prophetess, who was married to Archas the son of Calisto
begot by Jupiter: and that she was the first publisher of Pans Oracles.

Patroclus that commented upon Hesiod conferres upon her the invention of
Poesy; but the Poet himself says, that she first devised dancing: as may
appear by that which I have before interpreted.

Plectra gerens Erato saltat pede, carmine vultu.
Some of the Greek authors allow her dancing, others music. Pharnutus
writes, that she was so called from demanding and resolving, which is (more
plainly) from questions and answers, which two are much frequent amongst
disputants. Fulgentius deriues her from the invention of Similies, because that
after Science and Memory, is requisite that we devise something resembling that
which we have learned. To conclude therefore: Erato is a certain Love borne by
nature, which the wise men received from the gods. Or (to speak according to
Ariopagita) a certain institution by which Socrates, being elevated, and (as
it were) raped into an higher element, soong and declared his divine mysteries:
before which time (as he has of himself delivered) he was altogether
ignorant of things Superior or Inferior, Celestial or Infernal. Therefore
with Erato I thus conclude, The force of Love is in all creatures miraculous,
but in man especially.

POLYMNIA.
THis Muse purchased to her self the famous and reverend name of Mother, or one
more condign and excellent, and was of old held in great honor amongst
Generals, Princes, Optimates and Emperors. Her name importing nothing else but
Memory. Themistocles of Athens (as Tully affirms) had learnt the names of all
the citizens. In Cant. Mayor.
Cyrus, with no less happy retention, having an infinite army, yet knew every
one of his soldiers, and could call him by his proper name. Homer in his
Isliads speaks the like of the Archduke Agamemnon, who commanded his brother
Menelaus, from him to go to every particular soldier in the camp, and by
name to salute them. Nicias the Athenian, before he attempted that unfortunate
nauall battle against the Syracusans, spoke to all the captains and masters
of ships, not only by their own names, but the names of their fathers, and
of their Tribes, exhorting and encouraging them to fight valiantly; for this
Thucidades writes of him, Again, he called every ship-master by his own and
his fathers name, remembering the very tribes from whence they were descended.
Many have excelled in memory, but especially the Poet Symonides, of whom I
have thus read, That being invited by one Scopa (a fortunate and rich man) to a
great feast, where a multitude of his acquaintance, friends, and allies were
then present, so that all the Tables in his large hall were furnished and
thronged with guests, and every man had took his place, and he amongst the
rest; suddenly a hasty message was brought unto him, That two young men
attended without to speak with him upon business of great vrgence and
importance; he presently arose from his seat, but coming to the gate, saw no
man: In this interim whilst he expected them without, the whole structure with
the roof and battlements fell upon those within and slew them all, not leaving
one alive: only Symonides by this prodegie escaped. Now when the friends of
those that perished came to the place of slaughter, intending to give their
allies and acquaintance the due rightes of funeral, according to their
degrees, but by reason of that confused massacre and multitude of persons there
shattered almost to nothing no man could distinguish one from the other:
Symonides by remembering in what place every man sat (notwithstanding that
confusion) distinguished the bodies and gave to every one his friend and
kinsman to give unto them their due rights of burial according as their births
or offices in the commonweal deserved. This aproues unto us, that order is a
chief rule in memory: which Cicero himself has observed. Lib. 16.
Ammianus Marcellinus is of opinion that he strengthened and preserved his
memory with potions, extracted from the juice of diverse drugges and simples.
Most requisite and necessary is Polyhimnia to all such as shall enter the
chapel where the holy things of the Muses are kept. Whether the memory come
by nature or by art, or practice and exercise, who knows not but all men are
retentiue of such things as they are first instructed in, and that by nature:
nevertheless it is to be observed, that children and old men, the first have
not their memories so perfect, the latter, not so full and strong; for being in
continual motion, the brains of the one not ripe, and of the other somewhat
decayed, answer not to the vascitie or greatness of the body, the prime
senses being oppressed with an vnwieldie and unprofitable burden: in those
likewise that are fat and full of thick and gross humors, the exact forms of
things are not so easily dissigned or expressed. Plutarch in his book of Oracles
calls Memory the Antistrophe is where between two things conioined that have
mutual dependancie, there is a conversion by course.
Antistrophon to Divination: for things past only belong to Memory, and
things present are the objects of the senses. Themistius says that the
Southsayer deals only in predictions. And Plato in his Philebus affirms,
That Memory is neither sense, nor imagination, nor understanding, but an habit
or affection of these, with Time added, by which there is made an impression
and a spectre or imaginary fancy left in the soul. Lucian says, he that
proposes to himself to have Polymnia propitious unto him, endeauours to keep
all things in memory. She is called also Polyhimnia by Horace, a multitudine
cantus of the multiplicitie of songs, as Lambinus observes in his Commentaries.
Lib. 1. Carmen.
Ovid gives them the same title, as Muretus writes upon this verse: Discencere
Deae quarum Polyhimnia prima
Caepit --
The goddesses were at odds, of which Polyhimnia first began.


So Virgill: Nam verum fateamna amat Polyhimnia verum.
-- We must confess it sooth,
For Polyhimnia nothing loves but truth.


In many places, and by diverse Authors, she is sometimes called Polymnia, of
Memory, and again Polyhimnia of variety in history: In the commentary upon
the Argonauts, she is said to be the mistress of the Lyre, or harp. Hesiod
gives Geometry to her, and other of the Greek Poets, Gramer. Cassiodorus in
varijs, entreating of the Comedy, makes her the first inuentresse of Mimick
action: and Plutarch in Symposia. of Histories: For (says he) She is the
remembrancer of many. Polymnia therefore, or Polyhimnia, is called Multa
memoria, because Memory is most behoouefull to all such as practice the study
of arts and disciplines.

De URANIA.
FRom Polymnia I proceed to Urania, and from Memory we are drawn up to
Heaven: for the best remembrancers, as Pliny says, comprehend the whole world
or universe, in which the heavens are included, and all the secrets therein, as
much as by inuestigation can be attaind to, have the full and perfect
knowledge: for the most secret and hidden things, are contained in the Heavens
above, and therefore such as are expert in them, cannot be ignorant of these
less and more easy to be apprehended below: Plutarch of Urania thus speaks:
Plato (as by their steps) has traced all the gods, thinking to find out
their faculties by their names. By the same reason we place one of the Muses in
the Heavens, and about celestial things, which is Urania: for that which is
above has no need of diversity of government, having one universal
directresse, which is Nature: where therefore there be many errors, excesses,
and transgresses, there the eight remaining are to be transmitted (and one
particular Muse still reserved) one to correct this fault, and another that.
Urania therefore (according to Plutarch) has predominance in things
celestial, which by how much they are above things terrestrial in
excellence, they are so much the more difficult. Some stretch the influence of
the stars to Zoriasta's magic, in which he was popularlie famous, nay more,
his name by that art enobled: notwithstanding, the annalls testify that he was
subdued and slain in battle by Ninus. Pompey the great was curiously
addicted to these diuinations; yet his potencie fayl'd him, and he dyed a
wretched death in Egypt. Howbeit by these instances it is not to be inferred
as the mysticallest and powerful part of the Mathematical desciplines. The
inventions of Manilius most indirectlie conferres it upon Mercury. Plato in
Epinomide, would have all that contemplate Astrology, to begin in their youth;
such is the excellency of the art, and the difficulty to attain unto it: for
these be his words, Be not ignorant that Astrology is a most wise secret: for
it is necessary, that the true Astronomer be not that man (according to
Hesiod) that shall only consider the rising and setting of the stars, but
rather, that has a full inspection into the eight compasses, or
circumferences, and how the seven are turned by the first, and in what order
every star mooues in his own sphere or circle: in which he shall not find
any thing which is not miraculous. If therefore the praise of Astronomy be so
great, What encomium then is Urania worthy, who first illustrated the art? This
only shall suffice, that by her is meant celestial Astrology, so called of
the Heaven, for (as Pharnutus says) The entire universe, the ancients called by
the name of Heaven. So by this means Urania is acknowledged to be frequent in
all sciences below, and speculations above whatsoever. Her Etimologie importing
Sublimia spectantem, that is, Beholding things sublime and high. Of her Ovid
thus: Incipit Urania fecere silentia cunctae,
Et vox audiri, nulla, nisi illa potest.
Urania first began to speak:
The rest themselves prepared,
To hear with silence, for but hers,
No voice could then be heard.


She is then received from the Heaven, either because all nations and languages
beneath the firmament, have some learned amongst them; or that such as are
furnished with knowledge, she seems to attract and carry upwards; or, to
conclude, because glory and wisdom eleuate and erect the mind to the
contemplation of things heavenly. Fulgentius says, That some of the Greek
authors have left written, that Linus was the son of Urania: but it is
elsewhere found that she was called Urania of her father Vranus, otherwise
styled Caelum, whom his son Saturn after dismembered. Xenophon in Sympos.
remembers, that Venus was called Urania, speaking also of Pandemius: of both
their Temples and Altars, the sacrifices to Pandemius were called
Radiouorgaraera; those to Venus, Agnotaera. Some (as Lactantius Placidas) call
Heleneuae that menacing star, Urania. In a word, that celestial Muse called
Astrologia, or Urania, intimates nothing else, than after mature judgment, to
deliberate what to speak, what to despise; to make election of what is useful
and profitable, and to cast off what is frivolous and impertinent, is the
adiunct of a mind celestial, and a wisdom inculpable. Lib. 7. de repub.
Most true therefore is the sentence of Plato, who tells us that Urania is she
that first attracts the eyes of our mind to sublime things above, and if it
were possible, would draw our selves after.

CALLIOPE.
THere are two things in the mind chiefly predominant, Knowledge, and
Disposition, Plat. in Gor.
which as Plato says, are in continual and restless motion. Knowledge, which
by the Sophists under a color of truth, is abused, with things false and
erroneous; and Disposition or Affection, which tempted by the popular Poets,
under a bait of delight and pleasure swallows the hook of many perturbations
and distractions: those Orators that are meerelie superficial and not seen in
the grounds of wisdom, corrupted; with idle and vain reasons, they delude
the knowledge, and with unnecessary curiosities precipitate the affection.
From Sophists we must altogether beware, as pestiferous and infectious: from
Poets and Orators, in some kinds, but not in all cases. Plato confineth
Sophisters every where and from all places, and Poets too, but not all; such
only as comment false and scandalous tales of the gods; nor these from all
places, but from the cities only, that is, from the society of young men,
and such as are ignorant, prone to perturbation, and not capable of the
allegorical sense included: admitting only such as speak well of the gods,
sing divine Hymns, and bravely register the acts of noble and illustrious
persons; Such is the practice that Calliope teaches her Poets: which practice
as Ficinus witnesses, is nothing but the rapture of the soul, with a
transmigration into the majesty of the Muses. This Poesy rouseth us from the
sleep of the body, to the awaking of the mind, from the darkness of
ignorance to the light of knowledge, from death to life, and from dull oblivion
to a contemplation divine and heavenly: But where the wit fails, there is no
help to be expected from the invention, for it is not within the compass of
man's capacity to compass deep and great matters in a moment, for all
knowledge is inspired from above. And since Poetry comes not by fortune, nor
can be attained to by art, it must consequently be a gift from the gods and
Muses. For when Plato names the god, he intends Appollo; when the Muses, he
understands the souls of the spheres: for Jupiter is the mind of the deity,
who ecstasies and illuminates Appollo, Appollo the Muses, the Muses the Poets,
the Poets inspire their interpreters, the interpreters make impression in the
Auditors. By diverse Muses diverse souls are enlightened, as it is in Tymaeus,
that sundry souls are attributed to sundry spheres. The Muse Calliope, is a
voice resulting or rebounding from the sound of the other spheres, and of the
rest the most excellent, Lib. 2. Theog.
who is not only a friend of Poets, but the companion of Kings, as Hesiod
says: Calliopeque and haec excellentissima est omnium,
Haec enim and reges venerandos comitatur.
He makes her the mother of Orpheus, and to inspire him as Urania did the Poet
Musaeus; Clio, Homerus; Polyhimnia, Pyndarus; Erato, Sapho; Melpomene,
Thamyras; Terpsichore, Hesiodus; Thalia, Virgilius; Euterpe, Pub. Ouidius. Thus
the nine Muses, who have reference and hold correspondence with the nine
celestial sounds, make one harmony and consent by inspiring nine illustrious
Poets: Amongst them Calliope is held to be the most ancient. Ancient likewise
is Poesy, whose invention is given to Calliope, as to the Championess that
defends the standard of the Muses. Besides Orpheus, some say she had two other
sons, Ialmus and Hymenaeus, of whom we spoke before. Hymenaeus was beloved of
Thamiras, who was the first Poetiser of unchaste venerie. She is also said to
have a son called Cymothon, by Oeagrus; some also make the Syres the
daughters of Calliope, others of Melpomene: Venus (because Orpheus the son of
Calliope discovered Adonis, whom she had delivered to Proserpina to be six
months concealed) gave him to be lacerated and torn in pieces by the Thracian
women. But now to search what was chiefly aymd at by the Poets in this Muse
Calliope: It appears that by her they apprehended the sweetness and
modulation of song, as taking her denomination a bona voce, of a good and
tunable clear voice; therefore she is called Vox deae clamantis, The voice of
the calling goddess; from which they gave her the dominion over the persuasiue
art of Rhetoric and Poetry. The general tractat of the Muses, aiming only
at this, That the first thing requisite, is to have a will to knowledge and
learning; the second, to be delighted in that will; the third, to be constant
in that we delight; the fourth, to attain to that in which we are constant;
the fifth, to commemorate that which we have attained; the sixth, to make
similitude and compare what we have commemorated; the seventh, to judge of
those likes which we have made and compared; the eighth, to make elections of
such things as thou have judged; the last, eloquently to speak, and
facundiouslie to delate of that thing of which before thou have made election.
So much Fulgentius. And those no doubt that have long and much exercised
themselves in these disciplines, and have been the devout adorers of the
Muses, the daughters of Jupiter, and practiced themselves as well in the
gentler sciences as the hidden mysteries of Philosophy, shall not only by
their endeauours attain to the perfection of fame and glory, but purchase to
themselves incredible joy, pleasure, content, and delectation.

A word or two of the Muses in general, and so conclude with them. They are
held to be the souls of the Spheres: Urania, of the starrie Heaven, and of
that sphere which is called Aplanes; Polyhimnia, of Saturn; Terpsichore, of
Jupiter; Clio, of Mars; Melpomene, of the Son; Erato, of Venus; Euterpe, of
Mercury; Thalia, of Luna. These eight Muses are referred to the eight Tones of
the spheres; from all which Calliope, not till now named amongst them, arises
and is begot; these being near to the body that is first moved, which is said
to be next to the seat of the supreme deity, are said by Hesidus to dance
about the Altar of Jupiter. But because diverse and sundry are the studies of
these Muses, therefore by their influence the minds of mortal men are inspired
with sundry and diverse delectations, which (as the Pythagorians think)
descend down upon them from these spheres. Those over whom the Moon has
predominance, participate of the nature of Thalia, and are therefore delighted
with comic lasciviousness and wantonness. Those whom the sphere of Saturn
gouernes, or Polyhimnia, being of a dry and cold temperature, they are
wondrous retentiue in the remembrance of things long past. For the dispositions
of the mind, and constitutions of the body, have a consonance to the nature of
that planet under which they were borne: therefore some are delighted with one
study, some another, according to the aspects of the planet. For example, if
Mercury be in a good and pleasing aspect, he begets eloquence, facunditie, and
elegancie of speech, besides skill and knowledge in many things, but
especially in the Mathematics: the same being in conjunction with Jupiter,
they are bred Philosophers and Divines: being joined with Mars in his happy
aspect, it makes men skillful Physicians and fortunate; but in his bad aspect,
such as prove unskillful, unlucky, and sometimes thieves and robbers, which
commonly happens when he is scorcht with the planet of the Sun. Being in
conjunction with Venus, thence proceeds Musicians and Poets; joined with Luna,
wary merchants, and diligent and thriftie husbands; with Saturn, it infuseth
men with prediction and prophecy. But let this little serve to illustrate the
rest, so from the Muses we come to the Sybells.

Of the SYBELLS.
Lib. 4.
ISiodorus says, that the word Sybilla is a name of place and office, and not
of person: It is derived of Syos, which signifies Deus, God; and Beele, as much
as to say, Thought. So that Sybell comprehends a woman that had gods thought:
For as a man that prophesies, is called a Prophet, so a predicting woman is
called a Sybill. Of their number the ancient writers much differ. Aelianus in
his book De varia Historia thus speaks: There were four Sybells, Erithraea,
Samia, Aegyptia, and Sardinia. Others to these add six more, to make the
number ten: amongst which are numbered Cymaea, and Iudaea, with the three
Bachides, one of Greece, a second of Athens, a third of Arcadia. It seems he
had forgot to reckon the tenth. Lib. 2. cap. 22.
Aretine in his book De aquila volante, agrees with Isiodorus. In the
Etimologye of the word, Tanto s^na quanto a dire mente d^uina, He likewise
numbers ten, the first (says he) was of Persia, the second of Libia, the
third was named Delphita, being borne in the Island of Delphos, and near to
the Temple of Apollo, who prophesied of the wars of Troy; the fourth was
called Omeria, and was of Italy; the fifth Erythraea, and borne in Babylon; she
composed a book, which in the Greek tongue was entitled Vasillogra; the sixth
was called San^a, or rather Samia, as borne in the Isle Samos; the seventh
Cumana, of the city Cuma, whose sepulcher, as Isiodorus writes, is in
Sicilie, she brought certain books to Tarquinius Priscus, which spoke of the
Roman succession, and what should futurelie betide them, prescribing them the
Ceremonies to be used in their sacrifices; the eight Ellespontiaca, who
likewise prophesied of the wars of Troy; the ninth, Phrigia; the tenth and
last, Alburnea, who prophesied many things concerning the Savior of the world.
Lib. 1. cap. 7.
And so far Aretine. The opinion of Johannes Wyerius in his book De
prastigijs Demonum, is to this purpose, That the devil in the thea^re of this
world might put a face of honesty upon all those Tragedies which he aimed to
execute upon mankind, he instituted his Enthusiastae and his Pythe^^ Oracles,
which were in use almost amongst all nations, in so much that their
superstitions, and prophanations had crept in amongst the people of god: so
that Moses made a law that all such as repaired to these iugling sorcerists,
should be stoned to death. Amongst these are counted some of the Sibells,
though not all, as hirelings of the devil, for the conservation and
confirmation of his kingdom: for out of their books the Romans were drawn
into many lunacies and frenzies, as (besides many other) it is manifest in
Zozimus, who recites many of their verses full of tradition, and superstitions
meerelie unlawful, though the two Sibells Erythraea and Cumana in heroicke
poems prophesied of Christ, and sung and declared his praises: which as some
conjecture, they did by the sight of the prophesies of Esaias and David. These
oracles lasted to the coming of our Savior, but then surceast through all the
parts of the world. There were also a kind of sorcerists, which some call
Le^^res; the word importing the spirits and ghosts of such as per^isht before
their times, or abortiuelie, for from such they fathered their predictions and
prophesies. Of this kind there were many in Germany (as Wyerius relates) who
were of long continuance, and such were called Albae mulieres, or the white
women, which in their modern tongue, implies as much as the white Sybells: and
this sort of people was ominous to women with child, The white Sibill^.
and to infants sucking at their mothers breasts, and in their cradles: These,
though in times of old they were most frequent and common, when the world
attributed too much to the iugling illusions of the devil; yet since the
Savior of the world, and our only patron, has supplanted him by the more
pure and fervent preaching of the Gospel; these mockeries and fallacies, by
which he cheated the unlettered multitude of their faith, and god of his honor
are meerelie adnichilated, in so much there is scarce left to posterity the
least memory of their wicked traditions. Of such as these, it seems S. Hierom
took especial notice, when in an epistle writ to Paula upon the death of
Blesilla, he thus speaks, Quae causa est vt saepe Dimuli and Trimuli, and
vbera lactantes, etc. i. What is the reason that children of two and three
years of age, and such as suck at the breast should be corrupted by devils?
The Ethnicks custom was to give names to such, according to the diversity of
their actions: there were some called Hecataea, as sent from Hecate: others by
the Italians, Tolle^ae or Empedusae. But this may appear a digression from our
Sybills, therefore I thus proceed with them. Cap 1.
Petrus Crinitus in his twentieth book De honesta disciplina, speaking of the
Sybells, the Branchi, and the Delphick prophetesses, alleadges Gallius,
Fir^^anus, Hieronimus, and other ancient writers, extracting from their
opinions which way and by what means these oracles were imagined to be possessed
with the spirit of divination: These of that order (as Plato and Iamblicus,
have learnedlie related) either from the gods or spirits (say they) are
inspired with that illumination, by which they discern the fundamental causes
of things, and can presage and foresee such events as shall succeed. Iamblic
in his book to Porphirius says thus, The Sybell of Delphos two several ways
conceiues the spirit by which she prophesies, either by a soft breath, or else
by fire proceeding from the mouth of a certain den or cave; before the entrance
of which she seats her self upon a three-footed, or foure-footed stool of
brass, in which place the divine power either by whispering in her care, or by
some other infused blast inspired into her, gives her the facility of uttering
her predictions. The Branchae sitting upon an axeltree, held in her hand a wand
consecrated to some deity or other, and either washed her self in some sacred
fountain, or received some influence from the vapor of fire, and by this
means were made repleate with divine splendor. These Branchae derive
themselves from Branchus the son of Apollo, upon whom his father bestowed the
gift of divination, to which Statius assents; so Strabo in these verses makes
him a Priest of the Temple of Apollo. Mirandula in Himnu.


Phoebus, from Branchus axeltree,
His Prophet did inspire:
Who with a thousand Ambages,
Has set the world on fire.
Colephonius Zenophanes has denied, that there can be any divination at all,
but Democritus has approved it: of the same argument Chrysippus has wri^ two
books, one of Oracles, another of Dreams. Diogines Babilonius, publishe one
De diuinatione, Antipater two, Possidonius five. Panaetius the scholar of
Antipater doubted whether there were any belief at all to be given to that art
or no. Cicero is of opinion, that it has only power over such things as
happen accidentally or by chance. Of divination there be two sorts, one of
art, as by the entrails of beasts, or by casting of lots; the other of nature,
as by dreams and visions: in both, the conjectures made by vaticinations, aim
at more than they can accomplish, and intend further than they can proceed.
Further, this art is by the Greeks called Mantices, that is, the knowledge of
things to come; the first inuenters thereof were the Egyptians and Chaldaeans,
by their observations of the stars. The nations of the Cilici, the Pysidauri,
and the inhabitants of Pamphilia near unto these, predicted by the singing and
flights of birds. The Magi among the Persians had many assemblies of purpose
only to augurate and to divine: but all such are condemned of ignorance and
want of art, who presage merely by concitation and rapture, without the help
of reason and conjecture. Sagire signifies to perceive acutely or sharply;
therefore they are called Sagaces that know much: he that is said Sagire, viz.
to know, before things come to pass, is said Presagire that is to presage. It
is called Divination when it extends to a higher degree of prediction. But when
by divine instinct (as in the Sibells) the mind is as it were transported and
extaside in rapture, it is then called Fur^r, or fury. Amongst the Ligurians,
a people of Thrace, it was a^custome for their Priests before they would
dema^nd any thing from the Oracle, to glut and gorge themselves with
superfluous excess of wine: The Clarij contrary to these in their
superstitions, used to quaffe great quantity of water. The Divination that was
made by water was called Hydromantia: That which was made by an Axe or Hatchet,
was styled Axinomantia: That which was made by a Skin in which water was moved
too and fro (from whence a soft and gentle voice of presage was heard to
breath) was called Le^^^omantia: That which did consist of certain points and
marks fixed in the Earth, Geomantia: That which was gathered from Figures and
imaginary shapes shining in the fire, Pyromantia: The Divination by smoke was
called Capnomantia: That which was derived from skipping shadows in a mirror or
glass, seeming to leap this way or that, Capyromantia: That which was
apprehended from Brass, Aeromantia: That which was begot from a Sieve,
Coschinomantia: That which came by Lots, Cleromantia: That which was gathered
from the Aspect or Countenance, Phisiognomia: The conjecture by the hands,
Chiromantia: That which was collected from Herbs, Batanomantia: That which
was apprehended from a great bigbellied Vessel into which children were set to
look and tell what they spide therein, Gastromantia: It is called Augurium or
Auguri, from Birds; and Extispicum, from the intrailes of Beasts. Phauorinus
upon Gellius says that he would have no faith nor belief at all given unto
these Diuinations, arguing in this manner, Either (says he) they must presage
Prosperity or Adversity, and bad or good fortune: If they promise good and
fail us, we are made miserable in our expectation; if prosperity to come,
though it happen in the process of time, in the interim, time spent in hope of
it seems irksome and tedious; if they prognosticate Adversities, and lie, yet
are we made wretched in our fears; if Miseries to come, and lie not, we are
first excruciated in our minds before we be once touched by the hand of Fate,
and by that means doubly suffer. Mart. Cappell. will allow but two Sybells,
namely, Symachia and Herophila: yet our latter authors approve the number of
twelve, of which though briefly we will speak in order.

SIBILLA PERSICA.
SHe was borne in Persia, and is said to be the most ancient of all the rest,
and therefore she wears this character, Antiquissium vaticinantium: she is
figured with her hand crossing her breast, her eyes sixth upward, as one
contemplating of divine things, holding a book in her hand open, as if she had
bin lately reading, and now meditated what she had read: she prophesied of
Christ in this manner, as likewise of the seven ages.

From Adam unto Noah (as well appears) Age 1.

Were a thousand five hundred fifty and six years,
To make up the first age. And from the flood, Age 2.

Two hundred ninety two, are understood
To Abraham. From him, Israel to free Age 3.

From Egypt, makes five hundred adding three.
Till of King Salomons Temple, the first stone Age 4.

Be laid, just years four hundred eighty one.
Age 5.
Fourteen and full four hundred years there be
To Babylons distressed captivity.
Age 6.
The sixth age from that bondage may be seen
To make up just six hundred and fourteen:
In which year, of a Virgin shall be borne
The Prince of peace, crowned with a wreath of Thorn,
Age 7.
Him the seventh age shall follow, and extend
Till the worlds frame dissolve, and Time see end.
Amalthaea and Marpesia are the names of Sybills, as Tybullus accounts them in
his second book.

Quicquid Amalthaea, quicquid Marpesia dixit,
Heriphile Phoebo grataque quod monuit.
What Amalthaea said, or speak
Marpesia was able:
Or what Heriphile forwarn'd,
To Phoebus acceptable.
Politianus reckons up diverse of the Phebaiedes, or Sybells, withal some men
skillful in divination, in these verses, -- Quad and veteres prompsere Sybilla
Carmen Amalthaea, etc.


Which I thus interpret.

The ancient Sybells did in numbers sing,
Amongst them Amalthaea, who did bring
The verse in use. Marpesia, rich in fate:
Herophile next her, who does translate
Her birth from Ida. Sabbe, of known skill.
Demo, and Phigo, with Phaennis quill,
Which writ all truth. Carmenta who was held
A matron still: with Manto that excelled.
Pythian, Phoemonoe, who thought it meet,
To make the proud verse stalk on longer feet.
Old Glaucus daughter in this art has strived
To exceed the rest. Deiphoebe longe-li^'d
Marcia, and Bacis. Olle does adorn
The train (just under the Triones borne,)
Lychus most famous i^ the Attid land
Rankt; the Dodonia^ do^es with these must stand.
This Persian Sybell is of such long standing, that it seems by antiquity she
has lost her name, neither am I willing further to inquire of her than the
writers of the former ages were desirous to leave recorded to posterity.

SYBILLA LIBICA.
SHe is by some called Phoemonoe, Plin. lib 20.
and held to be the daughter of Apollo, surnamed Prima. By all ancient writers
she has the honor to be the first that invented the heroic verse: of her
particular actions much is not left recorded. It is reported of a Prefect whose
government was over Cilicia, that he gave no credit at all to these Oracles, and
to make proof whether there was in them any thing worthy admiration, or
belief, he inscribed a question which he sealed up (his Aenigma was not known
to any save himself) this letter by one of his freed men whom he best loved and
most trusted, he sent to the Oracle, charging him not to open it till he had
received a direct answer to the demand included. The messenger having made his
Orisons, offered sacrifice, and presented gifts according to the custom of the
place, petitioned for an answer to his unknown request, and so laid him down
to sleep by the altar: in the morning being thoroughly awake, he remembered
himself of a vision that appeared unto him; it seemed unto him that he saw one
of the Sybells standing before the altar, who only spoke to him this word,
Nigrum, (a black) and so vanished. With this satisfaction he returns to his
lord, and tells him every circumstance as it happened, withal, the short
answer that he received by vision: when the governor, vnsealing the paper,
discovered only these words written with his own hand, Album tibi an Nigrum
imolabo taurum. i. Shall I sacrifice unto thee a white bull or a black? to
which the answer was given, a black: this ever after better possessed him of
the Oracles. The first Oracle that was heard, The beginning of Oracles.
was by certain sheapheards, the chief of whom was called Coretas, these
grasing their flocks in the place where the Temple now stands, heard a sound
of certain words uttered by Divine instinct; of which at first they took
small heed, as merely neglecting them: but when by proof they found all
things to happen punctualy according to the prediction, they gave a sacred
reverence to the place, which since has enlarged the fame thereof through all
the parts of the world. But concerning this Sybell, Libica her prophesies
concerning Christ were somewhat to this purpose.

A King, a Priest, a Prophet, all these three
Shall meet in one: sacred Divinity
Shall be to flesh espoused. Oh who can scan
This mystery, uniting God with man!
When this rare birth into the world shall come,
He, the great god of Oracles strikes dombe.
Plutarch in his book Oraculorum defunctione relates this history: Aemilianus
the Rhetoritian was the father of Epitherses, a doctor in Grammar, and a man of
approved truth and fidelity; he reports that in his travel by sea toward
Italy, he happened into a ship laden with merchants goods, and full of
passengers of diverse nations: In the evening, being just against the Echinadae,
they failed before the wind till with an incertaine course they were driven
near unto Pa^is, Epitherses with many of the other passengers being then
awake, ^ voice was heard from the Island which (to the admiration of them all)
called upon the name of one Thamus: this Thamus was an Egyptian, and his name
scarce known to any in the ship: twice he was called, but answered not, but at
the third summons breaking scilence, these words with a loud voice were
uttered: Thamus, when thou arrinest at the Palodes, tell them there that the
great ^an is dead. Epitherses reported that these words put them into an
universal fear: diverse arguments being held amongst them, and it being long
disputed, Whether it were necessary that this command should be performed, or
omitted? But Thamus thus resolved, that if the wind stood fair, he would not
alter his course, but pass the Island, but otherwise he would deliver the
message according as he was enjoined. Coming near the Palodes, their sails
were on the sudden becalmed, for neither wind was felt to blow, nor tide or
water perceived to move; whith he perceiving, turned himself toward the
Island, and made this loud acclamation, The great god Pan is dead: which words
were no sooner uttered, but a great intermixture of howling, yelling and
mourning, was heard from the Island, to the infinite amasement of them all.
This was done in the presence of so many witnesses, that the rumor thereof
spread so far as Rome, even to the ears of Tyberius Caesar, by whom Thamus
being sent for, he related the circumstance in the presence of the Emperor and
many learned men: all which concluded, that this Pan before spoken of, was the
same who was held to be the son of Mercury and Penelope. The truth is, and
agreed upon by all approved authors, that at the birth of Christ, all Oracles
ceased, and since that time were never heard to give answer unto any demand
whatsoever. And thus I take leave of the second Sybill Phoemonoe.

SYBILLA DELPHICA.
SHe was called Daphne, and said to be the daughter of the Prophet Tyresias:
many of whose verses Homer is said to assume to himself, and make them his
own. She prophesied of the wars and destruction of Troy. Tyrasius was king
of Thebes, who as some say was struck blind, because he unawares saw Diana
naked, bathing her self in a fountain. Of whom Ovid speaks in Metamorph.
Lib. 3.


At pater omnipotens, etc.
Omnipotent Jove did for his loss of eyes,
Inspire him with the spirit of Prophesies:
Things future to predict, which was (I guess)
To make his plague seem in his honor less.
Of him Statius likewise speaks in the second book of his Thebaiedes. Some
think Daphnis the neateheard, who was the first inuenter of the Bucolick
verse, to be her brother; Lib. 10.
he (as Sindus and Vollateranus both auerre) was struck blind because he
adulterated a woman in his drunkenness; the circumstance is so set down by
Aelianus. He was the darling of Mercury, and no sooner borne, but laid out
under a Laurel tree; the kine which he fed, were said to be the sisters of the
Sun (for so Homer in his Odissaea relates.) In his flower of youth he was
beloved of a beautiful nymph, who grew enamoured of him in Sicilia, with whom
he made a covenant, That if ever he cast himself into the embraces of any
second love, he desired of the Fates that his eyes might for ever loose the
benefit of the Sun. Not long after, the Kings daughter fell in love with him
whom, he vitiated in the heat of his wine, and grew blind soon after. Some
make him the inuentor of the Beucolicks, which others confer upon Stesichorus
Himeraeus. But touching Daphne, thus Palephatus in his fabulous Narrations
speaks of her: Terra, or the Earth, fell in love with the flood Ladon, of
their mutual compression Daphne was begot: of her Apollo grew inamoured and
laid daily siege to her chastity, but she not able to oppose his
importunities, and willing to preserve her virginity pure and without blemish,
petitioned to her mother Earth, That she would again receive her (to conceal
her from the Sun) into her bosom, from whence she at first proceeded: to
whose request her mother condiscended, and kept her so long, till from her
breast she sprung out a Laurel tree, whom Phoebus notwithstanding courted,
Lib. prim.
but in vain. The manner of her transportation Ovid with great elegancie
relates in his Metamorph. Without this Laurel (as some think) the Tripos in
Boetia (placed near the vaticinating cave) cannot be erected. All writers
confirm a her Sybell and a Prophetess, belonging to the Delphian Oracle,
howsoever the Poets have fabled. Her prophecy was to this purpose.

An Angel shall descend and say,
Thou blessed Marie hail;
Thou shall conceive, bring forth, yet be
A Virgin without fail.
Three gifts the Chaldaeans to thy son
Shall tender, with much piety,
Myrrh to a Man, Gold to a King,
And Incense to a Deity.
SIBILLA CVMAEA.
SHe was called Cimmeria, and was one of Apollo's Priests, borne in Cuma, a
city of Aeolia. Leonard Aretine in his book de Aquila volante, calls her
Omeria, Lib. 2.22.
and would derive her from Italy. Herodotus in his first book has left this
history recorded, That Pactias the Persian flying for refuge into the city
Cuma, he was demanded thence by Mazares the great general; but the Cumaeans
would not deliver him up without advise from the Oracle. There was in those
days an ancient and much adored altar, sacred to Apollo, to which the Aeolaes
and the Ionians in all their hesitations repaired for counsel; it was situate
in the Milesian fields, near to the port called Panormus: to this place were
sent men both of birth and trust, to demand from the Cumaeans, Whether Pactias
should be delivered unto the Persians? who answered, Let him be surrendered
up: which when the men of Cuma heard, they with a joint sufferage concluded to
send him thence, and to obey the Oracle. To which decree, Aristodicus the son
of Heraclius violently opposed himself (a man amongst the rest at that time
most illustrious) either not giving credit at all to the answer, or
distrusting their fidelity that brought it: therefore he himself with other
of the prime citisens prepared themselves for a second expedition; these
repairing to the Branchidae or Priests, of which this Cumaea was one;
Aristodicus humbly kneeling before the altar, thus bespake Apollo, Pactyas the
Lidian (oh king, and god) to shun a violent death, gave himself into our
patronage, the Persians redemaund him of the Cumaeans; we, though we fear not
their forces, yet dare not surrender up a suppliant to death, who has tendered
his safety into our hands, till we hear from thee what in this destraction
is most fit to be done. To these words, the Priest as from Apollo returned this
answer: Let Pactias be delivered up to the Persians. This done, Aristodicus it
seems not well pleased to betray the life of his friend, surueying the Temple
round, he spyde where sparrows and other small birds had builded their neasts,
who taking away their young was about to depart the Temple: when instantly was
heard from the altar, the sound of a voice thus speaking; Oh thou most wicked
of men, what arrogant boldness has so far possessed thee that thou presumest to
take hence my suppliants, and such as I have taken to my protection? at which
words Aristodicus returning, made this free and bold answer, Do thou (oh
king) succor and protect thy suppliants, and command us to betray the life
of Pactias to the Persians?

Some have cauelled with these Oracles that their verses have bin harsh, and
not in smoothness of style or elegancie of phrase to be compared with those of
Hesiod or Homer: to which may be answered, We are sick with the disease of the
Ear and the Eye; let us not blame a Pythian Prophetess because she sings not
so sweetly as Glauce the mynstrell, nor appears in her heir perfumed with
precious unguents, and her self ietting in Tyrian purple; when the Sybel
vtters her diuinations with a troubled brain, and a destracted countenance,
her words harsh and unpleasant, as not rellishing laughter, delight, or
ornament; for such things are least pleasing to us in show that are most
beneficial to us in proof, Voluptatem enim, non admittit quod integrum and
castum, That admits no pleasure which of it self is perfect and chaste.
Besides, these were answers to be leasurely writ, not suddenly spoake; studied
with long meditation, and not extemporall; it is probable, that they in
sweetness and smoothness might equal if not exceed the facunditie of the
former: neither is it the sound, the voice, the language, or the number or
meeter of the god himself, but of a woman, and she too extaside in spirit, and
ravished with a divine furor. These shall suffice for Sybilla Cumaea, I will
only conclude with her Prophecy.

Th'antient of days, shall then submit to time,
The maker yield himself to new creation:
The deity and Godhead most sublime,
Take shape of man, to ransom every nation:
Die, to make others live, and every crime
Committed, from the round worlds first foundation,
Take on himself: as low as Hell descending
To win man Heaven, upon his grace depending.
SIBILLA SAMIA.
SHe is called Erophile, or Hierophile, taking the name of Samia from the Isle
Samos where she was borne. She was derived from Jupiter and Lamia the daughter
of Neptune.
Simon Grinaeus in his annotations upon Justin, thus says, That this continent
is likewise called Samothracia, because it buts so near Thracia; in that place
was Pythagoras the Philosopher borne, with one of the Sybells, styled Samia.
The Island is dedicated to Juno, because as they believe, there Juno was borne,
brought up, and espoused unto Jupiter. Heraclides in Politijs says, That it
was first a sollitude or desert, only inhabited by wild beasts, amongst which
were the Neides first seen in that wilderness. It was once called Parthenia,
after that Driuse; there Ancaeus reigned, of whom came the Proverb first,
Multa cadunt inter, etc. Many things fall between the cup and the lip. In this
Island have bin seen white Swallows, as great in body as a Partridge. In this
place flourisht Aesop, where he first published his Fables; and Theagines
Samius, after, the scholar of Euripides. Plut. in Quaest. Graecis, relates,
that when any sacrifice was offered to Mercurius Charidota (which is as much as
to say, Munificent) it was lawful for any to steal and catch away each others
garments: because that having by the command of the Oracle left their own
country, and were forced by shifting into Micale, there to live by rapine and
theft; that time being expired, and at their return, by vanquishing their
enemies, being possessed of their own inheritance, in remembrance of their
former confinement, they have observed that custom. Of this Sybells particular
actions, much has not been commended to posterity: only of her person, that
such a one there was; and of her prophecy, which was thought to be this: The
world shall to six thousand years aspire,
By water once, but then destroyed by fire:
The first two thousand void: the next, the Law;
The last two, under the Messiah awe.
And as repose by Sabbath is expressed,
Sun, Moon, and Stars, all things shall then have rest.


It is likely, and may be coniectured, that she came to the light of Elias
prophesies, for in the like manner he distributed the world, divining of the
continuance of mankind, and the change of times: the first two thousand years
he called Tempus inane, which may be thus interpreted, because the many regions
of the earth were not fully inhabited, Babylon not yet built, and diverse
spacious provinces undiscovered: or else because the polliticke estate of the
Church was not yet visiblie established, and separated from other nations: For
then were no Empires extant, which after were apparent in the Monarchies. Yet
doubtless it is, that the first age was the golden and most flourishing;
because the nature of man was then most potent and vigorous, as may appear by
their longeuitie, living so many hundred years: moreover, it bred many wise
old men, full of the divine light, that spoke of God, of the Creation, and were
witness of the arts and sciences. The second times was numbered from the
Circumcision to Christ's coming in the flesh, and being borne of a Virgin;
which conteiues little less than two thousand years, and that is under the
Law. The third Time, if it reach not to the full number to equal the former,
it is for our sins, which are many and great, for which mankind shall be the
sooner destroyed, and Christ for his elect sake will hasten his judgment.

SYBILLA CVMANA.
SHe was likewise called Amalthaea. Hyginus in his second book speaks of
Amalthaea, Cap. de Heniacho.
that gave suck to Jupiter in his infancy; his history he deriues from
Parmenesius, and relates it thus: There was a certain King of Creete called
Mellisaeus, to whose daughters young Jupiter was sent to be nursed; but they
wanting milk, brought unto him a goat called by that name, which gave him
suck. This goat was so fruitful, that she ever brought forth two kids, and
was then newly eased of her burden, when Jupiter was brought thither to be
fostred. In gratitude of which good done to him, he after translated her and
her kids amongst the stars which Cleostratus Tenedius first observed. Musaeus
reports otherwise, That Athemides and Amalthaea were two nurses, to whom the
charge of Jupiters infancy was committed, both beautiful Nymphs: Amalthaea
having a goat whom she much loved, Lib. 1.
and with whose milk she brought him up. Palephatus in his fabulous narrations
speaks of the Horn of Amalthaea, which Hercules still boar about him, which
was of that virtue that it still supplied him with all necessaries whatsoever:
from which grew a Proverb, That all such as were supplied without complaining
of want, were said to have the Horn of Amalthaea; the history is thus.
Hercules traveling through Boeotia to visit his nephew Iolaus, soiourned by
the way for a season amongst the Thespians, where lived a woman of approved
beauty and virtue, called Amalthaea; with whose feature Hercules being much
delighted, he hosted there longer than his purpose, which Iolaus taking ill,
Amalthaea out of a horn in which she had hoarded some quantity of money,
furnished Hercules with all things needful: which some strangers taking
especial notice of, they rumord it abroad, and from thence first grew the
Proverb. But to return to our Amalthaea Cumana: This was she by whose conduct
Aeneas had free passage into hell, as Virgill expresses at large in his sixth
book. She brought to Tarquinius Priscus those three books of Prophesies,
Valor Max. lib. 8. cap. de Senc.
of which two were burnt, and one preserved. By which computation comparing the
time betwixt Aeneas and Tarquin, she could live no less than five hundred
years; nor is it altogether incredible, since when Liuia the daughter of
Rutilius, Terentia of M. Cicero, and Clodia of Aulus, the first lived ninety
seven years; the second, a hundred and thirty; the third, a hundred and
fifteen after the bearing of fifteen children. Gorgias Leontius (the tutor of
Isocrates and many other learned men) in the hundred and seventh year of his
age, being asked, Why he desired to live any longer? answered, Because he felt
nothing in his body by which to accuse age. Herodotus, Pliny, Cicero, and
others, speak of one Arganthonius Gaditanus, who reigned fourscore years,
being sixty years of age before he came to his crown. Solynus and Ctesias
with others, auerre, that amongst the Aethiopians a hundred and thirty years
is but a common age, and many arrive unto it. Hellanicus testates that the
Epians, a people of Aetolia, attained to two hundred: whom Damiates exceedes,
naming one Littorius that reached to three hundred: the like we read of
Nestor. I will conclude with Dondones, whom Pliny affirms suruiued five
hundred years, yet never stooped with age. More liberally speaks Zenophon,
who bestows on one of the Latin Kings eight hundred, and six hundred upon his
father: but I will forbear further to speak of her age, and come to her
Oracle.

Unto the Assyrian Monarchy, Monarch. 1.
we assign
One thousand years, two hundred thirty nine.
When thirty six successions shall expire,
The last, his glories pomp shall It ended in Saraanap. who burnt himself,
his concubines and jewels.
end in fire.
Thence to the Meades it transmigrates, and they
Shall in nine full successions bear chief sway:
Three hundred years shall memorise their deeds,
Wanting just eight. Monarch. 2.
The Persian then succeedes
In th'vniuersall Empire: which must last
Fourteen Kings raigns, and then their sway be past
Over to Greece: Monarch. 3.
but ere their light blow out,
Two hundred fifty years shall come about,
Adding five months. The Monarchy now stands
Transferd on Macedonia: Monarch. 4.
who commands
The world, but Alexander? by him is guided
The spacious earth, but in his death divided
Amongst his captains: Macedon one cease,
Asia another, Syria best pleases
A third, Egypt a fourth: thus lots are cast,
Two hundred eighty eight their pomp shall last,
And then expire. Great Rome shall then look hye.
Whose proud towers from 7. hills shall bra^e the sky,
And ouerlooke the world. In those blessed days,
Shall come a King of kings, and he shall raise
A new plantation: and though greater far
Than all the Monarchs that before him are,
In majesty and power: yet in that day,
So meek and humble, he shall daine to pay
Tribute to Caesar: yet thrice happy he,
That shall his subject or his servant be.
After the death of Alexander, the kingdom of Macedonia was successively
inioyed by fifteen Kings, and endured a hundred fifty seven years and eight
months. Asia and Syria were governed by nineteen Kings, and lasted two
hundred eighty nine years. Egypt was possessed by ten Ptolomies, and lastly
by Cleopatra; and it continued two hundred eighty eight years. These Kingdoms
failing, the Romans gained the chief predominance. Of this Sybell S. Isiodore,
Virgill, and Ovid writ more at large; she writ her Prophecy in leaves of
trees, and then placed them over the Altar, which when the wind moved, or made
to shake, they had no efficacy, but when they remained firm and without
motion, they received their full power and virtue: therefore Dante the famous
Italian Poet thus writes: Come la neue al sole se distilla,
Cosi, al vento nelle foglie leave,
Si perdea la sententia de Sibille.


I cannot here pretermit Ouids expression of this Sybell: who when Aeneas
(having received from her that great courtesy to enter hell, and to come safe
thence, and for that would have sacrificed to her, done her divine adoration)
she thus answered him.

Nec dea sum dixit, nec sacrifuris honor, etc.
I am no goddess (goddess son) it is true,
Nor are these divine honors to me due:
I had been such, and darkness not have seen,
Had I a prostitute to Phoebus been.
For whilst he courts my love, and day by day
Hopes with large gifts, mine honor to betray:
Ask what thou will, oh bright Cumaean maid,
It shall be granted thee, Apollo said.
I, willing that my days should ever last,
Prostrate upon the earth, my self I cast,
And graspt as much dust as my hand could hold;
Let me then live (said I) till I have told
So many years, as there are bodies small
Locked in this hand. The god could not recall,
Nor I unsay; I had forgot in truth,
To insert in my rash boon, All, years of youth.
Even that too, to have yielded to his will,
I might have had: but I am virgin still
Have to this hour remaind, my happier days
Are all forespent, Decrepit age now lays
His weak hand on me, which I must endure
Long time to come: seven ages I am sure
Are past, nor shall my thread of life be spuune
Until the number of these sands be run.
The hour shall be, when this my body here,
Shall small or nothing to the sight appear,
(This, time and age have power to do) and when
I shall not lovely seem, as I did then:
Nay doubtless) Phoebus will himself deny
That e're he cast on me an amorous eye.
Save by my voice, I shall no more be known,
But that the Fates have left me as mine own.
Ovid has fabulated, that she was changed into a Voice, the word Sybilla
importing Vox. She prophesied much of the Roman wars, and the success of
their Empire.

SIBILLA HELLESPONTICA.
SHe has the denomination of Marrinensis, and as most Authors affirm,
deriues her self Ex agro Troiano, from Troy in Asia. She sung of the wars
betwixt the Trojans and the Greeks. I will be brief with her, because I fear
I have been too tedious in the former: her Prophecy of Christ, I have
included in these few lines.

When Atlas shoulders shall support a star,
Whose ponderous weight he never felt before,
The splendor of it shall direct from far
Kings, and Wisemen, a new light to adore,
Peace in those days shall flourish, and stearne war
Be banished earth, lost mankind to restore.
Then shall the Eastern Monarchs presents bring,
To one, a Priest, a Prophet, and a King.
And so much for Sybilla Hellespontica.

SYBILLA PHRIGIA.
SHe was called Vates Ancirrae, and as most will have it, this was Cassandra
the daughter of King Priamus and Hecuba: their femall issue are thus numbered,
Cre^sa, Cassandra, Ilione, Laodice, Lycaste, Medesicastis, Polixena, Climene,
Aristomache, Xenodice, Deimone, Metioche, Pisis, Cleodice, and Medusa. Amongst
which, she only attained to the spirit of Prophecy, and predicted of the
destruction of Troy; but her Augurie was never credited. Appollodorus, as also
Higinus gives this reason: Appollo inflamed with her beauty, promised if she
would prostitute herself to his pleasure, he would inspire her with the spirit
of Divination, which he accordingly performed; but she failing in her promise
to him, he in revenge of that injury caused that her Prophesies, howsoever
true, should never have credit; which makes her in her divination thus
complain: The world to Troy I fitly may compare,
Erected first by Neptune, and the Son:
These two, the aptest Heirogliphicks are,
For water, and for fire. The buildings done,
Lao^edon, their right the gods denies:
For which, by water Troy was first destroid:
So was the world for man's false periuries,
In the great Deluge, where but eight inioyd
The benefit of life. Troy happy were
If it by water could forewarned be;
So were the world^ but oh, too much I fear,
In their like fatal ruin they agree.
Troy must be burnt to ashes (woe the while)
My mother in her womb conceived a brand,
To give it flame: he that shall many a mile
Travel by water, to bring fire to land.
Lust is the fuel: Lust and other sins,
Are the combustible stuff, will bring to naught
The worlds great fabric, since from them begins
All desolation, first to mankind brought.
The world like Troy must burn: they both before
Suffered by water, so they must by fire.
We Prophecy these things: what can we more?
But after our predictions, none inquire,
Unless in scorn. This does Cassandra grieve,
To speak all truth, when none will truth believe.


The better to illustrate this Oracle, know that Laomedon, about to build the
walls of Troy, borrowed much coin of the Priests of Neptune and Phoebus to
accomplish the work, upon promise of due payment when the walls were finished:
But breaking his faith and denying restitution of those sums lent, the gods
enraged at his perjury, Neptune brought up his waves so high that he in a
deluge utterly destroyed the city; whilst Apollo by the scorching of his
beams made the upper countries barren. For the burning of Troy, it happened
after the ten years siege; elaboratly described by Virgill in his Aeneidos,
when Aenaeas discourses the whole desolation of the city, to Dido: in which he
speaks of the prince Chorebus to be much inamoured of Cassandra, who rescued
her when she was dragd by the hair from Apollo's altar, and was slain in the
attempt. The death of Cassandra is thus reported by Hyginus in Fabulus: When
the spoils and prisoners of Troy were divided amongst the Princes of Greece,
Cassandra fell by lot to the archduke and general Agamemnon, with whom he
safely arrived in Mycene, of which place he was king and governor. But
Clitemnestra, the daughter of Tindarus sister to Hellen and wife to Agamemnon,
being before their landing possessed by Oeaces (or as some call him Cethus) the
brother of Palamides, that Cassandra was the prostitute of Agamemnon, and had
supplanted her from his love (which lie he had forged, to be revenged of the
General, for his brothers death before Troy:) Clitemnestra therefore surprised
with iealosie, complotted with Aegistus the son of Thiestas, to murder them
both the first night they lodged in the Palace, which was accordingly
performed; but Electra the daughter of Agamemnon, stole thence her brother
Orestes, then but an infant (who else had perished with his father) and
conveyed him to be safe kept to one Sihophius of Phocis, who had before bin
married to Astichaea the sister of Agamemnon; he brought him up to manhood,
till Orestes found fit opportunity to revenge himself on the two Regicides,
his mother and Aegistus.

SIBILLA EVROPAEA.
SHe is said to be Incertae patriae, as no man knowing from what particular
region to derive her, and therefore is known by no particular name, nor by the
ancient Historiographers numbered amongst the ten* only amongst the twelve she
has place, as may appear by this her Prophecy, When the great King of all
the world shall have,
No place on Earth, by which he can be known:
When he that comes all mortal men to save,
Shall find his own life by the world orethrowne:
When the most just, injustice shall deprave,
And the great judge be judged by his own;
Death when to death a death by death has given,
Then shall be op't the long shut gates of Heaven.


SIBILLA TIBVRLINA.
IT seems she deriues her self from the river Tiber; she is otherwise called
Albunaea, of the city Alba, (which was erected before Rome) as also Italica,
and by some Alburnea. It is reported that the Romans (going about to deifie
Augustus Caesar) demanded advise of this Sybill, who after three days fast,
standing before the altar, where the Emperor himself was then present, after
many hidden words miraculously spoke concerning Christ, upon the sudden Heaven
opened, and Caesar saw a beautiful Virgin standing before the Altar, who held
in her arms as lovely an infant; at this apparition Caesar afrighted, fell on
his face: at which instant was heard a voice as from Heaven, saying, This is
the altar of the Son of God. In which place was after built a Temple
dedicated to the Virgin Marie, and called Ara Caeli. i. The altar of Heaven.
This Policronicon affirms, and for the truth thereof cites saint Augustine
lib. 18. cap, 24. There is little more remembered of her life, saving, that in
her books she prophesied of the coming of the Savior of the world much after
this manner: Seven wonders of the world have bin proclaimed,
But yet a greater than these are, not named.
The Egyptians high Pyramides, who seemed 1 Wond.

To meet the stars, a work once much esteemed.
The Tower of Pharos. The miraculous wall 2 Wond.

That Babylon begyrt. The fourth, we call 3 Wond.

Diana's Church in Ephesus; Fame sings 4 Wond.

'Thad fix and thirty Pillars, built by kings
As many. Next to these, Mausolus Tomb; 5 Wond.

Than which, the Earth supporteth on her womb
No brauer structure. Next to these there was
The huge Colossus that was cast in Brass, 6 Wond.

Of height incredible, whom you may espy,
Holding a lamp fifty seven cubits hye.
Bestriding an huge river. The seventh wonder, 7 Wond.

Was of great Jove that strikes with trisulck thunder:
His Statue carved in Yuorie, and contrived
By Phideas, the best workman then suruiu'd.
What at these trifles stands the world amazed?
And has on them with admiration gazed?
Then wonder, when the troubled world to appease,
He shall descend, who made them that made these.


Of these Wonders briefly, to make her divination the more plain. Of these
Pyramides there were diverse, That 60000 men were 20 years in building.
of which the greatest took up eight acres of ground, parted into four
angles, each equally distant eight hundred eighty foot, and in height twenty
five. A second, four angles, every one containing by even spaces seven
hundred thirty and seven foot. A third, comprehended three hundred sixty
three foot betwixt every angle. A fourth, errected by Rhodope the strumpet,
the mistress of Aesop, by the money which she got by her trade. Herodotus
speaks of a Pyramid made by Cleopys king of Egypt, of stones fetched from
Arabia, whose length was five furlongs, the breadth ten paces. He erected a
second more magnificent, which was not finished in twenty years, upon which he
spent so much treasure, that he was forced to prostitute his daughter, a most
beautiful young virgin, to supply his own necessity. Pliny reports, that in
this structure he impolyed so many workmen, that they eat him 1800 talents in
onyons and garlic. 2. The tower of Pharos, built by Ptolomaeus, in that Isle,
which served as a lantern to direct nauigators by sea in the night: he spent
upon it 5300 Talents: Sostrata was the Architectour, as appears by the
inscription of his name upon the Cittadell. 3. The walls of Babylon were built
by Semiramis, they were (as Hermodorus writes) in thickness fifty cubits, in
height two hundred, within the compass of which were an hundred Ports, having
brazen gates, that all moved upon hinges; they were beautified with three
hundred Turrets, and Chariots might meet upon the top of them, and have free
passage without impediment. 4. The Temple of Diana, of which I have spoken
before, was in length 425 foot, in breadth 220: It was beautified with 127
Collumns. 5. The tomb of Mausolus, built by Artimesia queen of Caria, was in
height 25 Cubits: it was compast with 36 collumns: it contained from the South
to the North 33 foot, the whole compass contained 1411; That part which lay
toward the East, was perfected by Scopas; that which was toward the North,
was ended by Briax; that toward the Meridian, by Tymothaus; that which butted
upon the West, by Leocares. 6. The Colossus of the Sun, which bestrid the river
Rhodes (betwixt whose legs ships without vailing their top sails came into
the harbor) was of that vastness, that a man with his spread arms could not
compass his thumb, every finger being as big as a common statue. After it
had stood six and fifty years it was emolisht by an earthquake. The Souldan
of Egypt having invaded Rhodes, with the broken brass thereof laded thence
900 cammells. The chief workman was Chares Lindius, the scholar of Licippus.
7. The image of Jupiter, to which some equal the palace of Cyrus king of the
Meades, built by Memnon, the stones of which were simmented together with gold.
But I leave further to speak of these, and proceed to the next Sybill.

SIBILLA AEGYPTIA.
SHe was called Agrippa, not numbered amongst the ten, but has place amongst
the twelve, she prophesied upon the number of Three, and on this manner:
Sacred's the number Three (as Sybells tell)
Betwixt three brothers, the Heaven, Sea, and Hell,
Were cast by lot. The Earth, as all men write
In their divisions, is called Tripartite.
Jove, three ways striking, has his Trisulc Thunder,
Neptun's allowd his Trident, to keep under
The mutinous waves. Three fatal sisters spinne
Our thread of life. Three Judges punish sin.
Even monsters are described so. Gerion wears
Three heads: Grim Cerberus as many bears.
Sphinx has three shapes, of Bird, of Beast, of Maid,
All three, in wings, in feet, in face, displaid.
Chimaera is Triformd: the monstrous creature
Scilla's of dogs, fish, and a woman's feature.
The Erynnaes, Harpyes, Gorgons, threefold all
The Sybells As divining three sundry ways.
Trifatidicae we call,
Divining from the Tripos. Orpheus Lyre,
Sings, that 'twas made of water, earth, and fire.
Three Charites, three Fates, three Sirens be.
Number the Muses, they are three times three.
She Is triple-Hecat's called. Diana stilde,
Triuia. The ground of Music was compild
But on three Chords at first, and still expressed
By voice, by hand, by breath. In the Meant natural Philosophy.
Phisicks rest
Three principles, God, World, and Creature framed.
Creator, Parent, Issue, these are named
In all production. Into Three we cast
Man's age: two legs, next three, then four at last.
Physicians three things to observe are sure,
First to preserve, prevent, and then to cure,
Three gouernements are famous in Romes state,
That of the Tribunes, and Triumuirate.
Three sorts of people they distinguish can;
The Senate, Souldior, and the common Man,
In the taking height of stars, w'obserue these Three,
First Distance, then the Form, next Quality.
But which of us observes that sacred Tryne,
Three persons in one Godhead sole divine.
That individual essence who dares scan,
Which is, shall be, and ere the world began,
Was in eternity? When of these Three,
One of that most inscrutable Trinity,
The second person, Wisdom, shall intombe
All majesty within a Virgins womb.
True Man, true God, still to that blessed Trine linckt,
True light shall shine, and false stars be extinct.


SIBILLA ERYTHRAEA.
SHe is the twelfth and last, borne in Babylon, of the Assirian nation, and
daughter to Berosus a famous Astrologian. She writ in Greek a book called
Vafillogra, which some interpret, Penalis scriptura, which as Eugenius in his
Res de Sicilia testates, was transferred into Latin. She prophesied of all the
Greeks that came to the siege of Troy, designed the places whence, and how
long they should continue there. In those books she speaks of Homer, and that
he should write of those wars partially, according to his affection and not
truth. In the same volume she prophesied of Christ, after this manner: The
times by the great Oracle assignd,
When God himself, in pity of mankind,
Shall from the Heaven descend and be incarnate,
Entering the world a lamb immaculate;
And as himself, in wisdom, thinks it meet,
Walk in the earth on three and thirty feet,
And with six fingers: all his subjects then,
Though a king mighty, shall be fishermen,
In number twelve: with these, war shall be tried
Against the devil, world, and flesh; their pride,
Humility shall quell, and the sharp sword
With which they fight, shall be the sacred Word,
Established upon Peter, which foundation
Once laid, shall be divulged to every nation.


The only difficulty in this prophecy is Trentra tree piede, which signifies
thirty three years: and Mese dito, six fingers, intimating the time of six
months. And thus I take leave of the Sybells.

Of the Virgins VESTALLS.
FEnestella in his book entitled de Sacerdotijs Romany, proposes Numa
Pompilius to be the first that devised the form of this Vestall adoration:
Fenest. lib de Sacerdot. c. 6.
though the first institution thereof was held to be so ancient, that Aeneas
transferred it from the Trojans to the Albans; as Virgill witnesses in these
words: Virgill lib. 2. Eneid.
-- Vestamque potentem.
Aeternumque aditis adfert penetratibus ignem.


To this goddess Vesta (whom some call the Earth, others the Mother of the
gods) Fire perpetually burning, was consecrated: and to this observation and
coustome, certain virgins picked out of the noblest families were chosen, as
directors and chief overseers of that Order; by whose negligence if by chance
at any time that sacred Fire was extinguished, their judgment was to be
beaten to death with strokes by the hand of the chief Priest or Flamin.
Valerius Maximus reports that the same judgment was executed upon the same
negligence, by P. Licinius Crassus then in the high Priesthood. All such as
were found guilty of incest were condemned to be buried alive: nor was it
lawful (as Labeo Antistius writes) for any under six years, or above ten, to
be admitted into that service; besides, she must not be the only child of her
father and mother, neither must she have a lisping or stammering tongue, be
deaf of her ears, nor marked with any blemish about her body; neither such
an one whose parents, one or both, have lived in servitude, or have bin
conversant in any base offices; neither such a one whose sister has been
elected into the Priesthood: all these are excused from the service of Vesta:
neither she who^e father is a Flamin, a South-sayer, or one of the Decemuirie
in the sacrifices, or of the Septemuirate in the banquets. There is likewise a
dispensation with the daughters of kings, and priests, as incapable of this
ministry: neither can that man's child be admitted that has not a known
house and an abiding place in Italy, for so Capito atteius writes: so likewise
the children of all such are restrained, as have the number of Three, or more.
By the edict of the Praetor, that no Virgin Vestall or Dialis which belongs to
the sacrifices of Jupiter shall be compelled to any thing; these be the words
of the Praetor by the mouth of the crier: Through all my jurisdiction I will not
urge or force an oath from the Vestall Virgins, nor from the Flamin Dialis: in
the choosing of the Vestall these things were observed. There is a caution by
the law called Lex P^pia, That by the approbation of the chief Priest, and by
his special appointment, twenty virgins were selected out of the people: but
this ordinance with many other were abrogated and abolisht by Time, in so much
that it was sufficient, if any of free parents and honestly descended,
petitioned or made means to the high Priest, she might without more
difficulty enter her oath, and be admitted into the sacred order; being
received by him as one snatched and taken violently from the hands of her
enemies. The words he used were these, This vestall Priest, whom I enter into
this holy office, according to the institution of the best law, I receive by
the name of Amata, to make her intercessions for the Nobility and people of
Rome. It was a custom to admit them all by the name of Amata, because she that
was first chosen by king Numa was so called; and with these ceremonies she was
as it were hurried to the Temple of Vesta. In Labeons commentaries it is thus
found recorded, The Vestall virgin is incapable to be made heir of any man or
woman that dies intestate: her goods likewise after her death return to the
common treasury. Pomponius Latus in his book de Sacerdotijs, agrees with
Fenestella, That Aeneas first brought the Vestal fire from Troy into Italy: and
Lauinium being built, he there erected a Temple to her honor. After this,
Ascanius consecrated another in a part of the hill Alba: beneath which, or at
the foot thereof, was a thick grove, in which Mars vitiated Illia the mother
of Romulus. These Ministers of Vesta were tied to an oath of perpetual
virginity: for it was a custom amongst the Latins, to make choice of the
most noble and chaste virgins. After many years Romulus devised all the chaste
ceremonies belonging to that Order: and as Varro declares to us, created three
score Priests to those public seruises, selected by their Tribes and
Families, but of the most noble and unblemished stocks amongst the Romans. The
temple of Vesta is built round, and is scituat betwixt the Capitol and the
Palace: in this is kept the perpetual Fire; for the Etimologie of Vesta is
nothing else, but purus ignis, i. pure Fire. Some are of opinion that in that
Temple are kept the remenbrances of many both sacred and secret monuments, some
strange and unknown even to the Priests and Virgins. Some speak of two
toonnes of no great quantity, the one continually shut, the other open and
empty: some of the Virgins have reported that the Palladium that fell from
Heaven and was received into Troy, is there still to be seen. The first
Virgins appointed by Numa, were four, Gegania, Berenia, Camilla, Tarpeia,
Gegania. Berenia. Camill. Terpeia.
two others were added by Seruius Tullius. Their vows of virginity were
unalterable for thirty years. In the first ten years, they were to learn
the ceremonies, and to be as ministers and handmaides: in the rest she was to
govern and instruct others; and the thirty years expired, she had liberty
(if she pleased) to marry. If any of these Vestalls had wantonly offended, she
was to be chastised by the Priest: but such as were found incestuous, were
punished after this manner, Being first bound she was laid upon a beer, like a
coarse already deceased, and so carried through the midde Forum to the port or
gate called Collina, for there betwixt two walls, is the grave of the unchaste
Vestalls still apparent: there is a cave hollowed under the earth, the descent
is with a ladder by the mouth, which is of no great wideness; in this vault is
a bed ready prepared, a light burning, with bread, milk, and oil: these
things being all made ready for the purpose, the delinquent is set down, her
bands loosed, and her head covered, the high Priest whispering certain secret
things in her ear, the other priests turning their faces from her, which is no
sooner done, but she is let down into the cauerne, earth thrown upon her,
the grave filled, and she stifled alive; and that day on which this execution
is done, there is a general silence and sadness through the whole city.

OPPIA.
SHe was one of the Vestall virgins: who being taken in whordome, and the fact
manifestly proved, she was conuented, convicted, and had her doom to be
buried alive. Upon whom Strozzafilius inscribed this Epitaph: Vestalis virgo
laesi damnata pudoris,
Contegor hoc viuens Oppia sub tumulo.
I Oppia, once a Vestall, that
For sin my judgment have:
Condemned for lust, am living shut
And covered in this grave.


Claudia. Claudia.
There were two of that name, as Liuy in his 22 book reports, who were
addicted to the ceremonies of Vesta.

Fonteia was the sister of Marc. Fonteius, Fonteia.
who being a Prefect or governor amongst the Galls, was accused before the
Senate of injustice and misgouernment, as transgressing the laws and edicts of
the Romans.

Marcia was a Vestall virgin, Marcia.
and one that attended upon the sacred ceremonies, she was condemned of incest,
and (as Oppia was before her) buried alive.

Minutia also a minister of Vestaes sacrifices, Minutia.
who for her elegant feature, and extraordinary beauty (and withal because
the costly ornaments with which she used to attire herself, exceeded the
precise custom of her Order) she was brought within suspicion of lust and
inchastitie: for which being called into question, and not able legallie to
acquit her self, she was brought within the compass of the law, and for her
supposed offense, had both the sentence and execution due to the like
delinquents.

Justin in his 43 book commemorates this history: Aeneas, after many tedious
trauells, landing in Italy, was by marrieng Lauinia the daughter of King
Latinus, made partner with him in the Kingdom: for which marriage, war was
commenst betwixt them two of the one party, and Turnus King of the Rutilians
on the other. In which combustions, Turnus being slain, and Latinus yielding
to Fate, Aenaeas both by the right of victory and succession, became Lord of
both the Kingdom and poeple: erecting a city called Lauinium, in remembrance
of his wife Lauinia. In process, he made war against Mezentias, king of the
Etruscians, whom having slain, Ascanius the son of Aenaeas succeeded in the
principality. Ascanius leaving Lauinium, built the city Alba; which for
three hundred years space was the capital city of that Kingdom. After many
discents, the regal honors were conferred upon Numitor and Amulius. These two
Princes emulous of each others greatness, Amulius the younger, having oppressed
his brother Numitor, surprised also his sole daughter Rhaea, Rhaea Ve^^alis.
who was immediate heir to her fathers honors and regal dignities: all
which, he covetous to ingrosse to himself, and fearing withal, least from her
issue might in time descend some one that might punish his insolences, and
revenge her and her fathers injuries, devised with himself how to prevent
both; and fearing least by putting her to death, he might incur a general
hate amongst the people, in whose love he was not as yet fully settled; he
apprehended (as his safest course) to shadow her vow of virginity to be
elected into the sacred service of Vesta. Being thus confined into the groaue
celebrated to Mars, whether begot by Mars himself (as was then believed) or
otherwise adulterouslie conceived, it is uncertain, but she was delivered of
two sons. This being known to Amulius, increased his fears, who commanded
the infants to be cast forth, and Rhaea to be laden with yrons, under whose
severe sentence expiring, she yielded to Fate. The two children ready to
perish, were miraculouslie nourced by a she wolf, and after found by the
shepherd Faustulus were by him brought up and called Remus and Romulus: and so
much of Rhaea. Tranquillus, and Cornelius Tacitus both of them remember one
Rubria, Rubria.
a Vestall virgin, who was forceably deflowred by Nero. Another, whose name was
Pompilia, Pompilia.
because by her inchastitie she profaned the sacred orders of Vesta, was
buried alive; the same death for the like offense suffered Cornelia. Cornelia.
Floronea the Vestall was convicted of whoredom, Floronea.
but she to prevent one death, made choice of another: For taking to her self
a brave Roman spirit, she with her own hands boldly slew her self.
Posthumia taxed for her two curious habit and gaudinesse in attire, Posthumia.
(as much transcending the custom of that more strict Order) was suspected of
Lust, and accited before the Senate, and there arraigned, she wittily and
nobly answered to whatsoever could be objected against her; so that being
found guiltless, she was absolved by the sentence of the high Priest or
Archflammin. Sextilia sped not so well as this Posthumia, Sextilia.
for she being suspected of inchastitie, and found culpable, suffered according
to the law made for the punishment of the like offenders. Tutia.
The like suffered Tutia the Vestall for her unlawful prostitution. Plutarch
in Gracchis, in the Catalogue of these consecrated virgins, numbers Licinia.
Lycinia.
And Pliny relates, that when Clodius the Emperor was in opposition with his
wife Messalina (that sink of lust, and most incontinent of women) when their
differences could be no ways decided, Messalina sent to Vbidia (one of the
most reverent amongst the Vestalls) by whose mediation atonement was made
betwixt her and the Emperor. Vbidia.
The vestfall fire upon a time going out, and it being imputed to their
inchastitie, Aemilia.
Aemilia with these words besought the goddess; Oh Vesta, thou that art the
protector of this famous city Rome, as I have truly and chastely, almost
for thirty years space, celebrated thy sacrifices, so either at this present
crown my purity with fame, or before this multitude, brand my lust with
infamy. These words were no sooner spoken, but casting her mantle upon the
Altar, the fire instantly brake forth, where before there was nothing in
place save cold embers; by which prodigy her innocent life was protected.
Claudia.
Claudia the Vestall was of no less remarkable chastity, who when a bark
laden with the sacreds of the goddess stuck fast in the river Tyber, and by
no human strength could be loosed from the sand: she thus openly protested
before the people, If (quoth she) o goddess, I have hitherto kept my chastity
undefiled, vouchsafe these may follow me: when fastening a cord to the stearne
of the ship, she without any difficulty drew it along the river. Tuscia.
Tuscia likewise suspected of incontinence, by the like wonder gave testimony
of her innocence, who inuocating Vesta in these words: If (says she) o mother
of the gods, I have offered thy sacrifices with chaste and undefiled hands,
grant that with this sieue I may take up water from the river Tyber, and
without shedding the least drop bear it unto thy Altar: which when she had
obtained and accordingly performed, with loud acclamations of the multitude,
she was absolved, and her austere life euerafter held in reverence. The
attributes of Modesty and Temperance are greater ornaments to a woman than
gold or jewels; and because all perfections cannot be in one woman at one
time, this Modesty is that which supplies all things that are wanting. It is a
dower to her that has no portion, not only an ornament to deformity, but in
blackness it impresses a kind of beauty; it illustrates the ignobilitie of
birth, supplying all those defects wherein fortune has been scanting. And so
much shall suffice for the Vestalls.

Of the Prophetesses.
COncerning these Prophetesses, I will only make a brief catalogue of some
few, whom the ancient writers have made most eminent. We read of Hyrtia the
daughter of Sesostris king of Egypt, most skillful in divination, who to her
father foretold his Amplitude and Monarchy. Volatteranus in Georg. writes of
one Labissa, a divining woman, that was eminent for many predictions in
Bohemia, whom succeeded her daughter Craco, as well in skill, as in fame.
Plutarch in Mario speaks of one Martha, whom Marcius most honorably
circumducted in a horse-litter, and at her appointment celebrated many
sacrifices: her the senate with a general suffrage for her approved skill in
augurie, rewarded with liberty, making her a free woman of the city. Polyxo
is the name of one of the Phebaiedes; of whom Val. Flaccus in his Argonauts
thus writes: Tunc etiam vates Phoebo delecta Polixo.


Where he calls her a Prophetess beloved of Phoebus. Sosipatra, a woman by
nation a Lydian, and the wife of Aedesius the Sophist, was possessed with that
divining spirit and true conjecture of future things that in their times
accordingly happened, that she was said to be educated and instructed by the
gods themselves. Of the like approbation was Spurina, who as Tranquillus
testates, forewarned Caesar to beware of the Ides of March, who in the same day
was murdered in the Capitol, of which he bid him beware. Martianus Capella
speaks of one Symachia, and calls her one of the Sybells; and of ten by all
authors granted, will allow but two; namely, Herophile Troiana the daughter
of Marmensis, and Symachia the issue of Hippotensis, who was borne in
Erythraea, and prophesied in Cuma. Theano and Eucyppa, the daughters of one
Scedasus, sung many oraculous cautions to the people of Sparta, yet could they
not predict their own disaster; for after they were forciblie defloured by the
young men of the same city, and slain, and their bodies cast into a well;
their father after long search finding them, confounded with the sight of so
sad a spectacle, upon the fight thereof slew himself. Caelius writes of a
woman borne in his country, called Iacoba, out of whose belly unclean
spirits made acclamations of future things to come; of which one of them called
himself Cincinnatulus, who gave marvelous answers to such as demanded of him,
but spoke as often falselie as truly. Of better knowledge (as it seems) was
Appollonius of Tyana, a city in Greece, who told one Cylix, a man given to
all voluptuousness, That before three days were expyred he should be slain;
which accordingly happened. He used to protest, that he spoke nothing without
the counsel of the gods and direction of the spirit that attended him: he
professed the knowledge of all languages and tongues, to have insight into the
thoughts of men, to discourse any thing punctuallie that had past, and divine
as truly of any thing to come; he was moreover an exact interpreter of
dreams: his life is compendiouslie set down by Vollaterranus. Parialla lived
in the age of Cleomines, and was called the championess of all the Delphian
prophetesses. Now how the devil should come to the foreknowledge of things to
come, it shall be held no unnecessary digression briefly to inquire. These
spirits being of a thin substance (by their tenuitie, subtlety, and
incredible celeritie, moreover by the quickness of their apprehensions, in
which they far excel the slownesse and dullness of all earthly bodies) by
the divine permission, understand and deliver many things which appear to us
miraculous: Cap. 28.
Therefore S. Augustine in his book De Spiritu and Anima, says, That by
reason of their antiquity, and benefit of the length of time (as having
continued from the beginning of the world) they have gathered to themselees
that absolute and unmatchable experience, of which man (by reason of the
brevity of his age) is no way capable, by which means, some of their actions
seem the more admirable: some things they fashion out of the holy Scriptures
themselves, as having them all at their fingers ends, and often times predict
such things as they themselves have purpose to act; by this means tempting and
seducing mankind. Therefore Plato in Epinomide, attributes unto them, Lib. 4.
acuteness of wit, retentiue memory, and admirable knowledge. Clemens in
Recog. says, That these spirits therefore know more, and much more perfectly,
as not being burdened or dulled with the gross weight of the body. Cap. 22.
Tertullian in his Apology against the nations thus argues: All spirits are
winged, and therefore are every where in an instant; the spacious earth and all
the corners thereof, are to them but as one place, and whatsoever is therein
done, they can as easily know as suddenly declare: by this means they make
themselves the authors of many things; and so they are indeed of mischiefs
often, of good things never. The Croesians and the Pirhians make it most
apparent with what deceiving cunning he has shadowed the ambiguities of his
Oracles. No question but the devil by the infallible prophesies of Esaias and
Daniell (both which had lively and expresselie deliniated the young man
Alexander) knew that this Alexander by subduing Darius, should enjoy all Asia,
and transfer the Monarchy from the Babylonians to the Graecians. The Prince
therefore coming to the Delphian Oracle, and of the Prophetess demanding the
success that should follow his intended expeditions, she of long time made
him no answer; but he not so satisfied, by entreaties, menacies, and all manner
of importunities, at length wrested from her these few words, Inuictus eris
Alexander, Oh Alexander, thou shall be invincible: which words, had they failed
in the success of his wars, yet had a shadow of truth, in that his vrgence
overcame the silence of the Oracle. After, traiecting his army against the
Persians, diverse prodigies appeared; at his entrance into Asia, the statue of
Orpheus was seen to sweat; in his conflict with Darius, an Eagle was still
visibly, seen soaring and houering over his head, and as it were menacing the
enemy: these were, no question, the mockeries of the devil, to auert the
opinions of such as gave not much credit to the superstitions of these vain
Auguries, and to the firmer establishment of his own kingdom. He knew before
out of the Prophesies of Esaias, Esa. 23.
That Tyrus should be destroyed by the Macedonians, for so says the Prophet:
The burden of Tyrus: howl ye ships of Tarshish, for it is destroyed^ so that
there is no house: none shall come from the land of Chittim, it is revealed
unto them. This land Cethim, many hold to be Macedonia, for after that dialect
the Macedonians are called by Homer. Others by Cethim, Joseph. lib. 1. Aitiquit.
interpret the land of the Cyprians. Now when after the defeat and utter
subversion of Darius, Alexander had invested his army before Tyrus, the devil
by oracle forewarned one of the prime cittisens, That Appollo would instantly
forsake the City: that the event answering the prediction, might the more
firmly establish the confidence settled upon these false idols. To this
purpose makes that of the Pithian damsel in the Acts of the Apostles, thus
says the text; Act. 16.16.
And it came to pass, as we went to prayer, a certain maid having a spirit
of divination met us, which gate her master much vantage with divining: she
followed Paul and us, and cried: saying, These men are the servants of the most
high God, which show unto you the way of salvation; and thus did she many
days. Here we see the devil confesses the truth, but not with the intent to
move the people to give belief to his doctrines: For that appears by the
sequel. For when Paul grieved, turned about, and said to the spirit, I command
thee in the name of Jesus that thou come out of her, and he came out the same
hour. For instantly follows the innate malice of the devil; for when her
masters saw the hope of their gain was gone, they caught Paul and Silas, and
drew them into the market place unto the Magistrates, etc. The devil
prosecuting his hate against them, even to false accusations, beating with
rods, and imprisonment. This argument I will end with one historical
discourse. Cap. 15.
Johannes Wyerius in his first book, De praest. Demon. tells us, that upon a
time mention being made of Hector and Achilles before the Emperor Maximilian
in his imperial palace, one of his chief nobility, and a prime counselor
of Sat amongst the rest began to speak most affectionatlie in their praise,
extolling their actions, strength, and valor, in that high measure, that the
Emperor was most desirous (if it were possible) to behold them in their true
effigies and portrature. A Magitian at the same time lived about the court, who
boasted so much of his skill, that he professed himself able to accomplish the
desires of the Emperor, and that without danger or prejudice to any: this
coming to the ears of the Emperor, he was sent for, and commanded to show
some testimony of his art. The Magitian, in hope of reward, and promise of
silence, free from all interruption, undertakes it, and moreover to secure the
spectators from danger: when placing the Emperor in his regal throne, he cast
about the same a wide and spacious circle, that done, he mumbles certain
unknown words to himself, which he seemed to read out of a small book of
characters, which he drew out of his pocket. This was no sooner done, but
Hector beats at the door with such violence, that at the terror of the
strokes, the whole palace seemed to tremble: the door being opened, Hector
enters armed Cap a pe in a helmet plumed, his target upon his arm, and in his
right hand a long mighty spear, headed with brass: who thus accountred, with
terrible and flaming eyes looks round about the room; his stature much larger
than any that has lived in our latter days. At another door, first knockes,
then enters Achilles, with the like maiesticke gate, compleatlie armed, with an
austeare and menacing brow, beholding Hector, shaking and charging his spear
against him, as if he instantly purposed to invade him. These two, after
honor done unto Caesar, having gone on, and returned back three times, upon
the instant vanished. This act being past, next enters on the stage king David,
his head crowned with a rich diadem, and adorned with all kingly
magnificence, playing upon his harp, but his aspect more plaucible and his
countenance more amiable than the former: he likewise three several times past
by the Emperor, still sitting in his throane, but without any reverence done
to his person at all, and so likewise vanished. The Magitian being asked by the
Emperor, Why, of the rest, David had only denied to do him honor? he
presently answered, That all kingdoms to the kingdom of David must submit
themselves, because Christ himself came of his stock and lineage. Thus we see
how the devil is never without scripture in his mouth, though blasphemy and
execration in his heart. Besides these kind of Diuiners, there are such as are
called Sortiligae, and these predict by lots, and that after sundry manners,
of which I will instance one only: They make a round circle, and divide it
into four and twenty equal distances, according to the number of the Greek
alphabet, every space having the character of one of these letters, upon which
they put a grain of wheat or barlie; then is put forth a Cock kept for the
purpose, and by those grains that he picks up from the letters, they make
their conjectures. Valens the Emperor much perplexed in his mind about the
succession in the Empire, retired himself to this kind of Augurie: when the
letters and the grains being placed as is aforesaid, the vaticinating Cock
(called Alectiomanticus) was turned out, who picked up the grains, and made
bare these five letters, THEOD: by which was signified Theodosius, who after
succeeded. Other predictions were gathered out of the sentences of the Poets:
but especially out of Homer of the Greeks, Iliad. 9.
and Virgill for the Latins. Socrates being in prison, out of a verse in Homer
told to Aeschinus, That he should not outliue the third day. Alexander Senerus
thus meaning to calculate what should futurelie betyde him, happened upon this
verse in Virgill: Aen^id. 6.
Tu regere imperio populos, Roman memento.
And after some few years he attained to the Empire. Claudius the Emperor
acquiring his own fate the like way, happened upon that in his sixth book of
his Aeneid: Tertia dum Latio regnantem viderit Aestas.
Neither did he reign above two years. The same Claudi^s inquiring after his
brothers fortunes, he light upon that verse, which after Gordianus Junior
chanced upon, Ostend^nt terris hunc tantum fata.
This Gordianus was slain within seauenteene days after he had taken upon
him the imperial purple. Claudius Secundus, predecessor to the Emperor
Aurelian, inquiring of the success of his posterity, had the lot of this
verse in Virgill: Aeneid. lib. 1.
His ego, nec metas rerum, nec nomina pono.
Whose progeny lasted for a long time after. Of this kind there were infinite,
which I purposelie pretermit. The Pithian woman that sat stradling with her
legs upon the Tripos, received the unclean spirit at the immodest parts of
her body, from whence she was likewise heard to deliver such answers as were
demanded of her, with a strange furor and rapture; her heir scattered about
her ears, and foaming at the mouth, she delivered her frantic oracles.
Methodius against Origin writ a book of these mad diuinors, as Sophranius
^aith. Others there were, called Ventriloquae (so named by S. Augustine) because
they were heard to speak from their wombs and bellies. Tertul. a great
author, affirms that he has seen such women, that from their immodest parts
(sitting) have uttered such kind of oracles, answering in that manner to
questions demanded. To conclude with these, Caelius Lodo^icus that lived in the
memory of our fathers, in his eight book Antiquit. has left recorded, Lect
cap. 10.
that he has seen such a woman in Rhodigium, a city of Italy, from whose
secret parts such a voice was often heard, which though small and weak, yet
was altogether intelligible: that which she uttered was strange to the hearers;
but in future things her words were full of vanity and leasings. To speak of
Fortune Tellers, Gypsies, Wisewomen, and such as pretend to tell of things lost
(a profession too much suffered, as most frequently abusiue in this age) would
but fill much paper, and give small or no content at all to the Reader, I will
therefore shut up all their imposturous lies in one short and known truth? A
Cunning woman.
A cunning woman that not long since lived about this city (whom I for fear
for some reasons to name) pretended great skill not only in Palmestrie, to
tell maids how many husbands they should hauc; and young men, what wives, and
how many children legittimate, or bastards, with such like ridiculous and
illusiue conjectures; but besides this Art, she professed the knowledge of
things lost, and to return any stolen goods to the true owner: growing by this
so popular, that she grew not only in fame but in wealth, and of great opinion
amongst the vulger. It happened that in a certain house a silver spoone being
lost, and some of the family above the rest suspected about the felony, two
of the servants knowing themselves innocent, to clear themselves, and find
out the private thief, made a stock betwixt them of ten groats (for that was
her fee) and very early in the morning repaired to this cunning woman's house,
because they would be sure both to take her within, and find her at leisure.
They happened to come just at the time when she her self opening the street
door, the first thing she cast her eye upon was, that some beastly fellow or
other had egregiously played the slouen just before the threashold of her door,
at which being exceedingly moved, she in her anger thus said, Did I but know
or could I find out what rascal has done this, I would be revenged on him
though it cost me twenty nobles. One of the serving men somewhat wiser than
his fellow, hearing this, plucked him by the elbow and thus whispers to him,
Thou hear her talk of twenty nobles, but by my consent we will even back
again, and save our ten groats. The other demanding the reason; Marry (says
he) she that cannot tell who has done that abuse at her door, I will never
believe that she can tell us the party that has stolen the spoone. I would
wish that all would take caution from this servant.

The HESPERIDES.
THey were the daughters of Hesperus the brother of Atlas, or as some think of
Atlas himself, of which number is Eubulus. Chaeretra^es deriues them from
Phorcus and Cetus. Their names were Aegle, Areth^sa, and Hesperthusa. These
kept certain pleasant and delectable gardens, not far from Lyx^s a town of
M^^ricania in the farthest part of Aethiopia toward the West; where all the
country was scorched with the heat of the Sun, and the place almost
inhabitable for the multitude of serpents. These Gardens were not far distant
from Meroe, and the red Sea, where lived the Serpent that kept the golden
Apples, whom Hercules after slew. The keeper of this Dragon was called Ladon,
the son of Typhon and Echidna, whom Apollonius takes to be the Dragon
himself: Lib. 4.
these Virgins inhabited the remotest parts of the Earth, the same where Atlas
is said to support the Heavens, as Dionisius signifies to us, in his book de
Situ orbis.

Sustinet hic Atlas Caelum, sic fata iubebunt
Vltimus Hesperidum locus est, in margin terrae
Hic Capite and manibus fert vasti pondera mundi:
Here Atlas does support the Heaven, for so
The Fates command; the Hesperid's give it name
In the Earth's utmost margent, he we know
Bears with his head and hands the worlds vast frame.
The fame is, the mountain Atlas has round incompast or hedged in this
Orchard or Garden, because Themis had prophesied to him, That in process of
time the son of Jupiter should break through his pale and bear away his
golden apples; which after proved true in Hercules. These Apples, Agretus in
rebus Libicis explaineth them to be sheep, and because kept by a rude and
churlish sheap-heard were said to be guarded by a Dragon. Lib. 1^.
But Pherecides, where he commemorates the nuptials of Juno, affirms that the
earth next to the sea in the furthest West, brings apples of the color of
gold; whose opinion Lucan follows. With three of these apples was Atlanta the
daughter of Scocneus vanquished, which Venus gave to Hippomines when she was
proposed the reward to the victor, and death to him that was overcome: but more
plainly to reduce these fables to history, It is probable, that there were
two brothers famous and renowned in these provinces, Hespereus and Atlas, that
were possessed of sheep beautiful and fair, whose fleeces were yellow and of
the color of gold. Hesperus having a daughter called Hesperia, conferd her on
his brother Atlas, of this Hesperia the region was called Hesperitis. By her,
Atlas had six daughters, and therefore they had a double denomination, from him
Atlaintides; from her Hesperides. Their beauties being rumord far off, it came
to the ears of Busiris, who desirous of so rich a prey, sent certain pirates
and robbers with a strict command, by some stratageme, or else by force to
steal them thence, and so to transport them within the compass of his
dominions. These Damosells sporting themselves in the garden, were by these
spies and outliers surprised and borne thence which happened just about the time
that Hercules combatted Antaeus: these Virgins being shipped away, the pirates
went on shore to repose themselves with their prey upon the beach; of which
Hercules having notice (who had heard before of the rape) he sallied upon them
and slew them all to one man, returning the Virgins safe to their father, for
which he received not only a present of those sheep (the reward of so great a
benefit but many other courtesies; amongst other things he instructed him in
Astronomy, and to distinguish of the stars: which knowledge Hercules first
bringing into Greece he was therefore said to ease Atlas, and in his stead to
support heaven upon his shoulders. So the Hesperides are called the daughters
of Hesperus, which signifies the Evening. And they are said to have gardens in
the Occident which brings forth golen Apples, by reason the color of the
stars are like gold, and their orbs round as apples, neither rise they but
in the West because instantly after the setting of the Sun the Stars
appear, which by reason of his splendour are concealed and obscured all the day
time: the Dragon, some think it to be the signe-bearig Circle; others a river
that by many windings and serpentlike indents incompast the Orchard. And so
much for the explanation of the Hesperides.

PLEIADES, or HYADES.
OVid in his first book de Fastis leaves remembered, how Atlas took to wife
Pleione the daughter of Oceanus and Thetis, by whom he received seven
daughters: these, when Orion (with their mother) had for the space of five
years together prosecuted only to vitiate and deflower them, they all jointly
petitioned to the gods, That they might be rescued from all violence; whose
prayers Jupiter hearing, and withal commiserating their distress, he changed
the seven sisters into seven stars, whose names Aratus in Astronomicis thus
recites, -- Septemillae esse feruntur.
Quamuis sint oculis hominum sex obuia signa.
Alcione, Meropeque, Electraque, diua Celaeno
Taigete, Sterope, preclaro Lumine Maia.
-- Seven stars they are held to be,
Though we with our weak eyes but six can see
Celaeno, Electra, Alcyone, Merope,
Clerre-sighted Maia, Taygete, Sterope.


All these stars are placed in the head of the Bull, two in his ears, two in
his eyes, two in his nosthrills, and one in the middle of his forehead where
the hair curles and turns up. Some reckoned the daughters of Atlas to the
number of twelve, and that Hyas was their brother, who being stung to death by
a serpent, five of his sisters took his death so grievously that they dyed
with sorrow; of whom Jupiter took such pity that he translated them into so
many stars, which still bear their brothers name, and are called Hyades.
Hesiod thus gives us their names, Phoeola, Coronis, Cleia, Phoeo, and Eudora,
Quas nimphas, Hyades mortales nomine dicunt.


Others nominate them after this manner, Ambrocia, Coronis, Eudora, Dione,
Aesila, and Polyxo: Others have added to these, Thiene and Proitele, which they
have believed to be the Nourses of Bacchus: as also Dodoninas so called of
Dodonus the son of Europa, but write them as descended from other parents,
whence some held them for the daughters of Erecheus, others of Cadmus: some
would have Calypso to be the daughter of Atlas. Neither is their number free
from controversy; for Thales Milesius holds them but two, the one Australis,
the other Borealis. Euripides in his Tragedy de Phaetonte adds a third.
Achaeus makes them four, and Euripides six: some think them called Hyades
because they were the Nurses of Bacchus, who is also called Hyes, of which
opinion Euphorion is.

Hyaecornuto Dionisio Iratae.
Others think them to have took name of the Rain, because their rising still
pretends shewers in the Spring. Besides, these are the most certain signs of
weather which the Nauigators at sea gather from the rising of these Stars, as
Euripides in Ione most perspicuously demonstrates. These Pleiades and Hyades
are therefore called the daughters of Atlas, because Atlas signifies Axis
mundi, i. the axeltree of the world. The Collumnes of Atlas are the North and
the Meridian or South poles, on which the Heaven is thought to be supported.
Now the axeltree first made, the Stars were next created: Some think them
the issue of Atlas. Libicus who being a most skillful Astronomer, called his
daughters by the names of the stars, thereby to eternise their memory, as
diverse others have done the like. Amongst whom was Conon, who lived in the
time of Ptolomaus, who called his Com^, and Berenices. Proclus in his Coment.
upon Hesiodus his works and days, writes that these Pleiades are all divine,
and their stars the souls of the Planets; as Celaeno is the soul of
Saturn; Sterope, of the sphere of Jupiter; Merope, of Mars; Elect^ra, of
Apollo or the Sun; Alcione, of Venus, Maia, of Mercury; and Taigete, of the
Moon. Of whom some have had congresse with their own Planets, and some with
other of the gods. Which Ovid in his fourth book Fastor has with much
elegancie related: Pleiades Incipiunt humeros releuare paternos.
The wandering Pleiades gadding abroad,
Begin to ease their father of his Load.
Who though in number Seven, all shining bright,
Yet only six of them appear in sight.
Twice three of these, themselves have prostrate cast
Into the gods embraces: Mars clings fast
To Sterope; Alcione the fair,
And sweet Celaeno, Neptunes darlings are.
Maia, Electra, and Taigete, three
Of that bright sister-hood Jove's wantons be:
But Merope (the seventh) of mind more base,
Stoopt lower, to a Merope was the prostitute of Sisiphu^.
mortal man's embrace.
The thought of which fact she does so detest,
She since near showed her face amongst the rest.


And so much for the Pleiades and Hiades shall suffice.

Of the GRACES.
THese whom the Latins call Gratiae or Graces, the Greeks call Charites.
Hesiod calls them the daughters of Jupiter and Eurinome, these called Oceanus
father. Orpheus in an hymn soong to the praise of these sisters, calls them
the daughters of Eunomea and Jupiter. Antilemachus deriues them from Aegles and
the Sun, others from Antinoe and Jupiter: as they differ in their brith, so
they do in their names and number: some allow but two, and name them Clita and
Pha^na. Pausonias in Boeticis styles them Auxo and Hegemone. Some number
Suadela amongst the Graces. But all those ancient writers that are best
received and most authentically approved, conclude them to be three; their
names Euphrosine, Aglaia, and Thalia: of whom Hesiod in his Theogonia: Tres
sibi, and Eurynome Charites parit edita magno,
Oceano, etc.
Eurinome of the Greek Ocian borne,
(A nymph excelling both in shape and face)
Brought forth the three fair Charites, to adorn
Jove's issue: Fair Euphrosine the first Grace,
Aglaia, and Thalia etc.


They are never separated but always put together, whenever they are
remembered by the ancient Poets. The younger sister Aglaia is said to be the
wife of Vulcan, and all jointly the handmaides and attendants of Venus.
Concerning their habits, there has been some difference, because some have
presented them naked and without any garments at all: which difference
Pausonius has reconciled, In Boeticis.
who witnesses that the Graces were set forth as objects, either by the
Grauers, the Painters, or the Poets; of which number were Pythagoras, Parius,
Bupalus, Appelles, and others: but in habits fashioned in a modest decency,
their hair fair, long, and comely; therefore Homer in his hymn to Apollo
calls them Pulcricemae, or fair haired. Horace he sets them out with
gyrdles, which are never worn without other garments. It is therefore apparent
that the ancient writers allowed them robes and vestures, either because it was
a great immodestie to present women unclothed, or else to keep them from the
violence of the winters cold, by which their tempers are much distasted,
howsoever since they have fallen into the hands of latter writers who have
robbed them of these habits, with which they were apparelled by the former: for
which robbery they are said, as ashamed of their nakedness, to have exiled
themselves from the Earth. The first of all mortal men that erected a Temple
to the Graces was Eteocles a king over the Orchomaenians; Lib. 9.
for as Strabo writes, amongst them was the fountain called Acidalia, in which
these three sisters used to bathe themselves. Plato advised Xenocrates, being a
good man and of honest conversation, but of austere life and condition, that he
would sacrifice to the Graces. And Plutarch in his Conjugal precepts, says,
That a chaste and modest woman in her society and conversation toward her
husband, needs the help of the Graces, that (as Metrodorus was wont to say)
she may lead her life with him so sweetly, that her boldness be to him no
distaste, nor bashfulnesse any burden; for by all such as affect their husbands,
neatness and cleanliness in the house and at board, with pleasing and smooth
language at bed, are by no means to be neglected: for coursenesse of manners
in the one, makes her appear harsh; and frowradnesse in the other, Lib 4.
unpleasant. Herodotus, relates that the flood Cynips glydes along by a hill
dedicated to the Graces, distant from the sea two hundred furlongs, which hill
is only woodie and full of trees, and all the rest of the land of Libia
desolate and barren; near to which hill a people called Gnidani inhabit, whose
wives use to wear strings about their garments made of small thongs of
leather, and so many sundry men as they have carnal society withal, so many
knots they tie upon these strings, she that can show the most, being the most
respected and honored amongst the rest, as above the others beloved. But now
to find out what by these Graces was first intended; They are called the
daughters of Jupiter and Eurinome, which implies nothing else than the
fertility of the fields, and the abundance of fruits: all which plenty
arises from the benefit of peace, signified in this word Eunomia. For where
law and equity have predominance, there violence, oppressions, robberies, and
direptions are exiled, the fields smile, the houses flourish, the Temples of
the gods are both repaired and honored, and all places filled with splendor
and ornament. Neither are these the sole blessings of Eurinome, or Eunomia, or
of Autonoe (by which is meant Prudentia, Wisdom) without the help of
Jupiter, which includes the Divine clemency, by which the air and the earth
are both reconciled unto us, the one in his temperature, the other in increase.
They are called the children of the Sun and Aegles, as knowing the Sun to
be the chief planet in the governance of the elements, without whose heat and
encouragement, no herb or plant can attain to any ripeness and perfection.
They are tearmd, conioynd and inseperable sisters, by reason of the threefold
profit arising from agriculture; the first from the fields, the second from the
trees, the third from the creatures: nor are their names unfitly conferred
upon them. Thalia, is a pleasant budding or burgening; Aglaia, is splendor;
and Euphrasine, gl^dnesse. All these commodious delights arising to the lord of
the soil, by his industrious tillage and manuring the earth. And therefore is
Aglaia called the wife of Vulcan, because there is a refulgence arising from
all arts whatsoever. Others have preferred Pasithaea in the place of Aglaia, in
that she signifies herds, flocks, or such cattle as belong to tillage: out of
whose labors or increase, there grows pleasure or profit. They are nominated
the goddesses of Benefits and good Turns: the reason is, in regard that
without the fertility of the earth, no man can be liberal or munificent, nor
rich, which is the foundation of all bounty. They are vpheld to be virgins,
because the most honest and conscionable usury is bred from the earth, without
sallerie or brokage; at the first demonstrated unto us by the ancient Poets,
habited and well apparrelled, unless injury, oppression, and usury, in these
latter times leave them despoyled and naked.

HORAE, or the Hours.
OF the parents, or names of the Hours, there is small doubt or none at all,
since all the Poets from the first to the last agree, that they were the
daughters of Jupiter and Themis: amongst whom was Hesiod in his Theog. in these
words, Inde Themim rursus ducit sibi quae parit Horas,
Eunomiamque Dicensque, etc.
By marrieng Themis, he begat the Hours,
Eunomia, Dyrce, and Irene fair.
And flourishing still, these sisters have the powers
To ripen all men's actions by their care.


Orpheus not only assents with him in their names, but adds also, That they
were borne in the Spring time. Pausonias in Boetic. introduces other name^ and
foreign from these; one he calls Carpo, another Thalote, of the third he
conceales the name. Fas^or. lib. 1. ^^b. de Sypacus. lib. 5.
Ovid calls them, the porters to the gates of heaven. They are deciphered, to
have soft feet, to be the most slow paced of all the goddesses, yet ever to
pruduce some thing new; for so Theocritus rep^^ts of them. Homer in his Isliads
tells us, that they are not only placed to keep the gates of heaven, but
have power at their pleasure over fair or foul weathers, calling it an open
sky when the air is fair and clear, and a shut heaven when the welkin is
dark and cloudie, as may appear in these words: Sponte sores Coeli patuerunt,
etc.
The gates of Heaven did of themselves stand wide,
Those which the virgin hours are set to keep
(As their great charge.) The Poles they likewise guide,
With all the upper Regions. From the deep,
The showers exhaled they store: and when they please,
The borrowed rain pay back into the Seas.


They are called Horae of the Greek word, which signifies Custodire, or to
keep; and therefore said to be the guardians of heavens gates, as having power
to admit of our devotions, and give them access unto the gods, or otherwise if
they be not faithful and sincere, to exclude them at their pleasures: having
moreover always been, and still continue great favorers and prosperers of
all such as are laborious and studious. They are called the daughters of
Jupiter and Themis, because as the Graces import nothing else but the hilaritie
and gladness that arises from the increase of the earth, so these Hours
signify the fruit it self; for the Greek word Carpo, is Fructus: properly
then they are said to be the attendants of the Graces, as the Graces are still
the handmaids of Venus, for the fruits of the earth are the increase, as that
plenty still follows delight: and therefore they all equipage together, as
being by the Poets never separate. Besides, the names of the Hours are thus
properly Englisht, Law, Justice, and Peace. The abundance of all things is the
companion of Virtue, and Honesty: but Scarcity and Death are the pages to
Irreligion and Impiety: for there is not a cleerer mirror in which may
truelier be discerned the malice or gratitude of men toward the gods, and
consequently of their punishment and pity toward men, than in the
alterations of the Seasons; which, the ancient writers the better to signify
unto us, made the Hours the Porters to heaven gates, and gave them power over
the clouds, both in the mustering of them, or dispersing them. And so much for
the Hours.

AVRORA, or the Morning.
HEsiodus in Theog. terms her the daughter of Hyperion and the nymph Thya,
and sister to the Sun and Moon. Others derive her from Tytan and Terra, they
call her the way-leader to the Sun; as Lucifer the day star is styled her
henshman or usher: for so says Orpheus in an hymn to Aurora. Homer in an
hymn to Venus, allows her roseat fingers, a red or ruddie color, and to be
drawn in a golden chariot. Virgill sometimes allows her four horses,
sometimes but two, and those of a red color. Theocritus describes them white
or gray, Lib. 6. Theoc. in ^yla.
according to the color of the morning. Lycopheon in Alexandra, brings her in,
mounted upon Pegasus. Pausonias in Laconic. writes that she was doatinglie
besotted of the fair young man Cephalus, as likewise of Orion, in which Homer
agrees with him. Apollodorus makes her the mother of the winds, Odiss. lib. 5.
and the stars: Hesiod is of the same opinion, that by prostrating her self
to her brother Astraeas, the son of Hyperion and Thia, she brought forth
Argestre, Zephyrus, Boreas, and Notus, with a daughter called Iadama. She was
married to Tythonus, the son of Laomedon and brother to King Priam, but by
diverse mothers, Priam being the son of Leucippe, Tython of Strimo, or as
others inuert it of Rhaeo, daughter to the flood Scamander. It is commemorated
by the Poets, that this Aurora begged for her husband Tython, Immortality,
which was granted her by the gods. But forgetting in her petition to insert
that withal, he should not grow old; in process, he grew to that extremity
of decrepit age, that living to be twice a child, he was swathed and cradled.
Tython had two sons by Aurora, Memnon and Aemathaeon, of whom she took the
name Aemathia. In reb. Phocen.
Pausonias calls Memnon the king of Aethiopia, and from thence, or rather (as
some more approved will have it) from Susis, a city in Persia, he came to
the wars of Troy; for he, before that expedition had subdued and subiugated
all the nations near or adjacent to the river Choaspes. Strabo relates that in
the city of Abidus, not far from Ptolomais in Egypt, he had a magnificent
palace all built of stone, Lib. 16.
than which the Eastern world affoorded not a more miraculous structure; in
which there was a labyrinth of the same stone, and erected by the selfsame
worke-master, which was called after his name Memnonium. He died in a single
Monomachia valiantly by the hand of Achilles, in a battle fought betwixt the
Greeks and the Trojans. In the place where he was slain, a fountain
presently issued, which yearly as that day flowed nothing but blood, which
Calaber commemorates: his sepulcher was in Paltus in Syria^ near to the river
Bada, for so says the Poet Symonides. Some have held argument, that Aurora
made suit to Jupiter, that when Memnons body was committed to the funeral
fire, he would transhape him into a bird, which accordingly happened, as his
Metamorph. most lively expresses it in these words: Memnonis orba mei, venio
qui fortia frustra, etc.
Deprived of my sweet Memnon, who in vain
Took Arms for his dear uncle: and now slain
By great Achilles in his prime of years
(For so you gods would have it) Lo, appears
Before thy throane, oh Jove (thou chief and rector
Of all the gods, their patron and protector)
A weeping mother: begging, to assure
Honors to him, by which my wounds to cure.
To this great Jove assents. The funeral fire
Is kindled, the bright sparks toward heaven aspire,
And like so many stars, they make repair
Through the thick smoke which clouds and dulls the air,
Darkning the clear day, as when damps and fogges
Exhaled from rivers, or from marish bogges,
Before the sun has power: In such a mist,
Up fly the obscured sparks, till they subsist
Above, all in one body: which assumes
First shape, then face, next color, from the fumes.
Thus from that Pyle the Metnnian bird first springs,
Fire gave it life, and lightness lent it wings.


It is said that many of these birds, which still bear the name, were seen to
arise from his ashes, which dividing themselves into diverse squadrons, fought
so long amongst themselves, till they fell dead into the fire, sacrificing
their own lives to his obitts. But Theocritus in his Epitaph upon Bion,
speaks of none but Memnon only, who himself was changed into a bird, and was
seen to fly about and soar over his own funeral fires. Lucian in
Philopseudo, speaks of a prodigy, or rather a miracle, which was most
frequent where his statue was erected in the Temple of Serapis; no sooner did
the rising sun begin to shine upon his monument, and seemed to touch it, but
his statue yielded a most sweet and melodious sound, but when he took his
leave to rest himself in the West, as if it mourned the Suns departure, it
breathed an harmony so sadly passionate, that often times it drew tears from
the hearers: which was thus interpreted, That he still rejoiced at his mothers
approach and presence, but lamented her departure and absence. Cornelius
Tacitus, and S^idas, both report the same, as likewise Zetzes, Chil. histor.
64. But to return to his mother Aurora, she was still held to be the sweetest,
the most delightful and welcome of all to the nymphs and goddesses, not to man
only, but to all other creatures, beasts, and plants. Orpheus in one of his
hymns affirms no less: By thee o goddess mankind is made glad,
Thy gracious presence cheares such as be sad.
Since Memnons death, in tears thou risest still,
And from thine eyes thick shewers of dew-drops spill,
Through all the spacious earth: which to thy grace,
The mornings sun still kisses from thy face.
By thee his glorious palace is much graced,
By thee, the pitchy night to Laethe chaced:
All sleepie mankind to their sport thou wakest,
And sleepie slumbers from their eyelids shakest.
Thy beauty to behold or hear thy voice,
Serpents and men, beasts, birds, and all rejoice.
The very Marine Frye thy presence craves,
And to behold thee, dance upon the waves.


And these things are the most remarkable which have been fabulouslie
observed of Aurora, who is therefore supposed to be the daughter of Hyperion
and Thia, because by the divine bounty Light proceeds from the Sun, to
illumine the earth and all the inhabitants thereof; for there is no benefit
either of pleasure or profit that can accrue to us, which flows not from their
immediate grace and goodness. She is said to have a ruddy color, because she
appears as if she came blushing from the palace of the Sun. And for that
cause they describe her with roseat fingers, a high complexion, a golden seat,
and red steedes to draw her chariot, to answer and correspond to the liuerie
which the Sun gives, his being all of the like color. For the swiftness of
her motion, she is allowed a chariot, and such as confer white steedes upon
her, derive not their hew from the gray vapors that arise from the earth, but
rather from the clear and perspicuous splendor of the light it self. Those
that of this fable would make a history, say that Tythonus married a wife out
of the Eastern countries, by whom he had the forenamed children, and after
lived to that age that he grew not only decrepit and bedridden of his limbs,
but doting and childish of his brain. From hence arises the fable, That
Aurora was inamoured of him, by reason of the temperature of those Oriental
climates, to be possessed of which pleasant places she purchased for him
Immortality. And where some fable that he was turned to a grasshopper, it
signifies nothing else but the loquacitie of age, ambitiouslie groaning in the
often repetition of things past, glorying in times of old, and despising those
latter in respect of them; such a one did Homer personate in Nestor. The mark
at which all these arrows are aimed in this fable, is to persuade men by
wisdom patiently to undergo all the chances and changes incident to us,
both in time and nature; since death by the bounty of the gods is granted to
man as a rest and cessation from all calamities and troubles. For when Aurora
had begged immortality for Tython, he feeling the infirmities and defects of
age, became himself a suppliant to the gods, That they would be to him so
gracious as to give him leave to sleep with his fathers, accounting it much
better and happier to dye once, and be at rest, than to be continually
afflicted with the troubles and difficulties of a weary and despised life.

NOX, or, the Night.
AFter morning past, the Sun gone about, and the day spent, comes Night;
neither was she in mean honor amongst the ancient Poets, who taught her to be
the first, and long before all other nymphs or goddesses, as possessing all
places, and all things, having in her own dispose and government that deformed
and unshapen matter, called Chaos, over which she reigned Emperesse before the
gods themselves had any existence or being: notwithstanding, some contend to
make her the daughter of this Chaos, as Hesiod and others: Inde Chao, est
Erebus, Nox, and tenebros a creati.
From Chaos, Erebus, and the Night tenebrous
Were both created --
And because so borne, she was called The most ancient: the reason is
approved, For before the mass was opened, the matter of which to make things
distinguished, and the world it self created, there could nothing be which
might be properly called Night: therefore Aratus in Astronomac. styles her Nox
antiqua; and Orpheus in one of his hymns, The mother of gods and men, as both
having their birth from her. She is drawn in a chariot, with stars waiting
upon her wheels, and vshering her, as Theocritus left recorded: -- Salueteque
Noctis
Sydera quae Canthis tacit praecurritis alta:
-- Hayle all you stars so bright,
Softly forerunning the round wheels of Night.
She is habited in sable garments, for so all writers agree, her head bound up
in a black veil, whom the stars attend behind her chariot, as well as
before: for so Euripides in Ione testates: Inuita nigris vestibus currum in
silit
Nox: Astra sunt deum secuta protinus.
Night in black vesture mounts into her carre;
Behind, the stars attend her, but not far.
Virgill gives her two horses to her chariot: Lib. 5.
therefore Appollonius in this third book describing the Night coming, says,
Nox iniecit equis iuga, The night upon her horses cast her yoke. But this
manner of the nights progress is later than in the time of Homer, for in his
days she was allowed neither chariot nor horses, they only deciphered her
with wings, like Cupid or Victory. Some introduce her at the departure of the
day to rise out of the sea, as Virgill in his Aeneids, Lib. 2.
Vertitur interea Coelum: and ruit Oceano Nox:
Inuoluens vmbramagna Terramque polumque.
The Heaven mean time is turned, the Night
Leapes from the sea in have,
In dark and pitchy clouds: the Earth
And Poles inuoluing fast.
Her whom Virgill brings from the sea, Euripedes inuocates as coming from
Erebus, in these words, Verenda, Verenda, Nox ex Erebo veni, Oh reverent,
reverent Night, ascend from Erebus. Orpheus relates, that she sends day to the
regions below, and again chaseth her thence, in her own person bringing them
darkness. Quae Lucem pellis sub terr as, rarsus and ipsa
Tartara nigra petis --.
Below the earth thou driuest Light,
And then again thou bring'st them Night.
In all her sacrifices, Lib. 2. de dijs.
a cock was still killed and offered, as a creature much opposed against
silence: for so Theagines has left recorded. Night had many children:
Euripides in his Hercules Furens calls one of her daughters Rabies, her name
importing outrageous Madness; a second daughter of hers was called Rixa, which
is Brawling and Scolding; a third Inuidia, or Envy, for so says Hesiod in his
works and days: Operib and dieb
but in his Theogonia, he makes mention of others, whom he calls her sons in
these verses: Nox peperit Fatumque malum, parcamque nigrantem,
Et mortem, and somnum, diuersaque somnis: natos,
Hos perperit nulli deanox connicta marito.
Night, evil Fate brought forth, black Parca bred,
With Death, and Sleep, and diverse Dreams beside:
Of all these Sons she was delivered,
And yet the goddess never husband tried.
Cicero in his third book De natura Deorum, having numbered all the children of
Night, deriues them also from their father Erebu^, as may appear in these
words: Quod si ita est, etc. If it be so (says he) those that are the Parents
of heaven should likewise be reckoned in the number of the gods Ether and
Dies, i. Air, and Day, with their brothers and sisters; by the ancient
Geneologists thus nominated, Amor, Dolus, Metus, Labor, Invidentia, Fatum,
Senectus, Mors, Tenebrae, Miseria, Querela, Gratia, Fraus, Pertinatia, Parcae,
Hesperides, Somnia: that is, Love, Deceit, Fear, Labor, Envy, Fate, old
Age, Death, Darkness, Misery, Complaint, Favor, Frawde, the Parcae, and the
Hesperides. All which are by some imagined to be the children of Nox and
Erebus; I will only speak a little of two of these as they now lie in my way,
and that very briefly too, and (because it may perchance be late before I have
done with them) I will conclude with Night. Death and Sleep are brother and
sister, and both the children of Night. Aristo calls Somnus, a severe exacter
from mankind, who as it were violently snatcheth away the half part of our age
to bestow on Sleep, and therefore by Orpheus he is called the brother of L^the,
which insinuates Forgetfulness, which he most elegantlie expresses in his
hymn to Sleep, So mi^e beatorum rex, and rex sum virorum,
Quem fugiunt curia, etc.
Sleep of the blessed man King, and King of men;
Whom cares still fly, and rest imbraceth then.
Of mischiefs, the sole solace and best friend,
To give them due repose, and comfort lend,
Who putting on the shape of Death, do give
(Only by that) all creatures means to live.
Sleep, thou have but two sisters, and these are,
Death and Oblivion, both which shorten care.


Lib. 11.
Ovid in his Metamorphos. for his so many benefits conferred upon Mortals,
places him in the catalogue of the gods. The house of Sleep the same Poet
has ingeniously described, upon whom he conferres a thousand children, or
rather, a number not to be numbered; nominating only three, Morpheus, Icelus,
and Phantasus: for sleep, if it be moderately used, is of all mortal things
the sweetest, best and most profitable, to whom all creatures whatsoever are
subject, therefore not improperly by Orpheus termed the king of men and gods.
Lib. 2.
Homer in his Illiades, makes an elegant expression, to show how wretched their
conditions are above other men, that are in high and eminent place and office
and have predominance over the greatest affairs, which he thus introduces,
by making all both gods and men asleep at once, saving Jupiter; which Juno
seeing, she with great bribes and rewards corrupts Somnus, that he would
amongst the rest charm the eyes of Jupiter; which he attempting, and the
other perceiving, the enraged god, feeling Sleep to steal upon him unawares,
cast him headlong from heaven into the sea; where he had doubtless for ever
perished, had not Night snacht up her son, and in her darkness hid him from
the wrath of Jupiter. But had he beeene destroyed, Sleep had bin exiled the
Earth, and so all creatures deprived of their quotidian rest. From hence
likewise may be collected, how wretched those sleeping gods are, when Jupiter
the only wise, and potent, is ever awake, to see, provide, foresee, and
govern, by his infinite providence both men and creatures.

The city of Sleep, Lucian^^ in his second book Verarum Historiarum, though
fabulously, yet has facundiously described: This city (says he) is situate
in ^ most spacious and silent plain, yet round incompast with tall and
spreading trees, amongst whose leaves the wind only whispers, but never
robustiously blows. There Poppy grows abundantly, Mandragora, and all such
plants herbs and simples as have the innate virtue to procure and provoke
sleep. There are multitudes of Battes which fly continually this way and
that, and betwixt one tree and another, great store of Night-rauens, Owls, and
Screechowles: no bird that is ashamed of day but is here frequently to be
found. But neither the crowing Cock, the chattering Pie, the quacking Duck,
the gagling Goose, nor any other foul, either of song or clamor can thither
have access. Fast by this city glydes a river with a slow silent pace, making
a murmr, but no noise, rather to rock and lull asleep than to waken; the
water is thick and soft like oil, the floods name is Lethe, whom others call
Nictyporus, it flows from two fountain heads, both hid and obscured in places
to no man known, the one is called Pannychius, the other Negretas. This city
has two ports or gates, one of home composed with miraculous workmanship, in
which as in a table are expressed all such true dreams as exercise the
fantasies of men in their depth of rest: The other is made of the most purest
and most white yuorie, in which are carved all sorts of dreams, but these as
it were artificially shaddowed by the pensell, but none fully drawn and
expressed to the life. Within this cities walls is a magnificent and spacious
structure, called the Temple of Nigh^, which with all superstitious ceremonies
is religiously honored: there is a second instituted to the goddess Apales,
and a third to Alethia, in both which there are Oracles. The sole inhabitants
of this place are an infinite company, but not a cittisen in shape or favor
one like another, some are lean, lancke, and little, with crooked legs, and
hutch-backes, rather like monsters than men; others are comely, well featured,
tall and proper, with cheerful faces, and promising looks; some are of a
froward and terrible aspect, as if they threatened mischief and disaster;
others portly, gallant, and regally habited: and whosoever shall enter the
gates of this city, some domesticke dream or other continually will
encounter him and give him a familiar and friendly salute, in the shape of some
one of these formerly rehearsed, relating to him, some sad things, some
pleasant things, to minister content or distaste: sometimes they whisper truths,
but that sildome, for the greatest part of that multitude are lying and
deceitful, because for the most part they speak one thing and intend another:
and thus far Lucianus of the house of Sleep. I had once occasion to write my
self in this manner: Near to the dark Cimerians lies a cave,
Beneath the foot of a declining hill,
Deep in the earthes warm intrailes, like a grave,
Where charming Silence makes all hushed and still:
Hither did never piercing Sun beam crave
Admittance; nor the voice of hunter shrill
Fieres through the crannies of this concaue deep,
Where stands the dull and leaden house of Sleep.
Here the thick vapoures from the earth exhaild,
Myst^ all the place about: a doubtful light,
(...) twixt night and day (when (...) is faild,
And the other not yet perfect) dulls the sight.
No w^^efull dogg^, o^ clamorous cook has raild
Upon the drowsy Morn, early to dight
The Suns steedes. Here, the bird that fa^'d of old,
Romes Capitol, is never heard to scould.
The brawlling Crane, nor yet the prating Crow,
Or tatling Parret, to desturbe the ear:
No bestowing Bull, swift Heart, or Ass more flow,
Is heard to bray: we have all silence here.
Only a murmuring river (which does flow
From Lethe) with his streams amongst peables clear
Lulls the dull sense to soft and feathered rest,
Charming the cares and sorrows in the breast.
Before the gate the drowsy Poppie springs,
With thousand plants and simples without number;
Not one, but to the brain a numnesse brings,
In^iting all the powers of man to slumber:
Whose milkie juice, the Night on her black wings
Bears, t'wart the earth, and scatters. Who dares cumber
This universal whistnesse; where none come,
But Taciturnitie, and Silence d^mbe?
Upon the door no rattling hammers stroke
Is heard without, to startle those within,
No creeking hinge, by which soft sleep is broke.
Than to speak loud, there is held no greater sin.
Midst a vast room, a bed Hewd out of Oak,
(That had of late some ancient relic bin,
Fringed with thick dust and lasie cobwebs) stands,
Not in an age once stird with careful hands.
Upon this easy couch, with curtains hung
Of duskie colored silk, you may behold
The god of Sleep in careless fashion flung,
Stretching his drousie limbs, whom now is so bold
To iogge or stir: where snortings are heard sung:
They are pincht to softer breath. Some dream of gold,
Of Trifles some: his court here Morpheus keeps,
Which no man sooner enters than be sleeps.


And this description begins to make me drowsy already. But least speaking
too much of sleep, I may be taxed, and so taken napping my self, I leave the
brother fast sleeping to find out the sister who to the worlds end shall ever
be waking. In Elia^is.
Death is said to be educated by her mother Night. Pausanias puts us in mind
that in a Temple amongst the Elaeans, there was a woman pourtraied, leading two
sleepy children, that in her right hand White, that in her left hand Black,
both with crooked legs and misshapen feet; the inscription upon the one was
Sleep, upon the other Death, the woman that cherisht them, Night. This Death
of all the powers that are, is most impartial and implacable, and because by
no prayers nor intercessions she is to be moved, therefore there are no
altars nor temples nor sacrifices celebrated to her honour^ her impartialitie
and implacabilitie Orpheus has signified in one of his hymns, Nec prece,
muneribus, nec tu placabilis vllis.


She is attyred in a sable garment spotted with stars. The wise men of the
former ages extold her with miraculous praises, calling her the port and only
secure harbor or rest: she frees the body from a thousand pains and diseases,
delivers the subject from the cruelty of the tyrant, and makes the beggar
equal with his prince. She to all good men is acceptable and welcome, only
dreadful to the wicked, who have a presage and fear of punishments to come.
Alcid^^^us writ an excellent book in the praise of Death, having a large and
copious argument: in which he strove to express with what an equal sufferance
and modest patience she was to be entertained. Of the same argument writes
Plutarch in Consolator: for life is nothing else but a light lent us by the
Creator of all mankind, which if it be redemanded of us, ought no more
grudgingly to be paid back, than coming to a friends house to be merry in
the morning, and having feasted there all the day, to return to our home at
night; or to pay back what we borrow, to the owner: For there is no injury
done to us, if God demand that back at our hands which he has before but
lent us. Now from the daughter to come back to the mother, and know what is
allegorically meant by Night. These pests and mischeifes before commemorated
are therefore said to be her sons and daughters, because the ignorance and
malice of man (which is indeed the night of the mind) is the parent and nurse
of all calamities incident to us: yet may some of their violences by wisdom
be mitigated, though not frustrated of their ends, namely Age, Love, Fate,
Death, and the like; who though they be in perpetual motion, their speed may
be slackned though not stayed, and their pace slowed though not quite stopped.
She was called the most Ancient, because before the Heavens and the Sun were
created there was no light extant; which is said to proceed from the lower
parts of the earth, in regard that the Sun compassing the world, when he
lights the Antipodes with his beams, the earth shadows them from us, which
shadow is nothing else than Night. She is called the mother of all, as being
before the birth of any thing. The word Nox is derived a Nocendo, of hurting or
harming; the reason is, as some Physicians hold opinion, because the corrupt
humors of the night are infectious and dangerous, especially to men any way
diseased; of which there is continual experience in all such as have either
wounds, or aches, or agues, or feauers, or the like, to all such weaknesses
or imperfections, the humors of the Night are still most hurtful and
obnoxious. And so much briefly what morally can be gathered by that which has
bin fabulously commented of Night.

That Sleep could not fasten on the eyes of Jupiter, it is intended, not to
be convenient for him that has the charge and protection of the whole
Universe, to whose care and foresight the administration and guidance of all
things are committed, should so much as slumber or wincke at all; neither does
the divine Nature need any rest to repair and comfort his troubled spirits,
when he is not capable of either labor or discommoditie. And Lethe is called
the sister of Somnus, in regard that by our natural repose, we for the time
forget all pain, anguish, or trouble. Because he comes to many creatures, and
at the same time, he is said to be winged; in regard the humor of the Night
increases the vapors of the stomach, ascending to the higher parts of the
body, which after by the frigiditie of the brain, descend again lower and
more cool, by which Sleep is begot; he is therefore not improperly called,
the son of Night: which Night calls me now to rest, with the finishing of
this second book, called EVTERPE.

Explicit Lib. 2.
THE THIRD BOOK of Women, inscribed THALIA. Treating of Illustrious Queens,
Famous Wives, Mothers, Daughters, etc. Containing the Histories of sundry Noble
Ladies.
GOrgias held opinion, that Women were not to be honored according to their
form, but their fame; preferring actual virtue before superficial beauty: to
incorage which in their sex, funeral orations were allowed by the Roman Laws
to be celebrated for all such as had been either presidents of a good and
commendable life, or otherwise illustrious for any noble or eminent action. And
therefore (least the matrons or virgins in Rome, the one should divert from her
stayed gravity, or the other from her virgins professed integrity) the use of
Wine was not known amongst them; for that woman was taxed with immodestie,
whose breath was known to smell of the grape. Pliny in his natural history,
says, That Cato was of opinion, Lib. 14.
That the use of kissing first began betwixt kinsman and kinswoman, How kissing
first came up.
howsoever near allide or far off, only by that to know whether their
wives, daughters, or neeces, had tasted any wine: to this Iuuenall seems to
allude in these verses: Paucae adeo cereris vittas contingere digna
Quarum non time at pater oscula.
As if the father were jealous of his daughters continence, if by kissing her,
he perceived she had drunk wine. But kissing and drinking both are now grown
(it seems) to a greater custom amongst us than in those days with the
Romans: nor am I so austeare to forbid the use of either, both which though the
one in surfets, the other in adulteries, may be abused by the vicious; yet
contrarily at customarie meetings, and laudable banquets, they by the nobly
disposed, and such whose hearts are fixed upon honor, may be used with much
modesty and continence. But the purpose of my tractate, is to exemplify, not
to instruct; to show you presidents of virtue from others, not to fashion any
new imaginary form from my self; and that setting so many statues of honor
before your eyes, of Beauty, Nobleness, Magnanimity, Bounty, Courtesy,
Modesty, Temperance, and whatsoever else in goodness can be included, each
heroic and well disposed Lady, or woman lower degreed and vnder^qualified,
may out of all, or some of these at least, apprehend some one thing or other
worthy imitation; that as the best of Painters, to ^^law one exqui^it Ve^us,
had set before him a hundred choice and selected beauties, all naked, to take
from one an eye, another a lip, a third a smile, a fourth a hand, and from
each of them that special lineament in which she most excelled; so having in
these papers as many virtues exposed to your view, as the Painter had beauties,
and all left as naked to your eyes, you may make like use of it: draw from one
a noble disposition, bounty, and courtesy, the ornaments of great Ladies; from
others, temperance, sobriety, and government, things best beseeming matrons;
the married wives, conjugal love and sincerity; the virgins chaste life and
purity; and every of you fashion her self as complete a woman for virtue, as
Apelles made up the purtraiture of his goddess, for beauty. I need not speak
much of the worth of your sex, since no man (I think) that remembers he had a
mother but honors it; the renown of which, ^ome by their virtues have as much
nobilitated, as others by their vicious actions have studied to disgrace: of
both which, though my promise bind me to speak in their course, yet you
Ladies in this treatise (as you most worthily deserve) have the precedence and
prioritie of place. What man was ever known to be eminent, whom woman in some
manner has not equalled? Come to Fortitude, as there was an Hercules and a
Theseus; so there was a Menalippe and an Hippolite to encounter them: who as
they conquered not, so they were not vanquished. Come to limning or drawing of
Pictures, as there was a Zeusis, a Timanthes, an Androcides, and a Parhasius;
so the world yielded a Timarete, the daughter of Micaon; an Irene, the daughter
and scholar of Cratinus; an Anistarite, the issue and puple of Nearchus; a
Lala Cizizena, and a Martia, M. Varronis to boot: to them, in that art no whit
inferior. In Poetry compare the Lyrickes of Sapho with Anacreons, and
Corinnaes with Pindarus, and it shall be easily made manifest that Sapho in all
points paraleld the first, and Corinna, in five several contentions for the
palm, preceded the last. But the similitude or discrepance of men and women's
virtues conferd together, can be made no better apparent (as Plutarch says)
than by comparing Life with Life, and Action with Action, by which we shall see
they have almost one and the same effigies: For oppose the magnificence of
Sesostris against that of Semiramis; tha craft and subtlety of Seruius Tullius
against Tanaquills; the magnanimity of Brutus against Porceaees; compare
Pelopidas with Timoclea; and which shall yield to the other pre-eminence?
especially if we exactly consider the end at which the virtue it self does
aim: for diverse virtues have diverse colors laid upon them, according to the
temperature of body, or the disposition of the mind. Achilles was valiant one
way, and Ajax another, yet both their endeavors intended to one Fortitude; the
Prudence of Nestor unlike that of Ulysses, yet both wise men; Cato and
Agesilaus were both upright men, yet executed justice two sundry ways; Irene
loved one way, Alceste another, yet both endeeredly affected their husbands; so
likewise Cornelia and Olimpias were differently magnanimious, yet either of
them attained to that height of honor to which their heroic minds aspired.
But to come to our former comparison from which I have somewhat digrest; in
what greater virtue can either sex express themselves, than in true conjugal
love? Cicero de Diuinatione, and Pliny in lib. 1. cap. 16. report of Tiberius
Gracchus, Tiber. Grach.
That finding two snakes in his house, male and female, he consulted with a
south-sayer concerning the prodegie; who told him as a consequence infallible,
That if he slew the male, swift death should surprise himself, but if he
killed the female, himself should escape death, and his wife in (...) like
manner perish, but to one of them that fate must necessarily happen. He
therefore preferring the safety of his wife before his own health, caused the
male to be instantly cut in pieces, and the female let go, beholding with his
own eyes his own instant destruction in the death of the serpent. Therefore
it was disputed, whether Cornelia were more happy in inioying such a husband,
or made more wretched in loosing him? An admirable and rare president in man,
and a husband; which I can easily instance in woman, and a wife: for as there
is nothing more devilish and deadly than a malicious and ill disposed woman, so
there is on the contrary, nothing more wholesome and comfortable to man than
one provident, gentle, and well addicted; for as she that is good and honest,
will upon just necessity lay down her life for her husbands health and
safety, so the other will as willingly prostitute hers for his destruction and
ruin. Therefore a wife by how much nearer she is to us in the strict bond both
of divine and humane laws, by so much either the sweetness of her behavior
tastes the pleasanter, or the harshnesse of her crabbed condition, relishes more
bitter; for she is ever either a perpetual refuge, or a continual torment:
she of whom I intend to speak is none such as the last, Alceste.
her history I thus receive in brief. Admetus a king of Greece, demanded
Alce^te in marriage, whose father had published an edict, That none should enjoy
her save such a one as could reconcile two wild beasts of contrary cruelties
and natures opposite, to draw without iarring together in his Chariot. This
Admetus hearing, he petitioned to Apollo and Hercules, who commiserating his
suit, the one brought him a Lion, the other a Bear, both made tame and gentle
to his hand: who presenting them to the father of Alceste, and having yoaked
them and made them draw according to the Edict, received her as his bride, and
departed with her thence into his own country of Thessaly. Not long after
Admetus falling into a great infirmity of sickness, and consulting with the
Oracle about his health, answer was returned, That he must necessarily leave
the world unless he could procure some friend, kinsman, courtier, or other,
who by sacrificing their own lives to his love, might ransom his, and by no
other means his health to be restored. This motion being made to many both
near and dear to him (who no doubt had promised more, with purpose to
perform less) in conclusion it was refused by all; which coming to the ear
of Alceste, she gave her self up to a most willing death, to redeem the
health and life of her husband, and with her own hands slew her self. Now
tell me (o you Satyrists against the sex of women, that call them frail,
inconstant, weak, and timorous) in which of these two did manly courage, noble
resolution, or conjugal love most shine? in him that by suffering death to
steal upon him yielded himself to the necessity of fate, or in her who like
a bold Virago with an unmatchable resolution with her own hand extracted that
blood from her chaste breast, with which she writ herself a character of
honor, to outlast all antiquity? In these things then you see, they may
justly claim an equal competence with men, but in many things a just
prioritie, as in noursing and bringing up their children, in mannaging the
affairs of the house, and care of all domestic business, in providing us
Diet, Linen for the back and bed, in sewing, weauing, and in spinning: for
who cannot imagine how ill great Hercules did become the distaffe? But I will
cease further to speak in their praise, least I be taxed of palpable
flattery, and some may lay on mean aspertion, That either I loved that sex
wondrous well in my youth, or perhaps now begin to dote on them in my age. And
since I last spoke of that conjoined love that ought to be betwixt man and
wife, I will produce an Epigram taken from Ausonius to that purpose, the
inscription is as follows. Ad Vxorem.
Live as we have lived, still to each other new,
And use those names we did when we first knew:
Let the same smiles within our cheeks be red,
The same sports thought on we first used in bed.
Let the day never come to see the change,
That either Time, or Age, shall make us strange:
But as we first met, let us ever be,
I, thy young man, and thou a girl to me:
To others, though I seem like Nestor old,
And thou more years have, than Sibilla Cu^
Cumana told:
Times snow we will not see, though it appears,
It Is good to know our age, not count our years.
Such I must confess, Husbands ought to be to their Wives, and wives to their
husbands, but they are seldom found in these days, as may appear by a short
tale that I will tell you. Of three gentlemen and their wives.
Three gentlemen being late at supper in a tavern, every man in courtesy made
offer to pay the reckoning, at length a motion was made amongst them, that
because it equally concerned them all, to put it to fortune and cast the dice;
so that committing it to chance, the other should be no ways beholding to him
for his charges. To this two of them assented, but the third presuming much
upon the love of his wife, was willing to put it to another venture, both to
save his purse, and express to his friends the gentle disposition of a woman
to her husband, whose welcome home was still as constant at midnight as at
midday: he therefore made a second motion, that to decide the controversy,
every man should instantly make have home by turns, as they lay nearest in
their way, and he that did not that thing instantly which his wife badde, the
whole charge of the reckoning should be imposed upon him, and not to part
company till they see this done: upon which they concluded. They went to the
next house, the gentleman first knocked at his own door, and he was let in,
the rest followed, but the husband only showing himself, found his wife in
the kitchen; how now wife (says he) what have thou rese^ued for my supper? She
churlishlie replied, here is nothing but the porridge the dog has lapt in,
you had best sup up them: this was sport to the other two, and he not willing
both to be charged and laughed at, and so doubly punished, did as she bad, and
so away they went all three to the house of the second. His wife was in bed,
how now sweet heart where are you (says he) here sweet husband (she answered
again) and I pray you come to bed quickly: who hastily put off his clothes,
went to bed, and as speedily rose again to see what would become of the
third. To his lodging they went (and this was he that presuming on his wives
gentleness drew the rest to the motion) being entered, he asked the maid for her
mistress, who told him she was newly gone to her chamber, up the stairs
runs he, the gentlewoman asked who is there? it is I sweet wife says he, and
for have stumbled at the uppermost step: You had best break your neck down
the stairs says she. At which words he pawsing a little, Nay on my word not
so quoth he, rather than do that, I will even back again with my friends to
the Tavern and pay the reckoning. But leaving this, which by some may be
consured to be little better than trifling, I thus break off my introduction,
and proceed to matter more serious, beginning with a brief summary or
catalogue of the names of some famous Queen^s, Mothers and Daughters, many of
which we shall have occasion to handle more at large in the process of our
Treatise.

Of Queens Illustrious.
SEmiramis was Queen of the Assyrians, Camilla of the Volscians, Nicaul^ (whom
some call Saba) of the Aethiopians, Athalia of the Hebrews, Thomiris of the
Scithians, Hesther of the Persians, Cleopatra of the Egyptians, Zenobia of the
Palmyriens, Amalasuntha of the Goths; of these we shall speak more at large,
Wherefore the Hunnes were first called Lombards or Longbeards.
as they fall in course. Theolinda of the Longobards or Lombards succeedes.
This nation dwelt first in Pannonia, and were governed by the king Albinus: now
the reason why they were first so called, was this. In the time that Justinius
surnamed the Less, wore the imperial purple, Narses the Eunuch had fought
under him many brave and victorious battles against the Goths, who had
usurped the greatest part of Italy, from whence he expeld them, slew their
king, and freed the whole country from many outrages. Notwithstanding his
great good service, he was calumniated to the Emperor, and so hated by the
Emperesse Sophia, that she sent him word, That she would make him lay by his
sword and armor, and with a distaffe spinne wool amongst her maids: to which
message he returned answer, That he would make such a thread to put into her
loome, that all the weauers in the Empire should scarce make good cloth on.
Upon this ground he sent to Albinus king of the Hunnes, who then inhabited
Pannonia, asking him, Why he would dwell in the barren continent of Pannonia,
when the most fertile country of Italy lay open to his invasion? Albinus
apprehending this encouragement from Narses, in the year six hundred
threescore and eight, made his first incursion into the Emperors confines, who
sent certain spies to discover the forces of Albinus; of which he having
intelligence, caused all the women to untie their hair and fasten it about
their chinnes, thereby to seem men, and make the number of his army appear
the greater. The spies observing them, wondered amongst themselves, and asked
what strange people these were with the Long beards? and from hence their names
were first derived, which has since been remarkable in the most pleasant and
fertile climate of all Italy, from them called Lombardie. Others say, that when
they went to fight against the Vandales, There was a man that had the spirit of
Prophecy, whom they besought to pray for them and their good success in the
battle; now when the Prophet went to his orisons, the queen had placed her
self and her women just against the window where he prayed, with their heir
disposed as aforesaid; and just as he ended his devotions, they opened their
casements and appeared to him, who presently said to himself, what be these
Long-beards? to whom the queen replied, To these Long-beards then whom thou
have named, let the victory happen, thus says the history. Rhodegondis was
queen of France, Why women in France are disabled from bearing Sovereignty.
but after her not any. Now some may demand the reason why the Salicke law was
first made, by which all women were made incapable of succession in the
principalities, which (as Plicronicon relates) was this; The crown lineallie
descending to a Princess of the blood, whom for modesties sake he forbeares
to name, or at least their own Chronicles are loath to publish; this Lady
having many Princely suitors, neglected them all, and fell in love with a
Butcher of Paris, whom she privately sent for, and as secretly married: since
when, all of that sex were by an irreuocable decree disabled of all
sovereignty. Cassiope was the famous Queen of Aethiopia; Harpalice, of the
Amazons; Hyppolite, of Magnesia; Teuca, of the Illyrians, etc. Of these in
their places. Amongst whom let me not be so unnatural to her merit, The memory
of Queen Elizabeth.
or so ungrateful to my country (thrice blessed and diuinelie happy in her
most fortunate reign) as not to remember that ever to be celebrated Princess,
Elizabeth of late memory, Queen of England: She that was a Saba for her
wisdom, an Harpalice for her magnanimity (witness the Camp at Tilburie) a
Cleopatra for her bounty, a Camilla for her chastity, an Amalasuntha for her
temperance, a Zenobia for her learning and skill in language; of whose
omniscience, pantarite, and goodness, all men heretofore have spoke too
little, no man hereafter can write too much: sacred be still her memory to us
on earth, as her blessed soul lives ever glorified in heaven. Q. Anne.
Her succeeded (though not in her absolute Monarchy, yet a Princess of
unspotted fame, incomparable clemency, unmatchable goodness, and most
remarkable virtue) Queen Anne, whom all degrees honored, all nations loved,
and no tongue was ever heard to asperse with the least callumnie: who in her
too short eminence here amongst us, was known to be the step of dignity to
many, but detriment to none; in whom all were glad, by whom none had ever the
least cause of sorrow, unless in the lamented loss of so grave and gracious a
princess. And for my own part (gentle and courteous reader) let me borrow so
much of thy patience, that I may upon this so just and good occasion, remember
a long neglected duty, by inserting in this place a few funeral tears upon
her hearse.

A Funeral Oade upon the death of ANNA PANARETA.
NOw Hymen change thy saffron weeds
To roabe and habit sable:
For joyful thoughts, use funeral deeds
Since nothing's firm or stable;
This (alas) we
May read and see,
As in a map or printed table.
It was not at the time of year
Birds bid the Spring god-morrow,
Nor when we from the Summer clear
Her warmth and pleasures borrow.
Nor when full fields
Ripe Autumn yields,
That we are thus inuolu'd in sorrow.
But when the barren earth denies
Fruits to the reapers mowing:
When Meteors muster in the skies
And no fair fruits are growing.
When winter cold,
Dry, sear, and old,
His frozen fingers over the fire sits blowing.
When the Sun scants us of his heat,
And Phoebe tempests threateth:
When Boreas blustering in his seat,
His frozen pineons beats;
And as a King
Above the Spring,
The fresh and timely budds defeateth.
In this great barrenness were we
Our plenty made to smother:
But what might this rare jewel be?
A Saint, a Queen, a Mother,
An Hester fair,
A Judith rare;
These dead, oh point me out another!
Save Debora, that is likewise dead,
Famed for her countries freeing:
But shall we henceforth see or read
Of such another being.
Oh what a dearth
Is now on earth
That hear none lives with these agreeing.
Saba was wise, so was our Queen,
For beauty others famed,
Some for their virtue crowned have been,
And in large legends named.
Who living shall
Contend in all
With her (alas) shall be but shamed.
But since our praises at their best,
Shorten so far her merit,
Leave her to her eternal rest,
A glorious Sainted spirit:
For aye to sing
Unto heavens King
Thanks, for these joys she does inherit.
Yet, it is a duty that we owe
To give our grief expression,
The greater that our sorrows grow,
It shows the less transgression,
A loss like this
It Is not a miss
That we then leave to all succession.
Skies mourn her death in stormy clouds,
Seas weep for her in brine:
Thou earth that now her frailty shroudes,
Lament though she be thine;
Only rejoice
Heaven with loud voice,
That you are now become her shrine.
For this appeared the Blazing star,
Yet fresh in our memory,
That Christendom both near and far
Might tell it as a story.
Great Jove it sent
With an intent
Only to get her to her glory.
In this Catalogue of Queens, The Lady Elizabeth.
having so late remembered the mother, how can I forget the daughter? she to
whom I must give that attribut which all soldiers bestow upon her, The Queen
of women, and the best of Queens, whose magnanimity in war, and gentleness in
peace, resolution in the one, and generous affability in the other, have so
sweet a correspondence, that when the Canon roared loud at the gates, and the
bullet forced a passage even through the Palace where she lodged, was no more
daunted in courage nor dismayed in countenance, than when the gentle and soft
music melodiouslie sounded at the celebration of her espousalls. Sacred (oh
Princely Lady) for ever be your memory, and fortunate and happy your hopeful
posterity; may your womb prove a bed of soldiers, and your breasts the
nursserie of Kings, may the sons victories redeem the losses of the father,
and the daughters surmount the fertility of their mother: may your future
fortunes be answerable to your former virtues, that as you have the earnest
prayers of all good men, so you may have the success of their wishes: which
millions that never yet saw you desire, but all that understand you, know you
worthily deserve. And to conclude, that as you are the last of these in this
my Catalogue by order, posterity may reckon you the first amongst the
Illustrious by merit.

Of diverse Ladies famous for their Modesty.
OH thou Chastity and purity of life, thou that art the ornament as well of
man, as woman, from whence shall I inuoke thee? thou did first help to
kindle the sacred fires of Vesta, where virginity was made Religion: Thou that
was wont to frequent the chambers of great Ladies with sinnelesse and undefiled
hands make the beds of the city Matrons, and to be obsequious about the
Pallats strowed in the country cottages, where shall I find thee now to direct
this my pen in her large and unbounded progress? or to tutour me so far,
that I may know what on this argument thou thy self would have done? Liuie,
Florus, Plutarch, and others, speaking of the wonder of the Roman chastity,
Lucresse, Lucresse.
accuse fortune, or nature of error, for placing such a manly heart in the
breast of a woman; who being adulterated by Sextus Tarquinius, after she had
sent to her friends, and to them complained her injuries, because she would not
live a byword to Rome, nor preserve a despoiled body for so noble a husbands
embraces, with a knife which she had hid under her garment for the same
purpose, in presence of them all slew her self: which was after, the cause
that the Tyrannical monarchy of Rome was transferd into a Consular dignity.
Armenia, Armenia.
the wife of Tygranes, having been with her husband at a sumptuous banquet
made by King Cyrus in his Palace Royal, when every one extold the majesty,
and applauded the goodlinesse of the Kings person; at length Tygranes asked his
queen what her opinion was of his magnitude and person: She answered, I can
say nothing sir, for all the time of the feast mine eyes were stedfastle ^ixt
upon you my dear husband; for what other men's beauties are, Cornelia.
it becoms not a married wife to inquire. Cornelia the wife of Aemilius Paulus,
when a great lady of Campania came to her house, and opening a rich casket (as
the custom of women is to be friendly one with another) she showed her gold
rings, rich stones and jewels, and causing her chests to be opened, exposed to
her view great variety of costly and precious garments: which done, she
entreated Cornelia to do her the like courtesy, and to show her what jewels
and ornaments she had stored to beautify her self, which hearing, she
protracted the time with discourse till her children came from school, and
causing them to be brought before her, turned unto the Lady, and thus said,
These be my jewels, my riches, and delights, nor with any gayer ornaments
desire I to be beautified.

Filij bonae indolis, parentum lauta supellex.
Viz. No domesticke necessaries better grace a house, than children witty and
well disposed. Many have bin of that continence, they have imitated the Turtle,
who having once lost her mate, will ever mourn, but never enter into the
fellowship of another. Therefore Ania Romana, Ania.
a woman of a noble family, having buried her first husband-in her youth, when
her friends and kindred continually laid open the sollitude of widdowhood, the
comfort of society, and all things that might persuade her to a second
marriage; she answered, It was a motion, to which she would by no means
assent: for (says she) should I happen upon a good man, such as my first
husband was, I would not live in that perpetual fear I should be in, least I
should loose him; but if otherwise, Why should I hazard my self upon one so
badde, that am so late punished with the loss of one so good. It is reported of
Portia Minor, P^ortia Min.
the daughter of Cato, That when a woman who had married a second husband, was
for many virtues much commended in her presence; Peace (says she) That woman
can neither be happy, well manner'd, nor truly modest, that will a second
time marry. But I hold her in this to be too censorious; yet the most ancient
Romans only conferred on her the Crown of modesty and continence, that was
contented with one matrimony, as making expression of their uncorrupted
sincerity in their continewed widdowhood. Especially such were most
discommended to make choice of a second husband, who had children left them by
the first, resembling their father. To which Virgill in the fourth book of his
Aeneid. seems elegantly to allude, Dido thus complaining of the absence of
Aenaeas: -- Siqua mihi de te suscepta fuisset
Ante fugam soboles -- etc.
Had I by thee but any issue had
Before thy flight; some pretty wanton lad,
That I might call Aeneas, and to play
And pra^e to me to dri^e these thoughts away:
And from whose smiling countenance I might gather
A true presentment of the absent father;
I should not then my wretched self esteem,
So altogether lost^^^ I now seem.


Plutarch much commends the widdowhood of Cornelia, Cornelia.
the illustrious mother of the Gracchi; whose care, having nobly provided for
her children and family after the death of her husband: she expressed her self
every way so absolute a matron, that Tiberius Gracchus (of whom we spoke
before) was not ill counseled by the gods, by preserving her life, to
prostrate his own: for she denied to marry with king Ptolomeus, and when he
would have imparted to her a diadem and a scepter, she refused to be styled a
queen, to keep the honor of a chaste widow. Of the like purity was Valeria,
Valeria.
the sister Messalar: who being demanded by her kindred and dearest friends,
why (her first husband dead) she made not choice of a second? answered, that
she found her husband Seruius to live with her still: accounting him alive to
her whom she had ever in remembrance: A singular and remarkable sentence,
proceeding from a most excellent matron, intimating how the sacred unity in
wedlock ought to be dignified, namely with the affections of the mind, not the
vain pleasures of the body. This was proved in the daughter of Democion the
Athenian, Democion Filia.
who being a virgin, and hearing that Leosthenes, to whom she was contracted,
was slain in the Lemnian wars, and not willing to survive him, killed her
self: but before her death, thus reasoning with her self; Though I have a
body untouched, yet if I should fall into the embraces of another, I should but
have deceived the second, because I am still married to the first in my heart.
Not of their minds was Popilia the daughter of Marcus, Popilia.
who to one that wondered what should be the reason why all feminine beasts,
never admitted the act of generation but in their time, and when they covet
issue, and woman at all times desires the company of man? thus answered, the
reason is only this, Because they are beasts.

The wife of FVLVIVS.
THis Fuluius the familiar and indeered friend of Augustus Caesar, heard him
privately complain of the great solitude that was then in his house, since two
of his grandchildren by his daughter were taken away by death, and the only
third that remained, was (for some calumnies published against the Emperor) now
in exile, so that he should be forced to abandon his own blood, He was called
Posthumus.
and constitute a son in law, and a stranger, to succeed in the Imperial
purple; and therefore he had many motions in himself, and sometimes a purpose
to recall the young man's banishment, and to restore him to his favor and former
grace in the court. This Fuluius hearing, went home, and upon promise of
secrecy told it to his wife: she could not contain her self, but makes what
speed she can, and tells this good news to the Empress Liuia; Liuia she
speeds to Augustus, and briefly expostulates with him about the banishment of
her grandchild, and what reason he had not to restore him to his former
honors? and why he would prefer a stranger before his own blood? with many
such like vpbraidings. The next morning Fuluius coming (as his custom was)
into the Presence, and saluting the Emperor, Augustus cast an austere look
upon him, and shaking his head said only thus, You have a close breast Fuluius;
by this, he perceiving his wife had published abroad what he had told her in
secret, posts home with what speed he can, and calling his wife before him, o
woman (says he) Augustus knows that I have revealed his secret, therefore I
have a resolution to live no longer: to whom she replied, Neither is that death
you threaten to your self without merit, who having lived with me so long,
and known my weakness and loquacitie, had not the discretion to prevent this
danger to which you have drawn your self by tempting my frailetie; but since
you will needs die, it shall be my honor to precead you in death: which she
had no sooner spoke, but snacht out his sword and with it slew her self. A
noble resolution in an heathen Lady, to punish her husbands disgrace and her
own oversight with voluntary death; and a notable example to all women that
shall succeed her, to be more charie in keeping their husbands secrets: all
which I would wish to follow the counsel of the comic Poet Philippides, who
when king Lysimachus called him unto him and using him with all courtesy spoke
thus, What of the things that are within or without me shall I impart unto
thee, o Phillippides? he thus answered, Even what thou please oh king, so
thou still reseruest to thy self thy counsels. This puts me in mind of king
Seleucus Callinicus, who having lost a battle against the Galatians, and his
whole army being quite subverted and disperced, casting away his crown and
and all regal ornaments, was forced to fly only attended with two or three
servants; and wandering long through many deserts and by-pathes, as fearing to
be discovered, and growing faint with hunger, he came to a certain ruinate
cottage, where he de^ired bread and water: the master of the house not only
affoorded him that, but whatsoever else the place could yield or the
suddenness of the time provide, with a large welcome. In the interim of
dinner, fixing his eyes upon Seleucus face he knew him to be the king, and not
able to contain his own joys nor conceal the kings dssimulation, after
dinner the king being ready to take horse, and bidding his host farewell, he
replied again, And farewell o king Seleucus: who finding himself discovered,
reached him his hand as to embrace him, beckning to one of his followers who at
the instant at one blow struck off his head, so that as Homer: Sic caput
estque loquentis ad huc cum puluere mistum.


These were the fruits of unseasonable babbling; for this fellow, had he kept
his tongue till the king had been restored to his former dignities, might have
received large rewards for his hospitallitie, who su^ered an unexpected death
for his loquacitie.

Aretaphila.
ARetaphila Cyrenaea, is deservedly numbered amongst the heroic Ladies, she
lived in the time of Mithredates, and was the daughter of Aeglatur, and the
wife of Phedimus: a woman of excellent Virtue, exquisit Beauty, singular
Wisdom, and in the managing of common-welthes business and civil affairs
ingeniously expert: this Lady the common calamities of her country made
eminent, for Nicocaentes the tyrant, having usurped the principallitie over the
Cirenaeans, amongst many other of his inhumane butcheries, slew Menalippus the
Priest of Apollo, and assumed to himself the sacred office and dignity. In
the number of these noble citisens, he caused Phedimus the husband of
Aretaphila to be injuriously put to death, and married her against her will:
who as well distressed with her private discontents as suffering in the public
calamity, meditated a remedy for both, and by advise of some of her nearest
allies attempted to poison the king; but the project being discovered, was
prevented: and upon that ground Calbia mother to Nicocrates, a woman of an
implacable spirit, and prone to any thing wherein there might be blood and
slaughter, first condemned her to insufferable torture, and next to violent
death: but the tyrant her son in regard of the extraordinary love he bore
unto her, being the more relenting and humane of the two, was pleased to put
her cause first to examination, and after to censure. In which trial she
answered boldly and with great courage in the defense of her own innocence:
but being by manifest proofs convicted, in so much that her purpose could not
be denied, she then descended so low as to excuse herself, alleging that
(indeed) apprehending the greatness of his person, and that she was in degree
no better to him than an handmaide; and fearing least some other more
accomplished beauty might step betwixt him and her to insinnuate into his
favor and grace, she therefore had prepared an amatorious confection, minding
only to continue his love, not to betray his life; and if her womanish
weakness had in any kind (through ignorance) transgrest the bounds of
loyalty, she submitted her self to his royal clemency, whose approved
judgment she made no doubt, knew how to distinguish betwixt folly and malice.
Notwithstanding these smooth euasions, Nicocrates fully possessed of the truth,
gave her up into the hands of his mother to be tormented, who (as she is
before charractered) being a harsh and merciless woman, left nothing
unattempted that torture could devise, to wrest from her a capitol confession:
but Aretaphila with wondrous patience and constancy enduring whatsoever the
beldame could inflict upon her, Calbia grew as weary in punishing, as she in
suffering, insomuch that Nicocrates was in some sort persuaded of her
innocence, and commanded her release, seeming sorrowful for the torments she
had endured, so that his former love conquering his suspicion, he began to
study a new reconcilement, and excusing his too much credulousnesse renewed
his ancient familiarity and custom. But she not forgetting her former rackes
and strapadoes, now began to meditate upon his death another way: she had a
daughter of exquisite feature, and the tyrant had a brother called Leander, a
wildeheaded young man and apt for any innovation or hair-braind attempt, she
wrought so far with her, and so inwardly with him, that by the consent of the
king a match was concluded betwixt them. All these things falling out according
to her wishes, her daughter (by the mothers instigation) wrought so far upon
his rashness in private, and the mother gave him such encouragement withal,
that putting him in hope to enjoy the soueraignetie to himself, they persuaded
him to supplant his brother: This took such prosperous effect, that he
suborned a servant of his called Daphries, who attending his opportunity, slew
the tyrant. Aretaphila not with this contented, whose revenge aimed to extirpat
the whole family of the tyrant, and whose goodness, to free her country from
all servitude, instigated the citisens against Learchus for the murder of her
king and second husband, drawing him into the compass of that public hate,
that he was forced to fly as a traitor and a fratricide: neither was she
satisfied whilst he yet lived, therefore by her wit and policy, and the
industry of one Anabas, he was at length subtlely surprised; by which the
city received her pristine liberty and freedom. For which the people would
have done her divine honors, as to a goddess, which she utterly refused.
They next proceeded to justice upon the delinquents, where Calbia was judged to
the fire and burnt a live, and Leander to be sowed in a sack and so cast into
the Sea, both which executions were accordingly performed. The people then once
again assembled and prostrated themselves before her, jointly beseeching her
either to take upon her the primacie and chief government, or at least to be a
gracious assistant to the magistrates and princes, with her directions and
counsel: both which she utterly refused, betaking herself to a solitary and
retired life, spending the rest of her age in spinning, weauing, and the like
womanish chares, amongst her handmaides.

Pieria.
Many of the Jones by reason of a discord that fell betwixt them and the sons
of Neleus, were forced to leave the city Miletum, where they before
inhabited, and were driven to plant a new collonie in Minus, betwixt which
cities there was perpetual jarre and enmity; in so much that from a private
quarrel it grew to a public war, yet not in that violence but that upon
some certain feastiuall days there was free recourse betwixt the citisens of
the one and the other, to be present at the sacred solemnities. There was
amongst these of the city of Minus, one of a noble family whose name was
Pythes, his wife was called Iapigia, and his daughter Pyeria: He, when the
great feast celebrated to Diana, called Nelaim (of the opposite family) was
kept, sent thither his wife and daughter, entreating the Milesians to suffer
them to participate of their solemnities, which was granted: at which
enterview, Phrigius, the chief of the sons of Neleus a man most potent in
the city, grew inamoured on Pyeria; and in courting her, desired her to
demand what courtesy soever the city or his power could yield and it should
be instantly granted: to which she answered, That nothing could be more
acceptable unto her than that the Jones might have more often and peaceable
recourse into their city. By which he apprehended that she desired no more
than a cessasion of arms, and that peace might be established betwixt the two
cities: which by their marriage was accordingly effected, and Pyeria ever
after honored for the motion. In so much that it grew to a proverb, All the
Milesian women desiring to be no better beloved of their husbands than Pyeria
was of her Phrigius.

Aspasia.
Aspasia being the daughter of Hermotimus Phocencis (her mother dying of her in
childbirth) was by her fathers care brought up, though meanly, yet modestly:
and growing toward understanding, she had many dreams as presages of her
future fortunes; namely, that succeeding times should afford her a husband
fair, good, and rich. In this interim she was troubled with an unseemly
swelling of the chinne, so great, that it grew almost to a deformity, being a
sorrow to the father, and almost a heart-breake to the daughter. Hermotimus
careful of her health, presents her malady to the Physician; who was willing
to undertake the patient, but withal proposed too great a sum for the cure:
the one replying, The demand is above my strength; the other answered, Then is
the cure above my skill, and so departed. This discouragement from a Tumor
without, grew to a Corsiue within: as much tormented with the despair of her
recovery as the violence of the disease. In this anxietie of thoughts and
agony of pain being much perplexed, she gave her self to all abstinence and
forbear to eat; till on a time a gentle slumber stealing upon her, there
appeared to her a Turtle, which was instantly transhapt into a woman most
beautiful, who drawing more near, bids her take courage, and be of comfort,
and forgettting the Physicians with all their drugges, unguents, and
emplasters, only to apply to the place then grieved, rose leaves dried to
powder, and not to doubt of her present recovery; and having thus said, upon
the instant vanished. Aspasia awaking, and by this vision much comforted,
applied to her face such things as she was taught; in short time all swelling
was taken away, and she restored to her pristine beauty, with such an addition
of comeliness, that those with whom she before was held but equal, she in the
eyes of all men might now claim over them a just precedence: for she is thus
described, Her hair somewhat yellow, and from the temples naturally curling,
her eyes big and clear, her nose somewhat (but most becomminglie) hooked,
her ears short, her skin white and soft, her cheeks seeming to lodge the
sweet blushes of the rose (for which cause the Phocenses called her from an
infant Milto) her lips red, her teeth than snow more white, her feet without
all fault, her voice so sweet and rauishing, that when she spoke, she would put
you in mind of what you have read of the Sirens. From all effeminate
curiosities she studied to alienate her self, these being commonly the
superfluities of wealth and abundance, she being but of humble fortunes, and
descended from mean parentage. It happened this Aspasia was by a Persian
soldier taken from her father (as all their cities in those days were
subject to the like oppressions) and presented unto Cyrus the son of Darius
and Parasatides, but much against her own will, or the liking of her father:
thus presented to him in the company of other of the most choice virgins, she
was commended above them all, both for the modesty of her countenance, the
civility of her carriage, and an irreproouable beauty without all stain or
blemish; and that which heightened the love of all men toward her, she was of
singular wisdom: for which Cyrus afterward often admitted her into his
counsels, and so often as he was swayd by her advise, his disseignes never
failed their wished success. The first time she stood before the King was at
supper time, which ended, and Cyrus after the Persian manner willing to take
his cups somewhat lauishly, in midst of their healthing there were
presented before him four Grecian damosells, with Aspasia the Phocensian
making up the number; the other three being richly adorned, whose friends had
set their baire out in curles, beautified their heads with jewels, and
polisht their faces and bodies with sweet odours and unguents; besides they
had instructions how to behave themselves toward the king, how to insinuate
into his favor, not to move back when he came forward, nor make squemish of
any courtesy he should offer, but freely to recompense kiss for kiss, being
fully instructed in the amatorious precepts belonging to such a business. But
on the contrary, Aspasia would not present her self in any curious or gay
vesture, nor suffer any roabe of honor or state to be put upon her, neither
would she wash or bath her self: but in sadness and sorrow she muoakt all the
Grecian and Eleutherian gods to her assistance, still calling upon her fathers
name, accounting those unusual ornaments and superfluous garments, rather the
marks of seruit^de than honor; and scarce with stripes could she be forced to
appear in any kind, rather a strumpet than a chaste and unblemished virgin: The
others coming before Cyrus, smiled using many immodest and lascivious
gestures; she only with her eyes dejected, and manifest blushes in her
cheeks, by her tears expressed an extraordinary bashfulnesse. The king
commanding them to sit down in his presence, the rest boldly contended who
should place herself next him; but this Phocean damsel at first seemed not
to hear, nor without the robustious usage of that soldier who first surprised
her, could be won to sit down. The king beginning to dally with them, and
playing with their cheeks, necks, and breasts, the rest willingly suffered
him; she only struck his hand aside, and if he offered but to touch her in
the least part, she presently cried out, and told him he should not do it
unpunished. The king much delighted with this unexpected coyness, since at
every offer of his she fled his embraces (which was against the custom of
the Persians) he more ardently fixed his affection upon her, and turning to the
soldier who first presented them, thus said, This Phocean only thou have
brought me chaste and uncorrupted, the rest both in beauty and behavior are
impostures: and from thencefoorth she was solicited and beloved of the king
above all others with whom he had before or after conuerst with, and from that
time a mutual affection grew betwixt them, so great, that it increased as
far as the modest and absolute confirmation of marriage, conformable to the
custom of the Graecians. In so much that the love of the king to Aspasia was
not rumoured in Ionia solely, but through all the spacious provinces of Greece,
even Peloponesus was filled with the bruit thereof, to the glory of the great
King; who after his familiar acquaintance with her, was never known to have
used the company of any other woman. And now began the vision of Aspasia
(concerning the Dove) to be much spoken of, and of the goddess that appeared
to her, to whom she dedicated (after) a goodly statue, called the image of
Venus, beautified with many rich jewels; withal, the picture of a Dove, to
which she made daily supplications, sacrifices, and oblations, still imploring
the favor of the goddess. To her father Hermotimus she sent many rich and
unvalued presents, making him of a subject almost vnparraleld for wealth, using
in the process of her life (as witness, as well the Persian as Grecian
Ladies) a wondrous modesty and continence. Hormus, sometimes of Thessaly, was
sent from Scopa the junior, who was of Scicily, with an admirable rich Jewel
to Cyrus for a present. Who having showed it to many, all wondering at the cost
and workmanship, and proud of so rich a gemme: presently after dinner repaired
to the chamber of Aspasia, and finding her asleep, cast himself upon the bed
by her without disturbing her rest: who waking and espying the king so near,
began to embrace him according to her accustomed manner, who presently taking
the jewel from the casket, showed it to her using these words, This I bestow
on thee as a gift worthy the daughter or mother of an Emperor, which I charge
thee to wear for my sake in a carkanet about thy neck. To whom she wisely and
consideratly answered, And how dare I be the possessor of so great a treasure,
which rather becomes the majesty and estate of your mother Parasatides?
therefore I entreat you send it to her, for I without this ornament can present
you with a neck sufficiently beautiful. The king much pleased with her answer,
daily and howerly more and more increased his love toward her, and what she
said and did, sent in a letter to his mother, with the jewel enclosed. For
which she was not only much graced and favored by the Princess, but after by
Cirus rewarded with many rich gifts, of value inestimable, all which she
modestly sent back with this message; These things, o king, may be useful to
thee that have the charge of such infinites of men, when my greatest riches is
to be solely beloved of thee: with these and the like, she tied the King in
inseparable bonds of affection toward her. For without all competitorship, in
the beauty of face, feature of body, integrity of life, and nobleness of
mind, she was above all those of her time admirable. But after Cyrus being
slain in battle by his brother, and his whole army: overthrown, she
likewise fell into the hands of the enemy: whom the king Artaxerxes with
singular care and diligence caused to be sought, and brought before him, as one
whose name and virtues he held in great respect and estimation; and being
presented before him bound, he grew wondrous angry, commanding all such to
prison as were the authors of her least durance: withal commanding a costly
and magnificent roabe to be cast about her, which she with many tears and
much sorrow refused, till she was compeld to it by the king, still taking to
heart and lamenting the death of Cyrus. But thus adorned, according to the
Persian state, she appeared in the eyes of all men the fairest of women,
especially in the kings, much surprised with her extraordinary beauty, still
persuading her to race out the memory of Cyrus dead, and in his room to admit
of Artaxerxes living; which slowly and at length though late, he obtained,
respecting her above all other his wives and concubines. Soon after, his
Eunuch Teridates dyed, more than a child, and scarce full man, the most
beautiful youth in Asia, and of the king the most beloved; who so much
lamented his death, that all the principalities and nations under him seemed to
participate of his grief; yet none that durst be so bold as to come into his
presence, or minister to him any words of comfort. Three days being past in
these lamentations and sorrows, Aspasia in a funeral habit, and with her eyes
fixed upon the earth, appeared before the king; who no sooner espied her, but
demanded the cause of her coming: To comfort thee (said she) o king, if thou
be so pleased, else to return to the place of sorrow from whence I came. At
which seeming to rejoice, the king entreated her to her chamber whether he
would presently repair, to whom she obeyed. And having put on a roabe of the
Eunuchs, so much bewailed, and in that casting her self upon her bed, she
gave the king such content, that he commanded her till the days of mourning
were past, never to appear to him but in that habit; she more prevailing with
him than all his Princes, wives, subjects, and servants about him, still living
in his most especial grace and favor. And so far Aelianus.

The Matrons of Lacedemon, The women of Lacedemon.
in all battles fought against the common enemy, as many of their husbands
sons or allies as they found slain, they used to search what wounds they had
about them; if the greater number were in the face or breast, with great joy
and solemnity they bore them to be intombed in the monuments of their
ancestors; but if on the contrary those on their backs exceeded the number of
the former, surprised with shame and sorrow, they either left them to the
common burial, or gave them such private interment, as if they wished their
memories to have perished with their bodies. This history Aelianus in his
twelfth book records.

This discourse for the rareness of it, Odatis.
I hold not impertinent to insert amongst the women most illustrious. Chares
Mitylenus in his tenth book of Histories thus writes. Athenaus in Dipsonoph.
lib. 13. cap. 12.
Zariadres the younger brother of Hystaspes, both of them being so naturally
beautiful, that they were said to be the sons of Adonis and Venus. The elder
reigned in the lower parts of Media, the Junior kept his principality in the
higher country, as far as the river Ta^ais: not many leagues distant from
thence, there lived the king Homartes, who had one only daughter called Odatis,
whom as diverse Authors affirm, seemed in a dream to have seen this
Zariadres, and of his person to be much inamoured. The like in a vision
happening to him, in so much that he was ardentlie affected to her whom as yet
he had never seen. This Odatis was the fairest Princess in that time living
in Asia, and Zariadres no whit to her inferior, who sent to the king Homartes
to demand her in marriage; he would by no means yield to the motion, because
not having any male issue he was loath to transfer the succession of his
kingdom upon a stranger, purposing rather to bestow her on some Prince of his
country, though a subject. Not long after he caused to be assembled all the
friends, kinsmen, Nobility, and Gentry of his land, inuiting them to his
daughters marriage, but not yet knowing or having determined in himself on
whom to confer her. His subjects thus assembled, he invited them all to a
solemn and high feast, whither having called his daughter^ in the hearing of
all his guests he thus bespake her: We are now (o Princely daughter) to
celebrate thy nuptials, take therefore this golden bowl filled with rich
Greekish wine, and having thoroughly and advisedly perused all this noble
company, to whom thou shall daine first to drink, he is undoubtedly thy
husband. She having viewed and reuiewed them all, and none pleasing like that
person presented to her in her dream, she demanded of her father some few
days respight, which granted, she sent word to Zariadres, how her affairs
stood concerning her marriage, and withal much desiring his speedy presence.
He being in his army near to Tanais, and hearing this news, secretly
conveyed himself out of his tent, and without any servant or attendant saving
his chariotter, came privately into the City of Homartes, having in wondrous
short space run 8000 furlongs; this done, he disposed both of his chariot,
and driuer, and withal putting himself into a Scythians habit, he came to
the place where this marriage was to be celebrated, and thronging in amongst
the rest, he beheld the beautiful Odatis sad in countenance, and tempering her
draught with a slow and unwilling hand: to whom approaching more nearer, he
thus whispered, Behold Odatis thy dearest Zariadres for whom thou did lately
send, ready to do thee all service. She casting an advised eye upon him, and
perceiving him to be a stranger beautiful, and in all semblance so like the
person of whom she had dreamt; in a great ecstasy of joy drank to him, and
gave him the cup: and whilst the rest were, amassed at the novel, he snatched
her up and carried her where his chariot stood ready, and so transported her
into Media. This their love was so famous amongst the barbarous people, that
the history was portraied in all their Palaces and Temples, nay even in their
private houses; many of the Nobility in memory of her, calling their
daughters by the name of Odatis.

Aristomache
Dionisius the Tyrant banished Dion out of Sicily, taking into his own custody
the exyles wife Aristomache, and her daughter: but after, at the great
intercession of one of his servants, Aesian. lib. 2.
Polycrates, (a man by him much affected) he compelled the Lady (who still
lamented the absence of her Lord) unto a second marriage with this Polycrates,
who was by nation of Syracusa. But Dion having gathered fresh forces, and
expelling Dionisius from Syracusa unto the Locrenses: Ar^^e his sister, meeting
him and congratulating his famous victory, made intercession for Aristomache,
who with great shame had sequestered her self from the presence of her first
husband, not daring to look him in the face, howsoever her second nuptials
were made by force and compulsion: But the necessity of the cause, the
wondrous submission and modest excuse of Aristomache, together with the
mediation of Arete, so much prevailed with Dion, (all confirming her innocence)
that he received his wife and daughter into his family, still continuing their
former love and society.

Hippo, Hippo.
a woman of Greece, traveling by sea with her husband, and being surprised by
Pirates, finding the chief of them to be inamoured of her beauty; rather than
yield to his lustful desires, she voluntarily threw her self into the sea,
and was drowned, leaving behind her a remarkable president of chastity: her
body was driven upon Ericheon, or (as some will have it) the Erythean shore: in
memory of whom a sacred monument was raised, which was many years after
yearly celebrated with many condign honors. Valor. Max. lib. 7. cap. 1.

Chiomara, Chiomara.
of whom Li^ius, Frontinus, Florus, and others have written, was the wife of
Orgiantes Regulus, and borne in Galatia; Plutarch calls her Oriagontes, it is
thus related of her: Plin. de viris Illustr. cap. 55. Val. Max. lib. 7. cap. 1.
The army and the forces of the Gallogrecians being part of them defeated, and
the rest taken captive by Ca. Manlius then consul, near to the mount Olimpus,
this Chiomara the wife of Regulus, a woman of most known modesty and
chastity, being first taken, and after committed to the custody of a Roman
Centurion, was forceably by him adulterated. A commandment coming from the
Consul, that all the treasure of which the Lady was possessed should be
confiscate to the Centurion, only her self with that ransom to be returned
safe and untouched to her husband: she presently promised the captain to bring
him to a place where all his desires should be satisfied. He of a covetous
disposition, with all celeritie hasted with her to the discovery of this
Magazin, where she before had placed a company of Gallogrecians her country
men, and in their language commanded them to fall upon him and kill him: which
done she cut off his head and presented it to her husband, and kneeling to him,
both expressed the nature of her injury, and the manner of her revenge. The
censures of the Consul Manilius and her husband Regulus both assented in this,
That she was of a courage unmatchable, for though her body was brought under
the subjection of an enemy, neither her mind could be conquered, nor her
chastity made captive.

An ancient woman amongst the Syracusans, Valor. Maxim. lib. 6. cap. 2.
when all the subjects of Dionysius, with many execrations cursed and openly
inueighed against his insufferable cruelties; she only was observed morning
and evening to solicit the gods for his long life and happiness: which
coming to the ear of the king, he caused her to be called before him, and
demanded of her the cause, Why amongst all his oppressed subjects who daily
wished his ruin, she alone inuoakt the gods for his health and preservation? to
whom with an undaunted resolution she thus answered, That which I do (o King)
is not without due premeditation, and grounded both upon reason and judgment,
for we were before oppressed with a tyrant whose government was very grievous
unto us; after him succeeded another far more burdensome and cruel than the
former, for whose destruction I amongst the rest besought the powers above; now
you being by succession the third, and more bloody and inhumane than the
former, I therefore with great devotion pray for your continuance, least when
you be taken from us, the devil himself take upon him the scepter, and
succeed you in your principality. The Tyrant though touched to the quick, yet
in regard of her age, and fearelesse liberty of her language, suffered her to
depart unpunished.

Tertia Aemilia.
This Tertia Aemilia, a famous Roman Lady, was the wife of the first Affricanus,
the mother of Cornelia, mother to Caius and Titus Gracchus. She was of such
gentleness and patience, that knowing her husband to be familiar with one of
her handmaides, yet she dissembled it, least he that had conquered a third
part of the world, should have the imputation of any such lightness laid upon
him; being so far from revenge, that her husband being dead she gave her
bondwoman manumission, and married her richly to a freed man of her own.

Turia.
Turia was the wife of Quint. Lucretius, who when her husband was proscribed by
the Triumuirate, Val. Max. lib. 6. cap. 7.
and therefore instantly to depart into exile (only trusting the secrecy of
her chambermaid) she hid her husband in her house betwixt two chambers, where
no search could discover him, where to her great peril she kept him long
without any prejudice or danger; expressing therein her singular faith and
loyalty, that when the rest that were confined into countries remote, were
exposed to the labor of the body and discontent of the mind, he alone under
his own roof and in his own chamber, lived safe in the bosom of his wife,
so remarkably loving and constant.

Sulpitia.
Sulpitia being strictly kept by her mother Iulia, least she should follow her
husband Lentulus Crustellio into banishment, who by the Triumuirate was
confined into Sicily, Plin. lib. 4.
notwithstanding, putting on the habit of a servant, past through their guards
and watches, and attended only with two handmaids, and as many men-seruants,
by secret flight came to the place whether he was proscribed, leaving all the
pleasures and choice delicates of Rome to participate with the miseries of a
husband. Plin. Not. Hist lib. 7. cap. 35.
Pliny writes of another Sulpitia a famous Roman Lady (daughter to Paterculus,
and wife to Quint. Fuluius Flaccus,) she when the Senate and Decemuirat, by
inspection into the books of Sibill, had decreed that an image should be
dedicated to Venus Verticordia, by which the minds both of virgins and matrons
might be the more alienated from libidinous affections, and reduced to the
strict rules of modesty and shamefastnes, when to the dedication of this work
out of the whole city a hundred of the most chaste matrons were to be
selected; and then out of these hundred, ten supposed to be pure above the
rest; and out of these ten, one to be preferred; this Sulpitia carried the
suffrage from all, for virtue, modesty, and incomparable chastity.

Iulia^
This Iulia was the daughter of Caius Caesar, and wife of Pompeius Magnus: after
the battle of Pharsalia, Pl^^. in Pomp.
seeing the garment of her husband brought home sprinkled with his blood (and
not yet knowing of his death) the object so affrighted her, that instantly at
the sight thereof she sunk down to the earth, and in the extremity of that
passion was with much pain and anguish delivered of that burden in her womb,
which no sooner parted from her, but in that agony she expired.

Portia.
Portia, the wife of Brutus and daughter of Cato, whose noble resolution, and
conjugal love to her husband, all future ages may admire; for hearing that in
the battle at Philippi he was vanquished and slain, Valor. Max. lib. 4. cap.
6.
when all weapons and instruments of death were strictly kept from her, she
feared not with her womanish spirit to imitate (if not exceed) the resolution
of her father in his death, for by swallowing hot burning coals she expired.
Herein only they differ, that he by a common, she by an unheard of death were
extinct.

Horestilla was the wife of Marcus Plautius, Horestilla.
who by the commandment of the Senate, having the charge of threescore ships
to pass into Asia, his wife so entirely was devoted to his love, Valerius Max.
Cap. de amore con^ugat.
that she shipped her self with him, exposing her self to the dangers of the
sea, but not able through her weakness to endure the casualties appending on
so harsh a journey (as the distemperature of weather, and such like) in the
city Tarentum fell sick and dyed. Plautius willing to show himself a
husband worthy such a wife, when her body was brought to the funeral fire,
betwixt the ceremonies of annoynting her body and taking his leave with a
parting kiss, fell suddenly upon his naked sword and so slew himself: which
his friends seeing and lamenting, they took him as he was apparrelled, without
so much as stripping his body, and joining it to the corse of his wife (and
adding more combustible matter to the fire) burnt them both together. Over the
vrne that covered their ashes, the Tarentines erected a famous sepulcher, which
they called The two lovers. By Plautius and Horestilla it may appear, that
where the greatest and most honest love is settled betwixt man and wife, it is
often times more happy to be joined in death than to be separated in life.

Artimesia, Artimesia.
Q. of Caria, so much hououred the remembrance of her husband Mausolus, Herod.
lib. 8. Strab. lib. 13.
being dead, that after meditation, and deliberat counsel which way she might
best decorate his hearse, and withal to express to perpetuity her
unmatchable love; she caused to be erected over him a tomb so magnificent,
that for the cost and state it was not doubted to be worthily reckoned amongst
the nine wonders. But what do I speak of so rich a structure, when she her
self became the living sepulcher of her dead husband, by their testimonies who
have recorded, that she preserved his bones, and having beaten them to powder,
mingled their dust with her wine in remembrance of him, every morning and
evening. Cicer. Tusc. lib. 3. and Plin. lib. 36. cap. 5.

Of woman's fortitude and magnanimity, Harmonia.
I will add one admirable president in two virgins of Syracusa, Val. Max. lib.
3.
equally resolute: when by the intestine sedition and civil wars in
Syracusa, the stock and family of Gelo (in these combustions) was quite
extirpt and rooted out, even to his only daughter Harmonia, and all the
seditious weapons of the enemy now drawn and aimed at her bosom: her nurse
pitying her threatened ruin, made choice of a young virgin like to her in
favor, and of equal stature, and attyring her in the habit and ornaments of a
Princess, offered her to the points of their yet bloody weapons; this damsel
was of that constancy and noble resolution, that notwithstanding she saw
imminent death before her, was not affrighted with the terror thereof, nor
would reveal her name, or tell of what condition she was. Which Harmonia
seeing and admiring at her loyalty and faith, she called out to the murderers,
and discovering her self to preserve her handmayd, offered her own naked
breast to the slaughter, telling them she was present whom they sought for: so
that a covered fallacy to the one, and open truth to the other, in both an
admirable and undaunted constancy, was the cause of their deaths.

This Hormisda was a great and mighty man amongst the Persians, The wife of
Hormisda.
and of one of the most noblest families amongst them, as Zozimus, Marcellinus
and others commemorate. He being confinde unto a certain mountain and
fettered, was there kept with a strict guard of Persians, who against the laws
of the kingdom had purpose to inuest his younger brother in the state
imperial. Petr. Cri^itus. Lib. 18. cap. 1.
It happened, that in the time of his confinement, his wife (the remembrance of
whose name it is pity time has abolisht and not left it to posterity) thus
devised for his enlargement: she sent to him a fish as a present, of an
extraordinary bigness, in whose belly she had hid an iron file and other like
engines fit for his purpose, committing it to the charge of one of her most
faithful eunukes, desiring her husband by his mouth, not to have the fish cut
up in the presence of any, only to make happy use of such things as he found
enclosed therein. To his keepers the better to hide her stratagem, she sent
Camells laden with sundry kind of meats, and several wines. Hormisda
apprehending the plot, gave it a bold and resolute performance, for having
first filled off his yrons, he changed his habit with that of his eunukes, and
taking the advantage of their feasting and healthing, past safe through them
all, and by study and policy of his wife came after to the possession of his
right, which his younger brother had usurped.

Quint. Curt. lib. ^.
Alexander the great, amongst his many other conquests, having besieged the
great city Halicarnassus, and by reason of opposition made against him,
leueld it with the ground. He entered Caria, where Ada then reigned Queen, Q
Ada.
who being before oppressed by Orontobas (imployd by Darius) was almost quite
beaten out of her kingdom: having at that time no more of all her large
dominions left her saving Alynda the most defenced city, into which she had
retired her self for safety. She hearing of Alexanders approach, gave him a
royal meeting, and submitted her self, her subjects and city into his
power, withal adopting him by the name of son. The king neither despising
her liberality nor the name, gave her back the city entyre as it was, and
made her keeper and gouernesse thereof, who soon after recovering all those
cities Darius by invasion had usurped from her (in gratitude of her former
courtesy) reduced her country and people to their pristine estate, and
stablisht her in her former Empire.

Zenocrita.
This Zenocrita was borne in Cuma, whose father was at that time, amongst many
other oppressed citisens, Plutarch de Virtat. Mulier.
in exile: Her the bloody tyrant Aristodemus was much inamoured of, but not
dayning so much as to court her or to persuade her to his love, he imagined in
the pride of his heart, that the damsel would think it grace and honor
sufficient to her, to be seen in his company, and only for that cause to be
held blessed and fortunate, of all such as should so behold her: But far other
cogitations troubled her more noble mind, being tormented in soul to lead
such an unchaste life, though with a prince, who never had motioned contract or
promised her marriage; her apprehensions were rather how to purchase her
countries freedom and rid the earth of a tyrant. About the same time that she
was busied in these and the like imaginations, it happened Aristodemus would
needs compass in a certain spacious piece of ground with a broad and deep
ditch, not that it was any way necessary or profitable, but only to vex and
weary the citisens with extraordinary pains and insufferable labors, for to
every man was so much ground limited as daily task, which whosoever in the
least kind neglected, he was fined in a great mulct, either in purse or person.
It happened she being abroad to take the air near to the place where the
citisens were hard at work, that Aristodemus with his train came thither also,
to ouerlooke his laborers; who after some faults found, and other directions
given, left the place, and in his return past by where Zenocrita was then
standing, she spying him come toward her, made him a low obeisance, and
withal covered her face with her apron. The tyrant being gone, the young men in
the way of jeasting and sport, and seeming a little to touch her in chastity,
demanded the reason, why to all other men her face was bare and free, only to
him veiled? (intimating that something had past betwixt them which might
discover her blushes) to whom she made this plain and serious answer, I did
it to him as an honor, because amongst all the Cumani there is but one only
man, and that is Aristodemus. These words touching them all to the quick, it
impressed in the minds of the more generous, a true feeling of their baseness
and slavery, with a shame thereof, and withal an apprehension of the
recovery of their pristine liberties: which perceiving, she thus proceeded, I
had rather to purchase my fathers repeal from exile, to play the labourer, and
bear burdens as you do; than live with the tryant in all the surfeiting riots
and delicacies on the earth: and so left them, These last words gave
confirmation to what they had before scarce apprehended; which afte^ brought
the embrions of their thoughts unto a timely and full-borne action; For with
the prince Timotoles they conspired against Aristodemus, and Zenocrita had made
their entrance free, at such time as he was secure, and his guard negligent,
when with great ease and small danger they rusht upon him and slew him. Thus by
her means her country recovered their ancient liberties and honors. But when
great and magnificent gifts were presented her for this good service, she
refused them all, only making one request unto the people. That it might be
lawful for her to take the body of Aristodemus and give it a solemn and
royal burial: to which they did not only with great willingness condescend,
but they instituted her the Priest of Ceres, supporting it to be an honor no
less acceptable to the goddess than worthily becoming her.

This Pythes lived in the time of Xerxes, The wife of Phythes.
who had to wife a noble and wise Lady, whose temperance and humanity shall
outliue posterity: He in his country finding a Mine of gold, from whence he
had gathered by the industry of his subjects an infinite mass of treasure,
which he used with no moderation, for all his study, industry, and
employment both of his subjects and servants, were in this Mine, either in
digging Ore, or drawing it up, or fining and refining it; all other actions,
labors, affairs, and businesses quite neglected, many having died in the
Mine, and many ready to perish for want of food by reason the earth lay
neglected. The women came to make a petitionarie complaint to the wife of
Pythes, who understanding their greefes, with fair language returned them
back somewhat pacified though not altogether satisfied, yet putting them in
good hope that their griefs should shortly be redressed. They thus dismissed,
she sent for all the goldsmiths that were known to be exquisit workmen, and
sequestring them into a remote place of the house, where she had fitted them
with forges, and all things necessary for the purpose, she commanded them to
mold and cast all kind of fruits, as Apples, Citrons, Mellons, and such like,
with whose taste her husband was most delighted, and to fashion them all of
gold. Pythes coming from his Mine with a good stomach, as soon as he had
seated himself, called to eat: his Lady served him in a golden table, but
with no meat that could be eaten, but every dish composed of sollid gold.
Being at the first delighted with this banquet (as pleased that art should so
imitate nature) after being much delighted with the object, he demanded meat
again, and calling for such a dish, and such a dish, as his appetite was best
inclined to: but she still whatsoever was brought to the table, caused it to
be all of gold: he still growing more hungry, and very angry withal, she
made him this modest and effectual answer, Oh sir, consider with your self,
of these and such like dishes, you have provided for your self and your
subjects plenty, but of other viands no plenty at all; we have store of
artificial, but the use of natural things has utterly forsaken us: no man
tills, plowes, sowes, or manurs the fields; plantation, or hope to reap from
the earth, is now forgot, only we study for things unprofitable, and (as you
see) unnecessary, to please the eye and not the palate, the fancy and not the
stomach, such indeed as to your subjects bring sorrow but no satisfaction,
great molestation but no meat at all to suffice the necessities of nature.
This short but pithy speech took such impression in Pythes, that though he
would not altogether desist from his Mines, yet upon her vrgence, he only
peculiarised to himself a fifth part of the people, and the rest were employed
in agriculture, and tillage, planting, and such things most useful for man's
sustenance. This Pythes after many disasters (as rich men are sildome without
some or other) as the death of his children, who all came to violent and
unexpected deaths, by the means of Xerxes; he fell into a wondrous deep
melancoly, for he hated life, and yet was loath to die, and like a foolish
rich man (as this age affoords many) grief still would have killed him, had
not the thought of his wealth still recovered him; therefore he proposed this
farewell, betwixt the weariness of life and the tediousness of death: There
was in the city a great heap of gold, by which a river softly glyded, which
was called Pythopolite, within the midst of this great magazin he had provided
himself a sepulcre, and had so turned the channel, that the water might come
just to the brinke of the shore where his monument was ready prepared. The
work being finished, he committed the sole government of the state and empire
to his wife, with this charge, That none should dare to approach his tomb, but
daily to send him such a quantity of victuals in a boat by the river; and
when they found the meat untouched, to forbear to send any more, for they
should then imagine him dead. And such was the covetous man's end in the midst
of his treasure. His wife after, managed the state with great wisdom and
policy, and to the general good of the subject.

The wife of Nausimines.
HErodotus reports of one of the sons of Craesus, that he was borne dumb and
never spoke word from his birth, being in all things else complete, of an able
body, and a spirit undaunted: to supply which defect he used all means possible
that art or humane skill could devise, but all failing, as his last refuge, he
consulted with the Oracle, which returned him this answer: Lyde genus, rex
multorum, etc.
Thou of the Lydian offspring, and the king
Of many nations; if such be thy care
To know this secret, and effect that thing,
Which divine work, no mortal can, or dare:
Be thus resolved, His tongue shall accent give,
When save by it, thou can no longer live.


Craesus being besieged in Sardis, and the city taken (as first entered by
one Mardus Hyreades) a Persia^ that had disguised himself, of purpose to murder
Crasus in his palace: who insinuating into his presence, and now lifting up
his hand to strike the fatal blow, the king (by reason of his present
distress) not apprehending the danger, which his son coming in at the instant
and espying, the strings of his tongue were unloosed on the sudden, and he
cried out, Oh man spare the king Craesus, and from that time forward his
imprisoned voice was ever at liberty. Val. Max. li. 1.
More disastrous was that which besell the wife of Na^simenes the Athenian, who
happening by chance upon the place where she found her sons and daughters mixed
together in the horrible action incest, she was suddenly struck with that
horror and ecstasy, that neither able to punish the fact, nor reprove the
heinousness of the sin, she was struck mute and domb^: Her children
punished their own offense with voluntary death, and she was deprived the use
of speech all her life time after.

Cyane and Medullina.
DOsithaeus in his book Rerum sicularum commemorates this history Cyanippus
Syracusanus sacrificing to the gods, Lib. 3.
amongst all others he had neglected the celebrations of Bacchus; at which the
god incenst, and to revenge himself of the injury, punished him with
drunkenness when at a high feast he found him pleasantly disposed, being
otherwise in his own condition of a known abstinence: the heat of his wine
wrought with such violence upon him, that meeting by accident his own
daughter, Cyane, in a dark and remote place, (and ignorant who she was) he
forcibly defloured her; in which wrestling together she wrong the ring off from
his finger, hoping by that in time to find out the adulterer. This ring she
gave her nurse in keeping: not long after a pest reigning in the city, the
Oracle being consulted with returned this answer, That unless the incestuous
person were sacrificed to the gods that have the charge of punishing these
horrible vices, the plague should still continue amongst them. The people being
as much to seek as before, in regard that the person aimed at, was to them
altogether unknown. Cyane truly apprehending the intent of the Oracle, took
her father by the reverend locks, and dragging him to the temple, slew him
there before the altar; which she intended for the common good: but to expiate
her own sin in killing her father she fell upon the same sword, and in her
death mingled her blood with his.

Aristides writes a history to the like effect. In the celebrations of Bacchus
feasts, Arnutius (who was likewise a man of known temperance from his birth)
was for the like contempt, alike punished, by the god of Healths. This Roman
touched with the like distemperature, in the dark vitiated by force his
daughter Medullina; she also by his ring knowing the incestuous, be thought a
greater mischief, for having a second time besotted him in the dregs of the
grape, and crowning him with Vine leaves like a Bacchinall, slew him at the
altar. Excuse me Reader, I illustrat not these as they are parrasides, but as
without respect of time, person, or place, they thought no revenge great enough
to be inflicted on the corrupters of their virginities.

Erixo.
ARchelaus the Tyrant using many tyrannies upon the Cyraeneans over whom he
usurped, (but more by the evil instigation of one Laarchus, whom he had
entertained as his familiar friend and counselor) was at length supplanted by
this Laarchus whom he most trusted, and as some think, poisoned. Archelaus
left behind him a son after his grandfathers name Battus Falix, called
Battus: who because he was weak of body, and lame of his feet, his mother
Erixo (in whose guardianship he was) was by that means held in more respect
and reverence, being a woman of approved humanity and goodness. L^archus,
notwithstanding she had the love and hearts of all the cittisens, yet he
inioyed the power, and by the help of his mercenarie soldiers, usurped the
dominion over all. But apprehending in himself that his tyranny could not
last long without better supporture, he sent to this chaste dowager to treat
with her of marriage, proposing to her as a maine article, to make her son
Battus copartner with him in his regencie. About this motion she consulted
with her brothers, pretending a seeming consent. They debated with Laarchus
(but somewhat protractedly) about the matter, in which interim, she privately
sent to the usurper one of her damosells with a message, That notwithstanding
her brothers (as unwilling the match should go forward) had made needless
delays, yet her purpose was so fixed upon the motion, especially since it
concerned the general good, that she wholly submitted herself to his service,
in so much that if it pleased him to vouchsafe to come privately in the night,
she would yield her honor entirely up into his hand: upon which beginning a
good success would doubtless follow, for then in vain her brothers and kindred
should oppose themselves against that to which the public good, occasion,
place, opportunity, and all things necessary invited them. This message was
plausible to Laarchus, who apprehended at once the embraces of a beauteous
lady, a principality, and a countinuance thereof. Briefly, the night was
betwixt them appointed, and he in regard of her honor to come privately and
vnattended; all which she revealed to her eldest brother Poliarchus, making him
solely of her counsel: who at the time of their appointed meeting hid himself
in his sisters chamber. Laarchus comes singly according to promise, and is
admitted by Erixo: and in the midst of his hopes, ready to cast himself into
her embraces, is transpierst and slain, and his body cast over the walls,
Battus proclaimed Prince, and pristine liberty restored to the long oppressed
Cyraenians. This Poliarchus did in revenge of Archilaus death, husband to his
chaste sister Erixo. There were then about the city many soldiers belonging to
Amasis king of Aegipt, by whose assistance Laarchus had bin long terrible to
the people, these complained to the king, accusing Poliarchus and Erixo of the
murder of Laarchus. But as he was about to invade the Cyraenians, his mother
happily died, and so hindered that expedition. Polyarchus and Erixo
notwithstanding purposed a voluntary journey into Aegipt, to purge themselves
of all accusations commenced against them: in which journey Critola, a woman of
great reverence and very aged (as having been the wife of Battus Felix) would
needs accompany them. These appearing before Amasis, so well pleaded their
own cause, that their injuries appeared to him much to surmount their revenge:
so that imbrasing Erixo, he commended her fortitude and temperance, and with
princely gifts sent them back into their own country.

A Woman of the city Pergamus.
MIthridates king of Pontus having diverse ways oppressed the Galatians, as by
sending to the city by way of inuitation to Pergamus, for diverse of the
chief citisens, and then unjustly detaining them. This wrought such an
impression to supplant the tirant, in the heart of Toredorix Tetrarch of
Tosipporus, that he made a combination wherein many noble gentlemen of quality
were engaged, all which had vowed the tyrants death. Their plot being
discovered and they in the attempt surprised, were all commanded to death: in
the midst of the execution Mithridates remembered a beautiful young man of
extraordinary shape and feature, that was one in the conspiracy; but half
despairing whether he were yet alive, he sent in have, that if the hang man
had not done his office upon him, to reprieue him to his mercy. This young man's
name was Bepolitanu^, whose turn being come, and he presenting himself to the
block, it happened at that time he had on a rich and precious garment of
purple embrothered with gold, of which the executioner being greedy, and
careful to keep it from blood, thereby to make the better sale of it, he
spent so much time in disposing his head this way and that way, not for the
prisoners ease, but for his own advantage, till the messengers appeared from
the king and called aloude to make stay of justice: by which means Bepolitanus
his garment was as much beneficial to his life as the kings mercy, and
covetousness that has been the destruction of many, was the means of his
unexpected safety. The executioner in his greediness making good the old
english Adage, All covet all loose. To leave circumstances and come to the
matter. The body of Toredorix was cast out, and by the kings edict denied all
rights of burial, with a grieuious penalty imposed upon any such as should
contradict the kings writ. This notwithstanding, dismayed not a fair Pergamaean
damsel (with whom Toredorix had been in familiarity) to accomplish the
vowed office of a lover and a friend, who in the night watched the opportunity
to take thence the body and bestow on it a fair interment: but being taken by
the soldiers in the performance of this last memorable duty, and brought
before the tyrant; either her beauty so much moved him, or her tears so
far prevailed with him, as that his body was not only left freely to her
dispose, but to recompense her love and loyalty, she had a fair and
competent dower allotted her out of the lands and goods of the trespassor.

Stratonica.
OF Stratonica, Galatia may boast, as breeding a Lady scarce matchable before
her time or since, in her condition, she being the wife of king Deiotarus, and
barren: and knowing how desiro^s her husband was to have issue from his own
loins to succeed in the kingdom, solicited him, and that with great
importance, to select some beautiful Lady whom he best fancied, and by her to
raise his posterity: which the king (overcome with so unexpected a courtesy,
and therefore unwilling to wrong her bed) refusing, she of her own accord, out
of many captive virgins chused one who seemed to excel all the rest in feature
and modesty, and suiting her in all respects like a princess, presented her
to the king as a jewel to be received from her hand. This Virgins name was
Electra, by whom Deiotarus had fair and fortunate issue; to whom Stratonica
was a second mother, and saw them educated with as much magnificence and state
as if they had been borne of her body, and she given them suck from her
own breasts. Her example is memorable, but since her time by few (that I can
read of) immitated.

Valeria and Cloelia.
TArquinus Superbus being expulsed the kingdom, because his son Sextus had
stuprated the fair Lucretia, wife to Collatine, to reobtaine his principality
he insinuated unto his aid Porsenna king of the Tuscans. These with an
infinite army besieged Rome, insomuch that the cittisens were not only
wearied with long war, but oppressed with famine; therefore knowing Porsenna,
as well in war as peace to be a prince eminent both for justice and
humanity, they made choice of him to arbitrate and determine all controversies
betwixt Tarquine and them. This motion being offered by the Romans, Tarquine
refused to stand to any such comprimise, not allowing Pors^^^^ a lawful judge
in regard of their late league commensed. This, Porsen^^ not well relishing,
treated with the Romans about a peace, conditionally that they should restore
back certain lands before taken from the Etruscians, and of them put him in
peaceable possession, and till this were performed to send him ten young men,
and as many virgins of the noblest families for hostage: which was accordingly
done, and he dismissed his army. These virgins walking by the river side which
parted the camp and city, (for though he had sent away the greatest part of
his army, he had not yet raised his tents) two of the chief, the one Cloelia,
the other Valeria, daughter to the Consul Publicola, persuaded the rest, and
by persuading so far prevailed, that they were all resolved to pass the
river: when stripping themselves naked, and holding (as well as they
conveniently could) their clothes above their heads, they ventured over that
unknown passage full of whirlepooles and where there was no steadfast footing;
and what by wading and swimming, to all men's wonders got safe to shore, and
presented themselves to their fathers and friends: who though they admired
their boldness and commended their resolutions, yet disallowing the Act it
self (as those that in their faith and honor would not be outbid by any) they
sent them back to king Porsenna, and submitted their rashness to be punished
at his pleasure. These virgins being presented before him, he demanded of them,
Which she was that first animated and encouraged the rest to so rash and
dangerous an enterprise? when Cloelia beckning to the rest to keep silence,
took all the injury, contempt, or whatsoever they pleafed to call it, upon
her self, protesting the rest innocent, and she of what would be objected the
sole author. Porsenna observing, and withal admiring her undaunted courage,
caused presently a horse furnished with rich trappings to be brought^ which he
gave to Cloelia in recompense of her magnanimous attempt, sending them all in
his regal courtesy back to their friends and parents^ Upon this horse given to
Cloelia by Porsenna, some have grounded that she first past the river on
horseback, sounding the way for the rest; which others deny, only that the
king thought to gratify her manly courage with the meede of a soldier. Her
statue on horseback is erected in Via sacra: This some confer upon Cloelia,
others on Valeria.

Olympias.
ALexander having caused himself to be called the son of Jupiter, writ to
his mother in this maneer, King Alexander the son of Jupiter Hamon to his
mother Olimpias sends health: to whom with great modesty she thus rescribed,
Dear son as you love me, instead of doing me honor, proclaim not my
dishonor, neither accuse me before Juno; besides, it is a great aspertion you
cast upon nice to make me a strumpet, though to Jupiter himself. A great
moderation in a woman, who for no swelling title or vain ostentation could be
won to loose the honor to be called a Loyal and chaste wife.

Troades.
Plutarch
AMongst those frighted Trojans that fled from the fearful ruins of subverted
Troy, some by the violence of outrageous tempests were driven upon the coasts
of Italy, where landing at certain ports near to the river Tygris, they made
up into the country, the better to acquaint themselves with the conditions of
those places. In which interim, the women began to apprehend that they had
better far to take up an abiding place in any land, than again to commit
themselves to the merciless fury of the seas: Wherefore with one joint
consent, they agreed to make that their fixed habitation, seeing all hope of
their former losses at Troy were utterly desperate. Having thus conspired
together, with all possible expedition they burnt the ships (in this exploit,
one Roma is reported to be chief) which being done, they ran to meet their
husbands (making to their Navy to quench it) fearing their anger for their
rash enterprise; some of them embracing their husbands, others their friends
and acquaintance they tempred their amorous kisses with such persuasiue
Rhetoric, that soon allayd the angry tempest of their husbands fury. From
these (as some have writ) the custom of kissing at salutations, by the Roman
women to their kinsmen, first took Original. The Troianes now tied by
necessity, and likewise finding the inbahitants so loving and courteous, they
much applauded this deed of the women, and dwelt there with the Latins.

The Phocides.
AFter an implacable war betwixt the Thessalians and the Phocenses, which had
long lasted with much slaughter on both sides; those of Thessaly (bringing
their army through the Locrenses) invaded the men of Phocis on all sides,
making a decree to kill all that were of age, and the women and children to
bear away captive. Diaphantes the son of Bathillius with his two colleagues
then governing the city: he persuaded the besieged boldly and valiantly to
issue out and give the enemy battle, but with this caution, That all their
wives, daughters, and children, even to one soul should be brought into a
place circled and compast in with all manner of dry wood and matter
combustible, and the doors by which they entered to be shut after them, and so
guarded; and if the day were lost and they perished in battle, the pile to be
kindled, and all their bodies to be burned at once. This being not only
proposed bu^ confirmed, by the men; the resolution of the women was demanded,
who all with one unanimous consent applauded the decree, not one amongst them
having will to survive her husband, son, or father, to fall into the
captivity of a fierce and bloody enemy. This concluded, the Phocenses issue
and encounter the enemy, and fought against them a noble and victorious
battle, in which they returned conquerors. The Edict made, they called
Aponaea, Aponaea.
as signifying, A bold action, arising from a desperate foundation. On the day
that battle was fought and so remarkable a victory achieved, they yearly
celebrate a feast to Minerua, which they call Elaphebolia.

The Women of Chios.
IN Chios, a gentleman of a noble family riding through the city with his
contracted Lady, in a chariot, as the custom was then amongst them: king
Hippasus being a familiar friend of the bride grooms, meeting him in the
streets, with no pretense of injury, but rather as a testimony of their
former familiarity, leapt up into the chariot betwixt them: which act being
mistaken by the Cittisens, he was violently assaulted and cruelly murdered in
their fury. Not long after, their affairs on all sides succeeding but ill,
they perceived they had incurd the anger of the gods, and therefore sent to
consult with the Oracle: who returned them this answer, That nothing could
expiate the Butchery of Hippasus till all the Regicides were to one man exild
the city. But when all of them confessed themselves guilty of the fact, the
god imposed on them all an equal doom of banishment: so that as well the
murderers themselves as the abettors and accessaries (howsoever many and
mighty) were forced to transport themselves with their wives and families into
Leuconia; where they had not long soiourned, but growing distasteful to the
Leuconians, as fearing their power, who began to increase both in wealth and
number, they were commanded by such a day to depart the city, and bound by
oath to bear nothing forth the gates, saving a coat close girt to them, and a
loose mantle or cloak over them. The Chij distrusting their own strength (as
no way able to affront them in power and number) were forced to submit
themselves to the present necessity, binding themselves by oath to observe the
covenants before rehearsed. The day coming on, and the women seeing their sons
and husbands thus meanly accoutred, demanded of them, Why unarmed they would
pass by the face of a public enemy? They excused themselves by the
strictness of the oath enjoined them: to whom the women with a joint
acclamation thus replied, Show your selves worthy the nation from whence you
are derived, and guirt your arms about you: if they exact from you the strict
conditions of an oath, answer them thus, That to a soldier and a man
magnanimous, his Spear is in stead of his cloak, and his Target in place of
the garment which he should buckle about him. To whose counsel they assented,
and at their departure appearing so strongly armed, and their countenances
menacing and daring, It struck such a terror into the hearts of the
Leuconians, that as men amassed, they suffered them peaceably to depart with
honor, who but by the noble and brave counsel of their women, had left the
place with shame and infamy. As noble an act worthy memory was not long after
done by the women of Chios, what time Philip the son of Demetrius opposed the
city, who published a proud and barbarous Edict to insinuate the slaves of
the city to his aid, promising them not only free manumission but to marry
them to their mistresses and possess them of their masters fortunes: which
kindled such an unquenchable wrath in the ladies and matrons of the city,
that fired with rage and disdain, they together with their servants assisting
them, with incredible faith and honesty maintained the breaches, defended the
walls, guarded the ports, casting stones, darts, fighting, exhorting and
encouraging one another, even to the beating of the enemies back, raising
their shameful siege, and pursuing them flying with their weapons, till
Philips army was quite discomfited. In all this troublous war
(notwithstanding the proclamation) not one servant amongst so many had the
least suspicion, much less aspersion cast upon his fidelity.

Persides.
CYrus having alienated the Persians from King Astiages, was overcome in
battle, his soldiers flying toward the city for refuge, in so much that
the enemy was ready to enter with them: the women this seeing, issued from the
gates, and holding up their clothes as high as their breasts met them running
and said, Whether fly you, oh you cowards and basest of men, have you any hope
to hide your selves in these places from whence you came? Which object cast
such a shameful blush upon them, that renewing the battle, the conquerors
were defeated, and they obtained a glorious victory: In memory of which,
Cyrus made a law, That what Persian King should ever after approach that
city, so often as he entered it, should bestow on every woman a piece of gold.
It is said of Occhus his successor, Base avarice in a king.
a covetous King, that he often past by it and compast it, but would never
enter the gates, only to spare his purse, and to defraud the women of their
reward. But euer-renowned Alexander visited the city twice, according to the
custom, bestowing on every woman one piece, and upon all such as were with
child two pieces, to show himself as royally bountiful as the other was
penuriously sparing.

Celtae.
THese be a people of France between the rivers Graumna and Sequana, who
dissenting amongst themselves, fell into an intestine and implacable civil
war. After many bloody conflicts, being ready once more to join battle,
the women presented themselves betwixt their armies, and with such smooth
Oratory and persuasiue arguments laid open the miseries of war, with the
abundant commodity arising from peace and amity, that they not only
reconciled all hostility for the present, but betwixt all the cities and
chief families confirmed an indissoluble league of friendship, which continued
many years after. Since which time, either in foreign differences, or
domesticke quarrels, as well in war, as peace, their counsel is ever
demanded, and for the most part followed. Therefore in the league which this
people made with Hanniball, it is thus written; If the Celtae have any thing
worthy taxation to object against the Carthaginians, let it be disputed by the
generals and Praefects in Spain; If the Carthaginians find any thing justly
to reprove the Celtae, the matter shall be discust and arbitrated by their
women.

Melitae.
THis people growing to that multitude, that the cities in which they
inhabited could neither conveniently contain their number, nor supply them
with victual sufficient, sought the plantation of a Collony elsewhere, under
the command of a beautiful young man called Nymphaeus. These falling upon the
coast of Caria, were no sooner landed to discover the country, but by a mighty
tempest, their ships were either swallowed in the sea, or scattered and
dispersed. The Carians who then inhabited the city Cryassa, either
commiserating their distress, or fearing that boldness their necessities
might enforce them too, were pleased to allot them part of their land, and
suffer them peaceably to dwell amongst them: But finding them in a short space
to increase both in wealth and power, they consulted amongst themselves by what
means to destroy them and utterly extirpe their memory: this stratagem was
agreed upon to be performed at a banquet. It happened that one of the Carian
damsells called Caphana, a Lady of a noble family, grew much enamoured of this
Nimphaeus, and loath that the least detriment should happen to her best
respected friend, especially loath to see him perish, she opened to him the
full purpose of the city, wishing him to use all means of prevention. When
therefore the Cryassences came to inuit them to the feast, Nimphaeus answered
them that it was not the custom of the Graecians to assemble unto any such
feasts, without the company of their women: which the Carians hearing,
entreated them likewise to grace the solemnity with their presence. This done,
Nymphaeus relates the whole circumstance to the Melians his countrymen,
entreating them to bear him company to the feast, all ciuilly habited, and
without weapons, only that every woman should wear a sword beneath her kirtle
and sit close by her husband. About the midst of the banquet when the Carians
were ready to give the watchword, the Graecians perceiving that the instant
(for the pretended execution) drew on, all the women opening their garments at
once, showed their concealed weapons, which their hudbands snatching from their
sides, assaulted the barbarous Carians, and slew them all to one man: by which
prevention, they possessed themselves both of the country, and city. But
relinquishing that, they built another which they called the new Cryassa, and
in which they planted themselves. Caphaena was married to Nymphaeus, having
honors done to her worthy her noble fidelity. One thing in this history is
worthy especial admiration, namely, Secrecy, to be kept amongst so many women.

Tyrrhenae.
THe Tyrrhenians were by the Spartans oppressed and cast into prison, where they
were prouidentlie kept and guarded, purposing to question them for their lives.
The wives of the captives this hearing, came to the prison doors and with
humble prayers and infinite tears, besought those that had the charge of them,
that by their visitation they might administer some small comfort to their
husbands: which after much importunity granted, they were admitted, where
suddenly they caused their husbands to change habits with them, which they
did, and so were let forth in stead of the women; they arming themselves
against all the spite and fury of the Spartanes. The men that had escaped
repaired to Taygeta, entering league with the Heilotes: by which confederacy
the Spartans somewhat affrighted, by intercessours concluded a peace with them,
conditionally that taking back their imprisoned women, they should be
furnished with ships and coin to seek new fortunes elsewhere; they therefore
made a brotherhood betwixt them and the Lacedaemonians. Of which Collony two
brothers, Pollis and Crataida of the city of Lacedemon were made governors.
Part of them made residence in Melo, the rest with Pollis sailed into Creete,
and having asked counsel of the Oracle, answer was returned them, That in the
place where they should leave their goddess, and loose part of their anchor,
they should find a period of their trauells, and upon that continent make their
abode, plant their collony, and erect a city. In process, arriving in a part
of Creete called Cheronesus (a place half environed with water (or almost an
Island) a sudden fear surprised them, in so much that hasting to get back to
the navy, they left behind them the image of Diana which they had received
from their ancestors, by Brauron first brought into Lemnos, and borne by them a
ship-bord in all their navigations. The fear being past over, and the tumult
appeased, they weighed anchor to make from shore: but Pollis perceiving a
great part of his anchor missing, and left in the rocks, he remembered the
Oracle, and causing his people to land again, he made his plantation in that
country, and after many battles in which he prevailed against the
inhabitants, he subdued Lictium with diverse other cities, of which he had
prosperous and peaceable possession.

Examples of Modesty and Magnanimity.
THe Phocenses oppressed by the tyrants of Delphos, in that commenced war which
was called Bellum sacrum, in which the Thebans were engaged; it happened that
the Bacchinalls (who were women that were usually drunk in the celebrations of
the feasts of Bacchus, and were called Thiades) extasied in their divine furor
(for so they termed it) in their nightly wandering lost their way, Thyades.
and erred so far, that unwittingly they happened upon the city of
Amphissa, and wearied as they were, cast themselves dispersedly abroad in the
market place, there to repose themselves till they came to their better senses.
The Amphissesian matrons, fearing least any outrage of offense might be done
unto them (by reason there were at that time many foreign soldiers who were
in league with the Phocenses) themselves in person watched these Bacchides till
morning, guarding and gyrting them round, least any thing unseemly might be
spied amongst them, and only with a reverent silence attended them till they
awaked: but finding them in their better temper, ministered unto them all such
necessaries as the city yielded, and sent them (though the wives of their
enemies) in the charge and safe conduct of their own husbands peaceably home
to their own cities. Comparable to their Modesty was the Magnanimity of
Megisto, Megisto.
an eminent Lady of the city Elis. Aristotemus the tyrant having (by the
power of Antigonus) usurped the Franchises and Liberties of that city,
oppressed the people with infinite calamities; amongst which, that of
Philodemus was not the least, who having a beautiful daughter called Micca,
Micca.
when Lacinus one of the Captains of Aristotemus in the heat of wine and
lust, would forceably have ravished her, and the poor innocent Virgin fled for
refuge into the arms of her father, he there most inhumanly transpierced her,
mixing the tears of the reverend old man with the blood of his daughter. The
horridnes of this nothing moved the tyrant, but (that if greater could
possibly be devised) he gave countenance even to such mischeifes, causing many
of the prime cittisens to be slain, and to the number of eight hundred
banished. But fearing in regard of their number, he might be in time by them
subverted: he made proclamation, That all such women that had a desire to visit
their absent husbands, should with such gold and treasure as they could
conveniently carry (with their children) have peaceable passage from the
city into Aetolia, where many or the most of their exiled friends then
soiourned. Many of the women encouraged by this edict, being to that purpose
assembled, and with such goods as they had, departed the city, he sent after
them his horse men, who not only rifled them, but stamped their children
beneath their horses feet, where many of the infants perished, and so in
confused heaps hurried them back into the town, bearing the spoil into the
Tyrants treasury. These outrages were the least of many which I purposely
omit. There lived at that time an ancient noble man in the city, called
Hellanicus, who entered into a combination with the exiles, about the
suppressing of the Tyrant, and by reason of his years was neither by him
feared nor suspected: by the encouragement of this Hellanicus, the confined
citisens assembled themselves into a city most convenient for their deseigne
called Amimona, to whom many of their allies and friends (copartners in the
public calamity) resorted Aristotemus somewhat affrighted with this new
faction, repaired to a place of public assembly, whether he had caused all the
chief matrons to be before called, and there in a premitated oration, stuffed
with many threats and menaces, protested to inflict upon them rackes, tortures,
and lingering deaths, unless by speedy letters they did not only persuade but
prevail with their husbands, instantly to abandon the place they had
fortified. To whom Megisto the wife of Tymoleon (a Lady amongst the rest most
respected, not daigning the tyrant the least honor, or so much as rising to
do him reverence but sitting) with a bold and undaunted courage, thus speak.
Weart thou a true spirited man, as nothing less appears in thee, thou
would not threaten women in this base kind to betray their husbands, but
would rather have negotiated with them, who have entire power and command
over us, and that in smoother and more deceitful language than such by which
thou have hitherto beguiled us. But if thy cowardice and despairation compel
thee to this exigent, as thinking by our means to complot their ruins, thou
art in that hope destitute of all comfort: let that day never be callendred, to
memorise them among men so void of council and discretion, that by sparing the
lives of their wives and children, they should betray the sacred liberty of
their country: for the mischief is not so great to loose us altogether, whom
they have already wanted so long, as the good and profit that must necessarily
accrue by redeemimg the cities from thy insolency and tyranny. These words
were no sooner uttered, but Aristotemus distracted with rage and fury,
commanded her young son to be sought and brought, whom he purposed to
massacre before the mothers face: and whilst his lictors and serieants were
inquiring for him amongst others that were then busied about their childish
sports, she spying him, or her own accord called him to her with these words,
Come hither to me, o my son, and now in thy childhood before thou have
apprehension or passionate feeling of tyrrannie, be freed both from the terror
and burden thereof; for mine own part, I had rather see thee innocently dying,
than basely and ignobly serving. The Tyrant at her last speech more enraged
than the former, drew out his sword with purpose to have slain her, when Cylo
one of his familiar friends (but indeed a chief man in the confederacy with
Hellanicus) staid his hand, and by gentle words so tempered his spleen, that
he departed thence without any act of murder, yet purpose of a future revenge.
Upon a day as he was sporting upon the bed with his wife until dinner was
prepared and disposed upon the table, it happened that an Eagle soring above
the Palace, let fall a great stone upon the battlements just over the bed
where the king then lay, and alighting there, made such a fearful and
prodigious noise that it not only amassed the king within, but was wonderful
to all that beheld it without. The Augurers were sent for to know what omen
should succeed: they flatter the tyrant, and promise nothing but what is good
and prosperous. Hellanicus the same night in his dream immagined his son
appeared to him (which son was by Aristotemus before murdered with his
brother) who spoke to him to this effect, O father arise, is this a time to
sleep when the whole government of the city must depend on you to morrow?
With this dream encouraged, he comforted his adherents, all attending the
opportunity of revenge. Aristotemus mean time hearing that Craterus was
marched as far as Olimpius with a great army, leauied for his safety and
supporture, grew so bold upon the rumor of so great a power, that without his
guard, accompanied with Cylo only, he adventured into the market place: whom
Hellanicus meeting by chance, and almost extasied to see him so weakly
attended; with both his hands advanced, and with an audable and clear voice he
made this clamor, Where be you, you good and long oppessed countriemen? a
brave Theater is this for so noble a contention as our liberty, being seated
in the midst of our country, and center of our city. This Cylo invaded the
next man to the king and slew him. Thrasibulus and Lampides assaulted the
tyrant, who fled to the temple of Jupiter, where they fell upon him and killed
him; then dragging his body into the market place proclaimed their liberty.
The women issued out of their houses with joy and clamor, embracing their
husbands, fathers, and friends, with loud and glad acclamations; thence in
multitudes they made concourse to the palace. The tyrants wife to prevent
their fury made fast her door, and in her private chamber strangled her self.
Aristotemus had two beautiful young virgins to his daughters, both marriagable,
these they were about to dragge into the streets with purpose to destroy them,
but first to excrutiate them with all disgraces and contumacies. Which Megisto
seeing, with her best oratorie appeased their present fury, proposing to them
how shameful a thing it were for a noble and free state, to immitate the
insolences of a bloody and inhumane tyranny: liberty therefore was granted
the young damosells (at her intercession) to retire themselves into their
chambers, and to make choice of what death best suited with their present
fears. Myro the elder sister unloosing from her wast a silken gyrdle, Myro.
fastened it about her own neck, and with a smiling and cheerful look thus
comforted the younger: My sweet and dear sister, I more commiserat thy fate
than lament mine own: yet immitate (I entreat thee) my constancy in death,
least any abject thing or unworthy may be objected against us vnagreeable with
our blood and quality. To whom the younger replied, That nothing could appear
more terrible to her than to behold her die; therefore besought her, by the
affinity of sisterhood, to be the first that should make use of that gyrdle,
and dying before her to leave to her an example of resolution and patience.
Myro to her made answer, I never denied thee any thing sweet soul in life,
neither will I oppose thee in this thy last request at thy death: and for thy
sake will I endure that which is more greeuouous to me than mine own death,
namely to see thee die. When accommodating all things for the present
execution, she no sooner saw her dead, but she gentlely laid her out and with
great modesty covered her. Then she besought Megisto on her knees, to have a
care of them in their deaths, that nothing immodest or uncomely might be done
to their bodies: which granted, she not only with courage, but seeming joy,
underwent her last fate, till she expired: nor was there any spectator there
present, to whom the memory of the tyrant was never so hateful, from whose
eyes and hearts this object did not extract tears and pity.

In Megisto is expressed the Magnanimity of spirit, but in these following, I
will illustrate Fortitude in action. The Turks busied in the siege of some
towns in Catharo, Vluzales and Carocossa (two of no mean place and eminence
among them) wrought so far with the great Admiral, that he delivered into
their charge the managing of threescore galleys, with munition and men in
number competent, to make incursions into the bordering Islands then under the
state of Venice. These two Turkish captains land their forces before Curzala,
a city that gives name to the country, with purpose to inuest themselves
before it: which Antonius Contarinus (then governor of the city)
understanding, like a timorous and fearful coward, taking the advantage of
the night, fled with his soldiers thence, not leaving the ^owne any way
defensible; which the cittisens understanding, all or the most followed after.
The town thus left to the weak guard of some twenty men, and about fourscore
women, the Turks give them a bold and fierce assault: when these brave viragoes
choosing rather to dye like soldiers than like their husbands run like
cowards; some maintain the Ports, others defend the walls, and with that noble
resolution, that what with fire, stones, scalding water, and such like
muniments then readiest at hand, so opposed the assailants, that many of the
Turks in that conflict were slain, and all repulst, retyring themselves with
purpose (some rest given to the soldiers) to salute them with a fresh alarm.
But fortune was so favorable to these Amazonian spirits, that a mighty tempest
from the North so tossed and distressed the Turks gallyes, that they were forced to
abandon the Island with dishonor, leaving to the besieged, a memory worthy to
outliue all posterity.

Of Dido, Cesara, Gumilda, and Ethelburga.
OF Dido queen of Carthage, all Authors agree to have fallen by the sword, and
to have died by her own bold and resolute hand; but about the cause that
moved her thereto diverse differ. Ausonius is of opinion, That her husband
Sychaeus being dead, she did it to preserve her viduall chastity, and so free
her self from the importunities of Hyarbus king of Getulia: of his mind is
Marullus, and of these Remnius, or as some will have it Priscianus in the
Geography of Dionisius writing De scitu orbis, i. the Situation of the world:
Contrary to these is the Prince of Poets (he whom Scalliger calls Poeta noster)
Pub. Virgilius, who ascribes her death to an impatience of grief conceived at
the unkind departure of Aeneas; which though it carry no great probability of
truth, yet all the Latin Poets for the most part (in honor of the author)
have justified his opinion: as Ovid in his third book De fastis, his Epistles
Metamorph. and others works; so likewise Angelus Polytianus in his Manto, with
diverse others. Iustine in his eighteenth book of Hystor. speaking of the first
erecting of Carthage says, The building of Carthage.
That where they began to dig with purpose to lay the first foundation, they
found the head of an Ox: by which it was predicted that the city should be
futurelie fertile and commodious, but withal full of labor and subject to
perpetual servitude: therefore they made choice of another piece of earth,
where in turning up the mould, they chanced upon the head of a horse, by which
it was presaged their collony should in time grow to be a warlike nation
fortunate and victorious. In what manner she dyed, I refer you to Virgill,
and will speak a word or two of her sister Anna, the daughter of Belus. She,
after the death of her sister, forsaking of the city of Carthage then
invested with siege by Hyarbus, fled to Battus king the Island Melita, but
making no long soiourne there, she put again to sea and fell upon the coast of
Laurentum, where being well known by Aeneas, she was nobly received, but not
without suspicion of too much familiarity betwixt them: in so much that
jealousy possessing Lauinia the wife of Aeneas, she conceived an
irreconcilable hatred against Anna, in so much that fearing her threatened
displeasure she cast her self headlong into the river Numicus, and was there
drowned; for so Ovid reports in his book de Fastis. But touching the
illustrious Queen Dido, under her statue were these verses or the like
engraven in a Greek character, interpreted into Latin by Ausonius, and by me
in the sacred memory of so eminent a queen thus englisht: I am that Dido,
look upon me well,
And what my life was, let my visage tell:
It Is fair and smooth, what wrinckle can you find
In this plain Table, to express a mind
So sordid, and corrupt? Why then so uneven
And black a soul should to a face be given
That promises all virtue? Virgill, where
Begott'st thou those ill thoughts, that brand me here
With lust and incest? Never (I protest)
Was that Aenaeas, whom thou calst the best
Of men, in Lybia: Never saw I land
One Trojan on the Carthaginian strand.
Because Sychaeus (my first husband) dead,
To keep my sacred vows to him, I fled
Th'imbraces of Hyarbus; am I made
A prostitute to nothing, to a shade:
He came in arms to force me, and compel
Me a chaste widow, to another hell,
A second marriage: It Is the gods advise,
No woman can be chaste that marryeth twice.
To avoid that sin, I slew my self; o why
Could thou (o Maro) then comment a lie,
With lust to brand my memory? When heaven knows,
To save mine honor I my life did lose.
Give faith to History, you that Readers are,
Before this fabling Poesy, since that far
Transcends the bounds of truth: for Poets can
Make the high gods much more corrupt than man.


So much touching queen Dido, and as far as probability can, to acquit her
of all incontinence. One Paulus an historiographer in his fifth book remembers
us of Cesara, Cesara.
a queen of Persia, who having some light of the Gospel, traveled as far
as Constantinople in Greece to be further instructed, only attended by a few
private followers: who being satisfied in all the fundamental points of her
faith, she with her small train was christened. The Persian Sophy having
notice thereof, sent ambassadors to the Emperor, to know the reason why he
detained his queen, wishing him to return her safe upon such easy sommons.
Cesara being in presence when this embassy was delivered, desired the Emperor
that she might give them their answer, which granted; Return (said she) my
humble duty and vassaladge to my Lord the King, and tell him withal, That
unless he receive my faith, and renouncing his false Idols believe in the
only true God, he can claim no interest at all in me. The messenger
dispatched, and this short answer returned to the Sophy, he levied an army of
forty thousand men, and coming into Greece, the Emperor and he came unto a
peaceful enterview: at which, by the mediation of this royal and religious
Empress, the Sophy with all his princes and soldiers there present, received
the Christian faith, and after the interchange of many Princely and
magnificicent gifts, returned with his wife into his own country. Another
noble history I think not amiss to be here inserted, which is recorded by one
Willielmus de reg. lib. 20. Gunnilda the daughter of Canutus and Emma, Gunnilda.
who being accused of adultery by her husband Henry the Emperor, who to
justify his accusation had provided a champion, in stature a giant, and for
his presence and potencie much feared; she notwithstanding relying upon God and
her own innocence put her life upon the valor of a private young gentleman of
England, who^ she brought with her to the same purpose. These Champions
adventuring their lives, fought a brave and resolute combat, but in the end the
victory inclined to the Empress: her adverse champion being vanquished,
confessed his treasons, and she was nobly acquit: but after, by no entreaties or
intercessions made by the Emperor or others, she could be won unto his
embraces, but abiuring his bed, and vowing an austere and sequestered life, she
retired her self into a Monastery. Three royal presidents of three
v^matchable queens, the first for Magnanimity, the second for Religion and
devotion, and the last for Chastity. To these I will yet add another.
Willielmus de Regibus, in his first book writes that king Iue betook his
kingdom of the West Saxons to his cousin Ethelardus, and undertook a pilgrimage
to Rome: the occasion of his journey was this, The queen Ethelbnrga had often
counseled her husband the king to forsake the pride and riches of the world,
and to have a respect to his souls health, especially now in the latter days
of his life; but not able to prevail with him, she bethought her self of a
queint stratagem: after they had left their royal palace where they had but
latly feasted in all pomp, pleasure and delicacies, and removed into another
house, she caused him to whose charge the place from whence they departed was
committed, to take down all the hangings, make foul and and filthy every
room and chamber, nay in the very place where the king had but the other day
sported with his queen, was lodged a sow and pigges, with all the
loathsomenesse that could be devised: this done according to her command, she
by a wile, enticed the king to the place thus strangely disguised. The king
wondering at this sudden change stood amassed, to whom she thus spoke, I pray
you my Lord where be now these rich hangings and curtains, either for state or
ornament? Where is all the glyttering pomp and rich array, tending to nothing
else save gluttony and luxury? Alas how suddenly are they all vanished? Shall
not (my Lord) this beauty of ours so fade, and this frail flesh even so fall
a way? This with other her words to the like purpose, took such impression in
the kings breast, that he resigned his kingdom to his Nephew, and betook
himself to a religous and Monasticke life, after his vowed pilgrimage. The
queen Ethelburga went to the Abbey at Berking, in which place her sister had
been before Abbess, and there spent the remainder of her life in devotion and
penitence.

Polycrita.
THere arose great wars between the Milesians and Naxians, kindled by the
adultrate practice of the wife of Hypsicreon a Milesian, who violating her
conjugal vows, by throwing her self into the lustful embraces of Promedon,
a Naxian, then her guest, and fearing the just anger of her husband, and
withal the punishment due to her adultrate sin, fled with him into Naxos:
from whence being again demanded, but denied, this private wrong turned to a
public ruin: for devouring war accompained with many calamities preyed upon
both their countries. But as this Beacon was first fired by a woman's lewdness,
so was it at last extinguished by a woman's virtue: Diognetus who had the
command of those Erythraeans which came in aid of the Milesians, had committed
to his custody a certain strong hold, situated against the city Naxos: who
having taken from the Naxians a prize of women and free virgins, he was deeply
stroke in love with one Polycrata, whom he led with him not as a captive, but
as his wife. It chanced that the Miletians celebrated a general festival day,
Polycrita besought Diognetus to make her so far indebted to his favor, as to
suffer her to send her brothers part of those iuncates then at the table, which
willingly he granted: she secretly writ upon the leaden table of the marchpane
what she had proiected, withal charging the bearer to entreat her brothers
not to let any participate thereof save themselves: when they had heard the
writing, which contained thus much in effect, Take hold upon the opportunity
which occasion thrusts into your hands: this night you may seize the Castle,
for the enemy will lie down in wine, and sleep in a presumptious security.
They show it to the chief commanders of Naxos, who uniting themselves, give
the affrighted and unweaponed Miletians a sudden and unexpected assault, and
having slaughtred many, possess themselves of the castle: But by Polycritas
intercessiue entreaties, surprised Diognetus scapes with life. And for this
noble exploit of hers, the glad citisens running to meet her with shoutes and
acclamations, every one bearing in his hand a Garland to receive her with those
wreathes of honor; Polycrita was so far extaside, that her sudden joy vshered
a sudden death, for as she stood amassed at the gate, she instantly fell down
exanimated: in which gate she was buried, and her sepulcher called The tomb of
Envy, because it is supposed that Fortune grew so envious of her merits, that
thus she robbed her of her life, that so she might cheat her of her deserved
honors. And thus much speaks the histories of the Naxians. Aristotle affirms
Polycrita was no captive, but only that Diognetus having seen her, he grew
so far enamoured of her, that to enjoy her he proferred her any thing that was
in his power to give. She promises to yield to his desire, if he will grant her
the fruition of one boon, which when he had confirmed to her by oath, she
demanded Delium to be surrendered up (for the castle was so called.) Diognetus
being so much enchanted with her beauty, and moreover bound by the religion of
his vow, delivered up to her and the cittisens the castle Delium.

Of Queens and other Ladies for diverse virtues memorable.
We read of diverse other women for diverse noble actions Illustrious.
Dominica the wife of the Emperor Valens, Dominica
when the Goths had threatened the utter subversion of Constantinople, by her
wisdom and descretion mediated with the enemy and was the sole means of the
safety both of the people and city. Sex. Aurelius reports of Pompeia
Plautina, Pompeia Plautina.
when her husband Julian the Emperor, had with intolerable exactions oppressed
the people, insomuch that their discontents were ready to break out into
rebellion; this virtuous princess so far temporised with the Emperor, that
by her means they were released from all exactions and tributes. Diaconus
makes mention of Placidia the sister and wife of Honorius, Placidia.
who (in the year 412 when Ataulphus king of the Goths presented himself
with an invincible army before the walls of Rome, threatening utterly to
subvert the city and after rebuild it again, and in steed of Rome to call
it Gothia) so wrought with the barbarous king by persuasions and promises, that
she turned his pride to pity, and his immanitie to mercy, so that he departed
thence without any assault made against the city, or the least spoil done
unto the country. Vollateranus speaks of Inguldis the sister of Childebert,
Inguldis.
who being married to Hermogillus, son to Lemigildus king of the Goths,
persuaded her husband (then an infidel) to be a true and constant professor
of the Christian faith. The like we read of Cleotilda, Cleotilda.
queen of France, who did the like good work upon her husband Clodoncus the
son of Childericke. Nor has our own nation been barreine of good examples,
Helena.
since Helena the mother of Constantine may in that kind claim equality, if
not precedencie before any. As Rome affoorded a Volumnia, mother to Martius
Cariolanus; so England yielded as eminent a Lady in all points, the mother to
Brennus and Belinus. The first, when her son had worthily deserved of his
country, even to the attaining of all military honors, and as an addition to
the rest, for his brave service against the city of Coriolorus, had the
denomination of Coriolanus bestowed upon him by the public sufferage of the
Senate: yet notwithstanding for all his merits and unmatchable exploits, by
which he purchased to himself the honor to be called Pater Patriae, yet after,
by the ungrateful multitude (who were ever emulous of any man's deserved
greatness) he was not only degraded from all his titles of dignity, but had
the doom of everlasting banishment denounced against him; in revenge of which
ingratitude, having raised an army and invaded the towns of the Roman empire,
ready to inuest himself before the quaking and affrighted city, when they
had first sent to him (to make their atonement) their priests, who by reason
of their sacred offices were held in much reverence, next their Augurers and
South-sayers, then the Aeditiae which were the keepers of their Temples, and
last their prophets; but none of these prevailing, as their last refuge, the
Roman matrons presented themselves before Volumnia the mother of Martius,
humbly entreating her to make intercession betwixt her sons rage and the
imminent calamity. This reverent Lady moved with their tears and
acclamations, accompanied with Virgilia the wife of Coriolanus and many other
noble matrons and damosells, having before promised to plead in their behalfes
as far as a miserable mother could claim interest in an injured son;
repaired to his tent, and casting themselves down at his feet, humbly
besought him of compassion: the fear expressed in their faces and the sorrow in
their habits, cast upon the enemy a sudden reverence and silence, when Volumnia
with such feeling accents and moving Oratorie mixed with tears, besought the
peace of the city, that they made a reverent impression in the heart of
Coriolanus: who supporting his mother, and advancing his wife from the earth,
brake out into this ecstasy, Vicistis, You have overcome me. Thus by these
excellent women, all combustions of war were appeased, a threatened misery
prevented, and a general and safe peace settled in the Commonweal. Of no less
remarke, was the wife of Mulmutius Dunwallo, the son to Cloten duke of
Cornwall, who as Fabian remembers of him, having in great peace and
tranquillity governed the kingdom for the space of forty years, and was after
buried in a place by him before erected, called the This some think to be Paul's
church, others Blackwell hall.
Temple of peace; leaving the land equally divided betwixt his two sons,
Belinus and Brennus: to Belinus the elder was allotted England, Wales, and
Cornwall; unto Brennus all the North parts beyond Humber: who being a young
man and desirous of honor, not content with the principality appointed him,
commenced against Belinus a fearful war. But as the two brothers were ready
to join battle, the mother presented herself betwixt the armies, exposing
her body to their opposite weapons, showing the breasts that gave them suck,
and with noble admonitions and motherlie persuasions so molified the hearts of
the incensed princes, that all civil and seditious war laid aside, they
entered a friendly and brotherly league; which was so established in the
reverent virtues of the mother, that it was never after violated in all their
life times after. With what condign honors is queen Marcia's memory worthy
to be celebrated? Mercia.
who being the wife to Guinthelinus king of Britain (the son of Gurgunscius)
was in those days of that excellent learning and knowledge, that she devised
many profitable and wholesome laws to the benefit of the Commonwealth, which
were much esteemed amongst the Britains, and carefully observed, being called
after her name, The Mercean laws, many ages ensuing. But being loath to
instance too many to one purpose, least I should rather seem tedious than
delightful to the reader, I will add only one English lady in another kind
memorable, and worthy for her goodness an everlasting character. There was a
noble man of England created Earl of Couentrie, this man was so austere to the
citisens, that he had injuriously wrested from them all their ancient
franchises and privileges, insomuch that by his oppressions and insufferable
exactions, the city was much decayed, the people disabled in their power, and
weakened in their fortunes: These petitioned to the Countess, a noble and well
disposed lady, A lady of Couentrie.
to mediate for them to the Earl, That their customs and former liberties
might be restored. The lady undertakes their suit, and with much importunity
solicited her lord in their behalf; but he being of a haughty and insolent
disposition, still persisted immovable: but she commiserating their estate, as
daily moved with their complaints, without cessation still solicited for
them, and with such vrgence, that he had neither peace at board nor quiet in
bed; he at length as much wearied with her importunity, as she tired with
their petitions, she wrested from him this churlish and indeffinite answer,
Cease Lady further to persuade me, for I protest, and that with an unaltered
resolution, that there is but one only means by which their franchises are to
be recovered, which if thou will undertake, (as I presume thou will not) I will
surrender them up entirely, if not, I will continue them in the same estate
that I now hold them. The lady gently demanding what imposition he would
inioine her, he thus replied, Thou shall strippe thy self stark naked, and
mounted on horseback, at midday ride in that manner through the city, from
one gate to another, and by this exployt only their desire and thy suit is to
be granted. The modest lady after some little pause, promised her lord that for
their general good she would do it. This being sealed by an oath from him,
and a vow from her, she acquainted the cittisens with her purpose, and
appointed a day in which she commanded them to lock all their doors and shut
in their windows, and not to leave any small cranny open toward the street,
nor suffer any living thing to be abroad. This being faithfully and punctually
performed by them, she as effectually accomplished her promise, and rid in
that manner with no more touch of immodestie, than when she shifted her smock
in her private chamber. Some may say, Yet what might the people apprehend in
their conceits, to think upon a naked Lady so mounted? I answer, They could
not more immodestlie conceive of her, than a man that sees any beautiful woman
well habited, many do in his libidinous immaginations, by comprehending every
naked lineament before she put on her apparel. Of this noble Lady there is
in the city both monument and memory unto this day.

In speaking of so many chaste, worthy and eminent Ladies, I wonder how the
name of Cuckold came to be so frequent amongst us: Of the name Cuckold.
might it be held no ridiculous digression, I would tell you an old tale to
that purpose, which though I dare not warrant it for truth, I am willing to
make it yours as freely as it was made mine. I speak not of the woman, that
when her husband came home to her in have, and brought news there was a new
edict come out, that all Cuckolds should be cast into the river; presently
asked him, why he did not learn to swim: nor of her that when her good man
came to her in like manner with acclamation, and said, Wotte you what wife,
such a woman (naming one of his neighbors) is found to be false, and he
branded for a notorious cuckold: answered, Lord husband you are such another
man. But my discourse is at this present of a disputation in hell, what this
thing Cuckold should be, or what kind of creature; since all sorts of people
of what estate or degree soever, examined by Lucifer, or any of the three
infernal judges, denied themselves to be the same. It was therefore agreed
amongst them, to send up some of the most ingenious devils amongst them, by
surueying the Earth, to discover this strange unknown creature: and if it were
possible to bring him thither alive, to make them spectators of an object they
so much desired to see. With this commission away goes the devil, shows
himself upon the earth, and taking the shape of a gallant thrusts himself
into the society of all kind of people: he comes to the country man, asks
if he be a Cuckold, who answers he knows not what it means. The cittisen
denies himself to be the man. The soldier with oaths outfaceth the name. The
lawyer will arrest any man upon an action of slander that shall call him by
that name. The courtier (indeed) confesses himself to be a Cuckold-maker, but
to be a Cuckold he can endure by no means. In so much that the poor devil,
altogether disappointed of his purpose was ready to retire again to his black
house of darkness: as he was meditating with himself to the same purpose,
he happened into an Ordnarie, where a cittisen being at game amongst many
gentlemen, the dyce so favored him, that he got a great hand, blew up two or
three gallants, and so gave over play; which one above the rest taking not
well, importuned him still to hold him game, which the other absolutely denying,
the gallant told him, A Cuckold he found him, and so would leave him, and with
that language he bad him farewell. This the devil hearing, grew joyful in
himself, thus intimating; I have found him at length whom I so long have
sought, this is my prise, and shall be my purchase. He presently prouides
himself of a large bag able to contain so great a burden, and desiring the
cittisen more familier acquaintance (to cut off circumstance) drew him out of
the town to take a turn or two in the fields. Together they walk, and
coming to a remote place, the devil discovering himself, appears unto him
in a rough black haired shape, and tells him to what purpose he was come, and
to what place he was enjoined to bear him: therefore wished him patiently and
quietly to creep into his bag. The man at these words amassed, began to
struggle with the devil, who laid violent hands upon him. It happened that
near to this wrestling place a poor laboring man was digging of gravel,
there lay by the edge of the pit a lusty mastiffe (that had bin a beare-dogge)
to keep the poor man's hat and jerkin, whilst he was at work below: this
dog seeing the man and the devil contend, took (it seems) the fiend, by
reason of his rough skin, to be a beast of the game; up skippes he to take
the devil by the throat, who presently lets go his hold to secure himself
from the dog, and away he flies. The citisen by this means secured from the
present danger, and willing to be grateful to his preserver, comes to the
labourer and bargains for the mastiffe; the price is made, and both parties
agreed. It is to be presupposed, that the devil in this fear, had left (for
have) his bag behind him, and fled out of sight: which the cittisen
apprehending, and being emboldned with so valiant a second, thinks to put a
new trick upon his adversary; for he imagines that (ten to one) he will
come back again for his bag, therefore he intreates the poor man to help
him to put the dog into the sack, and tie the mouth of it fast with the
strings. All is done and they retire themselves apart, when just as they
imagined, out comes the devil peaking from the place where he lay hid to see if
the coast was clear, and casting his eyes timerously about him, as fearing the
like assault, he came softly treading to the place where he had left his
sack, and gently feeling, finds somewhat to stir therein: upon which he
presently imagines that it was the supposed cuckold, who for fear had crept
into the same; and being wondrous iocund with this conceit, snatcheth him up
upon his back, and with his glad purchase sinkes himself down among the
infernalls. His return was rumord in hell, and a sinod called, in which Lucifer
seated himself in his wonted state with all his princes, judges, and officers
about him, all in great expectation of the object so much desired: the
messenger is summond, who appears before them with his bag at his back, or
rather upon his neck; he is commanded to discover this strange creature so
often spoken of, but till then in that place not seen; the sackes mouth is
opened, out flies the mastiffe amongst them, who seeing so many ougly creatures
together, thought (it seems) he had been amongst the bears in Paris garden:
but spying Lucifer to be the greatest and most ill-fauoured amongst them, first
leapes up into his face, and after flies at whomsoever stood next him. The
devils are dispersed, every one runs and makes what shift he can for himself,
the sessions is dissolved, the bench and bale-docke cleared, and all in
general so affrighted, that ever since that accident the very name has been
so terrible amongst them, as they had rather entertain into their dark and
sad dominions ten thousand of their wives, then any one man who bears the
least character of a cuckold. But having done with this sporting, I proceed to
what is more serious.

Of Women remarkable for their love to their Husbands.
IT is reported of the wives of Wynbergen, a free place in Germany, that the
town being taken in an assault by the Emperor, and by reason the cittisens in
so valiantly defending their lives and honors, had been the overthrow of the
greatest part of his army; the Emperor grew so inplacable, that he purposed
(though mercy to the women) yet upon the men a bloody revenge. Composition
being granted and articles drawn for the surrender of the town, it was
lawful for the matrons and virgins (by the Emperors edict) to carry out, of
their own necessaries, a burden of what they best liked. The Emperor (not
dreaming but that they would load themselves with their jewels and coin, rich
garments and such like) might perceive them issuing from the Ports, with every
wife her husband upon her back, and every virgin and damsel her father or
brother: to express as much love in preserving their lives then, as the men
had before, valor in defending their liberties. This noble example of
conjugal love and piety took such impression in the heart of Caesar, that in
recompense of their noble charity, he not only suffered them to depart
peaceably with their first burdens, but granted every one a second, to make
choice of what best pleased them amongst all the treasure and wealth of the
city. Michael Lord Montaigne in his Essays speaks only of three women for
the like virtue memorable; the first perceiving her husband to labor of a
disease incurable, and every day more and more to languish, persuaded him
resolutelie to kill himself, and with one blow to be rid of a lingering
torment; but finding him to be somewhat faint-hearted, she thus put courage
into him by her own noble example: I (quoth she) whose sorrow for thee in thy
sickness, has in some sort paraleld thy torment, am willing by one death both
to give date unto that which has (for thy love) afflicted me, and thy violent
and vnmedicinable torture. So after many persuasiue motives to encourage his
fainting resolution, she intended to dye with him in her arms: and to that
purpose, least her hold by accident or affright should unloose, she with a cord
bound fast their bodies together, and taking him in her loving embraces from an
high window which ouerlooked part of the sea, cast themselves both headlong
into the water. As pious an affection showed that renowned matron Arria
(vulgarly called Arria matter, Arria matter.
because she had a daughter of the name) she seeing her husband Poetus
condemned, and willing that he should expire by his own hand rather than the
stroke of the common hangman, persuaded him to a Roman resolution; but finding
him somewhat daunted with the present sight of death, she snatched up a sword
with which she transpierst her self, and then plucking it from her bosom
presented it unto her husband only with these few and last words, Poet non
dolet, Hold Poetus it has done me no harm, and so fell down and dyed: of
whom Martial in his first book of Epigrams has left this memory, Casta suo
gladium cum traderet Aria Poeto,
Quem dedit visceribus traxerat illa suis,
Si qua fides vulnus quod feci, non dolet inquit
Sed quod ^u facies, hoc mihi Poet dolet.
When Aria did to Poetus give that steel,
Which she before from her own breast had taken;
Trust me (says she) no smart at all I feel,
My only wound's to think upon thy pain.
The third was Pompeia Paulina, Pompeia Paulina.
the wife of Seneca, who when by the tyrranous command of Nero, she saw the
sentence of death denounced against her husband (though she was then young and
in the best of her years, and he aged and stooping) notwithstanding so pure
was her affectionat zeal toward him, that as soon as she perceived him to
bleed, caused her own vain to be opened, so to accompany him in death; few
such presidents this our age affords. Yet I have lately seen a discourse,
Rathean Herpin.
entitled, A true narration of Rathean Herpin, who about the time that Spinola
with the Bauarians first entered the Pallatinate, finding her husband
Christopher Thaeon, apoplext in all his limbs and members, with an invincible
constancy, at several iournies bore him upon her back the space of 1300
English miles to a Bath for his recovery. These and the like presidents of
nuptial piety make me wonder, why so many Satyrists assume to themselves such
an unbridled liberty to inueigh without all limitation against their Sex. I
happened not long since to steal upon one of these censorious fellows, and
found him writing after this manner: I wonder our forefathers durst their lives
Hazard in days past with such choice of wives,
And (as we read) to venture on so many:
Me thinks he has enough that has not any.
Sure either women were more perfect then,
Or greater patience does possess us men,
Or it belongs to them since Eu's first curse,
That (as the world) their Sex grows worse and worse.
But who can teach me, Why the fairer, still
They are more false? good Oedipus thy skill,
Or Sphinx thine to resolve me, lay some ground
For my instruction: good, the like is found
Among birds and serpents; did you never see
A milk white swan (in color like to thee
That wast my mistress once) as white, as fair,
Her downie breasts to touch as soft, as rare;
Yet these deep waters that in torrents meet,
Can never wash the blackenesse from her feet.
Who ever saw a Dragon richly clad
In golden skales, but that within he had
His gorge stuffed full of Venom? I behold
The woman, and me thinks a cup of gold
Stands brim'd before me; whence should I but sip,
I should my fate, and death, taste from thy lip.
But henceforth I Will beware thee, since I know
That under the more spreading Misceltow,
The greater Mandrake thrines, whose shrieke presages
Or ruin, or disaster. Who ingages
Himself to beauty, he shall find dependants
Contempt, Disdain, and Scorn; with their attendants,
Inconstancy, and Falsehood: in their train
Wait Looseness and Intemperance. But in vain
Before the blind we glorious objects bring;
Lend armor to the lame, or counsel sing
To them will find no ears: be it then approou'd
,,None ever fair, that has sincerely loved.
If beautiful, she is proud: if rich, then scorn
She thinks becomes her best. But 'ware the horn
Thou man if she be crossed once: bright, or black,
Well shaped, or ougly, does she fortunes lack,
Or be she great in means, haunts she the Cour^,
City, or Country; They all love the sport.
Further he was proceeding, when I stayed his pen, and so stopped the torrent of
his poetical rapture, and laid before him so many noble histories of glorious
and illustrious women, some already in this tractate, and others hereafter to
be remembered; that he forsook his late apostasy, confessed his error, and
apprehended a new belief, professing himself futurely to be a constant
champion of their honors and virtues. The like impression I wish they may make
in the hearts of all such whose poems have been too lauishly bold, and still
persist in the like peevish obstinacy. Now if any man tax me, Why I have not
equally suited my books in length? to excuse my self I will tell them a short
tale, and so conclude, this being the third in number. A gentleman of a
suspected wit, amongst many other crotchets that came often into his brain,
having a new suit to be made, sent to his tailor to give him directions about
the fashion, charging him above all things not to forget to make one sleeue
longer than another, because he would have a garb peculiar to himself: the
tailor loath to offend so good a customer, brings home his doublet made just
according to his direction. The Fantastic gentleman the first thing he does
measures the sleeves, and finding their inequality, in great chollor calls to
his tailor, and to him thus says, What a blockhead art thou? did not I charge
thee to make the one sleeue longer than the other? and see if (like a botcherly
fellow as thou art) thou have not quite mistook and made the one sleeue
shorter than the other. Gentle Reader this is easy to apply.

Explicit lib. tertius. Inscriptus THALIA.

THE FOVRTH BOOK inscribed MELPOMENE. Of Women incestuous, of Adulteresses,
and such as have come by strange deaths.
Never did my hand more compulsiuely direct my pen, nor my pen with less
willingness blot paper, than at this present, being forced in this tractat to
lay open the frailties of this Sex, before so much commended. But this is my
encouragement to proceed, because I can produce nothing out of History to the
disgrace of the bad and vicious, which adds not to the honor of the good and
virtuous. Were none foul, what benefit were it to be fair? and if none
deformed, what grace could it be to be well featured? There were no honor to
be ascribed to modesty, but that we see the dishonor of immodestie depending;
nor to the temperate, but that we daily find the inconveniences inherent to
riot and excess. Besides, were all alike fair, what praise were it to be
beautiful? or if all alike chaste, what admiration could be attributed to so
rare a Virtue? As we see in the trying of mettalls there is the gold and the
dross; in the progress of time, there is day and night, comprehending light,
and darkness; in the creation of man, there is the immortal soul and the
corruptible flesh. And as it has pleased the divine providence to provide a
heaven and a hell, the one to crown the virtuous, the other to condemn the
wicked: so there is a necessity of number to people both, nor are the torments
of the one more feelingly apprehended than in contemplating the joys and
felicities of the other. Amongst artificers, vessels are made some for honor,
some for dishonor; in all estates there are the noble and the base; amongst
Princes, the good king and the tyrant; amongst subjects, the true liegeman and
the traitor; in schools, the learned and the ignorant; amongst magistrates,
the wise and the foolish; if one be bountiful, another is auaritious and
griping; if one pious and religious, others atheistical and profane: neither
is the vileness of the one any aspertion or blemish to the other, but rather
as a foil to set it off with more luster and beauty. Those therefore that are
before presented, are to imitate: the rest that in this next book succeed, to
beware and shun. For who so foolish, that seeing shelues and sands on the one
side, and safe harbor on the other, will forsake the part of security,
willingly to swallow himself up in the quicksands: therefore I wish you all
to strive, that the beauty of your minds may still exceed that of your
bodies; because the first apprehends a noble divinity, the last is subject to
all frailty: and as the higher powers have bestowed on you fairness above
man, to equal that excellency of judgment and wisdom in which man claims
justly a prioritie before you, so it is both behoouefull and becoming your
Sex, that your outward perfections should altogether aim at the inward
pulchritude of the mind; since the first is accidental and casual, the last
stable and permanent. Besides, if beauty be once branded with impudence or
inchastitie, it makes that which in it self is both laudable and desired,
rejected and altogether despised. For virtue once violated, brings infamy and
dishonor, not only to the person offending, but contaminates the whole
progeny; nay more, looks back even to the injured ashes of the ancestors,
be they never so noble: for the mind, as the body, in the act of adultery
being both corrupted, makes the action infamous and dishonorable, dispersing
the poison of the sin even amongst those from whom she deriues her birth; as
if with her earthly being they had given her therewith her corruptions, and the
first occasion of this her infamy. It extends likewise to the posterity which
shall arise from so corrupt a seed, generated from unlawful and adulterate
copulation. How chary then ought a fair woman to be, to strengthen her bodily
beauty with that of the mind? Of what small continuance it is, and how nature
has disposed of your age, you should consider: the beauty of your Cradle you
cannot apprehend, nor of your Childhood, and therefore in it you can neither
take pride nor delight, or if you could, it is not yet perfect. When you grow
ripe for marriage, and that it begins to attract you suitors and servants, it
grows to budde, and is then commonly in the blossom, when you have made
choice of a husband: as you begin to be the fruitful mother of children, so
one by one the leaves fade and fall away. Alas, how swiftly does Age with
wrinkles steal upon you, and then where is that admiration it before
attracted? neither is that small season free from the blastings of disease and
canker worms of sickness, able to make the fairest amongst you to look aged
in her youth. Then may the choicest of you with beautiful Lais, who when she
saw the Lillies in her brow faded, and the Roses in her chekes withered, the
Diamonds in her eyes loose their luster, and the Rubies in her lips their
color (as being now grown in years) in these words give up your
looking-glasses back to Venus. Nunc mihi nullus in ho^ vsus, quia cernere talem
Qualis sum, nolo, qualis eram, nequeo.
Now there is no use of thee at all,
Because I have no will
To see what I am now: and what
I was, I cannot still.
If then this rare ornament be of such small permanens, even in the best, How
much then is it to be vnderprised, when it is contaminated and spotted with
lust and unlawful prostitution? since it is a maxim, That things common are
so far from begetting appetite and affection, that they rather engender the
seeds of contempt and hatred: for how should any thing festered and corrupt,
please the eye? or that which is rotten and unsound, give content unto the
pallat? But to return to my first appollogie: needful it is that to the
Tragic Muse Melpomone, I should suit Tragical history, wherein if any women
be personated for Incontinence, Intemperance, Adultery, Incest, or any such
vile and abominable action; she has in that disgraced herself, not her Sex,
as stretching no further than the delinquent. If any man object and say they
are bad presidents, to him I answer, they are examples of horror to be
eschewed, not immitated, which in their own natures beget a loathing, not
liking: and for placing them next to and so near to the women Illustrious I
will excuse my self in this short Epigram.

A skillful Painter having lim'd a face
Surpassing fair, of admirable feature,
Sets by the same, to give it the more grace,
The pourtrait of some foul deformed creature.
No doubt, as much Art in the last is shown
As in the first, albeit that pleases most:
How ever to the workman it is well known
They both to him are of like care and cost.
It Is so with me, I have set before you many
Brave Ladies, of them all to take full view,
Pleasing toth' eye (not of these pieces any
Whom a more willing workman ever drew)
Should these appear rough hewed or of bad favor
And whose aspect cannot so well content you,
Perhapes the next of more delight may savor,
And grinding other colors, I Will present you
A smoother piece, and limne (if I be able)
A fairer face in a more curious table.
Of Women incestuous, and first of Q. Semiramis.
IT is questioned by some authors, concerning this potent and mighty Queen,
Whether she be more renowned for her brave and magnanimous exploits, or
notorious for her ignoble and infamous actions? some willing that for her
virtues sake, her vices should be utterly buried in oblivion; others in regard
of what was bad in her, that nothing good or commendable might of her to
posterity be remembered. I purpose to give you a taste of both. Some say she was
called Semiram^is, of the birds named The name of Birds common in that country
Semiramides, by which it is said she was fostered in her infancy: but that
bearing no show of truth, others derive her denomination from Samir, which in
the Hebrew and the Syrian dialect imports as much as Adamant; because her noble
and brave atchieuements attracted the hearts of that barbarous rude nation to
her admiration and love, as the Adamant draws iron. Plutarch in libro Amator.
says, she was a damsel of Syria and concubine to the king of that country,
with whose love Ninus being after besotted, took her to his wife; of whom she
had that predominance, that though before he had conquered all the Eastern
parts, subiugated his neighbor kings, and subdued Zoroastes monarch of the
Bactrians (he that was the first inuentor of the Art magic, that devised the
principles of Astrology, and found out the true motions of the stars)
notwithstanding she so far prevailed with him, that for one day she might fit
in the royal throne, and for that space have the regal jurisdiction in her
full power, with entire command over the whole Empire. In the morning of her
sovereignty, she imposed upon the subjects such modest and mild injunctions,
that ere noone she had insinuated into their bosoms so far, that she found
them so pliable and conformable to her desires, that she presumed there was
nothing so difficult and impossible which for her sake they would not boldly
and resolutely undertake. Upon this presumption, she stretched her usurpation
so far, that she commanded them to lay hands upon the king her husband
before night, and committing him to prison, caused him within few days to be
put to death. She had by Ninus one son called Ninus junior, who should have
succeeded his father, that for fifty two years space had swaied the
Babylonian Empire: but whether in her own ambition desirous of the
principality, or finding her son too effeminate to be lord over so great a
people, and uncertain withal, whether so many men, and of so many sundry
nations would submit themselves to the sovereignty of a woman, all these
suppositions being doubtful, certain it is that in the stead of the mother
of Ninus, she assumed the person of Ninus her son, changing her woman's shape
into the habit of a man's; for they were of one stature, proportioned in
lineaments alike, semblant in voice, and in all accomplements difficultly to be
distinguished, in so much that never mother and child could have more true
resemblance: having therefore luld her son in all effeminacie, and attired
him in her queenelike vesture, the better to shadow her own proportion she
suited her self in long garments, and commanded all her subjects to do the
like; which habit has bin amongst the Assirians, Bactrians, and Babylonians in
use even to this day. Upon her head she wore a Turbant or Myter, such as none
but kings used to adorn their heads with: so that in the beginning, she was
known for no other than the prince, in whose name she accomplished many notable
and noble atchieuements, at whose amplitude, Envy and Emulation stood amassed,
confessing her in all her attempts supereminent: neither did her heroic
actions any way derrogate from the honor of the Empire, but rather add to the
splendour thereof admiration, in regard a woman had not only excelled all of
her Sex in valor, Herod. lib. 1.
but might claim a just prioritie over men. She built the mighty city
Babylon, These walls the Queen Nicocris who after some years succeeded her,
made much more stately, exceeding her in all her structures.
and the stately walls reckoned amongst the seven wonders. She not only
conquered all Aethiopia and made that kingdom to her state tributarie, but
invaded India, being the first that durst attempt it; and saving her, none
since but Alexander, who was the second and the last. Thus far Iustine, out
of the history of Trogus Pompeius. Berosus affirms as much, These be his
words: Nemo vnquam huic feminae comparandus est virorum, tanta in eius vita
scribuntur cum ad vituperationem, tum maxim ad laudem. i. No man was ever to
be compared with this woman, such great things have been written of her,
partly to her disgrace, but chiefly to her praise. He proceeds further: She
was the fourth that reigned in Assiria (for so it is approved) Nimrod was the
first, being father to Belus, and grandfather to Ninus, which Ninus was the
first that made war upon his neighbors and usurped their dominions, in whom
began to cease the Golden world: whom his widow Queen succeeded,
counterfetting the shape of man. She was after slain by her son Ninus the
second of that name, who as Eusebius writes, after her death swaid the scepter
thirty and eight years. One memorable thing is recorded of her by Diodorus
Siculus, lib. 3. as also by Vitruuius, This queen being making her self
ready in her palace royal, when the one part of her hair was bound up, and
the other half hung loose upon her shoulders, suddenly news was brought her,
That the cittisens of Babylon were revolted, and all or the most of them in
mutiny and uproar. She presently posted into the city, and what with her
presence and persuasion, attonde the discord, and before she had leisure to put
her disordered curles in form, reconciled the hearts of that innumerable
people to her obedience: for which her statue was erected in the city, being
pourtraied half ready half unready, in memory of that noble and
magnanimous adventure. Some thing of the best that was in her though not all,
you have heard, the worst is to come, Iuba apud Pli. relates that she immitated
the fashions of men, neglecting the habit of her own Sex, and in her latter
years grew to that deboisht effeminacie and for^id lust, that she did not
only admit but allure and compel into her goatish embraces many of her
soldiers, without respect of their degrees or places, so they were well
featured, able and lusty of performance, whom when they had wasted their
bodies upon her, she caused to be most cruelly murdered. She was slain by
her own son, because she most incestuously sought his bed: but, which of
all the rest is most prodigious and abominable, she is reported to have had
company with a horse on whom she unnaturally doted. But these things whether
related for truth or recorded of malice, I am altogether ignorant, and
therefore leave it to censure. Herodotus, Plutarch, and others writ that she
caused these words to be inscribed upon her Tomb. Quicunque rex pecunijs
indiget aperto monumento, quod voluerit accipiat, that is, What king soever
has need of coin, search this mo^ument, and he shall find what he desires.
This when king Darius had read, thinking some Magazin of treasure had been
there included, he caused the Tombe-stone to be removed; where he found upon
the other side thereof these words engraven, Misi rex auarus esses and pecuniae
insatiabilis mortuorum monumenta, non vi^lasses, i. Had thou not been an
auaritious king and insasiable of Coin thou would not have ransacked the
grave of the dead. Thus, as Franciscus Patritius Pontifex says, the excellent
Lady in her death taunted the gripple avarice of the living. That the
monuments of the dead are no way to be violated or defaced, Sertorius has
taught us, who having subdued the city Tigenna situate in the country of
Maurusia, in which a noble sepulcher was, which the inhabitants said belonged
to Antaus (which was the giant slain by Hercules:) when the greatness of the
grave exceeded all belief, Sertorius caused it to be ruined, and there dug
up a body (as Plutarch witnesses) of seventy cubits in length: which
beholding and wondering at, he caused it to be repaired with greater beauty
than before, least by deminishing that, Tagenna a woman of seuent^e cubits high.
he might have ruined a great part of his own honor. Some think it was the
body of Tagenna the wife of Antaeus, whom Hercules prostituted after the death
of her husband: of her he begot Siphax, who after erected that city, and in
memory of his mother called it by her name.

Pasiphae.
THis Lady, though I cannot fitly introduce her within the number of the
incestuous, yet for that horrid act which the Poets have reported of her, I
shall not impertinently place her next to Semiramis. Appollodorus Gramatticus
in his book de Deorum origin (as Benedictus Aegius Spoletinus interprets him)
thus sets down her history: Ninus king of Creet espoused Pasiphae, daughter
of the Sun and Perseis, or (as Asclepiades calls her) Creta, the daughter of
Aterius, she had by him four sons, Cretaeus, Deucalion, Glaucus, and
Androgeus, and as many daughters, Hecate, Xenodice, Ariadne, and Phaedra. This
Minos peaceably to enjoy his kingdom, had promised to offer such a Bull to
Neptune: but having obtained his desires, he sent that Bull before marked out,
back to the heard, and caused another of less value to be sacrificed: at
which Neptune enraged, knew not with what greater punishment to afflict him for
the breach of his faith, than to make his wife most preposterously and against
nature to dote on that beast which he had so carefully preserved. She therefore
confederated with Dedalus, a great Artsmaster (one that for murder had fled
from Athens, and with his son Icarus there secured himself) he devised by
his mischievous skill, a wodden cow, hollowed within with such artificial
conuayance, that the Queen enclosed, had satisfaction of her desires to the
glutting of her libidinons appetite. Of this congression she conceived and
brought forth a son called Asterion, or (as the most will have it)
Minotaurus, shaped with a Bulls head and a man's body. About this monstrous
issue, Minos consulted with the Oracle: which advised him to shut him in a
Labyrinth, and there see him safely brought up and kept. This Labyrinth (the
first that ever was) was built by Dedalus, being a house so intricated with
windings and turnings this way and that way, now forward, then backward, that
it was scarce possible for any that entered therein to find the direct way
back: thus far Apollodorus. Lib. 1.
But Palephatus in his Fabulous narrations reduces all these commented
circumstances within the compass of mere impossibility; and thus delivers
the truth concerning Pasiphae. Minos being afflicted with a disease in his
secret parts, with which he had been long grieved, was at length by Crides who
belonged to Pandion, cured. In the interim of this his defect and weakness,
the queen cast an adulterat eye upon a fair young man called Taurus whom (
Seruius says) was the scribe or secretary to the king; she prostituting her
self to his embraces, when the full time was expired she produced her issue:
Which Minos seeing, and taking a true supputation of the time, comparing the
birth with his discontinuance from her bed (by reason of his disease)
apprehended the adultery; notwithstanding he was unwilling to kill the
bastard, because it had a resemblance to the rest of his children, though an
impression of the fathers face, by which the adulterer might easily be known.
Minos therefore to conceal his own discontents, and as much as in him lay to
hide his wives shame, whom he endeeredly affected, caused the infant to be
carried into a remote mountain, and there by the Kings heardsmen to be
fostered. But growing toward manhood, he likewise grew intractable and
disobedient to those to whose charge he was committed. The king therefore
confinde him into a deep cave digd in a rock of purpose, not to curb his
fierce and cruel disposition, but rather encourage it; for whosoever at any
time he feared, or whatsoever he was that had offended him, he sent him to
this Minotaure on some impertinent message or other, by whom he was cruelly
butchered. The cave was called Labyrinthus, and therefore described with so many
intricate blind Meanders, in regard of the difficulty of his return with life
who was seen to enter there. Therefore when Theseus came to Minos, he sent
him to be devoured by this Minotaure: of which Ariadne having notice, being
enamoured of Theseus, she sent him a sword by which he slew the monstrous
Homicyde; and that was the clew so often remembered by the Poets which guirded
Theseus out of the Labyrinth.

Canace, Canusia, Valeria Tusculana.
MAcareus and Canace were brother and sister, the son and daughter to Aeolus
king of the winds (for so the Poets feigned him, because the clouds and mists
rising from the seven Aeolian Islands, of which he was king, always pretended
great gusts and tempests) he is reported to be the son of Jupiter and
Alceste, daughter to Hyppotes the Tyrian, of whom he had the denomination of
Hippotides. This Macareus and Canace, having most leaudly and incestuously
loved one another, covering their bedding and boosoming under the unsuspected
pretext of consanguinitie and neerenesse in blood: It could no longer be
conceald by reason Canace at length brought forth a son, which as she would
secretly have conveyed out of the court by the hands of her trusty nurse, who
had been before acquainted with all their wicked proceedings; the infant by
crying betrayed it self to the grandfather, who searching the nurse,
examining the matter, finding the incest, and miserably distracted with the
horridness of the fact: instantly in the heat of his incensed anger, caused
the innocent infant to be cut in pecces, and limb by limb cast to the dogs,
and before his face devoured. This Macareus hearing, took sanctuary in the
Temple of Apollo: but Canace by reason of her greenenes and weak estate, not
able to make escape, and shun the violence of her fathers threatened fury: he
sent her a sword, and withal commanded her to punish her self according to the
nature of the fact. Which she receiving writ a passionate letter to her
brother, in which she first besought him to have a care of his safety, and next
to cause the bones of the slaughtered infant to be gathered together, and put
into an vrne with hers: this having done, with the sword sent her by her father
she transpierst her self, Canusia.
and so expired. The like we read of Canusia, daughter of Papirius Volucris,
who being found with child by Papirius Romanus her own natural brother, when
the heinousness of the fact came to the knowledge of the father, he sent to
either of them a sharp sword; with which they as resolutely slew themselves,
as they had before rashly offended. The like success of her incestuous
affection had Valeria Tusculana, Valor. Tus.
who as Plutarch relates, by the counsel of one of her handmaids coming
privately in the night into the arms of her father, and the deed after made
known to Valerius, he in detestation of the act slew her with his own hand.

Iulia, the Empress.
THese abominable sins that have been punished in inferior persons, have in
great ones been countenanced. Sextus Aurelius and Aelius Spartianus both
testify, That Antonius Caracalla Emperor, doting upon his stepmother Iulia
was often heard to say in her presence, I would if it were lawful; at length
apprehending his purpose, to these his words she made this reply: What you list
to do (...) Emperor) you may make lawful, Princes have power to make laws,
but are not (...) to keep any: by which words imboldned, he took her to his
bed, whose son Ge^a but a while before he had caused to be slain. Herodotus
remembers us of one Opaea the stepmother to Scithes king of the Scythians,
Opaea.
who likewise took her to his bed and made her his queen. Berenices.
So Berenices the sister of Ptolomaus Euergetes was made partner both of his
bed and kingdom. Arsinoe.
Arsinoe the sister of Ptolomaeus Philodelphus became his concubine. The like
did Herod Antipas unto Herodias the wife of his brother Philip. Herodias.
We read also of one Leucon, who slew his brother Oxilochus king of Pontus for
the love of his wife whom he after married. Faustina the sister of Marcus
Antonius Emperor, Faustina.
became her brothers paramour; on whom he begat Lucilla, Lucilla.
whom he after gave in marriage to his brother L. Antonius. Theodoricus king of
the Frenchmen married the daughter of his own brother, whom he before had
slain. And Pontanus remembers us of one Johannes Ariminensis who espoused his
own sister. Phillip the brother of Alphonsus the tenth king of Spain,
forcibly married Christiana, Christiana.
daughter to the king of Dacia his own brothers wife, all Christianity and
Religion set apart. Volaterranus remembers us of one Stratonice, Stratonice.
who being deuilishly doted on by Antiochus Soter king of Syria, his own
father at his importunity gave her up into his sons incestuous embraces.
Virgill in his tenth book speaks of Casperia, Casperia.
stepmother to Anchemolus the son of Rhatus king of the Marhubians, who was
by him adulterated. These prodigious acts have been encouraged by kings,
drawing their presidents from Jupiter, who vitiated Ceres, and married his
sister Juno: when in my opinion, the industry of the Poets in illustrating the
escapes of Jupiter and the other gods, was aimed at no other end than to
manifest unto all men, That such deities were not worthy adoration that were
callumnised with so many whoredoms, adulteries, and incests.

The sisters of Cambises.
THese might seem fearful enough before related, but I will give you a short
taste of some more abominable: I have showed the examples of Lust, but these
following are besides lust polluted with unheard of tyranny. Herodotus in his
third book speaking at large of the life and acts of Cambyses the great
Persian king, and son of Cyrus, relates, that having showed his puissance
abroad in Aegipt, Greece, and other places, to the terror of the greatest of
the world: he caused his innocent brother Smerdis to be secretly made away by
the hand of his most trusted Praxaspes. The next inhumanitie which he purposd
to exemplify unto the world, was the death of his sister, who followed him in
his Camp to Aegipt, and back again: being not only his sister by parents, but
his wife also. The manner how she came to be his queen was as follows;
Before his time, it was not lawful, but punishable amongst the Persians, to
marry into that proximitie of blood: but Cambyses surprised with the love of
his sister, and having resolved by what means soever to make her his wife, yet
to color his purpose, he sent for those honorable persons who were styled the
kings Judges, being selected men for their wisdoms, and of great place and
quality, as those that enjoy their offices Durante vita, unless some capital
crime be proved against them; besides, they are the expounders of the laws,
and to their causes all matters of doubt and controversy are referred. These
being co^uented, the king demanded of them, Whether they had any one law
amongst so many, which licenst a man (that had a will so to do) to contract
matrimony with his sister? to whom the Judges thus ingeniously answered: We
have indeed no law which gives license for a brother to marry with a sister,
but we have found a law (oh Sovereign) which warrants the king of Persia to
do whatsoever likes him best. Thus they without abrogation of the Persian
laws soothed the kings humor, and preserved their own honors and lives, who
had they crossed him in the least of his disseignes had all undoubtedly perished:
This he made the ground for the marriage of the first, and not long after he
adventured upon the second. The younger of these two who attended him into
Egypt he slew, whose death as that of her brother Smerdis is doubtfully
reported. The Graecians write that two whelps, one of a Lion, the other of a
Dog, were brought before Cambises to fight and try maisteries, at which fight
the young Lady was present: but the Lion having victory over the Dog, another
of the same litter broke his chain, and taking his brothers part, they two had
superiority over the Lion. Cambises at this fight taking great delight, she
then sitting next him, upon the sudden fell a weeping: this the king observing,
demanded the occasion of her tears, she answered it was at that object to see
one brother so willing to help the other, and therefore she wept to remember
her brothers death, and knew no man then living that was ready to revenge it;
and for this cause (say the Greeks) she was doomed to death by Cambises. The
Egyptians report it another way: That she sitting with her brother at table,
out of a sallet dish took a lettice, and plucked off leaf by leaf, and
showing it to her husband, asked him, Whether a whole letice or one so
despoiled showed the better? who answered, a whole one: then (said she) behold
how this lettice now vnleaued looks, even so have thou disfigured and made
naked the house of king Cyrus. With which words he was so incensed, that he
kicked and spurnd her (then being great with child) with that violence that she
miscarryed in her childbirth and dyed ere she was delivered: and these were
the murderous effects of his detestable incest.

Of Lyuia Horestilla, Lollia Paulina, Cesonia, etc.
IT is reported the Emperor Caligula, that he had not only illegal and
incestuous converse with his three natural sisters, but that be after caused
them before his face to be prostituted by his ministers and servants, thereby
to bring them within the compass of the Aemilian Law and convict them of
adultery. He vitiated Liuia Horestilla, Liuia Horestilla.
the wife of C. Pisonnius, and Lollia Paulina, Lollia Paul.
whom he caused to be divorced from her husband C. Memnius, both whose beds
within less than two years he repudiated, withal interdicting them the
company and society of man for ever. Caesonia he loved more affectionatly,
Caesonia.
insomuch that to his familiar friends (as boasting of her beauty) he would
often show her naked. To add unto his insufferable luxuries, he defloured one
of the vestall virgins. Neither was the Emperor Commodus much behind him in
devilish and brutish effeminacies, Commodus born the same day that Caligula
v^tiated the Vestall virgin.
for he likewise strumpeted his own sisters, and would wittingly and willingy
see his mistresses and concubines abused before his face, by such of his
favorites as he most graced: he kept not at any time less than to the
number of three hundred, for so Lampridius has left recorded. Gordianus junior
(who was competitor with his father in the Empire) kept two and twenty
concubines, Capitolin.
by each of which he had three or four children at the least, therefore by
some called the Priamus of his age, but by others in dirision the Priapus. The
emperor Proculus took in battle a hundred Sarmatian virgins, and boasted of
himself that he had got them all with child in less than fifteen days: this
Vopiscus reports, and Sabellicus. But a great wonder is that which Johannes
Picus Mirandula relates of Hercules, as that he lay with fifty daughters of
Lycomedes in one night and got them all with child with forty nine boys, only
failing in the last for that proved a guirle.

Iocasta.
APollodorus Atheniensis in his third book De deoroum Origin records this
history: After the death of Amphion king of Thebes, Laius succeeded, who took
to wife the daughter of Menocoeas called Iocasta, or (as others write)
Epicasta. This Laius being warned by the Oracle, that if of her he begat a
son, he should prove a Patricide and be the death of his father;
notwithstanding, forgetting himself in the distemperature of wine, he lay with
her; the same night she conceived, and in process brought forth a male issue,
whom the king caused to be cast out into the mountain Cytheron, thinking by
that means to prevent the predicted destiny. Polybus the heardsman to the
king of Corinth finding this infant, bore it home to his wife Periboea who
nourced and brought it up as her own, and causing the swelling of the feet
(with which the child was then troubled) to be cured, they grounded his name
from that disease, and called him Oedipus. This infant as he increased in
years, so he did in all the perfections of nature as well in the
accomplishments of the mind as the body; insomuch that as well in capacity and
volubilitie of speech, as in all active and generous exercises, he was
excellent above all of his age, his virtues being generally envied by such as
could not equal them, they thought to disgrace him in something, and gave him
the contemptible name of counterfeit and bastard: this made him curiously
inquisitiue of his supposed mother, and she not able in that point to resolve
him, he made a journey to Delphos, to consult with the Oracle: about the true
knowledge of his birth and parents, which forewarned him from returning into
his country, because he was destinied not only to be the deathsman of his
father, but to add misery unto mischief, he was likewise borne to be
incestuous with his mother. Which to prevent: and still supposing himself to
be the son of Polybus and Peribaea, he forbore to return to Corinth, and
hyring a chariot, took the way toward Phocis. It happened that in a strait
and narrow passage meeting with his father Laius and Polyphontes his charioter,
they contended for the way, but neither willing to give place, from words they
fell to blows: in which contention, Polyphontes killed one of the horses that
drew the chariot of Oedipus: at which enraged, he drew his sword, and first
slew Polyphontes, and next Laius who seconded his servant, and thence took his
ready way toward Thebes. Damasistratus king of the Plataeenses finding the
body of Laius caused it to be honorably interred. In this interim Creon the
son of Menecoeus in this vacancie whilst there was yet no king, inuades
Thebes, and after much slaughter possesses himself of the kingdom. Juno, to
vex them the more sent thither the monster Sphinx, borne of Echidna and
Tiphon; she had the face of a woman, the wings of a foul, and the breast feet
and tail of a lion: she having learned certain problemes and Aenigmaes of the
muses, disposed her self in the mountain Phycaeus, The riddle which she
proposed to the Thebans was this, What creature is that which has one
distinguishable voice, The riddle of Sphinx.
that first walks upon four, next two, and lastly upon three feet, and the
more legs it has, is the less able to walk? The strict conditions of this
monster were these, that so often as he demanded the solution of this question,
till it was punctually resolved, he had power to choose out any of the people
where he best liked, whom he presently devoured: but they had this comfort
from the Oracle, That this Aenigma should be no sooner opened, and reconciled
with truth, but they should be freed from this misery and the monster himself
should be destroyed. The last that was devoured was Aemon son to king Creon,
who fearing least the like sad fate might extend it self to the rest of his
issue, caused proclamation to be made, That whosoever could expound this
riddle should marry Iocasta the wife of the dead king Laius, and be peaceably
invested in the kingdom: this no sooner came to the ears of Oedipus, but he
undertook it and resolved it thus: This creature (says he) is Man, who of all
other has only a distinct voice, he is borne fourefooted, as in his infancy
crawling upon his feet and hands, who growing stronger erects himself and
walks upon two only, but growing decrepit and old, he is fitly said to move
upon three, as using the help of his staff. This solution was no sooner
published, but Sphinx cast her self headlong from the top of that high
Promontory, and so perished; and Oedipus by marrying the queen, was with a
general suffrage instated in the kingdom. He begot of her two sons, and two
daughters, Eteocles and Polinices, Ismene and Antigone (though some write that
Oedipus had these children by Eurigenia the daughter of Hiperphantes.) These
former circumstances after some years, no sooner came to light, but Iocasta in
despair strangled her self; Oedipus having torn out his eyes was by the
people expulsed Thebes, cursing at his departure his children for suffering him
to undergo that injury: his daughter Antigone lead him as far as to Colonus
a place in Attica, where there is a grove celebrated to the Eumenides, and
there rem^ined, till he was removed thence by Theseus, and soon after dyed.
And these are the best fruits that can grow from so abominable a root. Of the
miserable end of his incestuous issue, he that would be further satisfied, let
him read Sophocles, Apollodorus, and others. Of him Tyresius thus prophesied:
-- Neque hic laetabitur
Casibus and euentis suis: nam factus, etc.
No comfort in his fortunes he shall find,
He now sees clearly, must at length be blind,
And beg, that is now a rich man, who shall stray
Through foreign countries, for his doubtful way
Still groaping with his staff. The brother, he,
And father of his children (both) shall be:
His mothers son, and husband: first strike dead
His father, and adulterate next his bed.


Crithaeis.
SHe was wife to one Phaemius a schoolmaster, Plutarch de Homero.
and mother to Homer prince of the Greek Poets. Ephorus of Cuma, in a book
entitled the Cumaean Negotiation, leaves her story thus related: Atelles,
Maeones, and Dius, three brothers, were borne in Cuma; Dius being much indebted
was forced to remove thence into Ascra a village of Boetia, and there of his
wife Picemeda he begot Hesiodus. Atelles in his own country dying a natural
death, committed the pupillage of his daughter Crithaeis, to his brother
Meones: but coming to ripe growth, she being by him vitiated, and proouing
with child, both fearing the punishment due to such an offense, she was
conferred upon Phaemius, to whom she was soon after married: and walking one
day out of the city to bath her self in the river Miletus, she was by the
flood side delivered of young Homer, and of the name thereof called him
Melesigines. But after loosing his sight he was called Homer, for such of the
Cumaeans and Ionians are called Omouroi. Aristotle he writes contrary to
Ephorus, that what time Neleus the son of Codrus was President in Ionia of
the Collonie there then newly planted, De re Poet. ^i. 3.
a beautiful Virgin of this nation was forced and deflowred by one of the
Genius's which used to dance with the Muses, who after removed to a place
called Aegina, and meeting with certain forragers and robbers that made
sundry incursions into the country, she was by them surprised and brought to
Smyrna, who presented her to Meonides a companion to the king of the Lydians;
he at the first sight inamoured of her beauty took her to wife, who after
sporting herself by the banks of Miletus brought forth Homer, and instantly
expired. And since we have had occasion to speak of his mother, let it not
seem altogether impertinent to proceed a little of the son: who by reason
of his being hurried in his childhood from one place to another, and ignorant
both of his country and parents, went to the Oracle to be resolved concerning
them both, as also, his future fortunes; who returned him this doubtful
answer, Faelix and miser ad sortem es quia natus vtramque,
Perquiris patriam, matris tibi non patris extat, etc.
Happy, and wretched, both must be thy fate,
That of thy Country do desire to hea^^;
Known is thy mothers Cl'ime, thy fathers not
An Island in the Sea, to Creet not near,
Nor yet far off, in which thou shall expire,
When boys a riddle shall to thee propose,
Whose dark Aenigma thou can not acquire.
A double Fate thy life has, thou shall loose
Thine eyes: yet shall thy lofty Muse ascend,
And in thy death, thou life have without end.


In his latter days he was present at Thebes at their great feast called
Saturnalia, and from thence coming to Ius and sitting on a stone by the
waterport, there landed some fishermen, whom Homer asked what they had taken,
but they having got nothing that day, but for want of other work only lousing
themselves, thus merrily answered him: Non capta afferimus: fuerant quae capta
relictis.
We bring with us those that we could not find,
But all that we could catch we left behind.


Meaning, that all such vermin as they could catch they cast away, but what
they could not take they brought along. Which riddle when Homer could not
unfold, it is said that for very grief he ended his life. This unmatchable
Poet whom no man regarded in his life, yet when his works were better
considered of after his death, he had that honor that seven famous cities
contended about the place of his birth, every one of them appropriating it
unto themselves: Pindarus the Poet makes question whether he were of Chius or
Smyrna; Simonides affirms him to be of Chius; Antimachus and Nicander of
Colophon; Aristotle the Philosopher to be of Ius; Ephorus the Historiographer
that he was of Cuma. Some have been of opinion that he was borne in Salamine,
a city of Cipria; others, amongst the Argiues; Aristarchus and Dyonisius
Thrax derive him from Athens, etc. But I may have occasion to speak of him in
a larger work entitled The lives of all the Poets Modern and Foreign, to
which work (if it come once again into my hands) I shall refer you,
concluding him with this short Epitaph: An Epitaph upon Homer prince of Poets.
In Colophon some think thee ( Homer) borne,
Some in fair Smyrna, some in Ius Isle,
Some with thy birth rich Chius would adorn,
Others say, Cuma first on thee did smile.
The Argiues lay claim to thee, and a^er
Thou art their countrie-man, Aemus a Hill in Thessaly where some say Homar was
borne.
Aemus says no.
Strong Salamine says thou tookest life from her.
But Athens thou to her thy Muse do owe,
(As there first breathing.) Speak, how then shall I
Determine of thy country by my skill,
When Oracles would never? I will try,
And Homer (will thou give me leave) I will
The spations Earth then for thy country choose,
No mortal for thy mother, but a Muse.


Doris the sister of Nereus the Sea-god, was by him stuprated: of whom he
begot the Nymphs called Nereides; Ovid in his sixth book Metamorph. tells us
of Philomela daughter to Pandion king of Athens, who was forced by Tereus king
of Thrace, the son of Mars and the Nymph Bistonides, though he had before
married her own dear and natural sister Progne: the lamentable effects of
which incest, is by the same author elegantly and at large described: as
likewise Beblis the daughter of Miletus and Cyane, who after she had sought the
embraces of her brother Caumus, slew her self. Mirrha daughter to Cyniras king
of the Cyprians, lay with her father, and by him had the beautiful child
Adonis. Europa the mother, and Pelopeia the daughter, were both corrupted by
Thyestes. Hypermestra inioyed the company of her brother, for whom she had
long languished. Menephron most barbarously frequented the bed of his mother;
against whom Ovid in his Metamorph. and Quintianus in his Cleopol. bitterly
inueigh. Domitius Calderinus puts us in mind of the Concubine of Amintor, who
was inioied by his son Phaenix. Rhodope the daughter of Hemon, was married to
her father, which the gods willing to punish, they were (as the Poets feign)
changed into the mountains which still bear their names. Caeleus reports of
one Policaste, the mother of Perdix a hunts-man, who was by him incestuously
loved, and after inioyed. Lucan in his eight book affirms, that Cleopatra was
polluted by her own brother, with whom she communicated her self as to a
husband. Nictimine was comprest by her father Nictus, king of Aethiopia.
Martial in his twelfe book writing to Fabulla, accuses one Themison of
incest with his sister. Pliny lib. 28. cap. 2. speaks of two of the Vestalls,
Thusia and Copronda, both convicted of incest; the one buried alive, the other
strangled. Publius Claudius was accused by M. Cicero of incest with his three
sisters. Sextus Aurelius writes, that Agrippina the daughter of Germanicus had
two children by her brother Claudius Caesar; Cornelius Tacitus says that she
often communicated her body with her own son Nero, in his cups and heat of
wine: he after commanded her womb to be ripped up, that he might see the place
where he had lien so long before his birth; and most deservedly was it
inflicted upon the brutish mother, though unnaturally imposed by the inhuman
son. A^silaena is worthily reproved by Catullus for yielding up her body to
the wanton embraces of her uncle, by whom she had children Gidica the wife of
Pomonius Laurentinus, doted on her son Cominus even to incest, but by him
refused, she stangled her self. The like did Phedra being despised by her
son Hippolitus. Dosithaeus apud Plutarch speaks of Nugeria the wife of
Hebius, who contemned by her son in law Firmus, prosecuted him with such
violent and inueterate hate, that she first solicited her own sons to his
murder; but they abhorring the vileness of the fact, she watched him sleeping,
and so slew him. John Maletesta deprehending his wife in the arms of his
brother Paulus Maletesta, transpierst them both with his sword in the
incestious action. Cleopatra daughter to Dardanus king of the Scithyans, and
wife to Phinaeus, was forced by her two sons in law: for which fact their
father caused their eyes to be plucked out. Plutarch reports of Atossa, that
she was doted on by Artaxerxes, insomuch that after he had long kept her as
his strumpet, against the laws of Persia and of Greece, to both which he
violently opposed himself, he made her his queen. Curtius writes of one
Sisimithres a Persian soldier, that had two children by his mother. Diogenian
also speaking of Secundus the Philosopher says, that he (unawares to them both)
committed incest with his mother, which after being made known to them, she
astonished with the horror of the fact immediately slew her self, and he, what
with the sorrow for her death and brutishness of the deed, vowed never after
to speak word, which he constantly performed to the last minute of his life.
Manlius in his common places reports from the mouth of D. Martin Luther, A
strange Incest.
that this accident happened in Erphurst in Germany: There was (says he) a
maid of an honest family that was servant to a rich widow, who had a son
that had many times importuned the gyrle to lewdness, insomuch that she had
no other way to avoid his continual suggestions, but by acquainting the
mother with the dissolut courses of the son. The widow considering with
herself which was the best course to chide his libidinous purpose and divert
him from that leaud course, plotted with the maid to give him a seeming
consent, and to appoint him a place and time in the night, of meeting, at which
he should have the fruition of what he so long had sued for: she herself
intending to supply the place of her servant, to school her son, and so
prevent any inconvenience that might futurely happen. The maid did according to
her appointment, the son with great joy keeps his hour, so did the mother,
who came thither on purpose to reform her son; but he being hot and too
forward in the action, and she overcome, either by the inticements of the
devil, the weakness of her Sex, or both, gave herself up to Incestuous
prostitution, the young man knowing no otherwise but that he had inioyed the
maid. Of this wicked and abominable congression, a woman child was begot of
whom the mother (to save her reputation) was secretly delivered, and put it out
privately to nourse, but at the age of seven years took it home. When this
child grew to years, the most unfortunate son fell in love with his sister,
and daughter, and made her his unhappy wife: what shall I think of this
detestable sin, which even beasts themselves abhor? of which I will give you
present instance. Lib. 9. cap. 47. Incest abominable in beasts.
Aristotle in his history Annimal. who was a diligent searcher into all
natural things, affirms that a Cammell being blinded by his keeper, was
brought to horse his damme, but in the action, the cloth falling from his eyes
and he perceiving what he had done, presently seized upon his keeper and slew
him, in detestation of the act he had committed, and to revenge himself upon
him that had betrayed him to the deed. The like the same author reports of a
horse belonging to a king of Scythia, who could by no means be brought to
cover his damme, but being in the same fashion beguiled, and the cloth falling
away, and perceiving what he had done, never left bounding, flinging and
galloping, till coming unto an high rock, he from thence cast himself
headlong into the sea. If then this sin be so hateful in brute beasts and
unreasonable creatures, how much more ought it to be avoided in men and women,
and which is more, Christians?

Cyborea, the mother of Judas Iscariot.
THis that I now speak of is remembered by Ranulphus, Monk of Chester, Jerome,
and others. There was a man in Jerusalem by name Reuben, of the Tribe of
Isachar, his wife was called Cyborea: The first night of their marriage the
woman dreamed that she was conceived of a son who should be a traitor to
the Prince of his own people: she told it to her husband, at which they were
both sad and pensive. The child being borne, and they not willing to have it
slain, and yet loath to have it prove such a monster to his own nation, they
in a small boat cast it to sea to try a desperate fortune, this vessel was
driven upon an Island called Iscariot, where the Queen of that place had then
no child. This babe being found, she purposed to make it her own, and put it
to be nobly nurced and educated, calling his name Judas, and Iscariot of the
Island where he was taken up. But not long after, she was conceived of a
son, who proving a noble and hopeful gentleman, Judas (whose favor in court
began to wane, and his hope of inheritance, which but late flourisht now quite
to wither) he plotted against his life and privately slew him: but fearing
least the murder might in time be discovered, and he compeld to suffer
according to the nature of the fact, he fled thence to Jerusalem, where he got
into the service of Pontius Pilatus, and found means to be protected by him,
being then in the city deputy governor for the Romans. Judas (because their
dispositions were much of one condition) grew into his especial familiarity
and favor. The Palace of Pilot having a fair bay window, whose prospect was
into Reubens Orchard, he had a great appetite to eat of some of those ripe
apples which showed so yellow and fair against the sun. This Judas
understanding, promised him to fetch him some of that fruit, and mounting over
the orchard wall, he was met by his father, who rebuking him for the injury,
Judas with a stone beat out his brains, and unseen of any, conveyed himself
back. Reubens death was smothered, and the murderer not known. Cyborea being
a rich widow, Pylate made a match betwixt her and his servant Judas, who being
married to his mother was now possessed of his own fathers inheritance. Not long
this incestuous couple had lived together, but Cyborea being upon a time
wondrous sad and melancholy, and Judas demanding the cause, she began to relate
to him her many misfortunes; First, of her dream, then of her son in what
manner he was put to sea, then how she lost her husband being slain, and the
murderer not found; and lastly, how by the authority of Pilat she was now
compeld to match against her will, who had protested to her self a lasting
widdowhood. By these circumstances, Judas most assuredly knew that he had
slain his father, and had married his mother; which acknowledging to her, she
persuaded him to repent him of these great evils, and to become a Disciple of
Jesus, who was then an eminent Prophet amongst the Jews. It shall not be
amiss to speak a word or two of Pilate. It is said that a king whose name was
Tyrus begat him on a Millers daughter, Pyla, Pyla.
whose father was called Atus, who from his mother and grandfather was called
Pylatus, at four years of age he was brought to his father, who by his
lawful wife had a prince just of the same age. These were brought up together
in all noble exercises, in which the prince having still the best, Pylat
awaited his opportunity and slew him; loath was the king to punish him with
death least he should leave himself altogether Issulesse, therefore he sent
him an hostage to Rome, for the payment of certain tribute which was yearly to
be tendered into the Roman treasury. Living there as hostage, he assotiated
himself with the son to the king of France, who lay pledge in Rome about the
like occasion, and in a private quarrel was also slain by Pylat. The Romans
finding him of an austere brow and bloody disposition, made him governor of
the Island called Pontus: the people were irregular and barbarous, whom by his
severity he reduced to all civil obedience, for which good service he was
removed to Jerusalem, bearing the name of Pontius from that Island; there he
gave sentence against the Savior of the world. Tiberius Caesar being then
Emperor was sick of a grievous malady, who hearing that in Jerusalem was a
Prophet who with a word healed all infirmities whatsoever, he sent one
Volutianus to Herod, to send him this man; but Christ was before condemned and
crucified. Veronica.
There Volutianus acquainted himself with one Veronica a noble Lady of the
Jews, who went with him to Rome and carried with her the lynnen cloth which
still bore the impresse and likeness of Christ's visage, upon which the
Emperor no sooner looked but he was immediately healed. The Emperor then
understanding the death of this innocent and just man, caused Pylat to be
brought to Rome, who being called before Caesar (the history says) he had at
that time upon him the roabe of our Savior, which was called Tunica Insutilis,
a garment without seame, which whilst it was about him, nothing could be
objected against him to his least damage or disgrace; this was three times
proved, and he still came off vnaccused, but when by the advice of this
Veronica and other Christians, the garment was took off, he was then accused
for causing guiltless men to be slain, for erecting statues of strange
nations in the Temple, against the ordinances of the Jews; that with money
wrested and extorted from the holy treasures, he had made a water-conduit to
his own house; that he kept the Vestiments and sacred roabes of the Priests in
his own house, and would not deliver them for the service of the Temple
without mercenarie hire: of these and other things being convicted, he was sent
to prison, where borrowing a knife to pare an apple he slew himself, his body
after was fastened to a great stone and cast into the river Tiber.

Of Adulteresses.
FRom the Incestuous, I proceed to the Adulteresses. Aulus Gellius in his
first book de Mortibus Atticis cites these words out of Varroes Menippea, Cap.
17.
The errors (says he) and vices of the wife are either to be corrected, or
endured; he that chastises her makes her the more conformable, he that suffers
her, makes himself the better by it: thus interpreting Varroes meaning, That
husbands ought to reprove the vices of their wives, but if they be perverse
and intractable, his patience (though it prevail not with them) yet much
benefits himself: yet are not their insolences any way to be encouraged,
because it is a duty exacted from all men, to have a respect to the honor of
their houses and families: Besides, such as will not be reformed by counsel
are by the Laws to be punished. Caesar sued a divorce from his wife because
she was but suspected of adultery, though no manifest guilt could be proved
against her, Lysias the famous Orator declaimed against his wife in a public
oration, because he was jealous of her spouse-breach. But much is that inhumane
rashness to be avoided, by which men have undertook to be their own
justicers, and have mingled the pollution of their bdes with the blood of the
delinquents, Cato Censorius reckons such in the number of common executioners,
and counts them little better than bloody hangmen; For (says he) impious and
abominable it is for any man to pollute his hands in such unnatural murder,
he may with as much justice violate the ordinances of the commonweal, or
with as great integrity profane the sacreds of the gods. Sufficient it is
that we have laws to punish, the judges to examine and sentence all such
transgressors. Nero the most barbarous of princes after that by kicking and
spurning he had slain his wife Poppaea in his anger, though he was altogether
composed of mischief, yet when he recollected himself and truly considered
the vildnesse of the fact, he not only with great sorrow bewailed her death,
to make what amends he could to the dead body before outraged, but he would
not suffer her coarse to be burned in the Roman fires, but caused a funeral
pile of all sweet and oderiferous woods (fetched from the furthest parts of the
world) to be erected, sending up her smoke as insence offered unto the gods,
and after caused her ashes in a golden vrne to be conserved in the famous
sepulcher of the Julian family: Neither is this discourse aimed to persuade
men to too much remisnes in wincking at, and sleeping out the adulteries of
their wives. A most shameful thing it was in Antonius, the best of the Caesar's
to extol his wife Faustina for the best of women, Faustina the wife of
Claudius.
and most temperate of wives, when it was most palpably known to all men, how
in Caieta she commonly prostituted her self to Players and Minstrells. L.
Sylla that was surnamed Happy, was in this most infortunat, because his easy
nature was persuaded that his wife Metella was the chastest of matrons, when
her known looseness and notorious incontinence was ballated up and down the
city. Disgraceful it was in Philip king of Macedon, who having conquered
diverse nations, and subdued many kingdoms, yet could not govern one wife at
home: who though he had manifest probability of her looseness and riots, yet
suffered with all patience her insufferable insolences, and being violently
thrust out of her bedchamber by her, and her maids, dissembled the injury to
his friends, excusing the wrong and seeming to laugh at the injury. In like
manner Clodius the Emperor excused his wife Messalina, being taken in
adultery: this liberty grew to boldness, and that boldness to such a height
of impudency, that from that time forward she took pride to commit those
luxuries in public, which at first she not without blushes adventured on in
private. It is related of her, that before the faces of her handmaides and
servants, she dissolutely (I might say brutishly) cast her self into the
embraces of one S^lius; not content with secret inchastitie unless she had a
multitude to witness her abominable congression: of whom the most excellent
of the Satyrists thus speaks, Quid priuata domus, quid fecerit Hippia curas
Respice riuales diuorum, Claudius audi
Quae tulerit --
Do thou take care what is done at home,
Or Hippia do thou fear?
Behold the riualls of the gods,
What Claudius, he does bear.


The sacred institution of marriage, was not only for procreation, but that
man should make choice of a woman, and a woman to make election of a husband,
as companions and comforters one of another as well in adversity as
prosperity. Aristotle conferres the cares and businesses that lie abroad, upon
the husband, but the domesticke actions within doors, he assigns to the wife;
for he holds it as inconvenient and uncomely for the wife to busy herself
about any public affairs, as for the man to play the cotqueane at home.

Lib. 4.
Marriage (as Franciscus Patricius says) becomes the civil man, to which
though he be not compelled by necessity, yet it makes the passage of life
more pleasing and delightful, not ordained for the satisfying of lust, but the
propagation of issue. Aelius Verus one of the Roman Emperors, a man given to
all voluptuousness, when his wife complained unto him of his extrauagancies,
as never satisfied with change of mistresses and concubines, he thus answered
her, Suffer me o wife, to exercise my delights upon other women, for the word
Wife is a name of dignity and honor, not of wantonness and pleasure. The
punishment of a woman taken in adultery (as Plutarch in his Quest. Grec.
relates) was amongst the Cumaeans after this manner: The punishment of
Adultery.
She was brought into the marketplace, and set upon a stone in the public
view of all the people; when she had certain hours sat there as a spectacle
of scorn, she was mounted upon an Ass and led through all the streets of
the city, and then brought back again and placed upon the same stone, ever
after reputed notorious and infamous and had the name of Onobatis, i. riding
upon an Ass, and the stone on which she was seated, held as polluted and
abominable. Aelianus in his twelfe book, thus sets down the punishment of an
adulterer amongst the Cretans: He was first brought before the judgment seat,
and being convicted, he was crowned with wool to denote his effeminacie,
fined with an extraordinary mulct, held infamous amongst the people, and made
incapable of office or dignity in the commonweal. Amongst the Parthians, no
sin was more severely punished than adultery. Carondas made a decree. That
no cittisen or matron should be taxed in the commodie unless it were for
Adultery or vain curiosity. Plutarch remembers two young men of Syracusa
that were familiar friends, De reip. Gereui. pr^ceptis.
the one having occasion to travel abroad about his necessary occasions, left
his wife in the charge of his bosom companion whom he most trusted, who broke
his faith and vitiated the woman in his friends absence; he returning and
finding the injury done him, concealed his revenge for a season, till he found
the opportunity to strumpet the others wife, which was the cause of a bloody
and intestine war almost to the ruin of the whole city. The like combustion
was kindled betwixt Pardalus and Tirhenus upon semblant occasion. Lyuie in the
tenth book of his Decades relates that Q. Fabius Gurges son to the Consul,
amerced the matrons of Rome for their adulteries, and extracted from them so
much coin at one time, as builded the famous Temple of Venus near to the
great Circus. So much of the same in general, now I come to a more particular
survey of the persons.

Of many great Ladies branded with Adultery amongst the Romans: and first of
Posthumia.
THis Posthumia was the wife of Seruius Sulpitius, as Lollia the wife of Aulus
Gabinus, Tertullia of Marcus Crassus, Mutia the wife of C. Pompeius, Seruitia
the mother of Marcus Brutus, Iulia the daughter of Seruitia, and the third wife
of Marcus Crassus, Furies Maura the Queen of King Bogades, Cleopatra of Egypt
and after beloved of Marcus Antonius, one of the Triumuirat: all these Queens
and noble Matrons is Julius Caesar said to have adulterated. Liuia the wife of
Augustus Caesar was by him first strumpeted, and being great with child, to
recompense her wrong, he hastened the marriage. This was objected to him in an
oration by Antonius. Tertullia, Drusilla, Saluia Scribonia, Tilisconia: with
all these noble matrons he is said to have commerse. Likewise with a great
Senators wife, whose name is not remembered, Augustus being at a public
banquet in his own palace, An impudent whoredom.
withdrew himself from the table in the public view, and before the cloth
was taken up brought her back again, and seated her in her own place with her
hair ruffled, her cheeks blushing, and her eyes troubled. Messalina.
Messalina the wife of Claudius Tiberius, first privately, then publicly
prostituted her self to many, insomuch that custom grew to that habit, that
such as she affected, and either for modesties sake or fear durst not enter
into her embraces, by some stratagem or other she caused to be murdered (as
Claudian says:) her insatiat desires yet stretched further, making choice of
the most noble virgins and matrons of Rome, whom she either persuaded or
compelled to be companions with her in her adulteries. She frequented common
brothel-houses, trying the abilities of many choice and able young men by
turns, from whence (it is said of her) she returned wearied but not satisfied:
if any man refused her embraces, her revenge stretched not only to him, but
unto all his family. And to crown her libidinous actions, it is proved of her
that in the act of lust she contended with a mercenarie and common strumpet,
which in that kind should have the prioritie, and that the empress in the 25
action became victor. Of her, Pliny, Iuuinall, and Sex. Aurelius speaks more
at large: a strange patience it was in an emperor to suffer this. A country
fellow and his mistress.
I rather commend that penurious fellow, who having married a young wife, and
keeping her short both in liberty and diet, she cast her eyes upon a plain
country fellow, one of her servants, and in short time grew with child: the
old churl mistrusting his own weakness, being as much indebted to his
belly as to his servants for their wages (for his parsimonie made him engaged
to both) and now fearing a further charge would come upon him, he got a warrant
to bring them both before a justice. They being conuented, and he having made
his case known, the gentlewoman being asked upon diverse interogatiues,
modestly excused her self, but not so cleanly but that the complaint sounded
in some sort just, and the case apparent. The country fellow was next called
in question, to whom the justice with an austere countinance thus spoke, Syrra,
syrra, resolve me truly (says he) and it shall be the better for thee, Have
thou got this woman with child yea or no? to whom the plain fellow thus
bluntly answered, Yes sir I think I have: how (quoth the justice) thou impudent
and bawdie knave, show me what reason thou had to get thy mistress with
child: to whom the fellow replied, I have served my master (a very hard man)
so many years and I never got any thing else in his service. How this
business was compounded I know not certainly, only of this I am assured, that
our English women are more curtious of their bodies than bloody of their
minds. Such was not Roman Fabia, Fabia.
who as Plutarch in his Paralells relates, was the wife of Fabius Fabricanus,
and gave her self up to a young gentleman of Rome called Petronius
Valentianus, by whose council she after slew her husband, that they might the
more freely enjoy their luxuries. Salust and Valerius Maximus both report of
Aurelia Oristilla, who suffered her self to be corrupted by Catelyn (against
whom Cicero made many eloquent orations) who the freelier to enjoy her bed,
caused her son to be poisoned. Comparable to Fabia, Thimen.
saving in murder, was Thimen the wife of king Agis, who forsaking the lawful
bed of her husband suffered her self to be vitiated by Alcibiades of Athens.
Neuina.
Martial in his Epigrams writes of one Neuina, who going chaste to the bath
returned thence an adulteress: of her thus speaking, Incidit in Flammam,
veneremque secula relicto
Coniuge: Penelope venit, abatque Helena.


Which is thus Englisht. She fell in fire, and followed lust,
Her husband quite rejected,
She thither came Penelope chaste
Went Hellen thence detected.
Paula, Thelesina, Proculina, Lectoria, Gellia, all these are by some authors
branded for the like inchastities.

An Egyptian Lady.
A young cittisens wife.
I Have heard of a young cittisen, who having married a pretty wanton less (and
as young folk love to be dallying one with another) set her upon his knee, and
sporting with her, and pointing one of his fingers at her face, now my little
rogue (says he) I could put out one of thine eyes: to whom with her two
longest fingers stretched forth right, and aiming at him in the like fashion,
she thus answered: If with one finger thou put out one of mine eyes, with these
two I will put out both yours. This was but wantonness betwixt them, and
appeared better in their action, than in my expression: and though I speak of
a blind King, he lost not his eyes that way. Herodotus relates that after the
death of Sesostris king of Egypt, his son Pherones succeeded in the
kingdom, who not long after his attaining to the principality was deprived of
his sight: The reason whereof some yield to be this, Thinking to pass the
river Nilus, either by inundations, or the force of the winds, the waters were
driven so far back, that they were flowed eighteen cubits above their
woonted compass, at which the king enraged, shot an arrow into the river as if
he would have wounded the channel. Whether the gods took this in contempt, or
the Genius of the river was enraged, is uncertain: but most sure it is, that
not long after he lost all the use of sight, and in that darkness remained
for the space of ten years. After which time (in great melancholy) expired,
he received this comfort from the Oracle, which was then in the city Butis,
That if he washed his eyes in the urine of a woman who had been married a full
twelve month, and in that time had in no ways falsified in her own desires,
nor derogated from the honor of her husband, he should then assuredly receive
his sight. At which news being much rejoiced, and presuming both of certain
and sudden cure, he first sent for his wife and queen, and made proof of her
pure distillation, but all in vain; he sent next for all the great Ladies of
the Court, and one after one washed his eyes in their water, but still they
smarted the more, yet he saw no whit the better; but at length when he was
almost in despair, he happened upon one pure and chaste lady, A strange cure.
by whose virtue his sight was restored and he plainly cured: who after he
had better considered with himself, caused his wife withal those Ladies
(saving she only by whose temperance and chastity he had reobtaind the
benefit of the Sun) to be assembled into one cittie^ pretending there to
feast them honorably for joy of his late recovery. Who were no sooner
assembled at the place called Rubra Gleba, apparrelled in all their best
jewels and chiefest ornaments, but commanding the city gates to be shut
upon them, caused the city to be set on fire, and sacrificed all these
adulteresses as in one funeral pile, reserving only that Lady of whose
loyalty the Oracle had given sufficient testimony, whom he made the partaker
of his bed and kingdom. I wish there were not so many in these times, whose
waters if they were truly cast by the doctors, would not rather by their
pollution put out the eyes quite, than with their cleerenesse and purity
minister to them any help at all.

Laodice.
IVstine in his 37 book of History, speaks of this Laodice, the wife and
^ister to Mithridates king of Pontus: After whose many victories, as having
overthrown the Scythians and put them to flight, those who had before defeated
Zopyron, a great captain of Alexanders army, which consisted of thirty
thousand of his best soldiers, the same that overcame Cyrus in battle with
an army of two hundred thousand, with those that had affronted and beaten king
Philip in many oppositions, being fortunately and with great happiness still
attended, by which he more and more flourisht in power, and increased in
majesty. In this height of fortune, as never having known any disaster,
having bestowed some time in managing the affairs of Pontus, and next such
places as he occupied in Macedonia; he privately then retired himself into
Asia, where he took view of the situation of those defensed cities, and this
without the jealousy or suspicion of any. From thence he removed himself
into Bythinia, proposing in his own imaginations as if he were already Lord
of all. After this long retirement he came into his own kingdom, where by
reason of his absence, it was rumoured and given out for truth that he was
dead. At his arrival he first gave a loving and friendly visitation to his
wife and sister Laodice, who had not long before in that vacancie brought him a
young son. But in this great joy and solemnity made for his welcome, he was
in great danger of poison: An unnatural wife.
for Laodice supposing (it seems) Mithridates to be dead as it before had
been reported (and therefore safe enough) had prostituted her self to diverse
of her servants and subjects: and now fearing the discovery of her adultery,
she thought to shadow a mighty fault with a greater mischief, and therefore
provided this poisoned draught for his welcome: But the king having
intelligence thereof by one of her handmaides who deceived her in her trust,
expiated the treason with the bloods of all the conspirators. I read of
another Laodice the wife of Ariarythres the king of Cappadocia, who having six
hopeful sons by her husband, poisoned five of them, after she had before
given him his last infectious draught; the youngest was miraculously preserved
from the like fate, who after her decease (for the people punished her cruelty
with death) succeeded in the kingdom. It is disputed in the greek
Commentaries, by what reason or remedy affection once so diuelishly settled in
the breast or heart of a woman, may be altered or removed; or by what
confection adulterous appetite, once lodged and kindled in the bosom, may be
extinguished. The Magitians have delivered it to be a thing possible; so
likewise Cadmus Milesius, who amongst other monuments of history writ certain
tractates concerning the abolishing of love (for so it is remembered by Suidas
iu his collections.) And therefore I would inuit all women of corrupted
breasts to the reading of this brief discourse following. A remarkable
example was that of Faustina, Faustina wife to Marcus Philosophus:
a noble and illustrious Lady, who though she were the daughter of Antonius
Pius the Emperor, and wife to Marcus Philosophus, notwithstanding her fathers
majesty, and her husbands honor, was so besotted upon a Gladiator or common
fencer, that her affection was almost grown to frenzy: for which strange
disease, as strange a remedy was devised. The Emperor perceiving this
distraction still to grow more and more upon his daughter, consulted with the
Chaldaeans and Mathematicians in so desperate a case what was best to be done:
after long consideration it was concluded amongst them, that there was but
only one way left open to her recovery, and that was, to cause the fencer to
be slain; which done, to give her a full cup of his lukewarm blood, which
having drunk off, to go instantly to bed to her husband. This was
accordingly done, and she cured of her contagious disease. That night was (as
they said) begot Antoninus Commodus, The birth of Commodus.
who after succeeded in the Empire, who in his government did so afflict the
Commonweal and trouble the Theater with fensing and prises, and many other
bloody butcheries, that he much better deserved the name of Gladiator than
Emperor. This that I have related Julius Capitolinus writes to Caesar
Dioclesianus. Were all our dissolute matrons to be cured by the like Physic,
there would (no question) be amongst men less offenders, and among women fewer
patients that complained of sick stomachs.

Phaedima.
CAmbises having before unnaturally slain his brother Smerdis, by the hands of
his best trusted friend Praxaspes: but after the death of the king (for the
horridnes of the fact) the Regicide not daring to avouch the deed to the
people, least it might prejudice his own safety: One Smerdis a Magician
(whose ears Cambises had before caused to be cut off) took this advantage to
aspire to the kingdom: A notable Imposter.
and being somewhat like in favor to the murdered Prince, (who was by the
soldiers generally believed to live) it purchased him so many abettors (such
as were deluded with his impostures) that he was generally saluted and crowned
Emperor. This was done whilst the greatest part of the Nobility were absent,
and none since, admitted into the palace, much less into the presence, least
the Magitian might be vnviserded, and the deceit made palpable. The greater
fears and doubts still inuironing the Princes, because Praxaspes not daring to
justify the murder, kept it still locked in his own breast. The Magitian in
this interim was not only possessed of all the Kings Palaces and Treasures, but
he inioyed all his wives and concubines; amongst which was a beautiful Lady
called Phaedima, the daughter of Otanes, a man of great power amongst the
Persians. Phaedima.
This Lady first (of all the rest) most indeered to Cambyses, and now since to
the counterfeit Smerdis, Otanes apprehends to be the first instrument, by
which to discover the truth: He therefore by a secret messenger sends to his
daughter, to know by whom she nightly lay, whether with Smerdis the son of
Cyrus, or with some other: to whom she answered that it was altogether unknown
to her who was her bedfellow, because she yet had neither seen Smerdis the
son of Cyrus, nor that man (whatsoever he was) into whose embraces she was
commanded. He then sent her word, that if she her self could not come to the
sight of him, to demand of Atossa the daughter of Cyrus, and brother to
Smerdis; who doubtless could decipher him in every true lineament. To which
the daughter returns him, That she was separated both from the society and
sight of Atossa, for this man whatsoever he is, as soon as he had possessed
himself of the Empire, commanded all the women into several lodgings, neither
could they have any discourse or intercourse at all together. This answer made
Otanes the more and more suspicious, and desirous with any danger to find out
the truth, he adventured a third message to Phaedima to this purpose: It
behooues you (o daughter) being descended from noble ancestors, to undergo
any hazard, especially at the request of your father, when it aims at the
general good of the commonweal and kingdom; if that imposter be not
Smerdis the brother of Cambises (as I much fear) it becoms him neither to
prostitute and defile your body, nor to mock and abuse the whole estate of
Persia unpunished: therefore I charge you as you tender my love, your own
honor, and the Empires weal, that the next night when you are called unto his
bed, you watch the time when he is soundliest asleep, and then with your
fingers gently feel both the sides of his head; if thou perceiuest him to have
both his ears, presume then thou lodgest by the side of Smerdis the son of
Cyrus, but if on the contrary thou find his ears wanting, then thou lie
in the bosom of Smerdis that base Magitian. To this she replied by letter,
Though I truly apprehend the danger, should I be taken seeking of such things
as he perhaps knows wanting (which can be no less than death) yet for your
love and the common good, I will undergo the peril: and with this brief
answer gave satisfaction to her father. But greater content he received from
her, when having discovered and laid open whatsoever her father suspected, she
sent him a faithful relation of every circumstance. Deceit discovered.
These things discovered by Phaedima, Otanes makes a coniuration amongst the
Princes, all vowing the supplantation of this usurper: who in the interim, the
more to confirm the people in their error, he sent to Praxaspes, promising
him honors and treasures, but to pronounce him once more before the people to
be the true and legitimate heir. This charge Praxaspes undertakes, the
multitude from all parts of the city were by the Magi assembled, and he
mounted unto the top of an high Turret the better to be heard, silence being
made and attention prepared, Praxaspes begins his oration, in which he
remembers all the noble acts of Cyrus, with the dignity of his blood and
progeny: and passing over Cambises to come to speak of his brother Smerdis
(contrary to the expectation of the Magitian) with tears began to commemorate
the death of the Prince, murdered and made away by his unfortunate hand. Then
told them whom in his stead they had voyced into the Sacred Empire; namely a
groom and one of low and base descent, one that for cousenages and forgeries
had lost his ears, a Magitian, a Coniurer, one that had long deluded them with
his devilish sorceries, a slave not worthy at all to live, much less to reign
and govern so noble a people: and as a further confirmation, that dying men
speak true, these words were no sooner ended, but he casts himself off from
the top of the Turret, and slew himself. After this, the Palace was
assaulted by the Princess, the imposter slain, and all his adherents put to
massacre: Of the sequel of the history, the succession of Darius, etc. you may
further read in Herodotus. But concerning Phaedima, only for whose sake I
have introduced the rest, I know not whether I have indirectly brought her into
this catalogue, because she was so noble a means of so notable a discovery:
yet considering she was one of the wives of Cambises, and he being dead, so
suddenly changing her affection to another; and after being inioyed by him (of
what condition soever) to betray him; all these circumstances considered, I
give her free liberty to be ranked amongst the rest.

Begum, Queen of Persia.
ABdilcherai, a brave and valiant Prince of Tartaria, taken prisoner by
Emirhamze Mirize eldest son to the king of Persia, in a battle betwixt the
Persians and Tartarians, was sent to the king into Casbia; where his captivity
in regard of his birth and valor was so easy, that he rather seemed a
denison than a forreiner, a Prince of the blood than a captive: he not long
soiourned there, Adultery.
but he insinuated himself into the love of the Queen Begum wife to the then
king of Persia, who spent their time together in such public daliance (not
able to contain themselves within the bounds of any lawful modesty) that
their familiarity grew almost into a byword, as far as his just taxation,
the Queens dishonor, and the kings scorn; insomuch that both court and
city made them not only their argument of discourse but theme of table
talk. Yet in all this banding of their disreputation, and the kings infamy,
nothing ever came within the compass of his ear knowledge or suspicion:
insomuch that seeing him to be so well a featured gentleman, knowing the Tartar
to be so brave a soldier, and approouing him to be so complete a courtier;
and withal acknowledging from what high lignage he was descended (as boasting
himself to be the brother of the great Tartar Chan: The king of Persia
therefore determined to marry him to his daughter, hoping by that means to
unite such a league, and confirm such an animitie betwixt the Tartarian
Precopenses and himself, that they might not only deny all aid and
assistance to Amurath the third of that name, and then the sixth Emperor of the
Turks; but also, if need were, or should any future discontent arise, oppose
him in hostility. But this politic purpose of the kings arriving almost at
the wished period, seemed so distasteful to the Sultans of Casbia, that they
first attempted by arguments and reasons to divert the king from this intended
match: but finding themselves no ways likely to prevail, to make the king
see with what errors he was maskt, and with what sorceries deluded, They
diligently awayted when in the absence of the king, the Tartar and the queen
Begum kept their accustomed appointment; of which the Sultans having notice,
they entered that part of the Palace, brake open the doors, and rushed into
the Queens bedchamber, where finding Abdilcherai in suspicious conference
with the Queen, they slew him with their Sables, and after cutting off his
privy parts, most barbarously thrust them into his mouth, and after (as some
report) slew the queen. Though this history show great remisnes in the king,
most sure I am it was too presumptiue an insolence in the subject.

To this Persian queen, The wife of Otho the 3.
I will join the wife of Otho the third Emperor of that name. This lustful
lady (as Polycronicon makes mention) was of somewhat a contrary disposition
with the former: For neglecting the pride and gallantrie of the court, she cast
her eyes upon an homely husbandman; better supplied, it seems, with the
lineaments of nature than the ornaments of art, but with an honesty of mind
exceeding both: for when this libidinous lady could by no tempting allurements
abroad, nor fitting opportunity sorted in private insinuate with him, either
to violate his allegiance to his prince, or corrupt his own virtue; her former
affection turned unto such rage and malice, that she caused him to be accused
of a capital crime, convicted, and executed. But the plain honest man knowing
her spleen and his own innocence, he called his wife to him at the instant
when his head was to be cut off: and besought her as she ever tendered his
former love (which toward her he had kept inuiolate) to meditate upon some
course or other by which his guiltless and vnmerited death might be made
manifest to the world: which she with much sorrow and many tears having
promised, he gently submitted to his fate, and his body was delivered to the
charge of his widow. Within few days after, the Emperor kept a day solemn,
in which his custom was, being mounted upon his royal Throne, to examine the
causes of the fatherless and widows, and to search wherein they were
oppressed, and by whom, and in person to do them justice. Among the rest came
this injured widow and brings her husbands head in her hand, humbly kneeling
before the Emperors throne, demanding of him, What that inhumane wretch
deserved, who had caused an innocent man to be put to death? to whom the
Emperor replied, Produce that man before the judgment seat, and as I am
royal he shall assuredly loose his head. To whom she answered, Thou art that
man (o Emperor) for by thy power and authority this murder was committed; and
for an infallible testimony that this poor husband of mine perished in his
innocence, command red hot yrons to be brought into this place, over which if
I pass barefooted and without any damage, presume he was then as much injured
in his death, as I am now made miserable in his loss. The yrons being brought,
and her own innocence, together with her husbands being made both apparent,
the Emperor before all his nobility submitted himself to her own sentence.
But at the intercession of the Bishop, the woman limited him certain days in
which he might find out the murder, he first demanded ten days, after eight,
then seven, and last six, in which time by inquiry and curious examinations, he
found his wife to be the sole delinquent: Noble Justice.
for which she was brought to the bar, sentenced, and after burned. This
done, Otho to recompense the woman for the loss of her husband, gave her four
Castles and Towns in the Bishopric of Beynensis, which still bear name
according to the limit of those days: First the Tenth, second the Eight, third
the Seventh, fourth the Sixth.

Olimpias.
OThas of Persia, having defeated Nectenabus king of Egypt and expelled him
from his kingdom; he the better to secure himself from the Sophyes tyranny,
shaued his head and disguising himself, with all such jewels as he could
conveniently carry about him, conveyed himself into Macedonia: the authors of
this history are Vincentius and Treuisa. There (as they say) he lived as a
Chaldaean or Cabalist, where by his Negromancie and art Magic, he wrought
himself so deeply into the breast of Olimpias, that taking the opportunity
whilst Philip was abroad in his foreign expeditions, The birth of Alexander.
he lay with her in the shape of Jupiter Hammon, and begot Alexander the
Great. After the Queens conception, many fowls used to fly about Philip when
he was busied in his wars; amongst others, there was a Hen that as he sat
in his tent, flew up into his lap and there laid an egg, which done she
cackling flew away: The king rising up hastily, cast it upon the ground and
brake it, when suddenly a young Dragon was seen to leap out of the shell, and
creeping round about it and making offer to enter therein again, died ere it
had quite compassed it. The king at this prodigy being startled, called all
his Astrologers together, dem^unding of one Antiphon the noblest artist amongst
them, What the omen might be of that wonder? who answered him, That his wife
Olimpias was great with a son, whose conquests should fill the world with
astonishment, aiming to compass the whole universe, but should dye before he
could reduce it into one entire Monarchy; the Dragon being the emblem of a
royal conqueror, and the round ouall circumference, the symboll of the world.
With this answer Phillip was satisfied. When the time came of Olimpias her
travel, there were earthquakes, lightnings, and thunders, as if the last
dissolution had been then present, when were seen ^wo Eagles pearched upon
the top of the Palace, presaging the two great Empires of Europe and Asia.
Young Alexander being grown toward manhood, it happened that walking abroad
with Nectenabus, in the presence of his father Philip, the young prince
requested the Astrologian to instruct him in his art. To whom Nectenabus
answered, that with all willingness he would; and coming near a deep pit,
Alexander thrust the Magitian headlong into that descent, by which sudden fall
he was wounded to death: yet Nectenabus calling to the prince, demanded for
what cause he had done him such outrage? Who answered, I did it by reason of
thy art, for ignoble it were in a prince to study those vain sciences, by
which men will undertake to predict other men's fates, when they have not the
skill to prevent their own. To whom Nectenabus answered, Yes Alexander I
calculated mine own destiny, by which I knew I should be slain by mine own
natural son. To whom the prince in derision thus speak, Base Negromancer, how
can thou be my father, seeing that to the mighty king Philip here present,
I owe all filial duty and obedience? to whom Nectenabus rehearsed all the
circumstances (before related) from the beginning, and as he concluded his
speech so ended his life. How the husband upon this information behaved
himself toward his wife, or the son to his mother, I am not certain, this
I presume, it was a kind of needful policy in both, the one to conceal his
Cuckoldrie, the other his Bastardie: so much of Olimpias concerning the birth
of her son Alexander. I will proceed a little further to speak of her
remarkable death, being as maiestically glorious as the process of her life
was in many passages thereof worthily infamous. Lib. 14.
Iustine in his history relates thus, Olimpias the wife of Philip and mother
of Alexan^^r the Great, coming from Epirus unto Macedonia, was followed by
Aeacida^ king of the Molossians, but finding herself to be prohibited that
country, By Euridice and king Ari^^aeus.
whether annimated by the memory of her husband, encouraged with the
greatness of her son, or moved with the nature of the affront and injury,
as she received it, I am not certain, but she assembled unto her all the
forces of Macedonia, by whose power and her command, they were both slain.
About seven years after Alexander was possessed of the Kingdom: neither did
Olimpias reign long after, for when the murders of many princes had been by
her committed, rather after an effeminate than regal manner, it converted the
favor of the multitude into an unreconcilable hatred, which fearing, and
withal having intelligence of the approach of Cassander (now altogether
distrusting the fidelity of her own countriemen) she with her sons wife
Roxana, and her nephew young Hercules, retired into a city called Picthium,
or Pictua; in this almost forsaken society were Deidamia daughter to king
Aeacidas, Thessalonice, her own daughter in law, famous in her father king
Philips memory, with diverse other princely Matrons, a small train attending
upon them rather for show and state, than either use or profit. These things
being in order related to Cassander, he with all speed possible hastens
toward the city Pictua, and inuests himself before it, compassing the place
with an invincible siege. Olimpias being now oppressed both with sword and
famine, besides all the inconueniencies depending upon a long and tedious
war, treated upon conditions, in which her safe conduct, with her trains,
being comprehended, she was willing to submit her self into the hands of the
conqueror: at whose mercy, whilst her wavering fortunes yet stood, Cassander
conuents the whole multitude, and in a public oration desires to be counseled
by them how to dispose of the queen; having before subborned the parents of
such whose children she had caused to be murdered, who in sad and funeral
habits, should accuse the cruelty and inhumanitie of Olimpias. Their tears
made such a passionate impression in the breasts of the Macedonians, that with
loud acclamations they doomed her to present slaughter, most unnaturally
forgetting that both by Philip her husband, and Alexander her son, their
lives and fortunes were not only safe amongst their neighbor nations, but
they were also possessed of foreign Empire and riches from provinces till
their times scarce heard of, but altogether unknown. Now the queen perceiving
armed men make toward her and approach her to the same purpose, both with
resolution and obstinacy, she, attired in a princely and maiesticke habit,
and leaning in state upon the shoulders of two of her most beautiful
handmaides, gave them a willing and undaunted meeting: which the soldiers
seeing and calling to mind her former state, beholding her present majesty,
and not forgetting her royal offspring illustrated with the names of so many
successiue kings, they stood still amassed, without offering her any further
violence: till others sent thither by the command of Cassander, through pierced
her with their weapons, which she incountered with such constancy, that she
neither offered to euade their swords, avoid their wounds, or express the
least fear by any effeminat clamor, but after the manner of the most bold and
valiant men, submitted her self to death, The death of Olimpias.
in her last expiration expressing the invincible spirit of her son Alexander;
in which she likewise showed a singular modesty, for with her disheueled hair
she shaddowed her face least in the struggling betwixt life and death it might
appear unseemly; and with her garments covered her legs and feete^ least
any thing about her might be found uncomely. After this, Cassander took to
wife Thessalonice the daughter to king Aridaeus, causing the son of Alexander
with his mother Roxane, to be kept prisoners in a Tower called Amphipolitana.

Romilda.
ABout the time that the Hunnes came first into Italy and expelled the
Longobards, they laid siege to the city Anguilaea, and in a hot assault
having slain the duke Gysulphus, his wife (the duchess Romilda) making the
Town defensible, bravely and resolutely maintained it against the enemy. But
as Cacana king of the Anes approached near unto the walls, encouraging his
soldiers to hang up their scaling ladders and enter; Romilda at the same time
looking from a Citadel, cast her eye upon the king, who as he seemed unto her,
with wondrous dexterity behaved himself, and with an extraordinary grace
became his arms. This liking grew into an ardencie of love, for she that at
first but allowed of his presence, now was affected to his person: in so much
that in the most fierce assaults, though within the danger of their crosse-bows
and slings, she thought her self secure, so she had the king her object. This
fire was already kindled in her breast, which nothing could qualify, in so
much that impatient of all delay, she sent unto her public enemy private
messengers, That if it pleased the king (being as she understood a batchilor)
to accept her as his bride, she would without further opposition surrender up
the town peaceably into his hands: these conditions are first debated, next
concluded, and lastly confirmed by oath on both sides. The town is yielded up,
and Cacana according to his promise takes Romilda to wife, but first he makes
spoil of the town, kills many, and leads the rest captive. The first night
he bedded with his new reconciled bride, but in the morning abandoned her
utterly, commanding twelve Hunnes, and those of the basest of his soldiers,
one after another to prostitute her by turns: that done, he caused a sharp
stake to be placed in the middle of the field, A miserable death.
and pitched her naked body upon the top thereof, which entering through the
same made a miserable end of her life, at which sight the tyrant laughing said,
Such a husband best becomes so merciless an harlot. This was the bloody and
miserable end (as Polycronicon says) of Romilda. But better it happened to her
two beautiful and chaste daughters, who fearing the outrage of the lustful and
intemperat soldiers took putrified flesh of chickens and colts, A rare
example of chastity.
and hid it raw betwixt their breasts: the soldiers approaching them, took
them to be diseased, as not able to come near them by reason of the smell; by
which means they preserved their honors for the present, and they for their
virtues sake were after bestowed upon gentlemen of noble quality. The same
Author puts me in mind of another Adulteress, who to her guilt of inchastitie
added the bloody sin of murder. Our modern Chroniclers remember us of one
Ethelburga, Ethelburga.
daughter to king Offa, and wife to Brithricus king of the West Saxons, who
aiming at nothing so much as her own libidinous delights, that she might the
more freely and securely enjoy them, by many sundry treasons conspired the
death of her husband: but having made many attempts, and not prevailing in any,
the devil (to whom she was a constant votaresse) so far prevailed with her,
that she never gave over her damnable purpose till she had not only dispatched
him of life by poison, but was the death also of a noble young gentleman the
chief favorite of the king, and one whom in all his disseignes he most
trusted. These mischiefs done, and fearing to be questioned about them,
because she had incurd a general suspicion, she packt up her choicest jewels,
and with a trusty squire of hers, one that had been an agent in all her
former brothelries, fled into France, where by her counterfeit tears and
womanish dissimulations, she so far insinuated into the kings breast, that
the wrinckles of all suggestions were cleared, and she freely admitted into
the kings court, and by degrees into his especial favor: so rich were her
jewels, so gorgeous her attire, so tempting her beauty being now in her
prime, and withal so cunning and deceitful her behavior; that all these
agreeing together, not only bated the hearts of the courtiers, but attracting
the eyes of the great Majesty it self, in so much, that the king sporting
with her in a great Bay window, the prince his son then standing by him, he
merrily demanded of her, If she were instantly to make election of a husband,
whether she would choose him or his son? to whom she rashly answered, That of
the two she would make choice of his son. The king at this somewhat moved and
observing in her a lightness of behavior, which his blind affection would not
suffer him before to look into, thus replied, Had thou made election of
me, I had possessed thee of my son; but in choosing him, thou shall enjoy
neither. So turning from her, commanded her to be stripped out of her jewels
and gay ornaments, and presently to be shriuen and sent to a monastery: where
she had not long been cloystred, but to her own infamy, and the disgrace of
the religious house, she was deprehended in the dissolute embraces of a wanton
and leaude fellow, for which she was turned out of the cloister and after died
in great poverty and misery. In memory of whom there was a law established
amongst the West Saxons, which disabled all the kings wives after her, either
to be dignified with the name of queen, or upon any occasion to fit with him
in his regal throne: yet this woman, though she died poorly, yet died (as it
is said) penitently, therefore me thinks I hear her leave this or the like
memory behind her.

An Epitaph upon Ethelburga Queen of the West Saxons.
I was, I am not; smild, that since did weep;
Labored, that rest; I wak't, that now must sleep:
I playde, I play not; sung, that now am still;
Saw, that am blind; I would, that have no will.
I fed that, which feeds worms; I stood, I fell:
I ^ad God save you, that now bid farewell.
I felt, I feel not; followed, was pursude:
I war'd, have peace; I conquered, am subdude.
I moved, want motion; I was stiff, that bow
Below the earth; then something, nothing now.
I caught, am caught; I trauel'd, here I lie;
Lived in the world; that to the world now dye.
This melancholy it is not amiss to season with a little mirth. A merry
accident.
In some other country it was, for I presume ours affoards none such, but a
common housewife there was, who making no conscience of spouse-breach or to
vitiate her lawful sheets, had interteined into her society a swaggering
companion, such a one as amongst us we commonly call a Roaring boy. This lad of
metal, who sildome went with fewer weapons about him than were able to set up
again a trade-falne cutler, had (to maintain his mistresses expenses and his
own riots) committed a robbery, and likewise done a murder, and being
apprehended for the fact, judged, condemned, and (according to the law in that
case provided) hanged in chains: the gybbet was set near to the common
hie-way, and some mile distant from the city where this sweet gentlewoman
with her husband then inhabited, who because in regard of the common fame that
went upon them, she durst neither give her Love visitation in prison, be at
his arraignement, or public execution, her purpose was (as affection that
breeds madness, may easily beget boldness) unknown to her husband or any
other neighbor, to walk in the melancholy evening and to take her last leave
of him at the gallows. Imagine the night came on and she on her journey. It
happened at the same time a traveler being a footeman whose iourny was
intended toward the town, as purposing to lodge there that night^ but being
alone, and darkness ouertaking him, he grew doubtful of the way and
fearful of robbing, therefore he retired himself out of the road and lay
close under the gybbet^ still listening if any passenger went by to direct him
in the way, or secure him by his company: as he was in this deep meditation,
the woman arriues at the place, and not able to contain her passion breaks out
into this ecstasy, And must I needs then go home again without thee? at
which words the trauellor starting up in have, No by no means (quoth he) I
shall be glad of your company; and with what speed he can makes toward her:
away runs the woman, thinking her sweet heart had leapt down from the gibbet
and followed her, after speedes the man as loath to be destitute of company,
still crying, Stay for me, Stay for me: but the faster he called, the faster
she ran, fear added to both their have, down they tumbled often, but as
quickly they were up again, still she fled, still he pursued. But contrary
was the issue of their fears, for she never looked back till she came to her
own house, where finding the doors open and her husband set at supper, for
have tumbled him and his stool down one way, and the table and meat another:
he rising with much ado, asked what the pox she ayled, and if she brought the
devil in with her at her tail? long it was ere she could make him any answer
or come to her right senses: how she excused it I knew not, the traveler when
he found himself near the city, and saw light, slackned his pace, and went
quietly to his Inn, whether they ever met after to reconcile their mistake or
no I know not, neither is it much pertinent to inquire.

A Modern History of an Adulteress.
Aeli^n. lib. 7.
THe king of Scythia observing a man to go still naked (whereas the coldness
of the clime enforces them to inquire after sables, furs, and the warmest
garments can be found) in a violent and continued snow, meeting him, demanded
of him whether he were not cold? Of whom the fellow asked another question,
Whether his forehead were cold or not? The king answered it was not: neither
can I be cold (o king replide he) where custom has made me all forehead: this
may aptly allude to many as well in these our days as the former, in whom
sin has begot such a habit, that where it once possesses it self, it
compells all the other powers and affections of the body and mind to become
ministers and vassailes: for sin wheresoever it does usurp, does tyrannise,
and as we see the dyer when he would stain white cloth and put it into
another hew does it with a small mixture, being nothing comparable either in
weight or quantity to the stuff he would have changed; so be the mind never
so chaste, or the body of never so white and unblemished a purity: yet if the
devil once come to put in his ingredients, with great facility and easiness
he will change the whole piece into his own color and complexion, and of this
we have both daily and lamentable experience: and therefore custom is called a
second nature: for alas how easily we see boldness grow to impudence, and
satietie into surfeit. This puts me in mind of seven short questions asked of
the seven wise men of Greece, and by them as briefly answered: What Is the
best thing in man? The mind that is pure. Bia^ Prianaeus.

What Is worst? A man within himself unsure. Piltacua Mitilaenus.

Who Is rich? He that naught couets. What Is he poor? Cleobulus Liudius.

The covetous man that starues amids his store. Periander

Woman's chief beauty what? Chaste life is such. Corinthius.

Who Is chaste? She only whom no fame dares tuch. Solo^ Athenien.

Who Is wise? The man that can, but acts no ill. Chilon Lacedemon.

The fool? That cannot, but intends it still. Thales Milesius.

They that can contain themselves within these few prescriptions, may
undoubtedly store up a good name to themselves, and honor to their posterity:
But what the neglect of these may grow unto, I will in some sort illustrate
unto you in a modern History lately happening, A true discourse.
and in mine own knowledge. An ancient gentleman, as well grown in
reputation, as years, and in those parts where he lived having purchased to
himself a general respect for both, married a beautiful young gentlewoman of
good parts and parentage: But having no issue by her, he selected unto his
acquaintance a noble young gentleman, one that had traveled France, Italy,
Spain, and had been at the Sepulcher: making that happy use of his travel,
that he was able to discourse properly and without affectation either of the
situation of cities, or the conditions and customs of people; and in one
word to give him his own deserved character, there was nothing in him wanting
that might become a perfect and a complete gentleman. This young man's father
was a great friend and familiar neighbor to this old man before spoken of, who
had observed his modesty and courteous behauior even from his infancy, and
therefore was the more affected to his discourse and company: his affection
grew so far that he purposed to make him a piece of his heir. Whilst they
continued in this familiarity (and the young man still frequented the house)
there grew great acquaintance betwixt him and the gentlewoman: No marvel, for
they had bin play-fellowes and school fellows, and by reason of their paritie
in years, used though an honest, yet a kind of suspected familiarity;
insomuch that it grew to a calumny, till passing from one man to another, it
arrived at length to the ears of the young man's father, who sorted opportunity
to talk with his son, demanding of him how that fire was kindled from
whence this smoke grew: who, notwithstanding many protestations of his own
innocence, in which he derogated nothing from truth, was charged by his father
(to avoid all rumor and aspertion) to forbear the occasion and absent himself
from the house, and this he imposed him upon his blessing. To this the young
man with great modesty assented; as unwilling to contradict his fathers
counsel as to increase that injurious suspicion concerning the gentlewomans
honor, which was undeservedly called in question. It is to be understood, that
many friendly and modest courtesies had past betwixt this young couple, in so
much that having all liberty granted both of society and discourse, he pressed
her upon a time so far, to know if it should please God to call away her
husband (being very old and by the course of nature not likely to live long)
how she purposed to dispose of her self. To whom she protested, that though
she wished her aged husband all long life and happiness, yet if it pleased the
higher powers to lay the cross of widdowhood upon her, she would if so he
pleased, confer upon him her youth, her fortunes, and whatsoever she was
endowed with, before any other man living, if it pleased him to accept of them,
and this she bound with an oath: This the gentleman (betwixt honoring and
loving her) could not choose but take wondrous kindly at her hands, and vowed to
her the like. The conditions on both sides were accepted, only as she had
bound her self by one oath, she imposed upon him another, namely, that till
that time of her widdowhood, he should neither associate him privately,
converse nor contract matrimony with any woman whatsoever. These things thus
accorded betwixt them, yet the fathers coniurations so far persuaded with the
sons obedience, that notwithstanding many urgent and important messages from
the good old man the husband (who wondered what distaste might breed his sudden
discontinuance, as suspecting nothing from either) he still excused his absence
and forbore the house. It happened that some month after riding to a market
town not far off equally distant betwixt his own fathers house and the old
gentleman's, to give a meeting to some gentlemen of the country, by chance he
happened upon a chambermaide that belonged to his betrothed mistress, whom he
well knew; he saluted her and she him, and after some complement past betwixt
them, he asking how every body did at home, and she on the other side wondering
at his strangenes, telling him how long he had been expected, and how much
desired of all the house: these things over, he entreated her to drink a cup
of wine, which the maid willingly accepted. They being alone and falling into
discourse of many old passages well known to them both, the young man began to
speak how much he respected her mistress, and how dearly tendered her
honor: she on the other side began a clean contrary discourse, as that for
his own part she knew him to be a noble gentleman and well parted, one whom her
old master affected above all men; proceeding, that she was not altogether
ignorant what familiarities had past betwixt him and her mistress, who only
bore him fair outwardly and in show, when another inioyed both her heart and
body inwarldly and in act, and that upon her own knowledge; and to confirm
her accusation, nominated the man (who was his nearest and most familiar
friend.) At this report the gentleman was startled, but better considering with
himself, told her he thankt her for her love, but could by no means believe
her relation; first by reason he knew her ladies breeding, and was confirmed in
her known modesty and virtue, as having himself made trial of both to the
uttermost, having time, place, and opportunity, all things that might beget
temptation. Lastly, for his friend, in all their continual and daily
conversation he never perceived either familiar discourse, wanton behavior, or
so much as the least glance of eye to pass suspitiously betwixt them. To which
she answered, it was so much the more cunningly carried; for her own part she
had but done the office of a friend, and so left him, but in a thousand strange
cogitations: yet love persuading above jealousy, he began again to itterate
and call to mind, with what an outward integrity she had still borne her
self toward him, and with a purity by no woman's art to be dissembled. Next
he bethought himself, that perhaps the maid might be fallen in love with him,
and by this calumny might seek to divert him from the affection of her
mis^^esse; or else she had taken some private displeasure against her, and by
this means thought to revenge her self. In the midst of these
apprehensions, or rather distractions came another letter from the husband,
complaining of his absence, wondering at the cause, and vrgently desiring his
company, though never so private, where he would reconcile himself touching
any unkindness that might be conceived, and withal resolve him what he
should trust to concerning some part of his lands. The gentleman still
remembering his fathers charge, yet thought a little to dispense with it, and
writ back word (knowing every part of the house by reason of his long
frequenting it) That if he pleased to leave his garden door open at such a
time of the night, he would accept of such provision as he found, and be
merry with him for an hour or two, and give good reason for his unwilling
discontinuance; but thus provided, that neither wife, friend, nor servant
(saving that one whom he trusted with his message) might be acquainted with
his coming in or going out. This was concluded, the time of night appointed,
and every thing accordingly provided: They met, the old man gave him kind and
freely entertainment, seeming ouerioyed with his company, and demanding the
reason of his so great strangeness; He answered, that notwithstanding his
own innocence, and his wives approved Temperance, yet bad tongues had been
busy to their reproach, measuring them by their own corrupt intents, and
therefore to avoid all imputation whatsoever, his study was by taking away the
cause to prevent the effect: his reason was approved, and the old man
satisfied concerning both their integrities. Time calls the old man to his
bed, and the young gentleman is left to his rest, purposing to be gone early
in the morning before any of the household should be awake and stirring. Being
now alone and not able to sleep in regard of a thousand distracted fancies
that were pondering in his mind and brain: he arose from his bed, and
walking up and down the chamber, after some meditation, as of her beauty, her
vows, her protestation, her oaths, all pleading together in the behalf of
her innocence so far prevailed with him, That considering he was now in the
same house, and that by reason of the old man's age they very often lay asunder,
that he was acquainted with every stayrecase, and knew the ready way to her
chamber; Love conquering all suspicion, he purposed once more to visit the
place where he had (but ever honestly) sat with her at all hours, and where
their intended marriage was by their interchange of oaths at first confirmed.
With this purpose stealing softly up the stayres, and listening at the door
before he would presume to knock, he might hear a soft whispering, which
sometimes growing louder, he might plainly distinguish two voices (hers, and
that gentleman's his supposed friend, whom the maid had before nominated) where
he might evidently understand more than protestations pass betwixt them,
namely the mechall sin it self. At this being beyond thought ex^aside,
scarce knowing how to contain himself for the present, he remembered him of
his sword in his chamber, whether he went instanly with intent to return, and
breaking open the door to transpierce them both in the adulterate act: but
better judgment guiding him, considering what murder was, and the baseness to
become a personal executioner, withal remembering her beauty, their often
meetings, kisses, and embraces; his heart became too tender to destroy that
goodly frame, in which nature had showed her best of a^t, though the devil his
worst of envy. Therefore he instantly made himself ready, left the place, and
without the knowledge of any man or discovering to any what had past, returned
to his fathers: where pondering at full with himself, the nature of his abuse
(being beyond example) the strictness of his oath, being not only debarred
from marriage, but as it were banished from the society of women; that she
only reserved him as a stale or shadow, whilst another carried away the
substance; that she kept her self to be his wife, and another whore; and
that from all these no safe evasion could be devised to come off toward her
like a gentleman, or toward God like a Christian; all these injuries jointly
considered, drove him into a sudden melancholy, that melancholy into a
doubtful sickness, and that sickness into a dangerous distraction, in so
much that his life was much feared, and he with great difficulty recovered:
but by the help of good Physicians being cured, and the counsel of his best
friends comforted; he at length gathered strength, and prepared himself for a
second travel, with purpose never more to reuisite his country where such an
unnatural monster was bred. But before his departure, the old man hearing what
he intended, sent for him to his house to take of him an unwilling leave: at
the importunity of his own father he was forced to accompany him thither,
where he must of necessity take another view of his betrothed mistress and
his treacherous friend. Dinner being past with his much impatience, it was
generally imputed to his loath to depart; when his sadness was merely
grounded upon her impudence. Parting growing on, she singles him for a
farewell, weeping in his bosom, wringing him by the hand, beseeching him to
have a care of his safety, but especially of his vow and promise; all which
proceeded from such a counterfeit passion, as he almost began to question,
what in his own notion he knew to be infallible. But in stead of reply he
delivered her a letter, which he entreated her to vouchsafe to peruse in his
absence, in which his mind was fully signified. Imagine them with the rest of
the company divided, every one wishing the gentleman good speed and safe
return: when she retyring her self, opens the letter, wherein was laid open
every passage concerning her lust, what he himself personally had heard and
known, the place where, the time when, the very words whispered, with every
undeniable circumstance, and these expressed with such passionate efficacy, in
which he labored to make known his injuries, and her treacheries (the sole
occasions of his voluntary exile;) all these (I say) were so feelingly set
down, that they struck her to the heart, insomuch that she fell into a
present frenzy, and dispairingly soon after dyed. Which news came to the
gentleman before he had past Grauesend, by which he understood himself to be
quite released of all his intricate oaths and promises: whose noble
disposition the old gentleman understanding, instated him in a great part of
his land, which he inioyes to this day, and in my opinion, not altogether
undeservedly.

The wife of Gengulphu^.
A homely tale I am next to tell you, were it of one of our own countrey-women
I would conceal it, but since it concerns a French woman, out it shall to the
full, the rather for the authority of the Author who affirms it. In the time
that king Aethelwold reigned in Mercia, and Stephanus Paulus was Pope, one
Gengulphus a good and devout man lived in Burgoigne, It is said that he
bought a well in France, and at his prayers it sunk there, and rose again in
Burgoigne. But the greater miracle is behind (for thereby hangs a tale.) This
man sued a divorce, and was separated from his wife, (upon whom the story
vouchsafes no name) she confederated with a clerk (who was the Adulterer) to
take away his life: he being dead (as Policronicon testates) there were many
miracles seen about his grave. This being told to his wife sitting at a
banquet, and being in all her iollitie, she fell into a loud laughter, and
thus said, When my husband Gengulphus does any such miracles, then do you all
take notice that my Tail shall sing. These words (as my author says) were no
sooner uttered, but instantly there was heard from under her a filthy foul
noise, and so often as she spoke so often it was heard, and that continued until
her dying day.

The history of Italy remembers us of one Isabella the wife of Luchinus,
Isabella.
a Viscount, who was the strumpet of Vgolinus Gonsaga Prince of Mantua, as also
of Vittoria Corumbona, Cornabona.
who slew her husband to enjoy the Duke Brachiano. Friga was the wife of
Othimus king of the Danes; Friga.
and as Saxo Grammaticus affirms, prostituted her body to one of her servants.
So Babtista Egnatius informs us of the Emperesse Zoe, Zoe.
who slew Romanus Argiropilus, that she might freelier enjoy the company of
Michael Paphlagon, who after succeeded in the Empire. Lewis, seneshall of
Normandy taking his wife in adultery, (named Carlotta with Johannes Lauerinus,
Carlotta.
slew them both in the act. Gregory Turonensis nominates one Deuteria, Denteria.
a beautiful French Lady, who was adulterated by king Theobert: as Agrippina
the mother of Nero was corrupted by the Emperor Domitian. Macrobius speaks of
one Iulia a Greekish woman who being suspected of adultery by the great
Orator Demosthenes; Iulia Greca.
his servant. Aesopus who was conscious of all their meetings, could neither by
fair means be won, nor torments compeld to betray hers or his masters
secrets, till Demosthenes himself made of it a voluntary confession. Blondus,
Martinus, Platina, Robert Barnes, and others, writ of Maude the Duchess of
Lorrein, who was after wife to a second husband. Aooron, Marquess of Esten,
from whom she was divorced by Pope Hildebrand, betwixt whom and her it is said
there were Furtiuae Complexus, i. Embraces by stealth: she was after called the
daughter of S. Peter, because in her last testament she bequeathed to the
Church of Rome a great part of Hetruria, which is called unto this day the
Patrimony of S. Peter. Tre^isa reports that in the time when Marcus Commodus
was Emperor, he sent into Egypt one Philippus as president over a Province,
then in the jurisdiction of the Romans. This Philippus had a beautiful
daughter called Eugenia, Eugenia.
who being wholly devoted to the Christian faith, but not daring to profess it,
because of her father who protested all rigor to those of that Sect, she
disguised her self in man's habit, stealing from her fathers house, and made
such means that she was baptized by the name of Eugenius, and after became a
Monk. In process the old Abbot being dead, she had so well demeand her self
in the Monastery, that she had the voice to be made Abbot in his stead; Being
possessed of the place, a leaud and an adulterous woman called Malentia, Malentia.
by all allurements possible would have tempted Eugenius to lust, but not
prevailing, she with loud acclamations pretending the other would have forced
her against her will, caused her to be apprehended and brought before the
Judge, which was the President Philip the father to Eugenia, who being an enemy
to all of Religious Orders, was easily induced to give belief to any
accusations commenst against them, and punished even slight faults with the
extremest severity. Eugenius is accused, the circumstances examined, and
carry great show of truth; The Judge is ready to proceed to sentence, when
Eugenia falling upon her knees discloseth her self to her father, and humbly
entreated his pardon. To whom (notwithstanding her disguise) her face is easily
known, his fellow Monks stands amassed, Malentia the accuser confounded, but
all in general wonder-strooke, till Philippus raising his fair daughter from
the earth, embraces her lovingly, as extaside with her recovery beyond all
expectation; for whose sake he after renounced all his false heathen gods, and
was christened with his whole household and family. Thus the wickedness of one
woman turned to the blessedness and profit of many.

Elfritha.
RAnulphus Monk of Chester tells this story: King Edgar (says he) being in
his youth much addicted to the love of fair women, had intelligence that one
Elfritha daughter to Orgarus, Elfritha.
was for face, feature, and accomplishments of nature, far surpassing all the
Virgins of her time; in so much that he not only greatly desired to see her,
but purposed that if her beauty were any way answerable to that which fame had
blazoned her to be, to make her his Queen. This secret apprehension he
communicated to one Earl Ethelwold, a noble gentleman, in his great favor and
best acquainted with his priuacies, commanding him to make a journey to the
Earl of Devonshire her father, and there to take of her a free and full
surueigh, and finding her answerable to the public rumor, not only to demand
her of the Earl Orgarus, but to bring her along with her father royally
attended like the bride of a king, to partake with him all regal honors. This
journey Ethelwold with great willingness undertakes, without disclosing to any
the secrets of his message: and coming to the place where the damsel with
her father then soiourned, he was nobly entertained, as a fellow peer, and an
especial fauourit to the king. No sooner came the Lady in presence, but
Ethelwold began to conceive that report had been too niggardly in her praise,
for he had not in his lifetime seen a Lady of so incomparable a feature, to
whom all the Court-beauties appeared scarce good Crystal to that unmatchable
Diamond. What cannot love work in the heart of man, when such a beauty is his
object? it makes the son forget his father, and the father not remember that
he has a son, but either has made the others bed incestuous: It has
subjected cities, and depopulated countries, made the subject forget his
allegiance to his sovereign, and the sovereign most unnatural and inhumane
to his subject, as may appear by this history. This Earl surprised with the
love of this Lady, has either quite forgot the message he was sent about, or
else is not pleased to remember it. Not speaking of the king at all, but
counterfeiting some occasions into that country, and as if he had happened
upon that place by accident, or come to give him visitation in noble courtesy;
at supper finds discourse concerning the Lady, and at length prevailed so
far with the old earl that they were contracted that night, and the next
morning married. After some few days soiourne there, the kings impositions
enforced him to take an unwilling farewell of his new married bride, only at
parting he earnestly entreated them for diverse reasons which much imported
him, to keep the marriage as secret as possibly might be, and so posted back
to the Court. He was no sooner arrived, but the king was busily inquisitiue
concerning the beauty of the Lady, how tall, how straight, of what hair,
what complexion, whether her looks were cheerful or sad, her behavior sober
or suspicious. To all which he answered in few, she was indeed a Lady, and
that was her best, an Earls daughter and therefore flattered, for what in a
private woman is commendable, is in such excellent; and what in the former
praise worthy, in the latter rare and admirable: but for this Lady Elfritha
she was a course homesponne piece of flesh, whose nobility and dower might
make her capable of being wife to some honest Justice of peace, or Sheriff of
the shire, but not becoming the bed of any of the nobility (unless some one
whose estate was decayed;) indeed a mere Rooke, and most unworthy the eye of
the princely Eagle. With this answer the king was satisfied, and for the
present disposed his affection elsewhere, immagining these praises might be
diuulged abroad as well in scorn of her person as otherwise, so for some few
weeks it rested: in which interim Ethelwold was often mist in the court^ and
discontinued his wonted service, no man could scant tell or inform the king
how he disposed himself, and still when he came to present his service he
would excuse his absence with some infirmity or other, which was the reason of
his enforced retirement: besides, he was often observed to entreat leave to
recreat himself in the country, and take the benefit of the fresh air, as
commodious for his health, in all which liberty he past his limits. This bred
some iealosie in the king, and the rather because the fame of this Ladies
unmatched beauty more and more increased. Therefore to be more punctually
informed of the truth, he sent another private messenger, who brought him
intelligence how all things stood, with the certeintie of every accident how
it befell. The king not knowing how to digest such an injury from a subject,
smothered his grieuance for a space, and at length caused the gests to be
drawn, for he purposed a progress into the West. Ethelwold yet nothing
suspecting, was the foremost man to attend the king upon his journey: but when
they came almost to Excester, he began to mistrust the kings purpose, the
rather because he sent to the Earl Orgarus that at such a time he meant to
feast with him. Now must Ethelwold bestirre himself, or instantly hazard the
kings high displeasure: he therefore posts in the night to his wife and to his
father in law, reports the truth of every circumstance from the beginning, how
he was sent by the king, and to what purpose, how her beauty had so inflamed
him that he was compelled by violence of affection to deceive the kings trust;
and lastly, to secure his own life, which for the love of her he had hazarded,
he was forced to disparage her feature, dissemble her worth, and disgrace her
beauty: and therefore besought her, as she tendered his safety being her
husband, either not to appear before the king at all, or if she were called
for and so compelled, to be seen in that fashion as he had described her to
his soueraign, namely with a smodged face, counterfeit hair, uncomely habit,
and in her behavior to put on such a garb of folly as might rather breed
loathing than any liking in his majesty. The first of his speech she heard
with patience, but when he came to deliver to her how he had disparaged her
beauty, and to the king too; nay more, would have her derrogate from her own
worth, and be accessarie to the blasting of that beauty which nature had made
so admirable, this her womanish spleen could hardly digest: yet she soothed
him up with fair and promising language, and told him she would better
consider of it, and so dismissed him in part satisfied. In the morning he
presented himself early to attend the king, who was that day to be
entertained by the earl his father in law. All things were nobly provided,
and Edgar royally received and set to dinner (some write that Ethel^old had
caused a kitchen maid to put on his wives habit, and sit at the kings Table,
but I find no such matter remembered in my Author) the truth is, the king about
the midst of dinner called for the Earl Orgarus and demanded of him whether he
had a wife or no, if he had, why he might not have her company, knowing it was
a general observation in England, that without the wives entertainment there
could be no true and hearty welcome? The earl replied, that at that time he
was an unhappy widdower: he then demanded, whether he had any children to
continue his posterity? to which he answered, heaven had only blessed him with
one daughter a plain damsel, yet the sole hope of his future memory. The
king was then importunate to see her, and commanded her to be instantly brought
unto his presence; which put Ethelwold into a strange agony, yet still hoping
she had done as he had late enjoined her, when she (contrary to his
expectation) came in apparelled like a bride, in rich and costly vestures, her
golden hair fairly kembed and part hanging down in artificial curles, her
head stoocke with jewels, and about her neck a chain of diamonds, which gave
a wondrous addition to that beauty which naked of it self without any
ornament was not to be paraleld; a contrary effect it wrought in the king and
her husband. To Edgar she seemed some goddess, at least a miracle in nature;
to Ethelwold (in regard of his fear) a fury, or what worse he could compare
her to. O frail woman, in this one vanity to appear beautiful in the eyes
of a king, thou have committed two heinous and grievous sins, Adultery, and
Murder, for accordingly it so fell out. Edgar was as much surprised with her
love, as incensed with hate against her lord, both which for the present he
dissembled, neither smiling on the one, nor frowning on the other. In the
afternoon the king would needs hunt the stagge in the forest of Werwelly,
since called Hoore-wood: In the chase, by the appointment of Edgar, Earl
Ethelwold was struck through the body with an arrow and so slain, the king
after made Elfritha his bride and queen. The Earl had a base son then
present at the death of his father, of whom the king asked how he liked that
manner of hunting, to whom he answered, Royal sir, what seems good to you
shall be to me no way offensive: from that time forward he was ever gracious
with the king. And Elfritha thinking to make atonement with heaven for the
murder of her husband, or rather (as Ranulphus says) for causing Edward (to
whom she was stepmother) to be slain, that her own son Egelredus might
reign, builded an Abbie for Nuns at Worwell, where she was after buried.

Gunnora.
IN the time that Agapitus was Pope, Lewis king of France, the son of
Charles, caused William Longa Spata the second duke of Normandy to be
treacherously slain: this William was son to Rollo. The Lords of Normandy
with this murder much insenced, watched their advantage, and surprised the king
in Rhothemage, where they committed him to safe custody, till he had promised
and sworn to yield up Normandy to Richard son and immediate heir to
William the late murdered duke, and moreover in what place soever the king and
the young duke should have meeting to confer, that Richard should wear his
sword, but king Lewis neither to have sword nor knife about him. This Richard
being young, was called Richard the Old; he had besides another attribute given
him, which was, Richard without Fear, because he was never known to be
dismayde at any thing; but a third above these was, that he pretended to be
wondrous religious. He was duke two and fifty years, and took a Lady to
his bed from Denmark, whose name was Gunnora, by whom he had five sons and
two daughters, the eldest of which was married to Etheldredus king of England,
her name was Emma, Emma.
and she was called the flower of Normandy. Concerning this bold, yet
religious duke, it is reported by Marianus, lib. 2. Henricus, Ranulphus, and
others, that besides many other testimonies of his sanctity, this one made him
most eminent, A Monk of Andoenus in Rothomage a town in Normandy, going one
night to meet with his sweet heart, his way lay over a bridge, and under that
bridge was a deep foord or river, A strange Tale.
it so happened, that mistaking his footing, he fell into the water and there
was drowned. He was no sooner dead but there came to carry away his soul, an
Angel and a Fiend, these two contended about it, the one would have it, so
would the other, great was the controversy betwixt them; at length they
concluded to put the case to duke Richard, and both to stand to his
arbitrament: much pleading there was on both sides, at length the duke gave
sentence, That the soul should be restored again to the body, and be placed
again upon that bridge from whence he had fallen, and if then he would offer to
go from thence to his sweet heart, the devil should take him; but if
otherwise, he (because he was a Churchman) should be still in the Angels
protection. This was done, and the Monk left his way to the woman, and fled to
the church, as to a sanctuary, whether the duke went the next day and found
the Monks clothes still wet, and told the Abbot every circumstance as it fell
out; therefore the Monk was shriuen, did penance, was absolved and reconciled.
This I have read, which I persuade no man to believe. This duke lived with the
fair Gunnora long time dishonestly and without marriage, had by her those
children aforesaid, but at length by the persuasion of the nobility, and
intercession of the clergy, he took her to wife. The first night after the
marriage when the duke came to her bed, she turned her back toward him, which
she had never done till that time: at which he maruelling, demanded of her
the reason why she did so. To whom she answered, before I was your strumpet,
and therefore as a servant was tide to do your pleasure in althings, but now I
am your wife, and made part of your self, therefore henceforth I claim with
you an equal sovereignty, and will do what me list, bearing my self now
like a princess, not like a prostitute. This I am easily induced to believe,
for how soon do honors change manners. Iuuenall in his sixth Satire speaking
of marriage thus says, Semper habet lites aeternaque iurgia lectus, etc.
The marriage bed is sildome without strife.
And mutual chidinges: he that takes a wife,
Bargains for mighty trouble, and small rest,
Sleep grows a stranger then, whilst in her breast
She lodges Passion, Self-will, Anger, Fear,
And from her eyes drops many a feigned tear? etc.
Somewhat to this purpose spoke Terentius in his Adelphis. Duxi vxorem, quam
ibi non miseriam vidi, etc.
I made choice of a wife, with judgment sound,
What misery have I not therein found?
Children are borne, they prove my second care,
They should be comforts, that my corsiues are.
For her and them, I study to provide,
And to that purpose, all my times's applyde:
To keep her pleased, and raise their poor estate,
And what is my meede for all, but scorn and hate?


And so much for Gunnora. It seems the Emperor Valentinianus was neither well
read in Iuuenall nor Terrens, He, when his wife commended unto him the beauty
of the Lady Iustina, Iustina.
took her to his bed, and for her sake made a law, That it should be lawful
for any man to marry two wives. It is read of Herod the Great that he had nine
wives, and was divorced from them all, only for the love of Mariamnes neice to
Hircanus, Mariamnes
for whose sake he caused himself to be circumcised, and turned to the faith
of the Jews: he begot on her Alexander and Aristobulus; on Dosides, Dosides.
Antipater; on Metheta, Archelaus; on Cleopatra, Philip and Herodes Antipas (he
that was afterward called Tetrarch, Metheta.
one of the four princes: Cleopatra.
) Aristobulus that was Herodes son begotten on Beronica the daughter of his
own Aunt called Saloma; Beronica.
he begot the great Agrippa, Aristobulus, and Herod that was struck by the
Angel: Saloma.
also on the aforesaid Beronica he begot two daughters, Mariamnes, and
Herodias who was after Philips wife, Herodias.
that was Uncle to Aristobulus: nevertheless whilst Philip was yet alive
Herodias became wife to his brother Herod. At length there fell debate betwixt
her, Mariamnes, and Saloma Herod's sister. Herod by the instigation of Saloma
slew Hyrcanus the Priest, and after Ionathas the brother of Mariamnes, who
against the law he had caused to be consecrated Priest at the age of
seventeen years. After that he caused Mariamnes to be put to death, with the
husband of his sister Saloma, pretending that Hyrcanus and Ihonathas had
adulterated his sister. After these murders, Herod grew mad for the love of
Mariamnes, who was held to be the fairest Lady then living, and innocently
put to death. He then took again his wife Dosides and her son Antipater to
favor, sending Alexander and Aristobulus the sons of Mariamnes to Rome to be
instructed in the best litterature, whom after he caused to be slain. And
these were the fruits of Adulterous and Incestuous marriages.

Of Women that have come by strange Deaths.
THere are many kinds of deaths, I will include them all within two heads,
Violent, and Voluntary: the Violent is, when either it comes accidentally, or
when we would live and cannot: the Voluntary is, when we may live and will
not; and in this we may include the blesseddest of all deaths, Martyrdom. I
will begin with the first, and because gold is a metal that all degrees,
callings, trades, mysteries, and professions, of either Sex, especially acquire
after: I will therefore first exemplify them that have dyed golden deaths.

Of the Mistress of Brennus. Of Tarpeia, and Acco a Roman Matron.
OF Midas the rich king, and of his golden wish I presume you are not ignorant,
and therefore in vain it were to insist upon his historie^ my business is at
this time with women. Brennus an Englishman, and the younger brother to Belinus,
both sons of Donwallo) was by reason of composition with his brother, with
whom he had been competitor in the kingdom, disposed into France, and
leading an army of the Galls, invaded foreign countries, as Germany, Italy,
sacking Rome, and piercing Greece: In so much that his glory stretched so
far, that the French Croniclers would take him quite from us, and called him
Rex Gallorum, witness Plutarch in his seventeenth Parallel. This Brennus
spoiling and wasting Asia, came to besiege Ephesus, where falling in love with
a wanton of that city, he grew so inward with her, that upon promise of
reward she vowed to deliver the city into his hands: the conditions were
that he being possessed of the Town, should deliver into her safe custody, as
many jewels, rings, and as much treasure as should counteruaile so great a
benefit: to which he assented. The town delivered, and he being victor, she
attended her reward; The reward of Covetousness.
when Brennus commanded all his soldiers from the first to the last, to cast
what gold or silver or jewels they had got in the spoil of the city, into
her lap; which amounted to such an infinite mass, that with the weight thereof
she was suffocated and pressed to death. This Clitiphon delivers in his first
book Rerum Gallicar. to answer which, Aristides Melesius in Italicis speaks
of Tarpeia, Tarpeia.
a noble Virgin or at least nobly descended, and one of the keepers of the
Capitol: she in the war betwixt the Sabines and the Romans, couenanted with
king Tatius, then the public enemy, to give him safe access into the
mountain Tarpeia, so he would for a reward but possese her of all the gold
and jewels which his soldiers the Sabines had then about them. This she
performing, they were likewise willing to keep their promise, but withal
loathing the covetousness of the woman, threw so much of the spoil and
treasure upon her, that they buried her in their riches, and she expired
amiddest a huge Magozin. But remarkable above these is the old woman Acco or
Acca, Acco,
who having done an extraordinary courtesy for the city of Rome^ they knew
not better how to requite her than knowing her auaritious disposition, to give
her free liberty to go into the common treasury and take thence as much gold
as she could carry. The wretched woman ouerioyed with this donatiue, entered
the place to make her pack or burden, which was either so little she would not
bear, or so great she could not carry, and swetting and striving beneath the
burden, so expired. The like though something a more violent death, died the
Emperor Galba, who in his life time being insatiate of gold, as being covetous
above all the Emperors before him, they powered moulten gold down his throat,
to confirm in him that old Adage, Qu^lis vita, finis ita. The like was read of
the rich Roman Crassus.

Of such as have died in child-byrth.
THough of these be infinites, and daily seen amongst us, yet it is not
altogether amiss to speak someting though never so little, which may have
reference to antiquity. Tulluota.
Volaterranus remembers us of Tulliota the daughter of Marcus Cicero, who being
first placed with Dolobella, and after with Piso Crassipides, died in
childbed. Iunia. Claudilla.
The like Suetonius puts us in mind of Iunia Claudilla who was daughter to the
most noble Marcus Sillanus, and wife to the Emperor Caius Calligula who died
after the same manner. Higinus in his two hundred threescore and fourth Fable
tells this tale: In the old time says he, there were no midwiues at all, and
for that cause many women in their modesty, rather suffered themselves to
perish for want of help, than that any man should be seen or known to come
about them. Above all, the Athenians were most curious that no servant or woman
should learn the art of Chyrurgerie. There was a damsel of that city, that
was very industrious in the search of such mysteries, whose name was Agnodice,
Agnodice.
but wanting means to attain unto that necessary skill, she caused her hair
to be shorn, and putting on the habit of a young man, got her self into the
service of one Heirophilus a Physician, and by her industry and study having
attained to the deapth of his skill and the height of her own desires, upon a
time hearing where a noble lady was in childbirth, in the midst of her
painful throws, she offered her self to her help, whom the modest Lady
(mistaking her Sex) would by no persuasion suffer to come near her, till she
was forced to strip her self before the women, and to give evident signs of
her woman-hood. After which she had access to many, proouing so fortunate,
that she grew very famous. In so much that being envied by the college of the
Physicians, she was complained on to the Ariopagitae, or the nobility of the
Senate: such in whose power it was to censure and determine of all causes and
controversies. Agnodice thus conuented, they pleaded against her youth and
boldness, accusing her rather a corrupter of their chastities, than any way a
curer of their infirmities: blaming the matrons, as counterfeiting weakness,
only of purpose to have the company and familiarity of a loose and
intemperate young man. They pressed their accusations so far, that the Judges
were ready to proceed to sentence against her^ when she opening her breast
before the Senate, gave manifest testimony that she was no other than a woman:
at this the Physicians the more incenst made the fact the more henious, in
regard that being a woman, she durst enter into the search of that knowledge,
of which their Sex by the law was not capable. The cause being once more ready
to go against her, the noblest matrons of the city assembled themselves
before the Senate, and plainly told them, they were rather enemies than
husbands, who went about to punish her, that of all their Sex had been most
studious for their general health and safety. Their importancie so far
prevailed, after the circumstances were truly considered, that the first
decree was quite abrogated, and free liberty granted to women to employ
themselves in those necessary offices, without the presence of men. So that
Athens was the first city of Greece, that freely admitted of Mid-wiues by the
means of this damsel Agnodice.

Of Women that suffered Martyrdom.
Corona.
ANd of these in brief. Corona was a religious woman who suffered martyrdom
under the tyranny of Antonius the Emperor, Her death was after this manner,
she was tide by the arms and legs betwixt two trees, whose stiff branches
were forced and bowed down for the purpose, the bows being slackned and let
loose, her body was tossed into the air, and so cruelly diss^uered limb from
limb. Anatholia a Virgin, by the severe command of Faustinianus the
President, was transpierst with a sword. Felicula (as Plutarch witnesses) when
by no persuasion or threats, promises or torments, she could be forced to
renounce the Christian Faith, by the command of Flaccus Comes she was
commanded to be shut up in a Iakes, and there stifled to death. Murita had
likewise the honor of a Martyr, who being banished by Elphedorus a certain
Arrian, oppressed with cold and hunger, most miseraby died. Hyrene the Virgin,
because she would not abjure her faith and religion, was by Sisimmius shot
through with an arrow. The like death suffered the martyr Christiana under
Julian the Apostata. Paulina a Roman Virgin, and daughter to the Prefect
Artemius was with her mother Candida stoned to death by the command of the
tyrant Dioclesian. Agatho virgo Catanensis was strangled in prison, by the
command of the Cons^ll Quintianus. Theodora, a Virgin of Antioch, was beheaded
by the tyranny of Dioclesian. Iulia Countes of Eulalia, suffered the same
death under the President Diaconus. Margaritu a maid and a martyr, had her
head cut off by Olibrius. Zo^ the wife of Nicostratus, was nailed unto a cross
and so ended her life, partly with the torture of the gybbet, and partly with
the smoke (that the executioner made at the foot of the gallows) suffocated.
Iulia Carthagensis, because she would not bow to Idols and adore the false
heathen gods, but was a constant professor of the true Christian faith, was
martyred after the self same manner. Emerita the sister of Lucius king of
England (who had the honor to be called the first Christian king of this
country) she suffered for the Faith by fire. Alexandria was the wife of
Dacianus the President, who being converted to the Faith by blessed saint
George, was therefore by the bloody murderer her husbands own hands
strangled. Maximianus the son of Dioclesian, with his own hands likewise
slew his natural sister Artemia, because that forsaking all Idolatry, she
proved a conuertite to the true Christian Faith. Flauia Domicilla, a noble
Lady of Rome, was banished into the Isle Pontia in the fifteenth year of the
reign of Domitian, for no other reason but that she constantly professed her
self to be a Christian. These two following suffered persecution under
Antonius Verus in France: Blondina who is said to weary her tormentors,
patiently enduring more than they could maliciously inflict, in so much that
before she fainted, they confessed themselves overcome, she ready still to
suffer and bear, when they had not blows to give, for as often as she spoke
these words, I am a Christian, neither have I committed any evil, she seemed
to the spectators of her martyrdom, to be so refreshed and comforted from
above, that she felt no pain or anguish in the midst of her torture, and in
that patience she continued without alteration even to the last gasp. Biblis,
one that before through her womanish weakness had fainted for fear of
torments, coming to see her with others executed, was so strengthened to
behold their constancy, that as it were awakened out of her former dream, and
comparing those temporal punishments (which lasted but a moment) with the
eternal pains of Hell fire, gave up her self freely for the Gospels sake.
Dionisius in an Epistle to Fabius Bishop of Antioch, reckons up those that
suffered martyrdom under Decius the Emperor. Quinta, a faithful woman, was
by the Infidels brought into a Temple of their Idols, unto which because she
denied divine adoration, they bound her hand and foot, and most inhumanly
dragged her along the streets upon the sharp stones; but when that could not
prevail with her, they beat her head and sides, and bruised them against
Millstones, that done, she was pitiously scourged, and lastly, bloodily
executed. The same Lictors laid hands on Appolonia a Virgin, but something
grounded in years, and because she spoke boldly in the defense of her Faith,
first with barbarous cruelty they beat out her teeth, then without the ^ittie
they prepared a huge pile, threatening to burn her instantly unless she would
renounce her Christianity, but she seeming to pause a little, as if she meant
better to consider of the matter, (when thy least suspected) leapt suddenly
into the fire and was there consumed to ashes. Ammomarion a holy Virgin, after
the suffering of many torments under the same tyrant, gave up her life an
acceptable sacrifice for the Gospel. Mercuria a virtuous Woman, and one
Dionisia a fruitful and childbearing Martyr, after they were questioned about
their faith, and in all arguments boldly opposed the judges, were first rackt
and tortured till they were past all sense of feeling, that done, they caused
them to be executed. Theodosia was a virgin of Tyrus; Theodosia.
about the age of eighteen years, she coming to visit certain prisoners at
Cesaria who were called to the bar, and because they stood steadfastly in the
defense of the Gospel, prepared themselves to hear the most welcome sentence
of death pronounced against them: which Theodosia seeing, gently saluted them,
comforted them, and persuaded them to continue in their constancy, withal
humbly desired them to remember her devoutly in their prayers, which she knew
would be acceptable to him for whose love they so freely offered up their
lives. The officers this hearing, dragd her before the President, who at first
despising her youth, began to talk with her as to a child, but finding her
answers modest and weighty, began further to argue with her: but seeing
himself unable to hold argument as being convinced in all things, he grew
into such a malicious rage, that he first caused her to be scourged before his
face, even till the flesh gave way to discover the bones; but this not
prevailing, he commanded her instantly to be dragged from thence, and from an
high place to be cast headlong into the sea. I will conclude this discourse of
Martyrs with one of our own modern stories: Our english chronicles report
that Maximus the Emperor having held long war with one Conon Meridock a
resolute and bold Britain, having in many bloody conflicts sped diversely,
sometimes the victory inclining to one side, and then to another, but in
conclusion to the loss of both; their hostility was by mediation at length
attoned, and a firm peace established betwixt them: that done, Maximus made
war upon the Galls, and inuading a Province then called America (but since
Little Britain) he won it by the sword, and after surrendered it to Conon
to hold it for ever as of the Kings of great Britain. This Conon Meridock was
a Welch-man, and from hence it may be, That all that nation assume to
themselves the name of Brittons. How Welch-men come to be called Brittons.
This eminent captain being only furnished with soldiers for the present
wars, but wanting women to maintain future issue, to him was sent S. Vrsula
with eleauen thousand virgins to be espoused to Conon and his knights. But
being met at sea by the the Pagan pirates, because they would neither change
their faith nor prostitute themselves to their barbarous and beastly lusts,
they were all by these inhuman wretches cut to pieces and cast over board, and
therefore in mine opinion not unworthily reckoned amongst the Martyrs. From
these I will proceed to others.

Aristoclaea.
OF all the deaths that I have read of, this of Aristoclaea me thinks exceedes
example: with which howsoever her body was tormented, her soul could not be
greeeued, Plutarch in Amator. narrat.
for never woman dyed such a loving death. Plutarch in his Amatorious
narrations has thus delivered it: Aliartes is a city of Boetia, in which was
borne a virgin so beautified and adorned with all the gifts and perfections of
nature, as she seemed unparalleled through Greece; her name was Aristoclaea, the
sole daughter of Theophanes. To her there were many suitors, but three
especially of the noblest families of the city, Strato, Orchomenius, and
Calisthenes Aliartius: Of these Strato being the richest, he seemed the most
inde^red to her in affection, for he had first seen her at Lebedaea bathing
her self in the fountain Hercyne, from whence having a basket upon her arm,
which she was to use in the sacrifice to Jupiter, he took a full view of her
in her way to the Temple: yet Calisthenes he fed himself with the greater
hopes, because he was of more proximitie and nearer to the virgin in allians:
betwixt these two Orchomenius stood as a man indifferent. Her father Theophanes
upon their importunities doubtful, and not yet having determined on which to
confer his daughter, as fearing Stratoes potencie who in wealth and nobility
equalled if not anteceded the best in the city, he therefore put it off to
one Trophonius to be decided: but Strato most confident in his own opinion and
strength took the power to her disposing from Trophonius and gave it up freely
into her own will. The damsel in a confluence of all her kindred and friends
gathered for that purpose, and in the sight of her suitors, was publicly
demanded, of which of them she made choice? who answered, of Calisthenes.
Strato taking this in an irreconcilable disgrace, and in the greatness of his
spirit not able to digest an injury (as he took it) of that nature,
dissembling his spleen, and some two days after meeting with Theophanes and
Calisthenes, he gave them a friendly and an unsuspected salutation, desiring
still a continuance of their ancient love and friendship; that since what many
covet one can but enjoy, he could content himself with his own lot, howsoever
desiring that their amity might remain perfect and unchanged: these words
came so seemingly from the heart, that they with great joy did not only
entertain his love and voluntary reconcilement, but in all courtesy gave him a
solemn inuitation to the wedding, which he as complementally entertained; and
upon these terms they parted. Strato subornes a crew of such as he might best
trust, and adds them to the number of his servants, these he ambushes in
diverse places selected for his purpose, but all to be ready at a watchword.
Calisthenes bringing Aristoclaea toward the fountain called Cisso^ssa, there
to perform the first Sacreds belonging to marriage, according to the custom
of her auncetors; Strato with his faction arises, and with his own hands
ceiseth upon the virgin; on the other side Calisthenes he catches the fastest
hold he can to keep her; Strato and his pull one way, Calisthenes and his
another: thus both contending in the heat of their affection, but not regarding
her safety whom they did affect, she as it were set upon the rack of love,
plucked almost to pieces, betwixt them both expired. Which seeing Calisthenes,
he was suddenly lost, neither could any man ever after tell what became of
him, whether he punished himself by some extraordinary death or betook
himself to voluntary exile. Strato openly before his own people transpierst
himself, and fell down dead upon the body of Aristoclaea. Of no such death
dyed Democrita, whose history next ensues.

Alcippus the Lacedemonian had two daughters by his wife Democrita. Democrita.
He having with great justice and integrity managed the affairs of the weal
public, more for the common good than any peculiar gain or profit of his own,
was affronted by an opposite faction which emulated his goodness: and being
brought before the Ephori, it was delivered to them in a scandalous and lying
oration, how and by what means Alcippus intended to abrogate and adnichilate
their laws: for which he was confind from Spatta, neither could his wife and
daughters (who willingly offered themselves to attend upon his adversity) be
suffered to associate him, but they were detained by the power and command of
the public magistrate. Moreover an edict was made, That neither the wife was
capable of inheritance, nor the daughter of dower out of their fathers goods,
notwithstanding they had many suitors of such noble gentlemen as loved them for
their fathers virtues. It was likewise by the enemy most enuiously suggested to
the Senate, that the two Ladies might be debard from marriage; their reason was,
that Democrita was heard often to wish, and withal to presage that she should
see children borne of her daughters who would in time revenge the wrongs of
their grandfather. This being granted, and she every way circumscribed both in
her self, her husband, and issue, every way confind; she expected a public
solemnity, in which according to the custom, the women of the city with the
virgins, household servants, and infants had meeting, but the matrons and wives
of the nobility kept their night-festiuall in a conclaue or parlor by
themselves. Then she guirt her self with a sword, and with her two daughters
secretly conveyed her self into the Temple, attending the time when all the
matrons were most busy about the ceremonies and mysteries in the conclaue:
then having made fast the doors and shut up the passages, and heaped together
a great quantity of billets with other things combustible, provided for the
purpose, but especially all that sweet wood that was ready for the sacrifice
of that solemnity she set all on fire: which the men hastening to quench in
multitudes, she before them all with a constancy undaunted, first slew her
daughters, and after her self, making the ruins of this Temple their last
funeral fire. The Lacedaemonians having now nothing left of Alcippus against
which to rage, they caused the bodies of Democrita and her daughters to be cast
out of the confines of Sparta. For this ingratitude, it is said by some, that
great earthquake happened which had almost ouerturned the city of Lacedemon:
from Democrita I come to Phillis.

Demophr^^ the son of Theseus and Phadra, the half brother of Hippolitus,
returning from the wars of Troy toward his country, by tempests and
contrary winds being driven upon the coast of Thrace, was gently received and
affectionately entertained by Phillis, Phillis.
daughter to Lycurgus and Crust^^ena then king and queen of that country, and
not only to the freedom of all generous hospitality, but to the liberty and
access unto her bed. He had not long soiourned there, but he had certain
tidings of the death of Muestham, who, after his father Theseus was expulsed
Athens had usurped the principality: pleased therefore with the news of
innovation, and surprised with the ambition of succession, he pretending much
domesticke business, with other negotiations pertaining to the public
government, after his faith pawned to Phillis that his return should be within
a month, he got leave for his country: therefore having calked and moored
his ships, making them serviceable for the sea, he set sail toward Athens,
where arrived, he grew altogether unmindful of his promised faith or indented
return. Four months being past and not hearing from him by word or writing,
she sent him an Epistle in which she complains his absence, then persuades him
to call to mind her more than common courtesies, to keep his faith engaged to
her, and their former contract to make good by marriage; the least of which if
he refused to accomplish, her violated honor she would recompense with some
cruel and violent death: which she accordingly did, for knowing her self to
be despised and utterly cast off, she in her fathers Palace hung her self.
From Phillis I proceed to Deia^eira.

I^piter begat Hercules of Alcmena, in the shape of her husband Amphitrio,
joining three nights in one; whom Euristius king of Micena (at the vrgence of
his stepmother Juno) imployd in all hazardous and fearful adventures, not
that thereby he might gain the greater honor, but by such means sooner
perish: but his spirit was so great, and his strength to eminent, that from
forth all these swallowing dangers he still plunged a victor: amongst these
difficulties was that combat against Achelous, a Flood in Aetolia (who
transhapt himself into sundry figures for the love of Deianeira daughter to
Oeneus and Althaea king and queen of Calidon, Deianeira.
and sister to Meleager) he, whom no monsters nor earthly powers could tame, by
the conquest of Achelous won Deianeira for his bride. But he whom all tyrants
and terrors were subject to, submitted himself to effeminacie, and the too
much dotage upon women: for when Euritus king of Oechalia had denied him his
daughter Iole (before promised him) the city taken and the king slain he took
her freely into his embraces; with whose love he was so blinded, that at her
imperious command he laid by his clubbe and Lions skin (the trophyes of his
former victories) and, which was most unseemly for so great a conqueror, put
on a womanish habit and blushed not with a distaffe in his hand to spinne
amongst her damsells. In brief, what slavery and servitude soever he had
before suffered under the tyranny of Omphale queen of Lydia, of whom he had
begot Lamus, he endured from her: which Deianeira hearing, in a letter she
lays open to him all his former noble acts and victories, that by comparing
them with his present deboishtnesse, it the better might encourage him to
return to the first, and deter him from the last. But having received news
of Hercules calamity, by reason of the poisoned shirt sent him by her servant
Lychas dipped in the blood of the Centaure Nessus, in which she thought there had
been the virtue to revoke him from all new loves, and establish him in his
first (for so Nessus had persuaded her, when in her transwaftage over the flood
Euenus he was slain by the arrow of Hercules dipped in the poison of Lerna) when
she I say heard of the death of her husband, and that (though unwillingly) it
happened by her means, she dyed by a voluntary wound given by her own hand.
Not such was that which follows. The Ionians through all their Province being
punished with a most fearful and horrible pest, Johannes Wyerius, lib. 1.
in so much that it almost swept the city and country, and had it longer
continued would have left their places and habitatious desolate, they therefore
demanded of the Oracle a remedy for so great a mischief, which returned them
this answer, That the plague should never cease till the young man Menalippus
and the fair Cometho were slain and offered in sacrifice to Dianae Tryclaria
(and the reason was, Cometho.
because he had strumpeted her in her Temple.) And notwithstanding their
deaths, unless every year at the same season a perfectly featured youth and a
virgin of exquisite-beautie (to expiate their transgression) were likewise
offered upon the same altar, the plague should still continue: which was
accordingly done, and Menalyppus and the fair Cometho were the first dish that
was served up to this bloody feast. The same author speaks of the daughter of
Aristodemus in this manner: The Messenians and the Lacedaemonians having
continued a long and tedious war, The daughters of Aristodemus.
to the great depopulation of both their nations, those of Missene sent to know
the event of the Oracle at Delphos, and to which party the victory would at
length incline. Answer is returned, That they shall be conquerors, and the
Lacedaemonians have the worst: but upon this condition, To choose out of the
family of the Aepitidarians a virgin pure and unblemished, and this damsel to
sacrifice to Jupiter. This Aristodemus hearing (a Prince and one of the noblest
of the family of the Aepitidarians) willing to gratify his country, chused
out his only daughter for immolation and sacrifice: which a noble youth of
that nation hearing, surprised both with love and pity; love in hope to enjoy
her, and pity, as grieuing she should be so dismembered; he thought rather to
make shipwreck of her honor than her life, since the one might be by an
after-truth restored, but the other by no earthly mediation recovered. And to
this purpose presents himself before the altar, openly attesting that she was
by him with child, and therefore not only an unlawful but abominable
offering in the eyes of Jupiter. No sooner was this charitable slander
pronounced by the young man, but the father more enraged at the loss of her
honor now, than before commiserating her death, being full of wrath he usurps
the office of the priest, and with his sword hewes the poor innocent Lady to
pieces. But not many nights after this bloody execution, the Idaea of his
daughter bleeding, and with all her wounds about her, presented it self to him
in his trouble and distracted sleep: with which being strangely moved, he
conueighed himself to the tomb where his daughter lay buried, and there with
the same sword slew himself.

Pheretrina.
Herodotus in Euterpe speaks of one Pheretrina queen of the Baccaeans, a
woman of a most inhumane cruelty, she was for her tyranny struck by the hand
of heaven, her living body eaten with worms and lice, and in that languishing
misery gave up the ghost. Propert. in his third book speaks of one Dyrce, Dyrce.
who much grieved that her husband Lycus was surprised with the love of one
Antiopa caused her to be bound to the horns of a mad bull; Antiopa.
but her two sons Zethus and Amphion coming instantly at the noise of her
loud acclamation, they released her from the present danger, and in revenge of
the injury offered to their mother, fastened Dyrce to the same place, who after
much affright, and many pitiful and deadly wounds, Consinge.
expired. Consinge was the queen of Bithinia, and wife to Nicomedes, whose
gesture and behavior appearing too wanton and libidinous in the eyes of her
husband, he caused her to be woorried by his own dogs. Pyrene.
Plin. lib. 7. Pyrene the daughter to Bebrix was comprest by Hercules in the
mountains that divide Italy from Spain, she was after torn in pieces by wild
beasts, they were called of her Montes Pyreneae. i. The Pyrenean mountains.
Antipater Tarcenses apud Vollateran. speaks of one Gatis, Gatis.
a queen of Syria, who was cast alive into a moate amongst fishes, and by them
devoured; she was likewise called Atergatis. Atergatis.
Sygambis was the mother of Darius king of Persia, Sygambes.
as Quintus Curtius in his fourth book relates, she dyed upon a vowed
abstinence for being taken prisoner by Alexander, yet nobly used by him,
whether tired with the continual labor of her journey, or more afflicted with
the disease of the mind it is not certain: but falling betwixt the arms of
her two daughters (after five days abstinence from meat, drink, and light)
she expired. Semele the mother of Bacchus, Semele.
a Theban Lady, and of the royal race of Cadmus perished by thunder. Pliny in
his second book writes of one Martia great with child who was struck with
thunder, Martia.
but the infant in her womb struck dead only, she her self not suffering
any other hurt or damage: in which place he remembers one Marcus Herennius, a
Decurion, who in a bright and clear day when there appeared in the sky no
sign of storm or tempest, was slain by a thunderclappe. Pausanius apud
Vollateran. says that Helena after the death of her husband Menelaus, Helena.
being banished into Rhodes by Megapenthus and Nicostratus the sons of
Orestes, Polyzo.
came for rescue to Polyzo the wife of Pleopolemus, who being jealous of too
much familiarity betwixt her and her husband, caused her to be strangled in a
bath: others write of her, that growing old, and seeing her hairs grown gray,
that face grown wythered whose luster had been the death of so many hundred
thousands; she caused her glass to be broken, and in despair strangled
herself. The like Caelius lib. 6. cap. 15. remembers us of one Acco,, Acco.
a proud woman in her youth and grown decrepid through age, finding her brow
to be furrowed, and the fresh color in her checkes quite decayed, grew with
the conceit thereof into a strange frenzy: some write that she used to talk
familiarly to her own image in the Mirhor, sometimes smile upon it, then
again menace it, promise to it, or slatter it, as it came into her fancy: in
the end with mere apprehension that she was grown old, and her beauty faded,
she fell into a languishing and so died. Iocasta the incestuous mother to
Aeteocles and Polynices, Iocasta.
beholding her two sons perish by mutual wounds, struck with the terror of
a deed so facinorous, instantly slew her self. So Bisaltia a maid, Bisaltia.
despised by Calphurnius Crassus, into whose hands she had betraide the life of
her father, and freedom of her country fell upon a sword and so perished. Zoe
the Emperesse, Zoe.
with her husband Constantius Monachus, both about one time died of the
Pestilence. Gregorius Turonensis writes of one Austrigilda a famous Queen,
Austrigilda
who died of a disease called Disenteria, which is a flux or wringing of the
bowels. Of the same grief died Sausones, son to Chilperick. Serena the wife
of Dioclesian, Serena.
for very grief that so much Martyrs blood was spilt by her husbands
remorseles tyranny, Glausinda.
fell into a fever and so died. Glausinda daughter to the king of the Goths
and wife to Athanagildus was slain by Chilperick, the son of Clotharius, at
the instigation of his strumpet Fredegunda, Freiegunda.
so says Volateranus. Sextus Aurelius writes, that the Emperor Constantius,
son to Constantius and Helena, caused his wife Fausta (by whose instigation
he had slain his son Crispus) to die in an hot scalding bath. Fausta,
Lysides al Melissa.
Herodotus speaks of Lysides otherwise called Melissa the wife of Periander,
who at the suggestion of a strumpet caused her to be slain, which makes
Sabellicus amongst others to wonder, why for that deed only he should be
numbered amongst the seven wise men of Greece. Marcus Cecilius in his seven and
twentieth book upon Pliny accuses Calphurnius Bestia for poisoning his wives,
sleeping. Pliny in his fourteenth book, nominates one Egnacius Melentinus who
slew his wife for no other cause but that she had drunk wine, Auctoclea.
and was acquitted of the murder by Romulus. Auctoclea the daughter of Sinon and
wife of Laertes king of Ithaca when by a false messenger she heard her son
Ulysses was slain at the siege of Troy, suddenly fell down and died. The
mother of Antista seeing her daughter forsaken by Pompey the great, Antista.
and Aemilia received in her stead, Perimela.
overcome with grief slew her self. Perimele a damsel, was vitiated by
Achelous, which her father Hyppodomus took in such indignation, that from an
high promontorie he cast her headlong down into the Sea. Lymone.
Hyppomanes a prince of Athens, deprehending his daughter Lymone in adultery,
shut her up in a place with a fierce and cruel horse, but left no kind of food
for one or the other, in so much that the horse oppressed with hunger devoured
her, hence came that Adage fathered upon Diogineanus, More cruel than
Hyppomanes. Deuteria.
Gregorius Turonensis remembers one Deuteria fearing least her young daughter,
now grown ripe and marriageable, who might be deflowred by the king
Theodebertus, cast her headlong into the river that runs by the city
Viridunum, Leucothoe.
where she was drowned. Orchamus finding his daughter Leucothoe to be vitiated
by Appollo caused her to be buried alive. Lucilla.
Lucilla the daughter of Marcus Antonius and Fausta, as Herodian reports, was
slain by the hand of her brother Commodus, Lychione.
against whom she had before made a coniuration. Lychione the daughter of
Dedalion, because she durst compare hirself, with Diana was by the goddess
wounded to death with an arrow; at the celebration of whose exequies when her
body was to be burnt, her father likewise cast himself into the fire. Hylonome
the she Centaur, seeing her husband Cillarius slain in the battle betwixt
the Centaurs and the Lapithes, fell upon his sword and so expired. Anmianus,
and Marcellus lib. 16. have left recorded, that Mithridates king of Pontus
being overcome in battle by Pompey, committed his daughter Dyraptis, Dyraptis.
to the safe custody of the Eunuch Menophilus to be kept in a strong
Cittadell called Syntiarium, which when Manutius Priscus had straightly besieged,
and the Eunuch perceived the defenders of the Castle dismaide and ready to
submit themselves and give up the fort; he drew out his sword and slew her,
rather than she should be made a captive to the Roman General. Sextus Aurelius
writes of the Empress of Sabina the wife of Adrian, Sabina.
who having suffered from him many gross and servile injuries, gave her self
up to a voluntary death, when she considered she had supported so inhumane a
tyrant, and such a contagious pest to the common weal. Pontus de Fortuna,
speaks of a Virgin amongst the Salattines called Neaera, Neaera.
who greeuing that a young man to whom she was betrothed, had forsaken her and
made choice of another, caused her veins to be opened, and bled to death.
Cleopatra.
Cleopatra after the death of Anthony, least she should be presented as a
captive, to grace the triumphs of Augustus, gave her arm to the biting of an
Aspe, of which she died; for in that manner was her picture presented in Rome,
of whom Propertius lib. 3. thus speaks, Brachia spectaui sacris admorsa
colubris.


Neaera and Charmione
Neaera and Charmione, were the two handmaides of Cleopatra, These (as Plutarch
and others report of them) would by no persuasion survive their queen and
misteresse, who perceiving (as they were gasping betwixt life and death) the
crown to be fallen from the temples of their dead Lady, raised themselves from
the Earth with the small strength they had left, and placed it right again on
her forehead, that she might the better become her death; which they had no
sooner done, but they both instantly fell down and breathed their last; an
argument of an unmatchable zeal to the princess their Lady. Monima Miletia
and Veronica Chia were the wives of Mithridates, Monima Milesia Veronica Chya.
who understanding of his tragical fall and miserable end, gave up their lives
into the hands of the Eunuch Bochides. Monima first hanged her self, but the
weight of her body breaking the cord, she grew somewhat recovered, and fell
into this acclamation, O execrable power of a diadem, whose command even in
this small sad service I cannot use: which words were no sooner spoke, but she
offered her throat to the sword of the Eunuch, who instantly dispatched her
both of life and torment. Veronica drank off a chalice of wine tempered with
poison, which dispersing into her veins and keeping her in a languishing
torment, her death was likewise hastened by the Eunuch Bochides. A strange
madness possessed the Virgins of Milesia: The Milesian Virgins.
these, as Aelianus and others have writ, gave themseues up to voluntary
deaths, many or the most strangling themselves, this grew so common amongst
them that scarce one day past in which some one or other of them were not found
dead in their chambers. To remedy which mischief the Senators of the city
made a decree, That what maid soever should after that time lay violent hands
upon her self, the body so found dead, should be stripped naked, and in public
view dragd through the streets, freely exposed to the eyes of all men: The
impression of which shame more prevailing than the terror of death, none was
ever after known to commit the like outrage upon themselves. Phaedra.
Phaedra the steppe-mother to Hyppolitus her son in law, and wife of Theseus,
when she could not corrupt the young man her son in law, to make incestuous the
bed of his father, despairing, hung her self: yet before her death she writ
certain letters in which she accused Hippolitus to his father of incest, which
after proved the speedy cause of his death. Amongst many strange deaths, Two
mothers.
these of two mothers are not the least remarkable: most strange it is that
sudden joy should have as much power to suffocate the spirits, as the power of
lightning. The rumor of the great slaughter at the Lake of Thrasimenes being
published, one woman when beyond all hope she met her son at the city gate
safely returned from the general defeates, cast herself into his arms, where
in that ecstasy of joy she instantly expired. Another hearing her son was
slain in the battle, after much sorrow for his death, sitting in her own
house and spying him unexpectedly coming toward her safe and in health, she
was so overcome with sudden joy, that not able to rise and give him meeting,
she died as she sat in her chair. Most strange it is that joy should make
speedier way to death than sorrow: these mothers Zoe remembered by Valerius
Maximus lib. 9. cap. 12. So much I hope shall suffice for women that have died
strange deaths, for I had rather hear of many to live well, than that any one
should die ill. I only entreat patience of the courteous Reader, that as I
have begun this book in sadness, so he will give me leave to conclude it in
jest. Some no doubt (though not justly) will tax me for my too much
intermixtion of history, and say there be many things inserted, not pertinent
to my project in hand, which might better have been left out than put in: They
in my conceit do but dally with me, and put such a trick upon me as gentleman
did upon a country hosteler. My Tale is but homely, The Hostelers Tale.
but it has a significant Morrall. This traveler often using to a thorowfare
Inn, was much annoyed by reason that betwixt his chamber and the stable, where
he commonly used to see his horse dressed and meated, there lay great heaps of
^ullen^ dounge in (...) way, which much offended him, and being willing either
to be rid of th^^ inconvenience, or punish him that might remedy it, he took
occasion to ask the hosteler what dounghill that was which was so offensive.
He answered him, his master kept great store of pullen about the house, and
that was all Hens doung. Hens doung says the gentleman, I have a piece of
land at home I would it were all there, if thou can help me to any quantity
of it (being sure that it is such) I will give thee twenty shillings a load
for as much as thou can provide, and fetch it away with mine own carriage.
The fellow hearing this, promised within a month to furnish him with twenty
load at least at the same price. The match was made, and the gentleman after
breakefast took horse and departed. The hosteler bespeaks all such soil as
the Town could afford, or the next Villages by, and made such a huge heap as
annoyed the whole yard (knowing the gentleman to have been ever a man of his
word) who came according to the time appointed. The hosteler is glad to see
him, and tells him he has provided him of his commodity, and withal brings
him to the place where it lay like a lays^all. The gentleman seems wondrous
glad of this new merchandise, and draws out certain pieces out of his pocket,
as if he meant to give him present payment, but withal asked him, Art thou
sure all this is Hens-doung? upon my life it is says the hosteler, expecting
still to finger the gold. But (replyde the gentleman) art thou sure there is no
cocks doung amonst it? o lord yes (says the hosteler) how can it be else? why
then quoth the gentleman I pray thee make thy best of it good friend, for if
there be the least cocks doung amongst it, it will do me no pleasure, I will
not give thee three farthings for it all. Thus was the hosteler,
notwithstanding his former cost, forced to remove all that muckhill, and make
the yard clean at his own charge, with much addition of mockery and
laughter. If for a little quantity of cocks doung you cauell at all the rest
here included, the better judgments I hope will impute it, as to my
simplicity, so to your over curiosity. Another maine thing is to be feared,
wherein I must of force incur the censure of some or other, namely, Why
amongst profane histories I have inserted Martyrs, and to confirm their
truth have brought Authors that have been held superstitious? I answer to all
in general, I have only specified such things as I have read, and for mine
own opinion I keep it reserved. But because I now come to a conclusion, I
will end this book thus briefly, in regard that women die, and so many die,
and that they die at all, I will give you a woman's reason why it is so, Because
they can live no longer.

Explicit lib. quartus. Inscriptus MELPOMENE.

THE FIFTH BOOK inscribed TERPSICHORE. Entreating of Amazons: and other Women
famous either for Valor, or for Beauty.
A Question may be demanded, Why under the Muse Terpsichore, I personate the
Bold and the Beautiful, the Warrelike and the Fair, she being the Muse to
whom measures and daunces are solely peculiar, as being of them the only and
first inuentresse? I answer, (and I hope not impertinently) that considering
every circumstance, I know not how to commend them to a more fit Mecaenas or
Patron: for of what does all your martial discipline consist; but upon time,
number, measure, distance, and order? and all these in Choreis, Tripudijs ( i.
daunces) especially are observed. In daunces we keep time to the music; so
in marching or drilling, our ears are attentive to the voice of the captain
or general. In the figures of the one, and files of the other, number is
necessarily observed, so is measure, distance, and order, for in these they
have an equal correspondence. Now concerning fair women, whom in all Maskes
at the Court, City, or elsewere, do your gallants pick out, but the virgins
or Ladies most beautiful? nay even at Wakes or weddings in the country, the
fairest less is continually called out to dance, be it but to the harp,
taber, or bag-pipe. Amongst the soldiers were celebrated the Pirhick dance in
armor, first instituted by king Pyrrhus of Epire; so likewise the Matachine or
sword dance: what measures have been devised for the exercise of fair
Ladies, Custom derived from all Antiquity still makes frequent amongst us. It
was used amongst the Jews, witness Herodias, and is still continued in Spain,
France, and England. A second doubt is, whether the magnanimous, or the
exquisitly featured, whether Fortitude, or Pulcritude, ought to have precedence
and first place. It is a maxim amongst the Physicians, Plus necat gula, quam
gladius, i. surfets have been the destruction of more men than the sword: so I
am of opinion, That beauty has been the ruin of more cities, the
depopulation of more kingdoms, and destruction of more men than the sword. But
in this place, since the courage of the mind, and excellence of form, contend
for the upper hand, I take it from Feature, to bestow it on Magnanimity and
spirit, since the deeds of the one live to all posterity, but the frailty of
the other is subject to every small infirmity: Therefore Ovid in his book
dearte Amandi thus writes, Forma bonum fragile est, quantumque accedit ad annos
Fit minor, and Grada carpitur ipse suo, etc.
Form's frail good: as time runs on, it wastes,
And the more spends it self, the more it hasts.
Nor always can the purple violet smell,
Or Lillies bloome, in whiteness that excel.
The fragrant rose whose beauty we desire,
The leaves once fallen, shows but a naked brire.
O thou most fair, white heirs come on apace,
And wrinckled furrows which shall plow thy face.


So likewise Petronius Arbiter in one of his Satyrs.

Quod solum formae decus est, cecidere Capillae.
The only beauty of her shape (her hair)
Fell from her head, her beauty to impair.
Summer succeedes the Spring, her Autumn chaceth,
And them sad Winter with his snow disgraceth.
Deceitful Nature, all these youthful joys
Thou gave us first, thou art the first destroys.
Now the fruits and effects of this frail beauty, especially where a fair
face meets with a corrupted mind, I will next show you by history. Achab by
the persuasion of his fair wife Iesabell Iesabell.
was the death of many of the Prophets of the Lord. Dalila was the confusion of
Sampson the Strong. Dalila.
Strange women brought Solomon the Wise to Idolatry, and to forget God. Ioram,
a king of Israel, at the instigation of Athalia committed many horrible
outrages. Athalia.
Helena's Helena.
beauty was the occasion of that infinite slaughter betwixt the Greeks and
Trojans. Pelops succeeding in the kingdom of Phrygia made war upon Oenomaus
the father of Hyppodamia, because being surprised with her beauty, she was
denyde him in marriage. Another Hyppodamia, Hippodam.
the wife of Perithous, was the occasion of that great Centauromachia, or
battai^e betwixt the Centaures and the Lapithes; Ischomach.
for which Propertius calls her Ischomache of the greek word Isco, which
signifies Habeo, and Mache Pugna: his words are these, Qualis and Iscomache
Lapithae genus Heroinae,
Centauris medio grata rapina mero.
Such as Iscomache that was,
Of the Lapythaean line,
She whom the Centaures would have rapt
Amidst their cups of wine.


Aspasia.
Pericles for his love to Aspasia made war against the Samians. For Chrisaeis
the daughter of Chrises (Priest to Apollo, Chrysaeis.
vitiated by Agamemnon) a plague was sent amongst the Greekish host, which
ceased not till she was returned back to her father: for so writes Tortellius.
Lauiniaes beauty, Lauinia.
the daughter of King Latinus and the Queen Amata, was cause of the combustion
betwixt Turnus and Aeneas: so says Pontanus, lib. 4. de Stellis. Lysimachus
the son of Agathocles poisoned his own son Agathocles, by whose fortunate
hand he had received the honor and benefit of many glorious victories, at the
instigation of his wife Arsinoe, Arsinoe.
the sister of Ptolo^teus. Vollateran. Iphis a youth of exquisite feature,
strangled himself, because he was despised by the fair, but cruel Anaxarite.
Anaxarite.
Archil^^us king of Macedon was slain by a young man called Crateua, because
having first promised him his fair daughter, he after bestowed her upon
another. The Poet Archilocus called Iambographus, because Lycambes denyde him
his daughter in marriage, writes against him such bitter Iambicks, that he
despaired and hanged himself, therefore Ovid thus writes: Post modo si perges,
in te mihi liber Iambus
Tincta Licambaeo sangui^e tela dabit.
If thou pursu'st me still, my book
Just vengeance shall implore,
And in Lambickes weapons yield
Dipped in Lycambes gore.


Iustine in his 27 book relates, That Seleneus Callinicus king of Syria, for
exiling Berenice his steppe-mother, Berenice.
sister to Ptolomaeus, was by the same Ptolomaeus invaded and prosecuted by
arms. Deiphebus after the death of Paris, having married Hellen, to which
unfortunate match her beauty had invited him, was by her treachery not only
murdered, but his body hackt and mangled, being almost made one universal
wound. Tortellius reports of one Euander the nephew of Pallas king of the
Arcadians, Nicostrate.
at the persuasion of his mother Nicostrate slew his own father. Orestes the
son of Agamemum slew Pyrrhus the son of Achilles, being surprised with the
beauty of Hermione daughter to Menal^us: Hermione.
and Helena Pteleras king of the Thebans was slain by king Craeon, being
betrayde by his own Polydices. Polidices.
Cleopatra was the cause of that bloody war betwixt Ptolomaeus Philopaser,
and her own father Alexander king of Syria. Idas and Lyncaeus the sons of
Aphareus and Arbarne fought a great battle near to Sparta about the two
fair daughters of Leucippus, Phebe and Ilaira, Plebe. Ilaira.
against Castor and Pollux, both which were slain in that battle, and
perished not by shipwreck as some write in the pursuit of Paris by sea, for
the rape of their sister Hellen, Liuie lib. 36. writes of Antiochus, who
warring against Rome, was so taken with the beauty of a Chalcidonian damsel,
that neglecting all warlike discipline to spend his time in dalliance with his
wanton, he became a shameful and dishonorable prey to the enemy. Octauia.
Octauia the sister of Augustus being repudiated by Anthony, was the occasion
of a civil and intestine war. The Poet Lucretius growing mad for the love of a
fair damsel, drank poison and so dyed. Tullia.
Tullia incited Tarquinius Superbus to kill her own father Seruius Tullius.
Martia Marcia.
the strumpet caused Autonius Commodus the Emperor (whose Concubine she was)
to be slain by a soldier with whom she had many times had lustful
congression. Tytus Corrancanus being sent on embassy to Teuca queen of the
Illyrians, Teuca.
because he spoke to her freely and boldly, she caused him to be put to
death, against the laws of kingdoms and nations: Liuius and Florus.
Vollateranus writes of one Rhodoricus king of the Goths, who because he
stuprated the daughter of Iulianus who was Prefect in the Province of
Tingitana, the father of the ravished virgin brought in the Moors and raised a
war, which before it was ended, was the death of seven hundred thousand men,
Chilpericus the son of Clotharius was slain by the instigation of his wife
Fridegunda in his return from hunting. Fridegund.
Luchinus a Count of Italy warred upon Vgolinus Gonzaga, because he had
adulterated his fair wife Isabella. Vollateran. Otratus king of Bohemia
accused of sloth and cowardice by his wife Margarita for entering league with
Rodulphus Caesar, Margarita.
raised war betwixt them, in which her husband was defeated. Gandulphus the
Martyr for but counselling his wife to a more chaste and temperate life, was
murdered betwixt her and the adulterer. Of wars and many other mischiefs, of
which fair women have been the original, Ovid elegantly delivers in 2 Eleg.
thus concluding: Vidi ego pro ^iuea pugnantes coni^ge tauros
Spectatrix animos, ipsa innenca dabat.
For a white heyfer I have seen bulls sight,
Both gathering rage and courage from her sight.


At the building of Rome, Romulus to people the city and get wives for his
soldiers, caused them to ravish the Sabine women and damsells: for which war
grew betwixt the two nations. Of which Proper. lib. 2.

Cur exempla petam Gracum? Tu criminis au^h^r
Nutribus duro Romule lacte lupae, etc.
What need I from the Greeks examples ask?
Thou Romulus by a fell she-wolfe nursed
To rape the Sabines made thy soldiers task,
Rape, Rome still loves, because thou taughtst it first.
Since then the form (at best) so soon fades, and that beauty has been the
cause of so much bloodshed, Why should women be so proud of that which rated
at the highest, is no better than an excellent evil, or a wretched wonder;
that had beginning, therefore subject to end; created from earth, and therefore
consequently transitory? but on the contrary, since the virtues of the mind
solely acquire after fame and glory, conquer oblivion and survive envy, and
Phenix-like recover fresh youth from forgotten ashes: To such I yield the first
place, and so begin with the Amazons.

Of the Amazons.
ANd first of their country. Cappadocia is a land that breeds goodly and
brave horses, it has on the East side Armenia, on the West Asia the less, on
the North Amazonia, on the South Mount Taurus, by which lies Sicilia and
Isauria, as far as the Cilicke sea that stretches toward the Island of
Cyprus. The less Asia (called Asia minor) joins to Cappadocia, and is closed
in with the great sea, for it has on the North the mouth and sea that is called
Euxinus, on the West Propontides, on the South the Egyptian sea. This less
Asia contains many provinces and lands, on the North side Bythinia butting
upon the sea against Thracia, and is called Phrygia the greater. The chief
city of Bythinia is Nicomedia. Galathia takes name of the Galls that assisted
the king of Bythinia in his wars, and therefore had that Province given them
to inhabit, It was first called Gallograecia, as being a people mixed of the
Galls and Graecians, but now they be called Galathians, and these are they to
whom Saint Paul writ his Epistles Ad Galates. The third part of Asia minor is
called Phrygia, and took name of Phrygia daughter to Europa the daughter of
Aegenor: that Phrygia was likewise called Dardania of Dardanus the son of
Jupiter; It has on the East side Lydia, and on the West the sea Hellespontus,
so called of Helles the sister of Phrixus, who was there drowned. Lydia is on
the East side of East Phrygia, there sometimes reigned the rich king Craesus.
There were two brethren kings of that country, the one called Liddus, the other
Tyrhenus: but the land being too little for both, they cast lots which should
abide there, and which should seek abroad to plant a Collony elsewhere; which
lot fell to the younger, Tyrhenus: He touched upon a land then called Galia,
which after he caused to be named Tyrhia, of him also the sea Tyrhenus took
denomination, as the land of Lydia of his brother Lyddus. Of Lydia, the chief
city is Smyrna, to which city S. John the Evangelist writes in his Apocal.
The chief river of that country is Pactolus, which as the Poets fable has
golden sands. The fifth part of Asia Minor is called Pamphilia, and Isauria, the
chief city is Seleucia, built by king Seleucus Antiochus; near to that is
Scilicia, and contains Lycia, which is called likewise Licaonia, in which are
the two noble cities Lystris and Derbe, spoken of in Actib. Apostol. By these
cities they sail out of Syria into Italy: but the chief of all these cities
is Tharsis, downwards toward the Amasonian sea, and that land is part in
Asia, and part situate in Europe. Now touching the Original of the Amasons,
and why they were first so called, diverse authors have diversely writ. Lib. 1.
cap. de Amazonib.
Palaephatus in his fabulous narrations says, The Amasons were not women, but
certain barbarous men who used to wear long garments and loose, reaching
below their ankles after the manner of the Thracian women, who shaued their
chinnes, and wore the hairs of their head long but covered with miters: These
Amasons were a warrelike people, and did many brave and remarkable deeds of
arms. But there is no likelihood (says he) that such should be women,
because of that nation there is at this day no memory: but this was but his
opinion. Trogus Pompeius, from whom Iustine extracts his history, thus speaks
of their origenall: Scythia toward the East, is of one side embraced by the
sea, on the other part hemmed in by the Ryphaean mountains, the longitude and
latitude thereof lies open to Asia and the river Tanais: These Scythians have
no portions of land amongst them which any man can call his own, The custom
of the Scythians.
they manure no fields, they build no houses, ignorant both of Agriculture and
Architecture, their riches are their herds and their cattle, they delight in
unfrequented solitudes and inhabitable deserts, when they remove from one
place to another, they carry their wives along with them in charriots and
wagons, these are covered with leather and skins of beasts, to shroud them
from summers shewers, and defend themselves from winters tempests; they know no
houses else, and for no others care. Justice is maintained by the modesty of
their manners, not by the severity of their laws: There is no offense so
grievous to them as theft, because their flocks lie open without folds or
sheep coats; Gold and silver they despise as much as other nations covet it,
esteeming it rather an unuseful burden than a profitable merchandise: Their
food is for the most part milk and honey, the benefit of wool or cloth is to
them altogether unknown, though the climate oppress them with continual
cold, their habit is furs and the skins of beasts; their continence
teaches them that justice, That they covet nothing but what is their own: for
where there is desire of riches, there must necessarily be usury and
oppression. Were the like moderation and abstinence used amongst all nations,
war and surfeit would not (as they now do) destroy more than age or nature.
Admirable it is, that custom in them should attain to as much true moral
humanity as the wise men of Greece have reached to by the learning of arts, or
study of Philosophy; and that untaught Barbarians should excel them that
profess to tutor others in manners; more eminent far in their ignorance of
Vice, The brave acts of the Scythians.
than the others in their knowledge of Virtue. Three times these Scythians
attempted the Empire of Asia, in all their expeditions remaining vnfoild, at
least unconquered. Darius king of Persia they put to shameful flight. Cyrus
with a supposed invincible army they slew in the field. Zopyrus the great
captain of Alexander, they victoriously defeated. Of the Romans they only
heard their power, but never felt their strength. The Parthian and Bactrian
Empire they established. A nation in labors unwearied, in dangers vndismaied,
not seeking to get what they cared not to loose, in all their victories
preferring the glory before the spoil. The first that made war against this
nation was Vexores king of Egypt, who by his Ambassadors sent them word to
prepare themselves for defense: by whom they returned to the king this answer,
We wonder that the captain of so rich a people will wage war against us that
are known so poor, considering the success of war is doubtful; and
howsoever the event prove, the reward of the victory is nothing, but the
damage arising from the fight, manifest. Their answer went before, which their
resolution as suddenly and swiftly pursued after, for their army and their
answer almost arrived together, whose celeritie in march, A base flight.
and resolution in purpose, when Vexores understood, he forsook his tents and
all provision for war, and betook himself to a base and dishonorable
flight. They pursued him to the Egyptian fennes, but by reason of the marshes
and uncertain ground, their further passage was prohibited. Retyring thence
they ouerranne Asia, and subdued it under their predominance, imposing on the
Nations a small tribute, rather in acknowledgement of the title, than to be
gainers by the victory, the enemy rather suffering disgrace than oppression:
fifteen years they continued in Asia, rather to settle the estate than to
extort from the inhabitants. From thence they were called by the wickedness of
their wives, from whom they received word, That unless they instantly repaired
home, they would seek issue from the neighbor nations, for they would not
suffer the posterity of the ancient Scythians to be in the women extinct.
Asia was for many years tributarie to the Scythians; Trogus and Iustine say
for a thousand and five hundred years, which ended in Ninus king of Assyria:
In this interim, two princely youths among the Scythians, Plinos and
Scolopitus, being by the optimates and chief of the people expulst from their
families, drew to their society a mighty confluence and invaded Cappadocia,
planting themselves near to the river Thermedon: and being by conquest possessed
of the Province of Themisciria, there having for many years made spoil of the
neighbor nations by the conspiracy of the multitude who were oppressed with
their insolences, they were betraide and slain. Their wives, by reason of
their exile half in despair, The first beginning of the Amasons.
boldly took arms, and first retyring themselves and making their own
confines defensible, after grew to the resolution to invade others. Besides
they disdained to marry with their neighbors, calling it rather a servitude
than Wedlock. A singular example to all ages. Thus they augmented their
seigniories and established their commonweal without the counsel or
assistance of men, whose fellowship they began now altogether to despise: and
to communicate their loss, to make the widows of equal fortune with the
wives, they slew all the men that yet remained amongst them, and after revenged
the deaths of their husbands formerlie slain, upon the bordering people that
conspired against them. At length by war having settled peace, least their
posterity and memory should perish, they had mutual congression with their
neighbor nations: The men children they slew, the female they nourced and
brought up, not in sowing and spinning, but in hunting and practice off arms
and horsemanship; and that they better might use their lances and with the
more ease, at seven years of age they seared or rather burnt of their right
breasts, Whence the name of Amasons was derived.
of which they took the name of Amasons, as much as to say Vnimammae, or
Vrimammae, i. those with one breast, or with a burnt breast. There were of them
two queens that jointly held the sovereignty, Marthesia and Lampedo;
Marthesia. Lampedo.
these divided their people into two armies, and being grown potent both in
power and riches they went to war by turns, the one governing at home
whilst the other forraged abroad; and least there should want honor and
authority to their successes, they proclaimed themselves to be derived from
Mars: in so much that having subdued the greater part of Aeurope, they made
incursions into Asia, and there subdued many fortresses and castles, where
having built Ephesus with many other cities, part of their army they sent home
with rich and golden spoils, the rest that remained to maintain the Empire of
Asia, were all with the queen Marthesia (or as some write, Marpesia) defeated
and slain. In whose place of sovereignty her daughter Orythia succeeded,
Orythia.
who besides her singular valor and fortunate success in war, was no less
admired for her constant vow of virginity, which to her death she kept
inuiolate. The brute of their glorious and invincible acts reaching as far
as Greece, Hercules with a noble assembly of the most Heroicke youths furnished
nine ships, with purpose to make proof of their valor: two of four sisters at
that time had the principality, Antiope and Orythia: Orythia was then imployde
in foreign expeditions. Now when Hercules with the young Heroes landed upon
the Amasonian continent, the queen Antiope, not jealous of the least
hostility, stood then with many of her ladies unarmed on the shore, who being
suddenly assaulted by the Graecians were easily put to rout, and they obtained
an easy victory; in this conflict many were slain, and diverse taken, amongst
whom were the two sisters of Antiope, Menalippe.
Menalippe surprised by Hercules, and Hyppolite by Theseus, Hyppolite.
he subdude her by arms, but was captiuated by her beauty, who after took
her to his wife, and of her begot Hyppolitus. Of her Seneca in Agamemnon thus
speaks: Vidit Hyppolite ferox pectore emedio rapi
Spolium and sagittas.
The bold Hyppolite did see that day
Her breast despoyld and her shafts taken away.


Of Menalippe, Virgill thus: Threicean sexto spolianit Amazona Baltheo.
Having relation to the golden belt of Thermedon, which was numbered the sixth
of Hercules his twelve labors, He received that honor, and she her liberty.
Orythia being then abroad and hearing of these outrages and dishonours done at
home, that war had been commenced against her sister, and Theseus prince of
Athens borne thence Hyppolite, whom she held to be no better than a rauishor;
impatient of these injuries, she conuented all her forces and incited them to
revenge, inferring, that in vain they bore Empire in Europe and Asia if their
dominions lay open to the spoils and rapines of the Grecians. Having
encouraged and persuaded her own people to this expedition, she next demanded
aid of Sagillus king of the Scythians, to him acknowledging herself to be
descended from that nation, shows the necessity of that war, and the honor
of so brave a victory: hoping that for the glory of the Scythian nation his
men would not come behind her women in so just an enterprise, the success of
which was undoubtedly spoil for the present, and fame for ever. Sagillus with
these motives encouraged, sent his son Penaxagoras with a great army of
horsemen to aid Orithea in this war: but by reason of a discention that fell
in the camp, the prince of Scythia withdrew all his auxiliarie forces and with
them retired into his country, by reason of which defect the Amazons were
defeated by the Grecians, yet many of them after this battle recovered their
countries. After this Orythea succeeded Penthisilaea, Penthisilaea
she that in the aid of Priam (or as some say, for the love of Hector) came to
the siege of Troy with a thousand Ladies, where after many deeds of chivalry
by her performed she was slain by the hands of Achilles, or as the most will
have it, by Neoptolimus: she was the first that ever fought with Pollaxe, or
wore a Target made like an half Moon, therefore she is by the Poets called
Peltigera and Securigera, as bearing a Target, or bearing a Poleaxe: Therefore
Ovid in his Epistle of Phaedra, Prima securigeras inter virtute puellas.


And Virgill in his first book of Aeneid.

Ducit Amazonidum lunatis Agmina peltis
Penthisilaea fureus medijsque in millibus ardet.
Penthisilaea mad, leads forth
Her Amazonian train,
Armed with their Mooned shieldes, and fights
Midst thousands on the plain.
These Amazons endured till the time of Alexander; and though Isiodorus Eth.
14. says that Alexander the Great quite subverted their nation, yet Trogus,
Iustine, Q. Curtius and others, are of a contrary opinion, and affirm that
when Alexander sent his Ambassadors to demand of them tribute, otherwise his
purpose was to invade their territories: Minithra or Thalestris.
their queen Minithra (or as some writers term her, Thalestris) returned him
answer after this manner: It is great wonder of thy small judgment, o king,
that thou have a desire to wage war against women; if thou being so great a
conqueror should be vanquished by us, all thy former honors were blemished,
and thou perpetually branded with shame and infamy; but if our gods being
angerie with us, should deliver us up into thy mercy, what addition is it to
thine honor, to have had the masterie over weak women? King Alexander (it is
said) was pleased with this answer, granting them freedom, and said, Women
ought to be courted with fair words and flattery, and not with rough steel
and hostil^tie. After this she sent to the king desiring to have his company,
as longing to have issue by him to succeed the father in magnanimity and
virtue, to which he assented. Some write, she stayed with him in wondrous
familiarity fourteen days: but Trogus in his second book says forty
days, and when she found her self with child by him, took her leave and
departed into her own country. Virgill amongst these Amazonians numbers
Harpalice, Harpalice.
Aenid. lib. 1.

-- Vel qualis equos Therissa fatigat
Harpalice --
Such as the Thracian Harpalice was
That horses tired --
Valerius Flaccus lib. 6. speaks of one Harp. Harp.


-- Qua pelta vacat iamque ibat in Harpea
He aimed at Harp where her shield lay void.
These Amazons were by the Scythians called Aeorpata, which is as much as
Viricidae, or man-killers. For Aeor signifies Vir, a man, and Pata, Occidere,
to kill. Their habits and manners Curtius thus describes lib. 5. de gestis
Alexandri. Their garments cover not their bodies round; their right side is
still bare toward their breast; their upper roabe which is buckled or buttoned
above, descends no lower than the knee; one of their breasts they reserve safe
and untouched, with which they give suck to their infants; the right breast
they burn off, that with the more facility they may draw a Bow, thrill a
Dart, or charge a Lance. Stephanus Byzantius writes, that they are called by
the Greeks Sauropatidae, because they are said to feed upon Lysards, which in
their language they call Saurae. Herodotus writes of them many things needless
here to insert, only one is worth the observation: To encourage their valor,
and that there should be no coward amongst them, A law among the Amazons
they have a law, That no Virgin shall be capable of a husband, or enter into
familiar congresse with man, before she has brought from the field, the head
of an enemy slain with her own hand; which has been the cause that so many
of them have died old wrinkled beldames, that never knew what belonged to the
interchange of carnal society. Of other Scythian women that had a purpose, it
seems, in some kind to immitate these Amazons, it is thus remembered by Strabo
and others: The warlike Scythians in their third Asian expedition, being absent
from their wives the space of seven years, they supposing their husbands
rather to have been defeated and lost, than detained with the tedioufnesse of
so long and lingering a war, married themselves to their slaves and servants,
such as were only left at home to keep their herds, flocks, and other
cattle. The Scythians after the expiration of their war, returning into
their country were opposed by their own vassalls, and repelled from their
territories as strangers and inuaders, and not such as came to repossesse their
own wives and fields: after many skermishes and conflicts, the victory still
remaining doubtful and incertaine, the Scythians were advised to change their
manner of fight, and because their opposition was against the basest of slaves,
not the noblest of enemies, therefore to suit their weapons according to the
persons, and laying by the noble arms of a soldier, to encounter them not
with weapons but with whips, not with steel but with scourges and other like
instruments of the terrors of base and servile fear. This counsel was
generally approved and followed, so that the next time their slaves affronted
them in battle, they met them with the commanding looks of masters, not of
equal enemies, and shaking these whips and scourges, with the sight thereof
their servants were so terrified that instantly they betook themselves to
servile and ignoble flight, conquering them as slaves whom they could scarce
oppose as enemies, all such of them as they took they put to tortures and
death. Their wives knowing themselves guilty both of adultery to their beds,
and treason to their lives, some slew themselves with the sword, others
strangled themselves with the halter, all in conclusion bravely and resolutely
with self hands finished their own lives, leaving their husbands lusty
widdowers, with free liberty to make choice of honester wives. After this
accident the Scythians had peace even to the time of king Lanthinus. Higinus
adds unto the number of those Amazons these following, Ociale, Dioxippe,
Iphinome, Xanthe, Hypothoe, Orthrepte or Otrere, Antioche, Laomache, Glauce,
Agaue, Theseis, Climene, and Polidora. Calaber besides these reckons up twelve,
but by diverse and doubtful names. Of the name of these Amazons, Ovid writes
in the latter end of his second book de Art amandi, having writ his two first
books wherein he has ingeniously proposed all the ways, plots, and
stratagems by which men may captiuate women to their wishes and attract them to
their desires, as if he had done his work as worthily as wittingly (which
indeed he has) he thus insultingly concludes.

Me vatem celebrate viri, mihi dicite lauds,
Cantetur toto nomen in orb meum, etc.
Call me your Poet, crown my head with Bays,
And let the whole world descant on my praise.
I gave you arms, god Vulcan gave no more
To Thetis son: conquer as he (before)
And he that shall his Amazon subdue,
Struck with the darts he from my quiver drew,
Upon his warlike spoils thus let him write,
,, Naso my master taught me first to fight.
Behold young Wenches likewise trace my skill,
They are the next charge of my laboring quill.
In his third book as having prepared and armed men against unarmed women, he
proposes to them the like precepts and instruction, with all the defensible
weapons needful against the ambushes and inticements of men, and thus begins:
Arma dedi Danais, in Amazonas arma sup^rsunt,
Quae tibi them and turbae Penthisilaea tuae,
The Greeks I have given arms to, who now stand
Ready to encounter the Amasonian band.
Others within mine armorie remain
For thee Penthisilaea and thy train:
Go equally acco^tred to the war,
And let such conquour as most favored are
Of Carine, Venus.
Dione, and the Cupid.
Boy that flies
Round'bout the world still hood-winckt of his eyes.
It were no justice to arm men in steel
Against naked women, bare from head to heel,
Oh too much odds there were in combat then,
And so to conquour a great shame for men.
And so much of the Amasons, I now proceed to other Magnanimous and brave
spirited virgins.

Of warlike Women, and those of Masculine virtue.
I Know not better how to express the boldness of women, than by showing you
the fear of men, nor can I more plainly illustrat the valor of one sex than by
putting you in mind of the cowardice of the other. It is well observed of an
Italian (who writes himself of Lucca) concerning the passion of Fear, Of
Fears.
of which there are three sorts commendable; the first is natural fear, by
which we avoid the injuries of men, prevent the inconvenience of postelent
sickness, with such like casualties, and arm our selves against want, dearth,
and necessity. The second is civil Fear, wherein we fear to transgress the
law or incur penalty, are timorous to do ill because it is ill, when we
dare not deprave what is good or derrogate from our own reputation. The third is
a more supernatural Fear, in which by our love toward God and our neighbor,
we fear to offend the higher Majesty, and next that, fear the terror of
eternal death and damnation; by the first we preserve our bodies, by the
second our honors, by the last our souls. But those other abiects the fears
I purpose hear to exemplify, Examples of Fear.
only such as proceed from Effeminacie and Cowardice. It is read of Pysander
of Greece, that being alive, he feared least his soul had already forsaken
his body. Likewise, of one Artemon who was of that hare-hearted disposition,
that he moved not abroad without Targets of brass borne over him like
cannopies, least any thing should fall from aloft and beat out his brains; or
if he rid, it was in a horse-litter seeled and crosse-bard with gads of steel
and plates of iron, for which he was called Peripharetes. Sabellicus writes
that Cassander so feared Alexander, that long time after his death coming to
Delphos to behold the goodly statues there errected, at the very sight of his
old masters effigies, he fell into such a timorous fever, that his very
bones daunced in his skin, and longtime it was ere they could constantly
settle themselves in their own places. This was that Cassander who had caused
Olimpias the mother of Alexander to be so cruelly butchered. It is related of
St. Valleir duke of Valentinois in France, that being condemned ^o death for
not disclosing the treasons of the duke of Burbon, just at the instant when the
executioner should have struck off his head, the king sent him his gracious
pardon, but all in vain, the fear of the blow before it came, had dispatched
him of life. Hereof has grown a proverb, to any man that has a strong
apprehension of fear, they will say he has La fieure de saint Vallier, i.
the fever of Saint Vallier. Another thing is recorded, of a fellow that was so
afraid of the name of Hercules, that he hid himself in caves and rocks,
though he knew not of any quarrel betwixt them, at length, stealing from the
obscure cauerne where he had denned himself, to see if the coast were clear,
casting his eye by chance on the one side and espying Hercules who came that
way by chance, his life blood sinking into his heels, he shook them a little
and died in that fever. I could recite terrors and vain fears which have
arise from nothing, that have terrified whole cities of Grecians, armies of
Romans, and multitudes of other nations, but these particulars shall suffice,
for my purpose is not too far to effeminate men, nor too much to embolden
women: since the most valiant man that is, is timorous enough, and the
modestest woman that is may be made sufficiently bold. Debora.
But to the purpose in hand: Debora a warlike woman was a Prophetess and
judged Israel; by whose counsel and courage, they were not only freed from
the inroads and incursions of the neighbor nations, but many times returned
from the field with rich spoils and glorious conquests: of her you may read
more at large in the Judges. Ianus was an ancient king of Italy, he
entertained king Saturn when by his son Jupiter he was chased out of Creet:
Because he was a provident and wise prince, the Romans pictured him with two
faces, and received him into the number of their gods, they attributed to him
the beginning and end of things, celberating to his honor the first month
January, which took the denomination of Ianus from his name, one face looked
upon the year to come, the other looked back on the year past; in his right
hand he had a golden key which opened the Temple of Peace, in his left, a
staff which he struck upon a stone, from whence a spring of water seemed to
issue out; he is thus described by Albricus the Philosopher in his book de
Deorum Imaginibus. This Ianus left behind him a beautiful fair daughter,
whose name was Helerna, Helerna.
she sucded her father in his kingdom, which was situate by the river Tiber,
and was a woman of Masculine spirit and virtue: she reigned over men without
the counsel or assistance of men, she subdued nations by her valor, and
conquered Princes by her beauty, of whom may be truly spoken as Propertius
lib. 2. writes of the queen Penthisilaea: Ausaferox ab equo quondam oppugnare
sagittis, etc.
Penthisilea from her steed,
When her high courage rose,
Durst with her shafts and warlike darts,
The Darnish fleet oppose:
No sooner was her beauer up,
And golden caske laid by:
But whom by force she could not take,
She captived with her eye.


Camilla and others.
THis Camilla was queen of the Volscians, who even in her cradle gave manifest
tokens of her future virtue and valor, for in her infancy she was neither
swathed in soft clothing, nor wrapped in silken mantle, not attended by a tender
nurse, nor fed with curious dainties or far fetched delicats, but fostered by
her father Metabus with the milk of hinds and wild goats, Metabus.
her court was a forest, and her palace a dark and obscure cave. Having
somewhat outgrowne her infancy, she took no pleasure in rattles, puppets, or
timbrells, in which children for the most part delight, neither did she inure
her hands to sowing, spinning, or any such like womanish chares: her clothing
was the skins of wild beasts, her exercise hunting, her practice shooting,
her arms the bow and quiver, her drink the fountain water, and her food
venison. To this absteinous life she added the strict vow of chastity. At
length war being commenst betwixt Turnus and Aeneas, she adhered to the
Rutilian faxion, and to those wars brought a regiment of brave and gallant
horse, which she in person commanded. Her magnanimity Virgill in the latter
end of his seventh book thus sets down, Hos superaduenit, volsca de gente
Camilla,
Agmea agens equitum and florentes are cateruas.
To their supply Camilla came,
The gallant Volscian Less,
Who bravely did command the horse
With troops that shined in brass.
Of the like condition was Maria Puteolana, Maria Puteolana.
so called of Puteolum a city of Campania, she was of a warlike condition and
an invincible courage, and flourisht in the age of Francis Petrarch: she is
described to be most patient of labor, and vntyred with travel, moderate in
diet, but altogether abstinent from wine, sparing of words, never boasting, but
always daring: The needle, the wheel, and the distaffe she utterly abiured;
horse, armor, the bow, the spear, and the target, above all other delights
she embraced; she used to walk whole nights without the least sleep, and
travel whole days together without rest; if necessity at any time compelled
her eyes to wink, or her body to lie down, the earth was her bed, and her
shield her pillow; she abandoned the society of women, her continual
conversation was with captains and commanders, which though it carried a face
of boldness and (as some term it) impudency, yet it is apparent to all men
in what a sovereign respect she held her chastity and honor, which she
maintained without the least blemish unspotted unto the end; from ribauld talk
or discourse that tended to immodestie she refrained, all affected habit that
sauoured of pride, or might be imputed to lightness she detested; she was
only adicted to chivalry, to be accounted valiant and virtuous that was her
honorable aim, and such her memorable end. Bona was a lady of Lombardie,
Bona Longabarba.
and was surnamed Longabarba, and not impertinently ranked with these, she was
a woman warrior, and lived in the year of grace 1568, she was the wife of
Brunorius Parmensis a worthy and renowned soldier, her virgin youth was
continually exercised in hunting and the chase, she attended her husband in all
his hostile expeditions, not as a partner of his pleasures but a companion in
his dangers, she kept not the city when he was in the camp, nor lodged in
tent when he lay in the field, nor crept she more close to him in bed than she
stood fast by him in battle; after many great services performed, and
glorious victories atchiued, he fell into the displeasure of Alexander king of
Sicilie, who cast him into prison; but this noble Lady Bona, good both in name
and conditions, never left soliciting the Emperor and other Christian princes
both by petitions and friends, till she had purchased him a safe and honorable
release. The next Virago that comes in place is Atalanta, Atalanta.
Apollodorus Atheniensis lib. 3. de deorum origin, thus compiles her history:
Of Lycurgus and Cleophile (or as some will have it, Eurinome) were borne
Ancaeus, Epochus, Amphidamus, and Idaeus; of Amphidamus, Melamian a son and
Antimalie a daughter, whom Euristhaeus married: of Iasus and Clymene the
daughter of Mimia, was Atalanta borne, whose father desirous of masculine
issue, cast her out to a desperate fortune, whom a she bear finding, fed her
with her milk, till certain huntsmen coursing that way, and chancing upon so
sweet and beautiful an infant, took her home, and saw her fairly and
liberally educated. She being grown to mature age, notwithstanding she was
solicited by many suitors, took upon her the strict vow of Virginity, and
arming her self after the manner of Diana, solely devoted her self to hunting
and the chase; and increasing in beauty as she did in years, she was ambushed
by two Centaures Rhaecus and Hyllaeus, who insidiating her virgin chastity,
she with two shafts transpierst them and left them dead in the place. The next
heroic action which made her famous, she came with all the noble youths of
Greece to the hunting of the Calidonian boar, and was the first that drew
blood of the beast in the presence of Mele^ger prince of Aetolia, and all the
other brave Heroes, of whom Putanus lib. 3. de Stellis thus speaks: Qualis in
Aetolum campis Meleagria virgo,
Strauit aprum, etc,
As did the Meleagrian guirle,
Who in the Aetolian plain,
Laid flat the foaming boar, and was
The foremost of the train
That gave him bold encounter, and
As ignorant of fear,
Noct her sharp arrow, and the string
Pluct close up to her ear:
The first that day in field that blood
From the stern monster drew:
Bearing the honor, spoil, and palm,
From all that princely crew.


Of the love of Meleager to her, and of his death, I either have or shall find
occasion to speak elsewhere. Her next achiuement by which she purchased her
self honor, was her contention in the sports of Peleus. It shall not be
amiss to tell you what these sports or pastimes were, They were the twelve in
number that were celebrated amongst the Greeks, Acastus the son of Peleus
instituted them in honor of his father. Zethaes the son of Aquilo overcame
in that which was called Dolichodromus, which signifies a race of twelve
furlongs. Calais his brother had the best in the Diantus, which was a race of
two furlongs. Castor the son of Jupiter was victor in the Stadium, which was
a place of running or exercise as well for men as horse; the word signifies a
furlong or a measure of ground; Three sorts of Furlongs.
there be of them three sorts, one of Italy containing 615 feet, which
amounts to 125 paces; the second is called Olimpicum, which exsists of 600
feet, which is an hundred and twenty paces; the third Pythicum, containing
1000 feet, which comes to 200 paces. About these Stadia, Pliny and Diodorus
differ: in the description of Sicily, eight of these furlongs make an Italian
mile, containing 1000 paces, and every pace five feet. Pollux carried away
the prise called Cestus, which signifies a marriage belt or gyrdle which the
husband used to tie about the wast of his bride, and unloose the first night of
their wedding. Telamon the son of Ajax had the praise in Disco, or casting
the bullet or the stone. Peleus in wrestling. Meleager the son of Oereus in
casting of the dart. Cignus the son of Mars, slew Pilus the son of
Diodatus. Bellerophon was the most eminent for riding the horse. And Iolaus the
son of Iphicles, for mannaging the chariot. Hercules overcame in many things,
but Atalanta in all. Not long after this coming, to the knowledge of her
parents, and being by them persuaded to marry; to prevent the loathed embraces
of a husband, trusting to her own incomparable swiftness, she devised a race,
in which she proposed her self the prise of the victor, but the vanquished
were mulcted with the loss of their heads: after the slaughter of many
princes, Melanion (before spoken of) inflamed with her love, received of Venus
three golden apples, which he let fall one after another in the swiftness of
their course, she by stooping to take them up slackened her speed, and by
loosing the race became his prise and bride. Some write that they ran in
chariots and armed, trusting to the swiftness of their steeds, not the
verocitie of their own feet. The manner of their running is elegantly
described in Ovid, of which I will guie you present expression. Hesiod, Naso,
and others will not allow Atalanta to be the daughter of Iasus, but Schoeneus;
Euripides deriues her from Menalus, making her the bride of Hyppomanes the
son of Megaraeus, grandchild of Neptune, not of Melamion. The manner of
their course is thus set down, Metamorph. lib. 10.

Signa tubae dederuns, etc.
The signalls given, whilst both prepared stand The race of Hippomenes and
Atlanta.

Now, on they go: their heels but kiss the sand
And leave no print behind, you would suppose
They might pass seas, and yet their nimble toes
Not mingle with the billows: or extend
Their course ore ripe ears, yet the stalks not bend.
On all sides the young men (spectators) cry,
Well run Hippomenes (who seems to fly
More swiftly than their voices) if thy meed
Be worth thy toil, now, now, it is time to speed.
Clamor and shoutes encourage both: her pace
She sometimes slackes to look back on his face,
His labor made it lively on the way,
Which forced her often when she might pass him, stay;
She outstrippes him tho, but half against her will,
And feels his dry breath on her locks play still,
Which her speed cast behind. The course is long,
He seems to faint, and she appears more strong.
The bold Neptunian Hero from his hand
One of those golden apples on the strand
Before her bowls; she stoopes amazed, and won
With th'riches of the jewel, is out-runne,
Stooping to take it up: he now gets ground,
Whilst loud appla^siue shoutes the people sound:
At which, her slacknesse she redeemes, and time
Lost in that small delay, she as a crime
Now in her speed corrects, and like the wind
Flies toward the goal, and leaves the youth behind.
Again he drops another, and again
She for the second stoopes, whilst he amain
Strives for the start, and gets it; but her pace
She still maintains, being foremost in the race.
The last part of the course lies plain before.
He now begins fair Venus to implore,
And the third fruit plucked from the golden tree,
He further casts, yet where she needs must see
The apple shine, 'twas thrown out of the way,
The ground uneven, to move the more delay:
The warlike less though tempted with the show,
Doubts in her self to take it up or no.
Venus persuades in favor of her knight,
And made it weighty, which before seemd light:
Which as from the earth she labors to divide,
He gains the goal and her for his fair bride.
It is said by Palephatus, Appollodorus, Ovid, and others, That for their
ingratitude to Venus, he was turned into a Lion, and she into a Lioness. The
probability is, that being in the chase they retired themselves into a cave
which proved to be a den of Lions, where they were torn to pieces and
devoured. They being mist by the people, who after saw two Lions issue from
that place, the rumor grew that they were transformed into beasts of that
shape. This Atlanta had by Me^amion or Hyppomanes, or as some write by Mars,
Parthenopaeus, who after made war upon the Thebans.

Of other warlike Ladies.
Candaces.
ABout Meroe reigned the queen Candaces, and had principality over the
Aethiopians, a woman of a mighty spirit, who in all her conquests in person
led her people to the field, amongst whom she obtained that dignity and
honor, that as amongst the kings of Egypt from the first of that name that
was renowned and beloved, they were for many successions called Pharaoes, and
after Ptolomyes, and since the time of Julius all the Roman Emperors have in
memory of him taken upon them the surname of Caesar; so for many years after
her decease, the queens of Aethiopia were called Candaces. The women of Lacena
imitated the men in all things, Lacena.
in schools, in hunting, and in arms. These in the war commenst against the
Messenians, adventured equally in the battle with their husbands: by whose
assistance they purchased a noble victory. It is reported of Valasca, Valasca.
a queen of the Bohemians, that having made a coniuration with the women of
her country to take away all the prerogative and jurisdiction from the men,
she instructing them in Military exercises, levied an army of her own sex,
with which they met their husbands and overthrew them, by which means they
attained the sovereign principality, and (as the Amasons had before times
done) for many years space managed all affairs as well for offense as
defense, without the help or counsel of men. Bellouacae.
The women of Bellouaca being long and fearfully besieged by Charles the great,
duke of Burgundy, most resolutely defended the walls, tumbling the assailants
from their scaling ladders into the ditches, to the everlasting honor of their
Sex, Lesbia.
and the reproach of the enemy. Lesbia a virgin being besieged by the Turks,
hazarded her self to discover their works and mines, and when the cittisens
were deliberating to surrender up the town to the merciless enemy, she
opposed their purpose, and presented her self upon the walls to the violence
of their arrows and engines, by whose only valor and encouragement the city
was preserved, and the assailants repulst with dishonor. Amalasuntha queeene of
the Goths, Amalasuntha.
kept her principality near to Rauenna, and as Volaterran has left recorded,
by the help of Theodotus (whom she made competitor in the Empire) she expeld
from Italy the Burgonians, Almaines and Ligurians. Teuca the wife of Argon
took upon her the sovereignty, Teuca.
she was queen of the Illyrians, a warlikenation, whom she wisely governed,
by whose valor and fortitude she not only opposed the violence of the Romans,
but obtained from them many noble victories. Hasbites was a warlike Virago,
Hasbites.
and lead armies into the field, of her Siluius lib. 1. thus speaks: Haec
ignara viri, vacuoque assu^ta cubili
Venatu, and siluis, primos defenderat as ^nnos, etc.
She knew not man, but in a single bed
Upon an empty pillow cast her head,
Her youth she spent in hunting, to th'alar^e
Of the shrill bugle: on her sin^wy arm
She wore no Osier basket, would not know
Or teach the fingers how to spinne or sow:
To trace Dictinna she did most desire,
And in swift course the long breathed stagge to tire, etc.


The same author, lib. 2. speaks of one Tiburna Saguntina, Tiburna Saguntina.
the wife of one Marhus, a brave and bold female warrior. Zenobia queen of the
Palmyrians, Zenobia.
after the death of her husband Odenatus took upon her the imperial regencie,
and made tributarie the kingdom of Syria; neither feared she to take arms
against the Emperor Aurelianus, by whom she was overcome and led in triumph:
but when it was objected to Caesar as a dishonor and reproach, that he had
triumphed over a woman; he answered, It was no disgrace at all, being over such
a woman as excelled most men in Masculine virtue. Of whom Pontanus thus
speaks: Qualis and Aethiopum quondam sitientibus aruis
In fuluum regina gregem, etc. --
As did the Ethiopian queen
In the dry fields of old,
Encounter with the yellow herds
whose rough hairs shined like gold,
Opposing the stern Lions paw
Alone and without aid:
To see whom wrestle, men aloof
stood quaking and afraid,
Such 'tweene two warlike hosts appears
This Amasonian Queen,
Zenobia, with her strong bow armed
And furnished with shafts keen.


Hypsicrataea the wife of Mithridates was still present with him in battle,
Hipsicrataea.
and left him in no danger, cutting her hair short least it should offend her
when she put on her beauer. Artimesia.
Artimesia queen of Caria after the death of her husband was admired through
Greece, who not only in a nauall expedition overcame the inuading Rhodians,
but pursued them even unto their own coasts, and took possession of the
Island, amidst whose ruins she caused her own glorious statue to be erected;
of whom Herodotus thus writes: I cannot wonder sufficiently at this warlike
queen Artimesia, who unforced and vncompeld followed the expedition of Xerxes
against Greece, out of her own manly courage and excellency of spirit. She
was the daughter of Lydamus, her father was of Halicarnassus, her mother of
Creete: she furnished five ships of her own charge with Halicarnassaeans,
Coeans, Nisirians, and Calidnians, in the great sea fight near Salamine, to
behold which battle Xerxes had retired himself and stood but as a spectator.
Iustine, lib. 2. says, There was to be seen in Xerxes womanish fear; in
Artimesia, manly audacitie: for she demeaned herself in that battle to the
admiration of all men; of whose ships the king taking especial notice, but not
knowing to whom they belonged, nor in whose management they then were; one
spoke to the king and said, Great Lord behold you not how bravely the queen
Artimesia bears her self this day^ the king would not at first believe that
such resolution could be in that Sex: at length when (notwithstanding her
brave service) he perceived his navy beaten and put to flight, he sighing
thus said, All my men this day have showed themselves women, and there is but
one woman amongst them and she only has showed herself a man. Many of the
most illustrious persons dyed that day, as also of the Meades, amongst whom was
the great captain Aria Begnes the son of Darius and brother of Xerxes.
Cleopatra queen of Egypt, Cleopatra.
the daughter of Dionisius Auletes, after the death of Julius Caesar having
taken Antonius in the bewitching snares of her beauty, she was not contented
with the kingdoms of Egypt, Syria, and Arabia, but she was ambitious to
soueraignise over the Roman Empire; in which though she failed, it showed as
invincible a spirit in the attempt, as she expressed an unmatched courage in the
manner of her voluntary death. Cyrus the Persian inuading the Messagets and
Scythians, of which Tomyris then reigned queen; Tomyris.
she sent against him her only son Spargapises with a puissant army to beat
him back again beyond the river Araxes, which he had late with a mighty host
traiected. But the young man not inured to the stratagems and policies of
war, suffered his soldiers in the height of wine and surfets to be invaded,
his tents rifled, his army defeated, and himself taken prisoner by Cyrus. To
whom the queen sent to this purpose, Thou have surprised my son by fraud not
strength, by deceit, not war, be now counseled by me, Return me the Prince,
and with the honor to have vanguisht the third part of my people (unpunished)
depart out of my country: which if thou do not, I vow by the Sun (the Lord
and God to which the Messagets give due adoration) that I will quench thy
thirst, be thou never so much insatiate of blood. This message being
delivered to Cyrus, he regarded it not, Resolution in a Prince.
but held it as the vain boast of a frantic woman. But Spargapises the son
of Tomyris being awaked from the drowsinesse of wine, and perceiving into what
mischief he was fallen, entreated Cyrus he might be released from his bonds, to
which the Persian granted; who no sooner found his legs unbound, and his
hands at liberty, but he instantly caught hold of a weapon, with which he slew
himself. The queen having intelligence of the death of her son, and withal
that Cyrus gave no heed to her admonition, collected a puissant army of
purpose to give him battle, who enticed him by a counterfeit flight into
certain straits of her country, where having ambusht her men, she fell upon
the Persians and made of them an infinite slaughter, to the defeating of their
whole host. In this strange and bloody execution, Cyrus himself fell, whose
body Tomyris caused to be searched for, and being found, filled a vessel with
blood, into which commanding his head to be thrown, she thus insultingly
spoke, Satiate sanguine quem ^^ti^^ie.
Of human blood in thy life thou weart insatiate, and now in thy death thou
may drink thy fill. The fashions of the Messagets are after this manner
described by Herodotus: A description of the Messagets.
Their habit and their food is according to the Scythians, they fight as well
on horseback as on foot, being expert in both; they are both archers and
lanciers, in all their weapons armor or caparisons, using gold and brass, in
the heads of their spears, their quiuers, their daggers, and other armor,
they were brass; but whatsoever belongs to the head, or to the belt, is of the
purest gold; the breast-plates of their horses and what belongs to their
trappings and caparisons are buckled and studded with brass, but that which
appertains to the headstall or raines is of gold: of iron and silver they have
small use or none (as being rare in their country) but gold and brass they
have in abundance. Every man marries a wife, but not to his own peculiar
use, for they keep them in common, for what the Greeks in this kind remember
of the Scythians they do not; it is customable only amongst the Messagets, if
any man have an appetite to a woman, he only hangs his quiver upon the next
bough, and prostitutes her in public without taxation or shame. There is no
limit proposed to terminate their lives; when any grows old, his neighbors
about him make a general meeting, and with great ceremony (after the manner of
a sacrifice) cause him to be slain, with other cattle in number according to
his degree, with whose flesh boyld together they make a banquet, counting him
to dye in the most blessed estate that is so slain and eaten: such as dye o^
consumption or disease they eat not, but bury in the earth, accounting all
such unfortunate that suffered not immolation, and whose flesh was not feasted
with. They neither sow nor reap, but live upon their cattaile and fish, of
which the river Araxes yields them plenty, they drink milk and honor the Sun:
and to the gods whom they most fear, they sacrifice such foure^footed beasts
as they hold most fearful: and so much for the customs of the Message^s. Now
least it might appear almost against nature that amongst so many fighting
women there should be no scolding at all, let it not be taken amiss if I put
you in mind of two or three shrowes by the way, and so return again to my
former argument.

Zantippe and Mirho.
HEieronimo writ a book against Iouinian, in which he copiously discourses of
the praise of Virginity, reckoning a cattalogue of diverse famous and renowned
in that kind amongst sunderie nations, Petr. Crinit. lib. 1. cap. 11.
besides the discommodities and inconveniences of scolding and contentious
wives: and amongst other husbands much troubled in that kind, he speaks of
Socrates, who having two cursed queanes and both at once (for the law of Athens
did allow duplicitie of wives) could endure their scouldings and contumacies
with such constancy and patience; for having Zantippe and and Mirho the
daughters of Aristides, the house was never without brawling and uproar. One
Euthidemus coming from the wrestling place, and Socrates meeting him by
chance, compelled him home to supper: and being sat at board and in sad and
serious discourse, Zantippe spoke many bitter and railing words of disgrace and
contumely against her husband; but he nothing moved therewith, nor making her
the least answer, she tipped up the Table and flung down all that was upon it.
But when Euthidemus being therewith much moved, arose to be gone and instantly
depart, Why what harm is there (quoth Socrates) did not the same thing chance
at your house when I dined with you the last day, when a cackling hen cast
down such things as were upon the board, yet we your guests notwithstanding
left not your house unmannerly. Another time in the open market, she snatching
his cloak from his back, the standers by persuaded him to beat her: but he
replyde, So whilst she and I be tugging together, you may stand by laughing,
and cry, o well done Zantippe, o well done Socrates. Another time she with her
much loquacitie had made him weary of the house, therefore he sat him down
upon a bench before the street door; but she at his patience being the more
impatient, and much more angry because she was notable to move in him the
least anger, she mounts up into a garret window, and from thence pours a full
pispot upon his head: such as came by, extremely moved, as much in derision
of his person, as at the suddenness of the action; he took up a laughter as
high and loud as the best, expressing no more anger than in these words, Nay I
thought verily in my mind and could easily judge by the weather, that after so
great a thunder we must necessarily have rain. Aulus Gellius writes, Aulus
Gel.
that Alcibiades demanding why he would keep two such scolding queanes in his
house and at once, who never ceased brawling, when either of them both were
sufficient to put any man of the gentlest temperance quite beyond his patience?
he thus answered him: These women (o Alcibiades) teach me at home that
sufferance which I ought to practice when I am abroad, for being (as you see I
am) well exercised and broken with the factions of these two, I shall be the
more gentle to deal withal in the society of other men: and so much for
Zantippe and Socrates. But since I am fallen into a discourse of Shrowes, let it
not seem much impertinent to insert what mine own opinion was, when a
gentleman demanded of me the difference betwixt a Shrow and a Sheep. I
considering with my self that there was so many of the one party and so few
of the other, thought it the most generous to take the weaker side: and
therefore because some speak too much for themselves, and the modesty of the
others will not give them boldness to say what is sufficient, I thus
determined in their behalf.

What Is he can teach me by their seeming show,
Whethers the best to choose, a Sheep, or Shrow?
A sheep.
A Sheep, what is that? A beast of gentle kind,
Harmles in nature, and of modest mind,
(If mind may be in beasts) she is of voice low,
Afraid of the least clamor: when the Shrow,
A shrow.
In calmes makes tempests, and to all men's wonder,
Speaks in the fairest weather, fire, and thunder.
What Is he that's wise, and would in warm'th compare
To The English wool, the Barbary lions hair?
Th'Hircanian Tygars, or the Musco Bears,
The Spanish Iennets trapt in all his geares,
The Lapland Heart, or the swift Finlands Dow,
The Arabian Panther (spo^^ed for the show?)
Does not the Indian Dromodarie want
Her riches? or the ioyntlesse Elephant?
Or can the Italian Fox, or German Bore,
The Danish Elke, or Cammell, boast her store?
Who that loves warm'th, and would desire to pull
The Irish Woolfe and leave the English wool?
When as the first would aim to tear thy throat,
The latter gently cloth thee in her coat.
Yet were it best a modest medium keep,
Choose neither complete Shrow, nor perfect Sheep,
I would have my wife neither tongue-tide quite
Nor yet all tongue; so much as could accit^
To affability and amorous prate,
So much I Would have her use, and more I hate.
But with a voice like Steutors should she rail,
Or like Xantippe skould, and when words fail,
Be sulleine, dogged, po^t and lowre, and whine,
Or chide, or be still dombe; if such were mine,
From her I Would wish my self remote as far,
As such from virtue and true goodness are.
She of the two extremes, if you demand
With which I would be troubled, understand,
I Would take the gentler beast, the h^rmelesse Sheep,
Whose calmenes would not fright me from my sleep,
Or make the down within my bed appear
Like knotted flocks, or curles of a rough Bear,
Or the sof^ holland sheets for rest prepared,
Feel in my nightly wallowing course and hard,
Or the smooth pillow on the which my head
I turn and toss, seem as if stuffed with lead.
These can the fury Shrow do; when the the other,
Her amorous silken self, will seem to smother
In my warm besome, cling to me as fast
As Salmacis, two in one body placed,
Whisper into mine ear soft ^u^es of love,
And be the sphere in which I sole may move,
Shrink me ^n smooth embracements, her white arm
Skarffe 'bout my neck, whilst every words a charm,
And every touch a motive to desire,
To kindle in my breast enchanted fire,
Upon whose smooth brow cannot ^it a frown,
She can make flints seem feathers, bare boords down.
I will now trouble thy patience gentle Reader, A trick of an English skold.
with a discourse that has in it more mirth than murder, and more sport than
spite, and yet a touch of both. A mad fellow newly married, had only one young
child by his wife, of some quarter old, whom he dearly and tenderly loved, as
being his first; but he was much given to good fellowship, and she altogether
addicted to sparing and good huswiferie: still when he used to come merry from
the tavern, where he had been frollicke with his boon companions, she being
as sparing of his purse as prodigal of her tongue (for she was little better
than a skold) would often vpbraide him with his expenses, that what he wasted
at the Tavern, were better bestowed at home, that he spent both his money and
time, and that being so often drunk, it was prejudicial both to his body and
estate, with many such matron-like exhortations: but always concluding her
admonitions with a vow, That if ever he came home again in that pickle, she
would (happen what could come) fling the child into the moat (for the house was
moated about.) It happened about some two days after, that he reuelling till
late in the evening in a cold frostie winters night, and she having
intelligence by her scouts where he was then drinking, and making no question
but he would come home flustred; she commanded her maid to conueigh the infant
to the further part of the house, and to wrap the cat in the blankets and put
it in the cradle and there to sit and rock it; presently home comes the
husband, she falls to her old lesson and begins to quarrel with him, and he
with her: Ill words begot worse, and much leaud language there was betwixt
them, when the woman on the sudden stepping to the cradle (having spyde her
advantage) I have long says she threatened a mischief, and that revenge I
cannot work on thee, come dogs come devils I will inflict upon the brat in
the cradle; and instantly snatching it up in her arms, ran with it to the
moate side and flung it into the middle of the water: A pretty revenge.
which the poor affrighted man following her and seeing, leaving to pursue
her, and crying, save the child, o save the child, in that bitter cold night
leapt up to the elbowes in water, and waded till he brought out the mantell,
and with much pain coming to the shore, and still crying alas my poor child,
opened the clothes; at length the frighted cat crying mewe, being at liberty
leapt from betwixt his arms and ran away: the husband was both amassed and
vexed, the woman laughed at her revenge, and retired her self: and the poor
man was glad to reconcile the difference before she would yield to allow him
either fire or dry linen. Considering this, me thinks it was not amiss
answered of a gentleman, who being persuaded by a friend of his not to marry
with such a gentlewoman to whom he was a suitor, his reasons alleged were,
because she had no quick and voluble tongue, neither was she of any fine wit
or capacity: to whom he instantly replyde, I desire to have a woman to be my
wife that shall have no more tongue to answer me to a question than yea, or
nay; or to have more wit than to distinguish her husbands bed from another man's.

Another woman having a husband who customably came drunk home, and shrinking
from his stool or chair would often fall upon the floor and there lie along:
and still when she called him to bed, he would answer her, Let me alone, the
tenement is mine own, and I may lie where I list, so long as I pay rent for
the house. Some few nights after coming home in the like tune, and sitting
asleep in a chair before the chimney, his wife being gone to bed, presently
the man falls into the fire: the maid cries out to her Mistress, Oh
mistress, my master is fallen and lies in the fire, even in the midst of all
the fire; she lay still and turning her on the other side, said, so long as
he pays rent for the house, he may lie where he please. But to more serious
business, for I have now done sporting.

Of English Viragoes. And of Joan de Pucil.
Guendolyne
OF Guendoline the wife of king Locrine, and daughter to Corinaeus duke of
Cornwall, I shall take more occasion to speak at large in the discourse of the
beautiful Estreld. Elphleda was sister to king Edward before the conquest
surnamed the fourth, Elphleda.
she was wife to Etheldredus duke of Mercia, who assisted her husband in the
restoring of the city of Chester, after it had been destroyed and demolished
by the Danes, encompassing it with new walls: he was general to the king in
all his expeditions against the Danes, in the last battle that he fought
against them at a place called Toten Hall.
Toten Hall in Staffordshire, he gave them a mighty auerthrow, but a greater
at Wooddensfield where were slain two kings, two Earls, and of the soldiers
many thousands which were of the Danes of Northumberland. In this battle were
the king and Elphleda both present. Soon after this victory Etheldredus dyed,
and she governed many years after him in all Mercia or middle England, except
in the two cities of London and Oxford, which the king her brother reserved to
himself. She builded many cities and towns, and repaired others, as Thatarne
Brimsbury, the bridge upon Seuerne, Tamwoorth, Liechfield, Stafford, Warwick,
Shrewsbury, Watrisbury, Edisbury in the Forest besides Chester, which is since
vttery defaced and destroyed. Also she built a city and a castle in the
North part of Mercia, which then was called Runcofan, and after Runcorn. Thus
far Ranulphus. William de regib. with others give her this noble character,
This Lady having once assayde the throws of childbirth, would never after be
drawn to have any carnal society with her husband, alleging that it was not
sitting or seemly for a woman of her degree being a princess, a kings
daughter, and a kings sister, to inure herself to such wanton embraces, whereof
should ensue so great pain and sorrow. She tamed the Welchmen, and in many
conflicts chased the Danes: after whose death the king took the province of
Mercia entirely into his own hand, disinherited her daughter Elswina, Elswina.
whom he led with him into West Saxon. Henricus lib. 5. has left this Epitaph
as a memorial over her Tomb: Oh Elphlede mighty both in strength and mind,
The dread of men, and victoresse of thy kind.
Nature has done as much as nature can,
To make thee maid, but goodness makes the man:
Yet pity thou should change ought save thy name,
Thou art so good a woman: and thy fame
In that grows greater, and more worthy, when
Thy feminine valor much out-shineth when.
Great Caesar's acts thy noble deeds excel,
So sleep in peace, Virago maid farewell.


Much to this purpose has Treuisa expressed these verses in old English. Maud
the daughter of Henry the first, was married to Henry the fourth Emperor of
that name, Maude.
after the death of her husband she bore the title of Maud the Empress: her
father in his life time swore all the nobility to her succession, but he being
dead many fell from their oaths of alleagence, adhering to Stephan Earl of
Bulleine, who by the sisters side was neaphue to the deseased king. He
notwithstanding he had before sworn to her homage, caused himself to be
crowned at London upon a Saint Stephens day, by William Archbishop of
Canturburie, one that had before past his oath of alleagence to the Emperesse.
Much combustion there was in England in those days betwixt Maude and Stephan,
and many battails fought, in which the success was doubtful, the victory
sometimes inclining to the one, and again to the other, the circumstances
rather would become a large Chronicle than a short tractat: I will therefore
come to that which sorts best with my present purpose. This lady took the king
in battle, and kept him prisoner at Bristoll from Candlemas day to Hollyrood
day in harvest: for which victory the people came against her with procession,
which was approved by the Popes legate. From Bristoll she came to Winchester,
thence to Wilton, to Oxford, to Reding and Saint Albons, all the people
acknowledging her their queen and sovereign, excepting the Kentishmen only:
she came thence to London to settle the estate of the land, whether came the
wife of king Stephan for her husbands delivery, upon condition that Stephan
should surrender the kingdom up entirely into her hands, and betake himself
ever after to a sequestered and religious life: But to this motion the Emperesse
would by no means assent, the Cittisens likewise entreated her that they might
use the favorable laws of S. Edward, and not those strict and severe statutes
and ordinances devised and established by King Henry her father; neither to
this would the bold-spirited Lady agree. For which the people began to withdraw
their affections from her, and purposed to have surprised her, of which she
having notice, left all her household pro^ision and furniture, and secretly
conueighed her self to Oxford, where she attended her forces, who were by this
time dispersed and divided. But taking with her her Uncle David king of Scots,
she came before Winchester, laying a strong siege to the bishops tower, with
was defended by the brother of king Stephan. Another English Virago.
But now observe another female Warrior: The wife of the imprisoned King being
denied his freedom, now takes both spirit and arms, and associated with one
William Iperus, came with such a thundering terror to raise the siege, that the
hardy Empress (to give way to her present fury) was from strength forced to
fly to stratageme: for finding her powers too weak to withstand the incensed
Queen, she counterfeited her self dead, and as a Corse caused her body to be
conveyed to the city of Gloucester, and by this means escaped. But Robert her
brother was there taken prisoner, and committed to safe custody. Then the
Queen employed herself on the one part for the release of her husband, and
the Empress on the other, for the enfranchisement of her brother: at length,
after long debating of the business, it was determined by the Mediators on
both sides, that Stephan should be restored to the Kingdom, and Duke Robert to
his Lordship and Earldom; and both, as they had disturbed the peace of the
Land, so now to establish it. To this the Earl would not assent: so that all
that year there was nothing but spoil, manslaughter, direptions, and all
manner of violence, robbing of the rich, and oppression of the poor. The King
upon Holy-Rood day was released, and besieged the Empress in the city of
Oxford, from Michaelmas day to mid-Winter: where, being oppressed with famine,
she took the advantage of the Frost and Snow; and attyring her self all in
white, escaped over the Fennes, and came to the castle of Wallingford. And so
much shall suffice to express the magnanimity and warlike dispositions of two
noble and heroicke English Ladies. A French Lady comes now in my way, of whom
I will give you a short character.

Ioane de Are, or de Pucil.
In the minority of Henry the sixth, when France (which was once in his entire
possession) was there governed by our English Regents, the famous duke of
Bedford, and others; Charles the Dolphin, styled after by the name of Charles
the seventh (being a Lord wihout land, yet at that time maintaining what
hostility he was able) whilst the English forraged through France at their
will, and commanded in all places at their own pleasure (the French in utter
despair of shaking off the English yoke) there arose in those desperate
times, one Ioane Are, the daughter of James Are and his wife Isabel, borne in
Damprin. This James was by profession a Shepherd, and none of the richest.
Ioane (whom the French afterward called Ioane de Pucil) whilst she was a young
maid and kept her fathers sheep, would report to diverse, That our blessed
Lady, S. Agnes, and S. Katherine, had appeared unto her, and told her, That by
her means France should regayne her pristine liberty, and cast off the yoke
of English servitude. This coming to the ear of one Peter Bradicourt, an
eminent captain then belonging to Charles the Dolphin, he used means that
she should be sent to have conference with his master, who soiourned then in
Chynon, in his lowest of deiection and despair of hope, supply, or comfort.
In her journey thither, she came to a town called Faire-boys, where taking up
her Inn (a place which she had never before seen) she desired a soldier to
go to a secret by-corner, where was a heap of old iron, and from thence to
bring her a Sword. The soldier went according to her direction, and searching
the place, amidst a great quantity of old tongs, shouels, hand-yrons, and
broken horse-shooes, found a fair bright sword with five Flower-delyces upon
either side engraven: This Sword (with which she after committed many
slaughters upon the English) she gyrt to her, and so proceeded to Chynon to
give the Dolphin meeting. Being there arrived, Charles concealed himself
amongst many others, whilst she was brought into a fair long gallerie, where
he had appointed another to take his place and to assume his person: she
looking upon him gave him neither respect nor reue^ence, but sought out Charles
among all the other in that assembly, and picked him from amongst the rest; to
whom making a low obeisance, she told him, that to him only was her business.
The Dolphin at this was amassed, the rather because she had never before seen
him, and was somewhat comforted, by reason that she showed cheer and alacrity
in her countenance: they had together long and private conference; and shortly
after she had an army given to be disposed and ^irected by her. She then
bespake her self armor, Cap a Pe, bearing a white Ensign displaide before
her, in which was pourtrayde the picture of the Savior of the world, with a
flower-de-lyce in his hand; and so marched to Orleance. Her first exploit was
fortunately to raise the siege and relieve the town. From thence she passed
to Reames, took the city and caused the Dolphin there to proclaim himself
king, and take upon him the crown of France. She after took Iargueux a strong
town, and in it the Earl of Suffolk with many other brave English gentlemen.
She fought the great battle of Pathay with good success, in which were taken
prisoners the lord Talb^^ (the skourge and terror of the French nation) the
lord Seals, the lord Hungerf^rd, with many others both of name and quality:
she took in Benueele, Mehun, Trois, and diverse other towns of great import
and consequence; at length in a camisado or skirmish, she was taken prisoner by
sir John of Entenburch, a Burgonian captain, and sent to Roan. The French
Cronicles affirm that the morning before she was surprised, she took the
sacrament, and coming from Church told to diverse that were about her, that
she was betraide, her life sold, and should shortly after be delivered up unto
a violent death, For sir John gave a great sum of money to betray her. The
English coming to inuest themselves before Mondidier, Joan was advised to
issue out by Ela^ie and skirmish with them; who was no sooner out, but he shut
the gates upon her: being taken, she was sent to Peter Bishop of Beuoise, who
condemned her to the fire for a sorceresse, which judgment was accordingly
executed upon her in Roane, in the market place. Twenty six years after,
Charles the king for a great sum of money procured an annichilation of the
first sentence from the Pope, in which she was proclaimed a Virago inspired
with divine instinct: in memory of whose virtuous life and unjust death, he
caused a fair cross to ^ee erected just in the place where her body was
burned. I return again to the English. Emma.
Fabian and Harding speak of Emma sister to the Norman duke called Richard,
who for her extraordinary beauty was called, The flower of Normandy, she was
married to Ethelred king of England. By her heroicke spirit and masculine
instigation, the king sent to all parts of the kingdom secret and strict
commissions, That upon a certain day and hour assigned, all those Danes which
had usurped in the land, and used great cruelty, should be slaughtered; which
at her behest and the kings command was accordingly performed, which though it
after proved ominous, and was the cause of much misery and mischief, yet it
showed in her a noble and notable resolution. Of queen Margaret the wife of
Henry the sixth, Queen Margaret.
her courage, resolution, and magnanimity, to speak at large, would ask a
Volume rather than a compendious discourse, to which I am strictly tied. And
therefore whosoever is de^irous to be further instructed in the success of
those many battles fought against the house of York, in which she was
personally present, I refer them to our English Chronicles, that are not
sparing in commending her more than womanish spirit, to everlasting memory.
With her therefore I conclude my female Martiallists: And now me thinks I am
come where I would be, and that is amongst you air Fones.

Of Fair Women.
IT is reported of a king, that for many years had no issue, and desirous to
have an heir of his own blood and begetting to succeed in the Throne, upon
his earnest supplication to the divine powers, he was blessed with a fair
son, both of beauty and hope. And now being possessed of what he so much
desired, his second care was to see him so educated that he might have as much
comfort of him in his growth, as hope in his infancy: he therefore sent
abroad to find out the most cunning Astrologians to calculate of his nativity,
that if the stars were any way maleuolent to him at his birth, he might by
instruction and good education (as far as was possible) prevent any disaster
that the Planets had before threatened. A meeting to that purpose being
appointed, and the Philosophers and learned men from all parts assembled: after
much consultation it was concluded amongst them, That if the infant saw Sun
or Moon at any time within the space of ten years, he should most assuredly
be deprived the benefit of sight all his life time after. With this their
definitive conclusion, the father wondrously perplexed, was rather willing to
use any fair means of prevention, than any way to tempt the cross influence
of the stars: He therefore caused a Cell or Cave to be cut out of a deep
Rock, and conueying thither all things necessary for his education, he was
kept there in the charge of a learned tutor who well instructed him in the
Theorie of all those Arts which best suited his apprehension. The time of ten
years being expired, and the fear of that ominous calculation past over, the
day was appointed when his purpose was to publish his son to the world, and
to show him the Sun and Moon, of which he had often heard and till then
never saw entire; and to present unto his view all such creatures of which he
had been told, and read, but could distinguish none of them but by hearsay.
They brought before him a Horse, a Dog, a Lion, with many other beasts of
several kinds, of which he only looked, but seemed in them to take small
pleasure. They showed him Silver, Gold, Plate, and Jewels; in these likewise
he appeared to take small delight or none, as not knowing to what purpose they
were useful: yet with a kind of dull discontent, he demanded their names, and
so past them over. At length the king commanded certain beautiful virgins,
gorgeously attyred, to be brought into his presence: which the Prince no sooner
saw, but as recollecting his spirits, with a kind of alacrity and change of
cheer, he earnestly demanded, What kind of creatures they were, how bred, how
named, and to what use created? To whom his tutor ieastingly replied, These be
called Devils, of which I often have told you, and they are the great tempters
of mankind. Then his father demanded of him, To which of all these things he
had beheld, he stood affected best, and to whose society he was most
inclined! who presently answered; O Father, I only desire to be attended by
these Devils. Such is the attractiue power of beauty: which women cannot fully
appropriate to themselves, since it is eminent in all other creatures. Who
wonders not at the beauty of the Sun, the glory of the Moon, and the
splendour of the stars? the brightness of the morning, and the fair shutting
in of the evening? Come to the flowers, and plants; what artificial color can
be compared to the leaves of the Marigold, the Purple of the Violet, the
curious mixture of the Gillyflower, or the whiteness of the Lilly; to which,
Solomon in all his glory was not to be equalled? You that are proud of your
hair, behold the feathers of the Iay, or Parrat, with the admirable variety
of the Feasant and Peacock: What Rose in the cheek can counteruaile the Rose
of the garden? or what azure vein in the temples, the blew flower of the
field? Come to outward habit, or ornament; what woman does better become the
richest attire (though fetched from the farthest parts of the world) than the
Panther his staynes, and the Leopard his pleasing and delightful spots? Are
not the Fishes as beautiful in their siluer-shining skales, and the terrible
Dragon as glorious in his golden armor, as women apparrelled in cloth of
Bodkin, or Tissue? What is she that exceeds the Dove or Swan in whiteness, or
the Pyne or Cedar in straitness? Let me hear her voice, that can compare with
the Nightingale in sweetness; or behold that eye, that can look upon the
Sun with the Eagles. Why should you fair ones then be proud of any thing,
that are by other creatures exceeded in all things? Besides, even the choysest
beauty amongst you being once enjoyed, is the less esteemed; Soldiers having
vanquished their enemies, hang up their arms; Seamen that have attained their
harbor, fold up their sails. The choysest dainties are loathsome to such as
have filled their stomachs, and Wine is a burden to him that has satiated his
thirst: Nobility of birth is a thing honorable, but you are not beholding to
your selves for it, but your ancestors: Riches and Plenty are excellent, but
they are the gifts of Fortune, therefore subject to change and casualtie:
Praise and Honor is venerable, but withal unstable: Health is precious, but
subject to sickness and infirmity: Strength an excellent gift and blessing,
but neither free from age, nor disease: Beauty is admirable above all, and yet
subject to all: only Learning, Knowledge, Art, and Virtue, are above the envy
of change, or malice of Fortune. Neither are you women solely beautiful: We
read in Martial, lib. 1. of a boy called Achillas, of admirable feature; of
Acanthus, whom the gods at his death, in memory of his exquisite form,
changed into a flower, that still bears his name. Amongst the Romans, Scipio
(surnamed Demetrius) and amongst the Greeks, Alcibiades carried the Palm from
women; who (as Plutarch in his life reports of him) was not only wondered at
in his youth, but admired in his age, his grace and comeliness still growing
with him.

Formosum pastor Coridon ardebat Alexim:
The shepherd Coridon doted on the fair Alexis.
Saxo Gramaticus speaks of Alphus the son of Gygarus, whose hairs exceeded
the brightness of Silver. Amaratus was changed into a sweet smelling flower
after his death. Calentius speaks of Amphim^don thus: Formosum Phiale prius
arserat Amphimedonta,
Amphimedon Phiales maxima cura fu^t:
Phiale was enamored of Amphimedon the fair,
Amphimedon of Phiale became the greatest care.
Antinous Bithinieus, was a youth of that admirable beauty and feature, that
Adrian the Emperor was enamoured of him, in whose memory he erected a Temple
in Mantinea, and built a city by the river Nilus, he caused his effigies to
be stamped upon his own coin, therefore Hieronimus (as Vollaterranus reports)
calls him the Emperor Adrians concubine. Asterius was the son of Ceres, a
young man of a singular form, but altogether abstenious from the love of women,
whom Ovid in Ilium remembres. Astur is celebrated by Virgil: -- Sequitur
pulcherimus Astur
Astur equo fidens and versicoloribus armis.
The fairest Astur follows next in field,
Astur that trusts unto his horse ans parti-colored shield.


Atis the Phrigian youth was for his fairness beloved of the mother of the
gods. Virgill speaks of Auentinus in these words: Victoresque ostentat equos
satus Hercule pulcro
Pulcher Auentinus --
Fair Auentinus he that of fair Hercules was borne
Boasts of his conquering steedes --
Batillus was the favorite or sweetheart of Anacreon the Poet, of whom
Pontan^s de Stellis: -- Amatum a vate Batillum
Pictum oculis fuscumque coma roseumque labellis,
-- The Poet of Batillus was enamoured,
With painted eyes, brown hair, and lips like Roses red.
(By the way). Sure there was a great dearth of beauty in those days amongst
women when boys and catamites were so doted on by men. Bellerephon was not
only affected by Sthenobaea the wife of Pretus, Sthenoboea.
king of the Argiues, but doted on by Venus. Of Castor and Pollux the two fair
Tindarides, Ovid. lib. 6. thus writes: At gemini nondum Coelestia sidera fratres
Ambo, conspic^i, niue candidioribus ambo,
Vectabantur equis --
The two twinne brothers, not as yet accounted
Amongst the celestial stars, conspicuous b^th
Upon two steeds whiter than snow were mounted etc.


The young boy Cestus, Martial thus commends.

Quanta tua est probitus etc.
How great thy honesty? thy fame as rare,
(Oh sweet child Cestus) thou that may compar^,
With Theseus son, did bright Diana see
Thee naked once, inamoured she would be
And tyce thee to some pleasant ^iuers brim,
There strip her self and teach thee how to swim.
Democles an Athenian youth was of that pulchritude, that he was called by all
men Pulcher Democles, and (that which seldom meets with beauty) of that rare
temperance, that when king Demetrius plucked him to have made him a prostitute
to his unlawful and beastly lusts; to shun his embraces, he leaped into a
caldron of seething hot liquor, and there drowned himself: Plutarch in
Demetrio. Diadumenus the cup bearer to Augustus was of that admirable feature,
that in the contention which was made at Elis he carried the palm both from
men and women: Volateran. For no other cause was Ganimede said to fill Nectar
to Jupiter than for his eligancie of form. Galetes was a youth of that
excellent feature and so indeered to Ptolomaeus, that when diverse malefactors
(and for great crimes) were led to execution, only at his entreatie he spared
their lives. Hypoclides the son of Thysander as Herodotus relates, was
excellent above all the Athenians for wealth and beauty. Of Hyas the son of
Atlas and Aethra, Ovid 5. de Fast.

Nondum stabat Atlas humeros oneratus Olimpo,
Cum satus est forma, conspiciendus Hias.
Olimpas weight did not as yet
Great Atlas back adorn,
When as the lovely Hyas of
Conspicuous shape was borne.
Hylas the son of Hyadamus, was not only indeered to Hercules, but doted on
by the nymphs called Driades. Iulus the son of Aeneas and Creusa, was taken
for Cupid the son of Venus. Iuuencus was the minion of Catullus, as Lygurinus
was to Horace; so likewise Lycus, of whom he thus speaks: Et Lycum nigris
oculis nigroque
Crine decorum.
Lycus rare,
Both for his black eyes and his black sleeke hair.


Some thing more freely he speaks of the Pulchritude of Nearchus in Carm. and
his Odes. Of Nireus the son of Caropus and Alaga, Homer speaks at large: as
Horace likewise in Carm. and Epedo. Tibullus commends his Marathis Maximinus,
that his head being mangled and bloody, yet notwithstanding in death it looked
admirable. Marcellus the son of Caphisus and Lyriope, was so fair that the
nymphs were surprised with his beauty. Endimion was beloved of the Moon, Val
Flaccus lib. 8.

Latmius Aestiua residet venator in vmbra.
Dignus amore Deae --
The Latmian swain sits in the Summer shade,
Worthy the love of that celestial maid.
In Ephestion was that maiesticall beauty, that the wife of king Darius
saluted him for Alexander: for his exqusite form he was especially beloved of
Alexander. Virgill commends the shape of Eurialus the son of Nisus. So Nysus
king of the Megarenses was said to have hairs of gold they were of such
splendour. Statius commends Parthenopaus the son of Meleager and Atalanta, or
as some write of Mars and Menalipp^. Caelius, Ovid, and others, celebrate Phaon
the beloved of Sappho the Poetesse, for the fairest of the world. Phedrus
Fliensis who was the familiar of Socrates and Plato, was for exquisite shape
compelled to be prostituted by the baud his master. Of Pyramus Ovid thus
speaks, Metamorph. lib. 4.

Pyramus and Thisbe Iuuenem Pulcherimus alter.
Young Pyramus and Thisbe, he
Of all the young men fairest,
And she of all the Eastern world,
Of lovely gyrles the rarest, etc.
Spurinae was a youth of such an alluring beauty, that when he could neither
reserve himself from suit of men, or importunities of women, he deformed his
own beauty with scratches and wounds to preserve his own chastity, Valor.
Max. de Verecundis. Magnes Smyrnaeus was the most beautiful of his age, and so
acceptable to Gyges king of Lydia, that when his parents cut off his delicate
and fair hair (somewhat to take off the kings affection) the king was so
incensed that for that cause alone he made war against the Magnesians,
Pauson. apud Volater. The Poet Musaeus celebrates the rare form of Leander, a
youth of Abidos and beloved of Hero: As Virgill does the like of Lausus the son
of Mezentius, Aeneid. lib. 7. Herodotus speaking of Xerxes says that he had in
his army sixty eight miriades of men, yet amongst them all he was the
beautifullest of face, and tallest of stature. I could reckon up others, as
Pelops, Idas, Jason, Artaxerxes, Cyrus, Troilus, Patroclus, Hymene, the least
of them a prince, the minion to a king, or the dearly beloved of some queen
or goddess. This is only to put you in mind and women, That though you have
engrossed a great portion of beauty, yet you are not possessed of all, since not
only men, but diverse other creatures share with you; neither have I
introduced these to derogate any thing from your worths, only to abate some of
that ambition or selfeloue which is commonly attendant upon beauty: One thing
for your grace I have read in the Spanish Cronicle of an exquisit lady (the
like I did never of any excellent man) Queen Isabell the wife of Henry
surnamed the Humble, being attyring her self in her window, against which the
Sun shined somewhat hot, it is credibly reported, that the beams of the
Sun set her curled locks on fire: some held it as a prodigy, others alluded
it to her miraculous beauty, some thought that one pane or other in the window
was of the nature of a burning glass and that was the cause, others imputed it
to certain oils and sweet unguents, with which the Queens and great ladies use
to dress their hair: howsoever, if their Cronicle speak truth, most certain
it is, that her lust made greater combustion in the land, than the Sun had
power to commit upon her hair. I have one thing more to instance to your
grace, and so I will conclude my discourse. An Ambassador being to be
entertained in the court of queen Elizabeth (where the greatest state was still
observed) he first passed through a lane of the guard in their rich coats, next
through the gentlemen pentioners, and so through all the greater officers, the
Lords, Ea^les, and Counsel: The Queen sat then in state at the upper end of a
long gallerie, which when the Ambassador should enter, the great Ladies of
either side richly attired were placed, through the midst of whom as he
passed along, he as amassed at the stare, or admiring at their beauties, cast
his eye first on one side, then on the other, and that not without some pause,
as if he had been to take a particular surueigh of all their features, but by
degrees coming up toward the Queen, who fat like Diana amongst her nymphs,
or Ariadne in her crown of stars, instated above the lesser lights, to give
him entertainment: and observing his eyes still to wander, she thus bespake
him, Auerte occulos ne videas vanitatem: i. Turn away your eyes least you
behold vanity: to whom he suddenly replyde, Imo potius mirabilia opera Dei,
i. Nay rather the wonderful works of God. Since then you are such, rather let
your virtuous actions beautify, than your vicious deeds any way disgrace his
so great and glorious workmanship.

Of Fair Women.
OF these, Herodica shall have the first place. Herodica.
Niceus in his book de Rebus Arcad. relates, That one Cypselus purposing to
raise a new Colonie, erected a fair and goodly city in a spacious Plain
bordering upon the river Alphaeus, to which place multitudes of the Parrhasians
came to inhabit. At the same time was a Grove and an Altar celebrated (with
much pomp and solemnity) to Elusina Ceres, with an annual feast: at this
public meeting was a contention, Which of all the women was censured to be the
fairest? The first that had the prioritie and Palm for beauty bestowed upon
her, was Herodica, the wife of Cypselus. Zenophon apud Coelium, lib. 7. cap.
53. speaks of Panthaea, Panthaea.
the wife of Abraditus, a nobleman of Persia, whom Cyrus (having defeated the
army of the Assyrians, and spoiled their tents) took captive; Abraditus at
that time being absent, as not long before employed upon an Embassy to the
Bactrians, in which interim, Panthaea was in the custody of a nobleman of
Media, called Araspes, who affirmed of her to the king with great admiration of
her feature and beauty, That in all Asia her like was not to be seen, or
found. Paulus Diaconus writes of Theodole, Theodole.
a Roman Lady, of that admirable splendor, that she attracted the eyes of
all men that but glanced that way, to dwell upon her with wonder: her hair was
bright, and yellow, which when she pleased to unloose and let fall about her
shoulders, it covered her from the crown to the heel. A large description he
makes of her perfections, howsoever most certain it is, that the king
Cambeoles was extremely entangled in the snares of her beauty. Saxo
Gramaticus in his Danish history, commemorates one Suabilda, Suabilda.
a Queen, in all the lineaments both of body and face to be of that rare
pulchritude, that being doomed unto a wretched and miserable death, and bound
with thongs of leather, to be trod upon by the hoofes of wild horses; her
beauty struck such an impression even in those unreasonable creatures, that
they could not be forced with their rude feet to leave the least character of
violence upon limbs so fair and exquisitely fashioned. The same Author
remembers us of Seritha and Signis, Seritha.

Signis.


the first a virgin of incomparable splendour, to whom one Otharus was a
robustious suitor; the other was the daughter of one Sygarus, who paralleld the
first, and was importunately solicited by Hyldegislaeus Teutonicus. Bryseis
was so fair, Briseis.
that she endeered unto her love the noblest of the Greeks, Achilles; who
though she was but his damsel, or handmaid, yet he was enamored of her above
all his other women: of whom Horace, Prius Insolentem
Serua Bryseis niueo color
Mouit Achillem:
His maid Bryseis, with her color white,
Insolent Achilles moved to delight.


Of her, Ovid likewise speaks, lib. 2. de Art Amandi: Fecit vt in capta
Lyrneside magnus Achilles
Cum premeret mollem lassus ab host torum.
This, great Achilles of his Love desired,
When with the slaughter of his enemies tired,
He doff'd his Cushes, and unarmed his head,
To tumble with her on a soft day-bed:
It did rejoice Bryseis to embrace
His bruised arms, and kiss his bloud-stain'd face.
Those hands which he so often did imbrew
In blood of warlike Trojans, whom he slew,
Were now employed to tickle, touch, and feel,
And shake a Lance, that had no point of steel.


Thargelia Milesia.
Thargelia Milesia was of that excellent aspect, that as Hyppias the Sophist
testifies of her, she was married by course to fourteen several husbands
(for so he writes in a Treatise entitled De inscripta Congregatione:) in
which, besides her character of beauty, he gives her a worthy attribute for
her wisdom, in these words, Anutis.
Perpulcra and sapiens. Anutis was the wife of a noble person called Bogazus,
and sister to Xerxes by the fathers side. She as Dinon writes (in his Persicke
history, in the chapter entitled De prima Coordinatione) in these words, Haec
vt pulcherrima fuit omnium mulierum, quae fuerant in Asia, etc. She (says
he) as she was the fairest of all women in Asia, so of them all she was the
most intemperate. Timosa, Timosa.
as Philarchus in his Lib. 19. contends, was the mistress of Oxiartes, who in
the accomplishments of nature anteceded all of her age: she was, for her
beauty, thought worthy to be sent as a present from the king of Egypt to the
most excellent queen of king Statyra, but rather for a wonder of nature, than
a president of chastity. Theopompus in his fifty sixth book of History
records, That Zenopithia, Zenopithia.
the mother of Lysandrides, was the fairest of all the women in Peloponnesus.
She, with her sister Chryse, were slain by the Lacedaemonians, at the time
when Agesilaus (in an uproar and mutinous sedition raised) gave command, That
Lysandrides as his public enemy should be banished from Lacedemon. Patica
Cipria was borne in Cyprus: Patica Cipria.
Philarchus remembers her in his tenth book of History. She attending upon
Olympias, the mother of Alexander, was demanded in marriage by one Mo^imus, the
son of Pythioa. But the Queen observing her to be of more beauty in face,
than temperance in carriage; O unhappy man (said she) that chusest a wife by
the eye, Violentilla.
not by counsel; by her beauty, and not behauior. Violentilla was the wife
of the Poet Stella: she for all accomplishments was much celebrated by
Statius; of her, Lib. 1. Syll. he thus speaks: -- At tu pulcherrima forma,
Italidum tandem casto possessa marito:
Thou of our Latium Dames the fairest and best,
Of thy chaste husband art at length possessed.


Agarista.
Agarista, as Herodotus calls her, was the daughter of Clisthenes the Syconian:
she was of that inexpressible form, that her beauty attracted suitors from
all parts of Greece, amongst whom, Hypocledes the son of Tisander is numbered.
From Italy came Smyndrides, Sibarites, Syritanus, and Damnasus. From the coast
of Ionia, Amphimnestrus, Epidamnius, Aetolus, and Meges. From Peloponnesus
Leocides, Amianthus, Archas, Heleus, Laphanes and Phidon, son to the king of
the Argiues. From Attica, Megacles the son of Al^menon. From Etruria, Lysanius.
From Thessalie Diacrides, and Cranomius. From Molossus Alcon, in number 20.
These came into Greece to express themselves in many noble contentions,
because Clistthines the son of Aristonius and father of Agarista had made
proclamation, that he only should enjoy the Virgin, who could best express
himself in noble action and valor. Hyppodamia was daughter to Oenemaus king of
Aelis, Hyppodamia.
and of such attractiue beauty, that she likewise drew many princely suitors
to her fathers court, though to the most certain danger of their lives. Caelius
writes that Marmax was the first that contended with her in the chariot race,
and failing in his course was slain by the tyrant; the Mares with which he
ran (as some write) were called Parthenia and Eripha, whose throats Oenemaus
caused to be cut and after buried. After him perished in the same manner
Alcathus, the son of Parthaon. Eurialus, Eurimacus, Crotalus, Acrius of
Lacedemon, Capetus, Licurgus, Lasius, Chalcodas, Tricolonus, Aristomachus,
Prias, Pelagus, Aeolius, Chromius, and Eritheus the son of Leucon. Amongst
these are numbered Merimnes, Hypotous, Pelops, Opontius, Acaruan, Eurilachus,
Antomedon, Lasius, Chalcon, Tric^ronus Alcathus, Aristomachus, and Croc^lus.
Sisigambis as Q. Curtius relates, Sisigambis.
was inferior to no lady that lived in her age, yet notwithstandig, Alexander
the Great having overcome her husband Darius in battle, was of that
continence, that he only attempted not to violate her chastity, but became
her guardian, and protected her from all the injuries that might have been
done to a captive. Plutarch writes of a Roman Lady called Praecia, Praecia.
of that excellent shape and admired feature, as she indeered Cethegus unto her
so far, that he enterprised no dissigne or managed any affiaire without the advice and approbation of the beautiful Pra^cia. So precious likewise was the
fair Roxana in the eyes of Alexander, Roxana.
that having subdued all the Eastern kingdoms, and being Lord of the world;
yet from being the daughter of a mercinarie soldier, and a Barbarian, he took
her into his bosom, and crowned her with the Imperial Diadem. Aegina, Aegina.
the daughter of Aesopus, king of Boetia, for her excellent pulchritude was
beloved of Jupiter; of whom Ovid, Aureus in Danaen, Aesopida luseritignis:
In Gold fair Danae had her full desire,
But with th'Aesopian Girl he played in fire.


So likewise Antiopa, Antiopa.
the daughter of Nycteis and wife of Lycus king of Thebes, was for the
rareness of her form comprest by him, of whom he begot Zethus and Amphion. O
what a power is in this beauty? It made the Cyclops Poliphemus turn Poet; who
(as Ovid in his Lib. 13.) thus writes in the praise of his mistress Galataea:
Galataea.
Candidior folio niuei Galataea ligustri, etc.
Oh Galataea, thou art whiter far
Than leaves of Lillies: not green Meadows are
More flourishing, thy stature does appear
Straighter than th'Elmes; than Glass thou art more clear:
More wanton than the young Kid, and more light
Than those loose shells the billows have made white
Still tumbled with the waves: more grace thou have won,
Than is in Summers shade, or Winters Sun,
Louelyer than is the Apple, when his side
Turns yellow; than the Plane tree, of more pride;
Transparenter than I sicles, that meet
With rising Phoebus; than ripe Grapes, more sweet:
Thou art of all choice things the general Theme,
Soft as Swannes plumes, and fair as clow^ed Cream.


Therefore you Fair ones, the more choice your beauty is, you ought of it to
be more charie: the sweeter the flower is, the sooner it loses the smell; the
fairer the color, it the sooner fades; and the purer the blood, the apter to
take putrefaction. Take heed then, least by unlawful prostitution you mar
that by which in outward appearance you come nearest to your Maker, who as he
is the Summum bonum, so he is the sovereign and only perfect beauty. A
Tyrant having studied many fearful and terrible deaths, to inflict upon such
as his malice would punish; when he thought none grievous enough, at length
(as his masterpiece of Tyranny) he devised to bind the living to the body of
the dead, that the stench and corruption of the one might stifle and suffocate
the other. In what greater torment then is that man, who shall marry a fair
false one, that shall bed with sin and bosom diseases? The dead body to
which the living is bound, as the blood dryes and the flesh consumes, so does
the loathsomenesse of the smell, till in time it wast to ashes, and so to
participate of the same earth from whence it came: but your catching and
infectious loathsomenesse, from lust grows to leprosy, still increasing in
you, to the impairing of his health and the impouerishing his estate, consuming
his purse and contaminating his person. O miserable man, whom thy rash choice
shall cause to die of this wretched consumption. But this is but a caveat or
admonition by the way: I proceed now with history.

The fair Mistress of Pisistratus.
Pisistrati amica.
PHilarchus speaks of a beautiful woman (on whom he has vouchsafed no name)
who first brought Pisistratus from a private man to a government Monarchical.
She took upon her the name and habit of Pallas, as paralleld with her both in
state and beauty, being thought by the people in all accomplishments to
resemble the goddess: she is said to have dealt Scepters, and to have made
sale of Crowns, distributing them where she pleased, and to whom she
affected. Pisistratus after gave her to his son in marriage, who was called
Hypparchus; for so Clidemus in his eight book, entitled Redditionum, leaves
recorded in these words: He gave unto his son Hypparchus a woman, by whom he
was overcome, who was a Pallas for her State, and for Wisdom might be called
the daughter of Socrates: and where beauty and counsel meet, there cannot
choose but be a sweet concordance and harmony. It shall not be amiss in the
next place briefly to discover unto you, what places have been the most
eminent for the breeding of the rarest beauties, and which by the ancient
Authors have been most celebrated.

Lib. 3.
Hesiodus in his Melampodia nominates the city Chalcides in Euboea, to breed
the choysest beauties, as that the most exquisite women are there borne. Of the
same opinion with him is Theophrastus: but Nymphodorus in his Navigations and
Travails through Asia, affirms, That the most incomparable features above all
other places whatsoever, are bred in Tenedos, an Isle belonging to Troy.
Dionisius Leuctricus has left recorded, That for many years continuance there
was an annual contention of Beauty held amongst the Elians in the city of
Elis, and that she that proved Victoresse, was honored with the Arms
consecrated to Pallas. Others in other places, as Mysilus in his historical
Paradoxes has left remembered, were crowned with wreathes of Myrtle. In other
places, as Theophrastus writes, there were meetings and solemnities kept to
censure women for their temperance and good huswiferie, as among the
Barbarians; but for the form and feature, they were most frequent amongst the
inhabitants of Tenedos and Lesbos. Heraclius Lembus writes, That in Sparta with
great admiration and reverence they observe the fairest man or woman, and
commonly the Spartane beauties are the most illustrious. Therefore of the king
Archidamus it is left registered, That being to make choice of a queen, when
one singularly beautiful, but of small dower, and another wondrous rich but
extraordinary deformed, were placed before him, he cast his eye upon the goods
of Fortune, and neglecting the treasures of Nature, preferred bondage before
beauty: For which, the Ephori (which in Athens were the same officers that the
Tribunes were in Rome) called him to account, and put him to an extraordinary
great mulct, saying, This man in steed of sovereigns would beget subjects, and
for princes leave peasants to succeed and reign over us. Euripides says,
That beauty has the first place in the claim of Empire: therefore those that
in Homer were admirers of Helens beauty, spoke to this purpose: Indignum nihil
est Troes fortes and Achiuos
Tempore tam longo perpessos esse labores;
Ob talem vxorem cui praestantissima foema,
Nil mortale refert superisque simillima diuis.
The Greeks and Trojans who can say were base?
So long and so great Labors to endure
For such a wife, whose most excelling face
Shows nothing mortal, but all God-like pure.


This made the Spartans (the place from whence Helen was ravished) as the
greatest courtesy to entertain a stranger, Athenae. lib. 13. cap. 7.
to show unto them their Virgins naked. A custom they had likewise in the Isle
of Chios in certain times of the year, after the same manner, to behold the
young men and maids in public wrestle together.

Nitetis.
CAmbyses hearing that the Egyptian women did much differ from other nations
in manners and behavior, Athenae. lib. 13. cap. 4.
especially from the custom of the Persians, sent to Amasa king of the
Egyptians, to demand his only daughter in marriage. The King something
troubled at this Embassy, as fearing he would rather keep his daughter as a
Concubine, than give her the right of her birth and to honor her with the
titles of a Queen and Bride, he devised this policy to delude Cambyses, and
still to conserve her chastity: he had there in his Court a young Lady,
called Nitetis, the daughter of Aprias an Egyptian, whom because he had been
defeated in a battle against the Cyrenaeans, Amasa had caused to be slain.
This Nitetis being the prime and choice beauty of the Court, in all her
lineaments so exquisite, that he presumed she would not only content but much
delight the king: he instructed her how to take upon her the name of his
daughter, and in every circumstance and complement how to demean her self,
so with a princely train accommodates her for the journey. Being arrived in
Persia, she was royally entertained by the king, her behavior and beauty more
pleasing him than any of his choice damosells selected out of his many
provinces: in so much that he hastened the marriage, which was with no small
pomp, according to the manner of the Persians. Nitetis lying in the kings
bosom, and knowing how much she was indeered to him, as now not casting his
eye or affection upon any other, began to call to remembrance her fathers
death, and what a plain and smooth way lay open to her to be revenged on him
that slew him; and forgetting the honors she had received by Amasaes means, in
preferring her to be quenne of Persia; not rating that good, equal with the ill
she received in the shedding of her fathers blood: she opened to Cambises all
the whole imposture, withal importuned him to revenge the death of her father
Aprias. The king as much pleased with her plain and seeming simplicity, as
incensed with so great an injury done to him by Amasa, as well to revenge her
father, as his own wrongs, with an invincible army invaded Egypt. Dinon in
his book of the Persian History, and Lynceas Naucratica in his Egyptian
History, they agree that Nitetis was sent to Cyrus, and that by him she was
the mother of Cambyses, and that after the death of Cyrus the Army with which
he went against Amasa and invaded Egypt; was to revenge the wrongs of a
mother, and not a wife.

Bersane.
Lib. 3.

Lib. 6. and 8.


SHe (as Curtius and Gellius both assent) was the widow of one Damascus, of
that singular aspect that Alexander the great became enamoured of her above all
other, so that when neither the rare beauty of Darius his wife and daughters
could tempt him, nor the whorish blandishments of Thais and others corrupt him
(indeed where his modesty and temperance is preferred before many other
princes, almost all) yet with her he was entangled. For those that write of him
affirm, that he was never known to enter into the familiar embraces of any
save his own wife and this Bersane; whom he made one of the Queens women.

Berseba.
It is not to be questioned, but that Berseba she was a goodly fair woman, and
of extraordinary feature, which pierced so deep into the breast of that most
wise king and prophet David, that all religion and sanctity set apart, he for
her love committed the two most heinous and horrible sins of adultery and
murder, for he caused her husband Vriah to be slain, and after married her, a
great blemish to his former holiness, of whom Strozza Pater thus writes: Ille
sacri vates operis Iesseia proles,
Praefecit populo quem Deus ipse suo,
Bersabeae captus forma --
The Psalmist borne of the Iesseian Line,
The famous Author of that work Divine,
Whom God made Ruler over his people, he
Dotes on the feature of fair Bersabe.


Lycaste, one of the daughters of Priam, was fair above measure, insomuch that
Polydamus the son of Anthenor, whom he begot of Theano the sister of Hecuba,
of a Concubine made her his wife. There was another Lycaste that we read of,
who for her perfection in all degrees of comeliness, had the name of Venus
bestowed upon her.

The wife of Candaules.
THis Candaules, Herodotus in Clio.
whom the Grecians call Myrsilus, was king of the Sardians, and descended from
Alcaeus the son of Hercules; having a wife whom he affectionately loved,
Plat. 2. de Repub.
and therefore judging her to be the fairest of women, could not contain his
pleasures, but coming to one Gyges, the son of Dascylus (a servant of his,
to whom he vouchsafed his greatest familiarity) he to him extolls the
beauty of his wife above measure; and because (says he) I would have thee
truly know that she is no otherwise than I have reported her, and that men's
ears naturally are more incredulous than their eyes, I will devise a means
that thou shall see her naked. To whom Gyges replyde, O royal sir, What words
be these? you speak that which rather savors of a man distract, than well
counseled and advised; women that put off their garments, with them put off
their modesty: therefore it was well determined and pro^ided by our fathers,
wherein they proposed unto us honest rules and examples, among which this was
one, That every man should have inspection into his own, and guide himself
by that compass. I verily believe she is matchless above all other women, and
deservedly to merit that character you have given her; but withal I beseech
you, that you will not persuade me to any thing which is not lawful. At these
words the king seemed to be displeased, and replyde: Be confident, o Gyges, and
neither distrust me in so persuading thee, nor my wife, who is altogether
ignorant of what I intend, since from neither of us any damage or detriment, no
not so much as the least displeasure can arise: for first I have devised, that
she shall not know nor once suspect that thou have beheld her; for I will order
it, that thou shall be secretly conveyed into the chamber, and (unseen) behold
every passage of her making unready and coming to bed: Now when thou have
freely surueyed her in every part and lineament, and spyest her back toward
thee, convey thy self out of the room; only in this be careful, that at thy
remoouing she cast no eye upon thee: This done, the next morning give me thy
free and true censure. Gyges that could by no means avoid his importunity,
was prepared against the time. The king according to his accustomed hour,
conueyes himself into his c^a^ber, and so to bed: the queen soon after
entering, despoyles her self of all (...) vesture and ornaments, even to her
nakedness, all which Gyges was spectator of, who no sooner spyed her back
turned to go toward bed, but Gyges ships from the place where he was hid;
which was not so cunningly done, but he was espied by the queen: she
demanding the reason of it from her husband, and ^^^^ertifying the truth (but
with what modesty he could excusing it) she neither seemed to be angry, nor
altogether well pleased, but in her silence meditated revenge (for amongst the
Lydians, and almost all those barbarous nations, it is held great inciuilitie
and immodestie to behold a man, much more a woman, naked.) The next morning, by
such servants as she best trusted, she caused Gyges to be sent for, who
(misdoubting nothing that had past, as one that had many times free access
unto her) instantly came; she causing her servants to withdraw themselves, thus
bespake him: Two ways are proposed thee, o Gyges, and one of them instantly
and without least premeditation to make choice of; Either thou must kill
Candaules, and that done, be possessed of me, and with me the Crown of Lydia, or
instantly dye; for thy doom is already determined of, because thou shall know
that in all things it is not convenient to obey the king, or search into that
which thou ought not to know: There is now a necessity, that either he
that counseled thee to this must perish, or thou that obeyedst him against all
Law or Justice, to behold me (against reason or modesty) naked. Gyges at these
words was first wonderously amazed, but after recollecting himself, entreated
her not to compel him to so hard an exigent, as to the choice of either. But
finding that necessity, that he must be forced to one or the other, to kill
the king, or to be slain by others; he rather made choice to survive, and let
the other perish, and thus answered her: Since (generous Lady) you urge me to
an enterprise so much opposite to my milder nature and disposition, propose
some safe course how this may be done. Even (says she) in the selfsame place
where he devised this mischief against himself (namely, his bedchamber)
where to thee I was first discovered. Therefore providing all things necessary
for so determinate a purpose, and the night coming on, Gyges (who knew no
evasion, but to kill his master or dye himself) awaited his best advantage,
and having notice when Candaules was asleep, followed the queen into her
chamber, and with a Poniard (by her provided for the purpose) stabbed him to
the heart, by which he attained both the queen and kingdom. Of this
history, Archilochus Parius makes mention in his Iambicks, who lived about the
same time; affirming, That Gyges was by the Oracle of Delphos confirmed in the
kingdom, after the Faction of the Heraclides had opposed his sovereignty.

Rowan and Estrilda.
Stowe.
ROwan was a maid of wonderful beauty and pleasantness, daughter to Hengest,
a captain of the Saxons. Of this Lady, Vortiger (then king) grew so enamored,
that for her sake he was divorced from his wife, by whom he had three sons;
for which deed, the greatest part of the Britains forsook him: therefore he
(by the instigation of Rowan) still caused more and more Saxons to be sent for,
under pretense to keep the Land in subjection. But the Britains considering
the daily repair of the Saxons, came to the King, and told him the danger that
might ensue; entreating him whilst it wa^ yet time, and to prevent a future
misery, to expel them the Land. But all in ^aine, for Vortiger was so
besotted in the beauty of his fair wife (by whose counsel he was altogether
swayed) that he would in no wise listen to the counsel of his subjects.
Wherefore they with one united consent deprived him of his Crown and dignity,
making Vortimerus his eldest son king in his stead. Who was no sooner
crowned, Harding.
but with all expedition he raised an army, and pursued the Saxons, and in
four maine battles, besides conflicts and skirmishes, became victorious over
them. The Saxons and their insolences thus sup^^est, and the king now
governing the Land in peace (after he had reigned seu^^ years) was by this
Rowan (in revenge of the disgrace done to her king, deposed, and her
countrymen disgraced) most trecherously poisoned.

Estrilda.
Locrin, the eldest son of Brute, chased the Hunnes which invaded the realm
of England, and so hotely pursued them, that many of them (with their king)
were drowned in a river which parts England, and Scotland; and after the name
of the king of the Hunnes (who there perished) the river is to this day called
Humbar. Harding in Fabian.
This king Locrin had to wife ^^^^doline, a daughter of Cori^eus duke of
Cornwall, by whom he had a son cal^^d Mad^n: He kept also a Paramour, called
the beautiful Lady Estrilda; by whom he had a daughter called Sabrina.
Locrine after the death of Corineus, of whom he stood in awe, divorced himself
from his lawful wife, and took to his embraces his fair concubine: moved
with this injury Guendoline retired herself into Cornwall, where she
gathered a great power, fought with her husband, slew him in battle, and
after caused him to be buried in Troy-nouant. That done, she caused the fair
Estrilda with her daughter Sabrina to be drowned in a river, that which parts
England and Wales, which still bears the name of the young Virgin, and is
called Seuerne. These her dessignes accomplished, for so much as Madun her young
son was but in his pupillage, and not of capacity or age to govern the
Land; by the common sufferage of all the Brittons, she was made Protectoresse
and Lady Regent of the kingdom, which to the comfort of the subjects and the
weal of the kingdom, she discreetly governed for the space of fifteen
years; and therefore her memory might fitly have been rancked amongst the
most Illustrious women. Her son coming to age and years of discretion, she
to him resigned the Scepter.

The Fair lady of Norwich.
ANd now because we traffic altogether with History, it shall not be
amiss sometimes to mingle Seria Iocis, as shall appear by this discourse
which I have often heard related. A knight both of same and memory, and whose
name is still upon record, being eminent and of note with Henry the fifth, as
personally with him in all the wars in France; after the king had both
conquered and quieted the Land, this noble Englishman retired himself into his
country. He had a Lady that was of such beauty that she attracted the eyes
of all beholders, with no common admiration, in brief I cannot speak of her
feature sufficiently, as being far beyond the compass of my pen, and
therefore I put her into the number of my Fair ones. This lady with her
husband residing in the city of Norwich, He, after so many troubles and
torments, purposed a more sequestered life, and (next the solace he had in the
beauty and virtues of his wife) to take a course merely contemplative: and
thought, out of the abundance of his wealth, to do some pious deeds for the
good of his soul: he therefore erected in the city and near to the place
where his house stood, a goodly Church at his own charge, and betwixt them a
Religous house that entertained twelve Friars and an Abbot, allowing them
demeanes competent for so small a brotherhood. In this covent there were two,
Friar John and Friar Richard; these were still at continual enmity, and
especial notice taken of it amongst the rest, which by no mediation could be
truly reconciled: but omitting that, it was custom of the knight and his
lady daily to rise to morning Mattins, and she being affable and courteous to
all, it bred a strange inciuile boldness in Friar John, for she never came
through the cloister, but he was still with duckes and cringes attending her,
which she (suspecting nothing) simply with modest smiles returned thanks to
him again: which grew so palpable in the Friar, that as far as they durst it
was whispered in the covent. Briefly, after these encouragements (as he
constered them) it bred in him that impudency, that he presumed to write a
letter to her, in which he laid open a great deal of more than necessary
love. This letter with great difficulty came to her hand; at which the lady
astonished, as not dreaming that such lewdness should come from one that
professed chastity, and not knowing whether it might be a trick complotted by
her husband to make trial of her chastity: howsoever, least her honor should
be any way called in question, she thought it her best and safest course to
show the letter to her husband; of which he had no sooner took a view, but he
began to repent him of his former charity, in regard of their so great
ingratitude. But there yet wants revenge for so great a wrong, the knight
concealing his rage, causes an answer of this letter to be drawn, to which he
commanded her to set to her hand; the contents to this effect, That she was
greatly compassionate of his love, and that such a night her husband being to
ride toward London, he should be admitted, lodged, and entertained according
to his own desires. This letter was sealed, closely sent, received by the
Friar with joy unspeakable: against the night he prouides him clean linen, a
perfumed nightcap, and other necessaries; he keeps his time, observes the
place, is closely admitted, and by herself without witness, and so conueighed
into a close chamber. Which he was no sooner entered, but in comes the knight
with his man, and in great fury, without giving him the least time either to
call for help to the house or to heaven, strangled the poor Friar and left
him dead upon the ground. The deed was no sooner done, and his rage somewhat
appeased, but he began to enter into consideration of the foulness of the
fact and heinousness of the murder, withal the strict penalty of the law due
for such an offense, which would be no less than forfeiture of life and
estate; and now he begins better to ponder with himself how to prevent the
last, which may give him further leisure to repent the first. After diverse and
sundry proiects cast betwixt him and his man, it came into his mind, by some
means or other to have his body conveyed back into the Monastery, which
being divided from his house only with a bricke-wall, might be done without
any great difficulty: this was no sooner motioned, but instantly his man
remembers him of a ladder in the backyeard fit for the purpose; briefly, they
both lay hand to the body, and the man with the Friar on his back mounts the
ladder, and sits with him astride upon the wall, then drawing up the ladder to
the contrary side, descends with him down into the Monastery, where spying
the house of office, he set him upon the same as upright as he could, there
leaves him and conueyes himself again over the wall, but for have forgetting
the ladder, and so delivers to his master how and where he and bestowed the
Friar: at which being better comforted they betook themselves both to their
rest. All this being concealed, as well from the Lady as the rest of the
household, who were in their depth of sleep. It happened at the same instant,
that Friar Richard being much troubled with a loosnesse in his body, had
occasion to rise in the night, and being somewhat hastily and unhandsomely
taken, makes what speed he can to the house of office, but by the light of the
Moon discerning some one before him, whilst he could and was able, he
contained himself, but finding there was no remedy, he first called and then
entreated to come away; but hearing no body answer, he imagined it to be done
on purpose, the rather because approaching the place somewhat nearer, he might
plainly perceive it was Friar John, his old adversary, who the louder he
called seemed the less to listen; loath he was to play the slouen in the
yard, the rather because the whole covent had taken notice of a cold he had
late got, and how it then wrought with him: therefore thinking this counterfeit
dea^^enesse to be done of purpose and spite, to make him ashamed of himself,
he snatched up a Brick-bat to be revenged, and hitting his adversary full upon
the breast, down tumbles Friar John, without life or motion: which he seeing,
thought at first to raise him up; but after many proofs finding him to be
stone dead, verily believes that he had slain him. What shall he now do?
The gates are fast locked, and fly he cannot: but as sudden extremities
impresse in men as sudden shifts, so he espying the Ladder, presently
apprehends what had been whispered of Friar John's love to the knights lady:
and lifting him upon his shoulders, by the help of the same Ladder, carries
him into the porch of the knights hall, and there sets him, and so closely
conueyes himself back into the Monastery the same way he came, not so much
as suspected of any. In the interim, whilst this was done, the knight being
perplexed and troubled in conscience, could by no means sleep, but calls up
his man, and bids him go listen about the walls of the Monastery, if he can
hear any noise or uproar about the murder. Forth goes he from his masters
chamber, and having past the length of the hall, purposing to go through the
yard, finds Friar John sitting upright in the porch; he starting at the
sight, runs back affrighted, and almost distracted, and (scarce able to
speak) brings this news to his master: who no less astonished, could not
believe it to be so (but rather his man's fantasy) till himself went down and
became eyewitness of the strange object. Then wonderously despayring, he
intimates within himself, that murder is one of the crying sins, and such a
one as cannot be concealed: yet recollecting his spirits, he purposes to make
trial of a desperate adventure, and put the discovery thereof to accident: he
remembers an old stallion, that had been a horse of service, then in his
stable, one of those he had used in the French wars, and withal, a rustie
Armor hanging in his Armorie; he commands both instantly to be brought, with
strong new cords, a case of rustie Pistolls, and a Lance. The horse is sadled
and caparrison'd, the Armor put upon the Friar, and he fast bound in the seat,
the Lance tied to his wrist, and the lower end put into the rest, his
head-peece clasped on, and his Beauer up; the skirts of his gray gown serve
for Bases: and thus accoutred, like a knight compleately armed Cap a pe, they
purpose to turn him out of the gates, he and his horse, without any Page or
Esquire, to try a new adventure. Whilst these things were thus in fitting,
Friar Richard in the Monastery no less perplexed in conscience than the
knight, about the murder, casting all doubts, and still dreading the
strictness of the Law, summons all his wits about him to prevent the worst; at
length sets up his rest, that it is his best and safest way to fly: he
remembers withal, that there was belonging to the Fryerie a Mare, employed to
carry corn to and fro from the mill (which was some half a mile from the
Monastery) being somewhat fat, and therefore misdoubting his own footmanship,
he thinks it the safer course to trust to four legs than to two, he
therefore calls up the Baker that had the charge of the beast, and tells him,
he understands there was Meal that morning to be fetched from the Mill, which
was grinded by that time; therefore if he would let him have the Mar^, he would
(it being now night) save him that labor, and bring it back before morning.
The fellow willing to spare so much pains, caused the back gate to be opened.
The Friar gets up, and rides out of the Monastery gate, just at the instant
when the knight and his man had turned out the Friar on horseback to seek his
fortune, the horse presently sents the mare, and after her he gallops. Friar
Richard looking back amazed to have an armed knight pursue him, and by the
Moone-light perceiving the Friar armed (for he might discern his face partly
by the Moon, and partly by the breaking of the day, his Beauer being up) away
flies he, and takes through the streets; after him (or rather the mare)
speedes the horse. Great noise was in the city; insomuch, that many awaking
out of their sleeps and morning rests, from their windows looked out. At
length it was Friar Richards ill fate to take into a turne-againe-lane, that
had no passage through; there Friar John ouertakes him: the horse mounts the
mare, and with his violent motion the rotten and rustie armor makes a terrible
noise; Friar Richards burdened conscience clamours out aloud for help, and
withal cries, Guilty of the murder: at the noise of murder the people being
amazed, run out of their beds into the streets. They apprehend miracles, and
he confesses wonders; but withal, that barbarous and inhumane fact, to
murder one of his Covent: the grudge that was betwixt them is known, and the
apparent justice of heaven the rather believed. Friar John is dismounted, and
sent to his grave, Friar Richard to prison; he is arraigned, and in process,
by his own confession condemned. But before the execution, the knight knowing
his own guilty conscience, posts instantly to the king, makes his voluntary
confession, and has his life and goods (for his former good service) pardoned
him, Friar Richard is released, and the accident remains still recorded.

Of Callirhoe, daughter to Boethius.
Plut. Amat. Narration.
I Now return to more serious antiquity: Phocus Boethius, was borne in the
city Glisantes and had a daughter called Callirhoe, of such incomparable
feature and beauty mixed, and withal so inherent a modesty and virtue, all
meeting in one center to make a perfect and complete creature, that thirty of
the noble youths of Boetia were suitors to her at once, and every one
solicited her for marriage; but Phocus fearing their importunities, and by
inclining to one, to hazard the displeasures of all the rest, delayde them for
his consent: but they still more and more urging him, he desired but respite
till he sent to Delphos, there to demand the advice of the Oracle, how to
dispose of his daughter; but they taking this his pretended delay in ill part,
all enraged, with an unanimous consent set violently upon him and his
household: in which conflict Phocus was slain. It happened that in the midst
of this tumult the Virgin escaped and fled into the country, whom the suitors
no sooner missed, but they with all expedition pursued her; it so fell out (for
such was her good fortune) that she light upon some country people that were
remoouing their corn from the field into the barn (for it was then harvest)
whom she humbly besought, to be her protectors from rape and the preseruers of
her virginity: they having commiseration of her youth and beauty (both which
are prevailing orators) hid her amongst the sheaues, by which the pursuers were
disappointed of their purpose, and being at a loss, ouer-run the game they
chaced. Amongst these honest and simple people she lived for a time retired
and unknown, till the solempnitie of a great feast day, which the Boetians
called Pamboeotia, at which there was customably a mighty confluence of people
of all sorts and degrees from the highest to the lowest. To this feast she
came, which was then celebrated in the city Coranea, and prostrating her
self before the altar of Itonia Minerua, in the face of that great
congregation, complained of the murder of her father, capitulating all their
insolences and her own injuries; which she did with such feeling words and
passionate tears, that she not only attracted the eyes of every one to
behold, but moved the hearts of all to pity; which perceiving, and how the
multitude was affected toward her, she gave to every of the murderers a
particular nomination, both of the families from whence they came, and the
places where they had then their residence. The rioters this hearing, and
finding how the people were annimated and incenst against them, they fled to
Orchomenus, but were not there admitted but excluded from forth the gates;
from thence they fled to Hippota (a small city near Hellicon situate
betwixt the Thebans and the Corineans) and were there received. To them the
Thebans sent, that these murderers and rauishers might be surrendered up to
their justice. But being denied, they with other Boetians made an expedition
against them; of which forces, Phaedus then Praetor amongst the Thebans, was
made captain: the city Hippota was bravely besieged and assaulted, so
likewise as resolutely defended; but number prevailing they were compelled to
yield themselves, with their city. The murderers now surprised, they were
condemned to be stoned to death, and had the execution of their judgment: the
rest of the Hippotences were brought under bondage and made slaves, their walls
and houses demolished to the earth, their fields and possessions being equally
distributed betwixt the Thebans and the Corineans. It is said that the same
night before the surrender of the city, that a voice was often heard to call
aloude from Helicon, Adsum Adsum, i. I am hear, I am hear; which the thirty
suitors affirmed to be the voice of Pho^^s; as likewise the same day of their
executions, and at the instant when they were stoned, saffron was seen to
distill out of a monument which was erected in the city Glisantes. Phaedus
being newly returned from the fight, a messenger brought him news of a young
daughter that day borne, whom for omens sake he caused to be called Nicostrate.

The Wives of Cabbas and of Phaillus.
A Preposterous thing, Plutarch. in Amatorio.
and almost against nature (at least humanity and good manners) it is that I
read of these two, who after the example of Domitian and Commodus, those
monsters of nature, have not only made their strumpets, but their own wives
(either for servile fear, or abominable lucre) prostitutes to other men. This
Cabbas, a Roman (worthy for ever to be branded with base Wittoldrie) had a
Lady to his wife of incomparable beauty, insomuch, that all men beholding
her, apprehended what happiness he was possessed of above others. The report of
her rare accomplishments, amongst many, attracted Mecenas (then a great
favorite of the Emperor Augustus) to inuit himself to his house, where he
was nobly feasted. Mecenas being of a corrupt and licentious disposition, and
much taken with her beauty, could not contain himself; but he must needs be
toying with her, using action of plain Incontinence in the presence of her
husband^ who perceiving what he went about, and the servants (it seems) for
modesty having withdrawn themselves from forth the chamber (the Table ^ot yet
being taken away) Cabbas (to give Me^enas the freer liberty) ca^ts himself
upon the bed, and counter^eits sleep. Whilst this ill-managed business was
in hand, one of the servants listening at the door, and hearing no noise, but
all quiet, with soft steps enters the chamber, to steal away a flaggon pot
that stood full of wine upon the Table: Which Cabbas espying, casts up his
head, and thus softly said to him; Thou rascal, Do thou not know that I
sleep only to Mecenas? A baseness better becoming some Ieaster, or Buffoon,
than the noble name of a Roman.

In the city of Argis grew a contention betwixt Nicostratus and Phaillus,
about the management of the Commonweal, Philip of Macedon, the father of
Alexander, coming then that way; Phaillus having a beautiful young wife (one
esteemed for the very Paragon of the city) and knowing the disposition of the
king to be addicted to all voluptuousness (and that such choice beauties, and
to be so easily come by, could not lightly escape his hands) presently
apprehends, that the prostitution of his wife might be a present Ladder for him
to climb to the principality, and have the entire government of the city:
Which Nicostratus suspecting, and many times walking before his gates (to
observe the passage of the house within) he might perceive Phaillus fitting
his wives feet with rich embrodered Pantofles, jewels about her hair, rings on
her fingers, bracelets about her wrists, and carkanets upon her arm, in a
Macedonian vesture, and a covering upon her in the manner of a Hat, which was
only lawful for the kings themselves to wear: And in this manner habited
like one of the kings pages, but so disguised that she was scarce known of
any; he submitted her to the king. There are too many in our age, that by as
base steps would mount to honor; I could wish all such to carry the like brand
to posterity.

Chloris.
Chloris was the daughter of Amphion, and the wife of Neleus the son of
Hyppocoon, as fruitful as beautiful, for she brought twelve sons ^o her
husband; of which, ten with their father were slain by Hercules, in the
expugnation of Pylus; the eleventh, called Periclemenes, was transformed into
an Eagle, and by that means escaped with life; the twelfth was Nestor, who was
at that time in Ilos: He, by the benefit of Apollo, lived three hundred
years, for all the days that were taken from his father and brothers by their
untimely death, Phoebus conferred upon him, and that was the reason of his
longeuitie. Aethra.
Aethra, the daughter of Pytheus, was of that attractiue feature, that Neptune
and Aegeus (both) lay with her in the Temple of Minerua: but Neptune
disclayming her issue, bestowed it on Aegeus; who leaving her in Troezene, and
departing for Athens, left his sword beneath a huge stone, enioyning Aethra,
That when his son was able to remove the stone, and take thence his sword,
she should then send him to him, that by such a token he might acknowledge him
his son. Theseus was borne, and coming to years, she acquainted him with
his fathers imposition; who removed the stone, and took thence the sword,
with which he slew all the thieves and robbers that interposed him in his way
to Athens. Danae.
Danae the daughter of Acrisius and Aganippe, had this fate assigned her by the
Oracle, That the child she bore should be the death of her father Acrisius:
which he understanding, shut her in a Brazen Tower, restrayning her from the
society of men: but Jupiter enamoured of her rare feature, descended upon her
in a shewer of Gold, of which congression Perseus was begot; whom Acrisius
caused with his mother to be sent to sea in a mast-lesse boat; which touching
upon the Island Seriphus, was found by a fisherman, called Dyctis; who
presents the desolate Lady, with her son, to king Polyd^ct^s. He surprised
with her beauty, married her, and caused her son Perseus to be educated in
the Temple of Minerua, and after made atonement betwixt them and Acrisius. But
Polydectes dying, at the funeral games celebrated at his death, in casting of
a mighty, stone (being one of the exercises then used) Perseus (whose hand
failed him) cast it unawares upon the head of Acrisius, and slew him, against
his own purpose making good the will of the Oracle. Acrisius being buried,
Perseus succeeded his grandfather in the city Argos.

Helena was first ravished by Theseus, Helena.
and afterward by Paris: she had these suitors, Antiochus, Ascalaphus, Ajax
Oeleus, Antimachus, Aeoeus, Blanirus, Agapenor, Ajax Telamonius, Clyrius,
Cyanaeus, Patroclus, Diomedes, Penelaeus, Phaemius, Nyraeus, Polypates,
Elephenor, Fumetus, Stenelus, Tlepolemus, Protesilaus, Podalyrius, Euripilus,
Idomenaeus, Teliotes, Tallius, Polyxenus, Protus, Menestaeus, Machaon, Thoas,
Ulysses, Philippus, Meriones, Meges, Philoctetes, Laeonteus, Talpius, Prothous:
but she was possessed by Menelaus.

A^ge was the fair daughter of Aleus, Auge.
and comprest by Hercules, and delivered of her son in the mountain
Parthenius: at the same time, Atalanta the daughter of Iasius, exposed her
son begot by Meleager, unto the same place; these children being found by the
shepherds, they called the son of Hercules Telephus, because he was nursed
by a Heart which fed him with her milk; they called the son of Meleager,
Parthenopaeus, of the mountain. Auge fearing her fathers displeasure, fled
into Moesia to king Teuthrus, who for her beauties sake (having himself no
children) adopted her his heir. These following are the fifty fair daughters
of Danaeus, The daughters of Danaeus.
with the fifty sons of Aegiptus, whom the first night of their marriage
they slew: Idea killed Antimachus; Philomela, Pantheus; Seilla, Proteus;
Philomone, Pl^xippus; Euippe, Agenor; Demoditas, Chrysippus; Hyale, Perius;
Trite, Enceladus; Damone, Amintor; Hyp^thoe, Obrimus; Mirmidone, Mineus;
Euridice, Canthus; Cleo, Asterius; Arcania, Xanthus; Cleopatra, Metalces;
Philea, Phylinas; Hyparite, Protheon; Chrysothemis, Asterides; Pyraule,
Athamas: her name is lost that slew Armoasbus; Gla^cippe, Ni^uius; Demophile,
Pamphilus; Antodice, Clytus; Polyxena, Egiptus; Hecabe, Driantes; Achemantes,
Echominus; Arsalte, Ephialtes; Monuste, Euristhanes; Amimone, Medamus; Helice,
Euideus; Amoeme, Polidector; Polybe, Iltonomus; Helicta, Cassus; Electra,
Hyperantus; Eubule, Demarchus; D^plidice, Pugones; Hero, Andromachus; Europone,
Atlites; Pyrantis, Plexippus; Critomedia, Antipaphus; Pyrene, Dalychus;
Eupheno, Hyperbius; Themistagora, Podasimus, Palaeno, Ariston; It^^,
A^tilochus; Erate, Endemon; Hypern^nestra was the only Lady that in that
great slaughter spared her husband Lyncaeus. What should I speak of Antigona,
the sister of Polinices; Electra, the daughter of Clytemnestra; Hermione of
Helen, Polyxena of Hecuba, Iphigenia of Agamemnon; Erigone, Merope, Proserpina,
Amimone, Oenone, Calisto; Alope, the daughter of Cercyon, and Theophane of
Bysaltis, both stuprated by Neptune; Th^onoe and Zeutippe, the daughters of
Thestor; Chi^ne, otherwise called Philonide, the daughter of Dedalion; Coramis,
the daughter of Phlegia, adulterated by Apollo; Nictimine, comprest by her
father Epopeus? The very Index or Catalogue of whose names only, without their
histories, would ask a Volume. For their number, I will refer you to Ovid,
in his first book de Art amandi: Gargarae quot segetes, etc.
Thick as ripe ears in the Gargarian fields,
As many green boughs as Methimna yields,
Fish, Foul, or Stars, in Sea, Air, Heaven; there be
So many pretty wenches (Rome) in thee.
Aenas Venus.
mother is still loved and feared
In that great city, which her son first reared.
If only in young girls thou do rejoice,
There Is scarce one house but it affoords thee choice:
If in new-marryed wives; but walk the street,
And in one day thou shall with thousands meet:
Or if in riper years; but look before,
Where ere thou go, thou shall find Matrons store.


If then one city, and at one time, could afford such multiplicitie, of all
ages, and degrees; how many, by that computation, may we reckon from the
beginning, amongst all the nations of the world? I doubt not then, but this
draught of water, fetched from so vast a Fountain, may at least cool the
palate, if not quench the thirst of the insatiat Reader.

Manto.
ZEbalia a man whose birth ranked him in the file of nobility, being employed
upon service in the Turkish wars, brought with him his most estimated and
greatest treasure, his dearest spouse styled Manto. But he dying in the crimson
bed of honor, the sinister hand of war gave her into the captivity of Bassa
Ionuses; who beholding with admiration a creature of so divine a feature, was
(though her conqueror) taken captive by her beauty: who having put her virtue
to the Test, found it to parallel, if not outshine her form. Wherefore being
covetous to engrosse so rich a booty to himself, he took her to wife,
bestowing on her a more honorable respect than on his other wives and
concubines, and she likewise endeavored to meet his affection with an answerable
observance and obedience. This fervent and mutual love continued long
inuiolate betwixt them; insomuch, that they were no less honored for their
eminence of state, than remarkable for their conjugal affection: but that
cursed fiend Jealousy envying at their admired sympathy, straight usurps the
throne of reason, and sits a predominant tyrant in his fantastike brain; for
he grew so strangely jealous, that he thought some one or other to corriuall
him, but yet knew not whom to taint with any just suspicion, nay he would
confess that he had not caught the least spark of looseness from her that
might thus fire this beacon of distraction in him. Briefly, his wife as
beautiful in mind as feature, wearied with his daily peevish humors, and
seeing all her studies aimed at his sole content, were entertained with neglect
and insolent scorn; she resolved to leave him, and secretly to fly into her
native country: to further which, she vnlockes this her secret intent, to an
Eunuch of the Bassaes, giving him withal certain letters to deliver to some
friends of hers, whom she purposed to use as agents in the furtherance of her
escape: but he proouing treacherous in the trust committed to his charge,
betrayde her to her husband, showing her letters as testimonies to his
allegations. The Bassa at this discovery swollen big with rage, called her
before him, whom in his disperate fury he immediately stabbed with his dagger,
thus with the cause of jealousy taking away the effect. But this bloody deed
somewhat loosened him in the peoples hearts, where he before grew deeply and
fast rooted: nor did he outrun Vengance, for at the last her leaden feet
ouertooke him, and in this manner. Selymus the first, at his departure from
Caire, his soldiers whom he there lefe in garrison made suit unto his highness,
That in consideration of the great labors they had already undergone,
together with the many dangers they were hourly in expectation of, that their
wages might be enlarged; which he granted, and withal gave this Bassa Ionuses
the charge to see the performance thereof. At last the pay-day came, but their
hopes proouing abortiue, the soldiers mutined: to conjure down which spirit
of insurrection, messengers are dispatched to the Emperor, to certify him of
the neglectiue abuse of his royal word, and fear of sedition: this news
ouertooke him at Larissa in Judea. Selymus enraged at this relation, sends for
Bassa Ionuses and examines the cause of his neglect in such and so weighty a
charge? Ionuses somewhat abashed, as being conscious (yet withal
highspirited) gave the Emperor a peremptory answer; at which being mightily
incenced, he commanded his head to be cut off, which was forthwith done: and
thus justice suffered not innocent Manto to die unrevenged.

The wife of Agetus the Lacedemonian.
HErodotus, Lib. 6. thus writes of this Lady, the daughter of Alcydes the
Spartan, first wife of Agetus, and after to the king Ariston. She, of the most
deformed infant, became the excellentest amongst women. Her nurse to whose
keeping she was given (for the parents were ashamed of their Issue) went with
her every day to the Temple of Helena, which stands in Therapne (near to the
Church of Apollo) and kneeling before the Altar, besought the goddess to
commiserate the child, and free her from her native ugliness and loathsome
deformity. Upon a time returning from the Temple, a woman appeared to her of a
venerable aspect, and desired to see what she carried so tenderly in her arms:
the nurse told her it was an infant, but such an one as she was loath to show,
and therefore desired to be excused, the rather, because she was enjoined by
the parents not to expose it to the sight of any. The more the nurse put her
off with euasions, the more importunate the strange woman was to behold it. At
length preuayling, she gently with her hand stroaked the face of the child,
and kissing it, thus said: Go nurse, and bear her home to her parents, who
shall in time become the most beautiful of the Spartan Ladies. From that time
forward, her deformity began to fall away, and a sweet grace and delightful
comeliness to grow as well in face as every other lineament. Coming to
marriage estate, she was solicited by many, but only possessed by Agetus: yet
after, by the craft of Ariston, she was divorced from Agetus, and conferred
upon him. Dion in Augusto speaks of Terentia, Terentia Mecenatis.
the wife of Mecaenas, to be of that rare feature, that she dared to contend
with Lyuia, the wife of Augustus Caesar, who was held to be the most amiable
and exquisite Lady of those days. Of Terentia the daughter of Cicero,
Terentia Ciceronis.
I have thus read: Titus the son of Milo, and Appius the son of Clodius
were as remarkable for their noble friendship, as their fathers notorious for
their irreconcilable hatred. Titus was for his fathers sake welcome to Cicero,
but Appius much hated, in regard of enmity betwixt him and his father Clodius,
for Cicero was of Miloes faction. Titus had long and dearly loved the fair
Terentia, but understanding that his friend Appius was likewise exceedingly
inamoured of her, he left his own suit, and earnestly solicited the lady in
his behalf, who was easily persuaded to the motion, having long before cast an
affectionate eye upon Appius, but durst make no expression thereof, much
fearing the displeasure of her father. Titus so well managed the business for
his friend that he brought him privily into the house of Cicero, where the two
lovers had mutual conference: her father coming home by accident, and finding
them together, in the heat of his impatience excluded him, and locked her up in
safe and close custody. Which the poor Lady took so to heart, that she
fell into an extreme fever and languishing daily, her father (now when it was
too late) desired to know what he might do to minister unto her the least
comfort: she only besought him that before her death, she might take her
last and loving leave of Appius; who was instantly sent for: at his sudden
coming in, she was extaside with his sight and expired in his embraces; which
the noble youth perceiving, he drew out a short dagger which he then wore
about him, and in the presence of her father and his own dear friend slew
himself. A more comicall conclusion has that which I shall next tell you.

A Vicars daughter.
An old Vicar in the country having a wondrous fair wench to his daughter, it
happened that a young scholar, that for want of means had left the
University, was preferred to the serving of a Cure somewhat near him; by
which he had opportunity to woo the maid, and after had the parents consent
to marry her. It happened not long after, this young man had a Parsonage
bestowed upon him by his patron; the father and the son meeting upon a time
at a market town, with diverse gentlemen of the country, being at dinner,
amongst other discourse cauelling about an argument, they fell into
controversy which should be the better man; many rough words passed, in so
much that the gentlemen were forced to come betwixt them and keep the peace.
The old man he stood upon his gravity and the name of father; the young man
pleaded, That in regard he was a Parson, and the other but a Vicar, that he was
the better of the two. This raised the uproar afresh, which the gentlemen had
much ado to appease: at length the young man demanded audience but for a few
words, in which (says he) if I do not convince him, and make it plain and
palpable before you all, that I am the worthier of the two, for name place and
antiquity, I will yield him prioritie and precedence for ever after. The words
of Name and Antiquity, the old man heard with much impatience; at length
audience being granted, and silence obtained: Now young knave (says the old
Vicar) what can thou say for thy self? I only desire (answered the young
man) to be resolved in one question: propound i^ say^h the other, Marry thus
(says he) When the world was distroyed in the general deluge, all save eight
Parsons, tell me, Where were the Vicars then? The old man was blanke, the
gentlemen smiled, and the young man carried it; so that ever after the son
took place of the father, and the fair daughter of the mother. I will only
remember you of a fair young gentlewoman, a country woman of mine, and so
conclude with my Fair ones.

A fair witty Wench.
A gallant newly come to his lands, became a suitor to a proper young Virgin,
her fathers only child and heir: He having had conference with her father,
conditions on both sides were debated, the match concluded, and the day of
marriage appointed: the father and the son in law riding abroad one morning
to take the air, the ancient gentleman was mounted on an easy paced Mare
which he kept his own saddle, this beast the young gallant was so enamored of,
that he offered to buy her at any rate, though never so unreasonable: but the
old man entreated him to hold him excused, because the beast was easy and
gentle, fitting his age, and being disfurnished of her he knew not how to come
by the like, therefore his resolution was, neither to depart from her for love
nor money. The gentleman grew so obstinate to have her, and the other so
selfe-will'd to keep her, that at length the son in law told him plainly,
That if he would not sell him his Mare, he would not marry his daughter. The
father at this grew into choler, and told him, If he respected his child no
better, but set her so slight, he bad him come when he sent for him, and upon
these short terms they parted. A fortnight passed in this discontent; at
length the young gallant better aduising with himself, and the gentlewomans
beauty still sticking in his stomach, he began to recant his former
obstinacy, and purposely took horse to renew old acquaintance and give her
fresh visitation: and coming something near the house, it was the young
gentlewomans fortune to spy him from a bay window, who instantly steps down
to the gate, meaning her self to play the porter. Three or four times he
knockes at the gate, but no body answered; at length he rapt so loud, that
she opened the wicket, and asked him, Who he was, and what he would have? He
seeing it was she, smilingly answered; It is I, sweetheart, do you not know
me? Not I indeed, replied she, for to my remembrance I never saw you before: To
whom he again answered, I am such a man, and by these and these tokens I can
put you in mind, that you cannot choose but know me. Oh, I cry you mercy; it
is true indeed (says she) I now very well remember you, You are he that came
a wooing to my fathers Mare: so clapped to the gate, and left him, and never
after would give him the least entertainment.

Of Women Deformed.
IT is remembered of the Poet Hypponax (by Pliny, Lib. 36. cap. 5.) to be of
that unhappy shape, unseemly presence, and uncomely countenance, so deformed
both in face and feature, that he became a general scorn to all: insomuch,
that two famous Painters, Bubulus and Anterinus, drawing his picture, and
setting it out to sale, had pensill'd him in such ridiculous and unfashionable
manner, that the Table begot laughter from all such as passed by and beheld it.
Which Hypponax hearing, he so persecuted the poor Painters, in his bitter
Iambicks, and inuectiue Satyrs, that despayring, they hanged themselves. Then
blame me not, if I be sparing in ripping up the deformities of women, least
they prosecute me as severely with their railing tongues, as the Poet did the
Painters with his Satyricall pen. It is an argument therefore that I desire
to be brief in.

Athenaeus, Lib. 9. tells us, That Anacharsis the Philosopher sitting at a
Banquet with his wife (who was a wondrous black and hard-fauoured woman) one
of the guests that sat with him at the Table being in his cups, could not
contain himself, but said aloud; O Anacharsis, you have married a wife
deformed enough: to whom the Philosopher (with great modesty) replied; I have
indeed: but Boy (says he, calling to one that attended on the Cup-board) Fill
the gentleman more Wine, and she will then appear to him sufficiently
beautiful; more taunting his intemperance, than he her deformity. As Ovid
speaks of the Night, so may it be said of Wine: Nocte latent menda --
The Night hides faults, the Midnight hour is blind,
And no mis-shap'd deformity can find.


Vetustina.
Martial, Lib. 3. describes one Vetustina: She has (says he) only three
teeth, and three hayres, the breast of a Grasse-hopper, the leg of an Ant,
the belly of a Spider, a rough and rugged brow; her mouth in smyling, showed
like the Crocodiles; her voice in singing, like the Frogs, and Gnats; her
face like the Owls, and her savor like the Goats, with other such like
offensive imperfections. The same Author, Lib. 1. speaks of Philenis: Philenis.
Oculo Phile^is semper altero plorat,
Quo fiat istud quaeris modo? Lusea est.
Philenis seems with one eye still to moan;
Would thou the reason know? she has but one.


I see no cause why any man should mock such imperfections as come by nature:
therefore I commend the answer of a gentlewoman, who being followed by a
gallant at the heels, and seeing her to be of an upright and straight body,
slender wasted, and clean legged, he commended her in his thoughts for an
exceeding proper and well-limb'd woman; who mending his pace to overtake her,
and spying her masked, entreated her in courtesy to vnpinne her mask, with
purpose to kiss her; but seeing her face to be swartie, and somewhat
wrinckled, and not according to his expectation answering to the other parts of
her body: Mistress (says he) I had purposed to have begged a kiss of you,
had I liked you before as well as I did behind. Then Sir (quoth she) so please
you, you have leave to kiss me where you best like. The Persians affect such
as have hooked noses (those the Greeks call Gripos) and such they hold to
beautify the face best, Plut. in Apoth.
because Cyrus (to which nation, no kings memory was ever dearer) had his nose
so fashioned. There are of those, two kinds; one, which in the descent from the
brow, instantly rises in the fashion of a Crows byll, Caelius, lib. 24. cap.
26. Antiq. Lect.
and such (says Aristotle) is a mark of Impudence; the second has his
bending separate from the brow, and the swelling in the middle part of the nose
like a Hawks byll, and those are the marks of Courage and Beauty, and such
we term a Hawks nose, or a Roman nose. I know not which of these it was the
wench had, of whom Sir Thomas Moore compiled his Epigram, which was after this
manner: A lovely Less, that had a Roman nose,
Meeting with Tyndarus, he would have kissed her:
But when he should have met her at the close,
I would (quoth he) but cannot kiss you (sister)
For had not your egregious long Nose bin,
I would have kissed your lips, and not your thin.
The poor wench blushed, and burnt with secret ire,
Which set her changing color all on flame,
And says to him; To furnish your desire,
Since that you feign would kiss, and crave the same;
Because my Nose no more shall let your will,
Kiss where is none, there freely take your fill.


Thus you see even the greatest scholars, and grauest men, will sometimes make
sport with the Muses. Many other things there are, which blast the brightest
beauties, making women loathed where they have been most liked; their number
is infinite: Amongst many, I will give you a taste of one, borrowed from an
Elegy in Ovid (which bears Title, Ad Amicam) to his Mistress, that demanded
hyre for her prostitution.

As fair as she that made two husbands jar,
Raising 'twixt Troy and Greece a Ten-yeeres war;
As bright as feathered Laeda, great Jove's rape,
She that was changed into a Swan-like shape;
As fair as Amimone, even so bright
Were you my Mistress. That which Poets write
Of metamorphos'd Jove, how ost Love changed him,
And from his own celestial shape estranged him,
To an Eagle, or a Bull; I feared least he
Would likewise from high heaven descend on thee.
I am not jealous now, my fear is vanished,
And the hot ardor of Affection banished,
My fire is cooled, Reason re'assumes his place.
And now me thinks thou have not thine own face.
Do thou demand why I am changed? Behold,
The cause I Will tell thee, thou did ask me gold;
Thou look that for my pleasure I should pay,
And that alone does fright me still away.
Whilst thou were simple, and in all things kind,
I, with thy sweet proportion, liked thy mind:
Thou now art cunning grown; what has that gayn'd?
Thy bodies beauty by thy mind is stayn'd, etc.
And after proceeds thus: Look on the beasts that in the meadows stray,
Shall women bear more savage minds than they?
What gifts do Kane from the rude Bulls enforce?
What price demands the Mare of the proud Horse?
Or of the Ram, the Ewe? they will comple twice,
Before they once debate upon a price.
Women alone have learnt to bargain well,
Their pleasures borne with them, alone they sell;
Alone they prize the night, and at a rate
Chaffer themselves to strangers: O vile state.
Alone for mutual pastime, Coin they crave,
And ere they sport, ask first, What shall I have?
That which delights both, to which both run,
And but by joint assistance is not done,
The pleasures which we both on euen-hand try,
Why should one party sell, the other buy?
Why should the sweetes which we alike sustain,
To me be double toss, thee double gain?
That which comes freely, much by that we set;
Thou give it me, and I am still in debt.
The love that is hyr'd, is plainly sold and bought,
Thou have thy price, and then I owe thee naught.
Then, o you Faire-ones, all such thoughts expel,
What Nature freely gives you, spare to sell:
Let not your bodies to base use be lent,
,,Goods leaudly got, are ever loosely spent, etc.


And with this gentle admonition, I take leave as well of the Fair, as the
Deformed.

Explicit Liber Quintus, Inscriptus TERPSICHORE.

THE SIXTH BOOK, Inscribed ERATO: Treating of Chaste Women, and of Women Wantons.
ERATO signifies Love; of which, there are but two kinds, that is, the love of
Virtue, or of Vice: then under what Muse could I more properly patronize the
Chaste, and the Wanton? But me thinks I hear some of our Critickes murmr and
say, Whither does this man purpose to wander, that has lost his way and gone
too far already? He might do well to break off here, and leave it to some
other heads, either more ingeniously witty, or more gravely serious. To such,
I make the same answer that Bishop Bonner did once to Henry the eight. The
king of England, and Francis the first of that name, king of France, being at
odds, Henry was much incensed, and appointed Bishop Bonner (his Ambassador)
to debate with him sharply about the designs then in hand: who having
accommodated all things fitting for the journey, came to take his leave of the
king his master, who uttered many bitter and disdainefull words against
Francis, all tending to his opprobrie and dishonor; And in these terms
(says he) deliver unto him thy Embassy. To whom Bonner replied; If it please
your Majesty, if I should give him such harsh and despightfull language, and
in his own Court too, he can do no less than take off my head. Thy head
(answered the king) If he do, it is no matter: but tell him further, If he
dares to cut off thy head, ten thousand of his subjects heads shall be sent
after it. To whom Bonner (after some small deliberation) again replied: But I
am doubtful (my Liege) whether any of these ten thousand heads will fit my
shoulders; in that short answer as well taxing the kings rash fury, as
provident for his own safety. With which the king somewhat satisfied, and
better considering with himself, delivered unto him a more calm and milder
Embassy. So, though those heads may favor both of more Judgment and Reading,
I am doubtful whether they could more naturally suit with my own method, and
style, though never so mean or barbarous: Therefore, Deo adiuvante and Erato
assistente, Plutarch. in Lacon. Apotheg.
I proceed: The Spartans had a custom in their solemn feasts, to have a song
of three parts, sung by three several Chorusses, The first was of weak old
men, The second of young able men, The third of Boys and pretty grown
children. The old men began with this verse: Olim iuuentutem, nos strenuam
egimus.
We have been Strong, that now Decrepit are.


To whom the young men in a second quire answered: Sorts sumus nos, fac si vis
periculum.
We are both Young, and Strong, prove us who dare.


To them in a third tone the children ecchoed: Nos erimus his prestantiores
plurimo.
With these in Youth and Strength we shall compare.


To this threefold age, I compare the triplicitie of the Muses. The first
three books are by this, alredie spent in your judgments: The second three, of
which this is the last, are the pyth and strength of my present work in hand;
to which the three succeeding (though yet in their infancy) I shall strive to
parallel, if not exceed the rest. And first of Chastity. It is reported of a
woman of Lacena, that a great man sending her rich gifts to corrupt her
chastity, she returned him this answer, Whilst I was a Virgin, I was taught
to obey my father, which I accordingly did; and being a wife, to submit my
self to my husbands will; if then you desire any courtesy at my hands, get
first his consent and you shall after understand my further pleasure. Plutarch.
in Lacon. Institut. relates, that diverse of these Lacenaean Virgins were taken
captives and sold in open market; one of them being cheapened, was demanded
what she knew? she answered, To be faithful. Another being asked if he should
buy her, whether she would prove chaste? answered, Whether he bought her or no,
she would be chaste howsoever: her master after seeking to corrupt her, she
slew herself, uttering these her last words, See what a treasure thou have
lost, that knew not my worth whilst thou wast possessed of me. There have
been many men that have left unto women strict rules of Chastity by their
examples. Saint Augustine being asked why he would not suffer his own sister
to dwell in the house with him? answered, Because such as may converse with her
are not my sisters; intimating, that all such as would avoid the sin ought to
shun temptation: for he was wont to say, It is not good to look upon a woman,
it is worse to converse with her, but worst of all to touch her. Therefore these
senses of ours that are most subject to danger, ought most to be suppressed and
bridled, Marul. lib. 4. Capit. 7. and Sabin. lib. 5. Hierome reports of the
Abbot Hylarian, That when he found any unchaste cogitations arise in his breast,
he would beat himself upon the bosom, as if with blows and buffets he
would expel them thence (and thus said) I will tame thee o Ass, that thou
shall no more kick and spurn against me with thy heels, I will not henceforth
feed thee with Barley but chafe, I will abate thy wantonness with hunger and
thirst, I will load thy back with grievous burdens, I will inure thee to the
Summers heat and the Winters cold. After which time he used the spare diet of
roots and the juice of herbs; and these only when necessity compelled him
to eat: He enjoined himself (the time of prayer excepted) to strict and
continual labor, to increase his appetite, but not augment his diet. Therefore
Hierom against Lust prescribes these three sovereign remedies; fast, prayer,
and hard labor: The examples are innumerable, as well amongst Ethnic men as
Christians. Alexander supping with Antipadres, there was brought to the table
and set just against the king, a wondrous beautiful woman, as excellent in
voice as in face, both tempting so far that Alexander began suddenly to be
surprised with her love, Plut Apotheg. Reg.
and demanded of Antipadres, If she were a woman whom he any way affected. To
whom he answered, That she was indeered to him above all other creatures
living. Then thou fool (replyde the king) cause her inst^ntly to rise and be
conveyed hence from the banquet. How far then was this temperate Prince from
adulterating another man's wife, that was afraid to do his host the least
injury in his strumpet? Therefore Iulianus the Emperor having took the
city Nalaca, wherein were many women of rare and extraordinary feature, was
so far from corrupting their virtues that he commanded, not any of them
should be suffered to come in his presence. Calius lib. 7. cap. 27. Fulgos.
lib. 4. cap. 3.
tells us that so great was the chastity of the Paduan women in times past,
that not any of them walked out of their doors but with their faces covered.
Therefore Caius Salpitius Gallus sued a divorce against his wife, because she
was met bare-browed in the streets, against whom he thus pleaded, Thou art
only to be governed and guided by the laws of mine eyes, thy beauty is to be
approved by them, and to please them alone thou ought to adorn thy self:
but to desire to seem fair in the eyes of strangers, Erasmus lib. 6. Apotheg.
incurres the imputation both of suspicion and trespass. What should we
think then of that fantastique attire and gawdie ornaments so much in use now
adays, which as well in youth as age, rather seem openly to profess lust
than inwardly to protect chastity. Of these curiosities in vain and
unnecessary attire, Plautus in Pen^lo thus speaks, Negotij sibi qui vole^ vim
parare, nauem and mulierem
Hec duo sibi comparato, and
He that is idle and would business have,
Let him of these two things himself provide,
A Woman, and a Ship; no two things crane
More care, or cost, to suite the one for pride,
The Other for tackles: they are both like fire,
For still the more they have they more desire.
And this I speak by proof, from morn to noone,
Their labor and their trauells have none end,
To wash, to r^b, to wipe, and when that is done,
To strive (whore nothing is am^sse) to mend:
To polish, and expolish, pain^, and stain,
Unguents to daube, and then wipe out again, etc.


Now what general censures these fantastic garbes and mere importunities
incur, if any demand, I answer, What less than weakness of the brain or
looseness of life: This jest following though it be old, yet me thinks it is
pity it should dye vnremembered. A gentleman meeting in the streets with a
brave gallant wench and richly accommodated, seeing her walk with her breasts
bare almost down to the middle: laying his hand upon them, demanded of her in
her ear, whether that flesh were to be sold, who skornefully answered, No, to
whom he modestly replied, Then let me advise you to shut up your shop-windowes.
I will end this monitorie counsel with an Epigram out of Ausonius, which
bears title of two sisters of unlike conditions: Delia nos miramur, and est
mirabile qoud tam
Dissimiles estis, etc.
We wonder Delia, and it strange appears,
Thou and thy sister have such censure past;
Though known a whore, the habit's chaste she woares
Thou (save thy habit) nothing whorish have:
Though than chaste life, she has chaste habit sought,
Her Manners her, thy Habit makes thee naught.


In memory of Virgin chastity, I will cite you one history out of Marullus,
lib. 4. cap. 8. Aegiptae.
The monument of Aegiptae (the daughter of Edgar king of England, a professed
Virgin in her life time) being opened after she had many years lain in the
grave, all her body was turned into dust saving her womb and bowels; and
they were as fresh and fair without any corruption, as at the first day of her
interment. Those that stood by wondering at the object, one Clerk amongst the
rest broke forth into these terms: Wonder not to see the rest of the body
to taste of putrefaction, and the womb still sound and perfect, which never
was contaminated with the least stayne or blemish of lust. Of her, Bishop
Danstan thus speaks: Worthy is her remembrance to be honored upon Earth,
whose chaste life is celebrated amongst the Saints in Heaven. O great reward,
due to Virgin chastity, by which such felicity is attained, that their souls
are not only glorified in Heaven, but their bodies are not subject to
corruption on earth. But because the Theme I am next to speak of, is of
Virgins, give me leave to begin with the best that ever was since the
beginning, for Beauty, Chastity, and Sanctity; nor shall it be amiss to
speak a word or two concerning her Genealogy.

MARY, the Mother of CHRIST, was the daughter of Ioachim, of the Tribe of Judah;
her mothers name was Anna, the daughter of Isachar, of the Tribe of Leui. Here
(as S. Hierome observes) is to be noted, That Anna and Emeria were two sisters:
of Emeria came Elizabeth, the mother of John Baptist: also Anna was first
married to Ioachim, Ranulphus.
and had by him Mary, the mother of Christ; and was after espoused to Cleophas,
by whom she had Mary Cleophe, who was married to Alphaeus. From them two came
James the less (surnamed Alphaeus) Simon Can^^^aus, Judas Thaddaus, and
Joseph, otherwise called Barsabas. Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History,
Lib. 2. cap. 2. says, That James the less was called the Brother of our Lord,
because he was the brother of Joseph, the husband of Mary: but his opinion is
not altogether authentical. Also Anna was espoused to Salome, and had by him
Mary Salome, after married to Zebedeus, and had by him I^mes the greater, and
John the Evangelist. Joseph, the husband of Mary, was the brother of Cleophas.
Marian. lib. 2.
It is also observed, That in the one and fortieth year of the reign of
Augustus Caesar, in the seventh month (which is September) in the eleventh day
of the Moon (which is the four and twentieth day of the month) on a
Thursday, John Baptist was conceived; and two hundred threescore and fifteen
days after, on a Friday, was borne: So that he was the forerunner of Christ,
both in his Conception, his Birth, his Baptism, his Preaching, and his Death.
A woman goes with child two hundred threescore and sixteen days (for so
long, by computation, was Christ in the womb of the blessed Virgin) though all
women go not so long with child, as S. Augustine observes, Lib. 4. de Ciuitate
Dei, cap. 5. So that Christ was longer in the womb by a day, and more, than S.
John Baptist. John also was borne when the days began to shorten and wane; and
Christ, when the days began to wax long. Concerning these Antiquities, I
conclude with a sentence of S. Augustines: Against Reason (says he) no sober
man will dispute; against the Scripture, no Christian man contest; and against
the Church, no religious man oppose. And so I proceed to the History.

Of MARY, the Blessed Virgin.
LEt it not be held unnecessary, Johan. Wyerus de Lamijs, lib. 3. Suidas.
or appear out of course, amongst these Virgins to insert a history memorable
for the ^arenesse thereof to all posterity, Johannes Wyerius in his book
entitled de Prestigijs demonum, has collected it out of Suidas. In the time
that I^stinianu^ was Emperor, there was a prince amongst the Jews whose name
was Theodosius, He having great acquaintance and familiarity with one
Philipp^s a Christian, a bancker, or one that dealt in the exchange of money
(for he was called Philippus Argentarius) this Philip did often solicit and
exhort him to leave his Iudaisme and be a conuertite, and turn to the
Christian religion: to whom he answered, Indeed he must ingeniosly confess,
he made no question but that Jesus whom the Christians adored, was the same
Messiah of whom the holy Prophets foretold, yet he could not be persuaded to
relinquish the honors and profits that he had amongst his own nation, and
give himself up to a name which they knew not, or at least would not
acknowledge: yet that he believed so of Christ, he was not only persuaded by
the Oracles of the holy Prophets, but he found it approved by a certain
mystery, namely a writing most charily still kept amongst the Jews, in a
place most safe and secret, where their choice records with the especiallest
care and trust are reserved; which was of this nature: It was a custom amongst
the Jewish nation, at what time, the holy Temple was yet standing in
Jerusalem, to have continually the number of twenty two chief and selected
Priests, (just so many as there be letters in the Hebrew language, or books
of the old Testamen^) and so often as any one of these was taken away by death,
immediately another was elected to succeed in his place; and being chosen (in a
book kept in the treasury for that only purpose) expressly to write down
his own name, and the names of both his parents, with the days punctually set
down of the decease of the one and the succession of the other. Now in the
time that Christ was conuers^nt in Iudaea, and yet had not showed himself to
the world, nor preached the Word openly to the people, it happened that one of
the Priests of the foresaid number dyed, neither after many voices and sundry
nominations was any agreed upon, or thought fit to be ascribed into his place.
At length was propounded JESUS, the son of the Carpenter Io^eph (for so they
termed him) a man though young, yet for the sanctity of his life, his
behavior, and doctrine, above all the rest commended. This suffrage standing,
as having general approbation from all, it was thought convenient to send for
his mother (for his father Joseph was late dead) into the Consistory, only to
know their names, and to register them in the aforesaid book. She therefore
being called, and diligently questioned of her son and his father, thus
answered, That indeed she was the mother of JESUS, and brought him into the
world; of which, those women are testates, that were present at his birth, but
that he had no father from Earth: in which if they desired to be further
instructed, she could make it plainly appear: For being a Virgin, and then
in Galilee, the Angel of God (says she) entered the house where I was, and
appearing unto me (not sleeping, but thus as I am, awake) he told me, That by
the Holy Ghost I should conceive, and bring forth a son, and commanded me
that I should call his name JESUS: Therefore being then a Virgin, by that
Vision I conceived, I brought forth JESUS, and I still remain a Virgin unto
this day. When the Priests heard this, they appointed faithful and trusty
Midwiues, with all diligence and care to make proof whether Mary were a Virgin
or no: they finding the truth most apparent and not to be contradicted,
delivered up to the Priests, That she was a Virgin, pure and immaculate. Then
they sent for those women that were known to be at her delivery, and were
witnesses of the Infants coming into the world; all which did attest and
justify, That she was the mother of the same JESUS. With these things the
Priests amazed and astonished, they presently entreated Mary, that she would
freely profess unto them what his Parents were, that their names (according to
custom) might be registered amongst the others. To whom the blessed Virgin thus
answered: Certain I am, that I brought him into the world, but know no father
that he has from the Earth; but by the Angel it was told me, That he was the
Son of GOD: He therefore is the Son of GOD, and me. This the Priests
understanding, they called for the Book; which being laid open before them,
they caused these words to be inscribed: Upon such a day deceased such a
Priest, borne of such and such Parents; in whose place, by the common and unite
suffrage of us all, is elected Priest, JESUS, the Son of the living GOD, and
the Virgin MARY. And this Book Theodosius affirmed (by the especial diligence
of the most noble amongst the Jews, and the chief Princes) was reserved from
the great sack and destruction of the city, and Temple, and was transferred
into the city of Tiberias, and there kept a long time after. S^idas testifies,
That he has heard this discourse from honest men, who delivered it to him
word by word, as they themselves have heard it from the mouth of Philippus
Argentarius. This most blessed and pure Virgin Mary, the mother of our Lord and
Savior, was borne of the holy Matron S. Anne, in the year of the World 3948,
and in the year before Christ, fifteen. Of him, Cla^dian thus elegantly
writes ^n one of his Epigrams: Proles vera Dei, ^unctisque antiquior Annis
N^^c geni^^s, qui semper er as --
True Son of God, older than Time, that have
Thy birth but now, yet from beginning wast,
Author of Light, and Light before all other,
Oh thou that art the parent of thy mother,
And by thine equall-aged father sent
From Heaven unto this terrhene continent.
Whose word was made Flesh, and constrained to dwell
In the straight prison of a Virgins cell,
And in a narrow angle to remain,
Whose power, no limit can, no place contain;
Who being borne, did now begin to see
All these great works created first by thee:
The work and workman of thy self, not skorning
T^obey those weary hours of Even and Morning,
Of which thou art Lord, and tell each minute ore,
Made by thy Wisdom, for man's use before.
And took'st on thee our shape, only to show
To us, that God we did (till then) not know, etc.


Petronilla.
WHen Peter the Apostle, had by his Faith cured all infirmities and diseases,
and in all places, yet he suffered his daughter Petronilla to be grievously
afflicted with a Feauor; and being demanded, why he that had cured others did
not help her; he answered, Because he knew her sickness to be most
behoofefull for her souls health, for the weaker she was in body, she was so
much the stronger in Faith, settling her cogitations on the joys of Heaven, and
not the pleasures of the world, desiring of God that she might rather die a
chaste Virgin, than to be the wife of the Consul Flaccus, by whom she was at
that time most earnestly solicited: whose prayer was heard, for she dyed of
that sickness, and the Consul was prevented of his purpose, who had long
insidiated her chastity. Marull. lib. 4. cap. 8. The like we read of
Hilarious Pictauiensis Episcopus, who having long trained up his daughter Appia
in chastity and sanctity of life, Appia.
fearing least time might alter her vows, and tempt her with the vain
pleasures of the world, he besought the giver of all graces, that he might
rather with joy follow her to her grave, than with sorrow to her marriage bed;
which was accordingly granted, Eustochium
as the same Author testifies. Eustochium the daughter of Paula a noble matron
of Rome, is celebrated by Saint Hierom for the only president of Virginal
chastity. Tora.
Tora the virgin was of that chaste and austere life, that having took a vow
and once entered her profession, she never put on her back any new garment,
Maria Aegipt.
or so much as changed her shoes. Maria Aegyptiaca, lived the life of an
Hermit in the sollitude of an unfrequented desert: some write of her that as
often as she was seen to pray, she seemed to be lifted up from the Earth into
the Air the height of a cubit. Columba.
Columba a Virgin of Perusina, is reported to be of that chastity and
abstinence, that she never tasted any other food than the bare fruits of the
Earth, from the years of her discretion till the hour of her death. Amata.
Amata was a professed Virgin, who in forty years space never set foot over
the threshold of that Cloister wherein she had confined her self, in which
time she never tasted food save bread and roots. Sara.
Sara lived in the time of Theodosius the elder, she made a Vow, never to lodge
beneath any roof; but inhabiting the bank of a certain river, removed not
from that place in threescore years. The like is read of Syluia, Syluia.
a Virgin, the daughter of Ruffinus, a Prefect or Ruler in Alexandria, who
betook her self to sollitude for the space of threescore years, in which
time she never washed any part of her body save her hands, nor reposed her
self upon any bed sa^e the ground. It is reported by Edward Hall, S. Ebb.
John Leisland, John Sleyden, and others, of S. Ebb, Abbess of Collingham,
That to preserve her own and her sisters Chastities, and keep their Vows
inuiolate (because they would seem odible to the Danes, who had done many
outrages both against Law and Religion, and then tyrannized in the Land) she
cut off her own nose, and upper lip, and persuaded all the other Nuns to
do the like: for which act, the Danes burnt the Abbey, Ildegunda.
with all the Sister-hood. Fulgos. Lib. 4. cap. 3. speaks of Ildegunda, a
German Virgin, borne in Nassau; who after many temptations, to which she
feared her beauty might subject her, in the year 1128 she changed her habit,
and got to be entertained in a Priorie near unto Worms, called Schuna beu
Heim: in which she lived long by the name of Joseph, in singular continence and
modesty, still conuersing amongst the learnedest and best approved scholars,
even till the time of her death: neither was she then known to be a woman,
till coming to wash her body, her Sex was discovered. In the same Monastery,
Euphrosyna.
and amongst that Covent, lived Euphrosyna, a Virgin of Alexandria, Marina.
by the name of Smaragdus: as also one Marina, who called her self Marinus,
Gunzonis.
both dissembling their Sex. Gunzonis, daughter to the duke of Arboa, was
possessed by an evil spirit; but after, by the prayers of holy men being
recovered, she vowed perpetual Virginity. And after being demanded in
marriage by Sigebertus, king of the Frenchmen, she was delivered unto him by
her father: who debating with her concerning his present purpose, she humbly
desired to be excused by his Majesty, in regard she had already past a
pre-contract: The king demanding, To whom? she answered, She was a betrothed
Spouse to her Redeemer: At which the king being startled, forbore to compel
her any further, but suffered her to take upon her a religious life; she
preferring her Virgin Chastity before the state and title of a Queen. And
these shall suffice for Religious Virgins; I now proceed to others, that
grounded their virtue on mere morality.

Baldraca.
Baldraca was a Virgin, but of mean parentage and of a dejected fortune: yet
to her neuer-dying honor, and president to all ages to come (notwithstanding
she was not able to supply her self with things needful and necessary,
either for sustenance or ornament) neither by threats or menaces, promises of
worldly honors, or promotion, she could not be tempted to prostitute her self
to the Emperor Otho. Saxo Gramaticus writes of Serytha, Serytha.
the daughter of Synaldus king of the Danes, to be of that modesty, that when
the fame of her beauty had attracted a confluence of many suitors to the Court
of her father, yet she could never be won either to converse with, Tara.
or so much as to look upon any of them. Tara was a French Lady, of a noble
and illustrious Family; she lived in the time of Heraclius: who when her
father Hagerticus and her mother Leodegunda would have compeld her to marry,
she fell into that excess of weeping, that with the extraordinary flux of
tears she grew blind soon after. Dula.
Dula was a Virgin famous for her Chastity, who chose rather to be slain by
the hand of a Souldior, than to be despoyled of her Virginity. Statyra. Roxana.
Statyra and Roxana were the sisters of Mithridates king of Pontus, who for the
space of forty years had kept their Vow of Virginity inuiolate; these
hearing the sad fate of their brother, and fearing to be ravished by the enemy
(at least, to fall into their captivity) by taking of poison, finished both
their days and sorrows. Plutarch writes of one Roxana, drowned in a Well by
Statyra. It is reported of an Hetrurian Damsel (taken by a Souldior) who to
preserve her Virginity, Etrusca Virgo.
leapt off from the bridge Ancisa into the river Arnus: of whom, Benedictus
Varchius has left this memory in one of his Epigrams: Perd^ret nitactum ne
Virgo Etrusca pudorem
In rapidas sese praecipitanit aquas, etc.
The Hetrurian Girl, her Honor still to keep,
Precipitates her self into the Deep;
And from the bottom three times being cast
Up into the air, as loath that one so chaste
Should there be swallowed, she as often sinkes down
Her modest face, her martyrdom to crown,
And shame the lustful world. What shall we say
Of the chaste Eucrece, famous to this day?
She for one death, is called the Romans pride;
To save her Fame, this Tuscan three times di'de.


Bernardus Scandeonus, Lib. 3. Class 34. Histor. Pat^ninae, writes, That when
Maximilian the Emperor made spoil of the Paduan territories, diverse of the
country people leaving the villages empty, fled into the city; amongst whom,
was one Isabella, Isabella.
a Damsel of Rauenna, who being seized on by some of the Venetian soldiers
that then had the charge of the city, and surprised with her beauty, drew her
aside, with purpose to have dishonored her: but finding no other means to shun
the violence of their lust, she from the bridge cast her self headlong into
the river Medoacus, where she was drowned: and afterward, her body being
drawn out of the river, was buried under a bank, without any other ceremony
belonging to a Funeral. Martia, Martia.
the daughter of Varro, was of that admirable continence and chastity, that
being most excellent in the Art of Painting, she not only alienated and
restrained her Pensill from limning any thing that might appear obscene, or
show the least immodestie, but she was never known to delineate or draw the
face of a man, Lala Cizizena.
Rauis. in Officin. The like is reported of Lala Cizizena, alike excellent in
Painting, and as remarkable for her Virgin Chastity. Britonia, Britonia.
a beautiful maid of Crete (giving her self wholly to Hunting, and the Chase)
to shun the importunities of king Minos (who laid traynes to vitiate her) threw
her self into a river, and was drowned. Daphne, Daphne.
the daughter of Amiela, retired her self both from walled cities, and all
public society, and was at length entertained into the fellowship of Diana,
frequenting the Laconian fields and Peloponnesian mountains. Of her, Leucippus
the son of Oenemaus was enamored; who having attempted diverse ways to
compass his will, but not preuayling in any, he bethought himself what course
Jupiter took to stuprate Calisto, the daughter of Lycaon; and attyring
himself in the habit of a female Huntresse, was entertained by Diana, and
admitted into their number: where he grew familiar with all, and especially
endeared to Daphne; insomuch, that she thought no hour spent well without
him. Of which acquaintance Apollo being jealous (in regard they had such
conuenience of time, place, and opportunity) he put his own dearly beloved
Daphne in mind, to entice Leucippus to a river, where Diana with all their
nymphs intended to bathe themselves: Whither when they came, the Virgins
disrobed themselves, even to nakedness; and being all stripped to their skins,
but finding Leucippus only to move delays, they plucked off his garments by
force, and so discovered him to be of the contrary Sex: at which Diana
enraged, commanded all her Virgins to take up their Bows and Quiuers, and so
they shot him to death with their Arrows. This is recorded by Parthen. de
Amator. Theodor. Flaietes in Eleg. and Philarchus, lib. 15.

Of Chaste Wives.
Rhodogune.
AN excellent president of Chastity was that in Rhodogune, the daughter of
Darius; who caused her Nurse to be slain, because her husband being dead, she
persuaded her to a second marriage. A more admirable remarke of Nuptial
Chastity it was of the Wives of the Theutonicks, remembered by Hieron. in his
Epistle to Gerontia; whose husbands being slain, and they taken captive by
Marius, humbly besought him on their knees, that they might be sent to the
Vestalls in Rome, as a present; protesting, they would be equally with them,
still from the society of men, and profess perpetual Chastity: but their
request being denied by the Consul Marius, the next night following all of
them with an unite consent strangled themselves. Theoxena was famous for her
Chastity, Theoxena.
who being environed at Sea by the Navy of Philip king of Macedon, seeing her
husband thrown ouer-boord, leapt after him to follow him in death; not only
to express her love to her husband, but her skorne to stand to the mercy of
the Conqueror. Baptista Pius, Lib. 2. Elegiar. speaks of Tyro, Tyro.
a woman of Thessalia, who (her husband being dead) could by no counsel of
friends, or persuasion of kindred, be won to survive him. Plutarch in Pompeio
speaking of Hypsicrataea, Hypsicrataea
says she was so endearedly affected to her husband king Mithridates, that
for his love she made a voluntary change of her most becoming womanish shape
and habit, into a man's: for cutting her hair, she accustomed her self to the
practice of Horse and Arms, that she might with the more facility endure the
labors and dangers of the wars. Her husband being subdued by Cn. Pompeius,
and his Army quite dissipate and overcome, she followed him (flying) through
many barbarous Nations, where her life and safety were in hourly hazard; and
these she enterprised with a mind undaunted, and a body vnwearyed, her faith
and loyalty in all his extremities being to him no small sollace and comfort:
for though an Exile (being still in the society of his Queen and bedfellow)
he imagined himself (in what place soever he reposed) to have been in his
own palace, and amongst his household gods.

Of Penelope.
THe beauty of Penelope attracted a number of suitors, who from diverse
countries came to adulterate the bed of Ulysses. From Dulichim came two and
fifty, from Samos four and twenty, from Xacynthus twenty, from Ithaca two
and twenty; of which, these are nominated by Homer: Antinous, Eurinous,
Eurimachus, Leocritus, Neso, Pysander, Hesippus, Agatus, Leocles, Ampinomus,
Demotholomaeus, Medo^ a common Crier, Euphemus a Minstrell, and Irus a Beggar;
all which, Ulysses (at his return from his twenty years travails) slew in
his own house. Some of these, Ouids Penelope reckons up in these verses:
Dulichij, Samijque, and quos ^^lit alia Xacinthus, etc.
Dulichium, Samos, and Xaci^^hus Hill,
Throng me with troops of want^n s^itors still:
What should I speak to thee of Medon fell?
Of Polibus, or of Pysander tell?
What of Antinous giddie head deplore,
Covetous Eurimachus, and other^ more?
These in thine absence cannot be withstood,
But still thou feed'st them with thy wealth and blood.
The Beggar Irus, and Melanthius too,
The Heardsman, etc.


And since we are in the history of Penolope, Homer lib. 1. Odiss.
It shall not be amiss to delate it a little further out of Homer: who in his
first book entitled Odissaea, of Phaemius the Harper speaks to this purpose:
Phaemius the Haerper to the b^^rd in^ited,
Where the bold suitors bid the^sel^es to feast^
A doleful song to a sad tune recited:
Of the Argiue fleet in their return distressed,
And cast in sundry exiles: on what coast
Such men miscarie, where such Princes perish,
Upon what rocks and shelues such ships were ^ost:
Him, wil'st Penelopes bold suitors cherish,
The discontented Queen, with Prayres, and Tears,
Wills him desist: the Harper soon forbeares.


But to leap from the first, to the seventeenth book, and to omit all Ulysses
trauells and adventures till his meeting with his son Telemachus, who brought
him into his own court in the disguise of a beggar, to see what reuells were
kept there in his absence: Known only to his son and his friend Eumaeus, and
not yet to Penelope.

Iam Caelum roseis rutilat Tritonia bigi^. Odiss. lib. 17. Perioch.

Telemacus unto the Queen relates
The process of his long peregrination:
Eumaeus brings Ulysses amongst those States
That sought his bed; where they in courtly fashion
Were sat at a rich banquet with his wife,
There he begg's meat. Antinous amongst the rest,
Threats with injurious words to c^ise his life,
But the mild queen inuites him as her guest.
Ulysses for that time forbeares their sight,
But s^nds the queen word he will come at night.
Odyss. lib. 18.
Irus adest populi per mendicabula notus.
In his own Palace whilst Ulysses craves
Their Charity, Irus (that was indeed
One of that rank, and begged amongst ragged slaves)
Boldly thrasts in, amongst the rest to feed:
From words these grow to blows; the suitors they
Encourage both parts to maintain the ^ray:
Proposing him that shall (...), for prise
The intrailes of a Goa^. Ulysses he
Proves victor in his beggars base disguise,
And (halfe-dead) Irus of the place does free:
For which he is guerd^^'d, as the Queens request,
With a rich Gift from many vnbid guest.
Odyss. lib. 19.
At part interiore d^mus sacratus Ulysses.
Ulysses with Telemachus conspires
The death of all those suitors, both devising
How to release the Queen to her de^ires,
And free the Palace from their tyrannizing:
And that they neither may offend, nor stand,
Compl^t by night, their weapons how to steal.
Now by Eumaeus to the Queens fair hand
Her Lord is brought (who will (...) y^^ reveal
Himself to her) but says he is of Cre^^e.
To whom her husband once had been a guest.
They part; the Queen commands to wash his feet,
(And for that night betakes her to her rest.)
That task Euriclia takes (his Nurse before)
She a known skarre upon his flesh espyes,
On Mount Pernassus given him by a Bore.
It was no sooner seem, but out she cries,
Ulysses, Are you come? Being thus descri'de,
He prays, and bribes, that she his name will hide.
Perioch. 20. Odyss.
-- Iamque process genua amplexus ^rabat Ulysses.
The guest at banquet, Eresippus casts
To hit Ulysses, but he mist his aim.
(After some Healths, both time and banquet wastes)
When to the place Theoclemenus came,
Expert in Divination, who fore-spake
At Table to them all, their imminent ruin;
But at his words they strange deri^ions make,
Abusing all that speak of things ensuing;
They mock the high Powers, and contemme the Fates,
And thrust at length the Prophet forth the gates.
Perioch. 21.
Unto Eumaeus and Philetius too,
In whom he trusts, the Prince himself makes (...),
And what that night he had intent to do:
And how to make safe seizure of his own,
(Which craft must do) he calls for that strong Bow,
In which, what time he wooed his beauteous Bride,
All that were Riualls, must their vigors show,
Yet he atchieu'd what many suitors tri'de:
This was proposed a second marriage-prise.
And now the selfsame Bow before them brought,
All prove their strengths (save he in his disguise)
But (much unable) they prevailed naught.
The Bow the son unto his father gave:
Which they (deriding) no way would admit,
That such a needy and penurious slave
(It being a Kings) should once lay hand on it;
The rather, they being in their prime of years,
And he so aged: yet he needs must try.
And now his ancient potencie appears;
They shame to see it done, and they stand by.
Squalentes Humeris habitus reiecit Ulysses. Perioch. 22.

Ulysses draws the string up to his ear,
The keen shaft flies, and stern Antinous pierces:
At this, the boldest stand amazed, and fear,
Whilst he enraged, strewes all the room with Hearses.
The Palace gates are shut, no man can fly;
Eumaeus and Telemachus proceed,
With bold Philetius, and aloud they cry,
Kill all, spare none, for now the bold'st must bleed.
The harmless Phemius, that but came in sport,
(Skillful in th'Harpe) their ruthlesse furies spare;
And Medon, that did never offend the Court,
Or'gainst Penelope the least thing dare;
But stern Melanthius, one of her own Train,
That did the suitors in their riots cherish,
He by their swords, amongst the rest, is slain:
Twelve strumpets likewise in their furies perish.
Chalcidicum gressu nutrix superabat anili. Perioch. 23.

From sleep Euriclia soon awaked the Queen,
Relating all that had that night been done,
What valor in her husband she had seen,
And what in her just servants, and her sonne^
In her distraction to believe, or no.
(By this) Ulysses to the Queens fair bed
Approaches, whom at first she did not know;
Till by some tokens he is acknowledge,
Received, and lodged: he makes a full Narration
Of his Wars, Travails, Acts, and Navigations.
And so much, the better to illustrate the History of Penelope.

Euadne.
Capanaeus being dead, at the celebration of his funerals, his wife Euadne
cast her self into the flames, of whom Martial: Arserit Euadne flammis iniect
a mariti.


Laodamia.
Of no less fame was Laodamia, her husband Protesi^ans (under whose
jurisdiction were Antron, Philaca, and Larissa, cities of Tessalie) was the
first Greek that was slain in the siege of Troy, and (some write) by the hand
of Hector: which sad news when his wife understood, to comfort her sorrow,
she only desired of the gods to see his ghost or shadow; which she supposing
to be granted her, in the imagination thereof she expired. Of no less memories
is Panthaea the wife of Abratidas a noble Persian, Panthaea.
who no sooner heard that her husband was slain in battle, but with a
poynard stabbed ner self to the heart, and so dyed. Sophronia Romana,
Sophronia.
by some called Christiana, by others Lucretia; when she could no longer put
off the importunities of the prince Decius, having before befought the consent
of her husband, slew her self. As great on honor to her family was Antonia,
Antonia.
who in the prime and flourishing time of her beauty, having buried her
husband, to prevent the temptation od suitors, married her self to the
strictness of one chamber, to which her younger sister being a vowed Virgin had
confined her self; thus in one bed the heat of youth in the one was extinct,
and the sollitude of widowhood wasted in the other. Q. Curtius lib. 1.
remembers us of one Timoclea a Lady of Thebes, Timoclea.
who being forcibly adulterated by a prince amongst the Thracians, dessembled
for a time both her hate and purpose; not long after she insinuated with him,
and told him she would conduct him to a place in which was hid much treasure;
of which he being covetous, she brought him to the brincke of a deep Well
being in a remote place of the house, to which he presenting himself and
bending his bodies downwards, to satisfy his expectation concerning the
treasure, she apprehending that advantage, thrust him headlong into the Well,
and casting huge stones after him, revenged her self upon the Rauisher.
Brasilla Dyrrachina a prime Lady, Brasilla Dyrrachina
as Ludouic. Vi^es lib. 1. de Instit. Tem. Christian relates being taken
prisoner, and seeing an immediate shipwreck of her chastity threatened by her
cruel victor: she couenanted with him, that if he would but reprieue her
honor for the present, she would give him an herb, with whose juice if he
would annointe any part of his body it should preserve it wound-free. The
soldier accepts of the condition; she from a neighbor garden plucking up the
weed that came next to hand, with the sap or moisture thereof annoyntes her
own neck and throat, bidding him to draw out his sword and make trial of her
self, whether she kept not with him faithful covenant. The soldier giving
credit to her words, in regard of her constancy and courage, with one strong
blow dispatched her of life: o resolute and noble Lady says Nicephorus li. 7.
c. 15. to prefer death before the loss of her honor. Francis Sforza prince of
Mediolanum, being General of the Florentine army, A woman of Casanoua.
having taken the city Casanoua, certain soldiers brought before him a most
beautiful captive, who with great vocifiration called out, Bring me to your
prince, Bring me to your chief General. The soldiers moved with her
earnest clamor, brought her before him, who demanded of the woman, Why she
was so importunate to be conducted into his presence? to whom she answered, For
no other reason, but to submit her self wholly to his pleasure; conditionally
he would secure her from the injury of the soldiers; to which he willingly
assented, and seeing her of such exquisite feature and so tempting a presence,
he purposed to make use of her liberal and free profer that night, therefore
he commanded a bed to be made ready, in which she was lodged, thither he
presently repaires, and being unclothed casts himself by her naked side; but
reaching his arm to embrace her, her eyes being full of tears and her heart
of sorrow, she humbly besought him before he touched her body, but to grant
her the hearing of a few words; at which the prince making a sudden pause: she
poynting with her finger to the picture of the blessed Virgin (for Sforza was
never without that or the like in his bedchamber) she entreated him, even for
the remembrance he bore to the person whom that Table presented, for the honor
due to her Son and his Savior, and for the dignity of his goodness, and
for the sacred memory of his noble ancestors, not to infringe her
matrimonial Vow, nor violate her conjugal Chastity, but deliver her back an
unspotted wife to her unfortunate husband, who was then a prisoner amongst many
other wretched captives. Her words took such impression in the noble General,
that notwithstanding her tempting beauty (the motives to inchastitie) his
present opportunity, and absolute power over her as she was his vassal and
prisoner, yet to show his miraculous temperance, he preferred the name of a
chaste and continent prince, before the imputation of a tyrant or an adulterer;
and instantly leapt out of the bed, and left her to her modest and more quiet
rest. In the morning he sent for her husband, to whom (after a great character
of her Chastity given) he delivered her, not only freeing them both without
ransome^ but from his own coffers bountifully rewarding her virtue: in the
subduing of his own affections gaining more honor than in the conquest of so
great a city. In this act not only imitating but exceeding Scipio: For that
incomparable Lady that was presented unto him, She was the contract^d bride to
the prince In^i^ilis.
was of high lineage and of princely parentage, besides he lived in a free
city, and to have dishonored her, he had not only incurred censure, but
being then in a foreign nation purchased to himself the name of tyrant, and
hazarded a new reuoult of the people: but that was nothing to oppose prince
Sforza in the satisfying of his lust, save his own goodness; for what
conqueror has not power over his captive. Fulgos. lib. 4. cap. 3. Anastatia
Constantino politana, Anastatia.
when Theodora Augusta was jealous, that she was not beloved of her husband
Iustinianus Augustus, and having to that purpose received some taunting words
from the Emperesse, to approve her innocence; she fled both court and city,
and retired her self into Alexandria, where she lived obscured in the
society of certain chaste Virgins: But after, hearing of the death of
Theodora, her fears were not diminished but augmented, for the Emperors love
appeared to her a greater burden than the hate of the Emperesse; therefore to
avoid that which many would have sought with greediness, she changed her
habit, and taking the shape of a young man upon her, fled into the furthest
part of Egypt, called by the name of Anastatius: where she lived privately,
austerely, and ended her chaste life in great sanctity. Hieronim. writes that
Paula Romana, Paula Romana.
after the death of her husband, was so far from being persuaded to a second,
that she was never known from that time to eat or drink in man's company.
Barbara.
Of a contrary disposition was Barbara the wife of Sigismund Emperor, Aenaeus
Silu. relates of her, that her husband being dead, when diverse persuaded her to
continue still in her widowhood, proposing unto her, that women ought to
imitate the Turtles, who if one be taken away by death, the other will never
choose other mate, but deuote her self to perpetual chastity? thus answered,
If you have none else to bid me imitate but byrds that have no reason, why do
you not as well propose me for example the Doves or the Sparrowes? As contrary
again to her was the daughter of Demotian prince of the Arcopagitae, who no
sooner heard that her husband Leosthenes was slain in the Lamick war, but
in^tantly slew her self, least she should survive a second marriage. Others
there be that have kept a viduall chastity even in wedlock. The Virgin
Edeltrudis, Edeltrudis.
as Sigilbertus and Beda both witness, was the daughter of Annas a Christian
king of the East Angles, she was first delivered by her father in marriage to
Candibertus a great prince, who were no sooner married but by mutual consent
they vowed lasting Virginity: at length he dying, she was by her father
compelled to a second nuptials with king Cephordus, with whom she lived
twelve years, yet never (as they could adiudge it) unloosed her Virgin gyrdle.
After which time, by her husbands consent she took upon her a religious life,
and entered a monastery, where (as Marullus lib. 4. cap. 8. says) she lived a
more secure, but not a more chaste life. Infinite to this purpose are remembered
by Fulgosius, Marullus, Albertus Cranzius, etc. as of Maria Desegnies,
Margarita Aegypta, Cecilia Virgo, Kunegunda Augusta, wife to Henry of that name
the first Emperor, Bafilissa, espoused to Iulianus Antiochenus, Stamberga the
niece of Clodonius, married to Arnulphus a noble Frenchman. These and others
without number (which is somewhat difficult to believe) have wedded, bedded,
boorded, line and lived together, yet went as pure Virgins to their graves as
they came first to their cradles. Of these I may say as Ovid Metamorph. lib. 1.
of Daphne: Saepe pater dixit generum mihi filia debes,
Saepe pater dixit, etc.
Thou ow'st me sons, often would her father say,
Young Boys and Gyrles, with whom my age might play,
Thou ow'st me child; this would he often repeat:
When she as if with skorne and hatred great
Sh'abhor'd the nuptial bed, and held it sin,
With modest blushes did the tender skin
Of her fair cheek: then to her father grows,
And her white arms about his neck she throws,
And says, Dear sir, this one thing grant your child,
That I may live from lustful man exiled,
A voteresse. Diana this desired,
And from her father had what she required.


I will only produce one history or two at the most from our modern
Histories, and so cease further to speak of our married Virgins. It is
reported in the Legend, That after Editha the daughter of Earl Godwin, Editha.
was married to king Edward (otherwise called S. Edward) they mutually vowed
betwixt themselves perpetual chastity, and therein perseuered to the end of
their lives. There continued in them (says the Legend) a Conjugal love,
without any Conjugal act; and favorable embraces, without any deflowring of
Virginity: for Edward was beloved, but not corrupted; and Editha had favor,
but was not touched; she delighted him with love, but did not tempt him with
lust; she pleased him with discourse and sweet society, yet provoked him to no
libidinous desire. It is moreover in that Treatise recorded, That they used to
call Marriage a shipwreck of Maidenhead, comparing it to the fiery Furnace of
the Chaldaeans; to the Mantle that Joseph left in the hand of a strumpet, the
wife of Putiphar; to the lascivious outrage of the two wicked Elders, who would
have oppressed and vitiated Susanna the wife of Ioachim: Susanna.
and lastly, to the enticements of drunken Holofernes toward fair Judith,
Judith.
one of the deliuerers of her people. And so much for the Legend. But Richardus
Diuisiensis says, That being awed by Earl Godwin, and for the fear of
hasarding his life and kingdom, Edward was compelled by threats and menaces to
the marriage of Editha. Moreover, Polydore reports, That for the hate he bore
her father (who had not long before most traitorously slain his brother
Alphred) he caused himself to be divorced from her, seizing her goods and
dower to his own use and pleasure. Ranulphus, and one that writes himself
Anonimos (as willing to conceal his name) say, That she was disrobed of all
her Queenelike honors, and confined into the Abbey of Warnwell, with only one
maid to attend her, and so committed to the strict custody of the Abbess.
William of Malmesbury, and Marianus Scotus have left remembered, That he
neither dismissed her his bed, nor carnally knew her; but whether it was done
in hatred to her kindred, or purpose of Chastity, they are not able to
determine. Robert Fabian confesses as much in his Chronicle, Part. 6. cap.
210. Howsoever, the effects of that abstenious life were not only
prejudicial, but brought lamentable effects upon this distracted kingdom,
namely, Innovation and Conquest: for Edward dying without issue, England was
invaded and oppressed by the Normans, and the people brought to that misery,
that happy was that subject that could say, I am no Englishman. And in this,
agree Matthew Paris, Capgraue, Fabian, and Polydore. As I hold it not
necessary for married folk to tie themselves to this strict kind of
abstinence, so I hold it not convenient for any such as have to themselves, and
in their souls, taken upon them the strict life of Virginity, to be compelled
to an enforced marriage; as may appear by this discourse following, recorded
by Gulielm. Malmsburien. Simeon Danelmens. Matthew Paris, Roger Houeden,
Capgraue, etc. Henry the first of that name, king of England, and crowned in
the year of Grace 1101, was by the instigation of Anselme (once a Monk of
Normandy, but after by William Rufus constituted Archbishop of Canterbury)
married unto Maude, Maude.
daughter to Malcolme the Scottish king, she having taken a Vow, and being a
professed Nun in the Abbey of Winchester. Much ado had the King her father,
the Queen her mother, her Confessor, Abbess, or the Bishop, to alienate her
from her settled resolution, or persuade her to marriage: but being as it were
violently compelled thereunto, she cursed the Fruit that should succeed from
her body; which after (as Polydore affirms) turned to the great misfortune
and misery of her children: for afterward, two of her sons, William and
Richard, were drowned by Sea. Besides, her daughter Maude (who was afterward
Empress) proved an unfortunate Mother; and amongst many other things, in
bringing forth Henry the second, who caused Thomas Becket to be slain; it thus
happened: All foreign wars being past, and civil combustions pacified, in
the year of our Lord 1120, Henry the first with great joy and triumph left
Normandy, and came into England. But within few days following, this great
mirth and iollitie turned into a most heavy and fearful sorrow; for William
and Richard (his two sons) with Mary his daughter, Otwell their Tutor and
Guardian, Richard Earl of Chester, with the Countess his wife, the Kings
Niece, many Chapleines, Chamberlaines, Butlers, and Seruitors (for so they are
termed in the story) the Archdeacon of Hereford; the Princes play-fellowes,
Sir Geffrey Rydell, Sir Robert Maldvyle, Sir William Bygot, with other Lords,
Knights, Gentlemen, great Heirs, Ladies, and Gentlewomen (to the number of an
hundred and forty) besides Yeomen and Mariners (which were about fifty; all
these (saving one man, which some say was a Butcher) were all drowned together,
and not any one of their bodies ever after found. Many attribute this great
Judgment to the heavy Curse of Queen Maude, others censure of it diversely:
Howsoever, in this King (as Polydore says) ended the Descent and Line of the
Normans. Of this Anselme (before spoken of) there are diverse Epistles (yet
extant) to many women, in those days reputed of great Temperance and
Chastity: as, To Sister Frodelina, Sister Ermengarda, Sister Athelytes, Sister
Eulalia, Sister Mabily, and Sister Basyle, To Maude, Abbess of Cane in
Normandy; and Maude, the Abbess of Walton, here in England. He writ a
Treatife about the same time, called Planctus a missae Virginitatis, i. A
bewayling of lost Virginity. So far John Bale: And so much shall serve for
Chaste Wives in this kind, being loath to tire the patience of the Reader.

Of Women Wantons.
DIon the Historiographer in Tiberio says, that Lyuia the wife of Augustus
Caesar beholding men naked, said to the rest about her: That to continent women
and chaste matrons, such objects differed nothing from statues or images; for
the modest heart with immodest sights ought not to be corrupted. The unchaste
eye more draws the poison of sin from beauty, which is Gods excellent
workmanship, from which the chaste and contrite heart deriues the Creators
praise and glory. But my hope is, that in exposing unto your view, the
histories of these fair Wantons, you will look upon them (should I strip them
never so naked) with the eyes of Lyuia, that is, to hold them but as beautiful
statues, or like Appelles his woman not better than a picture of white Marble.
I have heard of a man that living to the age of threescore and ten, had led so
austere a life, that in all that time he never touched the body of a woman,
and had proposed to himself to carry that Virginal vow with him to his
grave; but at length being visited with sickness, and having a fair estate
purchased with his small charge and great husbandry, and therefore willing to
draw out the thread of his life to what length he could, he sent to demand
the counsel of the Physicians; who having well considered the estate of his
body, all agreed in this, that since the physic of the soul belonged not to
them, but only the physic of the body, they would freely discharge their
duties; and indeed told him, that this present estate was dangerous, and they
found but only one way in art for his cure and recovery, which was in plain
terms, To use the company of a woman, and so took their leaves and left him
to consider of it. Loath was the old man to loose his Virginity which he had
kept so long, but more loath to part with his life which he desired to keep
yet longer; and having meditated with himself from whom he was to depart, and
what to leave behind him; namely his possessions, his money, his neighbors,
friends, and kindred, and whether he was to remove, to the cold and
comfortless grave; he resolved with himself to prolong the comfort of the
first, and delay (as long he could) the fear of the last: Therefore he
resolved rather than to be accessorie to the hastening his own death, to take
the counsel of the doctors. It was therefore so ordered by some that were about
him, that the next night a lusty young wench was brought to his bed, one that
feared not the robustious violence of youth, much less to encounter the
imbesillitie of sick and weak age. I know not with what queasie stomach the
patient relished his physic, but early in the morning he gave content to his
she Apothecarie, who was conveyed out of the house undiscovered. The next day
diverse of his friends coming to comfort him, they found him sadly weeping, and
by no means could they weane him from that ecstasy: at length the one of them
who was privy to the former nights passage, began to compassionate with him,
and told him he was sorry for his extreme heaviness, and (as knowing the
cause) said, No doubt but God was merciful, and wished him not to despair but
be of comfort, and with ghostly counsel persuaded him to take nothing to his
heart, because he hoped all would be well. The old man told him he
understood not his meaning, but desired him to be more plain, that he might
know to what purpose his language did in^end. His neighbor answered him
again, Sir I have been acquainted with you long, have known your continence
and strictness of life, and withal your abstinence from women; and I am sorry
that your last nights business should be the occasion of this melancholy and
these tears. To whom the sick (but pretily well recovered) man thus replyde,
Neighbor you much mistake the cause of my sorrow, I neither grieve nor weep
for the good and wholesome physic I had the last night, but I now vex and
torment my self that I have so idly spent mine age, there being such a
pleasure upon earth (above all that I have hitherto inioyed) that I never had
the grace to know it sooner, and try what it was before this time. If then
Lust can strike this stroke, and have this efficacy in age, o how much should
we pity youth ready daily and hourly to run into this dangerous
inconvenience.

Of these Wantons there be two sorts, Meretrices and Scorta, that is, Whores
and common Women, such as either for Lust or Gain, prostitute themselves to
many, or all. The second are Concubina or P^llices, Concubines to kings and
princes, or such as we call the private Mistresses to great men. The last are
as our Accidence teaches, like Eduardus or Gulielmus, proper names to this man
or that. The first like Homo, common to all men: both degrees sinners, but not
in the like kind. I have read of a third sort, but know not what consonant or
agreeing name to confer upon them. I have heard of some that have been
called honest whores, It may be those that I shall speak of were such, and
because they are the strangest, I will begin with them first. Dosithaeus lib.
3. Lydiacorum, tells us that the Sardians having commenced war with the
Smyrnaeans, invested themselves before the city of Smyrna, and having begyrt
them with a straight and difficult siege, those of Sardis (it seems being hot
fellows) sent their Ambassadors into the city to this purpose, That unless
they would send them their wives, to adulterate at their pleasures, they would
not only race their city, and level it with the earth, but kill man, woman,
and child, and so extirpe their memory. This message bringing with it not
only terror but horror, much perplexed the besieged: and betwixt the
distractions of perpetual infamy and most certain death, not able what to
determine (and having sat long in counsel, but nothing amongst them
concluded) a young lusty Virago (one that was handmaid or bondwoman to
Philarchus) desired to be admitted into the Senate. And being called in amongst
them to know what she had to say, she told them, That understanding to what
miserable exigent they were driven, she had devised (so pleased them to be
swayed by her direction) a means not only to deliver themselves from skorne,
their wives from dishonor, their children from the reproach of bastardie, and
their lives and goods from spoil, but to subject the barbarous enemy into
their hands, with a noble and memorable victory. No marvel if to such a
project they gave attention, when greedily demanding, By what means the least
of these proposed blessings might be accomplished? she thus counseled them,
Send (says she) to these lustful Sardinians, and tell them you will in all
points satisfy their desires: At the time appointed, let me with the rest of
your slaves and vassals, be attyred in the habits of our ladies and mistresses;
for (no question) being decked in their ornaments and jewels, we shall appear
not only free women, but sufficiently beautiful. Now in the night, when we
are fast lodged in their embraces, and they dreaming of no further dangers than
their present delights, and that you think we have sufficiently cooled their
hot courages; arm your selves against the Sardinians, whom (if they offer to
rise and arm themselves at the Alarm given) we will keep still fast locked
in our arms, till what we have left of them being naked, you your self
dispatch being armed. This counsel was followed, and accordingly took
effect. In memory of this, the Feast called El^theria, i. of Free-women, is
yearly celebrated in Smyrna; in which, the maid-seruants, attyred in their
mistresses habits, sit at the Table, and are waited on by them, whom they
attend all the year after. Aristides Milesius, lib. 1. Italicorum, parallels
this History thus: Atepomarus king of the Gauls, infesting the Romans with
war, and having compelled them to the like exigent, demanded the like
horrible conditions of peace, namely, to adulterate their wives: but being in
the same manner advised by their handmaids, and having intelligence given them
by one Retana, Retana.
the chief of that counsel, when the Gauls were sunk in sleep and lust,
they set upon them in the night, and gave them a brave defeat: from whence the
Feast of the Handmaids took beginning, which is celebrated amongst the Romans
even to this day.

A Tale something like unto these, I have been told of a Mistress, that in
some sort did as much to save her maids honesty; but whether to the same
commendable purpose, of that I am somewhat doubtful. In some great city it
was (I cannot say London) that a citisen of good reckoning having a fair wife,
kept diverse prentices and maid-seruants in his house: one of those busy young
fellows had cast a wanton eye upon her that ruled the roast in the kitchen, and
longing as much to be in her books as out of his time; and waiting many nights
for opportunity to find her in some remote place, or dark entry, it happened
that one night he dogged her at the heels: she hearing him to tread softly
after her, to escape him, stepped up a pair of stayres just as her mistress
came down. The prentice groping in the dark, caught hold upon his mistress,
and without any word speaking began to proportion his work according to the
shortness of his time. The gentlewoman all this while let him alone to see
what he would do, and having made proof of him to the full, she might very
well perceive what his unchaste intent was, when clinging him close too her
least he should escape undiscovered, She asked what bold sawsie knave he was
that durst offer her that injury? the young fellow knowing her voice and
finding his mistake, down on his knees and besought her to pardon him and not
to tell his master, for he to (...) her for one of the maids: The maids
says she, which of the maides^ he answered, The kitchin-maid: and is it so
(says she) well (...), I will henceforth prevent the getting of Bastards in
my house, without knowing who shall father them, and for that night said no
more: but the next morning to prevent all future danger, picked a quarrel with
the kitchin-wench, paid her her wages and turned her away. It seems after,
the yongman did well, for she made him (before his time was fully out) both
her iourneyman and foreman. It follows next in course, that I should define
unto you, what these prostitutes and common women are; but what need I trouble
my self so far, when in these corrupt days almost every Boy of fifteen or
sixteen years old, knows what a strumpet is, better by his own practice than I
can illustrate to him by all my reading. And for Concubines we need not
travel so far as the Turks Se^aglio, since but few kings palaces are
without them. And for such as we call Sweet-hearts, Friends, or Good wenches,
should we but search noble men's Diaries, gentlemen's Summer-lodges, or cittisens
Garden-houses, and travel no further, we should no question find plenty
sufficient. It would also become this place well, to persuade these loose and
incontinen^ women with some elaborat exhortation, to retire themselves from
that wicked and abominable course of life. But I am altogether discouraged,
when I remember the positions of one most notorious in that trade; word being
brought her, as of a strange and unexpected novelty, That one who had been a
famous strumpet, had retired her self from all her leaude courses, and was
lately turned honestwoman. Tush says she, tell me that as often as you will I
will never believe it, For once a whore and ever a wh^re, I know it by my
self: Of these Plautus thus speaks in Truculento: Meretricem ego item esse
reor
Mare vt est --
Strumpets are like the Sea which does devour
Rivers and brooks, and what so else you pour,
Into his vastness: neither has it been
Fuller by them, nor their great bounty seen.
So what so ere thou spend'st upon a whore,
It does not make her rich, but thee still poor.


Terentius in Helyra says: Nee pol-istae metuunt Deos nec hos respicere
Deos opinor.
They fear not God, and he regards not them.


I could produce innumerable adages and sayings of wise men both Poets and
Hystoriographers to the like purpose, but I desire to be prolix in nothing.
Petronius Arbiter in his Satyricon has left remembered, Panachis.
that when Panachis, a gyrle of seven years old, was brought to the fair
youth Gyton robe strumpeted, one wondering that so young a thing was capable of
prostitution; to him Quartilla the bawd thus answered, Quartilla.
Minor est ilia quam ego fui cum primum virum passa sum, i. Is she less than I
was when I lost my Virginity? and thus proceeded, May Juno ever be displeased
with me, if I can remember since I was first a maid; for being an infant I
commixt my self and had congresse with little ones like my self, and as I
grew in years so I picked out children of equal age, even till I came unto
this burden that you now see, and hereupon (says she) I think came the
proverb, Such may easily be brought to carry an Ox, that practiced at first
to carry a Calfe. I think the name of Quartilla was given her because she
began to practice at four years and held on to fourscore. From common
strumpets I should proceed to private mistresses: I will begin and end with them
in this Sonnet.

A Sonnet.
Though my Mistress seem in show.
Whiter than the Pyrene Snow:
Though I sitly might compare her
To the Lyllies, or things rarer,
Crystal, or to ice congealed
If those parts that lie concealed,
Be others given and kept from me,
What care I how fair she be.
Though her visage did comprise
The glorious wonder of all eyes:
Captive led she hearts in chains,
Killed or cured with her disdaines:
Chus'd Beauty (that commands fate)
Her forebeadwhere to keep her state:
Should another step in place,
I care not, I Would not love that face.
Imagine next her brain divine,
Or mansion for the Muses nine:
Did her bosom yield choice places
For the Charites and Graces:
Had she stately Iunos stile^
Pallas front, or Venus smile:
If he enjoy her and not I,
For those virtues what care I.
Trac't she Loves queen in her treasure,
And could teach the act of pleasure,
Make Lais in her trade a fool,
Phrine or Thais set to school,
To Helen read; or could she do^
Worth Io and Europa too:
If these sweets from me she spare,
I Will count them Toys, nor will I care.
But if my Mistress constant be,
And love none alive save me,
Be chaste, although but something fair;
Her least perfection I Will think rare,
Her I Will adore, admire, prefer,
Idolatrize to none but her.
When such an one I find, and try,
For her I Will care, I Will live, I Will dye.
Lais.
THis Lais (as Aristophanes Bizantius relates) was a strumpet of Corinth: she
was called Axine, for her ferocitie and rudeness of manners. Her, all the
prime and noblest Heroes of Greece frequented, and extasied with her beauty,
came daily in troops to visit her. Athenaeus in his Dipnosoph. speaks of her
country, behavior, and sepulcher, reporting her to be so beautiful, that the
most exquisite Painters of Greece came frequently to her, and besought her to
bare her neck, breasts, and other parts of her body before them: For when
they were to limne any extraordinary Piece, (wherein was to be expressed Juno,
Venus, Pallas, or any well-shaped goddess, or woman) her fair feature or
lineaments might be their example. She had a great emulation with Phrine the
Courtizan, for they lived both in one age. Aristippus the Philosopher (surnamed
Cyrenaicus) about the season that the Feasts were celebrated to Neptune, did
yearly for the space of two months together associate himself with this
Lais. Diogenes meeting him upon a time: O Aristippus (says he) thou keep
company with a common strumpet, be rather a Cinicke of my Sect, than a
Philosopher of such loose and dissolute behavior. To whom Aristippus answered,
Appears it to thee, o Diogenes, a thing absurd to dwell in an house which
others have before inhabited? who answered, No: Or to sail in the same Ship
(says Aristippus) in which diverse passengers have before-time put to sea?
Again he answered, Neither: Nor do I think it (replies he) O Diogenes,
worthy thy just taxation, to accompany with a woman with whom many others
have had commerse. Again, being by others calumniated for his often repair
and public recourse to her (in regard of her common prostitution, and
therefore the greater blemish to his more austere profession) he thus
satisfied them: This is the difference betwixt me and the rest of her Clyents;
I only enjoy Lais, all others are enjoyed by her. When Demosthenes (the famous
Orator of Athens) desired to have had company with her, and she for one
nights lodging demanded of him a thousand Drachmaes; affrighted with the name
of so great a sum, he thus replied: I purpose not to buy repentance so dear.
A young man, much taken with her beauty, came to Diogenes the Cinicke, and
asked him this question, What if a man should marry with Lais? Who presently
answered, For a young man it is much too soon, and for an old man it were
far too late. Concerning her, I have read an elegant Epigram, of an old man
desirous of company with her at any rate, and her witty answer to him: Canus
rogabat Laidis noctem Myron,
Tulit repulsam protinus,
Causamque sensit, and caput fuligine
Fucauit atra Candidum, etc.
White-headed Myron did of Lais crave
To have one night, and he her price would pay:
Which she denied. But why he could not have
His purpose, he perceived, his head was gray:
He knew his age betrayed him, therefore he
Dies his hair black, and did his suit renew.
She seeing face and head to disagree,
And them comparing with considerate view,
Thus says, Why do thou urge me thus? the rather,
Since but even now I did deny thy father.


Nimphodorus Syracusa in his book De admirabil. writes, That Lais came into
Sicily from Hycaris, the most defenced city of that country: but Strattis in
Macedon. or Pauson. affirms her to be of Corinth, in these words: Dic vnde
sunt ductae puellae
Venere nuper ex Megara Corinthiae
Decus Lais Ingens.


Aelian. de Varia Histor. Lib. 10. says, That Lais casting her eyes upon a
young man of Cyrenaea, called Eubatas, never left soliciting him by all
womanish enticements, till she had made him promise her marriage, but the
solemnization not to be performed till he had returned Victor from the
Olympicke Games: in which having had good success, but fearing to hazard the
embraces of a strumpet, he took her Picture only, and carried it to his city
of Cyrena, boasting by the way, that he had married and borne thence Lais.
Which she hearing, and enraged at the skorne thereof, writ to him this or the
like Letter: O false and perjured man,
Whose lust has no satietie,
Since nothing please thee can,
Save changes and variety:
O thou alone,
Constant to none,
In nothing settled save Impiety.
Our Sex why do thou blame?
Term women sole offenders?
It Is you, that past all shame,
Are still your own commenders;
That care nor fear
To whom you swear,
Cease judging, and be now suspenders.
Phillis was chaste and fair,
Demophoon false and cruel,
Sapho thought Phaon rare,
And he termed her his Jewel:
But Traitors they
Their Loves betray,
Poor we, can often foresee, but not eschew ill.
Falser than either, thou
As foulely have betrayed me,
But I Will beware thee now:
As Heaven I hope shall aid me,
All thy procurements,
And slye allurements,
Henceforth shall never more persuade me.
Thy Oaths I hold as Lies,
As skorne, thy crafty smiling,
Thy shape a mere disguise,
Thy practice but beguiling;
All thy protests,
As scoffs and ieasts,
And thy fair words no better than reuiling.
Poisons I Will think thy Kisses,
And from mine keep thee fastings;
Thy torments, count my blisses;
Thy breathings, fear as blastings.
And thank my fate,
I now can hate
Thee, whom I now abandon everlasting.


It is moreover reported of her, That being of purpose conveyed into the bed of
Xenocrates, by the means of his scholars, whom he had instructed in all
austeritie and strictness of life: but she by no whorish blandishments able to
corrupt his temperance, his scholars asking her the next morning, How she
sped? she told them, They had lodged her with a Statue or an Image, but no
man. Tymaeus in his thirteenth book of Histories says, That she was beaten to
death with wooden foot-stooles, by certain women of Thessalie, in jealousy
and madness, because she was beloved of a beautiful young man called
Pausonias, on whom some of them doted: This was done at a sacrifice, in one of
the Chapels of Venus: for which cause, the place was ever after called, The
Grove of wicked or unjust Venus. Her Sepulcher was near unto the river Paeneus
in Thessalie, which runs betwixt the two great mountains of Ossa and
Olympus; and upon her Tombe-stone this inscription was graven: Roboris inuicti,
ac animi sit Graecia quamuis
Victa tamen, formae paruit illa suae,
Laiais, ipse parens Amor est, aluitque Corinthus
At nunc ipsa tenet, inclita Thessalia,
Though Greece of unmatched strength and courage be,
It obeyed Lais to thy shape, and thee:
Love was thy father, thee Corinthus bred,
Who now in stately Thessaly lie dead.


(This notwithstanding) some will not allow her to have been educated in the
Cranaeum, which is a place of exercise in the city of Corinth.

Phrine.
SHe for her beauty was emulated by Lais, and was a prostitute in Thespis, a
city of Boetia: who being for some capital crime conuented before the Senate,
and (notwithstanding she had a famous Advocate to plead in her behalf) fearing
some harsh and severe censure, she trusting to her beauty, bethought her of
this project; before the Sentence was pronounced, she cast off her loose and
upper garments, and without any word speaking, as far as womanish modesty
would suffer her, exposed her body naked to the Judges. (O Beauty, thou can
more prevail than the tongues of a thousand Orators.) With her rare form and
extraordinary feature, the old gray-beards were so taken, that where before
their purpose was to inflict upon her some severe punishment, they changed
their austeritie into love and pity, and dismissed her without mulct or fine.
Therefore the famous Orator and Grammarian Quintilian, thus speaks: The
admirable beauty of so complete a Fabric more prevailed with the Senate,
than all the Rhetorical eloquence of the Advocate Hyppari^. Upon this occasion
an Edict was published, That from thence-forward no Clyent whatsoever should be
in presence whilst their Cause was in pleading, least either pity or
affection to the person should sway the balance of Justice and equity. It is
further remembered of her, That Praxitiles the most excellent Painter of his
time (for some courtesies she had done him, or some favors graced him with)
promised to give her the best and most curious Table in his worke-house: but
she by no persuasion or cunning able to wrest from him which (amongst so many)
had the prioritie, she bethought her of this slight; watching a time when the
Painter was abroad in the city, she hired a messenger to run to him in all
have, and counterfeiting a sudden passion, to tell him his house was on fire,
and many or most of his elaborate Pieces burnt to ashes: At which Praxitiles
amassed, and strangely moved, broke forth into this language, But is the
Picture of Cupid safe and reserved from combustion? by which, she found that to
be his maisterpiece, and therefore due to her by promise. This Phrine never
used the hot Bathes, as other of her profession accustomed to do: only at the
Feasts of Ceres and Neptune, she would in the sight of all the Grecians (in
her loose garment, and hair disheuelled about her shoulders) walk down to
the Sea side, and there wash her self. And from her, as Athenaus in his
Dypnos. Lib. 13. cap. 22. affirms, Apelles drew that admirable and unmatched
Piece, called Venus Emergeus, i. Venus swimming or rising out of the waters: Of
which, Ausonius composed an Epigram, with this inscription, In venerem
Andiomenen.

Emersam Polagi nuper genitatibus vndis
Cipria Apellai, Cerne laboris opus.
Behold fair Cipria from her native Brine
Flunging ( Apelles a brave work of thine)
Who shaking off her golden curles, late drowned,
Raynes the salt-sea-drops from her shoulders round:
Her hayres, yet danke, 'bout her white wrists she winds,
Which wreathed, she in her silken hayre-lace binds.
Pallas and Juno said (this ha^ing seen)
We yield the Palm to thee, fair beauties Queen.
Praxitiles, the Statuarie before spoken of, drew from her the Picture of Venus
Cnidia, and under the Table of Love (which was given to adorn the Theater) he
caused these verses to be inscribed: Praxitiles pinxit, prius est quem passus
amorem,
Deprompt sit proprio pectore qui Archetipum.
Love which himself has suffered, and best knew,
From his own breast (this piece) the Painter drew.


This Picture of Love, some say was placed in Thespia, a free town in Boetia,
near Helicon, and dedicated to the Muses, which others take to be a city in
Magnesia, near Thessalie: but her golden Picture, made by Praxitiles, was hung
in Delphos above the Marble Statue of Mercury, and betwixt that of Archidamus
king of the Lacedaemonians, and Philip of Amyntas, having this inscription,
Phrine Epicleis Thespia. This, when Crates Ci^icus beheld, he said, This Table
is dedicated to express the intemperance of the Grecians, as Alcaetus
witnesses, Lib. 20. deposit^rum in Delphis. Apollodorus in Lib. Amicarum,
speaks of two Phrines, the one was called Saperduis, the other Clausigelos, of
Kleo, i. Lugeo, to mourn; and Gelos, i. Risus, Laughter. Herodicus says, Lib.
6. Obi^^gator^m, That she was called by the Orators Se^tus, because she rifled
and despoyled her Clients, and the other Thespica. This Phrine grew exceeding
rich, and made offer to begirt Thebes with a new wall, so that upon the chief
gate they would make this inscription: This Alexander the Great demolished,
which Phrine the Courtesan at her own charge erected; for so writes
Calistratus in his book Amicarum. Ti^^cles Co^^^^i writ of her infinite riches
in his Ne^ra, as likewise Amphis in No^acula. Ari^^igiton in an Oration against
Phrine affirms, That her proper name was M^esarete. Of her, Posidippus Comicus
writ more at large in Ephesia.

There was one Timandra, Timandra.
daughter to Tyndarus and Laedia, the sister of Cli^^innestra: but Pliny
speaks of a notorious strumpet of that name, beloved of Aleibiades the
Athenian, for whom (being dead) she erected a famous Sepulcher: she was, with
her friend Atcis, oppressed in battle by Lysander. Equal to her in beauty was
Campaspe, Campaspe.
by some called Pancasta, a wanton of extraordinary feature, and much affected
by the excellent Painter Apelles; she was prisoner to Alexander the Great, and
at his earnest intercession, bestowed on him by the Macedonian Conqueror.

Glicerin or Glicera, and others.
THis Glicera was surnamed Thespi^nsis of the city where she was borne.
Satyrus in ^itis.
Pra^i^^les the Painter much doted on her beauty, and gave her a Table in
which Cup^d was most curiously pou^^^yde: which, after her death she
bequeathed as a legacy to the city. S^^yrus reports, That Stilp^ being at a
banquet with her, and reproouing her as a great corrupter of the youngmen of
Thespis, she answered, We are o S^ilpo of one and the same error guilty alike:
For it is said of thee, That all such as converse with thee and participate of
thy precepts, thou corruptest with thy amatorious and unprofitable Sophismes:
small difference then there is to be traduced by thee a Philosopher, or by me
a professed Prostitute. She was a great favorite of the Poet Menander.
Hipperides in an oration against Manlithaus, as also Theopompus affirms, That
Harpalus after the death of Pyth^nice sent for Glicera to Athens, who coming
to Tarsus was received into the kings palace, whither much confluence was
assembled, bowing their knees to her, and saluting her by the name of Queen;
neither would they suffer Harpalus to assume the Diadem till she were
likewise crowned; and in Rhossus where his statue was erected in brass, she
caused hers to be placed, for so Clearchus writes in his history of Alexander,
as likewise Catanaeus: Clearchus observes of her, that when any fair young lad
appeared before her, she used to say, Then do boys appear most beautiful,
Plini^^ lib. 21. cap. 2.
when they most resemble the looks and gestures of women. She was affected by
Pansia Sicionius a famous Painter.

Harpalus the Macedonian having robbed Alexander the Great of much treasure,
flying to Athens solicited there Pythonica, Pythonica.
and by many great gifts won her to his embraces: she dying, he profusely
lauished many talents upon her obsequies, and as Possidonius in his Histories
affirms, not only with the artificial skill of many of the best artists and
workmen, but with organs, voices, and all kinds of musical harmony decorated
her funeral. Dyo^^rchus writes, Dicaearch. de discensu, ad Trophonium.
That whosoever shall crauell toward Athens, by the sacred way called
Elusinis, there he shall behold a goodly temple built, in state height and
compass exceeding all others, which who so shall considerately peruse, he
shall guess it either to be the cost of Miltiades, Pericles, Ci^^^, or of
some other Athenian equally with them illustrious, and especially of such a one
that for merit toward the common weal, might command a voluntary
contribution from the public treasury. Theopompus in an epistle to Alexander
thus carpes at the intemperance of Harpalus, Consider (quoth he) and inquire of
the men of Babylon, with what superfluous charge he has interred his strumpet
Pythonic^, who was but handmaid to Bachis the shemusitian, and Bachis the
servant of Sy^^^e Threissa, who from the city of Aegina transported her
bawdries into Athens, she being not only of the third rank and degree of
servants, but of baudes; for with more than two hundred Talents charge, he has
dedicated unto her two sumptuous monuments, to the admiration of all men; when
it has not been known the like honor or cost to have been bestowed (by him
or any other) in memory of any brave soldier, or of such as perished in
Cilicia for the Empire and liberty of whole Greece, she only having
perdurable monuments raised to her as well in Babylon as in Athens, Temples and
Altars with sacrifices offered her by the name of Venus Pythonica. With other
such vpbraidings he complained on him to Alexander, of whom Alexis in Licisca
likewise speaks, as also that after her death he took to his bed the
beforenamed Glicera. Next her followers Irene. Irene.


Athenae^ Dipr. lib 13.
That Ptolomaeus that placed garrisons in Ephesus and was the son of king
Philadelphos, had a beautiful mistress called Irene; she, when Ptolomaeus was
^ssaulted by ^he Thracians in the city of Ephesus, and to shun their violence
fled into a Chapel consecrated to the goddess Diana, would not in that
distress forsake him, but entered the place together, and when the soldiers
role open the gates upon them to kill the king, she removed not her hand from
the ring of the door, but with her own blood sprinkled the altar, till the
soldiers likewise falling upon her, she expired in the arms of the
slaughtered king. As noble was that of Danae.

Philarchus remembers one Sophron of Ephesus to have had in his delights Lib.
12.
Danae, Danae and Laodice.
daughter to Leontius, of the Sect of the Epicures, a man well seen in the
speculations of Philosophy. To her trust were all the domesticke affairs of
the house committed, even by the consent of his wife Laodice; who at length
perceiving his love to incline to Danae, she purposed at her next best
opportunity to make away with her husband. This being found out by Da^ae, and
in great secrecy revealed to Sophron, he gave at the first no credit to the
report; yet at her importunacie, he promised within two days to consider of
the matter, and in that time to deliberate what was best to be done in the
prevention of such a mischief, and in that interim conceales himself in the
city: by which, Laodice finding her purpose to be discovered, she accused
Danae for his murder, and instantly (without further process) by the help of
her friends and servants, hurryed her to the top of a high P^omontorie, from
thence to throw her headlong; who seeing imminent death before her eyes,
fetching a deep sigh, she thus said: I marvel (...) now that the gods have
so small honor done to them, in regard of their injustice, since I am thus
punished for saving the life of my friend, and this Laodice is thus honored,
that would have took away the life of her husband.

Agathoclaea.
Wars having been long continued betwixt Ptolomey of Egypt and Antioch^s of
Syria, Iustine, lib. 30.
insomuch that Ptolomaeus was by his ambassadors rather by fear than
necessity as it were enforced to solicit a peace; notwithstanding, Antioch^s
inuading Egypt, took from him many towns and ci^ies of consequence: which
proffer drawing Ptolomey to the field, he gave him a brave affront and foil,
and had he taken the advantage of the present fortune, had paid him home with
an irrecouerable overthrow: but Ptolomy wholly devoted to effeminacie and
luxury, only contented with what he had recovered of his own, and pursuing
no further advantages, made choice of a dishonorable peace before a just war,
and so concluded all dissension with an unalterable league. And being free from
all foreign invasions, he began domesticke troubles at home. For being given
over to b^ own appetite, and be^orted to his insatiate pleasures, he first
began with (...) (both his sister and wife) causing her to be slain, that he
might the more freely enjoy the society and fellowship of his most rare and
beautiful mistress Aga^hoclea so that the greatness of his name, and the
splendour of his majesty both set apart, he abandoned himself solely to
whoredoms by night, and to banquets and all profuseness of riot by day. And
now liberty being grown to law, the boldness of the strumpet (for no better
my Author styles her) cannot be contained within the walls of the kings house,
which the over do^ag^ of the king, the extraordinary graces and hono^s
conferred for her sake on her brother Agathocles, together with her own
ambitions (growing every day more and more to greater insolence made still more
manifest. Next, there was her old mother, called (...), a cunning Hagge I may
term her, who by reason of her double issue, Agathocles and Agathoclea, had a
great hand with the king, or rather a great power over him. Therefore not
contented with the king alone, they possess the kingdom also: They ride
abroad in all state to be seen, are proud to be by all saluted, and with such
great traynes to be attended. Agathocles (as if sowed to the kings elbow) was
not seen without him, but with a nod or word swayed and governed the city.
The gifts of all military honors, as the Tribunes, Prefects, and Captains,
all these were appointed by the women, neither was there any in the kingdom
that had less power than the king himself: who long sleeping in this dream
of majesty (having given away all that was essential in a king) he fell sick
and dyed, leaving behind him a child of five years old by his afore-murthered
wife and sister Laodice. Laodice.
But his death was by these favorites long concealed, whilst they had by all
covetous rapine snatched what they might out of the kings treasury, by this to
strengthen a faction of the most base and desolate subjects; that by money thus
ill got, and deboisht soldiers thus levied, they might set safe footing in the
Empire: but it fell out far otherwise, for the kings death and their dissigne
was no sooner discovered, but in the rude concourse of the multitude, the
Minion Agathocles was first slain, and the two women, the mother and the
daughter, were in revenge of murdered Laodice hanged upon gybets, being now
made a skorne to every man, that was before a terror to all: the pupillage of
the infant and the safety of the realm to his use, the Romans most nobly
(after) took to their protection.

Cleophis.
Iustine Hist. lib. 12.
ALexander the Great after many glorious conquests entering into India, that he
might contermine his Empire with the Ocean and the utmost parts of the East,
and, to which glory that the ornaments of his army might suit, the trappings
of his horses and the armor of his soldiers were all studded with silver; and
his maine army of their Targets of silver (as Curtius writes) he caused to be
called Argyraspides. Q. Curtius.
In process, by gentle and pleasurable marches they came to the city Nisa,
the cittisens making no opposition at all, trusting to the reverence due to
Liber Pater, by whom they say the city was first erected, and for that cause
Alexander caused it to be spared: passing those fruitful Hills (where grapes
grow in abundance, naturally and without the help of art or hand of man) he
thence passed the Dedalian mountains, even to the provinces and kingdom of
the queen Cleophis, who hearing of his victories and fearing his potencie,
thought rather to affront him by fair means than by fo^ce, by policy than
power; for knowing her self to be a woman of extraordinary state and
beauty, she by her Ambassadors solicited an interuiew; which Alexander
granting, she appeared before him with such a Queenelike majesty, and her
accomplishments of nature so help^ with the ornaments of are (for she was
adorned with the richest and best shining stones of India) th^^ her glory so
captiuated the heart of the conqueror, that they came to treat of composition:
she proposing to him, That it were no honor for so magnificent a victor, so
famous through the world for his conquests oue^ men, to insult upon the weak
spoils of a woman, i^ured to no other arms than the arms of a sweet and
loving bedfellow; yet if for the ransom of her Empire he would accept of her
love and service, in that kind she was there in person at his command, his
subject and servant. Her beauty, with this submission wrought such impression
in the king, that it was concluded betwixt them and by both parties agreed,
That her honor should be the ransom of her Empire. In conclussion, they
lovingly lay together, and so ended these threatened hostilities in an amorous
peace; her body he left tainted, but her kingdom untouched. She was that
night with child by him of a son, whom after his fathers name she called
Alexander; he inherited the kingdom after her: but by the Indians from that
time forward, in regard of her prostitution, she was called The kings whore.

Callipygae.
SO much were the Grecians given to all voluptuousness and pleasure, Athenaeus.
that (amongst others) diverse Chapels and Temples were dedicated to Venus
Callipyga, the word importing, Quasi pulchras habens nates, i. She that has
fair buttocks; the original of that superstition (as Aegenaeus relates) was
this, A country Farmer being the father of two beautiful young Virgins,
these two concluded betwixt themselves which should have the prioritie in
beauty: But modesty forbidding them to dispute it with open faces, they
concluded between themselves to come to a place adjoining to the highway, and
there to expose their backe-parts naked to all such as passed by, and so by the
most voices to be censured. Amongst many others, a noble young gentleman of
the next city, by accident passing that way, and somewhat astonished at so
unwonted an object, enquired the reason thereof, and by one of the spectators
being presently resolved, he as suddenly gave the Palm to the elder; and
intimating by that he saw, what the rest might prove, grew greatly enamoured,
and returning to his fathers house, surprised with melancholy, was of his
brother demanded the cause; he after some few bash^ull denialls, still urged
with the others importunacies, discovered to him the whole circumstance of the
business. The brother de^i^ous to be further instructed, was by the lover
conducted to the place and object which made him first grow enamorated; whither
he was no sooner brought, but he grew presently inflamed with the love of the
younger, and gave his censure on her part. These two had an old Senator to their
father, who much observed his children: of him they demanded these Virgins in
marriage; but he proposing to them matches more honorable, they would no way
assent. But won at length with their importunacies, he sent in their behalf
to the F^^mer, to demand his daughters in marriage. An Enterview was granted,
the parties agreed, a marriage concluded, and after consummate, with
satisfaction on all sides. From which time, ever after, the two young married
wives were called Callipygae. Of these, Ger^ldas Megapelitanus in his Iambicks
to this purpose speaks, These two lived in Syracu^a, who by their marriage
having attained to wealth sufficient, erected a famous Chapel to Ven^^, whom
they styled Dea Callipygae. These, diverse other cities of Greece (^^ter them)
imitated. This History Arche^a^s likewise in his Iambicks records.

Alogunes, Cosmartidenes, Andia.
YOu shall read in the History taken out of Ex Ctesiae ^ersicis, That
Artaxerxes being dead, Xerxes his son succeeded, the legitimate heir by his
wife Damaspia (who dyed the same day with her husband, therefore to be
registered amongst the women most mastrious:) after their deaths the Eunuch
Bagorazus caused both their bodies to be borne into Persia, and there to be
intombed amongst their ancestors. It is remembered of this Emperor Artaxerxes,
that he had by several concubines seventeen bastards, amongst these was
Secundianus borne of Alogunes, Alogunes.
he by treason succeeded Xerxes (having before slain his brother:) this
Alogunes was borne in Babylon. By another concubine of the same city called
Cosmartidenes he had two sons, Cosmartidenes.
Ochus and Arsites; this Ochus by supplanting his brother Secundianus (reigning
some few months) succeeded him in the Empire. Xerxes had issue likewise by one
Andia a Lady of the same nation, Andia.
Bagapaeus and Parisatis who was the mother of one Cyrus and another
Artaxerxes. Xerxes the Persian Emperor (yet living) gave to his second son
Ochus the Prefect-ship over the Hircanians: Likewise Parisatis to wife,
daughter to Xerxes and natural sister to Ochus. This Ochus was after called
Dariaeus, who in all his counsels and proiects never did any thing without the advice of his sister queen; before his aspiring to the Empirie he had issue
by his wife Parisatis two children, a daughter called Amistris and a son
Arsaca, who after changed his name to his grandfathers, and was called
Artaxerxes: after his instalment she brought him a son called Cyrus, after
him Artostes, and so to the number of thirteen, of all which only the fourth
son called Oxendras suruiued, the rest perished in their minority. These
were concubines of Persia.

Iulia.
IT is remembered of Augustus Caesar whose daughter this Iulia was, that he
established a law which was called Lex Iulia, concerning adulterers, after what
process persons so offending should be punished, being convicted and found
guilty. It happened that a young gentleman of Rome being accused of the same
fact with the Emperors daughter Iulia before named, Augustus grew into such
fury, that not able to contain himself he fell upon the gentleman and gave
him many violent and sound buffets, till the supposed offender cried out, o
Emperor where is your Justice? you have made a law concerning these matters,
why am I not then judged by that? At which words it so repented him of his
rashness, that all that day and night he forbore to taste any food. At a
certain sword-playing or such like pastime solemnised in the great Roman
Theater, Lyuia the mother, and Iulia the daughter, had turned the eyes of all
the multitude upon them twain, and that by reason of the difference of their
habits and their attendants; Lyuia being matron-like attired, was accompanied
with aged Senators and Ladies of approved modesty and gravity; Iulia on the
contrary, loosely and wantonly habited, had in her train none but
butterflie-pages, wild fashion-mongers, and fantastic gallants: which
observed by Augustus, he the next day admonished her by letters, To observe
what difference and odds there was in the appearance of two such high and
noble persons: which having read, she returned him only this short answer,
Well, and these people about me shall be old likewise when I am. This Iulia,
to a noble Senator of stayed gravity giving her counsel to frame her self
after her fathers grave and sober behavior, she presently replyde, Though my
father does not remember that he is an Emperor, yet I cannot forget that I am
an Emperors daughter. It is further remembered of her, that beginning to have
gray hairs with the soonest and before she was old, as her maids and
gentlewomen were kembing her head the Emperor came in suddenly upon her, and
espyde them picking and plucking the white hairs up by the roots which still
stuck upon their garments; the Emperor for that present said nothing, but not
long after amongst many other discourses taking occasion to speak of old age,
he demanded of his daughter, Whether she had rather in the process of a few
years have a reverent white head, or to be directly without any hair at all?
she answered, She had rather to have a white head: Why then (said he) do thy
damosells all they can to make thee clean bald before thy time? Augustus much
grieved with her licenciousnesse, and seeing it subject to no reformation, he
banished her the Court, and with her, her daughter Iulia his grandchild, who
took something too much after the mother; and after that Agrippa whom he had
once adopted his heir, but after for his intemperance and brutish and
luxurious riots cast out of his favor. Whenever mention was made of any of
these three, he would recite a verse out of Homer, which imports thus much:
What Is now my sorrow, would have been my pride,
If I (as some) might issuelesse have di'de.


He used not to call any of those three by any other names than Ulcers or
rotten Impostumes, Cankers, and such like: for he used much more patiently to
take the deaths of his friends than their dishonours. He further provided by
his last will, That whenever either Iulia his daughter or Iulia his
grandchild expired, their bodies should not rest beneath his monument. One
thing of her I had almost forgot; Upon a time coming to visit and do her
duty to her father, she perceived his eyes to be much offended with the
gawdinesse of her attire, as sauering of immodestie; the next day taking
occasion to reuisite him, she changed her habit into a comely civil and
matronly garb, and in that sort came to embrace her father: Caesar who had the
day before suppressed his grief, was not now able to contain his joy, but
broke out into these terms, o how much more decent and seemly are these
ornaments for the daughter of Augustus? to whom she instantly replyde, Indeed
this day I apparelled my self to please the eyes of a father, but my
yesterdayes habit was to content the eyes of a husband. She, when some that
knew of her frequent inchastities, demanded how it was possible she should
bring forth children so like her husband, considering her so often prostitution
with strangers? answered. Because I never take in passenger till my ship have
her full fraught and lading. Macr^b. lib. 2. cap. 5. Satur. And so much for
Iulia.

Phileterus speaking of those wantons that lived before his time and were now
dead, In Cenegide.
scoffs them thus, Nonne Cercope iam egi^ annerum ^ria millia? etc. i. Has
not Cercope already lived three thousand years? (and proceeding) and rough
haired Diopethi^, and a second Tele^is ten thousand: for The^lite none. knows
or can remember when she was borne; Was not This dead when she should have
prostituted her self and come under? Ionias and Neaera are now dead and
rotten, so is Philace. Of Siph^^, Galinas, and Cor^nas, I speak not. Of Nais I
hold my peace, because her teeth are now no grinders.

Sinope and Phanostrate with others are remembered by Demosthenes in his oration
against Androtio^es. Herdicus Grateticus speaks of this Sinope in his
Commentaries, and says, That when she grew into years she was called Abidus;
she was no question a famous strumpet in her youth, for Antipha^es speaks of
her in many of his Comedies, in Ar^ade, in Horlicom^, in Medicatrice, in
Piscante, in Neottide: So likewise Alexis in Cleobulina, and Calicrates in
Moscione. Of Phanostrate, Appollodorus writes, That she was a prostitute in
Athens (and that of her rank were many others) and was called Ph^herophile of
(...) Pediculus, and (...) Porta, Propter quod pediculos cum staret in limine
Porta queritabat. Menander in Adulatore he numbers these wantons, Chrisis,
Coronis, Antecyra, Ischades, and Nanniculum, whom he calls Formosum valde,
Exceeding fair.

Potonice.
Quintus Curtius in his tenth book of the life of Alexander the Great, writes,
That after many honorable Conquests, having already subjected sundry Nations
to his jurisdiction (being now in India, where all his attempts were
prosperous, and his designs successful) proud of his victories, and thinking
himself to be Fortunes minion, insomuch that despising the offspring from
whence he came, he caused himself to be called the Son of Jupiter. Being
puffed up with these thoughts, and swelling in all ambitions, he betook
himself to all voluptuous delicacies, and of them, to the most tempting riots
of wine and women; insomuch, that lulled in all effeminacie, he so far forgot
both his high majesty, and that commendable temperance, for which he was
before all his predecessors renowned, that he sent as far as Athens for a
notorious strumpet (branded in her life, though famous for her beauty) called
Potonice, on whom the king was so much besotted, that he not only gave her
most princely and magnificent gifts in her life time, but after her death
caused a Tomb to be erected over her body, on which structure the king
bestowed thirty Talents. It were strange if our English Chronicles should not
afford some or other, to have correspondence with these.

Harlotta, or Arlotta.
THis History is recorded by an Historiographer of ancient times, who writes
himself Anonymus, or without name, by Gulielm. Malmesbury, Vincentius,
Ran^lphus, Fabian, Polydore, and others. As Robert duke of Normandy, and
father to William the Conqueror, rid through the town of Falois, he beheld a
beautiful Virgin (a Skinners daughter) playing and dancing amongst other
Virgins: with whose feature being on the sudden surprised, he so far
prevailed by his secret messages and gifts, that she was privately conveyed
into the dukes chamber, and there lodged and put in a bed, to await his
coming: who glad of such a purchase, without much circumstance made himself
ready for the business intended. The chamber cleared, and the place voyded,
and he ready to accomplish his desires, she rent her smock from the chinne to
the foot^ to make the freer way for the Prince: and he demanding the reason of
her so doing, she made him this pretty and read^^ answer; It were neither
fit nor comely, that the nether part of my smock should be ^^^ned up, and
kiss the lips of my lord: at which the duke was much delighted. And that
night was begot William the Bastard, whom our Chronicles honor with the name
of Conqueror: whether at first in memory of this least, or since, in disgrace
of the Wanton, it is not decided. But from that Harlotta, or Arlotta, our
prostitutes and common wenches ^re to this day in our vulgar Tongue called
Harlots.

Guinilde. ^^ban. Bal. Act. Engl Vot^r. Guliel. Malms. li. 2. de reg etc.
In the year of our Lord 1036, Henry the second Emperor of that name, was
married to Guinilde, the daughter of Can^tus a D^ne, and king of England. This
Empe^our had a sister, a professed Nun, whom he loved so entirely, that often
times he would have her lie in his own Palace, and near to his own privy
chamber. It happened in a cold Winters night, a Chaplain belonging to the
Court (it seems to keep her the warmer, and one that had been before much
suspected) lay with her: and in the morning, least both their footings should
be seen in the Snow (newly fallen that night) she took him up, and carried
him out of the Court toward his chamber. The Emperor chancing (as his custom
was) to rise just at the same hour, was spectator of this close conueyance,
and beheld how all the business happened. Not long after fell a Bishopric,
which the Priest expected, and a Nunnerie which the Nun much desired:
Whereupon the Emperor calling them before him the one after the other, Take
that Benefice (says he to the Priest) but saddle no more the Nun; And you
the Abbess (says he to his Sister) saddle no more the Priest, or look thou
never more bear Clerk riding upon thy back. It is said, that this served
after for a modest chiding betwixt them, and that they were parted upon these
friendly terms.

Of diverse Wantons belonging to sundry famous men, and others.
ARistophanes, Athen. in Dypnos.
Appollodorus, Ammonius, Antiphanes, and Georgia Atheniensis, of your Athenian
strumpets have writ at large: as also of the like argument Theomander,
Cyrenaus, Eleus, Amasides, Theophrastus in libro Amatorio, Polemon de Tabellis,
lib. 3. Ovid, and infinite others, out of whom may be collected many famous
wantons in their times. Ocymus is the name of a strumpet, much beloved of a
skillful Sophist in Corinth; Thalatra, of Diocles; Corianno, of Pherecrates;
Antea, of Philillius, otherwise called Eunicus; Thais and Phannium, of
Menander; Opora, of Alexis; Clepsydra, of Eubulus: for so Asclepiades, the
son of Arius, reports in his Commentary upon Demetrius Phalareus; where he
affirms her proper name to be rather Methica, In Agrestis.
which Antiphanes writes to be the name of a wanton. The Poet Timocles speaks
of Cina, Nannium, Plangon, Lyca, Pithionica, Myrhina, Chrisis, Conallis,
Ieroclea, Lopadium: Of these, likewise Amphis makes mention. In Nouaculis.
Anaxandries in his description of the madness of old men, amongst others he
reckons up Lagisca, and Theolyte. Polemon the Historiographer speaks of one
Cottina, whose Statue is erected in the city of Lacedemon, not far from the
Temple of Dionisius; she is mounted upon a brazen Bull. Athen. in Dypnos.
Alcibiades was beloved by a woman of Aegida, of whom he was likewise amorous:
after (relinquishing Athens, and Lacena) of one Me^ontide of Abidos, and with
her sailed through the Hellespont, with Axioch^s a friend of his and much
devoted to his fellowship; for so the Orator Lysias witnesses of him in an
Oration made against him. He had two other mistresses with whom he was
conversant, Damasandra the mother of Lais Junior, and Theodota, by whom he was
preserved when remaining in Melissa, a city of Phrygia, Pharnabazus laid
trains entrap his life. Abrotonax was the mother of Themistocles, a strumpet,
as Amphicrates relates. Hist. lib. 3.
Neanthes Cyzicenus (a Greek Historiographer) calls him the son of Euterpe.
The second Philodelphus, king of Egypt, had many famous Concubines, Lib. 3.
as Ptolomaeus E^^rgetes in his Commentaries witnesses; Didima, and
Bilistiche: besides these, Agathoclea, and Stratonica, whose monument was
erected in the sea; El^sina, Myrtium, with many others. Polybius in his
foureteenth book of Histories remembers one Clino, that was his Cup Bearer, in
whose honor many Statues were erected in Alexandria: Mnesides (a shee-Musitian
of the city Mnesis) and one Pothinae: his most delicate houses, in which he
took much delight, he was wont to call after the name of two of his Paramours,
either Myrtiae or Pothinae. Timothaeus, the great Captain of the Athenians,
was known to be the son of a common woman of Threissa: which being objected
to him as an aspersion, he answered; I am glad to have been borne of such a
mother, that had the wisdom to choose Conon to be my father. Caristius in his
Historical Commentaries auerres Phileterus (who soueraignized in Pergamus, and
the new Region called Boca) to be the son of a wanton shee-Minstrell, borne
in Paphlagonia. Aristophon the Orator, who in the reign of king Euclides
published a Law, That all such as were not borne of civil and free women,
approved for their modesty and temperance, should be held as bastards; yet he
himself is mocked by the Comicke Poet Calliades, for being the son to the
Prostitute Chorides, as may appear in the third book of his Commentaries. Of
Lamia the strumpet, the king Demetrius had a daughter called Phila: Polem. de
Var. porticu.
Polemon affirms Lamia to have been the daughter of Cleonor the Athenian.
Machon the Comic Poet numbers Leaena amongst this kings mistresses, with many
others. Ptolomaeus, the son of Agesarchus, in his History of Philopater
speaking of the mistresses of kings, bestows Philinna, a Dancer, upon Philip
of Macedon, by whom he had Aridaeus, who succeeded after Alexander. Damo was
the delight of Antigonus, Heracl. Lembus Histor. lib. 33.
by whom he had Alcyonaeus. Mysta and Nisa were the beloved of Seleucus Junior:
and Mania, most famous for her wit and ingenious discourse, of Demetrius
Poliorcetes. Of her, Machon the Poet writes much, as also of Gnathaena, who
with Depithaea were said to be two Lasses much beloved of the Poet Diphilus.
The city of Athens was so full of famous strumpets, that Aristophanes
Byzantius reckoned up at one time 135. but Appollodorus more, so likewise
Gorgias; as these, Parenum, Lampride, Euphrosine (the daughter of a Fuller of
Cloth) Megista, Agaellis, Thaumarium, Theoclea (otherwise called Corone)
Lenetocistus, Astra, Gnathaena, with two neeces by her daughter, Gnathenum,
Lynceus Comicus.
and Siga; Synoris, surnamed Lichnus; Euclea, Grammea, Thriallis, Chimaera,
Lampas, Glicera, Nico (surnamed Capra) Hippe, Metanira, of whom many things
worthy observation are remembered. Caelius.
One Sapho is likewise numbered amongst these loose ones; not Sapho the Lyrick
Poetresse, but another borne of a strumpet. Many Roman wantons may here
likewise not unfitly be inserted (as some related) others beloved and
celebrated by them in their Poems; as Ipsithilla, of Catullus, Quintilia, of
Caluus Licinius; Lyde, of Calimachus; Bathis, of Phileta; Lycinea and Glicera,
of Horace; Leucadia, of Terentius Varro Arecinus, Delia, Sulpitia, Nemesis,
Neaera, all these affected by Tibullus; Hostia, otherwise called Cinthia, by
Propertius; Prop. lib. 1.
Melenus, of Domitius Marsius Martialis; Cesennia, by Caius Getulicus the
Epigrammatist; Bissula, by Ausonius Gallus; Metella, of Tycida Epigrammatista;
Citheris (who was also called Licoris) of Cornelius Gallus; Pamphilia, of
Valerius Aedituus; Gellius.
Chrisis, of Q. Trabaea the Comic Poet; Martia, of Hortensius; Terentia, of
Marcus Tullius Cicero, Calphurnia, of Pliny; Prudentilla, of Apuleius; Neaera,
of Licinius Imbrex, a writer of Comedies; Aeme, of Septimius; Aufilena, of
Quintius; Lesbia, whose true name was Claudia, of Catullus; Argentaria, of
Lucanus; Delia, of Tibullus; Beatrix, of the Italian Poet Dante; Aureta, of
Petrarche; Pandemus, a famous curtisan, cited by Coelius, and therefore may
claim a place in this Catalogue. Aegiptia was doted on by Theon; Manulia, a
prostitute, spoke on by Gellius; Barine, the name of a famous Roman wanton,
deciphered by Horace; Spatale, by Martial called Mammosa; Chione, the name of a
common woman, expressed by the same Author. Licisca, not only remembered by
him, but by Iuuenal, in these words: Nomen mentita Licisca. Coelia is taxed in
Martial for one that would for gain prostitute her self to all men. Hermia
was a loose woman, so doted on by Aristotle, that he was said to sacrifice
unto her, and dedicate sundry Hymns to her praise: Origines.
for which, being vpbrayded by Eurimidon and Demophilus, he forsook Athens
(where he had taught the space of thirty years) and removed himself to
Chalcides. Martial in one of his Satyrs reprooues Philenis, who was much
beloved of the Greek Poet Philocrates. So far have these wantons prevailed
even with Princes, that some (to gratulate them, and continue their loves) have
not spared to rob the Altars of the gods. Athena. Gimos. lib. 13. cap. 18.
Bromia, a shee-minstrell, so much delighted Phiallus, that he rewarded her
with a rich Bowl taken out of the Temple, which was a gift presented by the
Phoceans. To one Pharsalia, a Thessalian shee-dancer, Philometus gave the
golden Crown of Daphnes, the Offering of the Lampsacens. This Statue of
Daphnes was in Metapontus, erected in the peregrination of Aristaeus
Proconnensis. In this place Pharsalia appearing, and strutting in her new
honors, the Priests surprised with a sudden fury, and in the presence of all
the people, tore her to pieces, dismembring her limb from limb: and being
demanded the reason, it was answered, It was the just anger of the Nymph,
Myrtilus.
for being so despoyled of her Crown. Lyda is remembered to have been the
mistress of Antimachus. There was likewise another of that name, beloved of
Laminthius Milesius. Clearch. in reb. Amator.
Clearchas affirms either of these Poets to have been besotted on that name,
the one expressing himself in Elegies, the other in a Lyricke Poem, Manno the
Minstrell was doted on by Mimnermus, as Leontium by Hermosinax Colophonius,
both Greek Poets. Naucrates produces one Dorica (amongst many other fair and
beautiful wantons) whom Sapho writes to be the sweetheart of her brother
Charaxus, when as a Merchant he touched in Naucrates; where she complaynes,
That by her, her brother was despoyled of all or the greatest part of his goods
and fortunes. Herodotus (though ignorantly) calls her Rhodope; not knowing,
that this is diuersse from her, who erected those famous Obeliskes in Delphos,
of whom Cratinus makes ample mention. Of this Dorica, Posidippus speaks often
in his Aethiopia, and of her composed this Epigram: Dorica te capitis ornarunt
Mollia vincla,
Et late vnguentum pallia quae redolent,
Quae quondam periucundum complexa Charaxum, etc.
Thy Hair tied in soft knots, become thee well;
Thy Robes, that distant, of sweet odours smell,
(Fair Dorica) do thee no common grace,
In which thou erst Charaxus did embrace.


Archedica, a very beautiful Girl, was likewise of this city: for as
Herodotus affirms, this place much gloryed in her fair ones. Sapho of Eressus
(who was enamored of lovely Phaon) was here famous, as she her self
expresses to her Nymphs, in her peregrination through Asia. No ignoble wench
was Nicarete the Megarensian, both for the antiquity of her blood, and for her
practice in the best disciplines, as well to be beloved as admired, being a
professed hearer of the Philosopher Stilpo. To her we may compare Bilistiche the
Argiue, who derived her birth from the ancient Family of the Atrides; for so
they relate of her, that composed the Grecian Histories. Bittiles was the
mistress of the Poet Euripilus. Nicol. Damascen.
Samia was the beloved of Demetrius Phalareus: he was used ieastingly and in
sport to call her Lampito, as Diyllus reports: She was also called
Charitoblepharus, which signifies Gratia Cilium, From the beauty of her
eyebrows. Nicareta was enjoyed by Stephanus the Orator, and Metanira by
Lysias the Sophist. Of their familiarity were Antea, Aratola, Aristoclea,
Phila, Istmias, and Neaera (who was mistress to Stratoclides) Zenoclides the
Poet, Hypparchus the Player, and Phrisoninus Paeaneius, the son of Damon, and
by his sister the nephew to Democharis. It is said, That by arbitration
Stephanus the Orator, and one Phrynion, enjoyed Neaera by turns, and several
days. These called her youngest daughter Strobyla by the name of Phano,
acknowledging her to be their own. But least with this multiplicitie of
Histories I should grow tedious, here (though abruptly) I will pawse for the
present.

Of Famous Wantons.
OF some of these, something more at large. It is a Maxim, Amor vbique in
natura; Love is every where in Nature. The Poets (as Euripides, and others)
called him, The Great and most mighty of the gods: and grave Aescilus in
Danais introduced his mother Venus, thus saying: Ferire purus Ether, arua
concupit
Amorque terrae, consequi vult Nuptias, etc.
The pure Air ever loves to stroke the fields,
And to the Nuptials of the Air, The Earth yields;
The showers drop from the clear Heavens, and rain down
To kiss the Earth, and give her a fresh Gown,
Whose garments were l^te threadbare: even these prove
In senseless things, congresse, and marriage-loue;
Whose birth we look for: where the country Swain
The Midwife plays; and Apples, Fruits, and Grain
Returns us in their time. Then Ceres takes
These Infants to her charge; nor them forsakes;
But (whilst she can) from all corruption saues,
Till being ripe for death, we find them graves.
If you would know who first prescribed these Laws
Of this free birth, I (Venus) am the cause.


The like Euripides speaks in Hyppolitus. If then this universality of Love
be in senseless creatures, no marvel if it be so frequent in such as pretend
to understand. Herodotus, Lib. 1. says it was a Law amongst the Babylonians,
The manner of the Babylonians.
That all women freeborn, and Denisens of the city, were enjoined once in
their life times to make repair to the Temple of Melitta (for by that name the
Assyrians called Venus) and sitting in the Porch, to subject themselves to the
embraces of any stranger. But some of the noblest and richest not willing to
publish themselves to open prostitution, were drawn thither in Chariots
covered, leaving their train and attendants behind them: many sitting in the
Temple in Pues, or places allotted them, with garlands upon their heads; of
which, whilst some are called apart, others still return (for their passages
to and fro are distinguished by small cords or strings, which direct strangers
unto such women to whom they are most addicted.) But of these, not any return
to their houses (after they have once took up their seats) till some clyent
has cast some coin or other into her lap (be it never so small or great)
and have had carnal company with her in a sequestered place of the Temple:
which done, he is to say, So much I did owe thee, o goddess Melitta. Nor was
any woman to refuse the money that was offered her (whatsoever it were) because
it was to be employed in their supposed pious uses. Neither was it lawful for
a woman to refuse any man, but she was compelled to follow him that cast the
first coin into her apron. This being done, it was lawful for her to mingle
her self in prostitution with whom she pleased. The fairest and most
beautiful were for the most part soonest dispatched, but others that have been
ugly and deformed, have been forced to sit in the Temple, some one, some two,
some three years, and upwards, before they could meet with any by whose help
they might give satisfaction to the Law, return to their own houses, and make
use of their free liberty. The like custom (though not in every particular)
was in Cyprus.

Amongst the Caunians (a people in Coria) there was a yearly conuention of
young men and women to the like purpose, as the same Author in the same book
affirms. Aelianus de var. Histor. lib. 4. says, That the Lydian women before
their marriage presented themselves for gain, till they had purchased to
themselves a competent dowry; but having once selected a husband, they from
that time lived in all continence and chastity. From this generality I come
to particulars, and first of Thais. Thais.
She was a strumpet of Corinth, whose beauty bewitched all the Atticke youth.
Her the Greek Poet Menander in his works most celebrated, of whom she was
called Menandraea. Clitarchus specifies unto us, That she was much beloved of
Alexander the Great; at whose request (after the conquest of Cyrus) all the
Imperial Palaces in Persepolis (with the greatest part of the city) were set
on fire, and burned down to the earth. This strumpet (after the death of
Alexander) was married to the first Ptolomey of Egypt, by whom she had two
sons, Leontiscus and Lagus, with one daughter called Irene, whom Solon king
of Cyprus after took to wife. Lamia.
Lamia was a Courtizan of Athens, and entyred to Demetrius, a lord of many
Nations, insomuch that in his Armor and Crown, with his Imperial Diadem, he
was often seen publicly to enter her roof, to converse with her, and eat at
her Table. It had been less dishonor for so great a person, to have given
her meeting more privately. In this one thing Diodorus the Minstrell was
preferred before Demetrius: who being diverse times sent for to this Courtezans
house, refused to come. This Lamia was wont (as Aelianus, Lib. 12. reports) to
compare the Greeks to Lions, and the Ephesians to Wolves. Gnathana was of the
same country, Gnathana.
and borne in Athens, of whom it is thus remembered: A noble fellow drawn as
far as the Hellespont by the attractiue fame of her beauty, she gave him
both meeting and entertainment: of which he growing proud and somewhat
insolent, using much loquacitie and superfluous language (being in the heat of
wine, and lust) she asked him, Whether (as he pretended) he came from the
Hellespont? To whom he answered, He did: She replied, And do you know the name
of the chief city there? He told her, Yes. She then desired him to give it
name? He told her, it was called Sygaeum. By which, she ingeniously reproved
his verbositie; since Syga (of which Greek word the city takes denomination)
signifies silence and taciturnitie. Of her prompt and witty answers the Poet
Machon sets down many: for she was held to be wondrous facetious and
scoffing, and exceedingly beloved of the Poet Diphilus. Lynceus likewise
remembers many things concerning her. Pausonius Lacus being dancing in her
presence, in doing a lofty trick above ground, and not able to recover
himself, he fell headlong into a Vessel that stood by: See (says she) Lacus
in cadum incidit, i. The Poole has powered himself into the Vessel: Lacus not
only signifies a Poole, but a Vessel which receives the wine when it is
pressed. Another, offering her a small quantity of wine in a great and large
Bole, and told her withal, That it was at least seventeen years old, Truly
(answered she) it is wondrous little of the age. Two young men in the heat of
wine quarrelling about her, and going to buffets, to him that had the worst,
she thus said, Despair not youth, Non enim Coronarium est certamen sed
Argenteum, i. This was a prize for Money only, not for a Garland. When one had
given her fair daughter (who was of the same profession) a piece of Gold
valued at a pound, and had received no more than labor for his travail, and
bare looks for his money, to him she said, Thou for this pound art made free
of my daughter, as those that are admitted into the school of Hyppomachus the
maisterwrastler; who often times see him play, but seldom prove his strength;
admire his skill, but never try his cunning. Many such (with great elegancie)
came frequently from her; for (as Lynceus says of her) she was Concinna
admodum and vrbana. Aristodemus in his second book Ridiculorum memorab.
relates, That when two men had bargained for her at once, a soldier and a
mean fellow, the soldier in great contumely called her Lacus, or Lake: Why
do you thus nickname me? says she, because you two floods fall into me,
Lycus, and Liber: Lycus is a river not far from Laodicea, which sometimes
runs under the earth, and in many places bursteth up again. She writ a
book which she called Lex Conuinalis, imitating the Philosophers of those
times, who had compiled works of the like subject: The project of her book
was, how her guests ought to behave themselves at Table toward her and her
daughter. The like Law Callimachus composed in three hundred and three and
twenty Verses.

Rhodope.
Rhodope was a Curtesan of Egypt, one that by her prostitution came to such a
mass of wealth, that she of her own private charge caused to be erected a
magnificent Pyramid, equalling those that were raised by the greatest Princes.
Sapho calls her Dorica, and makes her the mistress of her brother Charaxus,
upon whom he spent and consumed all his fortunes, even to the utmost of
penury: of whom Ovid thus writes, Arsit inops frater etc. Aelianus and others
report her for a woman most beautiful, who bathing herself in a pleasant and
clear fountain in her garden, her handmaides attending her with all things
necessary, upon a sudden an Eagle sowsing down, snatched up one of her
shoes, and flying with it as far as the great city Memphis, let it fall
from above into the lap of the king Psamneticus, then sitting in public
judgment: who much amassed at the strangeness of the accident, but most at the
riches, proportion, and curiosity of the shoe, instantly commanded that all
Egypt should be through-sought, till they could find the owner thereof, by
matching it with the fellow: which happened soon after. Being brought before the
king, he was so infinitely surprised with her feature, that the same hour he
contracted her in marriage, and consequently made her his Queen. Some say she
was first a Thracian damsel, and servant to Iadmone of Samos; she was after
carried into Egypt by the Philosopher Zanthus Samius. She was a friend and
Patroness of Aesopus, so famous for his Fables still frequent amongst us.

Metra was the daughter of Erisichthon a Thessalian, Metra.
who having spent all his fortunes, and wasted even his necessary means (as
brought to the lowest exigent of penury) was forced to make merchandise of his
daughters Chastity; but she would not yield herself to the embraces of any
man, without the gift and tender of a Horse, an Ox, a Cow, a Sheep, or a
Goat, or some such like commodity, to the supply of her fathers necessity:
(for it seems that Coin and Jewels were not then in use) For the exchange
aforesaid the Thessalians fabled, That she could transhape her self into all
those creatures presented unto her by her lovers. And hence came that old
adage, More changeable than Erisicthons Metra, Cyrene.
Much of the like continence was Cyrene, a notorious strumpet, who as Erasmus
reports, explaining of that old proverb, Duodecem artium homo, i. A man of
twelve Arts or Trades, could use her professed Venerie twelve several ways.
Archianassa was surnamed Colophonia, Archianassa
as borne in the city of Colophon, and was beloved of Plato the divine
Philosopher, of whom he himself thus protested.

Archianassam ego teneo Colophonis amicam,
Cuius and in rugis, mollia ludit amor.
Archianassa I still hold
My mistress, and I say
There is no wrincle in her face,
In which love does not play.
Thus we see even the deepest Philosophers and the wisest men, have made
themselves the captives of Beauty and vassailes unto Lust, Demosthenes the
Orator was guilty of the like aspersions, and subject to much intemperance. It
is said that having children by a noted strumpet, when both the mother and the
children were cited before the judgment seat (to avoid calumny) he presented
the issue without the mother, though it were against the custom of the city:
for as Idomeneus says, notwithstanding he were outwardly of a modest
disposition and carriage, yet inwardly he was profuse and incontinent. It is
reported of him, that he was wondrous prodigal and expensiue in banquets and
women, in so much that the public Scribe speaking of him in an oration, thus
said, What shall we then think of the Orator Demosthenes, when what he has
by his great travel and industry purchased in a whole year, he will
dissolutely spend in one night upon a woman? The like Nicolaus Damascenus
writes of Demetrius, the last of that succession, who so much doted on Myrina
Samia, Myrina Samia.
That she commanded from him all things save his Diadem, so that not only
Philosophers but even Kings have made themselves subject to all kind of
voluptuousnes and luxuries; and what has bin the lamentable success, but
shame and dishonor, the wasting of private estates, and the miserable
subversion of kingdoms. Therefore Claudian in his third book in Stiliconis
Lauds thus says: -- Nam cetera regna.
Luxuries vitijs odijsque superbia vertit, etc.
Of other kingdoms, the imperial state
Lust does subvert with vices; Pride, with hate:
So by the Spartans Athens was subdued;
And so Thebes fell: The Medes did first intrude
Into th'Assirian Monarchy: their lust
Buried their towering honors in the dust.
From the luxurious Medes, the Persians rest
Their proud dominion: they grown lustful, left
Their Empire to the Macedonian sway,
Who kept it till they wanton grew: then they
Their honors to the temper at Romans sold,
For so the ancient Sibills had foretold.


Aspasia.
The effects of this will more plainly appear in the History ensuing.
Aspasia, otherwise called Socratica, is numbered amongst the fairest women of
her time, insomuch that she had several suitors from all the Provinces of
Greece, as Aristophanes delivers in his discourse of the Peloponnesian war:
insomuch, that Pericles (for the love of this Aspasia, and for some servants of
hers, taken from her by force) begun and established that terrible Decree
against the Megarenses, remembered by Stesombrotus Thasius. She about her
private and necessary occasions sending her bawd Symaetha to the city of
Megara, the young men of the city detayned her: upon which restraint she sent
two others, who not being suffered to return, from these strumpets did arise
a war, almost to the depopulation of the greatest part of Greece. It is
likewise spoken of that Cyrus (who warred against his brother) to have had a
mistress of great wisdom and wonderful beauty, bred in the city of Phocis,
who as Zenophanes says, was first called Milto, and after Aspasia. Of these in
general, I^^enal with great elegancie speaks in his Satyrs: Nil non permittit
mulier, sibi turpe putat nil
Cum virides gemmas collo circumdedit, and cum
Anribus extentis magnos committit elenchos.
There Is nothing that a woman will respect,
Nothing so vile or odious that she fears,
So she with glistring Jewels may be dect,
And have great pendant Pearls way down her ears.


Of Mista, and others.
PHilarchus observes this Mysta to be much favored by the king Seleucus: who
being expelled by the Galathians, and hardly escaping with life, when his
Palace was seized and surprised, she casting aside all her princely ornaments,
put on a servile habit and mingled her self in the society of her handmaides
and servants, having so disguised her self that she remained unknown, and by
that means was sold amongst the rest at a small rate, and bought by the Rhodian
merchants, to whom after she disclosed her self. They to insinuat into the
favor of Seleucus (who had recovered his former fortunes) sent her to him
nobly attended in great state and magnificence, of whom she was accordingly
received and they most bounteously rewarded. Antecyra (as Caelius, Antecyra.
lib. 13. cap. 6. reports) was a famous (or rather infamous) strumpet, so
called because she yielded up her body to lunatickes and madmen; or else
because the Physician Nicostratus, at his death left her such a quantity of
Hellebore. Caluia Crisalpina is called by Tacitus, Caluia Crisalpina.
lib. 17. the stale misteresse of Neroes lust, an apt pupil for such a
tuteresse. Appollodorus and Caelius write of two sisters called Stragonium and
Anthis, Stagonium. Anthis.
both of the venerall profession: These were by a nickname called by some
Aphiae, because of the smalnesse of their statures and the greatness of their
eyes. Cynna, Cinna.
Saluacha, Saluacha.
and Casauria, Casauria.
were three famous strumpets of Athens, many times remembered by Aristophanes in
his Comedies. Hermippus, lib. 1. de Aristot. speaks of Herpillides the
paramour of Aristotle, Herpillides.
he had by her a son called Nicomachus. Melissa Melissa.
the daughter of Proclaeis (as Pythenetus in his third book de Aegina relates)
was beloved of Periander ex Epidauro king of Corinth, and numbered amongst the
seven wise men of Greece: He seeing her attyred after the manner of the
Peloponnesians (that was, almost naked, save a linen garment next to her skin)
and in that manner ministering wine to his servants and workmen; he was
suddenly so surprised with her beauty, that he first entertained her as his
friend and familiar mistress, and shortly after in great state and public
solemnity received and acknowledged her his queen and wife. Xenophon reports
of Socrates to have had familiar conference with Theodota, Theodota.
whose speech was to this purpose, Before thee o Socrates (says she) I claim
a just precedence, and hold my self the worthier person of the two: he
demanding the reason, she thus proceeded, Because thou with all thy gravity
and austeritie of discipline, can not alienate from me and my society any
one of my suitors and clients; but I when I please can draw from thee the best
of thy scholars and pupils, both such as I like and at what time I best
please. To whom Socrates replyde, It is no wonder, o Theodota, since the way to
thy house is merely to naughtiness, and lies down the hill; but the path to
my school is solely tending to nobleness and virtue, and is the way up hill,
therefore the passage sublime and difficult. It is said that Appelles espying
Lais (when she was a young Virgin) drawing water from the Pyrenaean fountain,
admiring her beauty, which was not yet grown unto perfection, he conducted
her by the arm home to his shop, and presented her to the society of his
fellow Painters; but they deriding his folly that he would entertain a
virgin, one not capable of prostitution: he said, Doubt you not, for within
this three years I will deliver her up to the game the most beautifullest of
any virgin living. The like Xenophon in Mirabil. testates, That Socrates
presaged of this Theodota in her childhood, Quod pulcherima (...), pectusque
quouis ratione haberet formosius, i. He said, That she would not only prove
outwardly fair, but her breast within every way more beautiful Demades the
Orator had a son called Demeas, by a she-minstrell, one that played upon the
Flute, or the Shaume, this young man puffing and blowing, and being (as our
English phrase says) in a p^lting chafe, Hyperides then standing by, Peace
(says he) young man and be patient, for thy cheeks begin to swell bigger
than thy mothers. Nicaeeus in Successionis Philosoph. says, That the
Philosopher Doristhenites was the son of a strumpet called Olimpia Lacaena.
Olimpia Lacaena.
Sophocles the Tragedian had in his delights one Theorides, Theorides.
in his age and decaying strength: therefore in his prayer to Venus he thus
says, O nutrix iuuenum exaudi, mihi da mulierem
Abunere hanc etc.
Here me thou nurce of youth, I thee entreat,
And grant that she to whom my lou's so great,
May shun the beds of young men, and despise
Their hot affection: only cast her eyes
On aged men, whose heads are snow'd by time,
Who though decade in strength, have minds sublime.


Stasimus says that this Theorides was first the friend of Theoris. Sophocles
after forsaking her, made election of another called Archippe, Archippe,
whom as Hegesander writes, he made his heir. Isocrates the modestest of all
Orators, was taxed with two wantons, namely, Metanira and Calls, Metanyra.
Calls.
for so Lysias affirms in his Epistles. Demosthenes in an oration against
Neaera confers Metanira upon Lysias, who had another mistress called Lagis,
Lagis.
whose Encomium was writ by the Orator Cephalus, as Alcidamus Laites (the
scholar of Georgius) most eloquently penned the praises of his beloved Nais.
Nais.
This Nais, Lysias gave description of in an oration against Philonides, her
proper name was Archias: of her Aristophanes makes mention in Geritade and in
Pluto, where he says, Amat ne Lais, number tua Philonedem causa?


Which should be writ Nais, not Lais, as Athenaeus is of opinion. Hermippus
speaking of Isocrates says, That he entertained into his house the strumpet
Lagisca, by whom he had a daughter. Lysias in an oration reckons up diverse
other prostitutes, Philyra, Scione, Hyppaphesis, Theoclea, Psamathe, Lagisca,
Anthaea, Aristoclaea, and Dagnista. Alce was the name of a famous Curtisan,
Alce.
as may be gathred out of the words of Laberius, Petrus Crinitus, and others.
Pythagoras (says he) the Samian Philosopher, in speaking of his
transformations, reports himself first to have been Euphorbus, then
Pyrander, then Calidena, and after a strumpet of admired feature called Alce:
with this Pithagorian Metamorphosis, Laberius the Minick Poet thus sported, --
Vt nos olim mutant Philosophi
Et nunc de mulo hominem, de muliere colubrum,
Faciant --


i. As the Philosphers of old would change us, making of a Mule a Man, and of a
Woman a Snake. Petrus Crintius calls her Famoso nominus Alce. In the threescore
and fourth Olimpiad, in the time that Hippias and Hipparchus tyrannised in the
city of Athens (as Eusebius relates in his Annalls) Harmodius and Aristogiton
with others (but those of the most note) made a coniuration against the two
princes, and in this conspiracy was Hypparchus slain. Leaena.
Leaena a famous strumpet, being known to be affected to some of that faction
(as being indeered to them for some former courtesies) was called into question,
and being commanded to discover the Regicides, and obstinately refusing it, she
was judged to the rack, where with wondrous patience enduring many almost
insufferable torments, and still being urged to discover what she knew
concerning that confederacy; she with a noble and memorable resolution bit out
her tongue, and cast it into the face of the tyrant Hyppias: which act, Pliny
and others record as a president of admirable patience in a woman. Let Leaena
(says he) the strumpet be memorised for her constancy, who by no tortures
could be enforced to discover Harmodius and Aristogiton, by whose hands the
tyrant Hipparchus fell. For the like resolution is Anaxarchides renowned
amongst men by Zeno and others. Synope.
Erasmus in Chiliad. speaks of Sinope before named, a famous strumpet of
Corinth, to be so extremely given over to lust, that from her came the Latin
word Sinopissare, which signifies, to be in the highest degree libidinous or
voluptuous. Suidas says, That Nannium the whore was called Capra, Nannium.
because she devoured a Vintner (or made him break) called Thallus, which
word sometimes signifies Germen, i. A bough or sprig on which Goats love to
feed. Acca Laurentia, Acca Laurentia.
the wife of Faustulus the kings shepherd, who being a beautiful woman,
prostituted her body for gain: she was surnamed Lupa, and from her even to
this day all brothel-houses are called Lupanaria. She nursed and brought up
Romulus and Remus, Liu. lib. 1. Decad. 1. Plutarch in Vita Romuli. Flora the
strumpet, Flora, or Laurentia.
who was likewise called Laurentia, constituted the people of Rome her heir;
from her came the yearly feasts celebrated, called Floralia: of her, Gellius
lib. 6. cap. 7. and Vollat. lib. 16. speaks more at large. Manilia.
Manilia was a Roman Curtesan, whom Hostilius Mancinus called into question,
because a stone was cast upon him from one of her galleries: Gellius. Phebe.
Phebe was a freed woman to Iulia the daughter of Augustus Caesar, and a
companion with her in all her lusts and brothelries; who when she heard that
her mistress was confined by her father, fearing some severe censure from the
Emperor, slew her self to prevent further torture: Dion in Augusto. The
immoderate lust of Caelia, Caelia.
Martial, lib. 7. thus reprooues: Das Cattis, das Germanis, das Caelia Dacis,
Nec Cilicum spernis Cappoducumque toros, etc.
To th'Catti, Germans, and the Dacians, thou
Caelia give welcome, and thou do allow
The Cappadians, and Cilicians bed:
Besides, from Pharo thou art furnished
With Memphian whorers, from the red sea sails
The swarthie Indian, and he brings thee vailes,
And thou take all, neither will thou refuse
The offer of the circumcised Jews, etc.


Catullus of his Lesbia thus speaks: Lesbia.
Nulla potest mulier tantum se dicere amatum,
Vere, quantum a me Lesbia amata mea est.
No woman truly can report to be,
So well beloved, as Lesbia thou of me.


Chrisis.
So Quintus Frabaeus Comediographus of his love Chrysis: De improuiso Chrysis
vbi me aspexerit,
Alacris obuiam mihi veniet, etc.
When Chrysis on the sudden me espide,
She looked upon me with a cheerful face,
Wishing withal, that me she might embrace,
To whom she owes her self: this I have tri'de.
It is a fortune I have seldom known,
And such as I prefer before mine own.


Dion, Nicaeus, and Xiphilinus, in the life of the Emperor Commodus, besides
the strumpet Martia whom he took to wife, remembers one Damostrat^, Damostrato
whom he after bestowed upon Cleander, him whom from a bondsman he raised to be
of his priuie-chamber. Time, Paper, and Leisure would fail me before example,
and I desire not to be tedious. I have hitherto showed you what whoores are, I
now desire to express unto you what they should be. Marie Magdalen the
daughter of Syrus and Eucharia, Marie Magdalen.
and sister to Lazarus and Martha, for some years gave her self up to all
voluptuousness and pleasure, in so much that she had incurred the name of a
common strumpet; but after, when she cast her self prostrat and washed the
feet of our Savior with her tears, and dryde them with the hairs of her
head, and anointing him with costly ointment in the house of Simon the Leaper,
her sins were forgiven her. We read likewise of Aphra who was borne in
Creet, Aphra.
her mothers name was Hylaria a notorious bawd: This Aphra with her three
servants Dimna, Eugenia, and Eutropia, for money prostituted themselves to all
men; but she her self being after converted to the Faith, by Narcissus bishop
of Jerusalem, abiured all incontinence, and adhering to the Christian religion,
proved so constant in the same, that for the true Faith she suffered
martyrdom. Niceta. Aquilina.
Nicaeta and Aquilina were two beautiful strumpets and made gain of their
bodies; these were employed by king Dagnes to tempt and traduce the blessed
Saint Christopher, and to vpbraide him of false religion, but it fell out
contrary to the purpose of the tyrant; for those two being by him converted to
the true Faith, and not to be removed by menaces or torments, were after by
the same king both caused to be slain. Faucula Clauia is remembered by the
Historiographer Lyuie, Faucula Clauia.
who though she was of that wanton and loose behavior, yet highly to be
commended for her piety; she to her great charge ministered food and
sustenance to many of the distressed Roman soldiers, all the time that
Hannibal was possessed of Capua. Marullus lib. 2. cap. 12. and Sabin. lib. 5.
cap. 5. speak of Thais an Egyptian strumpet, Thais Aegypti^.
who by the often admonitions of the Abbot Pannutius, repented her of her
wicked and leaud life; and to give the best satisfaction to the world that she
was able, she caused a great fire to be made, and all that wealth which she
had gathered by her prostitution she cast therein, and caused it to be burned
before her face: and from a common Brothel-house, retired her self to a private
Monastery, where after three years penetentiall sollitude she expired.
Pelagia Antiochena, Pelagia Antiochena
so called because she was borne in Antioch, exceeding in wealth and excelling
in beauty, was wholly given over to immoderate luxuries, in so much that no
woman appeared in public more gawdily apparrelled, or more voluptuouslly
minded than her self; but being drawn by some religiously disposed friend of
hers, to hear the Sermons of Nonius Bishop of Heliopolis, she acknowledged
her error, cast off her gay and gawdie attire, bewailed her sins, and
lamented her leaud course of life, distributing her wealth amongst the poor,
and as a farewell to all looseness and intemperance, builded a poor Cottage in
the Mount of Olives. And least any violence in such a sollitude might be done
unto her, in the way of prevention she changed her habit, and called her
self Pelagius, proceeding in that sanctity of life; that where before of
Pelagia she was called Pelagus Vitiorum, i. A Sea of Vices, she was after
styled Pelagus Virtutum, amarissimus Marath aquas in dulces conuertens, i. An
Ocean of Virtues, turning the most bitter Waters of Marath into sweet. And thus
I conclude with these Wantons, wishing all such whose lives have been as ill,
and infamous, that their ends might prove as good, and glorious.

Explicit Liber Sextus, Inscriptus ERATO.
THE SEVENTH BOOK, Inscribed POLYHIMNIA, or MEMORY. Entreating of the Piety
of Daughters toward their Parents, Women to their Children, Sisters to their
Brothers, Wives to their Husbands, etc.
THERE is no gift (according to Reason) bestowed upon man, more sacred, more
profitable, or auayling toward the attayning of the best Arts and Disciplines
(which include all general Learning) than MEMORY, which may fitly be called
the Treasure-house or faithful Custos of Knowledge and Understanding.
Therefore with great wisdom did the Poets call her the Mother of the Muses,
and with no less elegancie did they place Oblivion below in Hell, in regard of
their opposition and antipathie. Our Memory (as Sabellicus says) is a benefit
lent us from above, that has her existence in Nature, but her ornament and
beauty from Art. Alexand. ab Alex. Lib. 2. cap. 19. That the Egyptians in
their Hieroglyphics, when they would figure any man of an excellent memory,
they would do it by a Fox, or a Hare, with upright and erected ears: But when
they would represent one dull and blockish, they did it by a Crocodile. That
Nation, of all others, has been remarkable for their admirable retention;
who, before they knew the true use of Letters, had all the passages of former
ages by heart, and still the elder delivered them to the younger, keeping no
other Records than their own remembrances. Themistocles in this was eminent;
insomuch, that Simonides the Poet promising by Art to add something unto that
which he had already perfect by Nature, he told him, he had rather he could
teach him the Art of Forgetfulness, because he was still prone to remember
such things as he desired to forget, but could not forget such things as he
gladly would not remember. Cic. Lib. 2. de Finibus. It proceeds from a
moderate temperature of the brain, and therefore may be numbered amongst the
necessary good things which belong unto mankind. Many men have in this been
famous, but few women, unless for remembering an injury. Most necessary to a
good Memory, is Meditation; for as Ausonius says, in Ludo septem sapientum:
Is quippe solus rei gerendae est efficax,
Meditatur omne qui prius negotium.
He only squares his deeds by measure true,
That meditates before what shall ensue.


And again: Nihil est quod Amplior^^ Curam postulat, etc.
Nothing there is that greater care should ask,
Than to fore-thinke ere we begin our task:
All humane Actions justly are derided,
That are by Chance, and not by Counsel guided.


There is a Proverb frequent amongst us, Oportet mendacem esse memorem, It
behooues a Liar to have a good Memory. Neither is the sentence more common,
than is the practice in these corrupt days: insomuch, that one ingeniously
speaking of the generality of it, thus said, or to the like effect; Young men
have learnt to lie by practice, and old men claim it by authority: Gallants
lie oftener to their mistresses, than with them; nay, even women's Aprons are
stringed with excuses. Most of our Tradesmen use it in their bargayning, and
some of our Lawyers in their Pleading. The Soldier can agree with the thing it
self, but quarrels at the name of the word. It has been admitted into
Aldermens Closets, and sometimes into States-mens Studies. The Traveler makes
the modestest use of it, for it has been his admittance to many a good meal.
At a meeting of gentlemen about this Town, whether in a Tavern, or an
Ordinary, I am not perfect, but amongst other discourse at the Table, one
amongst the rest, began thus:

It is recorded (says he) by a Spanish Nobleman who had been Ambassador in
Russia, A poor man and a Bear.
that in the time of his residence there, a strange accident befell, which was
after this manner: A poor man of the Country, whose greatest means to live
was by gathering sticks and rotten Wood in the Forest, and after to make
merchandise thereof amongst the neighbor villages; he climbing a hollow Tree,
much spent with age, and that Country (above many others) being full of Bees,
as appears by their traffic of Wax and Honey; of which, in the bulk and
concauitie of the Tree there was such a quantity, that treading upon a broken
branch, and his foot-hold failing, he fell into the trunk thereof, where
presently he was up to the arme-pits deep in Honey, besides the emptiness
above his head, not being able to reach to any thing by which he might use the
help of his hands. In this sweet pickle he continued the space of three
days, feeding upon the relief the place affoorded, but altogether despairing
ever to be released thence, as not daring to cry or call out for help,
fearing the danger of wild beasts, of which in those Wildernesses there are
infinite plenty. But it so fell out, that a mighty great Bear coming that
way, and by reason of the poor man's moving and stirring himself up and down
within the Tree, smelling the Honey (which they say Bears have appetite unto
above all other things whatsoever) he mounts the Tree, and (as their custom
is) not daring to thrust in their heads first, as fearing to fall headlong,
provident Nature has allowed them that foresight, as catching fast hold upon
the top with their fore-feet, with one of their hinder legs (as with a
Plummet) they sound the depth of the place, and how far it is to the
commodity for which they come to search. All this the Bear did, at such time
as the miserable poor man was casting his arms abroad to catch hold of any
thing by which he might raise himself out of that pitiful Purgatory, who
meeting with such an unexpected Pulley, or Crane, caught fast hold upon the
Bears leg: at which, the beast being suddenly affrighted (fearing to leave
one of his limbs behind him) drew it up with such a mighty strength, that he
plucked out the man withal to the top, where he first fell in, by which means
the poor wretches life was preserved, and the affrighted Bear (as if the
Devil had been at his tail) never looked back, till he had got into the
thickest parts of the Wilderness.

His discourse being ended, and every one admiring the strangeness of the
accident, a Traveler that sat next him affirmed it for truth, as being then in
the Country at the same time: and thereupon took occasion to discourse of the
cities, the rivers, the manners, and dispositions of the people; and withal,
the coldness of the Clime, which in some places (says he) I protest is so
extreme, that one of my countrymen and I talking together one morning in the
fields, A cold Country.
our words still as we spoke them, froze before us in the air, and that so
hard, that such as the next day past that way, might read them as perfectly and
distinctly as if they had been ^exted in Capital Letters: to which one of the
gentlemen with great modesty replied, Truly Sir me thinks that should be a
dangerous Country to speak Treason in, especially in the depth of Winter.
Something before this discourse was fully ended, came up the gentlewoman of the
house to bid her guests welcome, and taking her c^ai^e at the upper end of the
table^ It seems gentlemen, says she, your discourse is of Russia; my first
husband (God rest his soul) was a great Traveler, and I have heard him in his
life time speak much of the Country, but one thing amongst the rest, which I
shall never forget whilst I have an hour to live, My Hostesses Lie.
That riding from Musco, the great city, to a place in the country, some five
miles off, in a mighty great Snow, and the high way being covered, and he
mistaking the path, he happened to tumble horse and man into a deep pit, from
which he could not find any possible way out either for himself, or for his
beast: and lying there some two hours, and ready to starve with cold; as
necessity will still put men to their wits, so he bethought himself, and
presently stepping to a Village some half a mile off, borrowed or bought a
Spade; with which coming back, he fell to work, and first dug out
himself, and after his Horse; when mounting, he (without more trouble) came
to the end of his Journey: And this (says she) he has told to a hundred and
a hundred Gentlemen, in mine own hearing. To end this discourse in a word
(which by examples might be amplified into an infinite) one of the guests
sitting by, said, I can tell you a stranger thing than all these: being
demanded what? he answered, I believe all these things related, to be true.
Plutarch in his book De educandis liberis says, Prater haec omnia ad sue
faciendi sunt pueri vt vera dicant, etc. Above all things, children ought to be
accustomed to speak the truth, in which consists the chief sanctimonie: but
to lie, is a most base servile thing, worthy the hate of all men, and not to
be pardoned in servants. Homer, Iliad. 1. to show the difference betwixt Truth
and False-hood, has these words: Poene mihi est orci portis inuisior ipsis.
Cuius verba son^^t aliud quam mente recondit.
He Is to me hateful, as the doors of Hell.
That when he ill does mean, does promise well.


Iuuenal in his third Satyr gives it a more full and ample expression, after
this manner: Quid Romae faciam? mentiri nescio; librum
Si malus est, nequeo laudare, etc.
What should I do at Rome? I cannot lie:
If a bad Book be laid before me, I
Nor praise it, nor desire it; I have no skill
In the Stars motions, neither can n^r will
I make deep search into my fathers fate,
To know when he shall die, nor calculate
From the Frogs entrails by inspection: never
Was it my study, how by base endeavor
To panderize, or close conueyance hide
Betwixt the Adulterer and another Bride.
These practices, seek they (that list) t'attaine,
Such as I have been, I will still remain.


This Muse Polyhimnia, under whom I patronize this seventh Book, as she is the
Mistress and Lady of Memory, and consequently of the multiplicitie both of
Hymns and Histories, so from her I assume a kind of liberty to continue my
variety of Discourse, and from Mendacia come to Sales, or Dicteria, i. From
Lies to Ieasts, or ingenious and witty answers. For which, Athenaeus in his
Dypnos. lib. 13. remembers these women famous; Lamia, Gnathena, Lais, Glicera,
Hyppo, Nico, Phrine, Thais, Leontium, and others. Yet least women should not be
content to equal men only, but to antecede them; I will here commemorate some
things, wittily and facetiously spoken by Princes and others. Anton. in
Melissa, Part. 1. Sermon. 56. speaks of an unskillful Physician coming to visit
an old friend of his (or at least an acquaintance) saluting him in this manner:
A Physician.
Sir, God be thanked you have lived to a fair age, and are grown an old man:
Yes Sir (answered he) and you Sir have my health too, for I never made use of
any Physician. Cicero.
Cicero thus played upon Vatinius, who was but a few days Consul: A great
prodigy (says he) there happened in the year of his Consul-ship, That there
was neither Spring, Summer, Autumn, nor Winter: one asking him, Why he had
neglected to visit the Consul in his honor? he answered, He had purposed it,
but the night prevented him. He sported in the like kind upon Caninius, Of him
(says he) we have had a most vigilant Consul, who never so much as slept in
his Consul-ship. Lucius Manilius, Lucius Manilius.
an excellent Painter, had drawn wondrous beautiful faces, but his children
were exceedingly deformed: A friend of his supping with him one night, taunted
him in these words, Non similiter fingis and pingis: as much to say, Thou do
not get thine own children as thou do paint others; No wonder answered he,
For I get those faces in the dark; but when I paint others, I do them by the
light of the Sun. The Christian Princes having united their forces to redeem
the Holy Land from the oppression of the Infidells, Santius of Spain.
Santius brother to the king of Spain was made General of the Christian
forces; a man of great sanctity and an austere life, and withal a noble
soldier: he amongst other Princes sitting in Council with the Pope, but not
understanding the Roman Tongue, in which the business was then debated, only
having his interpreter placed at his feet; upon the sudden (after their Decree)
there was a great acclamation and clamor, with flinging up their caps, etc. At
which Santius demanded of his interpreter, What that sudden joy meant? he told
him, It was because the Pope and College of Cardinals had by their public
sufferage created him king of Egypt (for the Saladine then usurped in the Holy
city.) Is it so (says he) then arise and proclaim the Pope Caliph of
Baildacha. Thus with a Princely liberty modestly taxing their forwardness;
who as they gave him a Kingdom without a Country, he to requite the Popes
gratitude, gave him a Bishopric without a Diocese. Pacuuius Taurus.
Pacuuius Taurus having for his former service sued to Augustus Caesar for some
great and gross sum of money, and the rather to induce the Emperor to
bounty, told him, That it was voyced in the city, and was frequent in every
man's mouth, how he had already received a large donatiue from Caesar: to whom
he answered, Let them say what they will, Augustus Caesar.
but do not thou Pacuuius belleue it. To another that was removed from his
command, and sued for a pention, yet insinuating with the Emperor that it was
for no covetous intent or any hope of gain, but because it should be thought,
that for no criminal cause he was put out of his place and dismissed his office,
that he desired an annual fee from the Treasury: to whom Augustus replied,
Do thou then report openly that thou have a pention, and if any shall ask me
about it, I will not deny but that I have given it. The same Augustus going
into a shop to buy Purple or Skarlet (for in those days the Emperors were not
so curious as some gentlemen are now) he cheapening a piece of Cloth, but not
liking the color, because it was not bright enough, and the Draper having (it
seems) a dark shop (such as are common amongst us in our days) faith the
Draper to him, So please your Majesty but to hold it up into the light, and
you shall see the color more perfect. Gramercie for that (says he) so when I
purpose to show my self amongst my subjects, to show the true color of my
garments, I must likewise be tied to walk upon the Tarresses and tops of
houses. Many other things are remembered of him, worthy to be commended to
posterity. Philip, Philip of Macedon.
the father of Alexander the Great, had a custom when his army was in the
field, to leave his own Tent, and come into the private Halls and Cabbins of
his soldiers, and observe how they spent their idle hours: The Poet
Calliniad. then following the camp, to whom the king had a particular love,
he stole upon him one day, and found him busily seething a Conger, stirring up
the fire, skimming the Kettle, and doing other such Cooke-like offices, for his
particular diet: the king clapped him upon the shoulder, and said; I never read,
o Poet, that Homer, when he was writing his famous Work called the Iliades,
could ever find so much spare time, as to kindle a fire, set on water, and
skimme a Conger. To whom he presently answered: Neither remember I, O king,
that I ever read in that Homer, the Prince of Poets, that Agamemnon, in all the
time of the ten years siege of Troy, had such vacancie as thou have now to
pry into the Boothes of his soldiers; and neglecting the public affairs, to
busy himself to know how every private man cookt his own diet. This was a
modest passage betwixt him that contended to act noble deeds, and him that the
king knew could give them full expression. Erasmus. lib. 6. Apoth. speaks of
the Orator Crassus, Crassus.
That when one Piso (being accused by Sylus for some words speaking) had
incurred a Censure, and Crassus being then the Advocate of Piso, found that
Sylus his testimony proceeded merely from malice and envy; after the
Sentence was past, Crassus thus spoke to Sylus: It may be (says he) this Piso
(notwithstanding this accusation) was moved, or angry, when he spoke those
words: who answered (as reuerencing his authority) Sir, It may be so. It may
be too Sylus (said he) thou did not at that time rightly understand him: who
again answered, It was like enough. And it may be (said Crassus again
somewhat hastily) That Piso never spoke those words which thou say thou
heardest; who answered unadvisedly, And it may be so too: At which the
Auditorie fell into a great laughter, Piso was acquit, and Sylus punished, by
the reuersement of Judgment. It pleased a king of France, who had heard a
great fame of the learned Scotus, Scotus.
to send for him and to seat him at his Table (which was a grace not common)
with expectation (it seems) to hear from him some extraordinary rare
discourse, answerable to the fame was given of him. The scholar seeing such
rarietie and variety set before him, only intended that for which he came,
and eat with a good and sound stomach: Which the king a pretty while
observing, interrupts him thus; Domine, qua est differentia inter Scotum and
S^tum? i. Sir, What is the difference betwixt a Scot and a Sot? To whom he
without pause replied, Mensa tantum, i. The Table only: the king playing upon
his name, and he taxing the kings ignorance. A great Earl of this kingdom
was sent over by Queen Elizabeth, to debate concerning State-businesse, and
joined with him in commission one Doctor Dale, Doctor Dale.
a worthy and approved scholar: To meet with these, from the Spaniard were
sent (amongst other Commissioners) Richardetti, that was Secretary to K.
Philip. These meeting about State-affaires, question was made, In what Language
it was most fit to debate them? Richardetti standing up (and belike having
notice that our Ambassador was not well practiced in the French Tongue) thus
said: In my opinion, it is most fit that this business about which we are
met, be discoursed in French; and my reason is, because your Queen writes her
self Queen of France. At which word, up start the Doctor, and thus replied:
Nay then rather let it be debated in the Hebrew Tongue, since your king writes
himself King of Jerusalem.

These may appear digressions: I will only, because this is a woman's book,
end this argument with the answer of a woman, remembered by Petrarch. Azo, the
Marquess of Este, The wife of the Marquess of Este.
was eminent for many extraordinary blessings both of Nature and Fortune: But
as these were never perfectly enjoyed without some difficulty and trouble, so
it proved in him; for having a beautiful Lady to his wife, he grew
extremely suspicious of her faith and loyalty. He having by her a young son
and heir then in the Cradle, looking earnestly upon him, he fetched a deep
sigh; of which she demanding the cause, he thus said, I would God wife this
infant were as certainly mine, as it is assuredly thine, to confirm which to
mine own wishes and desires, I would willingly part with the greatest moietie
of my means and fortunes. To whom she answered, Let this be neither grief to
your heart nor trouble to your mind, for of this doubt I will instantly resolve
you: and taking the infant from the Cradle and holding it in her arms, she
thus said, No man sir I hope, makes question but this child is mine: to which
words he assenting, she thus proceeded, Then to clear all former doubts and
suspicions, Receive him freely from my hands as my guife, and now you may
presume he is only and absolutely yours. Whether she equiuocated or no, I am
not certain, only this I am most sured of, That she has left a precedent
behind her to all succeeding wives, how their jealous husbands may be best
confirmed in their suspected issue. I fear I have bin somewhat to long in the
Preamble, I will therefore now proceed to the matter. And first of Filial
piety, ascending from Daughters to their Parents.

Of Pious Daughters.
OF Sons that have been remarkably grateful to their Parents for their
birth and breeding, the Histories are many, and the examples infinite: as of
Coriolanus to his mother, celebrated by Tully in Lelio, Dionisius
Halicarnasseus, Plutarch, Plini^, Gellius, Appianus, etc. as likewise of Lucius
Manlius. Torq^atus, of M. Co^^a, Caius Flaminius, Cimon, remembered by Iustine,
lib. 2. Cleobis, and Bithon; Amphinomus, and Anapus, recorded by Herodotus and
Solinus; the son of Croesus, etc. Yet should I undertake to write them all at
large, they cannot exceed that Piety of which I have read in women. Suetonius
and Cicero in an Oration pro Caelio, Claudia.
speaking of Claudia one of the Vestall Virgins, thus report of her: She
seeing her father in his triumphant Chariot riding through the streets of Rome,
and by the Tribunes of the people (who envied his glory) plucked and haled from
his seat, she with a wondrous dexterity, and a masculine audacitie, fr^ed him
from the hands of the Tribunes and their Lictors, and maugre all their
opposition, lifted him up into his Chariot; nor forsook him, till she saw him
in all magnificent pomp received into the Capitol: insomuch, that it was
questioned amongst the Romans, which of them merited the greater triumph, he
for his virtue and valor in the Forum, or she for her zeal and piety in the
Temple of Vesta: nor can it yet be decided which may claim a just prioritie,
the Father for his victory, or the daughter for her goodness. Pliny, The
History of a Pious Daughter.
lib. 7. cap. 36. and Solinus speak of another Roman Lady, of a noble Family,
who when her mother was condemned at the Iudgement-Seat by the Praetor, and
delivered up to one of the Triumviri to be committed to strait prison, and
there for her offense to be privately executed. But the keeper of the Jail
commiserating the Matron so sentenced (either because he pitied her gravity,
or suspected her innocence) did not cause her to be instantly strangled,
according to the rigor of her sentence. At the importunacie of the daughter, he
gave her leave to visit and comfort her mother, but narrowly searched before her
entrance into the prison, least she should carry with her any food or
sustenance to her relief; rather desiring she should perish by famine, and dye
that way, than himself to have any violent hand in her execution. The daughter
having daily access to the mother, who now had past over more days than the
keeper thought was possible by nature, and wondering in himself how she should
draw her thread of life out to that length, without any means to maintain it;
he casting a more curious eye upon the young woman, and watching her, might
perceive how she first drew out one breast, and after another, with her own
milk relieuing her mothers famine. At the novelty of so strange and rare a
spectacle being amazed, he carried news thereof to the Triumvir, he to the
Praetor, the Praetor he related it to the Consuls, they brought it before the
Senate; who to recompense what was good in the daughter, pardoned all that was
before thought ill in the mother: For what will not love devise? or whither
true zeal not penetrate? What more unheard or unexpected thing could be
apprehended, than for a mother to be fed from the breasts of her daughter? Who
would not imagine this to be against nature, but that we see by proof, true
natural piety transcends all bounds and limits? The like of this we may read
of in Pliny, of another young married woman, who when her father Cimon was
afflicted with the same sentence, and subject to the like durance, prolonged
his life from her breasts, for which she deserves to be equally memorized. Our
Parents in no dangers or necessities are to be by us abandoned, and that by the
example of Aeneas, in whose person Virgil thus speaks, as to his father
Anchises, Aeneid. 2.

Eia age chare pater ceruici imponere nostrae,
Ipse subibo numeris, nec me labor iste grauabit, etc.
Come my dear father, and get up, for see,
No burden to my shoulders you can be,
No weight at all; and hap what can betide,
One danger, or one safety, we will abide.
Rusticana.
Sabellic. lib. 3. cap. 6. remembers us of Rusticana, a noble Matron of Rome,
and the daughter of Synnarchus, who with his brother Boethius (the famous
Philosopher) being put to death by Theodoricus, king of the Goths. She, after
the Tirants miserable end, was the cause that all his Statues in Rome were
demollished and ruined, purposing utterly (if it were possible) to extirpe his
memory, that was the inhuman murderer of her father; for which fact of hers
being called in question before king Totila who succeeded him, she was so far
from excuse or denial, that she approved the deed with all constancy; whose
noble magnanimity and resolution proved more auailable to her saftie, than
any timorous evasion could have done, for he not only dismissed her unpunished,
but highly applauded and commended. Fulgos. Sabellicus and Egnatius writing of
Alboinus king of the Longobards, who at his first entrance into Italy, having
subdued and slain Turismundus (whom some call Cunimundus) son to Cunimundus
king of the Gepidanes, and after taken his daughter Rosamunda to wife; the
History says, he made a bole of her fathers skull, in which one night having
drunk somewhat lauishly, he caused it to be filled with wine and sent to
Rosamunda, Rosamunda.
then in her chamber, with this message, Commend me to my Queen and say, I
command her to drink with her father. The Lady though she knew him to be
slain by the Longobards, receiving his death by a common casualtie and chance
of war, and by this assuring her self that he fell by the hand of her husband;
betwixt filial duty and conjugal love (being for a time destracted) the bond
of affection toward her father, prevailed above those nuptial fetters in
which she was tide to her Lord; in so much that to revenge the death of the
one, she resolved to take away the life of the other: to bring which about, she
devised this project, she had observed one Hemegildus a noble man amongst the
Lumbards, to be surprised with the love of one of her waiting gentlewomen,
with whom she dealt so far, that when her maid had promised to give this
Hemegildus meeting in a private and dark chamber, she her self supplyde the
place of her servant; after which congression she caused lights to be brought
in, that he might know with whom he had had carnal company, and what certain
prejudice he had therein incurred, protesting withal, that unless he would
join with her in the death of the king, she would accuse him of rape and
outrage. The Lumbard to prevent his own disaster, undertook his sovereigns
death, which was accordingly betwixt them performed. The murder done, they fled
together to Rauenna, she preferring the revenge of a slaughtered father before
the life of a husband, the title of a Queen, State, Sovereignty, or any other
worldly dignity whatsoever.

Something is not amiss to be spoken in this place concerning the love of
mothers toward their children, The love of mothers to their children.
which as Plutarch in his Grec. Apotheg. says, was excellently observed in
Themistocles Prince of the Athenians, who was wont to say, That he knew no
reason but that his young son (whom his mother most dotingly affected) should
have more power and comma^nd than any one man in Greece whatsoever; and being
demanded the reason, he thus answered: Athens (says he) commands all Greece,
I Themistocles have predominance over Athens, my wife ouer-swayes me, and my
son ouerrules his mother. Olympias the mother of Alexander, Olympias.
caused Iollaes grave to be ripped up (who was Butler to her son) and his bones
to be scattered abroad, raging against him in death, on whom in his life time
she could not be revenged on for the death of her son, to whom this Iollas
was said to have ministered poison. Agrippina, Agrippina.
the mother of Domitius Nero, by all means and industry possible laboring to
confirm the Empire unto her son, enquired of the Chaldaeans and Astrologers,
Whether by their calculations they could find if he should live to be created
Caesar? who returned her this answer, That they found indeed by their Art that
he should be Emperor, but withal that he should be the death of his mother.
To whom she answered, Inter-ficiat modo Imperet, i. I care not though he kill
me, so I may but live to see him reign, Sab. lib. 3. cap. 4.

Loving Mothers.
The same Author tells us, that in the second Punick war, the Romans being
overthrown with infinite slaughter, in the battles fought at Thrasiamenus
and Cannas, many that were reported to be assuredly dead escaping with life,
after their funerals had been lamented, returning home unexpectedly to their
mothers, such infinite joy oppressed them at once, that as if sinking beneath
too great a burden, betwixt their kisses and embraces they suddenly expired.
Aruntius the Roman being proscribed by the Triumuirat, his wife would neddes
have him take her dearly beloved son along with him, to associat and comfort
him in his travels, who when they had gone a ship-boord intending for Sicilia,
and crossed by an adverse tempest, could neither proceed on in their voyage, nor
return to any safe landing; such was their fate that they perished by famine,
which the mother understanding, more for the grief of her son (whom she her
self proscribed) than for her husband exiled by the Triumuirat, slew her
self. The matrons of Carthage in the third Punick war, The Mothers of
Carthage.
when the choysest of all the noble young men of the city were selected to
be sent as hostages into Sicilia, with weeping and lamentation followed them
to the water side, and kept them hugged in their strict embraces, not suffering
them to go aboard; but when they were forcibly plucked from them and sent unto
the ships, they no sooner hoysed sail, but many of these woeful and lamenting
mothers, oppressed with the extreamitie of sorrow, cast themselves headlong into
the Sea and there were drowned, Sabel. lib. 3. cap. 4. The wife of Proclus
Naucratides having a wild and misgouerned son, The wife of Proclus.
addicted merely to voluptusnesse and pleasure, and withal to Cocks, Horses,
Dogs, and such like pastimes; his mother did not only not reprove him in this
licensiousnesse, but would be still present with him to help to feed his
Cocks, diet his Horses, and cherish his Dogs: for which being reproved by
some of her friends, as an incourager of his vnstayd and irregular courses to
whom she answered, No such matter, he will sooner see then into himself and
correct his own vices, by conuersing with old folks, than keeping company
with his equals. Niobes sorrow for her children, Auctoliaos death at the false
rumor of her son Ulysses his Tragedy, Hecubaes revenge upon Polymnestor for
the murder of her young son Polydore, and Tomiris queen of the Massagets
against Cyrus for the death of her son Sargapises, are all rare presidents of
maternall piety; nay so superaboundant is the love of mothers to their
children, that many times it exceedes the bounds of common reason, therefore
Terens in Heuton thus says: Matres omnes filijs
In peccato ad iutrices, and auxilio in patres
Solent esse --


i. All mothers are helpers in their childrens transgressions, and aid them to
commit injuries against their fathers; Therefore Seneca in his Tragedy of
Hippolitus breaks out into this ecstasy: -- Oh nimium potens
Quanto parents sanguinis vinclo tenes
Natura? quam te colimus inuiti quoque.
-- Nature oh
Too powerful, in what bond of blood thou still
Bind'st us that parents are: commanding so,
We must obey thee though against our will.


So great was the love of Parisatis, Parisatis.
the mother of Cyrus the less, to her son, that he being slain, her revenge
upon the murderers exceeded example: for she caused one of them, whose name
was Charetes, to be ten days together excruciated with sundry tortures, after
commanded his eyes to be put out, and then moulten lead to be powered down into
the hollow of his ears; the second, Metroclates, for the same treason she
commanded to be bound fast betwixt two boats, and to be fed with figs and
honey, leaving him there to have his guts gnawne out by the worms which these
sweet things bred in his intrailes; of which lingering torment he after many
days perished; the third, Metasabates, she caused to be flayed alive, and his
body to be stretched upon three sharp pikes or stakes, and such was his
miserable end, a just reward for Traitors. Fulgos. lib. 5. cap. 5. tells us,
That Augustus Caesar having subdued Cappadocia, and taken the king Adiatoriges
prisoner, The wife of Adiatoriges.
with his wife, and two sons; after they had graced his triumphs in Rome, he
gave command, That the father with the eldest son, should be put to death:
now when the ministers designed for that execution, came to demand which of the
two brothers was the elder (for they were both of a stature) they exceedingly
contended, and either affirmed himself to be the eldest, with his own death
to repriue the others life; this pious strife continuing long, to the wonder
and amasement of all the beholders. At length Dietenius, at the humble
intercession of his mother (who, it seems, loved him some deal above the
other) gave way (though most unwillingly) for the younger to perish in his
stead. Which after being known and told to Augustus, he did not only lament
the innocent young Princes death, but to the elder (who was yet living with his
mother) he gave great comforts, and did them after many graces and favors; so
great a reverence and good opinion does this fraternall love beget even amongst
enemies. Neither was this Queen to he taxed of severity or rigor to the
youngest, since it was a necessity that one must dye; it was rather a Religion
in her, hoping to leave her firstborne to his true and lawful inheritance. Now
least I should leave any thing unremembered that comes in my way, that might
tend to the grace and honor of the Sex, there is not any virtue for which men
have been famous, in which some women or other have not been eminent; namely,
for mutual love, amity, and friendship. Friendship in women.
Marul. Lib. 3. cap. 2. tells us of a chaste Virgin called Bona, Bona.
who lived a retired life in a house of religious Nuns: She had a bedfellow,
unto whom above all others she was entired, who lying upon her deathbed, and
no possible help to be devised for her recovery, this Bona being then in
perfect health of body (though sick in mind for the infirmity of her sister)
fell upon her knees, and devoutly besought the Almighty, that she might not
survive her, but as they had lived together in all sanctity and sisterly love,
so their chaste bodies might not be separated in death. As she earnestly
prayed, so it futurely happened; both died in one day, and were both buried in
one Sepulcher, being fellows in one House, one Bed, and one Grave, and now (no
question) joyful and joint inheritors of one Kingdom. Thus far Marrull. But
now to return a little from whence we began. Some sons have been kind to
their parents: as in Sicilia, when the mountain Aetna began first to burn,
Damon snatched his mother from the fire. Aeneas, in the fatal massacre of Troy,
took his father upon his back, his son Ascanius in his hand, his wife
Creusa following him, and passed through the sword and fire. We read likewise
in Hyginus, of Cleops and Bilias (whom Herodotus calls Cleobis and Bython) who
when their mother Cidippe, Cidippe.
the Priest of Juno Argyua, should be at the Temple at the appointed hour of
the Sacrifice, or failing, to forfeit her life: but when she came to yoke the
Oxen that should draw her Chariot, they were found dead, her two sons before
named laid their necks under the yoke, and supplying the place of those
beasts, drew her in time convenient unto the place where the sacred Ceremonies
were (according to the custom) celebrated. The Oblations ended, and she
willing to gratify their filial duty, besought of the goddess, That if ever
with chaste and undefiled hands she had observed her Sacrifice, or if her sons
had borne themselves piously and religiously toward her, that she would grant
unto them for their goodness, the greatest blessing that could happen to any
mortal or humane creatures. This prayer was heard, and the two zealous sons
drawing back their mother in her Chariot from the Temple, unto the place where
she then soiourned, being weary with their travail, laid them down to
sleep. The mother in the morning coming to give her sons visitation, and
withal, thanks for their extraordinary and unexpected pains and travail,
found them both dead upon their Pallets: by which she conceived, That there is
no greater blessing to be conferred upon man, than a fair death, when Love,
good Opinion, and Honor attend upon the Hearse. These (I must confess) are
worthy eternal memory, and neuer-dying admiration: But has not the like
piety toward their parents been found in women? I answer, Yes. How did
Pelopea, Pelopea.
the daughter of Thiestes, revenge the death of her father? Hypsipile,
Hypsipile.
the daughter of Thoas, gave her father life, when he was utterly in despair
of hope or comfort; Calciope would not lose her father, Calciope.
or leave him, though he had lo^t and left his kingdom; Harpalice, Harpalice.
the daughter of Harpalicus, restored her father in battle, and after
defeated the enemy, and put him to flight; Erigone, Erigone.
the daughter of Icarus, hearing of the death of her father, strangled her
self; Agaue, Agaue.
the daughter of Cadmus, slew the king Lycotharsis in Illyria, and possessed her
father of his before usurped Diadem; Xantippe.
Xantippe fed her father Nyconus (or, as some will have it, Cimonus) in prison
with milk from her breasts; Tyro, Tyro.
the daughter of Salmoneus, to relieve her father, slew her own children. Who
will be further resolved of these, let him search Hyginus. And so much shall
suffice for filial duty toward their Parents.

Of Sisters that have been kind to their Brothers.
THe Poets and Historiographers, to impresse into us the like natural piety,
have left diverse presidents to posterity. Innumerable are the examples of
fraternall love betwixt Brother and Brother. To illustrate the other the
better, I will give you a taste of some few. Volater. lib. 14. cap. 2. de
Antropo, Examples of fraternall Piety.
relates, how in that war which Cai. Cornelius Cinna, Tribune, (being
expelled the city with Caius Marius, and others) commenced against the Romans,
there were two brothers, one of Pompeyes army, the other of Cinnaes, who
meeting in the battle, in single encounter one slew the other: but when the
Victor came to rifle the dead body, and found it to be his own natural
brother, after infinite sorrow and lamentation, he cast himself into the fire
where the slaughtered carcass was burned. M. Fabius the Consul, in the great
conflict against the Hetrurians and Veientians, obtained a glorious victory:
when the Senate and the people of Rome had with great magnificence and cost, at
their own charge, prepared for him an illustrious triumph; he absolutely
refused that honor, because Q. Fabius his brother (fighting manfully for his
country) was slain in that battle: What a fraternall piety lived in his
breast, may be easily coniectured, who refused so remarkable an honor, to
mourn the loss of a beloved brother? Valor. cap. 5. lib. 5. We read in our
English Chronicles of Archigallo, brother to Gorbomannus, who being crowned
king of Britain, and extorting from his subjects all their goods to enrich
his own Coffers, was after five years deposed and deprived of his Royal
dignity, in whose place was elected Elidurus the third son of Morindus and
brother to Archigallo, a virtuous Prince, who governed the people gently and
justly. Upon a time being hunting in the Forest, he met with his brother
Archigallo, whom he lovingly embraced, and found such means that he
reconciled him both to the Lords and Commons of the Realm; that done, he most
willingly resigned unto him his Crown and Scepter, after he himself had
governed the Land five years. Archigallo was re-instated, and continued in
great love with his brother, reigning ten years, and was buried at York;
after whose death, Elidurus was again chosen king. What greater enterchange of
fraternall love could be found in brothers? To equal whom, I will first begin
with the sisters of Phaeton, called by some Heliades, by others Phaetontides;
Phaetontides
who with such funeral lamentation bewailed the death of their brother, that
the gods in commiseration of their sorrow, turned them into Trees: whose
transformations Ovid with great elegancie expresses, Lib. 1. Metamorph. as
likewise Virgil in Cutice; their names were, Phaethusa, Lampitiae, Phebe, etc.
Antigone, Antigone.
the daughter of Oedipus, when her brother Eteocles was slain in battle,
she buried his body, maugre the contradiction of the Tyrant Creon: of whom
Ovid, Lib. 3. Tristium, -- Fratrem Thebana peremplam
Supposuit tumulo rege vetante soror.
The Theban sister to his Tomb did bring
Her slaught'red brothers Corse, despite the king.


Hyas being devoured of a Lion, Hyades.
the Hyades (his sisters) deplored his death with such infinite sorrow, that
they wept themselves to death: And for their piety, were after by the gods
translated into Stars; of whom Pontanus, Fratris Hyae quas perpetuus dolor
indidit astris.


Electra. Iliona.
Thus you see how the Poet did strive to magnify and eternize this Virtue in
Sisters. No less compassionat was Electra, the daughter of Agamemnon, on her
brother Orestes; and Iliona, the issue of Priam, when she heard the death of
young Polidore. Stobaeus, Sermon. 42. out of the History of Nicolaus de morib.
gentium, says, That the Aethiopians, above all others, have their sisters in
greatest reverence: insomuch, that their kings leave their succession not to
their own children, but to their sisters sons; but if none of their issue be
left alive, they choose out of the people the most beautiful, and warlike
withal, whom they create their Prince and Sovereign. Even amongst the Romans,
M. Aurelius Commodus so dearly affected his sister, that being called by his
mother to divide their fathers Patrimony betwixt them, he conferred it wholly
upon her, contenting himself with his grandfathers revenue. Pontanus de Liber.
cap. 11.

I will end this discourse concerning Sisters, with one History out of
Sabellicus, li. 3. c. 7. the same confirmed by Fulgosius, The wife of
Intaphernes.
lib. 5. cap. 5. Intaphernes was (say they) one of those confederat Princes who
freed the Persian Empire from the usurpation of the Magician brothers, and
conferred it upon Darius: who now being established in the supreme dignity,
Intaphernes having some business with the king, made offer to enter his
chamber; but being rudely put back by one of the grooms or waiters, he took
it in such scorn, that no less revenge would satisfy his rage, than to cut
off his ears and nose: of which the king having present notice, his
indignation exceeded the others rage; for he gave commandment, That for this
insolence and outrage done in the Palace, and so near his presence, that not
only Intaphernes the Delinquent, but all the male issue of his stock and race
whatsoever, should be laid hold upon, and after, to the dread and terror of the
like offenders, by merciless death taste the terror of the kings incensement.
The Sentence of their apprehension was performed, and their execution hourly
expected: when the wife of Intaphernes cast her self groueling before the
Court gate, with such pitiful eiulations and clamours, that they came even to
the ears of Darius, and much penetrated him, being uttered with such
passionate and moving accents, able to mollify the Flint, or soften Marble.
Impressed therefore with her pittious lamentations, the king sent unto her, That
her tears and clamours had so far prevailed with him, that from the
condemned society they had ransomed one, and one only, to continue the
memory of their Name and Family; choose amongst them all, whose life she most
favored, and whose safety with the greatest affection desired, but further
than this to grant her his Sentence was unalterable. None that heard this
small (yet unexpected) favor from the king, but presently imagined she would
either redeem her husband, or at least one of her sons, two of them being
all that she had then groaning under the burden of that heavy Sentence. But
after some small meditation (contrary to the expectation of all men) she
demanded the life of her brother. The king somewhat amassed at her choice, sent
for her, and demanded the reason, Why she had preferred the life of a brother
before the safety of such a noble husband, or such hopeful children? To whom
she answered, Behold (O king) I am yet but young and in my best of years, and
I may live to have another husband, and so consequently by him more children:
But my father and mother are both aged, and stricken in years; and should I
lose a Brother, I should for evermore be deprived of that sacred Name. At which
words the king exceedingly moved, to see with what a fraternall zeal they were
spoken, he not only released her brother, but added to his unexpected bounty
the life of her eldest son.

Of Matrimony, and Conjugal Love.
IT was inserted in Platoes Laws, That what man soever lived a Bachelor above
five and thirty years of age, was neither capable of Honor, nor Office,
Alexand. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 8. Licurgus, the Lawgiver amongst the
Lacedaemonians (as the same Author testifies) to show the necessity of
Marriage, made a Decree, That all such as affected singleness and sollitude of
life, should be held ignominious. They were not admitted to the public
Plays, but in the Winter were compelled to pass through the Marketplace
naked, and without garments. The Law of the Spartans set a fine upon his head
first, that married not at all; next, on him that married not till he was old;
and lastly, on him they set the greatest mulct, that married an evil wife, or
from a strange Tribe, Stobae. Sermon. 65. Fulgosius calls these Judgments
Cacogamia, and Opsigawi^, lib. 2. cap. 1. So laudable and reverent was Marriage
amongst the Lacedaemonians, procreation of children, and fertility of issue,
That whosoever was the father of three children, should be free from Watch and
Ward by day or by night; and whosoever had four, or upward, were rewarded with
all Immunities and Liberty: This Law was first confirmed by Q. Metellus
Numidicus, Censor; after, approved by Julius Caesar; and lastly, established
by Augustus. Memorable are the words of Metellus, in a public Oration to the
people: If we could possibly be without wives, O Romans (says he) we might
all of us be free from that molestation and trouble: but since Nature incites
us, and necessity compells us to this exigent, That we can neither live with
them without inconvenience, nor without them at all; more expedient it is
therefore, that we aim at the general and lasting profit, than at our own
private and momentanie pleasure. Bruson. lib. 7. cap. 22. The Athenians, the
Cretans, the Thurians, all in their Statutes and Ordinances encouraged
Marriage, and punished the obstinacy of such as took upon them the
peevishness of singleness, and sollitude, either with amercement, or
disgrace. To that purpose was the Law Iulia instituted, that incited young men
in their prime and flourishing age to the marriage of wives, propagation of
issue, and education of children; and that such should be encouraged by
rewards, and the opposers thereof to be de^erred with punishments. Tiberius
Caesar deprived one of his Quaestorship, because he divorced himself from his
wife, having been but three days married, alleging, That he in whom there
was such lightness, could not be profitable for any thing. Claudius Caesar
caused the Law Papia to be abrogated, giving men of threescore years and
upwards, the free liberty to marry, as at those years of ability to have
issue. Theodoretus, lib. 1. cap. 7. and Sozomenus, lib. 1. cap. 10. both write,
That in the Nicene Council, when certain of the Bishops would introduce into
the Church a new Decree, before that time not known, namely, That all Bishops,
Prelates, Priests, Deacons, and Spiritual or Religious men, should be made
incapable of Marriage; as also all such as in the time of their Laity (before
they book the Ministry, or any service of the Church upon them) should be
separated from their wives, of whom they were then possessed: One Paphnu^ius,
Confessor, (who was likewise Bishop of a city in the upper Thebais) stood up,
and with great feruencie opposed the motion, yet a man of approved chastity,
and great austeritie of life: who though he were mightily opposed, yet at
length so far prevailed with the Synod of the Fathers, that it was
definitiuely concluded, That though the marriage of Priests were interdicted^
and singleness of life enjoined them, yet all such as had wives were dispensed
withal, till death made a separation betwixt them. Pius, the second Pope of
that name (being a man of unquestioned prudence and gravity, weighty in his
words, and discreet in all his actions) was often heard to say, That he held it
more convenient and consonant both to reason and Religion, that their wives
should be restored to Priests, than taken from them. For the wise Bishop well
understood, that the restraining them from lawful marriage, was the occasions
of their falling into many great and grievous sins, which by the former
legal and regular course might be prevented: and if the liberty of Marriage
were again admitted, peradventure many of those sins might in time decrease
and be forgotten, into which by that restraint they were subject hourly to
fall, Fulgos. lib. 7. cap. 2. This short discourse shall serve for the
necessity of Marriage; which is ever the most pleasing and contented, when it
is made betwixt equals. Therefore Ovid. Lib. Epist. Heroid. thus writes: Quam
male inequales veniunt ad aratra iuuenci
Tam premitur magn^ coniuge Nupta minor,
Non honor est sed onus, etc.


Which though not verbum verbo, yet the intent of the Author I give you thus in
English: Unsightly do the unmatched Heifers draw,
Nor can the Plough go even then: such the Law
Of Wedlock is; to prevent Nuptial strife,
There must be paritie 'twixt man and wife.
Then needs the one the other must oppress,
The husband great in power, the wife much less:
It is no honor, but a burden rather,
To join, and not be equal: this we gather
From th'vneuen yoke, for so you cannot strike
The furrow straight; if match, match with thy like.


Times forbidden in Marriage.
From the conueniencie or rather necessity of Marriage, I will speak briefly
of the times granted and allowed for the ceremony, or limited and forbidden
amongst other Nations; as also of some proemes or preambles, before the
consummation. It was religiously observed among the Romans, that no marriage
was suffered to be celebrated in the month of May, in which the Lemuria were
kept solemn, which were in remembrance of Remus and to the pacification of his
ghost or shadow; nor whilst the Feralia nor the Parentalia were solemnised.
The first was to appease the gods for dead souls, (as our All-soules-day) the
others were feasts made at burialls of their fathers, brothers, or ancestors;
neither any day that was held impure, nor when the Ancylia were observed, nor
upon any feastiuall or holy day, nor in the month of June till after the Ides,
neither did the Romans in their espousalls neglect Auguries and Presages, if
either there were earthquake or a troubled firmament, they held it fatal; and
therefore deferred it to a more quiet Earth, or less turbulent Heaven. A Crow
they hold to predict a fortunate Omen, and an inuiolate league of future faith
and loyalty betwixt the bride and bridegroom, for such is the society of
Crows that if one dye the other which is widowed never chooses other mate: the
like is remembered of the beast called a Loz or Lynx, above all other the
quickest sighted, as also of the Turtle. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 5. No
betrothed Virgin could marry amongst them, upon any of their holy days or
such as they called feastiuall; but a widow had that liberty, so it were done
in private and without any solemn ceremony: the reason pretended was, Because
to a widow there could be no force offered as to a Virgin, and therefore it was
no violent but a mere holy day labor: Upon this Verrius Flaccus took
occasion apud Verronem in these words, Fossas veteres festis diebus licet
tergere
Nouas facere non licet.
Old ditches on the feast-dayes they might skower,
But to dig new the law admits no power.


The Persians were only permitted to contract matrimony in, Ceremonies before
Marriage.
or before the Summer equinoctial, but not after: The Dapsolites once a year
make a solemn conuention of all the men and women that are disposed to
marriage, in one day, in which after their great feast, the women retire
themselves and lay them down upon their several pallats, the lights being
all put out, the men according to their number are admitted in the dark, where
without any premeditate choice but mere lot and chance, every man chooses her
whom he first lights on and diuirginates her; and be she fair or foul, ever
after holds her as his wife, Stobae Sermon. 42. Amongst the Carmanians no man
is suffered to marry, before he has presented the head of an enemy to the
king. About the Lake Meotes, there is a people called Laxamatae^ amongst whom
no Virgin contracts matrimony before she has subdued an enemy. There is a law
amongst the Armenians, that Virgins are first prostituted in an old Temple
dedicated to the goddess Anetes, whose picture was of sollid gold; which
Antonius after sacriligiously (as they held it) took away: according to the
gain of their compression, it was lawful for any man to choose a wife where he
pleased. Amongst the Ciprians, the Virgins before marriage daily repair to the
Seashore, and there company with strangers, till they have got such a
competent sum as may make up their marriage dower. The Phoenicians do the
like in the city of Syca, but their prostitution is in the Temple of Venus;
but the surplusage that arises above the dower, returns toward the repayring
of the Church. The Carthagenians observe the like custom. The Lydian Virgins
before they were suffered to lie with their husbands, made themselves for a
cert^ine time common to any man, till tired with sacietie they came gentle and
quiet to their beds, and from that time forward vowed chastity, but if any one
was found ever after to transgress the bounds of temperance, she was punished
with all rigor and cruelty, Aelian. lib. 4. de Var. Hist. Lycurgus having
prescribed a certain age, before which time it was not lawful for young men
and maids to have carnal company, being demanded the reason, answered,
Because the issue that proceeds from those of ripe years and grown strength,
is likewise able and perfect; but the hasty and untimely generation is still
subject to weakness and infirmity. Plutarch in Laconic.

Of Contracts before marriage, and of Dowries, amongst whom they were allowed,
and by whom forbidden.
Of Contracts
IT was a custom amongst the Grecians and Lacedaemonians, when a young man and a
Virgin were contracted, to eat of bread together that had bin divided by a
sword: Romulus the first erector of the city Rome, caused the covenant of
marriage to be performed betwixt them by a reciprocal receiving of bread and
water. There was after his time no stipulation or nuptial league fully
confirmed, without fire and water placed at the threshold of the door where
they should enter, both these they both were enjoined to touch; with the water
the new bride was after sprinkled, as if by that ceremony they were coupled
and joined in an inexpiable covenant and inseparable bond of affection; these
two being the chief elements of nature, on which the life of man in our common
food most essentially exist. Amongst the Indians, unless both the husband and
wife anointed their bodies all over with a gum or oil distilling from
certain trees growing by the river Pha^is, the matrimony was not to be
allowed. The Persians and the Assirians, only joined their right hands in
contract: so likewise the ancient Germans, accounting that the only firm
pledge of their love and loyalty. Amongst the Galatians in their espousalls,
the bridegroom drunk to the bride in a cup of Greekish wine; in other places
of milk, which she pledged him; by this ceremony intending that their
nuptials were not only firmly contracted, by that mutual love, equal
society, conjugal loyalty, marriage concord, but like food and diet should
always be common betwixt them. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 5. Of Nuptial
Dowries.
Concerning nuptial Dowries, by some nations approved by others interdicted.
Lycurgus and Solon because they would not have the Virgins oppressed by the
covetousness of men, forbad by their laws that any man should demand a dower
with his wife (a necessary and profitable decree;) by which he was condemned,
that being a long suitor to the daughter of Pysander, and promising her
marriage in her fathers life time, repudiated the contract after his death,
because he dying poor, her dower did not answer his expectation. Aelian. lib.
6. de Var. Histor. Amongst the Hetru^ians it was held base and ignoble, and
absolutely forbidden by their inscribed statutes, for a man to send tokens or
gifts to her whom he affected; accounting them no better than bribes or
mercenarie hire, not fit to be thought on in such a sacred commixion, where
nothing should be meditated save sincere love and conjugal piety. The
Egyptians were so opposite to demanding of portions with their wives, that
they called all such as received them, no better than slaves to them and their
dowries. Now touching bridal gifts and presents, Of Nuptial Gifts or Presents.
It was an ancient custom amongst the Greeks, that the father, the day after
the solemnisation of the marriage, sent to the bride some spousall offerings,
which they called Epa^lia dora, they were vshered by a beautiful young lad
attyred in a long white vesture reaching to his heel, bearing in his hand a
bright burning taper: in order followed after him all such young men and maids
youthfully attyred, that brought the presents; one presented Gold, another
Gemmes, a third a Basin and Ewre with other Plate-dishes, a fourth Boxes of
Alablaster full of sweet Oils and Unguents, a fifth rich Sandals or Slippers,
with other necessaries belonging as well to the whole house as to their private
bedchamber, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 5. Solon to this marriage-offering
allowed only three sorts of garments for the Bride to bring with her, besides
such small gifts as were tendered by the kindred, friends, and household
servants. A damsel of Lacaena being poor, and demanded, What Dower she had
to bring to her husband, and to marry her with? answered, That which was left
me as an inheritance from mine ancestors, namely, Virtue and Modesty;
Ingeniously inferring, that there is no more commendable Dower to be expected
in marriage, than Chastity and vncorrupt Manners. The daughters of C.
Fabritius, Cn. Scipio, and Manius Curious, because their fathers left them not
portions sufficient to bestow them according to their birth and quality, had
their Dowers allotted them from the common Treasury. There was a Law amongst
the Romans, That no Virgins Dower should exceed the sum of ten thousand
pieces of Silver: But after, that limitation was taken away, and brought to
forty thousand and upward. Insomuch, that Metulia (because the Dower of which
she possessed her husband, Metulia
amounted to five hundred thousand pieces) had a surname bestowed upon her^
being ever after called Dotata. Dotata.
In ancient times the husbands wooed their Brides with a Ring of Iron, without
any Stone or Gemme, but merely circular and round; by that denoting the
parsimonie of diet, and frugalitie in living. Homer (the Prince of Poets)
having no wealth with which to bestow his daughter upon a thriftie citisen,
gave her only an Epithal^mium, with certain Cyprian Elegies; for so Pindarus
and Aedianus, lib. 9. affirm. The Carthaginians gave no Portions with their
Virgins, but were only at the charge of the Nuptial feasts, which grew to be
immoderate and wastfull. Amongst the Indians, none can claim a greater Dower
with his wife than the price of a yoke of Oxen; neither can he marry out of
his own Tribe. The Assyrians brought their noblest Virgins into the
marketplace, and their prices there publicly proclaimed by the Crier,
whosoever wanted a wife, and would reach to the sum propounded, might there
be furnished; and he that had not ready money, if he could put in good
security, it was held sufficient. The like custom was amongst the
Babylonians; in which they observed this order, They first set out to sale the
most ingenuous, and beautiful, and those at an high rate; and when they were
put off, they brought forth the worser featured, even unto the degree of
deformity, and then the Crier proclaymes, That who will marry any of them, he
shall have so much, or so much, to recompense her foulness, or lamenesse. And
this money which sells them, is collected from the overplus of the price of the
other: so that the beauty of the fair ones, helps to bestow and dispose of
the foul. The Mass^lienses would not suffer any man to receive with his wife
more than an hundred pieces of Gold. Amongst the Cretans, half the brothers
estate was conferred upon the sister, to make her a Dowry. The ancient
Germans, when they had made choice of such with whom they meant to marry, at
their proper charge provided them of Dowries. Which custom even to these later
times has been continued amongst the Celtiberians, who dwelt in a part of the
Pyrenes, a Province which is now called Biskay, Fulgos. lib. 2. cap. 1. And
with the Dower which he sent, he was tied to present her likewise with a Horse
bridled, a Sword, a Targuet, and an Armor, with a yoke of Oxen. And these
were held to be the most assured Pledges of Conjugal love, without which no
Nuptials were legally solemnized. Alexand. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 5. Idem, lib.
4. cap. 8.

Of Nuptial Ornaments, Pomp, Feasts, Epithalamions, etc.
Nuptial Ornaments.
AMongst the Greeks, the Bride was crowned with water-Mints, or Cresses: her
head was kembed with a piece of a Lance or Spear of a Fencer, with which some
man had been slain; it was called Caelibaris, which imported, that the
new-married Bride should be as conioynedly commixt with her husband in mutual
affection, as that Spear was inward in the trans-pierced body, when it was
drawn from the wound: A strange Aenigma it appears to me; howsoever, it is so
recorded. Her hair was parted the one way and the other, leaving a seame in
the midst, that her forhead and face might be the plainlyer discovered. Some
interpret it as an Emblem, that she might be the breeder of a warlike and
valorous issue; or else, that by that ceremony she should ever acknowledge her
self obsequious to the will and pleasure of her husband, Alexand. ab Alex.
lib. 2. cap. 5. In other places of Greece the Brides heads were covered with a
Veyle, to signify her bashfulnesse and modest shame: It was of Clay-coloured
Silk, by which color the Matrons of the most temperate life and modest
carriage, denoted unto the world their continence and virtue. Amongst the
Athenians, the Bridegroom kept his Bride concealed and covered at home in the
place where she was after to be devirgined; the doors of the house were
adorned with white Wool, and crowned and beautified with Laurel, which were
first touched by the Bride, who anointed the posts and daubed the thresholds
with Swines grease, or the fat of Wolves, to prevent all Pest, or pernicious
diseases from ever having entrance into that house. Some used to sprinkle their
heads with a rough kind of herb called Carix, much like unto Broom, with the
fruits of Palme-trees, with Pulse or Pease, and with a kind of powder which
belongs to Painting: this office was still performed by new servants, at their
first entrance into the houses of their masters. The Law of Lycurgus amongst
the Spartans was, That the Bride should cut her hair, and putting her self
into man's habit, be brought into her chamber by the Bride-maids, who had
before prepared it; and being left by them, the Bridegroom then entered, and
first unloosing her Virgin Girdle, he had free liberty of congression. In
Boeotia their Virgins were crowned with a wreath made of the herb called
Sperage. In the Isle Cous the husbands were compelled to enter the
Bride-chamber, attyred like women. It was an use amongst the Locrenses, for the
Matrons to pick and gather selected flowers to make garlands for the Brides;
but such as were bought for money, were held vile and contemptuous. The ancient
Latins, as well the Bride as Bridegroom, wore Ribbands and Laces
partie-coloured, White and Purple: so likewise they are apparcelled in checkred
garments, of the same colors; or else their necks are put into one yoke (a
ceremony they have) of which Juno, the goddess of Marriage, is called
Iugalis; intimating, that with concordant minds and equal sufferance they
should bear all distresses and disasters. All Marriages amongst the
Lusitanians were celebrated in Rose-coloured garments, or else not permitted.
The Chelidonian women that had prostituted themselves to strangers, went with
half of their faces open, the other half covered, else it was not lawful for
them to be seen abroad. They wore Girdles of Sheep wool wouen, about their
Wastes, which was fastened about them with an Herculean Knot, which was not
lawful for any to unloose, but either in the Bride-bed, or in the celebration
of the Sacreds; in which they observe a kind of Omen, that they should prove
as fruitful in the propagation of issue, as Hercules was in getting of
children. The German Virgins, when they prepared to give meeting to their
betrothed, and so to proceed to the Conjugal ceremony, put on a straight or
plain garment, such a one as they in some places call a Huke, and over that a
Cloak without spot or stayne, bearing a garland wouen of Veruaine, an herb
dedicated to Venus, with other selected flowers intermixed. And so much for
their Habit and Nuptial Ornaments used amongst foreign Nations: I will now
give you the description of a Bride, in her way to the Bride-chamber.

Descriptio Egredientis Sponsae.
At length comes forth the Bride (in all parts rare) The Bride coming out of
her chamber.

Full ripe for man (of Venus the just care:)
A Virgins face, a Virgins chaste active
She wears. Now modest blushes kindle fire
Within her bashful cheek, which by degrees
Grows still more hot, and warmes all that she sees.
The youthful fri^, dispersed here and there,
On tip-toe move, to see this star appear,
And rise with such refulgence: on each hand
The aged Fathers and the Matrons stand,
And make a reverent Lane for her to pass:
She makes them think upon the time that was,
Their prime, their youth, their strength (now gone and wasted)
And Nuptial sweets, which they before have tasted.
On still she goes, and by the arms her lead
Two Ganimedes: where she vouchsafes to tread,
The Earth would have her feet still to insist,
As loath to part with what so late it kissed.
Still further she proceeds upon the way,
With her loose locks the Winds delight to play,
And Boreas (as if once again turned Lover)
Blows off her Veyle, the better to discover
So rare a Beauty; and amazed, dare swear
A new Orythea does in her appear:
He wantons with her garments, to behold
Her pictured Vesture, clouded late in Gold;
Did not her modest hands her coats ke^^^ down,
He Would blow her bare, them seize her as hi^ own^.
Thus habited was Argius Hellen seen^,
When Menelaus made her Sparta^s Q^eene.
The Goddesses celestial, when they trace
The milkie path to Jove's high Palace, grace
Their rich attire no better, scarce so well:
They in some one thing above the rest excel,
But she in youth, strength, state maiesticall,
In untouched purity, pulchritude, all
That beautifies the Sex. Thus is the Bride
Brought to the place, where she must now reside.
Egrediens Sponsus.
The Bridegroomes first appearing.
See from another part the gates spread wide,
From whence the Bridegroom issues toward the Bride,
A Youth of the first hair, whose tender skinne^
Yet never rasor felt, his budding chinne
(Save Down) can nothing show: upon him flows
A curious mantle, which he careless throws
About him with neglect, as skorning pride,
The ground thereof in Tyrian Purple did,
And mixed with golden Wyres; for understand,
'Twas wouen with his careful mothers hand;
About the edge double meanders run:
'Twas long in work, but against this day done.
His countenance lofty, and his shoulders spread,
As sometimes we have seen gods figured:
In whose bright eye the life of youth does shine,
And as the day star from the Oceans bryne
Where he has newly washed himself appears,
And as he mooues, the place about him cleeres;
So he, his star-like eyes aim at the place
To which he hasts, his dear love to embrace:
Love troubles him, whilst she attends him still,
Till entering, he finds time to gaze his fill,
And feasts his eyes upon his sovereign bliss,
That done, they first take hands, embrace, then kiss.
Oblatio munerum, or the Offering.
The Nuptial Offering.
The young men with their Presents next proceed,
With an affected gate, they neither speed,
Nor does their pace seem tarde, but on row
In order march, to make the goodlier show.
(Their parents set about them) now behold,
The first a rich roabe offers, stained with gold,
Figured with beasts and birds and creeping things.
Talents of gold and yuorie the next brings,
One an embrodered Chair, and then another
A Cabinet, which for the time does smother
Jewels, and Gemmes. The Tables seem to bend
And swell with golden heaps the offerers send,
Of Coin and Plate, the next before them throws:
Chaplets, set round with stones to deck their brows,
To her a hand-maid's given, as tither breast
A sucking babe; the moral is expressed,
In fertile marriage, as he would have sed
Lo here the fair fruits of a nuptial bed.
Four young men, and as many Virgins stand
Obsequious all to hers and his command.
Their hair's alike (as it is the custom) shorn,
And all their necks rich chains of gold adorn.
The Epithalamium, or Nuptial song.
The mothers then, with more than common care
Make business, and bestirre them; who prepare
To lead them to their rest, whom as they bring
Near to the chamber door, the Quirers thus sing:
Oh you most Fair, most Chaste, and meriting Bride, The Nuptial Song.

Of a like Husband; now to sports untried
Apply your selves: and may your Nuptial sheets
Flow and abound with all delicious sweetes:
Oh may Lucina when her childing grows
Be present, and release her painful throws:
Prove fruitful as the Vine, let Bacchus fill
Her cup to th'brim, with juices that distill
From his choice Grapes: the husband in all places
Skatter ripe Nuts, with Ribbands and with Laces; A Ceremony, for them to cast
Nuts about, used amongst the Romans.

The Altars hang and deck, since he has got
To lodge with him, a Virgin without spot,
A Flower, a Virtue, Glory of mankind,
And of her Sex the pride, o may you find
Long days of joy, nights shortened in your rest,
And as your parents are in you, live blessed
In your fair Issue, you are happy then,
Hark, hark, to this, the Fates cry all Amen.
Ingressus in cubiculum, i. Their entrance into their bedchamber.
Being entered, and the bed with all things fit, Their going to bed.

Upon the side thereof a while they sit,
When (left alone) they talk, and joy, and smile,
She whilst she can the time seeks to beguile,
Till suddenly her cheeks are all bewept,
To loose so soon what she so long has kept,
And often she casts her eye upon the place
Where she is to wrestle, and she hides her face,
But thinking on it, nor dares to enter in,
Doubting what is lawful, still to be a sin:
He with such gentle force compells the less,
As would not break her were she made of glass,
So loath he is i^ hur^ her, yet he throws
Her softly down and to her side then grows,
Venus begins to teach them a new trade,
The marriage queen here plays the chambermaid;
Juno her self, who is now officious grown,
And there attends to teach them wars unknown,
Th'whilst he seeks for babyes in her eyes,
Feels her white neck and yuorie breasts, that rise
Like two white snowie Hills, and still does praise
All that he feels or touches; then thus says,
Oh fresh and flowrishing Virgin, now my Bride,
And are you grown at length thus near my side?
Of all my hopes the storehouse and the treasure,
My long expected, now my latest pleasure:
My sweet and dearest wife, this could not be,
Nor happen thus but by the gods decree,
And will you now tht power of Love withstand?
At this she turns, and stays his forward hand,
Trembling to think on that which was t'ensue,
Or prove the thing which yet she never knew.
'Twixt Hope and Fear, she thus replyes^ Oh fair
And lovely Youh, list to a Virgins prayer,
By thee I in^reat, by those which got thee, such
Thy parents (lo) I only beg thus much,
Pity my tears, put me to no affright,
I only crave repriue but for this night.
With that she seems intranc't, and prostrate lies,
Has not one word to utter more, nor eyes
To see her self vnuirgin'd, winckes, lies still,
And since he needs must, lets him act his will:
Betwixt them two they quench their amorous Fires,
She, what she fears, he has what he desires.
I dare proceed no further with the Author, whose conceit I have borrowed, but
his words not altogether imitated; those that have read him I make no question,
will say I have broke off and shook hands with him in good time, and as far
as I have gone hand in hand with him, rather added to his invention, than any
way derogated from his style, or detracted from his conceit; therefore I pause
and now proceed to the Nuptial Pomp, used amongst foreign nations,
according to my promise.

Nuptial Pomp.
Pausonias has left related, That it was the custom amongst the Grecians, for
the bride to be placed betwixt her betrothed husband and one of her next of
kindred, and so in a Chariot (which was called by them Parochus) to be drawn
through the streets, the Axel-tree thereof at her coming home was taken off
and burned before the gates of her house, to signify that she must ever after
be an housewife and keep within, as a faithful and industrious ouerseer of
their domesticke affairs and business. It was the fashion in other Provinces
of Greece, that those of lower degree (I mean the brides) when they were
conducted home to their husbands, a young Boy went before them hung round with
Oaken leaves and Acornes, bearing on his arm a wicker Basket full of bread;
who all the way cried aloud, Efugi malum, and inueni bonum, i. I have shunned
the bad, and found or made choice of the good. As she enters the doors, there
the bridegroom stands ready to receive her, the children demand wall-nuts,
which are cast unto them in abundance. Amongst the Rhodians, the bride is
called from her fathers house by the common Crier, and by him conducted to the
bed of her betrothed. The Romans observed another custom: Their brides were
not to touch the ground or pauement with their feet, but were snatched up in
their arms and borne upon their shoulders, and as if she were rapt and
forcibly against her will hurried to her bedchamber: so Plutarch affirms,
others add, That their hair was braided and combed with a piece of a
soldiers spear, intimating that they were now valiantly and resolutely to
enter a new war and skirmish. Amongst the Lusitanians, she was not permitted
either to walk her self, or be led to her nuptial Chamber, but the young men
came, and with pretended rudeness and force snatched her from the arms of her
mother, as if according to the Roman custom she were ravished thence; before
them went a piper and one that sung an Hymenaean song, all her alliance and
kindred attended her, of whom one bore a Distaffe with Towe, another a Spindle,
next her a young man and a maid that had their parents living, one lighting
them with a taper whose staff was made of a Pine Tree; and with these
ceremonies she was conducted to her bride-bed.

Sacred Auguries and Nuptial Expiations, etc.
THe Auspices or Auguries, were Southsayers and such as used to handfast or
contract marriages, and these were still consulted with, as well in undertaking
Wars as propounding Nuptials, as also in most of their public enterprises
or private employments: these diuined either from the voices or by the flying
of birds. The women supt with their husbands the first night in their beds as
they lay together, which seemed to be an inuitation of the gods, Because
Jupiters banquets are (as some report) after the same manner celebrated, for he
still feasted in his bed, and Juno and Minerua sitting in chaires or upon
benches, Valor. lib. 2. cap. 1. The Athenians at their bridalls had the room
fumed with the skin of a black dog, burned in the fire, his p^iuie parts
were buried under the threshold of the door; at the outward gate was hid in
the Earth the snowt of a Wolf, and these they held to expel all Effacinations
and Witch-crafts from the house: others use a Fish called Stella Marina or the
Sea-starre, Alex. ab. Alex. lib. 1 cap. 24.
which sprinkled with the blood of a Wolf preserved the marriage couple from
all dangers or disasters. Cynxia and Gamelia Juno were deuoutely celebrated in
Hymenaean contracts. Cinxia. Gamelia.
In all their sacrifices they took from the entrails the Gall of the beast,
and buried it in an obscure and remote place not far from the Altar, thereby
signifiing that all marriage ought to be without gall or bitterness. Amongst
the Boetians and Locrens^s no contract was held firm unless they had before
offered at the Altar of the Virgin Euclia. Euclia.
In Rome there was a custom of old, that all maids before marriage should
kneel some certain hours in the Temple of the god Futinus (whom we may
term the god predominant in the act of Copulation) and of him entreat happy
success in their future congression. The Etrurians in their Hymenaenan
bargains from the noblest to the less qualified, slew hogs in their
sacrifices, by that calling the gods to witness, That their league and
covenant was from thencefoorth inviolable not to be altered but by lawful
Divorce, Death, Captivity, or Slavery and loss of freedom. Many other are
reckoned up by Alex. ab Alex. too tedious here to insert: a word or two of
their Hymns and Nuptial Inuocations.

Hymns and Inuocations.
The ancient Greeks used a kind of Verse, which they called Amboeum carmen, the
same which (they say) was sung by the gods at the brydalls of Peleus, the
father of Achilles and Thetis. Aristophanes in Auibus says, That they were
wont to cry aloud, Humin Ho Humenai Ho Humin. In other places, at their
marriages, the Matrons held the Tapers and Torches, at which time were sung
Fesciuini, which were broad and bawdie Verses: and they being ended, that which
they call the solemn and sacred Hymn in the Athenian Espousals, was sung;
Bonos ama timidos repelle, etc.
Love those that good are, and the fearful shun;
Observing these, thou do what is to be done.


Plato in Gorgia affirms, That at Nuptial Feasts was used to be sung this
short Hymn following: Formosum esse and diuitem and be^e valere,
Summum existimari bonum.
To attain the sovereign bliss, let us implore
Health, Wealth, and Beauty, then we need no more.


The Romans (as Liu. lib. 1. Decad. and Plin. cap. 2. de viris illustribus,
affirm) in all their celebrations called aloud upon the name of Thalassius,
which they held as an Omen to their future success and prosperity. Their
Brides, when they entered into the houses of their husbands, whilst their feet
were yet upon the threshold, inuoked the name of Caia Cecilia, Caia Cecilia, or
Tanaquil.
by another name called Tanaquilla, continuing and not surceasing to iterate
that name from the door till she came into the Bride-chamber. Tanaquilla was
the wife of Tarquinius Priscus, king of the Romans, for temperance, modesty,
virtue, and all the accomplishments that best grace a woman, most eminent; thus
intimating, that by remembering her name, they might imitate her life. All other
Ornaments laid apart, there was only borne before them a Distaffe and a
Spindle: and thus the mothers of Martia, of Portia, of Lucretia, were first
vshered to their Nuptial chambers.

Nuptial Diet.
Touching their Diet, Solon published a Law, That no Virgin might be permitted
to enter the Bride-bed, if at supper her husband and she had not before tasted
of a Quince-Peare, which they call Malum Cydonium. The Naucratians in all such
Feasts forbid both Eggs, sweetmeats, or any confection in which there was
Honey: Amongst them no service was admitted saving Skallions, or such roots as
were divided into cloves, Pineapple Nuts, the juice of the herb called
Rochet, and Pepper, and these were in the place of a Banquet. Amongst the
Persians, the husband was not permitted to come to visit his Bride, unless he
had first eaten an Apple, or else tasted of a sweet Rush called Squinanthum, or
Camels meat; neither might he eat of any thing else for that day. Amongst the
Babylonians they bedded not, without red Storax first tasted. The Carthaginians
in their Hymenaean Feastiuals sliced the fish called a Tunny, without the
eating of which there was no perfect and absolute celebration. Alex. ab Alex.
From their Feasts I come to ceremonies observed concerning the copulation in or
before Marriage; and of that briefly.

Amongst the Trogloditae, Nuptial Copulation.
their betrothed Virgins were first brought forth by their nearest kinsmen and
allies, and by them promiscuously prostituted. After which time, they betake
themselves to all civility and continence, which whosoever was known to
violate or digress from, was most severely chastised, without all
commiseration or pity. The same custom is observed amongst the Gymnesians,
the Lydians, and the inhabitants of the Islands Baleares. The Andrimachides (a
people of Africa) before they can bestow their daughters, offer their
Virginities to their Princes first, and such as he best affects, he vitiates at
his pleasure, and then they are permitted to marry. The like custom was held
in Scotland: but since the Christian Religion was there professed, that Law
has been abrogated; only the maids redeem their Virginities with a certain
piece of money, and by that Tenure their lands are held to this day. The
Volcinienses are tied to a more base servitude, because they are compelled
before marriage to prostitute their free daughters to their slaves and
servants. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 1. cap. 24. Herodotus writes, That the
Adyrmachidae present their daughters maidenheads first to their king, ere their
betrothed husbands can be admitted any congresse with them. The Babylonians
never have company with their wives, but they before sitting about a fire,
make a fume of a strong sent, which they snuff up at their nosthrils; by the
Authors description, it should not much differ from that which we have now in
such frequent use, and call Tobacco: In the morning they both wash, before they
touch any Vessel whatsoever. The Spartans (by the Decrees of Lycurgus) in all
their Bridals, the man still came into the woman's chamber, the Light being
first extinct; where (with bashful fear, and a religious kind of modesty)
they performed the offices of Nature, Love, and Custom.

The Conjugal Love of Women toward their Husbands.
Having done with the superstitious ceremonies of the Gentiles concerning
Marriage, as far as Polyhimnia or Memory will help me; I will now proceed
with some few remarkable examples of Conjugal Love, being an argument that
cannot be too often remembered, nor overmuch handled, I begin with the women of
India. Indian women.
These, according to the custom of the country, being many married unto one
man, he is no sooner dead, but they all contend together which of them was of
him in his life time best beloved; and if it cannot be determined amongst
themselves, they bring the controversy before the Judges, and plead as
earnestly to accompany him in death, as for some great fortune and honor:
she amongst the rest that preuailes, exults with joy, as having attained a
great victory, when being led by her best friends and nearest of kindred
(partakers with her in the same triumph) unto the place where her husbands
body is ready to be consumed; with a pleasant and merry countenance she
casts her self into the fire, and is th^re burned with him together; the rest
that survive and were deprived of this last honor, consume the remainder of
their lives in great discontent, sorrow, and anguish. Of this custom Cicero
remembers us Tusc. Quest. lib. 5. Vaeler. Maxim. lib. 2. cap. 1. Alex. ab Alex.
Aelianus, Egnatius, and others. This funeral ceremony, as Fulgos. lib. 2.
cap. 6. is continued amongst them unto this day: alluding to this purpose, is
that of Propert. lib. 3.

Foelix eo is lex funeris vna maritis, etc.
Which I thus paraphrase in English: You Eastern Husbands, in your funeral
Laws
Most happy, and their first inuentors wise,
In which you are more famous then, because
On you the blushing morning first does rise.
When Death has with his last mortiferous wound
The Husband struck, his last Rites to prepare,
A pious troop of Wives engirt him round,
Drying their moist cheeks with their scatt'red hair,
Who strive which shall associate him in fate,
And bed with him together in the flame;
To live beyond him, is a thing they hate,
And he once dead, life is to them a shame:
She that can die with him, has her desire,
And leapes with joy into the funeral fire.


Thracians.
The like is observed by a people of Thrace, that inhabit a little above the
Crestonaeans. They likewise are delighted with plurality of wives; who after
the decease of their husbands enter into the like contention, as the women of
India; and she that is Victoresse (as if glorying in some great conquest,
adorned in her best and richest ornaments) is with great ceremonious pomp
(amongst all her kindred and allies) conducted unto the place where his body
is to be interred: where being slain by her next of kin (as the best office
he can do her) she is buried in the same grave with her husband, Geates.
Herod. lib. 5. The wives amongst the Geates repair to their husbands
Sepulcher, and holding all life tedious and burdensome without them, offer
their bodies willingly either to the sword, or to the fire. The custom of the
Catheoreans was, Catheoreans.
That when the Bride chose her husband, she made a covenant with him, at his
death to be burnt in the same Pile, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 1. cap. 25. Herulians.
The women amongst the Herulians (a people that inhabit beyond the river of
Danubius) repair to the graves of their husbands, and just ouer-against them,
strangle themselves. Which marriage-loue appears the more strange, because the
men are of that barbarous and inhumane incontinence that they hold it no shame
to leave the society of their women, and have congression with brute beasts.
Bonifacius in his Epistle unto king Ethelbaldus, as Gulielm. Malmsbur. lib. 1.
cap. 64. de Anglia relates it, Winedi.
says, That the Winedi are the worst and the most nastie people among the
Germans; yet their wives are of that incomparable zeal and piety toward their
husbands, that she is held to be the most laudable and prayse-worthie, that
with her own hand kills her self, to burn with him in his last funeral
fire. From the generality of women, I descend to particulars. Phila.
Admirable was the love of Phila toward her husband king Demetrius, and
haughty and magnanimous her spirit; who receiving news of his defeat in
battle, and that his whole army being dispersed and scattered, he was
retired into Cassandria; drank poison, and so died. The wife of Straton, The
wife of Straton.
Prince of Sydonia, when the city was straightly besieged by the Persians, her
greatest care was, least the person of her husband should fall into the hands
of the merciless enemy, which she purposed to prevent by death. When
therefore she heard they had skaled the walls, and were ready to be instantly
possessed of the town, and seize upon the person of her husband, she snatched
from him his sword, with which she first ^lew him, and then (laying out his
body with as much comeliness as the shortness of the time would permit)
after fell upon the same sword; thus by voluntary death preventing the
dishonor of captivity. Fulgos. lib. 4. cap. 6. Fannia, Fannia.
the daughter of Arria the younger, wife to Poetus Patauinus (before remembered
in her brave and heroic death with her husband) was the Spouse of Heluidius
Priscus, who followed him in all his exile, even to his unfortunate and most
unjust death: she was the third time confined, from the reign of Tiberius Nero
to the death of Domitian. Pliny with infinite praises applauds the
incomparable virtues of this Fannia, with both the Arriaes, in Lib. 9. in his
Epistle to Quadratus, Triaria.
and in his seventh to Genitor and Priscus. Triaria was the noble and chaste
wife of L. Vitellius, brother to Aul. Vitellius the Emperor, who as
Hypsicrataea followed Mithridates in all his combustious wars, so she never
forsook her husband, but was present with him in all those civil dissentions
against Vespasian. And the night when Vitellius her Lord with a great army of
soldiers invaded and entered the city Terecyna, she presented her self in
the midst of the slaughter, not only daring but doing equally with the most
valiant, killing on all sides, till she had hemmed her self in with dead
bodies, slain by her own hand; so bold and magnanimous a spirit had the
conjugal love to her husband impressed in her: Her memory is made famous by the
same Author. Antonia or Archona.
Antonia Flaxilla (by some called Archona) when her husband Priscus was found
guilty of the Pysonian Faction, and for that cause exiled by Nero, and when
she might have enjoyed all the plenty and abundance in Rome, left all the
pleasures and delights of the city, to accompany her desolate Lord in his
penurious and uncomfortable banishment. Her example Egnatia Maximilla imitated,
Egnatia Maximilla.
who likewise associated her husband Gallus, guilty of the same Conspiracy
with Priscus. Fulgos. lib. 6. cap. 7. From Iacobus, the son of Vsson
Cassannus, amongst many other Captains that revolted, there was one eminent in
that Rebellion, called Pandoerus, who had a most beautiful young wife (her age
exceeded not sixteen years) to whom he was ardently and in conjoined love
affected. The wife of Pandoerus.
He being by her often earnestly entreated to forbear all conflicts with the
enemy, but by no means either moved by her tears, or persuaded with her
intercessions and prayers (persisting resolute for a present encounter) she
then begged of him, That before he hasarded himself to the extremity of
danger, he would first take away her fears, by transpiercing her with his
sword: which when he likewise denied, he presently left her, and gave signal
of battle; in which conflict he was vanquished and slain, his Tent rifled,
his wife surprised, and committed into the hands of one of the chief Captains
belonging to the king: who pitying her tears and sorrow (to which her feature
and beauty gave no common luster) made instant suit unto her, to make her his
wife. She (whilst she could) put him off with all possible delays: but
after perceiving, that what he could not compass with her good will, he
purposed to attain unto by compulsion and force, she craved only some few
hours of deliberation privately to her self: which granted, and being
retired, she first writ in a short Scedule these words, Let none report, that
the wife of Pandoerus harbored so little love, as to out-line him. Which Note
leaving upon the Table, she took a sword then hanging in the chamber, with
which she immediately dispatched her self of life, and so expired, following
him in death, with whose life she could be no longer delighted. Ibidem. Equal
in all Matrimonial piety with this Lady, was Cecilia Barbadica Veneta,
Cecilia Barbadica.
who after the death of her husband Philippus Vedraminus, by no counsel,
comfort, or persuasion, could be won (either by her kindred or friends) to
taste the least food whatsoever, or give answer to any word that was spoken to
her; in which silence and consumption, she (after some few days of
unspeakable sorrow) breathed her last, Egnat. lib. 4. cap. 6. Petrus Candianus,
after the decease of his first wife espoused a second, called Walberta,
Walberta.
the daughter of Vgon one of the Princes of Italy, who lived with him in all
obedience, with a religious observation of true conjugal love and piety,
never forsaking him in any disaster, but attended him with her young son in
law Vitalis. The Duke her husband being after slain by the Venetians in a
seditious mutiny, Vitalis escaped the fury of the Massacre, and fled, but
she stayed to abide the utmost danger, with the body of her dead husband,
meditating all posible means to revenge the death of her husband upon the
Conspirators: but her womannish inabilitie not preuayling, she likewise
secretly left the city, and followed her son Vitalis; in whose society she
fled to Adeleta, Adeleta.
the wife of Otho the German Emperor, who at the same time resided in the
city Placentia: but after long vain intercession (seeing her hopes and
purposes quite frustrate) she retired again to her own city, where she lived
a sad and solitary life, still inuoking the name of Petrus Candianus, with
whose name in her mouth she not long after deceased. The wife of Franc. Foscarus
Egnat. (the remembrancer of the former History) speaks likewise of
Franciscus Foscarus, another Duke of Venice, who married a second wife out of
the noble Family of the Nanae, with whom he conioynedly lived long and had by
her hopeful issue: But the Senate in his age depriving him of the
Principality, with the grief thereof he retired himself into the most
ancient house of his own Family, and there (after three days) died. Whose
body, when the Fathers would have had brought forth to a solemn and Princely
Funeral, because he had once been their Duke and Sovereign, she shut her
gates against them, blaming their former ingratitude, alleging, she had both
wealth and will sufficient (without them) to bestow upon him the latest rites
due to a worthy and royal husband: And though the Fathers were instant upon
her, first with entreats, and after menaces, yet she constantly persisted in
her resolution, not suffering them once to approach the place, much less to
take thence the body where she had carefully bestowed it; still exclayming on
the Senates malice, and the Commonweals ingratitude, who to their former
wrongs went about to add this new injury, not to leave him in death to her,
whom they had so periuriously in life forsaken. Notwithstanding these
exclamations, they shut her up in her chamber, and perforce took thence the
body, all the Fathers attending upon the Hearse, upon which they bestowed a
solemn and a pompous Funeral. The greater their counterfeit sorrow was
outwardly, the greater was her inward and essential grief, still more and
more weeping, every succeeding day adding to her tears, to think that her
Princely husband should in his death be for any courtesies at all beholding to
his enemies; desiring, that he (whom from his Principality they had degraded,
and compelled to a private life) might only by her and from her have had a
private Funeral: with whose choice affection, and rare Conjugal piety, I
have broke off, to enter upon a new Project.

De Laenis, or of Bawdes.
FRom the honor of Women, I now come to the disgrace and shame of their Sex, in
which I will strive to be as brief as I know the very name to be to all
chaste minds odious. Sotades Marionites Cinedus, that is, one abused against
nature or addicted to preposterous Venerie, was a Poet and writ most bawdie and
beastly Iambicks in the Ionicke tongue, which he entitled Cinaedi; in which
were described the forms and figures of several new devised Lusts (and before
that time) unheard of prostitutions: Of whom Martial thus says, Nec retro
lego Sotadem Cinaedum.
Neither do I read Sotades Cinaedus backward.
For as Valeterran. Lib. 17. Antropoph. relates, his verses were all to be
read backward, least their included nastinesse might appear too plain and
palpable, Tranquil. reports of Tiberius Caesar, That he had built Cellers and
Vaults, in which all kind of lusts and monstrous congressions were practiced in
his presence, which would offend any modest ear but to hear related. The
Emperor Domitian succeeded, if not exceeded him in those detestable and
diuillish abominations, He as Suetonius affirms, devised that which was
called Clinopales, i. The wrestling in the bed; he was often seen to bath
himself and swim in the company of the basest and most common strumpets,
he stuprated his brothers daughter yet a Virgin, after she was contracted to
another man. Cratinus Atheniensis the Comicke Poet, was so dissolutely addicted
both to Wine and Venerie, that he hung his chamber round with Glasses, the
better to discover himself in his own unnatural and beastly prostitutions. The
like some of our scandalous Grammarians most falsely would asperse upon Horace.
Suet. confers the like upon Tiberius, as likewise Gyrald. Dial. 6. Historiae
Poetarum. Elephantis Philaenis and Astianassa writ books of the several ways
of Congression, with the pictures of them inserted; but of them I shall speak
further in the title of the Poetesses, but before I come to those shee-monsters
in particular, I will remember some few men infamous in the like kind. Erasmus
in Chiliadib. speaks of one Clobulus a most wicked He-bawde, who kept in his
house two most infamous strumpets, whose bodies he prostituted for money to all
strangers, and what the whoores could not extort from them, he himself would
rob them of, from whence came the proverb. Clobuli ingum, which was still in
use when two knaves of like dishonestie were seen to have friendship and
socitie together. Timaeus apud Erasmun speaks of one Cymarus a Selenusian
Bawd, who all his lifetime promised to leave his ill gotten goods to the
Temple of Venus, in whose service he had got them; but at his death they were
all squandred and lost, by the direption of the multitude. One Cippius
counterfeited himself to sleep and snort, that others with the less fear or
doubt might have free intercourse and carnal society with his wife; an
argument that he was not haunted with the fiend called Iealosie, from him grew
the adage which Cicero used in an epistle to Fabius Gallus, Non omnibus d^rmio,
i. I sleep not to all men. Lucilius apud Beroaldum. Catullus remembers us of
the Bawd Silo, and Guido of one Bitraphus that made his wife basely
mercenarie. Cai. Ticinius Minternensis, provoked his wife to inchastitie for no
other reason than to defraud her of her ioynter. Gemellus one of the Tribuns in
Rome, a man of a noble family, yet was of that corrupt and degenerat
condition, that he made his own Palace no better than a common stews, in so
much, that in the Consullship of Metellus and Scipio, he suffered Mutia.
two great Ladies Mutia and Fuluia (innobled both ways in their families) with
the noble child Saturnius to be vitiated in his own house. Fuluia.
Clemens Alexandrinus Lib. 3. Stromatum and Eusebius. Lib. 4. have left remembered,
that the Arch-heriticke Nicolaus having a fair wife, Of him came the
Nicolaietans.
and being reproved of Iealosie by the Apostles, to show himself no way
guilty thereof, he brought her into the public assembly, offering her
freely up to the prostitution of any man whatsoever; more (in my mind)
offending in his too much remissness, than before in his over great
strictness. Nay least this detestable sin should want a countenancer, even
from royalty, Lycosthenes in his Theater of Human life, tells us of Henricus
Rex Castalionensis, who shamed not to be a Bawd to his own Queen, you may
read further of him in the Spanish history by the title of Henry the Unable.
Now of She-Bawdes, and of them briefly. Plutarch in the life of Pericles
reports, Aspatia.
That Aspatia his sole delight, made her house a Stews, in which the bodies of
the fairest young Women were made common for money. It is reported, Callistion
or Proche.
that Callistion surnamed Proche, being hired to lie with a common fellow or
bondman, and by reason of the hot weather being naked, she espied the marks
and skarres of blows and stripes upon his shoulders; to whom she said, Alas
poor man how came these? he willing to conceal his base condition answered,
That being a child he had skalding hot Pottage poured down his neck, I
believe it (says she) but sure they were Calves Pottage, or made of Calves
flesh, promptly reproouing his quallitie, because slaves eat Pottage made of
Veale, and the things with which they were lashed and skourged were made of
Calues-skinnes. Erasm. Apotheg. 6. Dipsas.
Dipsas is the name of an old Bawd in one of Ouids Elegies, whom for
instructing his mistress in the veneriall trade, he reprooues in these verses.

Est quaedam (quicunque volet cognosere lenam
Audiat) est quaedam nomine Dipsas as anus.
If any man an old Bawd list to know,
It Is the crone Dipsas she is titl'd so.
Of the Bawd Quartilla I have before given you a true character from Petronius
Arbiter. Tacitus lib. 17. puts us in mind of Caluia Crisalpina, Caluia
Crisalpina.
who was the schoole-mistresse of Neros Lures, a fit tuteresse for such an apt
and forward pupile. In my opinion to be wondered at it is, that these being
past their own actual sins, wherein too much sacietie has bred surfeit, or
the infirmity of age, or disease, a mere disabilitie of performance; yet even
in their last of days, and when one foot is already in the grave, they
without any thought of repentance or the least hope of grace, as if they had
not wickedness enough of their own to answer for, heap upon them the sins
of others; as not only intycing and alluring Virgins and young wives to that
base veneriall trade, and the infinite inconveniences both of Soul and body
depending thereupon, but to wear their garments by the prostitution of others,
and eat their Bread, and drink Sack and Aqua-vitae by their mercenarie
sweat; and so base an usury and uncomely a travel of their bodies, as is not
only odious in the eyes of Man, but abominable in the sight of Angels. This
apprehension puts me in mind of what Cornelius Gallius writes in a Periphrasis
of old Age, Of Age.
which I hold not altogether impertinent to be here inserted. These be his
words: Stat dubious tremulusque senex semperque malorum
Credulus, and stultus qua facit ipse timet,
Laudat preteritos, presents despicit annos
Hot tantum rectum, quod facit ipse, (...), etc.


What he speaks of the old man, may be as well appropriated to the aged woman;
his Verses I thus English: The trembling old man he is doubtful still,
And fearful in him self of that known ill.
Of which he is author, and in this appears
His folly, to be cause of what he fears.
Past years he^l praise, the present he will despise,
Naught sa^e what is his, seemed pleasing in his eyes.


It after follows: Hae sunt primitiae, etc.
Of Death these the first fruits are, and our f^thers
Declining toward the Earth, she her own gathers
Into her self, though with a tardie pace.
We come at length; the color of the face,
Our habit, nor our gate, is still the same,
Nor shape that was, yet all at one place aim.
For the loose garments from one shoulders slides,
And what before too short seemed, now abides
A trouble to our heels: we are contracted,
As if (of late) in a new world compacted,
Decreasing still; our bones are dride within,
As seems our flesh shrunk in our withered skin.
We have scarce liberty on Heaven to look,
For prone old Age, as if it in some book
Meant to behold his face, looks downe-ward still,
Prying where he th'indebted place might fill,
From whence he first was borrowed, and the same
Matter return to Earth, from whence it came.
We walk with three feet first, as infants creep,
Next crawle on four, as if the ground to sweep.
We follow our beginning, all things mourn
Till to their generation they return,
And fall upon the breast where they were nursed,
,,That goes to nothing, which was nothing first.
This is the cause that ruinous Age still beats
The Earth with th'staffe he leanes on, and intreates
A place to rest in, as if he should say
(With often knocking) mother give me way.
At length into thy bosom take thy son,
Who feign would sleep now all his labor's done.


Let this suffice as a short admonition to these old corrupters of Youth.

De Gulosis and Vinolentis, i. Of Women addicted to Gluttony, and Drunkenesse.
OF these there are not many left to memory, the reason (as may be
coniectured) is, because to seem the more temperat, being invited to public
Feasts and Banquets; many of them will dyne at home before they come, eating in
private and drinking in corners. Of men for their incredible voracitie, there
are presidents infinite, I will give you only a taste of some few, and those
not altogether common, and with them to compare some women. I will pass over
Eri^iethon remembered by Ovid, Ctaesias by the Poet Annaxilas, Morichus observed
by Aristophanes, Melanthius by Suidas, Theagines by Raues. Textor (who at one
meal eat up a whole Bull in imitation of Milo, who devoured an Ox at a
breakefast) Pub. Gallonus by Laelius surnamed Gorges, as also those Roman
Emperors infamous for the insacieties of their Throats and Bellyes, as
Tiberius Nero, C. Caligula, Nero, Galba, Vitellius, Aelius V^rus, Plautia^u^,
Seuerus, Anton, Heliogabalus, Bonosus, Maximinus Imperator, Firmius, Galie^^^,
Augustus, the most moderate in diet of them all able to ground a History.
Petrarch remembers me of one Hugotie Fagiolanus a Prince, who after many rough
and tempestuous storms of Fortune, as his last refuge retired himself into
the palace of Caius Magnus Duke of Verona, Hugotio being then an old man,
where he was magnificently feasted and received, more like a father
reverenced, than a guest entertained; upon a time discourse being commenced at
table concerning eating and devouring stomaches, where many of ravenous and
insaciat appetites were remembered; Hugotio being a man fat, gross, and of an
extraordinary bulk, began to recite many vnbeleeuable things concerning his
appetite in his youth. One Petrus N^vus sitting then at table, a man of a
ready and accute wit, thus replied, We wonder not o Prince, at these strange
and marvelous things which you have already related, having concealed greater
than you have yet spoken of, for there is none here but knows that at one
dinner you devoured the two rich dukedomes of Luca and Pysa; in these few words
reprehending both his incredible voracitie and discommendable prodigality. As
a fit match to this great eater, Aelianus puts us in mind of Aglais the
daughter of M^gacles a she-minstrell, Aglais.
who at one meal usually devoured twelve pounds of flesh, four great loaves
of bread, by the Grecians called Choenices panum (a Choenix contained a measure
of a quarter of a peck, which was as much as a man was allowed to eat in one
day) to which she usually drunk four Congiumus of Wine, every one containing
six Sextaries, and is according to our measure, a Gallon and a Pint. Timocre^^
of Rhodes for his gulosity in meat and wine, was called Hell^o, which signifies
an insaciable glutton, after his death this epitaph was inscribed upon his
tombe-stone: Multa bibens, tam multa vorans, male plurima dicens
Multis, hic iaceo Tymocreon Rhodius.
Much drinking, eating much, and much ill speaking, I
(Of many) here beneath this stone Rhodian Tymocreon lie.


What shall I now think of Agarista the daughter of Clisthenes, Agarista.
who it seems had an extraordinary good stomach, since Aelianus in his
twelfth book tells us, that when Smindrides of the city Sybarita came to
visit her as a suitor, he sent before him a thousand Cooks, a thousand
Bird-catchers or Fowlers, and a thousand Fishermen to catch fishes, and all to
the furnishing of one table. Astidamas Milesius being invited to supper by the
Persian Ariobarzanes, he alone devoured what was provided for himself and all
his other guests. It is read likewise of Gathis queen of Syria to be so
gluttonous, Gathis.
that she caused an Edict to be published with a great penalty depending upon
the breach thereof, That it was not lawful for any subject to taste or eat fish,
unless she were invited to the feast. Rauisius. Philoxenus Eressius the son of
Leucadius, a Parrasite, for his gluttony was called Philodipnos, by others
Philichthis, by Aristotle, Pachemerus, and in his third book Ethicorum,
Opsophagos, because (as Melanthius before him did) he wished his neck so long
as a Cranes, that he might be the better delighted in the swallowing of his
junkets. If any dish were set before him that realished his pallat, he would
purposely cast therein some nastie or noisome thing offensive to the guests,
that they abhorring the taste thereof, he might have the liberty to devour it
alone: he being set at Dionisius his Table, and a small Mullet being placed
before him, when the greater were set at the upper end of the board, he took
the little fish and held the mouth thereof close to his ear, which Dyonisius
observing, asked what his reason was to do so? who presently answered the
king, that he was inquiring of that small fish concerning Nereus and Galataea,
to be resolved of some Sea news; but the young Mullet excused himself by
reason of his youth and iunioritie, but commended him to those his elders and
greaters above, from whom he might be better ^atisfied. Dyonisius pleased with
his jest, reached him down the bigger fi^hes on which hefed to his content.
This Philodipn^s dyed in Syracusa, after heat one meal had devoured up a whole
Porpoise of two cubits long, all save the head. Gyrald. Dial. 9. Histor.
Poetarum. Though not for such voracious devouring, yet for her profuseness and
prodigallitie in diet, Cleopatra.
Cleopatra the last queen of Egypt is remarkable, who as Sidanius testifies
of her, at one supper to which she invited Marc. Antonius, bestowed an infinite
mass of treasure, one dish in the second course being valued at two hundred
and fifty pieces of gold; more famous she was for her draught in which she
drunk unto him, in which she pownded a Pearl that was valued at no less than
the ransom of a king. From eating I come now to drinking. The Greeks in all
their feasts and celebrations, used at first small cups and moderate draughts,
but after, boles of greater receipt and deeper quaffing healths, in so much it
grew to a pro^erbe, if any man took an extraordinary draught, he was said,
Greco more ^^bere, that is, to drink after the manner of the Gretians. Alex.
ab Alex. lib. 5. cap. 21. says, That there was a law amongst them established,
that such as would not freely take the round as it past, must depart the place.
They used at those public meetings, in their cups to salute the gods, and in
turning up the bottom of the bole or glass at the end of every draught, to
nominate them. The first drinking of Healths.
At the choosing of their Magistrates, or conferring any new Honors upon a man,
they drunk to him in a cup brimmed with wine, as a confirmation of his
dignity: And from them it may be coniectured, these drunken Healths (so
frequent in these days) had their first original. I need not reckon up any
great Drinkers of old, or derive the custom from antiquity, since this age in
which we live, is not able to equal them only in deep carowsing, and
quaffing, but far to exceed them in strange and new devised Healths: nay,
there is now scarce any meeting without superfluity of wine, and drinking,
even to surfeit. Adrianus Berlandus, Centuria prima, reports, That a young man
being at a banquet, was accused for many scandalous and calumniated words
spoken against a Priest: for which being questioned and cited before the
Judges, a question was demanded him, Why he durst speak so contumeliously
against a man of his holy profession and sacred Order? who answered, Should he
inuit me again unto the like Feast, and plye me so fast with wine as he did
then, I should not only be apt to malign and revile, but beat out of the
room (if they were then present) the twelve Apostles. The Judges by this
understanding that his contempt only proceeded from the excess of wine,
dismissed him unpunished, and upon the Priest that had first invited him, and
after accused him, they laid this Penance, That he should taste no wine for
four whole days together. Old Ennius (notwithstanding these effects) never
buckled himself to the writing of any brave Heroicke Verse, before his brain
was moistened, and his Muse kindled and awaked with the spirit of the Grape: of
whom Horace, Ennius ipse pater nunquam nisi potus ad arma
Profituit, etc.


They need no further explanation, the former words express them fully.
Tiberius was so addicted to immoderate cups, that being in the camp, the
soldiers used to nickname him, and in stead of Clodius called him Caldus; for
Tiberius, Biberius; and for Nero, Mero; all of them reproouing his intemperate
Vinositie. Iuuenal in his Satyrs reports one Lanfella, Lanfella.
a woman, for an incontinent wine-bibber. Martial taxes another, called
Myrtale, Myrtale.
for her insatiate drinking; but because her breath should not smell of the
Grape, she used to temper her wine with the leaves of Laurel: His words be
these: Foetore multo Myrtale solet vino
Sed fallat vt nos, solia de^orat Lauri.
Myrtale drinks much wine: which to excuse,
Least that her breath thereof should stink, and smell,
To deceive us, she in her cups does use
To have her wine with Laurel temp'red well.


Fescenina.
The like Epigram he has, Lib. 1. of another called Fescenina, a great drinker
of wine, whom he brands for her intemperance. In so great a custom was this
rioting in drink grown, that when the great and sumptuous Espousals of
Hyppolita and Alphonsus were celebrated by king Ferdinand his father, where
every thing was carried with extraordinary magnificence and state, as well
the Martial Exercises abroad, as the Maskes, Revels, and private sports
within, which extended not only to condign praise, but admiration of all the
spectators: and all these Pastimes, Feasts, and Banquets, kept to the end with
great plenty and abundance, yet without vain excess and superfluity. In the
shutting up of all these solemnities, one amidst the multitude (by Nation a
German) clamoured out aloud (even to the hearing of the King, and all his
Princely guests) in these words; Oh valiant ludi quibus nemo bibit, i. Happy
be those sports, in which there is no excess in drinking. Pontanus. And thus
for the present I give over Healthing.

Of Women beloved of diverse Creatures.
EGesidemus upon Pliny tells us, That the child Hermias was so beloved of a
Dolphin, that she would come to the Seashore and suffer him to get upon her
back, then swim with him into the Sea: and having sported with him
sufficiently bring him safe to Land, and then attend him the next day. It
happened, that having long continued this love betwixt them, upon a time being
mounted on the Dolphins back, a sudden tempest arose, by the violence of
which the Lad was beaten off, and so perished in the Sea. Which the Dolphin
perceiving, and having lost him whom she so much loved, she left the Water, and
casting her self upon the dry Continent, there gave her self up to a
voluntary death. Of the love of that kind of Fish to men and children, there
are diverse remembrances, as of Arion, and others. In Argis, the child Olenus
was affected by a Goose: so likewise Lycidas, the Philosopher; who would never
depart from him, nor be driven out of his company, but was his continual
associate, in public and private, in the Bath, in the Night, the Day, without
any intermission. Plin. Lib. 10. cap. 22. Glauce the Harper, was beloved of a
Ram; a youth of Sparta, by a Daw. Nicander apud Caelium witnesses, That one
Selandus, the Butler to the king of Bithinia, was beloved of a Cock, whom they
called Centaurus. A Cock doted likewise on a young Lad, whose name was
Amphilochus, by Nation an Olenian. Why may we not then as well give credit,
that Semiramis was affected by a Horse, Semiramis.
and Pasiphae by a Bull? when Pliny tells us, Pasiphae.
That in Leucadia a young Damsel was so beloved of a Peacocke, A Virgin of
Leucadia.
that the enamored Bird never left her in life, and accompanied her in death:
for seeing the Virgin dead, she never would receive food from any hand,
Gratitude.
but so pyned away, and dyed also. In the city of Sestos, A Virgin of Sestos.
a young Eagle (taken in a neast) was carefully brought up by a Virgin: The
Bird being come to full growth, would every day take her flight abroad, and
all such foul as she could catch, bring home, and lay them in the Lap of
her mistress: And this she used daily, as it were to recompense her for her
fostering and bringing up. At length this Virgin dying, and her body being
borne unto the Funeral fire, the Eagle still attended: which was no sooner
exposed unto the flames, but the Bird likewise cast her self, with a
voluntary flight, amidst the new-kindled pyle, and to her mistresses Hearse
gave her self a most grateful sacrifice. Pliny, lib. 10. cap. 5. Saxo
Grammat. in the tenth book of his Danish History reports, That certain young
maids of a Village in Swetheland, playing and sporting together in the fields
upon a holy day, suddenly an huge hee-Beare rushed out of the forest, and
snatched up the fairest amongst them, and hurryed her away to his Den; but
gently, and without any harm: where having bestowed her, long gazed on her
face, as if with a kind of admiration he grew so enamored of her on the
sudden, that in the stead of a murderer, he became a lover, imparting unto
her all the prey that he got abroad. The sequel of this History (which is
almost past belief) I am loath (for many special reasons) to prosecute any
further here: therefore (though abruptly) I break it off.

Of Women excellent in the Art of Painting, Weauing, etc.
INnumerable are the men that have been excellent in the quality of Painting:
the Catalogue of their Names (without a Capitulation of their Works) would
ask much Paper, but greater pains to set down. Yet as of the rest, I will
give you a small taste of their exquisite dexterity in that Art. I have read,
That Apelles having made an excellent Piece, in which he had deciphered a Horse
to the life, he thought it then a Present worthy Alexander: and coming to
present it to the king, he only gave it a neglected look, neither praising
it, nor discommending it, but found other discourse. The Painter still holding
it up, Bucephalus (on whom the king was then mounted) casting his eye upon the
Table, fell a neighing, thinking the lively effigies had been a living Beast.
Which Apelles observing, could no longer contain himself, but cried out
aloud; O Alexander, I now well perceive thy Horse has better judgment in
Painting than thy self. Zeuxes being almost with him equally famous, Apelles
maligning that any Painter should be named whilst he was yet alive, took
occasion in an humor, to make a purposed Journey to give him visitation, but
especially to observe the manner of his shop, and worke-house: and crossing an
Arm of the Sea, he came to the city where Zeuxes then lived; and enquiring
out his house, was directed thither, where knocking, the maid came to the
door; Apelles asked her for her master: she told him, he was gone into the
Town about very serious occasions, and was not then within; but I pray (Sir)
when my master returns, who shall I say was here to speak with him? Apelles
spying a fair Table hanging in the shop, ready to be wrought, but no work
therein, and the Pensils and Colors all ready by it, By thy leave maid (says
he) and entering the shop, chused out a Pensill, with which he only drew a
curious small Line cross the Table, almost of that finenesse to deceive the
eye: which having suddenly ended, Tell thy master (says he to the maid)
That he that drew this Line, was here to have spoken with him, and so away he
goes: who was no sooner out, but Zeuxes returning, and asking her, If any man
had been there to ask for him in his absence? she told him all, and showed
the Line drawn upon the Table; on which he looking with admiration,
suddenly broke out into an acclamation, saying, This could never have been
done, but by the hand of Apelles; and instantly sent up and down the Town to
seek him. In the Interim (this president being still standing before him) in a
kind of emulation, it animated him to adventure on something worthy the sight
of Apelles; when choosing out another color, differing from that Apelles had
wrought, he with his Pensill cut the first Line just in the middle with a kind
of miraculous sted fastness and evenness: when glorying in his work (which
indeed was rare) Now tell the Painter (says he) if he come again to enquire
of me, that I have been since at home, witness that, and show him the Table;
and so retired himself into the inner part of the house. Soon after comes
Apelles, and asks the maid, If her master had been yet at home? Yes Sir
(says she) and bad me show you this, and ask you how you like it. Apelles
wondered (as thinking it had scarce been to be found in Art) and was startled
at the first; but as one that had never been equalled, and loath now to be
exceeded, he again took the Pensill, and altering the color, in the very
life and spirit of Art he divided the (almost invisible) Line of Zeuxes,
parting it in the midst, with such a constant proportion, that it seemed
altogether to exceed the practice of Science. Which having done, Now (says
he) commend me once more to thy master, and ask him from me, If this last
Line has not made good the imperfections of the former: at which word Zeuxes
appeared, and before he had the power to give him any salutation (looking upon
what he had done) acknowledged him Victor, yet held it no dishonor to him to be
so overcome. This Table was after held as a rare and an unparalleled
maister-piece, and being sold for a great sum of money, as a choice Jewel
hung up in the Capitol of Rome, where it was long preserved, even till time
had defaced the colors, and raced out the memory thereof. Amongst thousand
Excellencies both in their Works and Inventions, these shall suffice in this
place: I now come to my Women Painters.

Tymarete, Tymarete.
the daughter of Mycon, or Mycaon (a man eminent in that quality) amongst
other curious Pieces (wrought by her own hand) made that admirable Picture of
Diana, which was hanged up in the Temple of Ephesus, clayming prioritie above
many that proceeded from the best Artists: She flourished in the time that
Archelaus reigned in Macedonia: Pliny, Lib. 35. cap. 11. Irene was the
daughter and scholar of the Painter Cratinus: Irene.
she was famous for pensilling the Maid, whose effigies was kept as a Relike
sacred to Memory, in the city Eleusina. Calipso.
Calipsoes excellency was expressed to the life, in drawing the old Iugler
Theodorus. Alcisthine.
Alcisthine limned a Dancer and shee-Minstrell, and by that got her a name
amongst the best. Aristarete.
Aristarete was the daughter and scholar of the Painter Marchus, and drew
Aesculapius. One Olimpias professed the same Art, Olimpias.
and instructed many scholars; amongst whom (as Pliny says) was Antobulus.
Lala Cyzicena.
Lala Cyzizena lived a perpetual Virgin, and was the sole daughter of Marcus
Varro: she practiced in Rome, and drew both with the Pensill and with a
sharpe-pointed Quill, called Cestrum: she cut in Iuorie. She meddled not with
the Faces of men, but women only; she made her own Picture from a
Looking-glass: she was commended for the nimblenesse and dexterity of hand,
for none ever equalled her in quickness; and for curiosity, she exceeded two
of the greatest and best practitioners in her days, Sopylon, and Dionisius.

From Painting, I come to Weauing: The practice of which was held in great use
and estimation amongst Princesses, and the chief Matrons; in which to be
excellent, was held as a prime honor. The Exercise thereof was accounted a
commendable thing in Wives, and a great sign of womannish modesty in Virgins.
It was first brought from the Phrygians to the Romans. King From him all rich
and costly Arras Hangings are called Attalia.
Attalus was the first that devised to weaue with threads of Gold. It grew to
that reverent and respected custom, that sisters for their brothers, mothers
for their sons, and women for their husbands, with their own hands weaued
Cloakes and Gowns. And therefore the Romans in all their Marriages, caused
the new married Virgins to present their husbands with a Distaffe, Thread, and
Spindle: it is a custom which the Iberians still observe; as also, That
whatsoever their women first spinne, and after weaue, is brought to be viewed
in public, and rated; she that has done most, and best, has so much the
more respect and honor, Alexand. ab Alex. Lib. 4. cap. 8. Amongst the
Phoeacenses, the men mind only Navigations, and the women Texture and Weauing;
but amongst the women of Persia it is held a great dishonor to lay her hand to
the Web, or Needle. Penelope.
Penelope (by the testimony of Homer, and other Poets) in this Art was
excellently practiced; of which came the Proverb, Tela Penelopis and
Icariotis, The Web of Penelope, or Icariotes (because she was the daughter
of Icarus.) Virg. Aenead. Lib. 5. nominates one Pholoe to be eminent in that
exercise. Pholoe.
Plin. lib. 11. cap. 22. conferres the invention of Weauing upon Pamphile,
Pamphile.
the daughter of Plates, who devised it in the Isle Coos. In this, Acecaeus
Patarensis, and Helicon Caristius, exceeded all others: these two brothers
woaue and embrodered a Vesture and a Hood for Pallas Poliades, who was honored
in the Temple of Athens, which was done with such inimitable cunning, that
thereupon came the Adage in Greece, if any thing were curiously or exquisitely
performed, it was called, The Work of Acecaeus, and Helicon. Above others most
magnified by Ovid, Metamorph. lib. 6. is Arachne Lydia, Arachne.
the daughter of Idmones, whose mother was borne in the small city Hypepis:
she having by many degrees exceeded all mortal women, and that without
difficulty durst compare with Minerua her self, who for her boldness and
pertinacie she turned into a Spyder. Her controversy with Pallas, is with
great elegancie expressed in Ovid. Alexander of Macedon, Olimpias.
and Octauius Augustus, the one wore a Garment woauen by his Mother, Lyuia.
the other a Mantle, by the hands of his Wife. These Ladies had sequestered
places in some part of their Palaces, and kept their handmaids and damosells
at work; of which, these two potent and mighty Queens disdayned not to be
the daily Directoresses and Ouer-seers. Alexand. ab Alex. cap. 4. lib. 8. Part
of the Wool which Tanaquil spunne, Tanaquil.
with her Distaffe, Spindle, and Slippers, were long time reserved as sacred
Relics in the Temple of Ancus Martius, as also a Kingly Garment or Imperial
Roabe, woauen quite through with Rays and Flames of Gold, wrought with her
own hand, in which Seruius Tullius often went in state, and sat in the high
Iudgement-Seat, in the Capitol. Varro apud eundem. By the Law called Pagana,
all women were forbidden to spinne or draw out any thread in the streets, or
the common highways, because they held it ominous to the prosperity of the
Grain sown in the Earth, or the Fruits blossomed, or growing upon the Trees,
as the same Author testifies. Ausonius speaks of one Sabina, Sabina.
not only excellent in this Science, but a Poet withal, which he left to
posterity in one of his Epigrams: Sieve probas Tyrio textam sub tegmine vestra
Seu placet inscripti commoditus tituli, etc.


Which is thus Englished: If thou affect'st a purple Roabe,
Woauen in the Tyrian stain,
Or if a Title well inscribed,
By which thy wit may gain;
Behold her works impartially,
And censure on them well:
Both, one Sabina does profess,
And does in both excel.


And thus I take leave of weauing, for Memory now transports me to another
Argument.

Of Women Contentious, and Bloody.
TExtor in his Officine remembers us of one Kailla, Kailla.
who was of that barbarous and inhuman cruelty, that being at dissension with
her husband Vazules, she having banished all conjugal piety and pity,
caused his eyes to be dug out of his head, spending the remainder of his age
in uncomfortable darkness. These subsequent stories of flintie and obdure
hearted women, though I could willingly have spared them out of this work,
that the world might almost be induced to believe that no such immanities could
ever have place in the smooth and soft bosoms of women, yet in regard I have
promised briefly to run over all Ages, Features, Affections, Conditions, and
Degrees, though they might perhaps have been thought well spared by some, yet
I make no question but they might be challenged at my hands by others. The
rather I present them and with the more confidence unto your view, because,
though their actions to the tender brested may seem horrid and fearful, and
therefore the hardlier to purchase credit, yet the testimony of the Authors
being authenticke and approved, will not only bear me out as their faithful
remembrancer, but in the things themselves fasten an inherent belief. I
proceed therefore. Cyrce.
Cyrce the Witch slew the king of Sarmatia to whom she was married, and
usurping the regal Throne, did much oppress her subjects: of her Sabellicus
writes more at large. Clitemnestra
Clitemnestra was the wife of Agamemnon Archduke or General of the Gretians at
the siege of Troy, she by the help of Aegistus (with whom she adultrated) slew
her husband, of this Virgill speaks, lib. 11. Seneca in Agamemnonae and
Iuvenall in Satyr. Danaus the son of Belus had fifty daughters, who were
espoused to the fifty sons of Aegistus; these made a coniuration in one
night to kill all their husbands, which they accordingly did, all save the
youngest, Hypermnestra, who spared the life of her husband Lynceus, Senec.
Hercul. Fur. Alexander Phaereus, The wife of Alex. Phaereus.
a tyrant of Thessaly, when he had showed his wife naked to a certain
Barbarian, she took it so impatiently, that she cut his throat sleeping:
Albina.
Ovid in Ibin. Volaterranus reports that Albina daughter to a king of Syria had
two and thirty sisters, who all in one night slew their husbands, who being
exild their country, landed in Britain; and that of this Albina this
Kingdom first took the name of Albion. Laodice.
Laodice was the wife of Antiochus king of Syria, who caused himself to be
called God: She poisoned her husband because of his too much familiarity with
Berenice the sister of Ptolome. Fabia slew Fabius Fabriclanus, Fabia.
that she might the more freely enjoy the company of Petronius Volentanus a
young man of extraordinary feature, with whom she had often before
accompanied. Agrippina.
Agrippina poisoned her husband Tiberius Claudius the Emperor. Lucia.
Lucilla the wife of Antonius Verus Emperor, poisoned her husband because she
thought him too familiar with Fabia. Filia Bentiu.
Galeotus prince of Forolinium, married with the daughter of Ioannes
Bentiuolus, of whom being despised and finding her self neglected, she hired
certain cutthroat Physicians, who slew him in his chamber. Andreas the son
of Carolus king of Pannonia, Ioanna.
was slain by his wife Ioanna Queen of Cicily, for no other reason but that
he was idle and held unprofitable to the weal public. Althaea.
Althaea sorrowing that her two brothers Plexippus and Toxeus were slain by
her son Meleager, she burned that Brand, of which the fatal Sisters had made
a prediction, That his life and health should continue as long as that was
preserved: Agaue.
Ovid Trist. lib. 1. Bocat. in Geneol. Agaue a Theban woman slew her son
Penth^us, because he would not honor the feast of the Bachinalls, with the
rest of the Menades: Virgill in Culice. Ericthaeus taking arms against
Eumolpus, and having an answer from the Oracle, That he should have a certain
victory, if he would sacrifice his only daughter to the gods; Praxitha.
by the persuasion of his wife Praxitha gave her up to slaughter: Euripides
apud Plutarch. Elearchus one of the kings of Creet, at the persuasion of his
second wife Phronima, Phronima.
commanded his only daughter by the hand of one Themisones to be cast into
the river and there drowned: Herodot. Polidice Polidice.
betrayde her father king Pletera to Creon king of Thebes and caused him to be
slain; as likewise Nisus being besieged by Min^s, by the treason of his
daughter lost that purple hair which was the stay of his sovereignty: Ovid
Metam. and Seruius. Tiphon Aegiptius, as Berosus, Seneca, Diodorus, and others
relate, slew his brother Osiris then reigning in Egypt and governing justly,
which done he caused him to be cut into twenty six pieces, and to every one
of the conspirators gave a part, the better to secure him of their fidelities:
Isis.
but Isis their sister after she had lamented the death of her brother Osiris,
by the assistance of her son (who was called Oros) slew Typhon and avenged
his death. Draomitia was a queen of Bohemia, Draomitia.
she caused Ludimillia (much devoted to religion) to be slain: Ludimillia.
by her instigation her son Boleslaus was the murderer of his brother
Wenceslaus: Volaterran. The nymph Lara was of that loquacitie, Lara.
that raising dissension betwixt Jupiter and Juno, by telling her of his
escapes, that in revenge thereof he plucked out her tongue. Talantia.
Talantia Spartana having intelligence that her son Pedaretes tyrannised over
the men of Chius, writ to him in this or the like language, Or govern there
better, or remain there; if thou returnest to me, thou art not safe: thus
admonishing him of better government, or menacing him with death. Damariana was
a woman of Sparta, Damariana.
and with her own hands slew her son, because she found him of a timorous
condition and would not be drawn to the wars. Amastris was the wife of
Xerxes, Amastris.
and did prosecute the wife of Massissa the President with that inhumane and
barbarous cruelty, that having first slain her, she caused her breasts to be
cut off, and cast unto the dogs, dismembring her of her Nose, Ears, Eyes,
Lips, and Tongue. Rauis. Textor. Cisenis, Cisenis.
the daughter of Diogerides king of Thrace, was of that savage inhumanitie,
that she took pleasure to see living men to be dismembered and cut in pieces,
causing young children to be killed and dressed, after commanding them to be
served in to their parents, and to be by them eaten. Solinus. Tullia, Tullia.
the wife of Tarquinius Superbus, she caused her Chariot to be drawn over the
face of her dead father Seruius Tullius, presently before murdered by her
husband in the Capitol. Liuie. Irene.
Irene the Empress was wife to Leo the fourth, and caused her own son
Constantius Sextus to be first cast in prison, and after to have his eyes
dug out, because before she had by him been expelled the Empire. Fuluia.
Fuluia was the wife of Marcus Antoninus: and how the excellentest of Orators,
M. Tullius, being dead, was tyrannized over by him, many Authors have commended
to posterity; whose sacred hands and head being cut off, were nailed unto that
Pulpit where he had often most learnedly declaimed. His head was first brought
to Anthony, which he caused to be placed before him upon a Table, and scarce
in a whole day could he satiate his rancorous malice with so sad and
pitiful a spectacle; but at length (as Appianus Alexandrinus reports) he
commanded it to be took thence: And (as it is gathered out of the collections
of Dion, Prusius, and Suidas) when Fuluia, the wife of Antoninus, came to the
sight of it, she took it in her hands, and after the breathing of many
fearful maledictions, execrations, and curses against it, spit in the face
thereof: then taking it into her lap, with a Bodkin or Penner which she wore
in her hair for an ornament, pricked his tongue, which she had caused
violently to be forced out of his jaws, least there should be any thing
wanting that might add to an indiscreet woman's hate and inhumane cruelty.
This murder and horride act against so worthy a Senator, has been deplored
by many, as well in Prose, as in Verse; as Portius Latro, Albutius Sylo,
Caestius Murrhedius, and others: but none more elegantly than Seuerius
Cornelius, in these Verses of his, which we have by tradition from A^^aeus
Seneca: Oraque magnanimum spirantia pene virorum
In rostris iacuere suis, etc.
As they were at large remembered in Crinitus. Euridice, Euridice.
the wife of Amyntas king of Macedonia, who had by him three sons, Alexander,
Perdicas, and Philip, father to Alexander the Great; as likewise a daughter,
called Euryones. This Euridice not only polluted the bed of her husband, but
sought his life, to transfer the Principality into the hand of the
adulterer: and least her daughter should discover either her whoredom or
treason, she likewise plotted against her life. The old man in the midst of
these dangers dyed, leaving the kingdom to his eldest son Alexander; she
after caused him to be slain: A president of strange and (almost) unheard of
cruelty in a mother. Iustine Histor. lib. 7.

Spitamenes (a puissant Captain that had long opposed Alexander the Great in
many battles and conflicts, The wife of Spitamenes.
with his competitor Daha) so dearly loved his fair wife, that he drew her to
be a partner with him in his wars, and lodged her in his Tent: But being put
to many affrights and distresses, (the common casualties belonging to war)
she grew so tired with Alarums, tumults, mutinies, affrights, slaughters, and
such like, that she daily importuned him (being before only used to feasts,
banquets, and effeminate delicacies) to submit him to the Macedonian Conqueror.
So long and so vrgently she solicited him to peace, both by her children, her
friends, and her self in person, that being a blunt and plain soldier,
traded in combustion (and to whom the very thought of submission was more
odious than death) though he entirely affected her, yet upon a time he
advanced his hand to have struck her, and had done it, had not his brother
come in by accident and suppressed his incensed fury: yet he concluded, That if
ever after she persuaded him to peace, or troubled his ears with that base
word of submission, that Hand which so long had opposed Alexander (all
Conjugal amity set apart) should be her luddaine and assured ruin. The Lady
affrighted with the name of death, thought it no safety to interpose so
robustious and settled a constancy, especially in a soldier daily and hourly
enured to blood and massacre, therefore considering with her self what was
best to be done; in meditating for her own safety, she thought it better, by
yielding, to conquer, than by contending against power and advantage, to be
overcome. After submission therefore made, and a new reconcilement established
betwixt them, she invited him to a banquet in her Tent (which was furnished
with all the dainties the Camp would yield, and whatsoever rarietie remote
places could afford) where she carried her self with all humility and
obedience. At this feast she caused him to be plied with Healths, and lavish
Cups, till the Wine having got the pre-eminence of his better senses, he grew
drowsy, and retired himself to his Pallat. The Tables were then withdrawn,
and every man that was invited, repaired either to his charge in the Army, or
to his rest. They having disposed of themselves, and the place now private,
she had confederated with one of her servants, by whose assistance, she in
his depth of sleep cut off the head of her husband, and gave it to him. This
done (having the Word) they past through the Watches and Guards, and by the
break of day came unto the Camp of Alexander, desiring to have conference
with him about affairs which concerned him nearly. The Prince understanding
it was a woman, commanded she should be admitted into his Tent; which was
accordingly done, and she appeared before him all stained and sprinkled with
blood (for she had not yet changed her habit) at which he grew at the first
amassed, demanding the cause of her repair thither? She desired her servant
might be likewise admitted (who attended at the door of his Tent) for he had
that about him by which he should be better informed. His entrance was
granted: but being suspected by the guard (because they perceived him hide
something folded up in his garments) they searched him, and found a head cut
off, but by reason of the palenesse of the face (which was disfigured with the
clottered and congealed blood) the countenance thereof could hardly be
discerned. The servant was brought in, with the head (still dropping blood) in
his hand. At which the king more wondering, desired by her to be better
certified concerning the Novel; to whom she boldly replied, Lo here (o
Alexander) the end of thy many troubles and fears, the head of the great
Captain Spitamenes, who though my husband, yet because he was thine enemy, I
have caused his head to be cut off, and here present it unto thee. At the
horridenesse of these words, the king, with all that stood by, were abashed;
every one glad of the thing done, but in their hearts detesting the manner of
the deed. The Lady still expecting an answer, Alexander (after some pawse)
thus replied: I must confess (Lady) the great courtesy and infinite benefit
received from you, in presenting me the head of an Outlaw, a Traitor, and one
that was to me a great obstacle and an hinderance in the smooth passage to my
intended Victories; but when I understand it to be done by the hands of a
woman, nay a wife, the strange horridenesse of the fact takes away all the
thanks and reward due to the benefit. I therefore command you instantly to
depart the Camp, and that with all speed possible; for I would not have the
savage and inhumane examples of the Barbarians contaminate and infect the mild
and soft temper of the noble Grecians: With which words she was instantly
hurried from his presence. As noble a president of Justice in a Prince, as it
was an abhorred example of cruelty in a most unnatural wife. Q. Curt. lib. 8.
de Alexandri Histor. From a remorselesse wife, I come now to as obdurate a
stepmother.

Pelops having married Hyppodamia, Hyppodamia.
the daughter of Tantalus and Eurianassa, had by her two sons, Thiestes and
Atreus, and by the Nymph Danais a third son, called Crisippus, to which he
seemed outwardly better affected than to the former; on whom king Laius of
Thebes casting an amorous eye, at length stole him from his father. But Pelops,
with his two sons by Hyppodamia, made war upon Laius, took him prisoner,
and recovered Crisippus: and when he truly understood that love was the cause
of his rape, he was attoned with Laius, and an inviolable league of amity
combined betwixt them. Whilst the Theban yet soiourned with Pelops, Hyppodamia
persuaded with Atreus and Thiestes to conspire against the life of Crisippus,
as one that aimed at the succession in the kingdom: but not preuayling, she
meditated with her self, how to despoyle him of life with her own hands; when
having conveyed the sword of Laius out of his chamber, when he was fast
sleeping, she came to the bed of Crisippus, and transpierced him as he lay,
leaving the sword still in his body, and left the place undiscovered, accusing
the Theban for his death: but the youth not fully dead, recovered so much
spirit as to discover the murtheresse; for which, king Laius was acquitted, and
she from her husband received condign punishment for her immanitie and
murder. Dosythaeus in Pelopedis. Progne, Progne.
to revenge the rape of her sister Philomela upon her husband Tereus, king of
Thrace, feasted him with the body of his own son Itis; of which, you may
read at large in Ouids Metamorphosis. Some women have been so unnatural, as
to betray their fathers. After Troy was utterly subverted and despoyled, king
Diomede (one of the most valiant amongst the kings of Greece) in the return
toward his country, being by storms and tempests violently cast upon the
coast of Thrace, where Lycas the son of Mars then reigned, and according to
the bloody custom of the country, sacrificed all such strangers as landed
upon his Continent; Callirhoe.
his daughter Callirhoe surprised with the love of king Diomede, not only
released him from durance, but betrayed the life of Lycus her father into his
hands; notwithstanding, he most trecherously left her: for which ingratitude
(and urged with remorse of conscience, for proouing so unnatural unto him from
whom she had her being) by strangling her self, she despairingly expired,
Iuba, lib. 3. Libicorum. Paralleld with this, is that which we read of
Calphurnius Crassus, an illustrious Roman, and sent by M. Regulus against the
Massilians, to take in a most defensible Castle called Garaetium: but by the
cross disaster of fortune being surprised in the siege thereof, and reserved
the next day to be sacrificed to Saturn, being in despair either of rescue,
or life; Besalia, Besalia.
daughter to the king (who was then possessed of the Port) falling in love with
Calphurnius, not only delivered up unto him the keys of the Castle, that he
might freely escape with life, but betrayed unto him the liberty and life of
her father: but after being most degenerately forsaken by him, she desperately
slew her self. Hegesinax, lib. 3. rerum Africarum. I am weary with setting
down these immanities in women, and Polihimnia now inuites me to a new
argument.

Of Women strangely preserved from death, and such as have unwillingly been
the death of their Fathers.
Iole.
NIceas Maleotes (as Plutarch in his thirteenth Parallel testates) reports,
That when Hercules for the love of Iole the daughter of Cacus invaded Oechalia,
and she abhorring the embraces of him who had before slain her father,
retired herself for safety into the strongest Cittadell in her country; in
which being straightly besieged by Hercules, and the Fort ready to be
surprised and taken, she having no way to escape, and unwilling to stand to the
mercy of so loving an enemy, mounted up into the highest Turret of the
Castle, and from thence cast her self headlong down toward the Earth, but
the wind gathering under her loose garments so extenuated the fall, that she
came to the ground without any hurt at all; by which miraculous fortune she
inioyed a desperate life, and Hercules a most desired mistress. Answerable
unto this, is that which Theophilus Italicorum tertio relates: The Romans in
the Etrurian war, instituted Valerius Torquatus General of their forces,
Clusia.
he having beheld Clusia the daughter of the Tuscan king, grew innamoured of
the Virgin^ and sent Ambassadors to demand her of her father: but she not
willing to make any contract with her countries enemy, and her father as loath
to contradict his daughter, the motion and offer of Torquatus was peremptorily
denied; at which enraged, he begyrt the city with a strong and fearful
siege, engaging the defendants to all dangers and difficulties, in so much that
Clusia timorous of surprisall, and preferring death before captivity, threw
her self from the highest part of the wall, to destroy her self in the open
view and face of the enemy: but either (as the former late mentioned) favored
by the winds, or (as my Author tells me) greatly supported by the hand of
Venus, or whether the pittious Earth unwilling to hurt or harm such fair and
well featured limbs, and therefore with more than accustomed courtesy
favorably received her into her lap, I am not certain, but the Lady (to the
wonder of all the beholders) was taken up whole and sound, without wound or the
least-astonishment, and from thence conducted to the Tent of the General; who
because he made but offer to violate her chastity, the ever nobly minded
Romans, not only took from him the charge of the army (alleging that he
that could not govern his own affections, was not fit to command others) but
confined him into the Island Corsica adjacent, near to the continent of
Italy. Not much less strange was that of Perhibaea, Perhibaea.
the daughter of Accathous, who when Telamon the son of Aeacus and Eudeides,
came into the city of Euboea where she then soiourned with her father, and
took her at that advantage, that she was by him devirgined and deflowred, his
name or person not being known by her or any, and so privily escaped and fled
away by night. Accathous after perceiving her by assured tokens to be grown
big with child, and suspecting it to be done by some one of his citisens or
subjects, he was thereat so incensed, that banishing all piety or paternall
pity, he delivered her into the hands of one of his captains, commanding
him either to kill her with his sword, or cast her into the Sea: the soldier
undertakes the imposition of his sovereign upon him, with many vows and
protestations to perform his pleasure with all strictness and severity; but
by the way commiserating her wretched fortune, and loath to be the destroyer of
such youth and beauty created for better use: coming near the Seashore, and
spying a ship there at Anchor, he sold her to the chief merchant for a sum
of money, returning to the father with an assured relation of his daughters
death. The mariners presently with this fair purchase hoysed sail, and a
fair and gentle gale favoring them, they attained unto the port of Salamine,
and there harbored, where purposing to make sale of their merchandise, they
exposed them to the public view, amongst the rest they set a price on the
Princess Perhibaea. Telamon who was duke of Salamine and then resiant in the
city, took his attendants with him, and hearing of this new merchant, went
down to the Key to take the first view of his goods, and provide himself of
such things as he wanted; amongst all, the fair Perhibaea pleased him best,
whose face he well knew and still remembered what had past betwixt them: he
bargained for her, paid down her price, conducted her to his palace, and
there acquainted her with the true passage of all his former proceedings.
Within few months she brought him a son which he called Ajax: and this was
that Ajax Telamon, who at the siege of Troy betwixt the two armies combatted
with bold Hector in the plain of Scamander: you shall read this history in
Aretades Guidius in his second book inscribed Insulis. The next that insues
has correspondence with this. Lucius Trocius had a beautiful young daughter
called Florentia, Florentia.
she was stuprated by the Roman Calphurnius, and when the act came to the
knowledge of her father, delivered to the trusty executioner to be cast into
the Sea; who in the same manner was by him pitied and sold to a merchant, his
ship being then bound for Italy, where she being exposed to public sale,
was seen, known, and bought by Calphurnius, by whom he had a son called
Contruscus. I proceed to such as have unwittingly been the death of their
parents.

Euenus, the son of Mars and Steropes, by his wife Alcippa the daughter of
Oennemanus had a beautiful female issue, Marpissa.
whom he called Marpissa who had vowed perpetual virginity; her, Idas the
son of Aphareus ravished and stole away, which her father hearing, prosecuted
him even unto his own country, but in vain, for not able to overtake them,
and returning without her, in grief of his lost daughter whom he so dearly
loved, he threw himself into the river Lycormus and was there drowned; some
think that by his death the flood lost his name, and was ever after called
Euenus. Dosithae lib. 1. rerum Italicarum. Anius king of the Etruscians, having
a rarely featured damsel to his daughter called Salia, Salia.
whose virginity he had vowed to Diana, and therefore admitted no suitors,
though many great and rich offers were made unto her: at length, as she was
sporting abroad amongst other virgins she was espied by one Calthetas, a
hopeful young gentleman and ennobled by his family, who at the first sight of
her was so extaside with her beauty, that maugre all fear of pursuit or
danger, he snatched her up in his arms, and used such means that he got her
safe within the walls of Rome. Her father following the rauisher, but not
ouertaking him, was struck into such a deep sorrow, that desparate of all
comfort or counsel, he violently cast himself into the next Foord that
parted Rome and his own Kingdom, which ever since that time still bears the
name of Anius. Calihetus had by Salia two brave sons, Latinus and Salinus,
who were famous in their noble and flourishing issue, insomuch, that some of
the best and greatest families in Rome, were proud from them to derive their
ancestrie. This history is recorded by Aristides Milesius, by Alexander and
Polihistor lib. tertio Italicorum.

Of Clamorous Women commonly called Skoulds.
CNeius Pompeius to make his faction the stronger, by his friend Munatius sent
to Cato that he would be pleased, of his two Neeces to contract the one of
them to himself, the other to his son: by whom Cato sent word back to
Pompeius, That though he as a friend took gratefully the free profer of his
friendship and alliance, yet being a man, he had ever kept himself from
being intricated in the snares of women; but he protested he would adhere
unto him in a more firm league of amity, than could be contracted by kindred,
if he would study any thing conducent and profitable for the commonweal,
but against the public good he would neither give nor take hostages; calling
his neeces (who as some write were his daughters, given so in matrimony) no
better than pledges, of much future inconvenience, especially in matters of
state, where the commonweal is distracted and divided. Eras. 5. Apotheg.
Socrates was wont to say, that he had patiently suffered three torments,
Grammar, Poverty, and a skoulding Wife Xantippe, two of which he had prettily
well euaded, namely, Grammar and Poverty, but the morositie of a Skould he
could never put off. Anton. Parle. 2. Meless. Sermon. 34. The like may be said of
Sausarion the Comicke Poet, equally tormented with a bitter and railing wife.
Pittacus Mitelenus having married the sister of Draco the son of Penthilius,
a proud insolent and railing woman, persuaded a dear friend of his to marry
with the other sister, for if he were never so much given to wrath and anger,
she would teach him sufferance and patience. Laertius when Georgias the
Sophist at the solemnity of the Olimpicke games, had made an elabourat Oration
Concerning concord, and to persuade men to unity: one Melanthius in the
conclusion or catastrophe thereof spoke aloude, This man persuades all Greece
to peace, who having but one wife and three maids at home, yet his house is
never without clamor and dissension, and with all his smooth and filed phrases
cannot make his own peace. Erasm. 6. Apotheg. Mar. Pacuvius upon a time said
(weeping) to his familiar friend and neighbor Actius (alias) Arius, Suidas
calls him Arius.
Dear friend (says he) I have a tree in my garden, in my mind the most
prodigious and unhappy that ever the earth produced or gave sap unto, for
upon that my first wife hanged her self, and after that the second, and now
but this morning my third and last; to whom Arius his neighbor replyde, I
wonder you being a learned man and approved for your wisdom, should be any
way grieved at these successes and chances, Dij boni (inquit) quot tibi
dispendia arbor iste suspendit? i. Oh you gods, how many of thy damages and
losses have thou hanged upon that tree; and proceeded thus, Dear friend give
me some of those grafts and scientes, tha I may plant them in my orchard or
garden. Valerius records this in an epistle to Rufinus. As also Cicero reports
the like of a Sicilian in 2. de Orat. and Gyraldus Dial. 8. Histor. Poetarum.
Even Cato Censorius could not escape a brawling and crabbed wife, though he
married her from an ignoble stock and family. Guide. Bitturn. says, That
Hadrianus had a wife called Sabina, Sabina.
hard, perverse, untoward, rude in her behavior toward her husband, and
worthy to be repudiated, and her bed and society abandoned. Alphonsus king of
Naples, demanding of one Antonius Panormita, What noble Neapolitane gentlemen
were delighted in Hunting, or whether any late Writer had published any
Treatise, concerning the goodness and excellency of Dogs? To whom Panormita
answered, I beseech thee (o king) rather ask this knight (pointing to one that
was then in presence) who can better resolve you, who for the space of forty
years has been continually so conseruant amongst such creatures, that every
night he beddeth with a Canicula (which word, as it signifies a Brach or
Bitch, so it is taken for a detractor or snarling slanderer, as also for a
Dogge-fish:) and proceeded, Therefore he (o king) can best describe unto you
their natures and conditions. This knight of Naples (whose name for his honors
sake is concealed) only smiled at the taunt given by Antonius, well
apprehending, that by Canicula he intended his wife; a woman barkingly
clamorous, most contentious, and bitter. Pontanus. Gregorius Hamburgensis, a
famous and eloquent Lawyer (amongst all the German practisers the most
approved) when all his busy employments were ended in the Court of Caesar,
where he was stayed some two months, or thereabouts; and (as we say in our
English phrase) the Term being done, and he returning home to his own house,
not far from the Town of Nurimburch, (where he then dwelled) he met with a
friend and neighbor, who after some familiar salutes past betwixt them, told
him, That his wife was living, and in good health at home: to whom shaking his
head, he made this short reply, Si vxor viuit, saene obij, i. If my wife be
living, then am I but dead; thereby intimating, that the morositie of a cursed
wife is no better than a daily death to her husband. Aeneas Sylu. Lib. 3.
Commentar. de reb. Cestis Alphonsi. Thisponius the Lawyer, and of the learned
Council to king Alphonsus, having at one time three hundred pieces of Gold
stolen from him, which was part of the Dower of a perverse and peevish wife
whom he had lately married, for which being wondrous sad and pensive in the
presence of the king, Alphonsus looking upon him, and seeming to commiserate
his sadness, broke out into these terms, O how happy a man were Thisponius,
if the thieves had stolen away his wife, and left the Gold behind them.
Panormita, Lib. 1. de Gestis Alphons. Euripides, the most excellent of the
Greek Tragic Poets, had two wives; the name of the first was Cherile,
Cherile, or Chaerine.
or (as Suidas calls her) Charine, the daughter of Mnesilochus, by whom he had
three sons, Mnesiloches the Actor or Stage Player, Mnesarchides the Merchant,
and the third, Euripides the Orator: yet partly for suspicion of adultery, and
by reason he led with her an unquiet life, after so hopeful an issue, she
was divorced from him. After this separation, he married another called
Melitto, Melitto.
who being apprehended in adultery with Ctesiphon the Player, he was so
branded for a Cuckold, and so taunted and ieasted at by the Comicke Poets in
the public Theater, that he was forced to leave the city and to remove
himself into Macedonia, where he spent the remainder of his life in the Court
of king Archelaus. Gell. Lib. 15. cap. 20. Athenaeus, Lib. 13. Arnus,
Tarquinius, and Tullia, lived together in perpetual discord and dissension, by
reason of her untoward and crabbed condition. Adrianus Berlandus tells us of an
Inne-keeper or Host (a pleasant and frolic fellow) who when a guest of his
complained unto him, that he could not endure such noise and clamor, for his
wives tongue never ceased walking, finding fault with this thing, then that;
besides, there was no cessation of her perpetual brawling and chiding with her
maids and servants. To whom the merry Host replied, And I pray (my friend) is
this a just cause for your impatience, or discontent? What do you think of me
then, that for two and thirty years space have had this noise and clamor
continually in mine ears, night and day, without ceasing, and yet you see with
what sufferance I bear it; and cannot you endure it for the space of a few
minutes? By which words he not only gave present satisfaction to his guest,
but converted his wives anger into laughter. Seruius Tullius, king of the
Romans, conferred his two daughters upon the two Tarquius, Tullia, and her
sister.
Aruns, and Superbus: of several dispositions were the men, and of sundry
conditions the women; as they were opposite in humor, they were as unfitly
disposed. To Aruns (a man of a quiet and mild temper) Tullia (a Lady bold and
daring) was given: on Superbus (a Prince haughty and insolent) the other
(being a modest and meek Lady) was bestowed. Disparitie of minds could not
brook the inequality of manners: Therefore bold and bloody Tullia poisons
her fair and gentle-conditioned Aruns, the other modest and mild-tempered
sister is made away by the proud and ambitious Superbus: the best are lost^ the
worst left. They two contract an incestuous Marriage, Pride with Cruelty, and
Immanitie with Ambition; Murder is the ground or cause, and Treason and
Usurpation the prodigious effect: she complots the death of her own natural
father; and he, the ruin of his liege Lord and Sovereign: she a Parricide,
he a Regicide. The king is betwixt them slain, over whose dead body she
caused her Chariot to be drawn: Her cheeks blushed not, when the wheels of
her Wagon were stained with her fathers blood. And so much to give Tullia a
short character, the most insolent of Wives, and the worst of Daughters. Of a
lower voice, softer spirit, and more temperate condition, Chilonia.
were these wives following. Chilonia the wife of Cleombrotus king of Sparta,
and daughter of Leonides, who had before soueranised, when in those civil
combustions the son in law had expulsed the father, and compelled him into
exile, she never ceased to importune her husband, till she had called him
home from banishment. But in process of time, when Fortune had turned her
Wheel, and Leonides in those dissentions (having got the better) had confined
Cleombrotus, she was an hourly intercessor for the repeal of her husband;
but finding her father to be obdure, and her suit by him not listened too,
though she might in all pleasure and ease have happily spent her age in her
own city with her father, she rather made choice to be a faithful
companion in all distresses with her husband, Fulgos. lib. 6. cap. 7.
Anaxandrides, the son of Leontias, married with his sisters daughter, whom
he exceedingly loved, but because she was barraine and that by her he had no
issue, the Ephori made suit unto him to be divorced from her, and would have
compelled him unto it: but when he had absolutely denied to condescend with
them in that point, they made another request unto him, That he would take
unto him another wife more fruitful, least the most fortunate issue of
Euristaeus might in him be extinguished. He therefore at their entreaties
took to him a second wife, namely Perinetades, Perinetades
the daughter of Demarmenus, and so brought her home to his house; where (which
is strange) the two women lived together peaceably, without emulation or envy.
His last wife brought him a son, whom he called Cleomenes: and not long
after, his first wife (before barraine) made him the fortunate father of three
sons; the first, Dorie^s; the second, Leonides; the third, Cleombrotus: but
Cleomenes (the eldest by the second wife) succeeded in the Sovereignty.
Herodot. Lib. 5. Thesca, Thesca.
the sister of Dionisius, being married to Polixenus, who having entered into a
Coniuration with other noble gentlemen, to supplant the Tyrant, but fearing
discovery fled for his best safety: Upon whose flight, Dionisius calls his
sister into question, as one that must of necessity be privy to his escape.
To whom she boldly thus answered: Think thou (o Dionisius) thy sister to be
a woman of that servile and degenerate condition, that had she known the
least purpose of his retyrement, she would not have made her self a companion
in all his Nauigations, and Travail? Erasm. Apotheg. Lib. 5. Caius Caligula
the Emperor, having found Herod (the husband to Herodias) Tetrarch of Galilee,
Herodias.
engaged in a revolt from the Empire, with Artahanus king of the Parthians,
amerced him in a great sum of money for that defect; and till it was levied
and paid into the Treasury, gave him in custody to king Agrippa, whom he had
found loyal unto him, and in whose fidelity he much trusted. He after
banished Herod into Lions (a city of France) with an irreuocable doom of
exile imposed upon him: but understanding Herodias to be sister to the wife of
Agrippa (whom he much favored) out of Herod's mulct, or fine, he proportioned
her a large Dower, reserved in the hands of Agrippa to her use, as not dreaming
she would have been a companion with him in his confinement. To which
extraordinary grace from the Emperor, she thus replied: You (o Emperor) as
best becomes your Majesty, speak like a royal and munificent Prince, but the
Conjugal Bond of Love and Piety, in which I am tied to a husband, is to me an
impediment, that I am not capable of this great Largess and vnmerited bounty.
Unmeet it is, that I (who have been a partaker with him in all his prosperous
and flourishing fortunes) should now forsake him, and not be a companion with
him in the worst that disaster or adversity can inflict. This noble answer
Caligula took in such scorn and high displeasure, to see himself in
magnanimity and greatness of spirit to be exceeded by a woman, that he
banished her with her husband Herod; and the bounty (before bestowed on her)
he conferred upon her brother in law Agrippa. Joseph. in Antiquitatibus.
Cleomenes, The wife of Cleomenes.
the son of Anaxandrides and Perinetades (but lately spoken of) being
expulsed from Sparta by Antigonus, king of Macedonia, fled for refuge to
Ptolomeus, king of Egypt: whither his wife would have followed him, but
dissuaded by her parents (notwithstanding a strict guard was set over her) yet
in the night she beguiled her keepers; and having provided a Horse for the
purpose, posted with all possible speed to the next Port Town, that was least
suspected; where hyring a ship, with all the Coin and Jewels she had then
about her she sailed into Egypt, and there spent the remainder of her days
with him in his uncomfortable exile. Fulgos. lib. 6. cap. 7. I have but one
more (gentle Reader) to trouble thy patience with at this present.

Blanca Rubea Patauina, Blanca Rubea Patauina.
the wife of Baptista a Porta, betaking her self into the same free
privileged Town, of which Bassianus was then Governor, and whither her
husband for his safety was retired in the year of our Redemption 1253, when
A^^iolinus the Tyrant having lost Padua, and bending all his forces to the
surprisall of Bassi^^^^, compassing that at length by fraud and stratagem,
which by opposition and violence he could never have accomplished; in the
entering of which Town Baptista was slain, and Blanca Rubea being armed, and
fighting boldly by his side till she saw him fall, was (notwithstanding her
masculine valor) taken prisoner by a soldier, and presented to the Tyrant;
who gazing on her rare feature (much more beautified by the rich armor she
then had on) grew exceedingly enamoured on this manly Virago, and first with
fair enticing blandishments he courted her love, but finding no possibility
to satiate his libidinous affections that way, where fair means failed, he
purposed force: which to avoid, and to prevent the dishonor intended her, she
cast her self out from an high Bay-window, two stories from the ground; where
being taken up half dead, with much difficulty she was recovered. No sooner
was she well able to walk, but the Tyrant still prosecuted his beastly and
brutish desires; which she still opposing, with that small strength she had
left, he caused his servants to bind her according to his lustful direction,
and not able to stir hand nor foot, in that horrible manner ravished her. At
length being loosed from those hateful and insufferable bonds, she (with what
patience she could) dissembled her grief, and wrought so far with some that
compassioned her miseries, that she had liberty to visit her dead husband in
his Tomb, into which (with loud shrikes and passionate lamentation) she
entered, still inuoking her husbands name, and with all the force she had,
plucked the great and ponderous Tombe-stone upon her, the weight whereof forced
the breath out of her bosom. And by this means she purchased the honorable
name of a most chaste wife, at which her life still aimed; and a common grave
with her husband, which even in death she most desired: one Stone being the
cover to both their Hearses. Bernard. Scardeonus, Lib. 3. Histor. Pataminae.

Variety of Discourse concerning Women.
APOLLO, or the Sun, is said to have five Daughters, which by their names
appear to be no other than the five Senses: The daughters of Apollo.
The first is called Pasiph^^, or Sight, of (...), i. Omnibus apparens, i.
Visible to all; for the Sight is a Sense that has inspection into all the
rest: for the Eye sees him that calls, or clamours, beholds him that feels,
observes those that taste, and intend such as smell. The Suns second
Daughter, is Medea, or Hearing, of the Greek word (...), i. Nullam visionem.
The third Phaedra, or Odoratus, of (...) Afferens s^auitatem, i. Affoording
sweetness and pleasantness. Dirce is derived of (...), i. Saporis Index, To
judge by taste; or Acre Iudicare, that is, To censure acutely. The Sirens were
the daughters of the flood Achelous, The Sirens.
and the Muse Melpomene, so says Hyginus: others derive them from Calli^pe.
They are by the Greeks called Tractatoriae, as attracting or insinuating into
the ears of man by their several illecebrations, or enticements; by Song, by
Sight, by Custom. They are three in number; the first excels in Voice, the
second in the Harp, the third in the Pype: it was so ordered by the Fates,
that whosoever listened to their music should instantly perish, but when any
one escaped their Incantations, they themselves should live no longer; which
destiny of theirs was made good in Ulysses. For stopping his own ears and
the ears of his sailors, with wax (by the counsel of Mercury) and causing
them all to be tide to the Masts of the ship, when these Syrenes perceived
that they were prevented, they tumbled themselves from the Rocks headlong into
the Seas and were so drowned. The place still bears their name and is called
Syrenides, it lies betwixt Sicilia and Italy. Some think that by these Syrenes
were intended no other than strumpets, who by their enchanting insinuations and
luxurious flatteries, have been the ruin of many eminent and excellent men,
as likewise of others meanlier degreed and quallified; but whatsoever he be
that by his wisdom can prevent them is his own preserver, and their destroyer.
Their bodies upward were feminine, withal fair; and from the navel downward
beastiall, or fishie, denoting unto us the ugliness of sin and deformity of
lust. Diverse differ about their number; These are reckoned unto us, Aglaosi,
Telsipoi, Pisno, Iligi: some think the city Parthinope to take denomination
from Parthenopaea, once numbered amongst these Mermaides, because she was there
buried: Others reckon amongst them the two nymphs Leucosia and Lygia. Plutarch
in Amat^r. speaks of Oenanthe a she minstrell and a dauncer, Oenanthe.
as also Aristonica, Aglais, and others. Aristonica.
These and the like of their alluring profession, to these Sirens may not
unfitly be compared. Aglais.


Some women have to honest purposes changed their garments, Women that have
dessembled their shape.
and dissembled themselves in men's habits; laudable it was in Theodora a Virgin
of Antioch, who when a rude and rough hewed soldier was sent unto her into
prison, Theodora.
forcibly to despoyle her of her virgin chastity, she with her modest looks
and becoming tears mixed with passionat persuasions, not only mollified his
obdurate heart and deterred from his wicked purpose, but won him to change
habits with her, by which fortunate stratageme she escaped out of prison, and
so prevented the threatened slaughter intended her by the tyrant Dioclesian,
Ambros. lib. 2. de Virgin. Euphrosina a maid of Alexandria, Euphrosina.
took upon her a man's habit, and for the space of thirty six years dissembled
her Sex unknown to any, all which time she spent in a religious monastery
only for devotion sake. Volaterran. Dicearchus apud Caelium testates, That
only for the love of learning and to be truly instructed in the grounds of
Phylosophie, Lasthenia, Martinea, Axiothea, and Phliasia came disguised in men's
habits into Platos school and were his daily auditors, into which place women
were not to be admitted. Pelagia a woman of Antioch, Pelagia.
being in her youth solely given over to voluptuousness and pleasure, at
length was so retired from all worldly delights and vanities, that abandoning
humane society, she assumed the shape of a man, least her Sex might be
discovered, and so betaking her self to the sollitude of a most disolate
wilderness, led a contemplative and devout life till she expired her last.
The like I have before related of Marina, who with her habit changed her name
to Marinus, and Eugenia to Eugenius. Here I might fitly introduce Iohanna
Anglicana, but I have reserved a place for her amongst the learned. Not to the
like commendable purpose, we read how Semiramis betrayde her Sex, Semiramis.
and for many years together beguiled the eyes of her people, took upon her
the style of a king, and reigned in the person of her son.

Women that have changed their Sex.
As those before remembered have dissembled their shape, so there be some
recorded in history, that have miraculously changed their Sex. In Phestus a
city of Creet lived one Lictus or Lignus of a noble family, Iphis.
who being married to Telethusa, Telethusa.
a Lady of equal birth, both nobilitated as well in wealth as parentage, he
as an addition to the rest being honorable above others by his place and
office; his wife being great with child and something near her delivery, he
not only besought her at the first but after enjoined her upon her life of two
things, the one was that she should bring him a male child to inherit, the
other that if it proved to be a gyrle, she should instantly bereave it of
life. Hard was the imposition to a mother, and it somewhat penterated the heart
of the father, for he no less wept to speak it than she moystned her cheeks
to hear it; it drew tears from both, yet by reason of a vow solemnly made to
the gods, notwithstanding all her passionate intersessions, he stood obstinate
from being removed, and she altogether in despair because he would be no
further entreated. All her small hope was now in the hasard, as not knowing
what her issue would prove; if a male the joy of her life, if a female her
double death, as not intending to survive her infant. The night before her
delivery she was comforted in her dream, in which a Vision appeared to her,
to cammaund her to save the child howsoever, for the gods would take it into
their protection; this somewhat cheared her throws: A gyrle is borne, the Sex
is concealed betwixt her and her nurce, the father is proud of his young
son, sends to comfort the mother, and performs the ceremonies of the vow
before past, nor does the countenance of the infant any way betray the Sex, for
as Ovid Metamorph. lib. 9. says of it: Cultus erat pueri, facies quam sieve
puellae
Sieve dares pueri sierat formosus vterque.
The habit of a Boy she wore
And it had such a face,
As whether she were Boy or Gyrle,
It either Sex would grace.
Lictus gives it the name of the grandfather, and calls it Iphis, a name that
may belong equally either to man or woman; the mother holds it as a fortuate
Omen. The infant grows to be ripe for marriage, and the father is as ready to
provide a wife for his supposed son: Ianthe is found, Ianthe.
the daughter of Dyctaeus and Thaleste, Thaleste.
a young damsel of large dower and commendable beauty; Iphis and Ianthe were
of equal years and alike in feature, they were bred together, brought up and
schooled together, and as they had like instructions, so they had like
affections, they were paraleld in love but not in hopes, Ianthe expected to be
possessed of Iphis, Iphis was in despair ever to enjoy Ianthe; as her fear
still grows greater, so the marriage day approaches nearer, the fathers joy
and comfort is the mothers dread and grief, the ones exaltation to bliss, the
others deiection to sorrow. The Contract is past, the Nuptial day come; there
are two Brides, and no Bridegroom: notwithstanding, Himen is present, Juno at
hand, Venus not far off, and Lucina (the goddess of Childbirth) in hope of
future employment. The mother retyres to her prayers, the daughter to her
tears: Where humane hope fayles, and Nature opposes (or at least helps
not:) whither should we fly but to the gods, for assistance? So they repair
to the Altar, where they humbly kneel, and as devoutly pray. Prayers are said
to be the daughters of Jupiter, and have at all hours access to the ears of
their father. Their Orisons ended, the mother and daughter returned; if not
helped, yet in their resolutions armed against hurt. In the way back, as Ovid
my master tells me, it thus happened: Matter abit Templo, sequitur Comes Iphis
enutem
Quam solita est maiore gradu, etc.
The mother from the Temple Iphis guides,
She follows her, but yet with larger strides
Than when she thither went; and thinks it strange
To find within her self such sudden change,
Because she feels about her something grow,
The like she never saw, nor yet does know.
The whiteness in her Cheek begins to fade,
She seems more swart; besides, more breadth is laid
Upon her spreading shoulders; she is now
More strong than erst, and in her modest Brow
A Look more manly: her fair Hair, that hung
Below her Waste, still shortens; and her Tongue
Has got a bigger tone: nor marvel, when
Iphis the Maid may now be ranked amongst Men.


What, and how great joy this prodigious change was, I leave to them that can
truly apprehend the happiness of such a hopeless and unexpected fortune
betwixt two Lovers: but whether this was done merely by the miraculous work
of the gods, or were possible in Nature, might be disputed. To this purpose, he
that collected the Memorable Histories of these times, has quoted an Author,
in many things beleeuable, That the like has been known in our later ages:
yea, children have been borne, that by the Midwiues, Nurses, and Parents, have
been mistaken for daughters, and so continued for some years. But growing to
the age of twelve, or thereabouts, and are able to distinguish of good or evil
(being capable of passions, and subject to affections) whether Love or Time
have produced these strange effects, I am not certain: but those manly parts
that were before inuerted, and concealed within the body, have burst sorth,
and been made apparent; insomuch, that they have been forced to change their
women's names into men's, with the exchange of their habits; and after made
choice of wives, and as this Iphis to Ianthe, have been joyfully married. Ovid
in his twelfth book of Metamorphosis remembers the like transhape from the
mouth of Nestor. Caenis (says he) the daughter of Elataeus, Caenis.
one of the most beautiful Virgins of Thessaly, and of such fame, that even
Peleus, the father of Achilles (amongst many others) was an earnest suitor unto
her to have made her his Bride and Queen: but the proud Girl despising both
his proffers and person, gave him a like repulse with the rest, pretending a
perpetual Vow of Chastity. At length Neptune grew enamoured of her, and
encountered her at such opportunity and advantage, that mauger all resistance,
she was by him vitiated and devirgined. To recompense which injury, he bad her
ask whatsoever was in his power (being a god) to grant, and she should be
recompensed to the fulness of her wishes and desires. She fearing least the
temptation of her incomparable beauty might bring her in danger of the like
violence, and to base prostitution (which she above all things hated) to him
she thus answered: Metam. lib. 12.
Magnum (Caenis ait) Facit haec iniuria votam
Tale pati, iam posse nihil, da femina ne sim,
Omnia prestiteris, etc.
My injury does make me ( Caenis said)
To ask a mighty Boon, which grant I pray,
(That I no more in this kind be betrayed)
Make me to be no woman from this day:
It Is all I beg. The last words that she spoke,
Seemed to be vtt'red with more manly sound
Than were the first: Great Neptune for her sake
Had granted it (which in her self she found)
And added more; To recompense this deed,
Never shall that smooth skin by weapon bleed.


After which time she proved invulnerable, changed her name to Caeneus,
practiced Arms, and proved a famous Soldier. She was in that great battle
betwixt the Centaures and the Lapithes, where fell by her hand Stiphilus,
Bromus, Antimachus, Helimus, and Pyrachmon, five valiant Centaures. Now though
this may seem somewhat to favor of fabulous Poetry, may not she (leaving out
the compression of Neptune, or being made wound-free) by the former
probability so late remembered (being borne of a warlike race, and having in
her the inherent seeds of hereditarie valor) though she was first thought a
Damsel, yet when time produced her virilitie, make show of that, imperfect
Nature had not till then ripened, and practice Arms, agreeable with the brave
spirits of her ancestors? And because either her good fortune assisted her, or
her valor so protected her, that she never received any apparent wound in
battle; may she not therefore (and without any palpable absurdity) be
thought invulnerable? And so much to apology (in the way of discourse) for
those supposed impossibilities; only producing these Histories, least any
thing (that savors not of immodestie) that can be spoke of Women, should be
left unremembered.

Explicit Liber Septimus, Inscriptus POLYHIMNIA.
THE EIGHTH BOOK, Inscribed URANIA: Entreating of Women every way Learned; of
Poetresses, and Witches, etc.
POLYHIMNIA remembers me to look up to her Sister URANIA, whose contemplation
is in the Stars and Planets; where (me thinks) I behold the twelve Signs,
as Manilius (in his first book ASTRONOMICON) thus describes their order:
Aurato Princeps Aries in vellere fulgens
Respicit, admirans aduersum surgere Taurum, etc.
The Princely Ram, clad in his golden Wool,
Looks back, admiring to behold the Bull
Against him rise; who with a cheerful face
Calls to the Twins, to bid them mend their pace:
The Crab these follows, and the Lion than;
Next, the Celestial Maid, not known by man:
Libra comes after, who (least Time should fail)
Weighes out the Nights and Days in equal Skale,
And calls the Scorpion on, who in his train
Bears a bright fulgent star, at which (in vain)
The Centaure (with his string drawn to his ear)
Aims his keen shaft: the Goat does next appear,
That Is Capricornus called, who oft-times lowres,
Because to quench his star, Aquarius powers
His Lauer forth: next after him, are placed
Pisces, that of the twelve Signs are the last.


And now whilst mine eyes are yet fixed upon the stars, let it appear no
unprofitable digression, to speak something concerning Astronomy. Atlas for
his skill in that Art, the Poets fabled him to support Heaven on his shoulders;
and Endimion for observing the course of the Moon, was therefore said to be
her friend and lover. The Babylonians are reported to be the first obseruers
of the Stars and Planets, by whom the Grecians being instructed, found out
the two Poles, devised the Dyall, and distinguished the Day and the Night into
four and twenty hours. Zoroastres that flourished in the time that Ninus
reigned in Assiria, was in this Art famous. Palamides the son of Nauplius and
Climene, was the first amongst the Greeks that accommodated the Weeks,
Months, and Years, and proportioned them to the true course of the Sun; he
observed the terrible eclipse of the Sun, and taught it to be a mere natural
cause and not prodigious, as it was then feared. Philostratus in Heroicis.
Thales Milesiu^ one of the seven wisemen of Greece, applyde himself to this
study, and as Calimachus witnesses of him, was the first that disputed upon
Vrsa mayor, as E^demus predicted the Eclips of the Sun to the Ionians, which
happened in the time that Haliattes was king of Lidia, and fought a great and
terrible battle against Aiaxaris king of the Medes, Herodotus in Clio.
Laertius, Lib. 1. Anaximander Milesius the scholar of Thales, first taught that
the Moon shined only by a borrowed Light, and that the Sun equalled in
bigness the compass of the whole frame of the Earth, and was the purest fire;
he made the first Sun-dyall in Lacedemon, and placed it where it might best
give a shadow from the reflection of the Sun; he observed the Aequinoctiall,
and made Spheres and Horoscopes, Laert. lib. 2. Anaxagoras Clazimonius taught,
That the Sun was a fire perpetually burning, greater in the Circumference
than the Island of Peloponessus, he called it a fiery Stone; he predicted
that a stone should fall from the Orb of the Sun, which happened near to
Aegos a flood in Thrace in the second year of the seventy eight Olimpiad. This
made Euripides his scholar in Pha^tontide, to call the Sun a golden Turfe;
and that the Moon contained within her Sphere, Houses, and Dwellings, Hills,
Valleys, Forests, Beasts, and People. He affirmed the Galaxia or Milkie-path
to be a mere reflex of the Sun, and no inter-light arising from the Stars;
Commets he taught to be a concourse of the wandering Stars, and the flames
or beards which proceed from them loose sparks shaken by the Air: Being asked
to what end he was borne into the world, he answered, Only to have inspection
into the Sun, the Moon, and the Planets, Laert. li. 2. Plin. lib. 2. cap.
60. In this were eminent Parmenides Eleates the scholar of Xenophon, Leucippus
Eleates, Democrates Abderites, Xenocrates Chalcidonius, who writ six books de
Astrologia, as Laertius witnesses lib. 4. E^doxus Guidius, Theophrastus
Erisius, Oenopides Chius, Meton Lacedemonius (both remembered by Aelianus)
Protagorus Astrologus, with infinite others: and among these Hyppatia a learned
woman of Alexandria, Hyppatia.
daughter of Theon the famous Geometrition, and wife to the Philosopher
Isiodorus, she writ of Astronomy, kept school in Alexandria, where she was
frequented by many worthy scholars, she flourished in the time of Arcadius
the Emperor, and was after by such as envied her fame in learning pitifully
slain and massacred. From the professors of this Art I come to the effects
thereof. It is related of Meton the expert Astrologian, when the Athenian forces
were to be shipped into Sicily to fight against the Syracusans, he foreseeing
by his Art the lamentable success of that battle, which after proved
accordingly, to avoid the danger thereof, being a man of especial employment
in that business, and to come off without suspision of fear or cowardice, he
counterfeited madness; which the better to confirm, he fi^ed a Summer^house
of his own which stood near Pyceta, by which act he was judged to be
distracted in his senses, and for that reason dismissed from his charge, Plutarch
in Alcebiad. P. Nigidi^s Figalus was of the Pythagorian Sect, excellent both in
the Mathematickes and Physic, of whom Lucian, lib. 1.

At Figulus cui cura deos secretaque mundi
Nosse fuit
But Figulus, whose chief care was to find
And know the gods, with secrets from mankind
Conceald, etc.
He flourished in the time of Caesar, he was skillfull in the reuolutions of
the Heavens above all that lived in his time: amongst other notable effects of
his Art, he predicted to Angustus being an infant, the Imperial Purple.
Xiphilin. in Augusto. Scribonius Mathematic^^ told Lyuia, the mother of
Tiberius Caesar being with child, that she was great with a male infant, not a
female, adding (wherein his Art failed) Verum sine diademate, i. But without a
Diadem, as ignorant then to what height the majesty of the Caesar's were to
ascend, Sabellicus, lib. 1. cap. 1. It is reported of the Astrologian
Thrasillus that when Tiberius was banished by Augustus into the Island of
Rhodes, and in his greatest mellancholly and discontent had been often
comforted by Thrasillus his schoole-maister, as promising him some speedy good
news apprehended from his Art. But on a time they two walking together upon
the banks of the Sea, Tiberius still fretting and chasing inwardly with
himself that he had been so long fooled with vain and idle promises, by the
Mathematician his master, he rated him with bitter and harsh terms, reuiling
his Art, and was ready to have cast him headlong (in this extremity of rage)
from the promontorie: when Thrasillus entreating his patience but a few hours,
espied a ship with full ^ayles making toward the harbor, when suddenly
rejoicing, Be of good comfort Tiberius (says he) for in yon ship is brought
thee what thou most de^irest; which proved accordingly, for they attending
their landing, letters were delivered to Tiberius from Augustus and Lyuia, of
his repeal from exile, and his calling back to Rome; at which time was laid
the foundation of his Empire. Fulgos. lib. 8. cap. 11. Dion in August. reports
it thus, Tiberius walking with Thrasillus, and privately intending to cast him
from the rock, without any appearance of anger, on the sudden he grew
wondrous melancholy and sad, upon which Tiberius demanding the cause,
Thrasillus answered, because I find there is now a present mischief intended
against me; upon which words the purpose of Tiberius was altered, and the
others prescience by him much commended. Even Tiberius himself studious and
expert in Astrology, Astronomy, and other mystical and hidden Arts, insomuch
that he caused many noble gentlemen of Rome to be innocently put to death, for
no other reason than that by calculating upon their nativity, he presupposed
them dangerous to the state; he observed the carriage and conditions of all
men, and whosoever excelled others in virtue, or entered into least popular
love, him he cut off. It is said, that meeting with Galba upon his marriage
day, he cast a steadfast look upon him, and withal uttered these words, Et tu
^liquando Princip^tum degustobis, i. And thou also shall in time attain unto
the Principality. The Emperor Hadrianus was not only industrious in the
attaining to the height of perfection in the knowledge of all other general
learning, but also in the Mathematics, in so much that Marius Maxim. affirms
of him, That he assuredly knew all things that were spoken of, or by him; he
writ down every morning with his own hand the chances and successes that
should follow the same day, and thus he continued to the hour of his death.
He was often heard to say of Verus whom he had adopted, Ostendent terris hunc
tantum fata, nec vltra
Esse sinent, etc.
The fates will to the Earth but show him, then,
Ere fully seen, snatch him away again.
Volaterran. Auturo, lib. 23. says, That he continued the writing down daily
of those predictions, even to the last month of the year in which he dyed,
and then gave over; speaking openly, that within the compass of that month he
should be gathered to his fathers, Fulgos. lib. 8. c. 11. Seuerus Pertinax
having buried his wife Martia, made choice of a second called Iulia, borne of
obscure parents; for no other reason, but that by the inspiration into those
Stars that were predominant at her birth, he found that she was borne to
participate of Imperial honors. Volaterran. lib, 23. An Astrologian in the
court of Frederick the second, Emperor, with great ceremony and diligence
observed Rodulphus Earl of Hausburch (a plain gentleman of mean fortunes and
lesser hopes, and one whom all the other courtiers despised) and still he was
mocked when he had neglected others of great place and office, to be only
obsequious to him: this being to the Emperor, he commanded the Artist before
him, demanding the reason of his so doing; to whom he answered, Because o
Frederick, in this Rodulphus I see a succeeding Emperor, who when thy issue
shall fail must repair the dignity of the Caesar's, and his noble memorable
acts fill all Christendom with condign praises: neither was this presage
frivolous or vainly spoken, for in the year of our redemption 1273, in the
Kalends of October, this Rodulphus was by the Princes of Germany confirmed in
the Imperial dignity, and crowned at Frankefort: Caspinianus in Caesaribus.
Marullus speaks of one Byli^tus an Astronomer, who died with eating of
Mushroms, or such as we call Toadstooles, his words be these: Dum canet
Astrologus prituris sidera amicis
Dum sibi Boletos non canet ipse perit.
Whilst to foresee his friends mishaps,
His skill the Artist tryde:
His own sad fate he could not find,
But eating Mushroms, did.


Rare effects of this Art were showed in Guido Boiatus foro liuiensis, who
lived under Martin the fourth, who sent to Guido Earl of Mountferrat, that if
such a day and at such an hour he would issue out of the city, and by
stratagem invade his enemies, posterity should remember him in that honorable
victory, in which he should give them a strange defeat and assuredly
overcome, and himself receive a dangerous wound in the thygh. The Earl at the
day appointed issued from the city, and assaulted them, providing himself of
all things necessary about him for a wound. He winnes the day, followed the
victory, was hurt in the same place, and after healed. F^lgos. Lib. 8. cap.
11. Egnat. Lib. 8. cap. 11. Paulus tertius Pope (Farnesius) was miraculously
skillful in Astrology: He sent to his son Peter Aloysius (who at that time
with great cruelty usurped in the Dukedom of Parma and Placentia) and warned
him to beware and take heed of his own safety the tenth day of September, in
the year of Grace 1547. for that day was malignant to his life, and opposite
to his good above all others. The father (as my Author says) had power to
fore-warne his son, but the soon had not grace to prevent the danger; for
the same day predicted, he was slain in his own Castle by Augustinus Landus
and Iacobus Scotus, two Earls of Placentia, who pretended private conference
with him. Being dead, he was delivered up to the long afflicted people; who
first hanged him up by the privy parts, and after (without all humane pity)
tore him limb from limb, to satisfy their malicious vengeance. Sleidanus,
Lib. 19. Comment. I fear I have stayed too long amongst the Stars, and
conferred so much amongst those Men, that some may fear I have forgot the
Women: but it is otherwise, for I now proceed with them. And first,

Of Women Orators, that have pleaded their own Causes, or others.
STrange and admirable is the efficacy and force of Eloquence. It is writ of
the Poet Ty^aeaus, That when the Lacedaemonians had been in three sundry
battles defeated, and were in despair for ever reobtaining their pristine
honors and dignities; in this lowest of their deiectednesse, he with his
excellently eloquent Verses so kindled and awaked their dull and drowsy
courages, that they the fourth time opposed the Massenians, their enemies; and
wearing about them the names of their noble ancestors (whose brave exploits he
in his Poemes had celebrated) they reassumed their former forces and courages,
with such an addition and increase of fortitude, that they after grew
irresistable. Answerable to the facunditie and eloquence of the Poet Tyrtaeus,
was that of Amesia, Amesia.
a modest Roman Lady, who being of a great crime accused, and ready to
incur the sentence of the Praetor, she in a great confluence stepped up
amongst the people, and without any Advocate pleaded her own Cause so
effectually and strongly, that by the public Suffrage she was freed and
acquit from all aspersions whatsoever: Which she did with such a manly yet
modest constancy, that from that time forward she was called Androgine.
Valor. Maxim. Lib. 8. cap. 3. Equal to her was Hortensia, Hortensia.
the daughter of Q. Hortensius: she, when the Roman Matrons had a grievous
fine imposed upon them by the Tribunes, and when all the Lawyers and Orators
were afraid to ^a^e upon them the patronage of their Cause; this discreet Lady
in person pleaded before the Triumuirate, in the behalf of the women; which
she did boldly and happily, for as one hereditarie to her fathers eloquence,
she prevailed so far that the greatest part of the mulct imposed upon them
was instantly remitted. Differing from their Modesties, was that of Caia
Affrania, Caia Affrania.
the wife of Lycinius Bructio, a woman prompt and apt for all contention and
discord, and in all troubles and controversies still pleaded her own Cases
before the Praetor: Not that she wanted the help of an Aduocat, but rather to
express her own impudence; whose common railing and loquacitie before the
Bench, grew to that scandal that it almost stretched to the injury of the
whole Sex: insomuch, that if any woman were justly taxed with boldness or
irregularitie, she (in the way of a Proverb) was branded with the name of
Affrania. Her spleen extended even to Caius Caesar Tertius; as likewise to M.
Seruilius the Consul. My Author leaves her with this Character, That it is
much better to enquire when such a Monster dyed, than curiously to be
inquisitiue when or of whom she was borne. Val. Max. Lib. 8. cap. 3.

From Orators I come to Sophists, and from Declamers to Disputants. It is
reported of Caecilia, Caecilia.
the chaste Roman Virgin (being married against her will to a noble gentleman,
called Valerianus) when they were left together in the Bride-chamber, she with
her strong reasons and prompt arguments discoursed and disputed with him in the
patronage and defense of her Virginity, proving unto him from the Scriptures,
how justly vowed Chastity is more acceptable in the eyes of the great Maker,
than Marriage: insomuch, that notwithstanding his heat of youth, meeting with a
tempting and provoking beauty, the conuenience of opportunity, time, and
place (with the lawfulness of the act, established by the Ceremonies of the
Church) yet he (at her intercession) not only abstained from that time to
offer her any force or violence, but ever after both betwixt themselves vowing
lasting Virginity. She, likewise when Tiburtius (the brother to Valerianus)
contended with her in disputation, refuted the Opinions then generally held,
concerning the idolatrous worship of the false Pagan gods^ so that having
convinced him with undeniable Propositions, he turned a zealous Conuerti^e to
the true Christian Faith. Catherina Alexandria, Catherina Alex.
under the Tyranny of Maxentius, argued with all the best and cunningest
Sophists of those days, stoutly and constantly maintaining the Faith of the
Gospel, and sillogistically refuting all their schismatic Opinions, causing
many of them to deliver up their names to the sincere profession of
Christianity. In her appeared how the wisdom of the world gave place and
submitted to the Divine knowledge; insomuch, that notwithstanding all the
Sillogisticall cunning, and Sophistical Dilemmaes (in which they were
elaborately practiced) they were forced to yield and submit to the authority
of a plain Virgins tongue, her wit and reason being illuminated with Divine
knowledge from above. Marull. Lib. 5. cap. 6. Guido Bit. in his Catalogue of
Philosophers, reports Diodorus Socraticus to have had five daughters, all
Disputants, and skillful in Logic. Hypparchia, Hypparchia.
the sister of Megocles and wife to Crates Cynicus, she with one Sophisme put
to silence Theodorus (surnamed (...)) Quod faci^n^ Theodorus non diceretur
unjust facere, idem si faciat Hypparchia non diceretur unjust facere, i. That
which Theodorus doing, he is not said to do unjustly; If Hypparchia do the
same, she is not said to do unjustly. To which when he granted, she added
this: But Theodorus beating himself, is not said to do unjustly; Ergo, If
Hipparchia beat Theodorus, she cannot do unjustly. To this Theodorus made no
answer, but in snatching up his Cloak, and leaving the place, he taunted her
in a Greek lambicke Verse, which was to this purpose, Why she being a woman,
would trouble her self with such Disciplines as are solely appertaining unto
men? thus saying, Radios apud Telas reliqui femina. To whom she replied;
Think thou I have been ill counseled, if that time which I might have past
upon the Loome, or Distasse, I have spent in the attaining of the liberal Arts
and Disciplines? Of Debora of the Tribe of Ephraim, her wisdom, and her
Prophe^ies (in which she excelled) the holy Scriptures gives ample testimony;
as likewise of Mary the sister of Moses, Anna the Prophetess, and others. I
procced to such as have been studied and practiced as well in Theology, as
Philosophy.

Of Women studious in Divinity.
TAbiola a Roman matron was very laborious in the reading and understanding of
the sacred Scriptures, Tabiola.
she was frequent in the old Prophets, the Gospells, and the Psalms of David,
which she had almost ad vnguem and by roat, her continual reading practiced
her in a more perfect knowledge; she was of that reverent respect amongst the
learned, that Saint Jerome vouchsafed to dedicate a book unto her, entitled
de Vesta Sacer dotali. Marcella.
Marcella Romana for her industry in the Scriptures, in which she was
zealously traveled; was in many of Saint Ieromes Epistles saluted by name: He
writ a book to her De mundi Contemplu, i. Of the contempt of the world;
another of the ten names by which God is called amongst the Hebrews; a third,
of our Faith, and the doctrine of the Heretics; a fourth, of Blasphemy
against the holy Ghost; a fifth, of the study of Theophilus bishop of
Alexandria, with diverse others. The same Saint Jerome witnesses of Eustochium
the daughter of one Paula a Roman matron, Eustochium
who was excellently practiced in the Greek and Latin Dialects, as also in the
Hebrew Charracter, in so much that she in her time was called, The new
Prodigy of the World: she gave her study chiefly to meditation upon the
Scriptures, in so much that she read the Psalms of David familiarlie, and
without the least hesitation. Anastatia.
Anastatia the scholar to Crisog^nus the Martyr, and wife of Publius Romanus
(who faining a counterfeit disease, sequestered himself from her and quite
abandoned her bed) she writ certain Epistles to her Master and Tutor
Crisogonus, in which she complained that all her means and substance was
consumed and wasted by her impious and sacrilegious husband, who most
unnaturally detained her in prison. This devout woman for the Faith and
ministering to the Saints, was arraigned and condemned to the fire, where she
publicly suffered a most glorious Martyrdom: of her Volateran. makes mention.
Giliberta Anglica.
Giliberta Anglica was borne in Maguns or Men's in Germany, where she was
beloved of a young scholar, for whose sake, and least their private and mutual
affection should at length come to the ears of her parents, all virginal
modesty and womanish fear set aside, she put her self into a young man's
habit, fled from her fathers house, and with her dear friend and paramour came
into England, where as well as to his observance and love, she gave her self
to the practice of the Arts, and to attain to the perfection of Learning. At
length the young man dying (finding her self entered into some knowledge, and
desirous to be further instructed, as one having a wondrous prompt and acute
brain) she still continued her habit, and withal her laborious study, as
well in the Scriptures as other humane Learnings. At length coming to Rome,
she read publicly in the Schools, where she purchased her self a great
and frequent Auditorie: And besides her singular wisdom, she was much
admired and beloved for her seeming sanctity and austeritie of life, and after
the death of Leo the fifth elected and confirmed in the Papal Dignity, for
thus writes Volaterran, Sigebertus, Platina, and others that have writ the
Lives of the Roman Bishops: she is remembered likewise to this purpose by
Boccatius in his book de Claris Mulieribus. But Sabellicus, Lib. 1. Aeneadis,
calls her Ioanna Anglica, i. Ioane English, who in her minority dissembled her
Sex; and so habited, travailed as far as Athens, and there studied with
infinite gain and profit: insomuch, that coming to Rome, few or none could
equal her in Disputation, or Lectures; which begot her such reverence and
authority with all men, that she was by a general Suffrage elected into the
Papacy, and succeeded Leo the fourth. Rauisius in Officina, tit. 6. Others
will not allow, that ever any such woman was Pope, and excuse it thus: There
was one Bishop of Rome, who was a decrepit and weak old man: He (by reason of
age) not being well able to manage his temporal affairs, and domesticke
business, received into his Palace as a guide and gouernesse, a woman called
Ioanna, his sister or near kinswoman: this woman took upon her great pride
and state, and usurped upon the infirmity of her brother: insomuch, that
having the command of all things, and being auaricious by nature, no business
was dispatched but by her, nor any thing concluded without her, for which she
was both hated and scorned; and therefore upon her that usurped the authority
of the Pope, they likewise bestowed his style, and nicknamed her Pope Ioane.
This I have not read, but I have heard some report it. From her I come to
Rosuida, Rosuida.
borne in Germany, and by Nation a Saxon: she lived under Lotharius the
first, and was of a religious place called Gandresenses, in the Diocese of
Hildesemensis; she was facundious in the Greek and Roman Tongues, and
practiced in all good Arts: she composed many Works, not without great
commendation from the Readers, one especially to her fellow Nuns and
Votaresses, exhorting them to Chastity, Virtue, and Divine worship. She
published six Comedies, besides a noble Poem in Hexameter Verse, of the Books
and Heroicke Acts done by the Otho Caesar's. She writ the Lives of holy women,
but chiefly a Divine Work of the pious and chaste life of the blessed Virgin
in Elegeicke Verse, which began thus, Vnica spes Mundiem. Cranzius, Lib. 6.
cap. 20. Metrapoleos. Fulgos. Lib. 8. cap. 3. Elizabetha, Elizabetha Abatista.
Abbess of Schonaugia, zealously imitated the practice and studies of this
Rosuida, which she professed in the city of Triers. She writ many things in
the Latin Tongue, of which she was divinely admonished and inspired from
above, besides many persuasiue Epistles to her Covent of Sisters, and others,
full of great conceit and elegancie: A Book also, that was entitled, A path
to direct us the way to God; besides, a Volume of many learned Epistles, full
of great judgment and knowledge. Fulgos. Lib. 8. cap. 3. and Egnat. ibidem.
Constantia, Constantia.
the wife of Alexander Sforza, is deservedly inserted in the Catalogue of
women, famous and excellent in Learning: She from her childhood was so
laborious in the best Disciplines, that upon the sudden, and without any
premeditation, she was able sufficiently to discourse upon any argument, either
Theological or Philosophical; besides, she was frequent in the Works of S.
Hierome, S. Ambrose, Gregory, Cicero, and Lactantius. For her extemporall
vain in Verse, she was much admired; in which she was so elegantly
ingenious, that she attracted the cares of many judicious scholars to be her
daily Auditors. And this facility is reported to be innate and borne with her,
as proceeding with such smoothness, and without the least force or
affectation. Baptista.
Her daughter Baptista succeeded her both in fame and merit, being accepted
and approved for one equally qualified with her mother Constantia: Therefore
Politianus in N^tricia doubts not to rank her amongst the best learned and
most illustrious women. Baptista Prima, Baptista Prima.
the daughter of Galeatinus Malatesta, Prince of Pisauria, and after the wife
of Guido Montefelcrensis, Earl of Vrbin, made many commendable proofs of her
wit and learning; for she held many disputations even with those that were
best practiced and grounded in the Arts, from whence she came off with no
common applause. She writ a Volume in Latin, which she titled, The Frailetie
of man's Life; with other prayse-worthie books, De vera Religione, i. Of true
Religion. Fulgos. Lib. 8. cap. 3. Isota Nauarula.
Isota Nauarula Veronensis devoted her life wholly to the study of all humane
knowledge, and withal, to the contemplation of Divine Mysteries, to which she
added the honor of perpetual Chastity. She writ many eloquent Epistles to
Pope Nicolaus Quintus, as also to Pius the second, being sufficiently seen as
well in Theology as Philosophy. Amongst other Works, she composed a
Dialogue, in which it was disputed which of the two of our Parents Adam and
Eve, sinned first, or more offended in the beginning Egnat. and Fulgos. Lib. 8.
cap. 3. Alpiades a Virgin (who much desired to be instructed in the true Faith)
was inspired from above with a miraculous knowledge in the Scriptures. Rauis.
in Offic.

Of Women excellent in Philosophy, and other Learning.
FRom Theology I descend to Philosophy. Nicaula.
Nicaula Queen of Saba traveled from the farthest part of Aethiopia up to
Jerusalem, to prove the wisdom of Solomon in dark Problemes and hard
Questions: which when he had resolved, and satisfied her by his divine
wisdom, inspired into him from above, she returned into her country richer
by her gifts, more benefited by her knowledge, and fruitful, as bearing with
her in her womb a child begot by Solomon. Lycasth. in Theat. Human. vitae,
Lib. 1. cap. de Femin. doctis. Adesia, Adesia.
a woman of Alexandria (a near kinswoman to the Philosopher Syrianus) both for
her Chastity and Learning is commemorated by Suidas, Vata. Lib. 13. cap. 3.
Antrop. Nicostrata Nicostrata.
(by some called Carmentis) helped to make up the number of the Greek
Alphabet: she is also said to have added to our Roman Letters. Hermodica was
the wife of Midas, Hermodica.
king of Phrygia: she is not only celebrated for her rare feature and
beauty, but for her wisdom: she was the first that ever stamped Money, or
made Coin amongst the Cimenses. Heraclides. Numa was the first that made Money
amongst the Romans, of whose name it was called Nummus. Isiodor. Lib. 16. cap.
17. It is likewise called Pecunia, of Pecus, which signifies Cattle: for the
first that was made to pass current betwixt man and man, was made of the
skins of beasts stamped with an impression. It has been current amongst our
English Nation; part of it may at this day be seen (as an ancient Monument) in
the Castle of Dover. Saturn made Money of Brass, with inscriptions thereon;
but Numa was the first that coined Silver, and caused his name to be engraven
thereon, for which it still retains the name in the Roman Tongue, and is
called Nummus. Aspasia
Aspasia was a Milesian Damsel, and the beloved of Pericles: she was
abundantly skilled in all Philosophical studies; she was likewise a fluent
Rhetorician. Plutarchus in Pericles. Socrates imitated her in his Facultas
Politica, as likewise Diotima, Diotima.
whom he blushed not to call his Tutresse and Instructresse. Of Lasthenea,
Mantinea, Axiothaea, and Phliasia ( Platoes scholars in Philosophy) I have
before given a short Character. Themiste was the wife of Leonteius Lampsacenus,
Themiste.
and with her husband was the frequent Auditor of Epicurus: of whom Lactantius
says, That save her, none of the ancient Philosophers ever instructed any
woman in that study, Arete.
save that one Themiste. Arete was the wife of Aristippus the Philosopher, and
attained to that perfection of knowledge, that she instructed her son in all
the liberal Arts, by whose industry he grew to be a famous professor. He
was called Aristippus, and she surnamed Cyrenaica. Cyrenaica.
She followed the opinions of that Aristippus, who was father to Socrates.
She (after the death of her father) erected a School of Philosophy, where
she commonly read to a full and frequent Auditorie. Genebria was a woman of
Verona, Genebria.
she lived in the time of Pius the second, Bishop of Rome: Her Works
purchased for her a name immortal. She composed many smooth and eloquent
Epistles, polished both with high conceits and judgment: she pronounced with
a sharp and loud voice, a becoming gesture, and a facundious suauitie.
Agallis.
Agallis Corcyrua was illustrious in the Art of Grammar, Caelius ascribes unto
her the first invention of the play at Ball. Leontium was a Grecian Damsel,
Leontium.
whom Gallius calls a strumpet, she was so well seen in Philosophical
contemplations, that she feared not to write a worthy book against the much
worthy Theophrastus. Plin. in Prolog. Not. Histor. Cicero, lib. de Nature.
Deorum, D^m^, Dama.
the daughter of Pythag^ras, imitated the steps of her father, as likewise his
wife; The^no her husband, Theano.
the mother and the daughter both proving excellent scholars. Laer^.
Themistoclea, Themistoclea
the sister of Pythagoras, was so practiced a student, that in many of his
works (as he himself confesses) he has implored her advise and judgment.
Istrina Queen of Scythia, Istrina.
and wife to king Ari^ithes, instructed her son Sythes in the Greek Tongue,
as witnesses Herodotus. Plutarch in Pericte says, That Thargelia was a woman
whom Philosophy solely illustrated: Thargelia.
as likewise Hyparchia Greca, La^r^^ Cornelia was the wife of Africanus,
Cornelia.
and mother to the noble Family of the Gracobi, who left behind her certain
Epistles most elaborately learned. From her as from a Fountain, flowed the
innate eloquence of her children, therefore Quintil* thus says of her: We are
much bound to the Mother or Matron Cornelia* for the eloquence of the Gracchi
whose unparalleled learning in her exquisite Epistles she has bequeathed to
posterity. The same Author speaking of the daughters of Laelius and Quint.
Hortensius uses these words, The daughters of Laelius is said in her phrase to
have refined and excelled the eloquence of her father; but the daughter of Q.
Hortensius to have exce^ded her Sex in honor. So likewise the facundity of the
two Lyciniaes flowed hereditarily from their father, L. Crassus, as the two
daughters of Mutia inherited the learning of either parent. Fuluia.
Fuluia the wife of M. Antonius was not instructed in womanish cares and
offices, but as Volater. lib. 16. Antrop. reports of her, rather to direct
Magistracies and govern Empires: she was first the wife of Curio. Statius
Papinius was happy in a wife called Claudia, Claudia.
excellent in all manner of learning. Amalasuntha.
Amalasuntha Queen of the Ostrogothes, the daughter of Theodoricus king of
those Ostrogothes in Italy, was elaborately practiced in the Greek and Latin
Tongues, she spoke distinctly all the barbarous Languages that were used in
the Eastern Empires. Fulgosius, lib. 8. cap. 7. Zenobia Zenobia.
(as Volaterran. speaks from Pollio) was Queen of the Palmirians, who after
the death of Odenatus governed the kingdom of Syria under the Roman Empire:
she was nominated amongst the thirty Tyrants, and usurped in the time of
Gallenus; but after being vanquished in battle by the Emperor Aurelianus,
was led in triumph through Rome, but by the clemency of that Prince, she was
granted a free palace situate by the river of Tyber, where she moderately
and temperatly demeaned her self: she is reported to be of that chastity,
that she never entertained her husband in the familiar society of bed, but for
issues sake and procreation of children, but not from the time that she found
her conception, till her delivery: she used to be adored after the
maiesticke state and reverence done to the great Sophies of Persia. Being
called to the hearing of any public Oration, she still appeared with her
head armed and her helmet on, in a purple mantle buckled upon her with rich
jems: she was of a clear and shrill voice, magnanimous and haughty in all her
undertakings, most expert in the Egyptian and Greek Tongues, and not without
merit numbered amongst the most learned and wisest Queens. Besides diverse
other works, she composed the Oriental and Alexandrian History. Hermolaus
and Timolus her two sons in all manner of disciplines she liberally
instructed, of whose deaths it is not certain, whether they dyed by the course
of nature, or by the violent hand of the Emperor. Olimpia Fuluia Morata was
the ornament and glory of our latter times, Olimpia Fulu. Morata.
the daughter of Fulu. Moratus Mantuanus, who was tutor in the Arts to Anna,
Prince of Ferrara, she was the wife of Andreas Gunthlerus, a famous Physician
in Germany; she writ many learned and elaborate works in either tongue; at
length in the year of our Lord 1555 in the month of October, being of the age
of twenty nine years she dyed in Hedelburgh. Saint H^lena may amongst these
be here aptly registered, S. Helena.
for thus Stow, Harding, Fa^ian, and all our modern Chroniclers report of her:
Constantius a great Roman Consul, was sent into Britain to demand the
tribute due unto Rome; immediately after whose ariuall, before he could receive
an answer of his Embassy, Coill who was then king dyed, therefore the
Britains the better to establish their peace, dealt with the Roman Ambassador
to take to wi^e Helen^, the daughter of the late deceased king, a young Lady
of an attractiue (...), adorned with rare gifts and indowments of the Mind,
(...), Learning and Vert^^; the motion was no sooner made but accepted, so that
Constantius having received the British tribute returned with his new bryde to
Rome, and was after by the Senate constituted chief ruler of this kingdom.
After twenty years quiet and peaceful government (which was thought her
wisdom) Constantius dyed and was buried at York: in his time was Saint Albon
martyred at Verolam, since called Saint Albones, as John Lidgate Monk of Bury
testifies, who in English heroical verse compiled his History: Constantius
(says he) the younger succeeded his father Constantius, as well in the
kingdom of England as diverse other Provinces, a noble and valiant Prince,
whose mother was a woman religious and of great sanctimonie; this young Prince
was borne in Britain and proved so mighty in exploits of war, that in
time he purchased the name of Magnus, and was styled Constantine the Great, a
noble protector and defender of the true Christian Faith. In the sixth year of
his reign he came with a potent army against Maxentius, who with greeous
tributes and exactions then vexed and oppressed the Romans: and being upon his
march, he saw in a Vision by night, the sign of the Cross shining in the
Air like fire, and an Angel by it, thus saying, Constantine in hoc signo
vinces, i. Constantine in this sign thou shall conquer and overcome; with
which being greatly comforted, be soon after invaded and defeated the army
of Maxentius, who flying from the battle was wretchedly drowned in the river
Tiber. In this interim of his glorious victory Helena the mother of
Constantine being on pilgrimage at Jerusalem, there found the Cross on which
the Savior of the world was crucified, with the three nails with which his
hands and feet were pierced. Ranulphus amplifies this story of Helena,
somewhat largelier after this manner, That when Constantine had surprised
Maxentius, his mother was then in Britain, and hearing of the success of so
brave a conquest, she sent him a letter, with great thanks to heaven, to
congratulate so fair and wished a Fortune; but not yet being truly instructed
in the Christian Faith, she commended him that he had forsaken idolatry, but
blamed him that he worshipped and believed in a man that had been nailed to
the Cross. The Emperor wrote again to his mother, That she should instantly
repair to Rome, and bring with her the most learned Jews and wisest Doctors,
of what faith or belief so ever, to hold disputation in their presence
concerning the Truth of religion. Helena brought with her to the number of
seuenscore Jews and others, against whom Saint Siluester was only opposed. In
this controversy the misbeleeuers were all nonplust and put to silence. It
happened that a Jewish Cabalist among them spoke certain words in the ear of a
mad wild Bull that was broke loose and run into the presence where they were
then assembled; those words were no sooner uttered but the beast sunck down
without motion and instantly dyed, at which accident the judges that sat to
hear the disputation, were all astonished, as wondering by what power that was
done. To whom Siluester then spoke, What this man has done is only by the
power of the devil, who can kill but not restore unto life, but it is God
only that can slay and make the same body revive again; so Lions and other
wild beasts of the Forest can wound and destroy, but not make whole what is
before by them perished: then (says he) if he will that I believe with him,
let him raise that beast to life in Gods name, which he has destroyed in the
Devils name. But the Jewish Doctor attempted it in vain, when the rest turning
to Siluester, said, If thou by any power in Heaven or Earth can call back
again the life of this beast which is now banished from his body, we will
believe with thee in that Deity, by whose power so great a miracle can be
done. Siluester accepted of their offer, and falling devoutly on his knees,
made his prayers unto the Savior of the world, when presently the beast
started up upon his feet; by which Constantius was confirmed, Helena
converted, and all the Jews and other Pagan Doctors received the Christian
Faith, and were after baptized: and after this, and upon the same occasion,
Helena undertook to seek and find out the Cross. Ambrose and others say she
was an Inne-keepers daughter at Treuerent in France, and that the first
Constantius travailing that way, married her for her beauty; but our Histories
of Britain affirm her to be the fair, chaste, and wise daughter of king
Coil, before remembered. The perfections of the mind are much above the
transitory gifts of Fortune, much commendable in women, and a Dowry far
transcending the riches of Gold and Jewels. Great Alexander refused the
beautiful daughter of Darius, who would have brought with her kingdoms for
her Dower, and infinite Treasures to boot, and made choice of Barsine, Barsine.
who brought nothing to espouse her with, save her feature, and that she was a
Scholar; and though a Barbarian, excellently perfect in the Greek Tongue, who
though poor, notwithstanding derived her pedigree from kings: And upon that
ground, Licurgus instituted a Law, That women should have no Dowers allotted
them, that men might rather acquire after their Virtues than their Riches, and
women likewise might the more laboriously employ themselves in the attaining to
the height of the best and noblest Disciplines. It is an argument that cannot
be too much amplified, to encourage Virtue and discourage Vice, to persuade
both men and women to instruct their Minds more carefully than they would
adorn their Bodies, and strive to heap and accumulate the riches of the
Soul, rather than hunt after Pomp, Vainglory, and the wretched Wealth of
the world; the first being everlastingly permament, the last, daily and hourly
subject to corruption and mutabilitie. Horace in his first Epistle to Mecaenas
says: Vitius Argentum est Auro, virtutibus Aurum.
Silver is more base and cheap than Gold, and Gold than Virtue.


To encourage which in either Sex, Plautus in Amphit. thus says: Virtus
praemium est optimum, virtus omnibus
Rebus anteit profecto, etc.
Virtue's the best reward, and before all
Justly to be preferred. That which we call
Liberty, Life, our Parents, Children Wealth,
Our Country, Reputation, Honor, Health,
By this are kept (though by the bad despised)
,,All that is good, in Virtue is comprised.


Moreover, all that are Noble, Virtuous, Learned, Chaste, and Pious, have their
places allotted them above; when on the contrary, their souls are buried
lower in the local place of torment, than their souls that are hayd to sleep
in the grave. At the blessedness of the good, and future glory assigned unto
them, Lucan most elegantly aimed at, Lib. 9. de Bello Civilly, where he thus
writes: Ac non in Pharia manes iacuere fauilla,
Nec cinis exiguus tantam compescuit vmbram, etc.


Which I thus English: In the Pharian flames, the bright Soul does not sleep,
Nor can so small a Dust and Ashes keep
So great a Spirit: it leapes out of the fire,
And leaving th'halfe-burnt members, does aspire
And aims up to the place where Jove resides,
And with his power and wisdom all things guides.
For now no air his subtle passage bars,
To where the Axle-tree turns round the stars,
And in that vast and empty place which lies
Betwixt us and the Moon (the visible Skies)
The halfe-godded Souls inhabit: such are named
There, whom bright fiery Virtue has inflamed,
And were of pious life: their hopes are fair,
Made Citizens and Freemen of the Air,
And such redeemed from all that was infected,
Are now within the eternal Orbs collected.


This somewhat more illustrated by the Tragic Poet Seneca in Hercule Oeteo,
thus saying: Nunquam Stigias fertur ad vndas
Inclita Virtus, etc.
To the dark and Stigian shades,
Virtue (when it seeming fades)
Is never borne. Then, O you chaste
And valiant, though your years may wast,
No limit (Time) to that can give,
It Death suruiues; then ever live.
The cruel Fates can claim no due,
Nor the black Stigian waves in you:
But when wasted Age has spent
The utmost minute Time has lent,
Then Glory takes in charge the Spirit,
And guides it to the place of Merit.


Let these serve for an encouragement to Virtue, and the attayning unto all
commendable Arts and Disciplines, by which the Body is honored, and the Soul
glorified. And thus I take leave of the Female Students in Theology and
Philosophy, and now consequently come to the Poetesses: may the Muses be
favorable to me in their relation.

Of Poetry.
Horace says, Et prodesse solent and delectare Poetae, In Poets there is both
pleasure and profit, who are for the most part (I mean the best) studious for
the pleasingest phrase and most moving eloquence. From hence it grew that
those of the first age, first introduced common civility, and humane morality
amongst men, reducing them from irregular and brutish conditions, into a
mutual and well governed society: for by pleasant and delightful language
refined from the vulgar Barbarism, they first drew the ears of the ruder
people to attention, from attention to instruction, and by instruction to
practice; so that in process of time, by their smooth and gentle persuasions,
illustrated with facunditie and eloquence, they brought them from
voluptuousness to temperance, from the fields into houses, from living in
villages to build walled cities, and by degrees from edifying of houses for
themselves, to erect Temples to the gods; by whose adoration it impressed a
reverent fear to offend them: and so consequently reduced them from rudeness
to a more formal regularitie. They were the first that taught them shame, and
fear; shame, to seem brutish to humanity; fear, to appear inhumane before
a deity. They moderated the ferocitie of their minds, by smooth orations,
profitable documents, and learned writings; and the more to insinuate into
their dull understanding, when prose seemed unto them less delightful, they
devised verse, and still as one kind grew stale or common they apprehended new;
and thus that eloquence that before lay loose and skattered, was first
contracted within feet and number. Then when the vulgar seemed less capable of
deep Sophismes tending to morality and civil government, and therefore their
grauer doctrines appeared to their ears harsh and unpleasant, they dealt with
them as careful fathers use to do with their untoward children; when things
profitable will not still them, they seek to please them with toys; so the
Poets, when wholesome food would not taste their mouths, they devised sweet
meats to realish their pallats, finding out merry and delightful tales, best
agreeable with their itching ears: comprehending notwithstanding, golden
truths in leaden fables. They after instituted good and wholesome laws, to
encourage the good, and deiect the bad, to raise the virtuous and well disposed
to honor, and to punish the evil doer either with penance or shame: then came
the industrious man to be first distinguished from the sloathfull, and the
thriftie from the prodigal: things were no more made common, every man eat
of his own labor, and what he earned he might call his own: Hence first grew
Industry, without which no commonweal nor public state can stand. And these
and much greater were the first fruits of Poetry, now in this age so much
despised; the use whereof was ancient, the apprehension divine, the practice
commendable, and the name reverent. There is a sympathy and correspondence
betwixt Poetry and Rhetoric: Appollo is god of the first, and Mercury the
Mecenas of the second; which the ancient writers the better to signify unto
us, say, That Apollo acquainted Mercury with the Muses, and Mercury in
requital first invented the Harp and gave it to Apollo, being the instrument
to which the Muses most delighted to sing; as if they more plainly would have
said, A Poet cannot be excellent unless he be a good Rhetorician, nor any
Rhetorician attain to the height of eloquence, unless he has first laid his
foundation in Poetry. They are two excellencies, that cannot well exist one
without the other: Poetry is the elder brother, and more plain in his
condition; Rhetoric the younger, but more crafty in his profession: hence it
comes Poets are so poor, and Lawyers so rich; for they have made a younger
brother of the elder, and possess all the land. Besides, as much as Apollo is
excellent above Mercury, as being God of Light, of Music, of Physic, of
Arts, etc. and the other God of Bargaining, Buying, Selling, of Cousening,
Theeuing, and of Lies; so far does the first claim due prioritie above the
second. They may be thus distinguished: Poets in that which outwardly appears
fabulous, color and shadow golden truths, to their own painful studies and
labor, and to the pleasure and profit of others: But many Orators, under
seeming truths, apparel scandalous fictions, aimed only to their own
benefit, to the impouerishing of others, and many times stripping them out of a
fair inheritance: I speak of some, not all; and I honor the Law, because I
live under it. Poets, they were the first teachers and instructers; the people
held them to be inspired from above, and to speak as from the mouths of the
gods: some were Holy, as Ennius; some Divine, as Homer; others Prophets, as
having the name of Vates conferred upon them: and amongst these, may be
numbered the Sybills, the Priests of Apollo, and such as belonged to all the
other Oracles. Of the Poets there were many sorts, and such as writ in diverse
kinds, yet all these imitated at least (if not equalled) by women. There were
such as were called Physiologi, that Poetised in Physic, as Palephatus
Atheniensis, Pronopides, Xenophanes, Coliph^nius, and others; there were Poetae
Mathematici, that writ of the Mathematickes, as Ma. Manilius, Thales Milesius,
Aratus, Solensis, etc. Poetae Medici, as Thaletas Cretenses, Damocrates,
Seruilius, Andromachus Cretensis, etc. Poetae Vates, or Prophets, as Moses,
David, Hieremias, Isaiah, etc. Poetae Theologi, as Solomon, Dantes, Alegerius
Florentinus; and amongst the Heathens, Linus Chalcedensis, Pyerius, Thamyras,
Amphion, Orpheus, etc. There are besides Ethici, Impudici, Historici,
Mechanici, Epici, Heroici, Eliogeographaei, Satyrici, Epigrammatographi,
Comici, Tragici, Mimographi, Histrionici, Melopaei, Lyrici, Mel^fi, Iambici,
Himnographi: and amongst these, not any whom some ingenious women, in one age
or other, has not facetiously imitated. I am loath to dwell too long in the
Proeme, I will now give you their names, with a particular of their works, who
have been in many or most of these eminent.

Poetriae, or Women Poets.
Of the Sybills, the Muses, Priests, and Prophetesses (included amongst those
whom we called Vates) I have already spoken at large; I now proceed to
others. Theanae tres
Theano Locrensis was so called, as borne in the city of Locris: she writ
Hymns and Lyrick Songs; she was also a Musical Poetesse, such as were called
Melicae. There was a second of that name, the wife of Pithagoras, a Poetesse;
besides a third, called Thuria or Metapontina, daughter of the Poet Lycophron,
Nicostrata, or Carmentis.
a Pythagorist, and wife of Caristius, or Brantinus Crotoniata, Test Suida.
Nicostrata was otherwise called Carmentis, skillful both in the Greek and
Latin Dialect; of a quick and nimble wit, and conversant in diverse kinds of
Learning. Sulpitia lived in the time of the Emperor Domitianus, her husbands
name was Galenus, or Gadenus, with whom she lived in most conjoined wedlock
for the space of fifteen years. Some fragments of her Poetry I have read,
inserted amongst the Works of Ausonius. Of her, Martial in one of his
Epigrams, Lib. 10. thus writes: Oh molles tibi quindecim Calene
Quos cum Sulpitia tua ingales
Indulsit Deus and peregit annos, etc.
O those soft fifteen years, so sweetly past,
Which thou Calenus with Sulpitia have
In iugall consocietie (no doubt
A time by the Gods favored, and picked out)
O every Night, nay Hour, marked by thy hand
With some rich stone, fetched from the Indian strand,
What wars, what combats have betwixt you been
(But to your Bed, and Lamp) not known or seen
Of any. Happy Bed, and Tapers grace,
Made of sweet Oils, whose smoke perfumes the place.
Thrice five years thou have lived (Calenus) thus,
Reckoning by that account thine Age to us:
So to compute thy years, is thy great'st pride,
No longer to have lived than with thy Bride.
Were Atropos at thy entreats content
To give thee back one day so sweetly spent,
Thou at a higher rate would prise that one,
Than four times Nestors Age, to live alone.


This Epigram has expressed the love of Calenus to Sulpitia, the husband to
the wife: but in 35. of the same book, her pious Love, chaste Muse, and
Beauty, the same Author has most elegantly illustrated, his words be these,
Omnes Sulpitiam legant puellae
Vno quae cupiunt viro placere,
Omnes Sulpitiam legant mariti,
Vnae qui cupiunt placere nuptae, etc.
All women read Sulpitia, such as can,
In their desires betake them to one man;
All husbands read Sulpitia, such whose life
Can be contented with one single wife.
She never spoke of mad Medeas sin,
Nor why Thyestes Banquet was served in;
It never with her pure thoughts could agree,
A Scilla or a Biblis there could be:
Sa^e chaste and pious Loves she did not write,
Yet mixed with modest pleasures and delight.
Her Verses who shall read, and read again,
And sift them well, shall find them without stain.
Such were the words divine Egeria spoke
(The wife of Numa) when she did betake
Her self to sollitude. Had Sapho been
Tutored by her, her Poems read and seen,
More chaste sh' had been, with greater Art endu'd:
Or had rude Phaon these together viewed,
And both their beauties well observed and noted;
He that left her, had on Sulpitia doted, etc.


Michaele.
Seneca speaks of one Michaele, a she Centaure, who in an Elegant Poem
instructed the Thessalians in the Remedy of Love, whom Ovid in his Remedium
Amoris is said to have imitated. Aristophanes (as also Suidas) speak of one
Charixena, Charixena.
the Author of many excellent Works: amongst others, she writ a Poem, called
Crumata. Musaea.
Caelius, Lib. 8. cap. 1. speaks of Musaea an Epigrammatist, in which kind
she was eminent; besides she composed sundry Lyrickes. Textor remembers us
of one Moeroe, Moeroe.
who (besides her other Works) is most celebrated for a Hymn to Neptune.
Manto.
Manto was the daughter of Tyresia, the Prophetess; of her, the famous city
Mantua took name: she was not only a Poetesse, but famous for her
Diuinations, for by the entrails of beasts she could predict and foretell
things to come. Textor. Cornificia was the sister of the Poet Cornificius,
Cornificia.
and famous for many excellent Epigrams. Luccia Mima.
Luccia Mima (as Pliny reports of her) was a writer of Comedies, in which
practice she continued no less than an hundred years. Amongst the Poets,
Cassandra.
Cassandra the Prophetess (daughter to Priam and Hecuba) is also numbered.
Archilas Hermonaicus (as Camelion says) writes of a Poetesse called
Megalostrate, Megalos^rate.
beloved of the Poet Alcman, he that first devised the amatorious Verse, in
which was expressed all lascivious intemperance (which some attribute to
Thamyris, as their first inuentor:) she, Amatores vel ipsis colloquijs ad se
trahere potuit, i. She with her very discourse could attract lovers: she was
termed Flana Megalostrate. Athenae. Lib. 13. cap. 16. Polla Argentaria.
Polla Argentaria was wife to the famous Poet Lucan, and has a merited place
in this Catalogue; of whom Martial thus speaks: Haec est illa dies, quae magni
conscia partus
Lucanum populis, and tibi Polla dedit.
This day of that great birth made conscious is,
Which gave him to the world, and made thee his.
She was reputed to be of that excellent learning, that she assisted her
husband in the three first books, entitled Pharsali^. Her, Statius, Lib. 2.
Sylu. thus remembers: Haec Castae titulum decusque Polla.
She likewise writ excellent Epigrams. As much as Sta^ius of her, Plin.
Secundus speaks of his wife Calphurnia. Calphurnia.
Fulgos. Lib. 8. cap. 3. Aspasia Milesia, the beloned of Pericles, Aspasia
Milesia.
as she was otherwise learned, she is likewise numbered amongst the Poets;
some of whose Verses are remembered by Athenaeus. Hedyle was the mother of
Hedylogus Samius (who by the same Athenaeus, Hedyle.
Lib. 4. Dypnoph. has allotted him a place amongst the Poets) she was the
daughter of Moschina Attica, Moschina.
that writ Iambickes. This Hedyle composed a Poem, inscribed Scilla; she made
another, called, The Loves of Glaucus. Sosipatra (as Eugapius apud Volaterran.
relates) was a woman practiced in many kinds of Disciplines, Sosipatra.
and so excellent in all her studies, that she was said to be educated by the
gods. Thymele.
Thymele was a Poetesse that first introduced Dances into the Scene, which the
Greeks from her call (...), i. The place which is only free for the Actors.
Of her, Martial thus speaks: Quae Thymele spectas derisoremque Latinum.
Suidas writes, That Thymele was an Altar frequently used in the Theaters,
which from her borrowed the name. Hyldegardis
Hildegardis Moguntina was eminent both for Learning and Piety; insomuch, that
from her very childhood she seemed inspired from above. Eugenius the third,
in the Council held at Tryer (where Doctor Bernard was then present) approved
her Works: she flourisht in the year of Grace, 1188. Of Clitagora
Lacedemonia, Clitagora.
Aristophanes speaks much; Hesteia.
but Strabo in Homerica Iliade, more of Hesteia Alexandria. Auyle writ Epigrams
against Themistocles, Auyle.
with Verses upon Birds, which are read unto this day. Myrtis Anthedonia.
Myrtis Authedonia in a Poem expressed the death of the Damsel Ochne, who
had been before the destruction of the Hero Ennostus. Praxilla Syconia
flourished in the 32 Olympiad, Praxilla Siconia.
whom Antipater Thessalus gives the first place unto amongst the nine Lyricke
Poets: She writ Dithycambi, and a Work which was called by her Metrum
Praxillium. She called Adonis from Hell, to demand of him what was most
beautiful in Heaven: who answered, The Sun, the Moon, Figs, Apples, and
Cucumbers: That and such like was the subject of her Poem; of which grew a
Proverb against Lunatikes and mad men, every such was called Praxillaes
Adonis. Nossis.
Nossis the Poetresse was the composer of Greek Epigrams, and is by Antipater
numbered with Praxilla amongst the Lyrickes. Myro Byzantia she writ Elegies,
Myro Byzantia.
and such as the Greeks call Melae, or Musical Poemes: she is said to be the
mother of Homer, and reckoned one of the seven Pleiades, the daughters of
Atlas: she was the wife of Andromachus, an illustrious Philosopher. Pamphilus
her Statue was erected, which (as Facianus witnesses) was made by
Cephisiodotus. Damophila was the wife of the Philosopher: Damophila
she was a friend to Sapho, and lover, whom in all her Poemes she striued to
imitate. Her Hymns were sung at the sacrifices which were celebrated to Diana
Pergaea, after the manner of the Aeolians and Pamphilians. She writ moreover
certain books, which she titled, Libri Amatorij.

Of Minerua, etc.
MInerua, Minerua.
the daughter of Jupiter, was for no other reason numbered amongst the gods, but
for her excellency and cunning in Poetry and other good Arts, of which she
is said to be the first inuentresse. From her the ancient Athenians have
borrowed the immortality of their name. Next her, we reckon the Corinnaes.
Corinnae tres.
There were three of that name: The first, called Corinna Thebana, or
Tanagraea; she was the daughter of Archelodorus and Procratia, Megalostrata
Poetria Athenaeus, lib. 13. cap. 16.
and scholar to Myrtis: she in several contentions five sundry times bore
away the Palm from Pindarus, Prince of the Lyricke Poets: she moreover
published five books of Epigrams: of her Propertius speaks. The second was
called Corinna Thespia, she is much celebrated in the books of the ancient
Poets, Lib. 3. Silu.
especially by Statius. The third lived in the time of Augustus, and was to
Ovid much indeered: but of her wantonness than her Muse, there is more memory
extant. I come to speak next of Erinna who was surnamed Teia, Erinna.
or (as some will hane it) Telia of the Island Telos not far distant from
Gnidon, she flourished in the time of Dion of Syracusa, and published an
excellent Poem in the Doricke tongue, comprised in three hundred Verses,
besides diverse other Epigrams, her style was said to come near the majesty
of Homers, Proper. lib. 2.
she dyed when she was but ninteene years of age. Damophila.
Damophila was a Greek Poetesse and the wife of Pamphilus. she was
Cousin-german and companion with Sapho, Lyrica Poetria, she writ many Poems
that were called Poemata Amatoria, because their argument was merely of love:
one Poem she writ in the praise of Diana, for so much Theophrastus in the life
of Appolonius remembers of her. Hyppatia was a woman of Alexandria, Hyppatia.
the daughter of Theon the Geometritian, and wife to Isidorus the Philosopher,
she flourished in the time of the Emperor Arcadius, she writ certain books
of Astronomy, and was frequent in diverse kinds of Poetry: she purchased her
self much fame for her learning, in so much that she engrossed a great
confluence of Auditors in the city of Alexandria where she professed, Suidas
apud Volaterran.

Sapho.
Elian. lib. 12.
ELianus affirms her to be the daughter of Scamandronius; Plato, Plato.
of Ariston; Suidas and other Greek writers deliver to us that there were two
of that name, Suidas.
the one called Erixia, a much celebrated Poetesse) who flourished in the time
of the Poet Alcaeus, of Pittachus, and Tarquinius Priscus) who first devised
the use of the Lyre or Harp with a quill; some give her the honor to be the
inuentor of the Lyricke verse: the other was called Sapho Mitelaena long after
her who was a singer and a strumpet, she published many rare and famous Poems
amongst the Greeks, and therefore had the honor to be called the tenth Muse,
the reason why she fell in love with Phaon, Pliny attributes to the virtue of
an herb, Plin. lib. 23. Bablist. Egnat.
but Babtista Egnatius a later writer and exquisite both in the Greek and
Latin tongues, in trasferring this fable from the original into the Romon
tongue, as likewise others of his opinion, conclude, that Phaon was of the
profession of such as get their living by transporting passengers from one side
of a river unto another, a plain Ferrie-man, and that it happened upon a time
that Venus coming to the place where he kept his passage, without demanding
any hyre he gave her a free transportage, not knowing to whom it was he did
that courtesy, no way suspecting she had been a goddess: This, Venus took
so gratefully, that she thought to requite his freeness, with a bounty far
transcending the value of his pains. She therefore gave him an Alablaster box
full of a most precious unguent (teaching him how to apply it) with which he no
sooner anointed his face, but he instantly became of all mortal creatures
the most beautiful, of whom the Lesbian damsels grew inamoured, but espesially
he was ardently and most affectionately beloved of Sapho. Phaon having
occation to pass from Lesbos into Cicilie, she was tortured in soul for his
absence, intimating that it was done in despite or disgrace of her; first
purposed to cast herself from Leucate, a high promontorie in Epyre, down into
the Sea, which she after did; yet before she would attempt it, she first in an
Epistle thought by all the allurements of a woman's wit, to call him back
again into his country; which Ovid in her behalf most feelingly has
expressed. And since it lies so fitly in my way for the opening of the History,
I thus give it English, Ecquid vt aspecta est, etc. Ovid. Epist. Sapho Phaoni.
Is It possible as soon as thou shall see
My charracter, thou know it comes from me?
Or else not reading of the authors name,
Could thou have known from whence this short work came?
Perhapes thou may demand, Why in this vain
I court thee, that profess the Lyricke strain?
My lou's to be bewept, and that is the reason:
No Barbitos, id est, Carmen Lyricum.
Barbit number suits this tragic season.
I burn as does the corne-fields set on fire,
When the rough East winds still blow high and higher,
Now Phaon the Typhoean fields are thine,
But greater flames than Aetnaes are now mine.
No true disposed numbers flow from hence,
(The empty work of a distracted sense.)
The Pirhian gyrle, nor the Methimnian less
Now please me; not the Lesbians who surpass.
Vil's Amithon, vile Cidno too, the fair,
So Atthis that did once appear most rare,
And hundreds more, with whom my sinn's not small:
Wretch, thou alone inioyest the loves of all.
Thou have a face, and youth too, fit for play,
Oh tempting face that did mine eyes betray.
Take Phoebus Faith upon thee, and his bow,
And from Apollo who can Phaon know?
Take horns, and 'bout thy temples wreaths of vine,
What Is he can say but thou art the god of Wine?
Phoebus loved Daphne, Bacchus Gnosis bright,
Yet neither she, nor she, could Lyrickes write.
The nine Muse-sisters of my verse dispose,
And what my numbers are the whole world knows,
Nor can my countryman Alcaeus more Alcae^s, a Lyrick Poet of Mitelene.

Than I, though he in age stand rank't before:
Nor though his name sound louder, can he raise
Or from his Lyre, or Country, greater praise.
If niggard Nature have denide things fit,
Yet what I want in shape, I have in wit:
My statur's low, but know my name is high,
And bruited through all regions far and nigh.
I am not fair, what therein do I lack?
Andromida pleased Perfeus, yet she black.
The whitest Doves with mingled colors make,
And the black Turtle will the Greene-bird take.
If none can be thought worthy of thy love,
But such as shall thy like in beauty prove,
Young man despair, thou art for ever free,
None such ere was, none such shall ever be.
When first thou readst my Verses, thou did say
I only pleased, and I was fair that way,
That I became my phrase (and none so well)
Then did I sing (we lovers, all must tell;)
And I remember, thou ('it is still my pride)
At every Note did on my lips divide.
Nay, even those kisses pleased thee wondrous well.
But most of all, when I beneath thee fell,
My wantonness contented thee above measure,
My nimble motion, and words apt for pleasure.
Then when in confused rapture we both lay,
Fullness of joy deprived all use of pla^.
Now the Sicilian girls are thy new spoil,
I Will be of them, and leave the Lesbian sail.
You Nisea, a mounta^nous country near Aetna.
Nisean mothers, and fair daughters, bred
In Sicilie: let him be banished
From forth your earth, nor let the many Lies
The smoothness of his false tongue can devise,
Beguile your simple truth; what to you ^e
Speaks now, h'hath spoke a thousand times to me.
And goddess Venus called so of Erix, a mountain in Sicilie, where she had a
famous Temple.
Erecina, thou that do
The barbarous rude Sicania honor most,
Advise thy Poetesse by thy wit divine,
And give me counsel, since thou know I am thine.
Can Fortune in this bitter course still run?
Vows she to end those Ills she has begun?
Six years are past, since my aborti^e gr^nes
Mourned, and my tears wet my dead parents bones.
My needy Chor^xus, who doted on the famous strumpet Rhodop^^ whom he bought
of Aesopus for a great sum of money.
brother (as a second cross)
Dotes on a strumpet, suffering shame with loss,
Turned Pyrate, proves the Seas with sail and oar,
And badly seeks wealth, lost as ill before.
Because my faithful counsel (that course rated)
My guerdon is, that I by him am hated.
And least my endless torments should find ease,
My young irregular Cl^is, a wanto^ daughter to Sap^o.
daughter adds to these:
The last and great'st cause why I thus miscarrie,
Thou art; my Bark still sails with winds contrari^.
Behold my erst well-ord'red Locks mis-plac'd,
And those that in times past my temples graced,
Neglected are, as if they were not mine^
No precious gemmes upon my fingers shine:
My habit's vile, my hair no Crispin wears,
Nor smell my Locks of sweet Arabian The tears of Mirrha, with which they used
to perfume their hair.
tears.
Whom should I seek to please, since ^ee's absent,
That was sole author of mine ornament?
My soft heart is with easy shafts impressed.
There Is still new cause to lodge love in my breast,
Either because the Sisters three, had force,
When I was borne, to spin my thread so course;
Or this, my studies in the Arts constrain,
Since soft Thalia does infuse my brain.
What wonder if a youth of the first chinne
Surprise me? years which man to man might win.
I was afraid least fair Aurora thou
For Cephalus would steal him, and I now
Am still in fear, for surely this had past,
But that thy first love holds thee still so fast.
If Phoebus (that spies all things) thee had seen,
Phaon in lasting slumbers cast had been.
Venus had rapt him into heaven by this,
But that she feared Mars would have made him his.
Thou, that no child, and yet scarce man appears,
(Best age) the pride and glory of thy years,
Return unto my bosom, since of thee
I beg not love, but that thou loved would be.
Lo as I write, tears from mine eyes amain
Still drop, behold how they my paper stain.
Thy parting had been gentler (in words few)
Had thou but said, Sweet Lesbian less adue.
Thou took'st with thee no parting kiss, no tears,
I little dreamed I was so near my fears.
Of thine, save wrong, I nothing have, no more
Thou (let that move thee) all my love do store:
I gave thee no command, nor had that day,
Unless some such, Do not forget me pray.
By Love that never can forsake that breast,
By our nine sacred sisters I protest^
He Is gone, when some (but who I know not) said,
For a long space both words and tears were stayed,
Mine eyes had banished tears, and grief my tongue,
Through cold, my heart unto my ribs was clung.
(My grief retired) I ga^ to beat my breast,
To tear my hair, nor blush to walk undressed;
Like careful mothers, who with loud exclaimes
Bear their dead children to their funeral flames-
Charaxus walks by lang hing too and fro,
And from my ecstasy his pleasures grow,
And (which more shame unto my sorrow gives)
Asks why this woman weeps, her daughter lives?
But Shame and Love are two, the people stare
To see my garments torn and breasts vnbare,
Thou Phaon art my care, and my dreams stay,
Thee fled (you dreams that have made night my day)
I find thee there, though absent many a mile,
But o, my dreams last but a little while.
Often think I that thy arms my neck infold,
As likewise these two are with thine like bold.
I know thy kisses, thy tongue-sport I know,
Which thou wast wont to take, and to bestow.
More pleased sometimes, words (like to truth) I spoke,
And to thy form, my senses are awake.
What Is more, I shame to tell, and blush to write,
Dreaming all done, may perfect our delight.
No sooner Titan dons his golden beams,
And with them all things sees, I curse my Dreams:
Deserts and Dens I then seek, as if they
Could profit me (once guilty of our play)
Madly, like her whom mad Erictho bears,
I thither run, my hairs fallen 'bout mine ears.
I see the Cauernes with rough Gravel strewn,
To me they like Mygdonian Marble showed.
The shades I find, that gave us often our rest,
And friendly Herbage, by our burdens pressed.
Thee (master of those Groves and me) no place
Can show me, therefore they appear most base.
I knew the very flowers where we have line,
Our weights have made their upright heads decline:
Where thou have fallen, I threw me in that place,
But first the grateful flowers drink from my face.
The boughs despoyl'd, a sadness seem to bring,
And on their top-most branches no birds sing,
Only the Philomela.
Daulian hird her discontents
Chaunts out aloud, and Itis still laments;
Itis the bird laments, Sapho, th'affright
Of Love forsaken: so we spend the night.
There is a perfect, clear, and Glasse-like Well,
Sacred, and where some thinks the gods do dwell,
Over which the watrie Lothos, the daughter of Neptune, turned into a Tree, so
called.
Lotos spreads her bows,
The ground a soft and gentle Turfe allows.
Here as I lay to rest me (drowned in tears)
One of the Nayades before m' appears,
And standing, thus spoke: Thou that scortcht do lie,
In flames unequal, to Ambracia, a city in Epire, so called of king Ambraces.
Ambracia fly;
Hence Phoebus from on high surueyes the Sea,
Some, Actium calls the place, some Leucate.
Deucalion from this Rock his Pyrha craves
(First seen) and she (vndanger'd) proves the waves.
Here Pyrha prostitutes to his desires.
Deucalion here first quenched his amorous fires.
The place the same law keeps: climb Leucats crown,
And from that high Rock fear not to leap down.
This spoke, she vanished: I affrighted rise,
Whilst my wet cheeks are moistened by mine eyes.
Thither let us run Nymphs, till that Rock appear,
From Love distracted we should banish fear.
Prove how it can, much better than you see
It has yet chanced, it needs must fall to me.
And gentle Love, to me thy feathers lend,
Still to support me, as I shall descend,
Least being dead, by my untimely fall,
Leucadia for my sake be cursed of all.
Then Phoebus, I Will bequeath into thine hand
My Harp, and by it shall this Distick stand:
Sapho, thy grateful Poetesse, does assign
This Lyre to thee, being hers as well as thine.
Why do thou send me to Actia hence,
When thou may call thy exiled fool from thence?
Safer to me, than can those waters prove,
Thou may, so Phoebus did he Sapho love.
Can thou (O harder than the Rocks obdure)
It should be said, Thou did my death procure?
Thy Sapho's ruin? O, how better far
Were it these breasts, that now dis-ioyned are,
Should friendly meet, and mutually please,
Than mine alone be swallowed in the Seas?
These are the breasts thou Phaon once did praise,
Which seen, they fire did from thy coldness raise.
O would I were as eloquent as then,
But sorrow takes all fluence from my Pen,
So might my brain have every ill withstood:
But now my passion makes nothing seem good.
My Verse is of her first power destitute,
Silent's my Quill, my Harp with sorrow mute.
You Lesbian Matrons, and you Lesbian young,
Whose names have to my Lyre been often times sung.
You for whose loves my fame has suffered wrong,
No more in troops unto my Music throng,
Phaon has stole all that you named Divine,
I was (O wretch) about to call him mine.
Make him return, my Muse shall then retire,
He dulls my wits, or can my brain inspire.
Can prayers prevail? or such a stubborn mind
Be softened, or made rougher? Shall the wind
Disperse my words, as merely spoke in vain?
Would the same winds could bring thee back again,
That mock my sighs, and make thy sails to swell,
It were a work that would become thee well.
If so thou mean, why do thou keep away
From all those vowed gifts that thy coming stay?
Why do thou with thy absence my breast tear?
Loose from the Haven, set sail, and do not steare,
She Is Sea-borne Venus called, and therefore still
She makes the waves calm to a lovers will,
The gracious winds shall in thy course prevail,
And bring thee safe when thou ar^ under sail,
Even Cupid at the Helm shall sit and steare,
He shall direct which way thy course to bear,
If so thou please thy Sapho shunned must be,
Yet thou shall find there is no just cause in me:
At least, thy cruel answer she now craves,
To end her fate in the Leucadian waves.
From that Rock, she cast her self headlong into the Sea, and so perished.
For preposterous and forbidden Luxuries which were imputed unto her, Horace
calls her Mascula Sapho; yet many are of opinion, this to be the same whom
Plato terms the Wise: of her, Antipater Sydonius thus writes; Dulcia
Mnemosine demirans carmina Saphus
Quesierit decima Pyeris vnde foret.


Mnemosine, When Sapho's Verse she did admiring reed,
Demanded whence the tenth Muse did proceed.


As likewise Ausonius: Lesbia Pyerijs Sapho soror addita Musis.
i. Lesbian Sapho, a Sister added to the Pyerian Muses. Her, Papinius and
Horace, with many others, celebrate.

Of Cleobule Lindia, and other Poetesses.
She was the daughter of Cleobulus Lindius, one of the seven wise men of
Greece; she was called also Eumite, and Cleobulina: Cleobulina, or Eumite.
in her writing, she imitated her father. She was eminent for Aenigmaes, and
Riddles; of which, this one is redeemed from oblivion, and remembered of her:
Est vnus genitor, cui vni sunt pignora bis sex,
His quoque triginta natae, sed dispare forma
Hae niuiae aspectu, nigris sunt vultibus illae,
Sunt immortales omnes, moriuntur and omnes.
One father has twelve children, great and small,
They beget thirty daughters, unlike all,
Half of them white, half black, immortal made,
And yet we see how every hour they fade.


Helpis.
Helpis was wife of the famous Philosopher and Poet Boethius Seuerinus, a Roman
Patrician; she was by Nation a Sicilian, of an elegant wit and capacious
invention. Many of her Hymns to the Apostles are yet extant: one began, Aurea
Luce; another, Foelix per omnes mundi cardines, i. Thou Feast that art happy
in being celebrated through all the countries of the world. Ranulphus calls her
the daughter to the king of Sicilie, and the best Writers constantly affirm
these holy Songs to be hers, witness Gyraldus Dialogo 5. Histor. Poet. She
writ her Epitaph with her own hand, which was after inscribed upon her Tomb,
which I thus give you in English, something near to Treuisaes, as he
translated it from Ranulphus.

AN EPITAPH.
Elpis my name, me Sicilie first bred,
A husbands love drew me from hence to Rome,
Where I long lived in joy, but now lie dead,
My soul submitting to The Almighty's doom:
And I believe this flesh again shall rise,
And I behold my Savior with these eyes.
Eudoxia, or Eudocia, Eudocia.
was the wife of the Emperor Theodo^ius Junior: She was excellently
qualified, and her chief delight was to be conversant amongst the Muses, for
which she was styled (...). She was the daughter of Leontius, of no higher
degree than a Sophist of Athens: she was first called Athenais, but after
being married to the Emperor, he caused her to be baptized by Atticus the
great Bishop of Constantinople, and for Athenais gave her the name of Eudocia,
which much pleased the Emperor her husband. Some attribute a Centon unto her,
of Christ the Savior of the world; it was called (...), which others would
confer upon Proba. Cyrus Panopolita she advanced unto the Praetorship.
Gyrald. ex 5. Dialog. Philenis was a strumpet of Leucadia, Philenis.
her Verses were as impurely wanton as her life was immodest and unchaste: she
imitated Elephantis, Elephantis.
if we may believe Suidas, and they both Astianassa, Astianassa.
one of Hellens maids, the wife to Menelaus. She was the first that devised
(...) in the Veneriall Trade, and left certain books behind her of Veneriall
Copulation. This you may read in Gyraldus in 30. Dialog. Histor. Poet. Bocho,
Bocho.
a penurious and needy woman of Delphos, who composed Hymns and pronounced
Oracles; she is remembered by Gyraldus, Dialog. 20. Elephantis, Elephantis.
or Elephantina, was a woman most wickedly wanton, and of notorious
intemperance. She (as Spinthria) described the several ways and figures of
Congresse and Copulation, Spinthria.
from whose books Lalage presents a gift to Priapus, Lalage.
in Priapaeis Poematibus: and Tiberius Caesar builded that chamber, wherein
were discovered the omnivarious shapes of beastly and preposterous Luxuries,
least any president of dishonest Brothelrie should be left unremembered. Proba
Valeria Falconia, Proba Valeria Falconia.
a Roman Matron (and wife to Adelphus Romanus the Proconsull, a man of noble
and religious carriage) flourished in the reigns of Honorius and Theodosius
the Junior, Emperors. She composed a Divine Work, of the Life and Miracles
of Christ, which she entitled Cento Virgilianum: she dedicated it to the
Empress Eudocia, wife of Theodosius. She also paraphrased upon the Verses of
Homer, and called the Work Homeroukentra, which some would confer upon
Eudocia. Her husband being dead, she is said to have inscribed upon his Tomb
this or the like Epitaph: To God, to Prince, Wife, Kindred, Friend, the Poor,
Religious, Loyal, True, Kind, Steadfast, Dear,
In Zeal, Faith, Love, Blood, Amity, and Store,
He that so lived, and so deceased, lies here.


Amongst these (and not improperly) are numbered the Sibylls: but I have spoke
of them in their place, therefore I proceed to others, and next of Telesilla.

Telesilla Poetria.
THis incomparable Lady I know not where to equipage, or in what rank to
place, whether amongst the women illustrious for Virtue, or amongst the Warlike
women, imitating the Amasonians for their noble Courage and Valor, amongst the
Chaste, the Fair, or the Wise, as being a most famous and learned Poetesse;
her History I will give you in brief. Amongst the memorable and remarkable
acts attempted and achieved by women, there is none more glorious or better
deserving a Cronicle of Perpetuity than that performed by the Argiue women
against king Cleomenes, by the persuasion and encouragement of Telesilla the
Poetesse; she was borne of a noble family, and in her youth being subject to
many infirmities of the body, she asked counsel of the gods concerning her
health, answer was returned her from the Oracle, That she should apply her
self to the study of the Muses, and employ all her industry in verse and
harmony. Not long it was ere recovering her health, she grew to that
perfection of Art, especially in Poetry, that she was only held in
admiration amongst all other women. Cleomenes king of Sparta, opposing the
Argiues with all the rigor that hostility could make, and having slain of
them an infinite number almost incredible to relate (for so says Plutarch;
Lib. de V^rtutib. Mulier.
) in revenge of this loss, a notable courage and an unspeakable boldness
inspyred the hearts of these Argiue women, in so much that under the conduct of
Telesilla, whom they made their General, they took arms to maintain their
fortresses, guard and defend the walls, and issue out upon the enemy, not
without admiration and terror to the besiegers, in so much that Cleomenes was
repulsed with the loss of many of his soldiers. Another king (as Socrates
says) called Demaratus, who besieged Pamphiliacum, they sent thence with loss
and infamous retreat. The city thus by their valor preserved, all such women
as fell in the conflict, the inhabitants honorably interred in a place called
Via Argiua, i. The Argiue way, and to the suruiuers as a memorable gratitude to
their virtues and valors, they granted a famous solemnity called the dedication
of Mars. This battle was fought (as some say) in the seventh day (others in
the new Moon) of the month which is now called the fourth, but by the Argiues
was of old called Hermaeus or Mer^ulialis; as that day they yearly celebrat the
great Feast styled Hybristica, in which the women are habited like men, and the
men are attired in vestures of women: And to make good the loss of so many men
that perished in the late combustions, the matrons did not (as Her^dotus
afirmes) match with their slaves and servants, but they joined themselves in
marriage to the best and noblest of the next adjoining cities; upon whom
notwithstanding they cast such a contemptible neglect, that they enacted a law
which enjoined all married women still to put beards upon their faces, when
they first went to bed to their husbands.

Perhilla.
Perhilla was a young Roman lady who lived in the time of Augustus Caesar, it
seems of no great noble family, nor extraordinary riches, only of an
admirable wit and excellent facility in Poetry, she was scholar to Ovid, who
enterchanged with her and she with him many Elegies and Epigrams, she
flourishdd in the time of his banishment. Her works it seems never came to
light: but that she was answerable to the character I have given her, I refer
you to his seventh Elegy, in his third book de Tristibus, in which he gives
her an approved testimony: the title in, Mandat Epistolam vt Perhillam Adeat,
which the better to express of what condition she was (and that speaking of
Poetesses, it will not be amiss a little to Poetise) I thought thus to
English: Vade salutatum, etc.
Ovid. lib. Trist. 3. Eleg. 7.
My wandering Letter to Perhilla go,
Greet her as one that does my mind best know.
Find her thou shall, or with her mother sit,
Or amongst her Books and Muses, searching wit.
What ere she be a doing, when she knows
Thee thither come, her work away she throws,
And without least delay, she will enquire
Wherefore thou come, or what thou can desire.
Tell her I live, but so, as life bemoning,
Mischiefs augment, but do not ease my groaning.
Though by the Muses harmed, I love their name,
And to even numbers how my words to frame.
Still do you to your common studies cling,
And your learned Verse to foreign fashions sing,
Nature that gave you Beauty, thought it fit
To add rare Gifts, chaste Manners, and choice Wit.
I taught you first from Hellecon to write,
Least such a fertile Spring should perish quite.
I saw how far in youth it did extend,
I was your Father, Captain, and your Friend.
If the same fires within your breast still live,
To none save Lesbian Sapho the Palm give.
I fear my fate your forwardness may slack,
And from your course my fortunes pluck you back.
The time was when your Lines to me were read,
And when by me your Muse was censured,
'Twas lawful then with both: and in those days
You did me as your Judge and Tutor praise.
Either unto your Verses I gave ear,
Or made you blush when I forbore to hear.
Perhaps (by my example) since my Muse
Has done me hurt, that practice you will not use;
And fear, because I su^^er in my Art,
That in my ruin you shall bear a part.
Fear not (Perhilla) for no woman shall,
Or man, by thy Muse learn to love at all.
Therefore (most learned) all cause of sloth adiorne
And to these sacred and good Arts return.
That comely favor will in time decay,
And rugged furrows in thy cheeks display.
Age (without noise) will by thee stealing pass,
When some will say by thee, once fair she was:
Thou then wilt grieve, thy faded front despise,
Or else complaining, swear thy Steele-glasse lies.
Your Riches are not great (O worthy more:)
But say you Wealth had in the amplest store,
Fortune bestows or takes at her own pleasure,
He Is Irus now, that late had Cressus Treasure.
'Briefe, save corrupt things, here we nothing gain
Except the Treasures of the Breast and Brain.
I, that my House, my Country, and you, lack,
In all they would take from me, suffered wrack.
My Brain I still keep with me to this hour,
For over that, great Caesar had no power:
Who though in rage he doom me to be slain,
When I am dead, my fame shall still remain.
Whilst warlike Rome on seven Hills lifts her head,
To o'relooke the conquered World, I shall be read.
And you (whom happier studies still inspire)
Preserve your name from the last coming fire.


Before many, or most of those, I may justly and without flattery prefer the
famous Queen Elizabeth. Of her Wisdom and Government, all the Christian
Princes that flourished in her time, can give ample testimony: of her
Oratorie, those learned Orations delivered by her own mouth in the two
Academies, in the Latin Tongue, bear record in her behalf. In the Greek
Tongue she might compare with Queen Istrina, before remembered amongst the
Linguists. In the French, Italian, and Spanish, she needed no Interpreter, but
was able to give answer to such Ambassadors in their own Language. Of whose
pleasant Fancies, and ingenious Ditties, I have seen some, and heard of many.
Others there have been likewise of our own Nation, of whose elegancie in
these kinds the World has taken notice, and pity it were their memories
should not be redeemed from oblivion: as the Lady Jane Gray, daughter to the
Duke of Suffolk, the unhappy wife of as unfortunate an husband, L. Guilford
Dudley. Here likewise worthily may be inserted the excellent Lady Arabella,
who had a great facility in Poetry, and was elaborately conversant amongst
the Muses; as likewise the ingenious Lady, the late composer of our extant
Urania. For others, let me refer you to Sir John Harrington, in his Allegory
upon the 37. book of Ariosto, where he commends unto us the four daughters of
Sir Anthony Cook, the Lady Burleigh, the Lady Russell, the Lady Bacon, and
Mistress Killegrewe, giving each of them in that kind a worthy Character. In
the same place the Author commends unto us a great Italian Lady, called
Vittoria, Vittoria.
who writ largely and learnedly in the praise of her dead husband: with whom
(though not in that Funeral Elegeick strain) I may rank (if in the
comparison I vnderprise not) the beautiful and learned Lady Mary, Countess
of Penbrooke, the worthy sister to her unmatchable brother Sir Philip Sydney.
But not to dwell too long on her praise (whom I never can commend sufficiently)
I will only bestow upon her Muse that Character which Horace bequeathed to
Sapho: Viuuntque commissi Calores
Aeoliae fidibus Puellae.


Of Witches.
Johannes Bodinus, Andegauensis lib. 3. cap. 3. de Magorum Demonomania writes,
That there is nothing which precipitates men or women to perdition, or more
allures and incites them to deuote and give themselves up to the Devil, than a
sortish and mere Artheisticall opinion settled in them, That he has power and
will to give to the needy, riches; to the afflicted, ease; to the weak,
strength; to the deformed, beauty; the ignorant, knowledge; the abject, honor;
grace and favor to them whom birth has nobilitated, and means, and supply,
to such as adversity has dejected: when on the contrary, we see by common
proof than such miscreants none more miserably base, more penurious, more
ignorant, more deboisht and contemned. Plutarch remembers us that when Olimpias
the wife of Philip king of Macedon, hearing that her husband was ensnared, and
extremely besotted with the beauty of a noble young lady, she much desired to
see her: who being brought unto her presence, and beholding a woman with all
the accomplishments of nature so every way graced, one of so exquisit feature,
she having never beheld the like till then, she grew astonished, and without
offering her the least discourteous violence, brake out into these terms, This
rare and incomparable beauty which has bewitched my husband, is likewise of
force to effacinate the gods. Most certain it is, nothing seems fairly
featured and beautifully composed within this large universe, but it shows to
us the glory of the maker, who is the only true and perfect pulchritude;
neither is the^e any thing lovely or amiable, which proceeds not from his
especial grace and miraculous workmanship. But it was never found or known
that ever any Witch could by exorsismes or incantations add any thing to
Nature, to make her self in any part appear more comely. It is further
observed, that all such are for the most part stigmaticall and ouglie, in so
much, that it is grown into a common Adage, Deformis vt Saga, i. As deformed
as a Witch. Moreover, Cardanus who was not held the least amongst the Magitians
(as having his art, Lib. 20. de Subtilit
or rather diabolical practice from his father hereditarie) confesses, that
in all his life time, in his great familiarity and acquaintance amongst them,
he never knew any one that was not in some part misshapen and deformed. The same
Author (with whose opinion Wicrius, Hippocrates, and others assent) affirms
that all those Demoniacks, or Witches, after they have had commerce and
congresse with the Devil, have about them a continual nastie and odious
smell, of which (by the ancient writers) they were called Faetentes, by the
Vasconians Fetelleres, a Faetore, i. Of stench; insomuch that women who by
nature have a more sweet and refreshing breath than men, after their beastly
consocietie with Satan, change the property of nature, and grow horrid,
putred, corrupt, and contagious: For Sprangerus witnesses (who has taken the
examination of many) they have confessed (a thing fearful to be spoken) to
have had carnal copulation with evil and unclean spirits, who no doubt, bear
the smell of the in^isible sulphur about them. Now concerning this Magic,
what reputation it has been in amongst men, (which in effect is no better
than plain Witchcraft in women) we may read in Nauclerus, and Platina; That
all the Popes inclusiuely from Siluester the second, to Gregory the seventh,
were Magicians: but Cardinal Benno, who observed all the Bishops that way
devoted, numbers but five, Siluester the second, Benedict the ninth, John the
twentieth, and one and twentieth, and Gregory the seventh. Of these,
Augustinus Onuphrius one of the Popes chamber (that from the Vatican, and the
Lives of the Popes there registered, made a diligent collection) speaks of two
only, Siluester the second, and Benedict the ninth; one of them was after
expelled from the Papacy. Siluester lying upon his death bed, desired his
tongue to be torn out and his hands to be cut off that had sacrifised to the
Devil, confessing that he had never any inspection into that damnable Art, How
the Devil rewards his servants.
till he was Archbishop of Rhemes. These are the best rewards that Satan
bestows upon his suppliants and servants: how comes it else so many wretched
and penurious Witches, some beg their bread, some die of hunger, others rot in
prisons, and so many come to the gallows or the stake. It is reported of a
gentleman of Mediolanum, that having his enemy at his mercy, held his
steeletto to his heart, and swore that unless he would instantly abjure his
faith, and renounce his Savior, had he a thousand lives he would instantly
(with as many wounds) despoile him of all; which the other for fear assenting
to, and he having made him iterate over and over his unchristianlike
blasphemies, in the middle of his horrible abiuration stabd him to the heart,
uttering these words, See, I am revenged of thy soul and body at once; for as
thy body is desperate of life, so is thy soul of mercy. This uncharitable
wretch was an apt scholar to the grand Devil his master, who in the like
manner deals with all his servants, who after he has made them renounce their
faith, blaspheame their maker, and do to him all beastly and abominable
adoration (such as in their own confessions shall be hereafter related) he not
only leaves them abiects from Gods favor, whose divine majesty they have so
fearfully blasphemed, but delivers them up to all afflictions and tribulations
of this life, and all excruciations and torments in the world to come. Horrible
and fearful have been the most remarkable deaths of many of the professors
of this diabolical Art, for whom the laws of man has spared (as a terror to
others) the hand of heaven has punished: I will only give you a taste of some
few. The wretched ends of sundry Magitians.
Abdias Bab. Episcopus lib. 6. Certam Apostol. writes, That Zaroes and Arphaxad
(two infamous Magitians amongst the Persians) with their exorcismes and
incantations deluding the people, in the hour when Simon and Jude suffered
martyredome, were stroke with lightning from heaven, and so perished. Lucius
Piso, in the first book of his Annals speaks of one Cinops, a prince amongst
the Magitians, who at the prayer of S. John the Evangelist was swallowed up in
a river. Olaus Magnus lib. 2. cap. 4. de gentib. Septentrional. tells us of one
Methotis, who by his prestigious iuglings had insinuated into the hearts of the
people, and purchased that opinion and authority amongst them, that he was
called, The high and chief Priest to the gods, who was after torn to pieces
by the multitude: from whose scattred limbs such a contagion grew, that it
infected the air, of which much people perished. Hollerus the Magitian was
stain. Oddo the Dane was (besides his skill in Magic) a great pyrat, it is
written of him Wierius li. 2. ca. 4. that without ship or boat he would make
his transmarine passage over the Ocean, and by his Inchan^ments raise storms
to shipwrecke the vessels of his enemies: he was after, notwithstanding,
swallowed in the sea, and there most wretchedly perished. D. John Faustus,
borne at Kuneling, a Village near Cracouia, was found dead by his bed side,
his face blasted and turned backward, in the Dukedom of Wittenberch, at which
time the house wherein he died was shaken with a tempest and horrible
Earthquake. The Earl Matisconensis (a practitioner in the same devilish
study) sitting at Dinner amongst many Lords, Barons, Captains, and others,
was snatched from the Board by Devils, and in the sight and view of all the
people, three times hurried swiftly round about the city, being heard to cry,
Succurrite, Succurrite, i. Help, Help: of him, Hugo Cluniacensis writes more
largely. A Priest at Noremberch searching for hidden Treasure in a place where
the Devil had directed him, found it guarded by a Spirit, in the semblance of
a great black Dog; in the search of which, the Earth fell upon him, and
buried him alive: And this happened in the year 1530. Wierius. A Magician of
Salsburch undertook to call all the Serpents together within a mile of the
place, and bring them into one Pit dug for the purpose: in the train of
which, came (after the rest) a great Serpent (supposed to be the Devil) and
twining about him, cast him in amongst the rest, where they together perished.
The like untimely deaths we read of Appion Grammaticus, Julian Apostata,
Artephius, Robertus Anglicus: amongst the Heluetians, Petrus Axonensis,
surnamed Conciliator, Albertus Teutonicus, Arnoldus de villa noua, Anselmus
Parmensis, Pycatrix Hispanus, Cicchus Ascalus Florentinus, and many others.
Commendable therefore it was in the French king, who when one Friscalanus
Cenomannus (a man excellent in this Science) came to show diverse prestigious
feats and tricks before him, for which he expected reward; amongst others, he
caused the Linkes of a Golden Chain to be taken asunder, and removed them to
diverse remote places of the chamber, which came of themselves to one place,
and were instantly joined together as before: Which the king seeing, and being
thereat astonished, he commanded him instantly from his sight, never again to
behold his face, and after caused him to be arraigned and judged. And these are
the Graces, Honors, and Aduancements, Offices, and Dignities, to which the
Devil exalts his liege people.

Of these several sorts of Iuglings, Several sorts of superstitious Iugling.
with which the Devil deludes his scholars (besides such as I have before
spoken of, amongst such as predicted of things to come) I will nominate some
few. One thing which is used now amongst our cunning Women and Witches, is so
ancient, that it was before the age of Lucian, or Theocritus, it is called
Coskinomanteia, i. Cribri saltatio, i. (as we call it) The Syue and the
Sheeres, and that is not shamed to be publicly used. Bodinus himself says
that he saw in Lutetia a Boy in a Noblemans house, and before many honest and
judicial spectators, by speaking of a few French words^ make a Syue turn
which way he pleased: but the same words uttered by another, could not make it
to move at all. Another superstition is with a Knife or a Key. If any be
suspected of Theft, read but such a Psalm, and name the party accused, if
the Knife at the speaking of his name, move or stir, he is then held
guilty: and that practice is called Axinomanteia. That which is done by a Ring
put over a Cruse of Water, is called Daktuliomanteia: And this is a famous
Sorcerie, much in use with the Witches of Italy. Ioachimus Cameracensis had a
speaking Ring, in which was a Familiar, or a Devil; that kind is called
Vdromanteia, as also Dactyliomanteia, i. A Ring wherein Spirits are worn.
Conjectures made from Wells and Fountains, were called Idromanteia: these,
Numa Pompilius was said to be the first inuentor of, which Varro otherwise
interpretes, i. Of a Boy employed by the Magicians to look upon Images in the
water, one of which pronounced distinctly fifty Verses of the wars of
Mithridates, before any such rumor was spread, or purpose of the like business
intended. Aeromanteia is a superstitious prediction by the air; but most
certain, when the wind is South. Another was made from Meal or Chafe, and
was called Alphitomanteia, or Aleuromanteia, remembered by Iamblicus; but to
what purpose it was, he explaneth not; as likewise of Lythomanteia, which was
practiced by Stones. Divination by Laurel was called Daphnomanteia. The
praescience which they gathered from the head of an Ass, Kephaleomanteia.
Puromanteia and Kapnomanteia were conjectures from Fire. Rabdomanteia was used
by a Physician of Tholosa, in speaking certain mystical words in a low and
submisse voice. The like unto that, was Zulomanteia, with loose chippes of
Wood, much practiced in Illyria. But of all these devilish and detestable
practices, there is none (says Bodinus) more Heathenish, irreligious, and
dangerous, than that so commonly in use now adays, and by Witches continually
practiced, to the injury and wrong of new married women; it is commonly called
Ligare ligulam, or to tie knots upon a point; which as it is usual, so it is
not new: For Herodot. Lib. 2. reports, That Amasis king of Egypt was by the
like Exorcisme bound and hindered from having any mutual congresse with his
wife Laodice, Laodice.
till those ligatorie Spells were after vncharmed. Paulus Aemilius in the life
of Clotharius the second witnesses, That king Theodoricus was by the like
ligaments effascinated by his Concubines, from having lawful consocietie with
his wife Hermamberga. Hermamberga.
Bodinus reports, That he heard from the mouth of Roileus, Ambassador general
amongst the Blesenses, who affirmed, That at the marriage of a young couple,
just as they were to receive the benediction from the Priest, a Boy was seen
by him tying one of these Magic knots in the Temple; whom thinking to have
deprehended, the Boy fled, and was not taken. Bodinus further adds, That in
the year 1567. he then being Procurator in Patauia, the gentlewoman in whose
house he soiourned (being it seems a pregnant scholar in this Art) related
unto him in the presence of one Iacobus Baunasius, That there were fifty
several ways of tying this knot, to hinder copulation, either to bind the
Husband, or the Wife only, that one hating the others infirmity, might the
freelyer pollute themselves with Adulteries. She said moreover, the man was
often so charmed, the woman seldom, and difficultly: besides, this knot might
be tied for a day, for a year, for the present time, or for ever, or whilst
the same was unloosed: That it might be tied for one to love the other, and not
be again beloved, or to make a mutual and ardent love betwixt them; but when
they came to congression, to bite and scratch, and tear one another with their
teeth and nails. In Tholosia, a man and his wife were so bewitched, who after
three years being vncharmed, had a fair and hopeful issue; and which is more
to be wondered at, in that time there appeared upon some part of their bodies
so many tumors, or swellings, like small knobs of flesh, as they should have
had children, if that impediment had not happened. Some there are that may be
charmed before wedlock, and some after, but those hardly. There are others,
whom their effascinations can keep from eiecting their Urine; others, to make
them that they cannot restrain it at all: but of the first, diverse have
perished. She likewise told him sundry speeches belonging to these
Witcheries, the words whereof were neither Hebrew, Greek, Latin, French,
Spanish, Italian, nor indeed deriuing their Etimologie from any known Language
whatsoever.

Erasmus in his explanation of the Adage, Pasetis Semiobulus, writes of some
Witches that by their Incantations could command in any void room, Tables on
the sudden to be spread and furnished with meats and iunkets of all varieties
to taste the palate, and when the guests had sufficiently fed and satisfied
every man his own appetite, with one word could likewise command all things
away as if no such thing had been: others also that when they had bought any
commodity of any man, their backs were no sooner turned but the money they
laid out would instantly forsake the seller and return into the purse of the
buyer. But to begin with the ancient Poets, by their testimonies it is manifest
that the practice of Witches and Witchcraft has been so great, that by their
Charms and Spells they have had the power to transhape men into bruit beasts,
to alter the course of the Planets, and Stars, have changed the Seasons,
making the natural course of the year preposterous: further, that their
exorcismes have extended to Herbs, Flowers, Fruits, and Grain, to infect men
with Diseases, and cattle with Murren, to delude the Eyes and weaken the
Senses, bewitch the Limbs, bind the Hands, give the Feet, and benumbe the
other Members, apoplex all the vital Spirits, and raise up dead bodies from
their Sepulchers; nay more, to call the Moon down from her Sphere, with other
most strange things, as miraculous to relate as difficult to believe, of such
in his first book Tibullus speaks, Hanc ego de Caelo ducentem sidera vidi:
-- This Witch I did espy
To call the Stars and Planets from the Sky.


Now, that women have been more addicted to this devilish Art than men, is
manifest by the approbation of many grave Authors: Diodorus in his fifth book
de Antiquorum Gestis, Speaks of Hecate, that she was the first that ever
tempered Aconitum (a venomous Herb, which some call Libbards bane, others
Wolves bane) applying her self to confections of sundry deadly poisons. Valor.
lib. 2.
This was frequent among the Romans, nay even among the noblest matrons, Lib.
3. cap. 17.
as their own writers testify. Of the like, Saint Augustine speaks in his
book de Ciuitate Dei: So Pliny affirms in his five and twentieth book and
second chapter, That women are most prone to these unlawful Arts; for so we
read of Medea, Cyrce, and others whom the Poets fabled to be goddesses, of whom
we shall find occasion to speak of in their order. Suidas of women Witches
cites an old proverb, Thessala Mulier, by which he notes all of that practice
as peculiar to that Sex, Lib. 5. Orat. Instit.
and not to men. Therefore Quintilian speaking of this argument, thus
determines it, Theft (says he) is much prevailing with men, and Witchcraft
most familiar with the Sex of women.

Of Cyrce, and others remembered by the Poets.
SHe was the daughter of the Sun, Virgill in Beucol.
and the Nymph Persa, and was said to be so exquisitely cunning in these
effacinations, that she changed men into several shapes of beasts, and the
companions and associates of Ulysses into Swine. She inhabited not far from
Caieta a city of Campania. The Marsians a people of Italy were said to be
linially descended from this Cyrce, Lib. 16. cap. 11.
who likewise succeeded her in that devilish Art. Gellius writes of this
nation, That they had skill in taming the most poysonus Serpents, and to make
them gentle and servile to their use; their Charms, Exercismes and
Incantations, by which they had power in the transhapes of creatures, their
mixtures of herbs and tempering of drugges being to them left as hereditarie
by her. Who would read further of her, I refer him to Ovid, who in his
Metamorphosis gives her a full and large character, so Homer in his tenth book
of his Odisses, the argument of which, for her better expression I thus
English: Aeoliam ventorum agimor patriamque domuque.
Ulysses From the Island of the Cyclops, where he thrust out Polyph^mus his
eye.
thence into Aetolia past,
Where Aeolus the king of Winds then reigned
Who the four brothers gave him closed fast
In leatherne bags (for so they were constraind.)
With prosperous speed he sails, and growing near
His native Ithaca, whilst he was sleeping,
His men supposed some wealth enclosed there,
Within those bags given to their masters keeping,
And opening them, the imprisoned winds now free,
With aduerfe gusts, despite his helm and glass
Blow him quite back, so he is forced to see
Islands in the Sea so called.
Antiphates, and the Lestrigone's.
Some ships there lost, he attaines the Cercian shore,
Where the most powerful goddess as she feasts,
Transhapes Eurilochus with many more
Of his companions, into sundry beasts,
The wily Greek, by Mercuries admonishment,
Alone escapes the Witches transformation,
Who failing in her Art, bred both astonishment,
And of his many virtues, admiration:
His wisdom so prevailed, him Cyrce adored,
And to his mates their pristine shape restored.


Medea.
Medea was the daughter of Otes and Ispaea king and queen of the Colchians,
and sister to Cyrce: she found out the virtues of many Herbs, Plants, and
Roots, and tempered their juice to her devilish purposes, growing to that
height of cunning, that by her incantations she tamed the mad Bulls that from
their mouths and nosthrills breathed fire and bellowed terror, charming asleep
the euer-waking Serpent that kept the Golden fleece, least they should hinder
Jason her beloved in the purchase thereof: for which courtesy he took her to
wife, and by long travel arriving in Thessaly, Aeson the father of Jason now
grown decrepit through age, she restored to his former youth and strength:
notwithstanding, her husband forgetful of this great benefit done to his
father, forsook her bed, and married Creusa daughter to Creon king of Corinth;
with which ingratitude Medea enraged (yet dissembling her malice) she after
some insinuation presents Creusa with a glorious Mantle to the eye, which she
no sooner put on but her whole body was in a flame and she consumed unto
ashes: after the same sort perished king Creon with his queen. This done, she
murdered her children had by Jason, and being openly hurried by winged dragons
through the Air, she fled to Athens, and there was married to king Aegeus;
whose son Theseus, when she attempted to have poisoned in a cup of Gold
tempered with Aconitum (gathered from an herb that grew from the ^ome of
Cerberus) her treason being discovered and prevented, by her Magic skill she
shut her self within a cloud in which with her young son Medus (whose father
Aegeus was) she escaped into Asia. Of her Ovid speaks, Proportius, Valerius
Flacchus, Pliny, and many others.

Vitiae were so called of an infamous Witch called Vitia, Vitia.
these (as some Authors write) have power like the Ba^iliske to kill with the
eye, especially all such on whom they cast an envious and malicious look: of
the selfsame condition are a certain people amongst the Tribullians and
Illyrians Textor in Officin. Lib. 12. Micale.


Mycale is the name of a Witch in Ovid, likewise Dipsas; of the one he writes
thus: Matter erat Mycale quem deduxisse canendo
Sepe reluctantis, constabat cornua lunae.
Her mothers name was Mycale,
Known to have had the skill,
By spells, to pull the horned Moon
From heaven, against her will.


And of the other in the first book of his Elegies: Est quaedam quicunque
volet, etc.


Locusta is numbered amongst the rest, Locusta.
and remembered by Cornelius Tacitus, for making certain venomous confections
with which Agrippina poisoned her husband Claudius; from her many or the most
of her diabolical practice, are called Locustae, she is likewise spoaken of
by Iuuenall in one of his Satyrs. Satyr. 1.
Eriphila was an inchanteresse of that devilish condition that upon whom
soever she cast an envious eye, Eriphila.
that creature was sure to come to some extraordinary mischief; of whom was
raised a proverb, cast as an aspersion upon all such kind of women, Anus
Eriphus: Textor in Officin. cap. de Venificis. Thracia was a Nymph famous for
her incantations, Thracia.
who for her skill in herbs and cunning in exorcismes, was by some adored as
a goddess; of her came the people amongst whom she lived, to be called by the
name of Thracians. Gyge was the name of a beldame, Gyge.
who was a household servant to Parasatis the mother of king Cyrus, and by the
queen especially imployde in all her sorceries, Canidia Neapol.
Herodotus. Canidia Neopolitana was a confectione^ of unguents, a Witch, and
practiced in diverse kinds of sorceries, excellently discribed by Horace. In
Epod. Erictho.
Erictho was the name of a notorions Witch of Thessaly, deciphered by Lucan,
whom who shall read and desire plainly to be instructed in that horrible Art,
he shall not find it more truly and punctually discovered by any of the Latin
Poets. Gunthrune.
Gunthrune was a Witch of a strange devilish condition, who by her
incantations was the death of many creatures, as well beasts as men, yet being
dead there was no wound or mark of death appearing about them. Sagana, Sagana.
Veia, Veia.
and Folia, Folia.
were professors of the selfsame devilish Art, and are remembered by Tacitus,
Iuuenal, and Horace, these were said to have had hand in the death of the noble
child Varus.

A Witch of Scotland.
It shall not be amiss to insert amongst these, what I have heard concerning a
Witch of Scotland. One of that country (as by report there are too many) being
for no goodness by the Judges of Assise arraigned, convicted, and condemned to
be burnt, and the next day according to her judgment brought and tied to the
stake, the reeds and fagots placed round about her, and the executioner ready
to give fire (for by no persuasion of her ghostly father, nor importunity of
the sherifes, she could be wrought to confess any thing) she now at the last
cast, to take her farewell of the world, casting her eye a tone side spied her
only son, and calls to him, desiring him very earnestly as his last duty
to her, to bring her any water, or the least quantity of licour (be it never
so small) to comfort her, for she was extremely a thirst: at which he shaking
his head, said nothing; she still importuned him in these words, Oh my dear
son help me to any drink, be it never so little, for I am most extremely
dry, oh dry, dry; to whom the young fellow answered, by no means dear
mother will I do you that wrong: For the drier you are (no doubt) you will
burn the better.

Of Witches transported from one place to another by the Devil.
THe difference betwixt Witches, or to define what Magae are and what Lamiae,
were but time misspent, the rather because it has been an argument so much
handled in our mother tongue, I will only rehearse unto you some few
particular discourses concerning Witches, out of Danaeus, Bodinus, Wierius,
Grillaneus Italus, and others: all agree, that some have made express covenant
with the devil by Bond and Indenture sealed and delivered; others by promise
and oath only: as likewise that all such have secret marks about them in some
private place of their bodies, some in the inside of the lip, some in the hai^e
of the eye brows, some in the fundament, some in the inside of the thigh, the
hollow of the arm, or the privy parts. Albertus Pictus an Advocate in the
Parliament of Paris, reported he had seen one in the castle of Theodoricus who
had a plain mark upon the right shoulder, Io. Herui^^eria.
which the next day was taken off by the Devil. Claudius de Fagus the kings
procurator affirmed the like of one Ioanna Heruilleria. Concerning the
transportation of Witches through the air, Paulus Grillandus an Italian Doctor
of the law, that writ the histories of many Witches, says, That a country
villager not far from Rome, upon a night spying his wife daube her self with a
certain unguent, and instantly leap out at the window, after her stay from
him some three or four hours, had provided against her return a good
cudgel, with which he so soundly entertained her, that he forced her to
confess where she had been, but would not grant her free pardon till she had
made him promise to bring him to the sight of all these novelties, and
vnbeleeueable passages by her related: the match was concluded, she forewarned
him that he must in no wise use the name of God by the way, unless it were in
scorn or blasphemy, with other such horrible instructions. The night came,
they were both anointed, when presently two rough goats appeared at the
window, upon which they being mounted, were instantly hurried through the air
into a place where were an infinite multitude of people, men and women, and in
the midst one that seemed to be prince and sovereign of the rest, to whom
every of them did obeisance and adoration, she bid her husband stand in a
remote place till she had likewise done her worship, which she accordingly
performed: This done, they all danced together in a circle or ring, not as our
custom is face to face, but back to back, the rest may be coniectured, least
if any should be apprehended one might appeach the other. After their dance was
ended, the tables were covered and furnished, she calls to her husband to sit
down amongst the rest, and bids him welcome, he begins to feed, but finding
the meat to have no ^elish, in regard it was not well seasoned, he calls aloud
for salt, and many times before it came, it was brought at length, which he
seeing, before he tasted it, he thus said, Hor laudato sui Dio per e venuto
questo sale, i. Now God be thanked that the salt is come: these words were no
sooner spoken, but Men, Meat, Tables, Devils, Witches, all were vanished in an
instant, he was left alone naked, almost frosen with cold, ignorant in what
place, or whether to travel for shelter; day came, he spies sheepheards, and
asks them where he is? they tell him in the principality of Beneuent, under
the jurisdiction of the Pope, above an hundred miles from Rome. He was forced
to beg rags to cover him, and bread to relieve him, being eight days before he
could reach to his cottadge; he accuses his wife, she others, who were all
after delivered to the fire and burnt alive. The li^e history the same author
relates of a young damsel enticed by an old Witch to this damnable assembly,
in the Duchy of Spoletum, in the year of grace 1535. The like confession of
these assemblies, dances, and banquets, and after all, their common carnal
society, women with he-Deuills and men with she-spirits, was extorted from a
Witch of Lochinum, another of Lions, both suffered by fire; and their
arraignements, confessions, judgments, and executions published by Danaeus in
the year 1474. Of these meetings, banquets, dances, and congressions,
Friscalanus the before named Magitian gave ample testimony to Charles the
ninth king of France. Saluertes the President speaks of a Witch called
Beronda, Beronda.
who being brought to the stake, accused a great lady of France, for being one
of that damned society, but she obstinately denying it, the Witch thus said,
Have you forgot since our last meeting, when you were appointed to carry the
Challice of poison? Olaus Magnus li. 3. ca. 11. says that many of these
conuenticles are made in the North, and are frequent in the mount Atlas; as
likewise Mel. lib. 3. Solinus lib. 38. cap. 44. and Pliny lib. 5. cap. 1.
Infinite are the Histories to this purpose. A Spanish Magician.
Antonius de Turquemada a Spaniard, says, That a Magitian would needs persuade
his friend to be a spectator of this wicked assembly, all things being
prepared for the purpose, in the midst of which con^^uence was an huge ugly
goat, sitting upon a sublime throne, whom every one came to kiss by turns,
En la part ma senzia que tenia, those that understand the Spanish know it to
be a place which cannot modestly be named: which when his companion beheld, as
detesting such a bestial adoration, he left all patience, and with an
acclamation said to his friend, Dios a mui grandes bozes, i. Oh God with a loud
voice; which was no sooner spoken, but all things vanished in a tempestious
whirlewind, he was only left desolately forsaken, being three years before he
could come to visit his own fields and gardens. Of their exportation after
their unction, many authors testify, as upon a Goat, a Pegasus, a Night-crow,
an enchanted staff, etc. This puts me in mind of a discourse which was told by
a great lady, to have happened at her being in the Brill, A Witch of Brill.
which was then one of the Cautionarie towns in the possession of Q.
Elizabeth, a Muscatier one night standing centinell upon the walls, a little
before day, he heard a great noise of tatling gossips, laughing and talking
aloude, their voices (as he thought) came from the air, when casting his eyes
about to know from whence this prodegie might proceed: he might perceive a
duskie cloud come sweeping close along by him, in which it seemed to him they
sat that were so merry; being first affrighted at the object, and after taking
courage, he gives fire and shoots toward the cloud at random, at the report
of the musket the town is up in arms, his officers leave the court of guard
and come to know the matter, he tells them an incredible discourse, which he
spares not to confirm with a volley of oaths, they seek further toward the
place where he aimed his musket, and found an old woman with a bunch of keys
at her girdle and a bullet in her buttock, dropped out of the cloud, and the rest
vanished, they ceise her, she is after examined, and confesses who had bin to
make merry in her company, some of them proved to be rich burgers wives of
the city. The L. Adrianus Ferreus vicar general amongst the Laodunenses has
left remembered, that one Margarita Bremontia the wife of Noel Laueretus confessed
unto him that she with her mother Marie upon a monday night, Margarita
Bremontia.
not long before her examination, came into a like assembly at the mil called
Franquisenum, which stands in the meadow near unto Loginum, who bestriding a
broom staff, after some few words mumbled to her self, they were presently
transported thither, where they found Ioanna Roberta, Ioanna Guillemina, Marie
the wife of Simou Agnes, and Gulielma the wife of one Grassus, every one
mounted upon the like wodden horse; there met them six spirits, or Devils,
according to their number, in humane shape, but in aspect horrible, etc. who
after they had danced together, every Devil singled out his mistress, and
had with them mutual copulation, she says the Devil kissed her twice, and had
her company for the space of half an hour. Guillemina confessed the like, as
also, Perfrigidum semen ab eo Excreatum. The song used in those dances was
this; Har, Har; Diabole, Diabole; Sali huc, Sali illuc; Lude hic, Lude illic:
Then answered the rest; Sabbath, Sabbath, i. The feast day of rest, etc.
Johannes Megerus the accurate writer of the Flanders History, relates thar in
the year 1459, a great number of men and women Witches were burned, who
publickely confessed their unguents, transuections, dances, feasts, and
consocietie with Devils: so likewise Iacobus Sprangerus of German Witches, in
the cities and villages about Constantienses and Ratisbone, in the year 1485,
reports the like. I could tire the reader with infinite examples, authors,
testats, and adiurors, with the places, times, and circumstances, one or two at
the most shall suffice. Ioachimus Camarensis in his book de Natura Demonum,
tells us of a traveler that passing by night through a forest, heard the like
noise of music, mirth, dancing, and reuells, and approaching nearer to
discover the novel, espied the like conuention, when on the sudden the Devils
and Witches all vanished, and left behind them certain boules and cups of
plate, with the names of the owners engraven upon them, which he took and
carried the next day to the magistrates, by which many of the Witches were
known, these discovered others, all which were condemned to the stake. In the
year 1564, Saluertus being President amongst the Pictauians, where he with
Dauentonius his fellow President sat as Judges, three men and one woman were
convicted, and after doomed to the fire, all these confessed the ceremonies in
the before named nightly meetings: as also, that there was a Goat placed in the
midst of them, whose hinder parts they all kissed, every one holding a lighted
Candle in their hand. At length, with these Lights the Goat was burnt to ashes,
of which every of them received a quantity. This dust they scattered upon the
thresholds of Houses, Stable-doores, Oxe-stalls, or Sheepecoates, to destroy
either Children, Horses, Sheep, or such Cattle of their enemies. This being
distributed amongst them, the Devil cried with a loud voice, Revenge your
selves of your enemies, or die your selves. At the next meeting, every one was
particularly examined of the mischiefs they had done; and such as could not
give just account of some or other ill, were publicly mocked and derided by
the rest, and after received so many stripes as were adjudged her by the
Devil; insomuch that one Witch confessed she could never rest nor be at quiet
in her own thoughts, unless she were doing some villainy or other; and if
she had no worse work in hand, she must break Pots, Glasses, pluck out the
Spiggots and let the Beer run out of the Barrells into the Cellar floores,
to keep her hand in ure. Of the power of Witches, and Witchcraft, Virgil (who
was held not to be the least amongst the Magicians) speaks in many places; but
none more amply than Ovid, when he thus writ: Quum volui, ripis ipsis
mirantibus, amnes
In Fontes rediere suos, etc.
When I so list, I make the banks admire
To see the floods back to their heads retire,
And stay them there: when standing on the shore,
I strike the Seas, I make the billows rore,
And calm them being angry, I beat back
The stormy Clouds, or can command the Rack
To bring in sweeping Tempests: the four Winds
My Incantation does let loose, or binds.
I remove Woods, shake Mountains: when I speak,
The Vipers jaws I by my Spells can break.
When I but please, the Earth beneath me groans,
And Sepulchers from the corrupted Bones
Send forth their Ghosts, before my face t'appeare.
I thee, o horned Moon, call from thy Sphere, etc.


Much more might be cited out of the ancient Poets, to illustrate these
collected out of our modern Histories of later times, and almost every day
presented before our eyes. But this one shall serve for many.

Of Witches that have either changed their own shapes, or transformed others.
WHether this be possible in Nature, or no, or whether it has any time been
suffered by the Divine permission, has been a Question as well amongst the
Theologists, as the Philosophers: It is no business of mine at this present to
reconcile their Controversies, my promise is only to acquaint you with such
things as I have either read, or heard related: which if they err in any thing
from truth, blame not me, but the Authors. Concerning Lycantropia, Lycantropia
or men that change themselves into Wolves, Doctor Bordinus (general
Procurator for the king) relates, That a Wolf setting upon a man, he shot him
with an arrow through the thigh: who being wounded, and not able to pluck out
the shaft, fled to his house, kept his bed, being found to be a man, and the
arrow after known by him that shot it, by the Lycantropies confession. Those
that are the diligent Inquisitors after Witches, report in a book entitled
Malleum Maleficarum, That a countreyman was violently assaulted by three great
Cats, who in the defense of himself wounded them all dangerously; and these
were known to be three infamous Witches, who were after found bleeding, and by
reason of their hurts, in great danger of death. Petrus Mamorius in his book
de Sortilegis, affirms that he saw the like in Sabaudia. Henricus Coloniensis
in Libello de Lamijs, affirms for an undoubted truth, as also Vlrichus Molitor
in his book dedicated unto Sigismund Caesar, in a Disputation before the
Emperor, confidently witnesses, That he saw of these Lycantropi (which have
transhaped themselves) at Constantinople, accused, convicted, condemned, and
upon their own confession delivered unto death. These, the Germans call
Werwolff; the Frenchmen, Loups Garous; the Picards, Loups Warous, i. diverse
Wolves: The Greeks call them Lukanthr^pous, or Mormolukias; the Latins (or
the Romans) call them Versipelles, i. Turne-coats, or Turne-skinnes, as Pliny
in these transmutations has observed. Franciscus Phoebus Fecensis Comes, in
his book de Venatione, i. of Hunting, says, That by the Garouz is signified
Gardez vous, i. Guard, or look to your selves. Pomponatius and Theophra^tus
(the Princes of the Philosophers in their age) most constantly affirm the
transmigration of Witches into Wolves. Gasper Peucerus (an approved learned
man, and the cousin german to Philip Melancthon) held these things to be mere
fables, till by Merchants of worthy reputation and credit he was better
informed (from certain proofs brought him from Liuonia) of such that for the
same fault were (upon their own confessions) adjudged to death. These, and
greater, are confirmed by Languetus Burgundus, Agent for the Duke of Saxony,
with the king of France; as also by Herodotus Neurios, who affirms these
conuersions and transhapes to be most frequent in Liuonia. In the History of
Johannes Tritemius you may read, Anno 970. of a Jew called Baianus, the son
of Simeon, who could transform himself into a Wolf at his own pleasure. Of
the like to these, Herodotus, Homer, Pomponius Mela, Solinus, Strabo,
Dionisius, Afer, M. Varro, Virgil, Ovid, and many others have written, long
before these times; as likewise Epanthes, remembered by Pliny, and Agrippas in
his Olimpionicis, who speaks of (...) Demaenetius Parrhasius, translated into
a Wolf. Or who so would be better confirmed, let him read Olaus Magnus, of
the Nations of Pilapia, Narbonia, Fincladia, and Augermania; or else Saxo
Gramaticus, Fincelius, and Gulielmus Brabantius. And therefore those things are
not altogether incredible, Lycaon, who was transformed into a Wolf.
which Ovid speaks of Lycaon (who included much truth in many Fables) who in
his Metamorphosis thus says: Territus ipse fagit, noctusque silentia ruris
Exululat frustraque loqui conatur, etc.
Frighted he flies, and having got
The silence of the shades,
Thinking to speak he howles, and then
The neighbor flocks inuades.


So much for monsterous Wolves, I come now to mere Witches. Saint Augustine in
this book de Ciuitate Dei, Lib. 18. cap. 17. and 18. tells of diverse hostesses
or Inkeepers practiced in these diabolical Arts, who put such confections into
a kind of Cheese they made, that all such travelers as guested with them and
eat thereof, were presently metamorphosed into laboring beasts, as Horses,
Asses, or Oxen, all which they imployde either in drawing or bearing of
burdens, or else let them out for Hackneyes to gain profit by-their hyre, and
when their work was done and they had made of them what benefit they could,
they restored them to their pristine shape; Ranulphus and Willielmus de Regibus
lib. 20. relates a History of two such Witches that lived in the road-way to
Rome. A strange Witchcraft.
A Minstrell or Pyper traveling that way, tasted of this cheese and was
presently changed into an Ass, who notwithstanding he had lost his shape,
still retained his natural reason, and (as one Banks here about this city
taught his Horse to show tricks, by which he got much money) so this Ass
being capable of what was taught him, and understanding what he was bid to do,
showed a thousand several pleasures (almost impossible to be apprehended by
any unreasonable creature) to all such as came to see him and paid for the
sight, insomuch that he was sold by these Witches to a neighbor of theirs, for
a great sum of money, but at the delivery of him says one of the Witches,
Take heed neighbor (if you mean to have good of your beast) that in any case
you lead him not through the water: The poor transhaped Pyper this hearing,
apprehends, that water might be the means to restore him to his former humane
figure, purposing in himself to make proof thereof at his next best
opportunity. Careful was the new merchant of the charge given, and watered
him still in a paile, but would never let him drink from the river; but the
master traveling by the way and to ease his beast alighting, and leading him
in his hand: the Ass on the sudden broke his bridle, ran out of sight, and
leaped into the next river he came near, where leaving his saddle and
furniture behind, he waded out in his own shape: the man pursues him with all
the speed he can, and follows him the way he took, the first he meets is
the Pyper, and asks him if he saw not such a kind of beast, and describes him
to a hair. The fellow acknowledges himself to have been the same Ass he
bought of the Witch; the master wondereth, and relates this to his Lord, his
Lord acquaints this novel to Petrus Damianus a man of approved knowledge and
wisdom, and numbered amongst the greatest scholars of his age; he examines
the Master, the Pyper, the Witches, and such as saw him leap into the river a
Beast and return a Man, and informs Pope Leo the seventh thereof. All their
examinations and confessions were taken, and a disputation of the possibility
thereof held in the presence of the Pope, before whom the truth thereof was
acknowledged and recorded. The same History is told by Viacentius in Speculo
lib. 3. cap. 109. and Fulgentius lib. 8. cap. 11.

We read in Gulielmus Archbishop of Tyrus, Miraculous Transformations.
whom Sprangerus the great Inquisitor cites to the same purpose: An English
soldier being in Cyprus, was by a Witch transformed into an Ass, and when all
his mates went on shipboard, he following them as loath to loose their
fellowship, was by his own friends and country men that gave him lost, beaten
back with clubs and staves. They put to Sea without him, and he having no
other owner, returned back to the Witches house that had transhaped him, who
imployde him in all her drudgeries; till at length he came into the Church
when the Bishop was at divine service, and fell on his knees before the Altar,
and began to use such devout gestures as could not be imagined to proceed
from a bruit beast, this first bred admiration, and then suspicion. The Witch
was called before the Judges, examined and convicted, after condemned to the
stake; having before restored him to his former shape after three years
transformation. Answerable to this we read of Ammonius the Philosopher, of the
Sect of the Peripate tickes, who has left recorded, That an Ass came usually
into his school at the time of reading and with great attention listened to
his Lecture. Merchants have delivered, that nothing is more frequent in Egypt
than such transhapes, in so much that Bellonius in his observations printed at
Lutesia, says, That he himself in the subburbes of Caire (a great city in
Egypt) saw a Commedian that desired conference with the Ass that he himself
rode on, who wondering what he then intended gave him liberty of free
discourse; where they seemed to talk with great familiarity (as having bin
before acquainted) where the Ass by his actions and signs seemed to apprehend
whatsoever was spoken to him; when the one protested with the hand upon his
breast, the other would strike the ground with his foot and when the man had
spoke as if he had told some jest, the Ass would bray aloude as if he had
laughed heartily at the conceit, appearing to him, not only to apprehend and
understand whatsoever was spoken, but to make answer to such questions as were
demanded him. These things have been so common, that Saint Augustine himself,
as he will not affirm the transformation of Apuleius, so he does not deny it,
but leaves it as a thing possible to be done by Witchcraft; De Ciuitate Dei,
lib. 18. cap. 18. Of the like opinion is Paulus Aegenita, Theophrast,
Paracethus, Pomponalius and F^rnetius, the excellentest Physicians of their
age, Fern. lib. de abditis rerum causis, You may read in the History of Saint
Clement, That Simon Magus transformed Faustinianus into his own shape, Simon
Magus.
insomuch that he was not only unknown to familiar friends, but denied and
abiured by his own wife and children. This Simon came likewise to Nero, and
told him if he cut off his head he would within three days appear to him
alive; which Nero having caused to be done in a great confluence of people, he
came to him after according to his promise, for which Nero caused a statue to
be erected to his honor, and inscribed upon the same, Simoni Mago deo, i. To
Simon Magus the god. From which time Nero wholely applyde himself to that
devilish Art. But Simon, as the History relates, had deceived the eyes of the
Emperor with the multitude, and had caused a Goat to be beheaded in his shape.
The like Apuleius relates of himself, who when he thought he had slain three
sundry men with his own hand, found them after, three Goats skins
effacinated by the Witch Pamphila. Among these Witches, it shall not be amiss
to insert a shee-diuell or two.

She Devils.
Franciscus Picus Mirandulanus in his book de Praenotione tells of a Priest
who was a Witch, called Benedictus Berna, of the age of fourscore years, with
whom he had conference, he confessed unto him that for the space of forty
years and upward he had carnal consocietie with a she-Spirit, Hermione alias
Hermelina.
who called her self Hermione, who continually attended on him, but visible to
no man save himself. He further confessed that he had sucked the blood of many
infants, with other most horrid and execrable commissions; and in this Wierius
and Bodin (though in many opinions they were Antagonists) agree. They relate a
further history confirmed by Cardanus de varietat. lib. 15. cap. 80. of one
Pinnetus who lived to the age of seventy years and upward, and exercised the
like congression with a Spirit in a feminine shape, who called her self
Florina, Florina.
and continued their familiarity and acquaintance for the space of forty
years. How true or false I know not, but I have heard the like (not many
years since) by an English gentleman, whose name I am loath to use, who had
the like company of a Spirit, who called her self Cadua; Cadua.
the circumstances I cannot discover without offense, though they be worthy
both relation and observation.

Of Witches that have confessed themselves to have raised tempests in a most
serene Sky, with other things of no less admiration.
IN the book of Inquisitors, lib. 4. de Malific. it is recorded, that anno
Dom. 1488 in Constantiensis, there were terrible tempests, prodigious hail^ and
storms, the like not seen before, and these within the compass of four
miles: but the air or temperate heavens beyond that space seemed no way
disturbed; upon which the villagers laid hands upon all such suspected women as
were thought to be of that Deuillish practice: amongst which were two, the one
called Anna de Mindele, Anna de Mindele.
the other Agnes, Agnes.
who first obstinately denied themselves to be so addicted; but after being
called before the magistrates, and strictly examined apart, they confessed, that
the one unknown to the other, went into the fields, where either of them made
a pit in the earth, into which they poured a certain quantity of water,
somewhat before noone, and by uttering certain words not fit to be named, and
inuoking the name of the Devil, they were no sooner got home to their
cottages, but those miraculous storms and tempests happened. The same author
specifies the confession of another Witch of the same place, who seeing all her
neighbors and acquaintance invited to a solemn wedding, where after dinner in
a fair and ^^mperate day, all the guests disposed themselves into the fields
to sport and dance, according to the custom, she caused her self to be
transported into the air by the Devil (in the open day and sight of certain
sheepheards) to a certain hill near unto the village, where because she had
no water ready, she notwithstanding dug a pit, and for necessity (because
it is a ceremony used in all these diabolical practices) she made water,
which stirring in the same pit, and speaking some blasphemous words, instantly
the air and sky which was then clear and vnclouded, was filled with storms,
hail, and tempest, which poured with such vehemency upon the guests of the
village, and upon them alone, that they were pittiously wet and weatherbeaten,
till they had not any of them a dry thread about them; all imagined this to be
done by Witchcraft: the same woman was accused by the sheepheards, who
confessing the fact, was adjudged unto the stake. In this is to be observed
that the fruits, the grain, nor vines were blasted, though there is a law
extant in the twelve tables, Qui fruges incantassit poenas dato, i. They that
shall inchant or blast the fields let them be punished. There was another edict
which prohibited any man from drawing the fertility and harvest of another
man's field into his own ground, in these words, Ne alienam segetem pellexeris
incantando, and in another place, Ne incantanto ne agrum defraudanto, which
has reference to the former. By the authority of these Roman ordinances
specified in the twelve tables, Turnius was accused by Spurius Albinus, because
when there was a dearth in the country, his fields were only abundant and
plentiful, and where other men's cattle died of the ro^ and murren, his were
fa^, fair, and in good plight and liking: upon this accitement he caused his
horses, his ox^n, his teemes, cattle, and servants all to appear with him
before the Senate, and there pleaded that the masters eye made the cattle fat,
and his care and industry the servant thriuing, sightly, and in good liking,
protesting he knew no other enchantments; and for that answer was acquitted by
the Senate. Notwithstanding this, we may read in Sprangerus of Hyppones and
Stradlinus, two famous Magitians of Germany, who confessed that they could at
any time, steal the third part of the croppe out of another field at their
pleasure; when by the most authenticke judgments it is aprooued that no Witch
or Coniurer was ever known to enrich himself the value of one mite by his
Magic documents. The like I could produce out of Pontan^s and other Authors,
Lib. 5.
with that ancient verse borrowed by all the Magitians from Virgill: Flectere
si nequeam superos acheroeta mouebo.
If to my prayers the gods will not incline
I will solicit Hell, and make that mine.


Boethius lib. 2.
In the Scottish-Cronicle it is related of king Duffus to be troubled with a
strange disease, that he could eat well, drink well, and in the constitution
of his body found no imperfection at all, only he could not sleep, but spent
the tedious night in faint and cold sweats, insomuch that there was despair of
the kings health and safety: There was at length a rumor published, That the
Morauians (certain inhabitants of Scotland, once great rebels and enemies of
the king, but since made regular, and reconciled to their faithful obeisance)
had hired certain Witches to destroy king Duffus, upon which report, one
Douenaldus was made Pre^^^^ to enquire after this business, and had authority
to pass into Morauia, and if he found any such malefactors, to punish them
according to their offenses; he being careful of the charge imposed on him,
had such good intelligence, and withal used such providence, that he came
just at the instant when certain Witches were rosting of a Picture called by
the name of the king, and basted it with a certain liquor: Douenaldus
surprising them in the act, examined them, who confessed the treason, and were
condemned to the stake; at which instant, by all just computation, the king
recovered and was restored to his pristine rest and health. After the same
manner it seems Me^eager was tormented by his mother, the Witch Althaea,
Althaea.
who in the fatal Brand burned him alive, as it is expressed at large by Ovid
in his Metamorph. The like effacinations we have had practiced in our memory
even upon the person of Queen Elizabeth.

A Tale of a Witch.
A woman of good credit and reputation, whom I have known above these four and
twenty years and is of the same parish where I now live, has often related
unto me upon her credit with many deep protestations (whose words I have
heard confirmed by such as were then passengers with her in the same ship).
That coming from the Landsgraues Court of Hessen (where she had been brought
a bed) to travail for England, and staying something long for a passage at
Amsterdam (either her business or the wind detaining her there somewhat longer
than her purpose 7 an old woman of the town entreated her to lend her some
money of a Ket^^e; which she did, knowing it to be serviceable for her, to
keep a Charcoale fire in at Sea, to comfort her and her child. When the wind
stood fair, and that she with her servants had bargained for their passage,
and they were ready to go aboard, she sent for this woman, to know if she
would redeem her pawn, for she was now ready to leave the town, and depart
for her country. The old woman came, humbly entreating her she would not bear
away her Kettle, notwithstanding she had as then no money to repay of that she
had borrowed, but hoped that she was a good gentlewoman, and would prove her
good mistress, etc. she answered her again, That she had lent her so much
money, and having a pawn sufficient in her hand, finding it necessary for her
purpose, she would make the best use of it she could a shipboord. The old woman
finding her resolute, left her with these words, Why then (says she) carry
it away if thou can. Marry and I will cry what I can do, replied she
again; and so they parted. The Master called aboard, the wind stood fair,
the Sea was calm, and the weather pleasant: but they had not been many hours
at Sea, when there arose a sudden, sad, and terrible tempest, as if the winds
and waters had been at dissension, and the distempered air at war with
both. A mighty storm there arose, insomuch that the Master protested, that
in his life time he had not seen the like, and being in despair of
shipwreck, desired both Sailors and passengers to betake themselves to their
prayers. This word came from them that labored above the Harches to those that
were stowed under: their present fear made them truly apprehend the danger,
and betake themselves to their devotions; when suddenly one casting up his
eyes, espied an old woman sitting on the top of the maine Mast: the Master saw
her, and all those that were above, being at the sight much amassed. The rumor
of this went down; which the gentlewoman hearing (who was then sitting with
her child in her Cabin, and warming it over a Charcoale fire made in the
Kettle) O God says she (remembering her former words) then the old woman is
come after me for her Kettle; the Master apprehending the business, Marry
and then let her have it, says he, and takes the Kettle, coals and all, and
casts them ouer-boord into the Sea. This was no sooner done, but the Witch
dismounts her self from the Mast, goes aboard the Brass Kettle, and in a
moment sails out of sight: the Air cleared, the Winds grew calm, the
tempest ceased, and she had a fair and speedy passage into England: and this
the same gentlewoman has often related. Nor is this more incredible than that
which in Geneua is still memorable. A Witch of Geneua.
A young wench instructed in this damnable science, had an Iron Rod, with which
whomsoever she touched, they were forced to dance without ceasing, til they
were tired, and lay down with weariness. She for her Witchcraft was condemned
to the fire, to which she went unrepentant with great obstinacy: and since
which time (as Bodinus says, who records this history) all dancing in memory
of her is forbidden, and held even till this day abominable amongst those of
Geneua. Our most learned writers are of opinion, that these Inchantresses can
bewitch some, but not all, for there are such over whom they have no power. The
same Author testifies, That he saw a Witch of Auerne, Another kind of
Witchcraft.
in the year 1579, who was taken in Lutetia, about whom was found a Book of a
large Volume, in which were drawn the hayres of Horses, Oxen, Mules, Swine,
and other beasts, of all colors whatsoever: She (if any beasts were sick)
would undertake their cure, by receiving some number of their hayres, with
which she made her Spells and Incantations; neither could she help any beast,
by her own confession, but by transferring that disease or malady upon
another; neither could she cure any creature, if she were hired for money:
therefore she went poorly, in a coat made up with patches. A nobleman of
France sent to one of these Witches, to cure a sick Horse whom he much loved:
she returned him answer, That of necessity his Horse or his Groom must die,
and bid him choose whether: The nobleman craving some time of pawse and
deliberation, the servant in the interim died, and the Horse recovered; for
which fact she was apprehended and judged. It is a general observation, That
the Devil (who is a destroyer) never heales one creature but by hurting
another, and commonly he transmits his hate from the worse unto the better: For
instance, if a Witch cure a Horse, the disease falls upon one of higher price;
if she heal the wife, she harms the husband; if help the son, she
infects the father. Of this I will produce one or two credible instances: The
Lord Furnerius.
The first, of the Lord Furnerius Aureliensis, who finding himself mortally
(as he thought) diseased, sent to a Witch to counsel with her about his
recovery; who told him, there was no hope of his life unless he would yield
that his young son (then sucking at the Nurses breast) should have his mortal
infirmity confirmed upon it. The father to save his own life, yields that his
son should perish: of which the Nurse hearing, just at the hour when the
father should be healed, is absent and conceales the child. The father is no
sooner touched, but helped of his disease; the Witch demands for the child, to
transfer it upon him: the child is missing, and cannot be found: which the
Witch hearing, broke out into this exclamation, Actum est, de me, puer vbinam
est? i. I am undone, where is the child? when scarce having put her foot over
the threshold to return home, but she fell down suddenly dead, her body being
blasted, and as black as an Aethiope. Example of the like.
The like remarkable Judgment fell upon a Witch amongst the Nanuetae, who was
accused of bewitching her neighbor: The magistrates commanded her but to touch
the party distempered with her Enchantments (which is a thing much used by all
the German Judges, even in the Imperial Chamber it self) the Witch denied to
do it: but seeing they began to compel her by force, she likewise cried out,
I am then undone; when instantly the sick woman recovered, and the Witch then
in health, fell down suddenly and died, whose body was after condemned to the
fire: And this, Bodinus affirms to have heard related from the mouth of one of
the Judges who was there present. In Tholosa there was one skillful in Magic,
who was borne in Burdegall: he coming to visit a familiar friend of his (who
was extremely afflicted with a Quartane Ague, almost even to death) told him
he pitied his case exceedingly; and therefore if he had any enemy, but give
him his name, and he would take away the Fever from him, and transfer it
upon the other. The sick gentleman thanked him for his love, but told him,
there was not that man living whom he hated so much, as to punish him with such
a torment: Why then (says he) give it to thy servant; the other answering,
That he had not the conscience so to reward his good service: Why then give it
me says the Magician; who presently answered, With all my heart take it you,
who it seems, best knows how to dispose it. Upon the instant the Magician
was stroke with the fever, and within few days after dyed, in which interim
the sick gentleman was perfectly recovered. Gregory Turonensis lib. 6. cap.
35. says, That when the wife of king Chilperick perceived her young son to
be taken away by Witchcraft, she was so violently incensed and enraged
against the very name of a Sorceresse, that she caused diligent search to be
made, and all such suspected persons upon the least probability to be dragged
to the stake, or broken on the wheel, most of these confessed that the kings
son was bewitched to death, for the preservation of Mummo the great Master, a
potent man in the kingdom: this man in the midst of his torments smiled,
confessing that he had received such enchanted drugs from the Sorcerists, that
made him insensible of pain: but wearied with the multitude of torments, he
was sent to Burdegall, where he not long after died. I desire not to be tedious
in any thing: for innumerable Histories, to these purposes, offer themselves
unto me at this present; but these few testimonies proceeding from authenticke
Authors, and the attestations of such as have been approouedly learned, may
serve in this place, as well as to relate a huge number of unnecessary
discourses from writers of less fame and credit. Neither is it to any purpose
hear to s^^ake of the Witches in Lap-land; Fin-land, and these miserable and
wretched cold countries, where to buy and sell winds betwixt them and the
merchants, is said to be as frequent and familiarly done amongst them as eating
and sleeping.

There is another kind of Witches that are called Extasists, Witches called
Extasists.
in whose discovery I will strive to be brief. A learned Neapolitan (in a
History not long since published, that treates altogether of natural Magic)
speaks of a Witch whom he saw strip her self naked, and having anointed her
body with a certain unguent, fell down without sense or motion, in which
ecstasy she remained the space of three hours; after, she came to her self,
discovering many things done at the same time in diverse remote places, which
after inquiry made were found to be most certain. Answerable to this, is that
reported by the President Turetranus, who in the Delphina^ saw a Witch burned
alive, whose story he thus relates: She was maidseruant to an honest citisen,
who coming home unexpected, and calling for her, but hearing none to answer,
searching the rooms, he found her lying all along by a fire which she had
before made in a private chamber; which seeing, he kicked her with his foot, and
bid her arise like a lasie huswife as she was and get her about her business:
but seeing her not to move, he took a tough and smart wand and belabored her
very soundly; A strange kind of Witchcruft.
but perceiving her neither to stir nor complain, he viewing her better, and
finding all the parts of her body insensible, took fire and put it to such
places of her body as were most tender, but perceiving her to have lost all
feeling, was persuaded she was dead, and called in his next neighbors, telling
them in what case he found her, but concealing unto them the shrewd blows he
had given her: the neighbors left the house, the master and mistress caused
her to be laid out, so left her and went to their rest; but toward the
morning, hearing some body to stir and gro^ne in the chamber, they found their
servant removed, and laid in her bed, at which the good man much amassed, asked
her in the name of God, being la^e dead, how came she so soon recovered? to
whom she answered, Oh master, master, why have you beaten me thus? the man
reporting this amongst his neighbors, one amongst the rest said, if this be
true she is then doubtless a Witch, and one of these Extasists: at which the
Master growing suspicious, urged her so strictly that she confessed, though her
body was there present, yet her soul was abroad at the assembly of diverse
Witches, with many other mischiefs, for which she was held worthy of death,
and judged. At Burdegall in the year 1571, when there was a decree made in
France, against the strict prosecution of Witches, an old Sorceresse of that
place, amongst many horrid and fearful things confessed by her, she was
convicted and imprisoned, where D. Boletus visited her, desiring to be
eyewitness of some of those things before by her acknowledged: to whom the
Witch answered, That she had not power to do any thing in prison. But desirous
to be better satisfied concerning such things, he commanded her for the present
to be released and brought out of the Jail to another lodging, where she in
his presence having anointed her body with a certain unguent, from the
crown to the heel naked, fell into a sudden apoplex, appearing to them as
dead, deprived of all sense or motion: but after five hours returning to her
self, as if she awaked out of a dream, she related many things done near and
far off in that interim; of which sending to know the truth, they found her
to err in nothing: this was confirmed to Bodinus by an Earl of great honor,
who was then present when this thing was done. Olaus Magnus in his history,
says, That those things are common in the Northren parts of the world, and
that the friends of those Extasists diligently keep and safeguard their bodies
whilst their Spirits are abroad, either to carry rings, tokens, or letters to
their friends though never so far off, and bring them answers back again,
with infallible tokens of their being there. Many I could here produce to the
like purpose, I will end with S. Augustine lib. de Ciuitate Dei 18. who
affirms the father of Prestantius has confessed himself to have been
transported with such ecstasies, that when his Spirit has returned to him
again, he has constantly affirmed that he has been changed into an horse,
and in the company of others carried provision into the camp, when in the
mean time his body was known to lie at home in his chamber breathless, and
without moving, and this has reference to Liranthropia, i. The changing of
men into beasts. So much spoken of by the ancient writers, and now so frequent
in the Oriental parts of the world. Some observe, as Strangerus Danaeus, and
others, that no Witch can weep or s^ed a tear. Others (as the Germans in some
parts) that a Witch cannot sink, Things observed in Witches.
nor drown in the water, and therefore to try them being suspected, they cast
them into moates and rivers. They can do nothing in prison, neither will they
confess any thing till the Devil has qui^e forsaken them (I mean in his
power to help them, not in his covenant to enjoy them.) They are all penurious
and needy, neither have they the least power of the Judges: they have art to
hurt others, but none any way to benefit themselves. There is not any of them
but wears the Devils mark about her. They never look any man or woman
steadfastly in the face, but their eyes wander of the one side or other, but
commonly they are dejected downward: they answer pertinently to no question
demanded them. They all desire to see the Judges before they come to their
arraignement, being of a confident opinion, that if they behold them first, the
Judges have no power to condemn them: but if they be first brought to the
place, all their Sorceries are vain and of no validity. Others are remembered
by D. Adamus Martinus, Procurator of Laod^num, proved upon the famous Witch
Beibrana, Beibrana.
whom he sentenced to the stake. But these shall suffice for this present, for
CALLIOPE now pluckes me by the elbow, to remember her.

Explicit Liber Octauus, Inscriptus URANIA.
THE NINTH BOOK, Inscribed CALLIOPE: Entreating of Women in general, with the
Punishments appertaining to the Vicious, and Rewards due to the Virtuous.
WHEN I enter into a true consideration of how many several Affections,
Dispositions, Actions, and Passions in Women I have had occasion to speake^ of
the Good and Bad, Famous and Infamous, Virtuous and Dishonest, Illustrious and
Obscure; next, of all Ages, from the Cradle to the Grave, the Swathband to the
Winding sheet^ then, of all Estates, Degrees, and Callings, from the Empress
in the Court to the Shepherdess in the Village: when I next ponder with my
self, that all these are gathered to the Earth from whence they came; and that
we (who are yet breathing) do but hourly tread upon our Graves, lingering and
prolonging a few uncertain minutes, and must necessarily follow; and that our
lives are but a Circular motion, or a Circle drawn by a Compas^ ending where
it first began, being but as the wheels of a Clock wound up, and (as we move
in the passage of our life) like the Hand of a Dyall, point first to one hour,
then a second, so to a third, still showing our years in our growth, that any
man may read what a Clock it is with us by our Age: but when the Plummets and
Weights have forced our Wheels so often about, till there is no more Line
left, then we cease both motion, noise, and being: Next, that all know they
must die, but none the time when they shall die, and that as Seneca in Hercule
Furente says: Prima quae vitam dedit hora carpsit.
i. That the first hour of our life, takes an hour from our life. These
considerations of humane frailetie (as that there is but one Life, but many
ways to destroy it; but one Death, yet a thousand means to hasten it) mooues
me to persuade all, as well men as women, young as old, noble as base, of both
Sexes, and of what calling or condition soever, to doubly arm themselves with
constancy to abide it, and courage to entertain it: For as Ausonius in
Periandri Sententia says, Mortem optare malum, timere peius, i. As it is ill
to wish death, so it is worse to fear it: besides, as it is base Cowardice
dishonourably to shun it, so it is mere Pusillanimitie despairingly to hasten
it. It is observed, such as live best, dread it least. Let this then persuade
you unto Virtue; since to the Vicious only it seems terrible, why should we
fear the Grave? since there the modest and chaste Virgin^ lies fearelesse and
secure, though by the side of the libidinous Adulterer; there the true man may
rest, and though he have twenty Thieves about him, sleep soundly, and never
dream of Robbing; there the poor Tenant is not afraid of his oppressing
Landlord; nor trembles the innocent, to lie next the wicked and corrupt Judge;
the Handmaid is not frighted with the tongue of her proud and cursed Mistress,
nor quakes the young scholar at the terrible voice of his Master. There is no
Brawling, but all Peace; no Dissension, but all Concord, Unity, and Equality:
which Propertius in his third book, Eleg. 5. elegantly illustrates.

Haud vllas portabis opes Acherontis ad vndas,
Nudus ad Infernus stulte vehere rates, etc.
No Wealth thou can bear with thee (O thou fool)
All naked thou must pass the Stigian Poole:
There is no strife in Weapons, or in Wits,
But now the vanquished with the Victor sits.
The Captive Iugurth has an equal place
With Consul Marius, now in eithers face
Shines Love and Amity. There is no Throne
For Lydian Croesus, he is now all one
With poor Dulichian Irus: no regard
Of persons there; he dies best, dies prepared.
Then, since all things acquire and pursue their ends, that no earthly thing
has been made, that shall not be destroyed; why should we not with as much
cheer and alacrity welcome our newest and last hour, as the Labourer desires
to rest, or the weary Traveler to come to his inn? To this purpose Seneca
speaks in his Tragedy of Agamemnon: Qui vultus Acherontis atri
Qui Stigia tristem non tristis videt,
Audetque vitae ponere finem
Par ille Regi, par superis erit.
Feareles who dare gaze upon
Black and griesly Acheron?
He that merrily dare look
On the gloomie stygian Brook.
Who so bears his spirit so hye
That he at any hour dares dye,
A king he is in his degree,
And like the gods (in time) shall be.


Some may wonder why I have took this occasion to speak of death, I am
willing to give them this satisfaction, The Muse CALIOPE under whom I patronise
this last book, being no other than a redundance of sound, or one entire
Music arising from eight several Instruments, and therefore as she
participates from every one, so she exists of all; therefore in this
succeeding tractate, I purpose by the help of the divine assistance, to take a
brief survey of what has passed in the eight former books, to show you the
punishments belonging to all such vices as I have discovered in the frailty of
the Sex, to deter the Vicious, and expose unto the eyes of the Noble, Chaste,
and Learned, the honor and reward due to their excellent gifts, thereby to
encourage the Virtuous. Then since besides the Shame or Honor in this life,
the one is punished and the other glorified in the life to come, what more
necessary meditation than (that we may live the better) hourly to think of
death, and that is the scope I aim at: but before I can arrive so far, I
purpose to deliver unto you the dispositions, conditions, and quallities of
diverse sorts of women by me not yet remembered.

Of Women Ravished, etc.
MArpissa the daughter of Euenus was ravished by Apollo, Marpissa,
she was the wife of Idas. Perhibaea.
So Proserpine the daughter of Jupiter and Ceres, by Pluto, therefore he is
called by Claudian, Europa.
Ovid, and Sylus, lib, 14. the infernal Rauisher. Auge.
Perhibea by Axus the son of Oceanus, as Europa by Jupiter, and Auge by
Hercules. Phaebe.
Castor and Pollux who for their valor were called Dioscuri, Ilairia.
which imports as much as the issue of Jupiter; they from Messene raped the two
daughters of Leucippus, Phoebe and Ilaira, whom they after married: of Pollux
and Phoebe was begot and borne Mnesilius; of Castor and Ilaira, Anagon. They
with their associats, Idas and Lynceas, the sons of Aphareus, had driven away a
great prey of cattle; when they came to divide the booty, a motion was made
that an Ox should be divided into four, according to the number of the
brothers, with this condition, that he which could devour his quarter first
should have the one half of the cattle, and he that had next made an end of
his part, should possess the remainder. This was no sooner agreed upon, but
Idas suddenly eat up his own portion, and presently devoured that which
belonged to his brother, by which he claimed the whole heard, and being
stronger in faction than the Dioscuri drove the prey back to Messene. With
which injury the two brothers incensed, they levied fresh forces^ invaded
Messene, and took from thence a much greater booty than the former: the
spoil being safely disposed off, Castor and Pollux awaited the pursuers,
ambushed themselves beneath a broad spreading Oak, quick-sighted Linces
espying Castor showed him to his brother, whom Idas slew with an arrow; whom
Pollux pursuing, transpiersed Linceus with his iaueline, Ap^llod. lib. 3.
and unadvisedly chasing, Idas was brained by him with a stone; for which
Jupiter stroke Idas with a Thunderbolt, and translated the two princely
brothers (the Dioscuri) into stars. Of these Propert. lib. 1. thus says: Non
sic Leucippi succendit Castora Phoebe
Pollucem cultu, non Ilaira soror.
Fair Phoebe did not so inflame
Her Castor with desire,
Nor Ilaira Pollux breast
Decked in her best attire.


Ariadne.
Theseus rapt Ariadne daughter of king Ninus, as also Hellen the daughter of
Tindarus and Laeda, and sister to Castor and Pollux, long before Paris, but
returned her back vnuitiated. Diomeda.
Achilles forced Diomeda the daughter of Phorbas from Lesbos, Orythea.
as Boreas the fair Orithea daughter of Erisicthon from Athens; Pyrene.
Hercules ravished the nymph Pyrene of Bebritia, from her the Pyrenaean
Mountains took name, of whom Syllius: Nomen Bebricia duxere a virgin colles
Hospitis Alcidae crimen, etc.
From the Bebrician maid these hills took name,
Of her guest Hercules, the fault and blame.


Lanissa.
Pyrhus surnamed Neoptolemus the son of Achilles and Deiadamia raped Lanissa
the niece of Hercules, Tecmessa.
Ajax the son of Telamon did the like to Tecmessa, of whom Horace: Mouit
Aiacem Telemone satam
Forma captiuae dominum Tecmessae.
Captive Tecmessas beautiegaz'd upon,
Ensnared her lord, the son of Telamon.


Ajax Oilaeus ravished Cassandra, Nessus the Centaure Deineira the wife of
Hercules, sister to Meleager, and daughter to Oeneus and Althea king and queen
of Calidon^ Axiothia.
Tleoptolemus stole Axiothia from Ephira a city of Peloponessus, he was the
son of Hercules and Astioche, Astioche.
he was first a suitor to Hellen, and came to the siege of Troy with nine
ships, and was after slain by the hand of king Sarpedon. Hypodamia the
daughter of Atracius and wife of Perithous, suffered the like violence by the
Centaures, being heated with Wine and Lust, especially by Euritus, of whom Ovid
lib. 12. thus speaks, Euritus, Hyppodamea, alij quam quisque probabat
Aut poterat rapiunt --
Euritus raped Hyppodame, and after him, the rest
By his example did the like, and snatched where they liked best,


The great enmity betwixt the Grecians and Barbarians, though it might seem
to arise by reason of the distance of countries and difference of manners; yet
most probable it is that their inueterate hate and irreconsilable malice, took
first original from diverse rapes committed on either part: for first the
Phoenician Merchanrs, exposing their commodities to public sale in the city
of Argis, Io.
when Io the kings daughter amongst other damosells came down to the Key to
take view of what merchandise she best liked, to furnish her self according to
her womanish fancy, the Merchants being extremely surprised with her
beauty, seized both her and the rest of her attendants, and stowing them under
hatches, hoised sail and transported them into Egypt. Not long after, the
Cretenses awaiting the like opportunity, stole away Europa the daughter of the
king of the Tyrians and bore her into Creet, in requital of the former rape.
The Heroes of Greece next, sailed in the great Argoe to Cholcos, pretending
their journey for the golden fleece, Medea.
and raped thence Medea the daughter of Areta; after whom sending Ambassadors
into Greece to redemand his daughter, they returned him answer, That the
barbarous Phoenicians had made no restitution nor satisfaction at all for the
rape of Io, neither would they for Medea. After that, Paris the son of Priam,
rather to revenge the injury done to his Aunt Hesione, Hesione.
than for any love or affection to Spartan Hellen, stole her from Lacedemon and
brought her to Troy in Asia. The Princes of Greece redemanding her, answer was
returned, That since they made no restitution of Europa, nor of Medea, nor
Hesione, neither would they of Hellena: which was the original of that
memorable siege of Troy, and the destruction of that famous city; Herodotus,
Lib. 1. Thrasimenes being enamored of the fair daughter of Pisistratus, The
daughter of Pisistratus.
and his affection daily more and more increasing, he gathered to himself a
society of young men, and watching the Lady when she came with other young
damosells to offer sacrifice (according to the custom of the country) by the
Seaside, with their swords drawn they set upon the company that attended her,
and having dispiersed them, snatched her up and hurrying her aboard, sailed
with her toward Aegina. But Hyppias the eldest son of Pisistratus, being
then at Sea to clear those coasts of Pirates, by the swiftness of their Ores
imagining them to be of the fellowship of the Sea robbers, pursued them,
boorded them, and took them; who finding his sister there, brought her back
with the rauishers. Thrasimenes with the rest of his faction being brought
before Pisistratus, not withstanding his known austeritie, would neither do
him honor nor use toward him the least submission, but with bold and
undaunted constancy attended their sentence, telling him, That when the
attempt was first proposed, they then armed themselves for death and all
disasters. Pysistratus admiring their courage and magnanimity, which showed
the greater in regard of their youth, called his daughter before him, and in
the presence of his nobility, to recompense his celsitude of mind and spirit
freely bestowed her upon Thrasimenes; by which means he reconciled their
opposition, and entertained them into new faith and obedience, no more
expressing himself a Tyrant but a loving and bountiful father, and withal a
popular citisen. Polinae lib. 5. The daughters of king Adrastus were ravished
by Acesteneutrix, as Statius lib. 1. has left remembered. Euenus the son of
Mars and Sterope married Marpissa daughter to Oenemaus and Alcippa, Marpissa.
whom Apharetas espying as she daunced amongst other Ladies, grew innamoured
of, and forcibly rapt her from her company, Plutarch. in. Paral. Hersilia,
Hersilia.
with the Sabine Virgins, were likewise raped by Romulus and his soldiers, at
large described by Ovid. Lib. de Art Amandi, 1. Lucrece, the chaste Roman
Matron, was stuperated by Sextus Tarquinius: of whom, Seneca in Octauia thus
says: Nata Lucreti stuprum saeui passa Tyranni.


Eudoxia.
Eudoxia being left by Valentinianus, was basely ravished by the Tyrant
Maximus, who usurped in the Empire: for which, she invited Gensericus out of
Afric, to avenge her of the shame and dishonor done unto her. Sigebertus in
Chronicis. The same Author tells us of Ogdilo, Duke of Boiaria, who forced the
sister of king Pepin: for which injury done to her, the king oppressed him with
a cruel and bloody war.

Of Handmaids, Nurses, Midwiues, and Stepdames.
Plecusa.
PLecusa was a Handmaid to Diana, whom Martial. Lib. 1. thus remembers: Et
cecidit sectis Icla Plecusa Crinis.


Lagopice.
Lagopice is another, Lib. 7. remembered by the same Author. Cibale was the
maid-seruant to a poor man called Similus, Cibale.
remembered by Virgil in Morete. Phillis Troiana was the Handmaid to Phoceus,
Phillis.
as Briseis was to Achilles. Pliny, Lib. 36. Ocrisia.
cap. 27. makes Ocrisia the Damsel to the Queen Tanaquil: Gyge.
so Horace makes Cassandra to Agamemnon. Gyge (as Plutarch relates) was such to
Parysatis Queen of Persia, and mother to Cyrus. Thressa was maid-seruant to
Thales Milesius, Thressa.
who (as Theodoricus Cyrenensis affirms) when she saw her master come home
durtie and myrie, as being newly crept out of a Ditch, chid him exceedingly for
gazing at the stars to find those hidden things above, and had not the
foresight to see what lay below at his feet, Rhod. Thracia.
but he must stumble. Herodotus in Euterpe calls Rhodope (the famous Egyptian
strumpet) the Handmaid of Iadmon Sami^s, a Philosopher. Elos.
Elos was a Damsel to king Athamas, from whom a great city in Achaia took
denomination, Lardana.
and was called Aelos. Lardana (as Herodotus affirms) was at first no better
than a servant, from whom the noble Family of the Heraclidae derive their
first original. Titula.
Titula (otherwise called Philotis) was a Roman Virgin of the like condition,
and is remembered for such by Plutarch in Camillo, Proconnesia
as also by Macrob. Lib. 1. Saturnalium. Proconnesia is remembered by Pliny,
who in one day brought forth two children, the one like her master, and the
other like another man with whom she had had company; Lathris.
and being borne, delivered either child to his father. Lathris was the
Handmaid to Cinthia, Cypassis.
so much spoken by Propert. as Cypassis was to Cersinna the mistress of Ovid:
of whom he thus writes, Eleg. Lib. 2. Commendis in mill modis praefecta
capillis
Comere sed solas digna Cipasse Deas.
She rules her mistress hair (her skill is such)
A thousand several ways, to her desires:
O, worthy none but Goddesses to touch,
To comb and deck their heads in costly Tyres.


Chionia was Handmaid to the blessed Anastasia, Chionia.
so likewise was Galanthis to Alcmena, Galanthis.
the mother of Hercules; of whom, the same Author Lib. 9. thus says: Vna
ministrarum media de plebe Galanthis
Flaua comas aderat faciendis strenua iussis.
Amidst them all Galanthis stood,
With bright and yellow hair,
A wench that quick and nimble was,
Things needful to prepare.


From Handmaids I proceed to Nurses: Annius upon Berosus, and Calderinus upon
Statius, nominate Caphyrna or Calphurnia, Caphirna.
the daughter of Oceanus, to have been the Nurse of Neptune, as Amalthea and
Melissa were to Jupiter, Amalthea. Melissa.
who fed him with the Milk of a Goat in his infancy, when he was concealed
from his father. Hence it came, that the Poets fabled how Jupiter was nursed by
a Goat, for which courtesy he was translated amongst the stars: Others say
he was nursed by Adrastea and Ida, Adrastea. Ida.
the two daughters of king Melisaeus; for so Erasmus teaches in the
explanation of the Adage, Copiae Cornu. Ino was the Nurse of Bacchus, Ino.
as Ovid witnesses in Ib. where he likewise calls her the Aunt to Bacchus, in
this Verse: Vt teneri Nutrix eadem Matertera Bacchi.
Of the same opinion with him is Statius, Lib. 2. Silu. But Ammonius
Grammaticus makes Fesula the woman that gave him suck: Fesula.
Pliny calls her Nisa, and says she was buried near to the city
Scythopolis. Policha.
Polycha was the Nurse of Oedipus, who fostered him when his father Laius cast
him out in his infancy, because the Oracle had foretold he should perish by
the hand of his son. Barce was the Nurse to Sychaeus, Barce.
the most potent and rich king of the Phoenicians, and husband to Dido: Her
Virgil remembers, Aenead. Lib. 4. Charm was Nurse to the Virgin Scilla: Charm.
of whom the same Author in Syri thus says: Illa autem, quid nunc me inquit
Nutricula torques?
i. Why, Beroe.
o Nurse, do thou thus torment me? Beroe Epidauria was Nurse to Cadmeian
Semele, Aceste.
the mother of Bacchus, as Aceste was to the daughters of Adrastus. Eupheme.
Stat. Lib. 1. Theb. Eupheme is memorated to be the Nurse to the Muses: she
had a son called Erotus, who inhabited the Mountain Pernassus, Spaco.
and was wholly devoted to Hunting, and the Chafe. Spaco was Nurse to Cyrus,
who because that word in the Median Language signifies a Bitch, Cyrus was said
to be nursed by a Brache; for so says Herodotus in Clio. Archimorus (the son
of Licurgus, king of Thrace) whose Nurse was called Hypsiphile, Hypsiphile.
being left by her in the fields, was fed by a Serpent: Test Statio. Ericlia,
or Euriclia, Euriclia.
was the Nurse to Ulysses. Homer. in Odyss. and Ovid. in Epist. Caieta was
Nurse to Aeneas, Caieta.
Lib. 7. Aenead.

Tu quoque littoribus nostris Aeneia Nutrix
Aeternam moriens famam Caieta dedisti.
And thou Aeneas Nurse, Caieta,
Unto our Shores have left
A never dying fame, because
(There) of thy life bereft,
Amicla.
Alcibiades had a Nurse, whose name was Amicla, or as some would have it Amida;
his schoolmaster was Zopyrus, so says Plutarch in Lycurg. and Alcibiad
Hellanice was the Nurse to Alexander the great, Hellanice.
witness Qu. Curtius. Acca Lauentia was Nurse to Romulus, Acca Lauentia.
so says Pliny li. 18. ca. 2. so Statius li. 1. Sil. in this Distican.

I am secura parens Thuscis regnabat in agris,
Ilia, portantem lassabat Romulus Accam.
Ilia the mother of Romulus.
Our parent Ilia now secure
The Tuskan waters keeps,
The whilst in Accaes wearied arms
Young Romulus fast sleeps.
Yet Liuie, and almost all the Roman Historiographers write, that Romulus and
Remus were nourst by Lupa, Lupa.
wife to the sheepeheard Faustulus; she was so called because she prostituted
her self for gain: they were cast out by the king Amulius, and was found by
the bounds of Tiber. Pliny calls her Acca Laurentia. Philix was Nurse to the
Emperor Domitian, Philix.
who when he was slain, and his corse lay derided and neglected, took up his
body and putting it in a common Bear, caused it by ordinary and mercinarie
bearers to be carried to the suburbs wherein she lived, and interred it in the
Latin highway, Author Sueton. Macrina was a pious and religious woman, Macrina.
the disciple and scholar of Gregory Neocaesariensis, she was Nurse and
schole mistress (in the first foundation of Christian religion) to the great
Basilius, as he himself witnesses in an Epistle to the Neocaesarienses. From
Nurses, a word or two of Midwiues.

Phanarite.
Phanarite was one, the mother of Athenean Socrates, she is remembered to be the
first that disputed of Morality (that which we call Ethick Instructions) and
taught the mystical Philosophy of the Stars and Planets, how it might be
made familiar and have correspondence with our humane and terrestrial actions.
The son imitated the mother, and proved as happy a Midwife of the mind, as
she of the body, both helping into the world ripe, timely, and fruitful
issues. Volateran lib. 19. Laertius in eius vita, and Valerius Maxim. lib. 3.
cap. 4. Pliny lib. 28. cap. 7. speaks of two Midwiues, the one called Sotyra,
Sotyra.
the other Salpe, whose opinions and rules he observes in the cures of many
diseases; of Salpe he speaks more largely, Salpe.
lib. 32. cap. 6. Lycosthenes speaks of one Philippa Midwife to Iolanta,
Philippa.
who endured many distresses and changes of fortune.

Of Stepmothers I will only name some few and so pass them over, because where
they be can be expressed nothing but malice and unnatural cruelty in women. The
histories must of force appear harsh and unpleasant, besides, some of their
bloody acts I have touched before under another title. Ino was Sepmother to
Phrixus, and Helles the daughter of Athamus; Hyppodamia, to Chrisippus;
Stratonice, to Antiochus Soter; Iulia, to Anton. Caracalla; Gedica, to
Cominius; Juno, to Hercules; Opaea, to Scylis king of Scithia; Eribaea, to
Mercury; Alphriga, to Edward the second of that name before the Conquest, king
of England; Martina, to Constantinus Heraclius who she slew by poison, etc.

Of Women for their Piety and Devotion remembered in the sacred Scriptures.
I Desire to leave nothing vnspecified, or not remembered in this work, that
might not make the excellency of good Women oppose in all contradiction, the
excess of the bad; and to draw (if it were possible) the worst to the
imitation of the best. Hanapus c. 125. commemorates these: Rebecka, Rebecka.
who when she saw the servant of Abraham at the Well where she came to draw
water, and desiring to drink; answered cheerfully, and without delay, Drink
sir, and I will also draw water for thy Cammells till they have all drunk
their fill, Genes. 24. The Midwiues feared God, and did not according to the
command of Pharaoh king of Egypt, but preserved the male-children whom they
might have destroyed, Exod^s 1. The daughter of Pharaoh coming down to the
river to wash herself (with her handmaid) and finding the young child Moses in
the arc amongst the bulrushes, she had compassion on the infant, and said,
Surely this is a child of the Hebrews; so caused him to be nursed, brought up
in her fathers court, and after adopted him her son, Exodus 2. Rahab the
strumpet, Rahab.
when she knew the spies of Joshua to be pursued, and in danger of death,
concealed them, and returned them safe to the army, Josh. 2. The messengers
that were sent to David in the wilderness, to inform him of the proceedings
of his son Absolon, were by a woman hid in a Well which she covered, and by
that means deluded their pursuers, Kings 2.17. When two common Women contended
before Saloman, about the living and dead infant, the one had a tender and
relenting breast and could not endure to see the living child to perish, Kings
3.3. The widow woman of Zerephath entertained Eliah as her guest, and by her
he was relieved, Kings 3. and 17. The Shunamitish woman, persuaded with her
husband, that the Prophet Elisaeus might have a convenient lodging in her
house, to go and come at his pleasure, Kings 4. and 2. When wicked Athalia had
given strict command to destroy all the Kings seed, Iosaba the daughter of King
Ioram took Ioas, Iosaba.
one of the Kings children, and by hiding him out of the way preserved his
life, Esther.
Kings 4. and 11. Esther having commiseration of her people (when a severe
Edict was published to destroy them all, and sweep them from the face of the
earth) she exposed her self (with the great danger of her own life) to the
displeasure of King Ahashuerosh, purchasing thereby the freedom of her nation,
and her own sublimitie, Esther 4.5. Women ministered to the Savior of the
world in his way as he went preaching to the towns and cities, Luke 8. when he
walked from place to place, preaching and teaching, he is said never to have
had more free and faithful welcome, than in the house of Martha and Marie,
Martha. Marie.
Luke 10. John 12. When the Scribes and Pharisees blasphemed at the hearing and
seeing the Doctrine and Miracles of Christ, a certain woman giving devout
attention to his words, as extasied with his divine Sermon, burst forth into
this acclamation: Blessed be the womb that bore thee, and the breasts that
gave thee suck, Luke 11. Christ being in Bethania, in the house of Simon the
leaper, as he sat at the table, there came a woman with a box of ointment of
Spicknard, very costly, and she brake the box, and poured it upon his head;
and when some said, disdaining, To what end is this wast, for it might have
been sold for more than Which is six pound English
300 pence, and given to the poor: Jesus said, Let her alone, she has wrought
a good work on me, etc. and proceeded, Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this
Gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, this also that she has
done shall be spoken in remembrance of her. The woman of Canaan was so full of
natural pity and maternall piety, that she counted her daughters misery
and affliction her own, when she said to Jesus, Have mercy upon me oh Lord
the son of David, for my daughter is vexed with an evil Spirit, Math. 15.
The women stood by to see the Lord suffer, and followed the cross when he was
forsaken of his Apostles, Luke 23. John 19. they were careful likewise to
visit him in his sepulcher, Math. 28. Luke 24. The wife of Pilat had more
compassion of Christ, and more unwilling that he should suffer upon the cross,
than any man of whom the Scripture makes mention, Math. 27. Mark 16. John 20.
For deeds of charity, and dealing alms to the poor and needy widows and
orphans, they entreated Peter (weeping) that he would visit Tabitha being dead;
Tabitha.
who moved with their teeres, kneeled and prayed, at whose intercessions she
was restored to life, Act. Apost. 9. Herod having slain James the brother of
John with the sword, and seeing that it pleased the people, he proceeded
further to take Peter, and put him in prison, delivering him to the charge of
four quaternions of soldiers to be kept: but the Angel of the Lord appeared
to him in the night, took off his double chains, and led him out of prison,
who having past the first and second watch, the iron gate opened to the Angel
and him; and finding that which he thought to be a vision, to be a real truth,
he came to the house of Marie the mother of John, whose surname was Mark,
where many had separated themselves to prayer. Peter knocking, a maid (whose
name was Rhode) came to the door, Rhode.
who hearing and knowing Peter's voice, the Scripture says, she opened not the
door for gladness, but ran in and told them that Peter stood without at the
entry. In which are to be observed two memorable women for their zeal and
piety, namely Rhode the handmaid, whose joy was so great at the very voice of
Peter, released from the prison of Herod: and Mary her mistress, who was a
devout harboresse, and one that gladly entertained the Disciples of Christ into
her own house (notwithstanding the persecution) to perform their zealous and
religious exercises, Act. Apost. 12. Lydia a dier of purple, Lydia.
believing the gospel which Paul preached, was baptized with her whole
household, after which she entreated them in these words, If thou think me
worthy (says she) to be a faithful servant to my Lord and God, vouchsafe to
enter my house, and abide there, and she compelled us, as Luke says. By which
is concluded, that women have been the ready, willing, and devout hearers of
the word of God, Act. Apost, 16. Many (no question) zealous and religious women
have to their power striued to imitate those with their best of industry.
Amongst others I might instance one, now of a great age, as having much past
that number by which David reckons the years of man, yet from her youth has
lead a life without any noted stain or blemish, devout in her zeal,
remarkable in her charity, beloved of all, hated of none, a Physician to the
sick, and Surgeon to the wounded, who with her own hands has sent more
lame and diseased persons from her gate whole and sound, than Lazarus had sores
about him when he lay at the rich man's gate vnrelieued, she feeding with
loaves, when that purple glutton would not spare his crummes, she doing this
out of a widows mite when he would not do any thing out of a Mammons
treasure; happy be her resurrection, as her birth was hopeful, whose name at
the Font was a future prediction to her blessedness above; Felicity she is
called on Earth, Eternal Felicity may she enjoy in Heaven.

Peter de Loyre a Frenchman in his book of Specters, Sights, and Apparitions,
has very well observed, that the Sirens and Muses may be in some sort
compared together: for as there are three sorts of Nymphs, namely, of Air,
Water, and Earth, so there are of the Muses, some that take their being from
the continual moving and stirring of Waters; a second, made by the agitation
of the Air engendring sounds; a third from the Earth, which is called Voice,
or distinguishable words spoken to the capacity of the hearer. So of the
Sirens, Parthenope presented with a womanish, Parthenope.
amiable, and enchanting face, imports the Voice, and proceeds from the
Earth, as of the three the most material and weighty. Ligia denotes
Harmony, Ligia.
arrising from the melodious sounds of the Air. And Leucosia, Leucosia.
called Albadea, or the white goddess, is the Hierogliphick of the ebbing and
flowing of the Sea, which begets the white froth or some, of which Venus is
said to be engendered: so that by these three, the Nymphs, the Muses, and the
Sirens are comprehended: the art of Music existing of three things, Harmony,
Rythme, and Number; Harmony proceeding from the Air; Number from the Sea,
bounded within his compass, yet as we see in Hexamiter and Pentamiter and
other verse, ebbing and flowing, according to the growth and wane of the Moon.
To these is added the Voice, which the Greeks call (...) the French Romans
Dictier. To Harmony are approprited Sounds; to Number or Rythme, Dances; and to
the Voice, all kind of Verse. But to come to my present purpose, all these
including one general music, and Calliope as she participates from every
one, so comprehending all, I think it not impertinent, as in a consort many
Instruments make but one melody, so in this book to recollect my self and
give you a taste of many or the most heads discoursed of in the former, the
better to put you in mind of the penalty due to the Vicious, and the guerdon
and reward stored for the Virtuous, and that in compendious History. The
Goddesses, Nymphs, Graces, Muses, Sybills, Vestalls, etc. I omit, as
sufficiently spoken of, and apply my self to things more familiar and
necessary to instruction. I begin with the bad, because my desire is to end
with the best, and of Incest first.

The sister of Leucippus,
I Insist not of the several sorts of Incest, The sister of Leucippus.
neither purpose I to stand upon the multiplicitie of History, let this one
serve to remember you of the former. Leucippus the son of Xanthius, who
derived his genealogy from Bellerephon, he was excellent both in strength and
valor above all that lived in his days, not in private contentions only but
in foreign combustions, he demeaned himself with such discretion and courage,
that having subdued the Lycians, and awed all the neighbor nations about him,
having no enemy to invade, nor opposite people to lift up a rebellious hand
against him, he retired himself into his country, and laying aside his
victorious arms which won him same and honor abroad, he abandoned himself
to ease and the private pleasures of his fathers house, and now wanting other
imploiment (as idleness is the greatest corrupter of virtue) he began to
intertaine such unusual flames, and unaccustomed cogitations, as before he had
no time to feel, or leisure to think on; for now he cast his incestuous eye
upon his sister. His passions much troubled him, at the first, and all possible
means he used to shake them off, but in vain: he lived in the same house with
her, they dieted at one table, had liberty of unsuspected conference, and he
having nothing else to do, had only leisure to meditate on that which was
fearful to apprehend, but horrible to enterprise. To this purpose Ovid with
great elegancie in remed. Amor. lib. 1. speaking of Aegistus, who in the
absence of Agamemnon adulterated his queen Clitemnestra, thus writes: Queritur
Aegistus quare sit factus adulter?
In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat, etc.
Does any man demand the reason why
Aegistus an adulterer was? Lo I
Can tell, Because that he was idle, when
Others at Troy were fighting, and their men
Led stoutly on: to which place were accited
The Gretian Heroes with a force united.
He no imploiment had: There was no war,
In Argos where he lived (from Troy so far)
No strife in law, to which being left behind,
He carefully might have imploid his mind,
That which lay plain before him, the man proou'd,
And least he should do nothing, therefore loved.


As Ovid of Aegistus, so may I say of Leucippus, whom rest, and want of action,
in a stirring brain, and body, wrought this distemperature. Ashamed he was to
court his sister, first because he knew her modest; a second impediment was,
she was elsewhere disposed, and contracted to a gentleman of a noble family:
besides, she was his sister, to whom he wished all good, and then to corrupt her
honor, he could devise for her no greater ill: he considered that to persuade
her to her own undoing, would show ill in a stranger, but much worse in a
brother. In these distractions, what should he do, or what course take? the
thing he apprehended was preposterous, and the means to compass it was most
prodigious; for he came to his mother, told her his disease, and besought her
of remedy: his words as they were uttered with fear, so they were heard with
trembling, for they feauered her all over. Being in to the knees, he cared not
now, to wade up to the chinne, and proceeded, That if she would not be the
means for him to compass his sister, notwithstanding all obstacles what
soever, he would by speedy and sudden death rid himself out of all his
miseries, desiring her speedy answer, or with his naked poniard in his hand,
he was as ready for execution, as she to deny her assistance. I leave to any
mothers consideration but to imagine, with what strange ambiguities, his words
perplexed her, and what conuulsions it bred in her bosom, even to the very
stretching of her heart strings: but as she knew his courage to dare, so she
feared his resolution to act, therefore more like a tender hearted mother, than
a virtuous minded matron, rather desiring to have wicked children, than none at
all, she promised him hope, and assured him help, and after some persuasiue
words of comfort, left him indifferently satisfied. What language the mother
used to the daughter to inuit her to the pollution of her body, and
destruction of her soul, is not in me to conceive: I only come to the point,
by the mothers mediation the brother is brought to the bed of his sister, she
is vitiated, and his appetite glutted, yet not so, but that they continued
their private meetings, in so much that custom bred impudence, and suspicion
certain proof of their incestuous consocietie. At length it comes to the ear
of him that had contracted her, with attestation of the truth thereof: he,
though he feared the greatness of Leucippus his known valor, and popular
favor, yet his spirit could not brook so unspeakable an injury; he
acquaints this novel to his father, and certain noble friends of his, amongst
whom it was concluded by all jointly, to inform Xanthius of his daughters
inchastitie: but for their own safety (knowing the potencie of Leucippus) to
conceal the name of the adulterer. They repair to him, and inform him of the
business, entreating his secrecy till he be himself eyewitness of his
daughters dishonor. The father at this news is enraged, but arms himself
with enforced patience, much longing to know that libidonous wretch who had
dishonored his family. The incestuous meeting was watched and discovered, and
word brought to Xanthius that now was the time to apprehend them; he calls for
lights, and attended with her accusers, purposes to invade the chamber: great
noise is made, she affrighted rises, and before they came to the door, opens
it, slips by, thinking to fly and hide her self; the father supposing her to
be the adulterer, pursues her, and pierces her through with his sword. By this
Leucippus starts up, and with his sword in his hand, hearing her last dying
shreeke, prepares himself for her rescue, he is incountred by his father, whom
in the distraction of the sudden affright, he unadvisedly assaulted and slew.
The mother disturbed with the noise, hasts to the place where she heard the
tumult was, and seeing her husband and daughter slain, betwixt the horridness
of the sight, and apprehension of her own guilt, fell down suddenly and
expired. And these are the lamentable effects of Incest, the father to kill his
own daughter, the son his father, and the mother (the cause of all) to die
suddenly without the least thought of repentance. These things so
infortunately happening, Leucippus caused their bodies to be nobly interred,
when forsaking his fathers house in Thessalie, he made an expedition into
Creet, but being repulst from thence by the inhabitants, he made for Ephesia,
where he took perforce a city in the province of Cretinaea, Leucophria
and after inhabited it. It is said that Leucophria the daughter of Mandrolita
grew innamored of him, and betrayed the city into his hands, who after married
her, and was ruler thereof. This history is remembered by P^rthenius de
Amatorijs, cap. 5. Of incest betwixt the father and daughter, Ovid lib. Metam.
speaks of, whose verses with what modesty I can, I will give you the English
of, and so end with this argument.

Accipit obscoeno genitor sua^ viscera lecto, Cynarus and Mirha.

Virgeneosque metus le^^t Hortaturque timentem etc.
Into his obscene bed the father takes
His trembling daughter, much of her he makes,
Who pants beneath him; 'bids her not to fear,
But be of bolder courage, and take cheer.
Full of her fathers sins, loath to betray
The horrid act, by night she steals away
Fraught, that came thither empty; for her womb
Is now of impious incest made the Tomb.
The punishment of incest.
Next to the sin I will place the punishment. Jacob blessing his children,
said to Reuben, Thou shall be poured out like water, thine excellency is gone
because thou have defiled thy fathers bed, Genes. 49. Absolon went in to his
fathers concubines, and soon after was slain by the hand of Ioab, Kings 2.16.
and 18. Of later times I will instance one Nicolaus Estensis, Marquess of
Ferrara, who having notice that his son Hugo (a toward and hopeful young
gentleman) had borne himself more wantonly than reverence and modesty
required, Parisia.
in the presence of his stepmother Parisia, of the family of Malatestae; and
not willing rashly either to reprove or accuse them, he watched them so
narrowly by his intelligencers and spies, that he had certain and infallible
testimony of their incestuous meetings, for which setting aside all conjugal
affection, or paternall pity, he caused them first to be cast in strict and
close prison, and after upon more mature deliberation, to be arraigned, where
they were convicted, and lost their heads, with all the rest that had been
conscious of the act, Fulgos. lib. 6. cap. 1. I will borrow leave to insert
hear one remarkable punishment done upon a Jew at Prague in Bohemia, in the
year 1530, who being taken in adultery with a Christian woman, they compelled
him to stand in a tonne pitched within, they boared a hole, in which they
forced him to put in that part with which he had offended: just by him was
placed a knife without edge, blunted for the purpose, and there he stood loose,
save fastened by the part aforesaid; fire being given, he was forced through
the torment of the heat, with that edgelesse knife to cut away that pars
virilis and ran away bleeding, after whom they set fierce mastifes, who worried
him to death, and after tore him to pieces, Lychost. in Theatro Human. vitae.

Of Adultery.
The wife of Argento Coxus.
THe wife of Argento-Coxus Calidonius, being tanted by Iulia Augusta, because it
was the custom of their country for the noble men and women promiscuously to
mix themselves together, and to make their appointments openly without
blushing; to her thus answered, I much commend the custom of our country
above yours, we Calidonians desire consocietie with our equals in birth and
quality, to satisfy the necessary duties belonging to love and affections,
and that publickely; when your Roman Ladies professing outward temperance and
chastititie, prostitute your selves privately to your base grooms and vassals.
The same is reported to have been spoken by a British woman, Dion Nicaeus
Xiphilin in vita seueri. Her words were verified (as in many others that I
could here produce) so in the French Queen Fredigunda, Fredigunda.
who though she infinitely flattered the King Chilpericus her husband outwardly,
yet she inwardly affected one Laudricus, to whom she communicated her person
and honor: these in the Kings absence were scarce to be found asunder, in so
much that Chilperick himself could not more freely command her person by his
power, than the other by his loose and intemperate effeminacies. It happened,
the king being on hunting, and leaving the Chase before his hour, stole
suddenly upon his Queen, and coming behind her as she was taking her
Prospect into the Garden, sportingly touched her upon the head with the Switch
he had then in his hand, without speaking: she not dreaming of the kings so
sudden return, and thinking it had been her private friend, (without
looking back) Well sweetheart Landricus (says she) you will never leave
this fooling; and turning toward him withal, discovered the king, who only
biting his lip, departed in silence. She fearing the kings distaste, and
consequently his revenge, sends for Landricus, and as if the king had been the
offender, betwixt them two conspired his death, and within few days affected
it (for seldom does Adultery but go hand in hand with Murder.) From the
Sin, I come to the Punishment.

Amongst the Israelites, it was first punished with Fin^s, The punishment of
Adultery.
as may be collected from the history of Thamar: who being with child by
Judas, he threatened her to the stake, and had accordingly performed it, had
she not showed by manifest tokens that he himself was the author of her
unlawful issue; Genes. 38. The Egyptians condemned the Adulterer so
deprehended to a thousand Scourges, the Adulteress to have her Nose cut off,
to the greater terror of the like Delinquents: Diodor. Sicul. Lib. 2. cap. 2.
Coel. Lib. 21. cap. 25. By Solons Laws, a man was permitted to kill them both
in the act, that so found them: Rauis. In Iudaea they were stoned to death.
Plat. Lib. 9. de Legibus punishes Adultery with death. The Locrenses (by
tradition from Zaluces) put out the Adulterers eyes. The Cumaei prostituted the
Adulteress to all men, till she died by the same sin she had committed:
Alex. ab Alex. Lib. 4. cap. 1. It was a custom amongst the ancient Germans,
for the husband to cut off his wives hair so apprehended, to turn her out of
doors naked, and scourge her from Village to Village. One bringing word to
Diogenes, That a fellow called Dydimones was taken in the Act: He is worthy
then (says he) to be hanged by his own name; for Didymi in the Greek Tongue
are Testiculi, in English the Testicles, or immodest parts. By them therefore
(from whence he derived his name, and by which he had offended) he would have
had him to suffer: Laert. Lib. 6. Hyettus the Argiue slew one Molurus, with his
wife, apprehending them in their unlawful congression: Coelius. Julius Caesar
repudiated his wife for no other reason, but because P. Clodius was found in
his house in woman's Apparel. And being urged to proceed against her, he
absolutely denied it, alleging, That he had nothing whereof to accuse her:
but being further demanded, Why then he abandoned her society? he answered,
That it was behoofefull for the wife of Caesar, not only to be clear from the
sin it self, but from the least suspicion of crime: Fulgos. Lib. 6. cap. 1.
Augustus banished his own Daughter and Niece (so accused) into the Island
called Pandateria (after into Rhegium) commanding at his death, That their
bodies (being dead) should not be brought near unto his Sepulcher. To omit
many, Nicolaus the first Pope of that name, excommunicated king Lotharius
(brother to Lewis, the second Emperor) because he divorced his wife
Therberga, Therberga.
and in her room instated Gualdrada, Gualdrada.
and made her Queen. Besides, he degraded Regnaldus, Archbishop of Treuers,
and Gunthramus Archbishop of Collen, from their Episcopal dignities, for
giving their approbation to that adulterate Marriage. And so much for the
punishment: I will conclude with the counsel of Horace, Lib. 1. Satyr. 2.

Desine Matronas sectarier, vnde laboris
Plus haurire mali est, quam ex re decerpere fructum est.
Cease Matrons to pursue, for of such pain
Thou to thy self more mischief reap'st than gain.
Sisters that have murdered their Brothers.
Fratricides.
AFter the untimely death of Aydere, his brother Ismael succeeded him in the
Persian Empire, who arriving at Casbin was of his sister received with joy, and
of the people with loud acclamations: and being now possessed of the
Imperial dignity, the better (as he thought) to secure himself, having
power answerable to his will, after the barbarous custom of the Turkish
tyranny, he first caused his eight younger brothers to be beheaded, stretching
his bloody malice to all or the most part of his own affinity, not suffering
any to live that had been near or dear to his deseased brother; so that the
^^ttie Casbin seemed to swim in blood, and ecchoed with nothing but
lamentations and mournings. His cruelty bred in the people both fear and
hate, both which were much more increased when they understood he had a
purpose to alter their form of religion (who with great adoration honor their
prophet Aly) into the Turkish superstition; his infinite and almost incredible
butcheries concern not my project in hand, I therefore leave them and return
to his sister whose name was Periaconcona, Periaconcona.
who when this Tyrant was in the midst of his securities, and the sister (as
he imagined) in her sisterly love and affection; upon a night when he was in
all dissolute voluptuousness sporting amidst his concubines, she into whose
trust and charge he had especially committed the safety of his person, having
confederated with Calilchan, Emirchan, Pyrymahomet, and Churchi Bassa, the most
eminent men in the Empire, admitted them into the Seraglio in woman's attire, by
whom with her assistant hand in the midst of his luxuries he was strangled:
an act though happily beneficial to the common good, yet ill becoming a
sister, unless such an one as striued to parallel him in his unnatural
cruelties, Turkish Histor.

Quendreda
Equal with this was that of Quendreda, who after the death of Ranulphus king
of Mercia, his young son Kenelme, a child of seven years of age reigning in
his stead, whose royal estate and dignity being envied by his sister, she
conspired with one Heskbertus, by whose treacherous practice the king was
enticed into a thick forest, and there murdered and privately buried; his body
long missed and not found, and the conspirators not so much as suspected: But
after, as Willielm. de regib. li. 1. and de Pontificibus lib. 4. relates, a
Dove brought in her bill a scroule written in English golden letters, and laid
it upon the Altar of Saint Peter, which being read by an Englishman contained
these words (by which the place where the body lay was discovered) At Clent in
Cowbach Kenelme Keneborne lies under Thorn, heaued by weaued, that is in
plainer English, At Clent in Cowbach under a thorn Kenelme lies headless
slain by treason. Some say it was found by a light which streamed up into the
Air from the place where his body lay covered. His hearse being after borne
toward his sepulcher, to be a second time interred, with solemn Dyrges sung
by the Churchmen. Quendreda sitting then in a window with a Psalter in her
hand, to see the funeral solemnly pass by, whether in skorne of the person,
derision of the ceremony, or both, The punishment of Fratricides.
is not certain, but she began to sing the Psalm of Te Deum laudamus
backward; when instantly both her eyes dropped out of her head, with a great
flux of blood which stained her book, and it was after kept as a sacred
relic in memory of the divine judgment. What need I trouble you with citing
antiquities how this sin ought to be punished on earth, when we see how
hateful it is in the eyes of Heaven; besides, to insult upon the bodies of the
dead is monstrous, and even in things senseless to be punished. Ausonius
remembers us of one Achillas, who finding a dead man's skull in a place where
three sundry ways divided themselves, and casting to hit it with a stone, it
rebounded again from the skull and stroke himself on the forehead, his words
be these: Abiecta in triuijs inhumati glabra iacebat
Testa hominis, nudum iam cute caluicium,
Fleuerant alij, fletu non motus Achillas, etc.
Where three ways parted, a man's skull was found,
Bald, without hair, unburied above ground:
Some wept to see it, Achillas more obdure,
Snatched up a stone, and thinks to hit it sure;
He did so, At the blow the stone rebounds,
And in the face and eyes Achillas wounds.
I wish all such whose impious hands profane
The dead man's bones, so to be stroke again.


Of Mothers that have slain their Children, or Wives their Husbands, etc.
MEdea, Parricides, etc.
the daughter of Oeta king of Colchos, first slew her young brother in those
Islands, which in memory of his inhumane murder still bear his name, and are
called Absyrtides; and after, her two sons, Macareus and Pherelus, whom she
had by Jason. Progne, the daughter of Pandion, murdered her young son Itis
(begot by Tereus the son of Mars) in revenge of the rape of her sister
Philomele. Ino (the daughter of Cadmus) Melicertis, by Athamas the son of
Aeolus. Althea the daughter of Theseus, slew her son Meleager, by Oeneus the
son of Parthaon. Themisto (the daughter of Hypseus) Sphincius, or Plinthius,
and Orchomenus, by Athamas, at the instigation of Ino, the daughter of Cadmus.
Tyros (the daughter of Salmoneus) two sons, begot by Sysiphus the son of
Aeolus, incited thereto by the Oracle of Apollo. Agaue (the daughter of Cadmus)
Pentheus, the son of Echion, at the importunity of Liber Pater. Harpalice,
the daughter of Climenus, slew her own father, because he forcibly despoyled
her of her honor. Hyginus in Fabulis.

These slew their Husbands. Clitemnestra (the daughter of Theseus) Agamemnon,
the son of Atreus. Hellen (the daughter of Jupiter and Laeda) Deiphebus, the
son of Priam and Hecuba; he married her after the death of Paris. Agaue,
Lycotherses in Illyria, that she might restore the kingdom to her father
Cadmus. Deianira (the daughter of Oeneus and Althea) Hercules, the son of
Jupiter and Alcmena, by the Treason of Nessus the Centaure^ Iliona (the
daughter of Priam) Polymnest^r, king of Th^^ce, Semyramis her husband Ninus,
king of Babylon, etc. Some have slain their Fathers, others their Nephews and
Neeces; all which being of one nature, may be drawn to one head: And see how
these prodigious sins have been punished.

Martina.
Martina, the second wife to Heraclius (and his Niece by the brothers side) by
the help of Pyrrhus the Patriarch poisoned Constantinus, who succeeded in the
Empire, fearing least her son Heraclius should not attain to the Imperial
Purple, in regard that Constantinus left issue behind him two sons,
Constantes and Theodosius, which he had by Gregoria, Gregoria.
the daughter of Nycetas the Patritian: notwithstanding, he was no sooner
dead, but she usurped the Empire. Two years of her Principality were not
fully expired, when the Senate reassumed their power, and called her to the
Bar; where they censured her to have her Tongue cut out, least by her
eloquence she might persuade the people to her assistance: her son Heraclius
they maimed of his Nose, so to make him odious to the multitude; and after,
exiled them both into Cappadocia. Cuspinianus in vita Heraclij. A more terrible
Judgment was inflicted upon Brunechildis, Brunechildis.
whose History is thus related: Theodericus, king of the Frenchmen, who by
this wicked woman's counsel had polluted himself with the blood of his own
natural brother, and burdened his conscience with the innocent deaths of many
other noble gentlemen, as well as others of meaner rank and quality; was by
her poisoned and deprived of life: for when he had made a motion to have taken
to wife his Niece, a beautiful young Lady, and the daughter of his late
slain brother, Brunechildis with all her power and industry opposed the
Match, affirming that Contract to be merely incestuous, which was made with
the brothers daughter; she next persuaded him, that his son Theodebertus was
not his own, but the adulterate issue of his wife by another: at which words
he was so incensed, that drawing his sword, he would have instantly
transpierst her; but by the assistance of such Courtiers as were then present,
she escaped his fury, and presently after plotted his death, and effected it
as aforesaid. Trittenhemius de Regib. Francorum, and Robertus Gaguinus, Lib. 2.
Others write, that he was drowned in a River, after he had reigned eighteen
years. Auentinus affirms, That presently after he had slain his brother
(entering into one of his cities) he was struck with Thunder. Annal. Boiorum,
Lib. 3. Punishment due to Regicides.
But this inhumane Butcheresse Brunechildis (after she had been the ruin of
an infinite number of people, and the death of ten kings) at length moving an
unfortunate war against Lotharius (to whom she denied to yield the kingdom)
she was taken in battle, and by the Nobility and Captains of the Army
condemned to an unheard of punishment: She was first beaten with four
Bastoones (before she was brought before Lotharius) then all her Murders,
Treasons, and Inhumanities were publicly proclaimed in the Army; and next,
her Legs and Hands being fastened to the tails of wild Horses, plucked to
pieces, and disseuered limb from limb, Anno 1618. Sigebertus Trittenhemius,
Gaguinus, and Auentinus. And such be the earthly punishments due to Patricides
and Regicides. Touching Patricides, Solon (when he instituted his wholesome
Laws) made no Law to punish such, as thinking it not to be possible in nature
to produce such a Monster. Alex. Lib. 2. cap. 5. Romubus appointing no
punishment for that inhumanitie, included Patricides under the name of
Homicides, counting Manslaughter and Murder abhorred and impious, but the
other impossible: Plutarch^ in ^^amulo. Marcus Malleolus having s^aine his
mother, was the first that was ever condemned for that fact amongst the Romans;
his Sentence was to be sowed in a Sack, together with a Cock, an Ape, and a
Viper, and so cast into the River Tiber: a just infliction for such immanitie.
The Macedonians punished Patricides and Traitors alike, and not only such as
perso^ally committed the fact, but all that were any way of the confederacy.
Alex. ab Alex. Lib. 3. cap. 5. and all such were stoned to death. The
Egyptians stabbed them with Needles and Bodkins, wounding them in all the
parts of their body, but not mortally; when bleeding all over from a thousand
small orifices, they burnt them in a pyle of Thorns: Diodor. Sical. Lib. 2.
cap. 2. de rebus antiq. The Lusitanians first exiled them from their own
confines, and when they were in the next foreign air, ^to^ed them to death.
Nero having slain his mother Agrippin^ by the hand of Anicetes, had such
terror of mind and unquietness of conscience, that in the dead of the night he
would leap out of his bed horribly affrighted, and say, (when they that
attended him, demanded the cause of his disturbance) That he heard the noise of
Trumpets, and charging of Battles, with the groans of slaughtered and dying
men, from the place where his mother was interred. Therefore he often shifted
his houses, but all in vain, for this horror still pursued him, even to his
miserable and despairing end; for so Xiphilinus testates, the Abbreuiator of
Dion. in Nerone.

The perfidiousnesse of Husbands to their Wives has been thus punished. By the
Law I^l^^, all such were condemned as rioted and wasted the Dowries of their
wives. The Romans did not only hold such, impious and sacrilegious, that
profaned their Temples, and despised the Altars of the gods, but those also
that were rudely robustious, and laid violent hands upon their wives and
children; in such a reverent estimation they held fatherly love and conjugal
piety. Alex. Lib. 4. cap. 8. Almaricus having married the sister of the French
king, and using her most contumeliously and basely (for no other reason, but
that she was a faithful follower of the true Religion, Punishments of unjust
Divorce.
and quite renounced Arrianisme) was by her brother Chilbertus vexed and
tormented with a bloody and intestine war. Michael Ritius, Lib. 1. de Regib.
Francorum. M. Valor. Maximus and C^i. ^anius Brut^s being Censors, removed L.
Antonius from the Senate for no other reason, but that without the advice and
counsel of his friends he had repudiated a Virgin, to whom he had been
before contracted. Val. Maxim. Lib. 2. cap. 4. So Tiberius Caesar discharged an
eminent Roman from his Quaestorship, for diuorcing his wife the tenth day after
he had been married; accounting him merely void of faith, or constancy, that
in a business so weighty, and of so great moment, in so small a time expressed
himself variable and inconstant. Alex. Lib. 4. cap. 8. Rhodulphus Veromandorum
Conies forsook his wife, to marry the sister of the Queen Petronilla, for
which he was excommunicated by the Church of Rome; and the Bishop Laudunensis,
Bartholomaeus Noui^comensis, and Simon Peter Syluanectensis, that were
assistants to the Earl Rhodulphus in that unjust Divorce, were all suspended
by the Pope. Robertus Abbas in Chronicis. The revenge of these libidinous
insolences was most app^rant in the Emperor Andronicus, who after the death
of Emanuel (who preceded him) caused his son (the immediate heir to the
Empire) to be sowed in a Sack and cast into the Sea. And being now securely
installed in the Constantinopolitane Principality, besides a thousand
Butcheries, Slaughters, and other insufferable Cruelties, he addicted himself
to all luxurious intemperance, as vitiating Virgins, corrupting Matrons,
contaminating himself with shameful Whoredoms and Adulteries^ not sparing
the religious Nunneries, but forcing the Cloisters; rauishing thence whom he
pleased to glut his greedy and insatiate lust, and when his own desires were
qualified, would deliver them up to be stuperated by his grooms and vassales.
With whose unbridled appetites, and insufferable madness; the people being
vexed and tired, they invited Isacius to the Empire, and besieging the Tyrant,
took him and presented him before the Emperor elected; who, because he had so
maliciously trespassed against every man, devised for him a punishment that
might give satisfaction to all: he therefore first caused him to put off his
Imperial Robes, and to appear no other than a private man, such as he had
maliciously offended; next, caused one of his eyes to be plucked out (the
punishment devised by Lycurgus for Adulterers;) he mounted him upon an Ass,
with his face toward the tail, which being forced to hold in his hand, and
putting a Garland of Derision about his temples, commanded him to be led
through all the streets of the city, allowing all men and women to speak
against him what opprobry they pleased, without limitation, and do him all
outrages that stretched not to destroy his life. Thus was the Tyrant conducted
along through an implacable multitude, entertained by the way with Clamors,
Shouts, Raylings, Curses, and all manner of Contempts and Derisions, some
spitting, others casting soil and dirt, the women emptying uncleanly Vessels
upon his head; insomuch, that no disgrace or abject usage could be devised, of
which he was not then in some kind sensible. Whoredom punished.
This done, he was carried to the common place of execution, and there like a
Felon hanged upon the gallows. Guido Bituricensis. And this which was done to
him, undoubtedly belongs to all such shameless, barbarous, and brutish women,
who with brazen impudence having abandoned all grace and goodness, expose
themselves to the profession of all impuritie and abominable dishonestie,
making their corrupt bodies no better than Sinkes of Sins, and Spittles of
Diseases; not only pleased in their own ruins, without the destruction of
others, till their Souls be every way as leprous as their infected Bodies:
nay more, since the Maladies and Aches of the one is but momentarie, and for
them the Grave is a Bed of Rest, and Death the Surgeon; but the other are
permanent and endless, namely, those of the Soul; of which, Hell is the
Prison, and the Devil the Tormentor. From these greater, I now proceed to
less; and though not in that measure, yet in some kind punishable.

Of Loquacitie and Excess, and how they have been punished.
BEcause I desire Women to entertain nothing, either to the prejudice of
themselves, or others, I could ingeniously wish, by taking away the cause to
remove the effect^ and by suppressing the temptation, to cut off all occasion
that might allure men to offend. Two things there are, that be great corrupters
of Modesty, and prouokers to Sin; namely, Wanton and unbridled Discourse,
and vain and fantastic prodigality in Attire: I will speak a little of the
due reprehension belonging unto these, ere I begin with others. If then the
tongue be the Orator of the heart, and by our words our minds are specially
signified, how much care ought women to have what they speak, and with what
modesty to govern the Organ of their thoughts, since corrupt words arise from
corrupt apprehensions, and nothing but what is pure and irreprouable should
proceed from a heart that is without stain and blemish. Besides, too much
Loquacitie I could wish you to forbear, with which many of your Sex has been
vnsparingly branded. Many also have accused you to be so open breasted, that
you cannot conceal any secret committed unto your trust. I advise you to be
counseled by Horace, Lib. 1. Epistot. ad Saeuam.

Sed tacitus pasci si posset Corvus, haberet
Plus dapis, and rixae multo minus inuidiaeque.
Would the Crow eat in silence, and not prate,
Much better she might seed, with much less hate.
It is reported of Theocritus Chius, Punishment of Loquacitie.
being taken in battle, that in the way as the soldiers conducted him, with
purpose to present him before the king Antigonus, they persuaded him when he
appeared before the eyes of the Conqueror, to bear himself with all submisse
humility, and no doubt but he should find the Prince royal. He rather willing
to hasard his life, than lose his jest (notwithstanding his bonds and
captivity) thus answered: If I cannot be assured of safety till I be brought
before the eyes of your king Antigonus, he having but one eye (for he had lost
the other in battle) what then shall become of me? At which words Antigonus
being enraged, caused him instantly to be slain; who had he kept his tongue,
might have been sent home safe and ransomelesse. Fulgos. Lib. 8. cap. 1.
Plautus in Asinaria thus reprooues your verbositie: Nam multum loquaces merito
habemur omnes
Nec mutam profecto repertam vllam esse
Hodie dicunt mulierem, illo in seculo.
Great praters all we women are, they say,
And full of words: there is not amongst us found
Any that can keep silence, but betray
Our selves we must (and seek the whole world round.)


If then Loquacitie be so reproueable in your Sex, Punishment of Lying.
how ill then would Lies (which women term Excuses) appear in your mouths?
For who will believe the chastity of your Lives, that finds no truth in your
Lips? It is reported of two Beggars, who watching Epiphanius (a zealous and
charitable man) as he came forth of his gates, to gain of him the greater
alms, the one of them fell prostrate upon the earth, and counterfeited
himself dead, whilst the other seemed pittiously to lament the death of his
companion, desiring of Epiphanius something toward his burial: The good man
wished rest to the body diseased, and drawing out his Purse, gave bountifully
toward his Funeral, with these words; Take charge of his Corse, and cease
mourning my son, for this body shall not presently rise again; and so
departed: who was no sooner gone, but the Beggar commending his fellow for so
cunningly dissembling, iogges him on the elbow, and bids him rise, that they
might be gone; but he was justly punished for his dissimulation, for he was
struck dead by the hand of Heaven: which his fellow seeing, ran after
Epiphanius with all the speed he could make, desiring him humbly to raise his
companion again to life: to whom he answered, The Judgments of God once past,
are unchangeable; therefore what has happened bear with what patience thou
can. Zozomenus, Lib. 7. cap. 26. Therefore Plantus in Mercatore thus says:
Mihi scelus videtur me parenti proloqui mendacium.
i. It appears a heinous thing to me, to lie to my father. If Lying be so
detestable, what may we think of Perjury? Punishment of Puriurie.
The Indians used to swear by the water Sandaracines (a flood so called,) and
who violated that Oath, was punished with death, or else they were curtailed of
their Toes and Fingers. In Sardinia was a Water, in which if the Periurer washed
his eyes, he was instantly struck blind, but the innocent departed thence
purer in his fame, and more perfect in his sight. Alex. Lib. 5. cap. 10.
Miraculous are those Ponds in Sicilia, Aristotle calls this Fountain Acedinus.
called Palici, near to the riner Simethus, where Truths and Falsehoods were
strangely distinguished: The Oaths of men and women being written in Tables,
and cast in them, the Truths swum above water, and the Lies sunk down to the
bottom. All such as forswore themselves, washing in these waters, dyed not
long after, but others returned thence with more validity and strength. The
sin of Perjury was hateful amongst the Egyptians, and the punishment
fearful. All Periurers had their heads cut off, as those that had two ways
offended, in their piety toward the gods, and in their faith to men. Diodor.
Sicul. Lib. 2. cap. 2. de rebus antiquis.

From instructing your Tongues, I come next to your Attyres: but having touched
it elsewhere, I will only speak of the just Taxation, luxurious Habit, or
prodigality in Apparel has been branded with in all ages, and reproved in
all persons, especially in such whose garments exceed their estates, which
argues apparent pride; or such as pretend to be mere Fashion-mongers, pursuing
every fantastic and outlandish garb, and such may justly be reproved of
folly: but since they are both so common in our Nation, to discover both too
plainly, I should but contend against custom, and seeking to please few,
offend many. There was a Law amongst the Grecians, That all such as vainly
spent their patrimony, either in riotous excess, or prodigality in attire,
as well women as men were not suffered to be buried in the sepulchers of their
fathers. Alex. Lib. 6. cap. 14. So hateful was sprucenesse in habit, and
effeminacie amongst the Macedonians, that Philip (the father of Alexander)
deprived a Nobleman of Tarentum of all his Honors and Offices, because he but
delighted in warm Bathes, thus reproouing him: It seems thou art neither
acquainted with the customs nor manners of the Macedonians, amongst whom thou
have not once heard of a woman (though great with child) that ever washed but in
cold water. I see not how that which is so reprooueable in men, can be any way
commendable in women. What shall we think then of those affected pleasures now
adays so much in use, as Riots, Revels, Banquets, Pride, Surfets, Vinocitie,
Voracitie: which as in men (I mean being used in excess) they appear odious,
so in young Virgins, in whom should be nothing but affected Modesty; in
married Wives, that ought to be presidents of Chastity; and temperate and
grave Matrons, that should be the patterns and imitable objects of sincere
Virtue, they cannot but show abominable. The inconvenience of these Excesses,
Silius Italicus well observed, Lib. 15. de Bello Punici, when he thus said: --
Inde aspice late Punishment of Prodigality and Excess.

Florentes quondam luxus quas vertitit vrbes
Quippe nec Ira Deum tantum, nec tela, etc.
-- Thence look abroad and see
How many flourishing Cities ruined be,
Famous of old, since neither the Gods Rage,
The hostile Weapon, nor the Enemies strage,
Has ruined Man in that abundant measure,
As Riot has, mixed with unlawful pleasure.


These are the sins that punish themselves, who as it is said of Lust, carry
their own whips at their girdles. I was bold in some part of this Work
(presuming on the goodness of your Sex) as to say, There was no excellent gift
in man, which was not in some sort paralleld by one woman or other. Therefore
if any of you have been or are still addicted to these enormities, I entreat
them but to remember what is writ of Themistocles, who in his youth was so
wholly given over to all dissoluteness, namely these two excesses, Wine and
Women, that his father banished him his house, and his own mother through
grief strangled her self. Valor. Max. Lib. 6. cap. 11: But after Miltiades
was made General, and fought that memorable battle at Marathon, in which
(against infinite odds) he defeated the Barbarians, there was never any thing
seen or known in him, which was not modest and comely. And being demanded,
how he came so suddenly changed, Militia inquit, etc. The thought of War
(says he) will admit neither sloth in me, nor wantonness: Plutarch. in
Grecor. Apotheg. Would you but entertain into your thoughts as settled an
enmity against all Vices (your public enemies) as he did against the
Persians (the foreign inuaders) you shall undoubtedly (after the Battle of
the Mind, constantly fought against all barbarous temptations) be ranked equal
with him in all his triumphs. It is likewise recorded of Isaus, an Assyrian
Sophist, who in his youth being given to all voluptuousness and effeminate
delicacies, but coming to riper understanding, assumed to himself a wondrous
continency of life, and austeritie in all his actions: insomuch, that a
familiar friend of his seeing a beautiful young woman pass by, and asking
him, If she were not a fair one? To him he answered, (...), i. Desij
laborare de oculis, i. I am no more sick of sore eyes. To another that
demanded, What Fish of Foul was most pleasant to the taste? he replied,
(...), i. I have forgot to look after them; and proceeded, I perceive that I
then gathered all my Fruits out of the Garden of Tantalus: insinuating unto us,
that all those vain Pleasures and Delights, of which Youth is so much
enamored, are nothing else but shadows and dreams, such as Tantalus is said
to be fed with.

Of several degrees of Inchastities, and of their Punishments.
PHilip of Macedon making war against the Thebans, Aeropus and Damasippus,
two of his chief captains, had hired a mercenarie strumpet and kept her in
one of their tents; which the king hearing, he not only cashiered them from
their commands, but banished them his kingdom: Polynaeus, lib. 4. In Germany
Chastity and Modesty is held in that reverent respect, that no mean
Artificer though of the basest trade that is, will entertain a Bastard into
his service or teach him his science: neither in the Accademies will they
permit any such to take degree in schools; though it be a strange severity
against innocent children, who gave no consent to the sins of their parents,
yet it is a mean to curb the liberties of men and women, deterring them from
the like offenses. Aeneus Siluius, lib. 1. of the sayings and deeds of king
Alphonsus, tells us of one Manes Florentinus, who being taken in forbidden
congression with a strumpet, was adjudged to penance, which was not altogether
as our custom in England is, to stand in a white sheet, but naked all save a
linen garment from his wast to his knees, after the fashion of Bases; the
Priests coming to strip him in the Vestrie, would have put upon him that roabe
to cover his shame, which he no way would admit, but was constantly resolved
to stand (as our phrase is) stark naked: but when the church officers demanded
of him, If he were not ashamed to show his virile parts in such a public
assembly (especially where there were so many Virgins, married Wives, and
widow Women?) he answered, Minime gentium, nam pudenda haec quae peccauerunt,
ea potissimum dare panas decet, i. By no means, quoth he, most fit it is that
those shameful things that have offended and brought me to this shame, should
likewise do open penance. Pontius Offidianus, a knight of Rome, after he had
found by infallable signs his daughters virginity to be dispoyled and
vitiated by Fannius Saturnius her schoole-maister, was not content to extend
his just rage upon his servant, and punish him with death, but he also slew
his daughter, who rather desired to celebrat her untimely exequies, than follow
her to her contaminated Nuptials. Val. lib. 6. cap. 1. Pub. Attilius
Philiscus, notwithstanding in his youth he was compelled by his master to
prostitute his own body to unnatural lusts, for brutish and vnthriuing
gain, yet after proved a severe father; for finding his daughter to have
corrupted her virginal chastity, he slew her with his own hand. How sacred
(then) may we imagine and conceive purity and temperance was held in Rome,
when such as had professed base prostitution in their youth, became judges and
punishers thereof even upon their own children, in their age? Val. Max. lib. 6.
c. 1. Appius Claudius Regillanus, the most eminent amongst the Decemviri, so
doted on Virginia the daughter of Virginius a Centurion, Virginia.
who was then in the camp at Algidus, that he suborned a servant of his to
seize her and claim her as his bondwoman, and bring the cause to be decided
before him: needs must the business pass on his side, being both the accuser
and the judge. The father being certified of these proceedings by Icilius a
hopeful young gentleman before contracted unto her, leaving his charge abroad,
repaires to the city and appearing before the judgment seat, sees his own
lawful daughter taken both from himself and betrothed husband, and conferred
upon another as his slave and bondwoman. The judgment being past, he desires
leave to speak with his daughter apart, it was granted him by the Court, who
slew her with his own hand: then taking up her body and lifting it upon his
shoulders, posted with that lamentable burden to the camp, and incited the
soldiers to revenge: Liuie, Volater. lib. 14. cap. 2. Antropol. Quintus Fabius
Seruilianus having his daughters chastity in suspicion, first delivered her to
death, and after punished himself with voluntary banishment. The punishment
of these inchastities is by the Poets to the life illustrated in the fable of
Titius the son of Terra, who intending to stuperate Latona, was by Apollo
slain with an arrow, and being thrust down into Hell and chained to a rock,
his Liver and Heart is perpetually tired on by a ravenous Vulture, who still
renewes his inceasible torments. Virgill lib. Aeneid. 6. under the person of
Titius, would pourtray unto us the unquiet conscience, which though sometimes
it may be at a seeming peace, yet the torment by being still renewed, daily
increases and gnawes the heartstrings of all such persons as to themselves are
guilty.

Of Witches and the Punishment due to them.
VIncentius cites this following History from Guillerimus in Specul. Histor.
lib. 26. Punishment of Witchcraft.
cap. 26. which also Johannes Wyerius, Ranulphus, and others, commemorats; an
English woman that dwelt at a town called Barkley in England, being a Witch,
yet not being much suspected, lived in indifferent good opinion amongst her
neighbors, and being feasting upon a time abroad and wondrous pleasant in
company, she had a tame crow which she had brought up, that would be familiar
with her and sit upon her shoulder and prate to her in the best language it
could: she at this feast (the Table being ready to be drawn) sported with
her, which spoke to her more plainly than it used some words which she
better than the rest of the company understood, at which suddenly her knife
dropped out of her hand, her color changed, the blood forsook her che^kes,
and she looked pale, ready to sink down, and fetching some inward suspires
and groans, she at length broke forth into this language, Woe is me, my plow
is now entered into the last furrow, for this day I shall hear of some great
loss which I must forciblly suffer. The rest wondering at her sudden change
from mirth to passion, next at her alteration of look, and lastly at her
mystical language, when her words were scarce ended, but a messenger rushed
hastily into the room, and told her that her eldest son with all the whole
family at home were found suddenly dead: which she no sooner heard but
overcome with sorrow she fainted, and being recovered and conducted to her
own house she took her bed, and presently caused the only two children she
had living to be sent for, the one a Monk the other a Nun, who presently
came to visit her and know her pleasure, to whom with a pensive and destracted
heart, the tears running from her eyes, she thus speak: Alas my children
behold me your mother, and commiserat my wretched and distressed estate, whose
fate has been so maleuolent and disastrous, that I have hitherto been a
wicked professor of diabolical Witchraft, having been a mistress of that
Art, and a great persuader to those abominations; now, all the refuge I have
to fly to is your religious zeal, and piety, in this despair, for now is
the time that the Devils will exact their due. Those that persuaded me to this
mischief, are ready to demand their Covenant. Therefore by a mothers love I
charge you, and by your filial duty I conjure you, since the Sentence of may
Souls perdition is irreuocable, that you will use your best endeavor and
industry for the preservation of my Body. This therefore I enjoin you, in
stead of a Winding Sheet, sow my Body in the skin of a Heart, or Bucks
Leather, then put me in a Coffin of Stone, which cover with Lead, and after
bind it with Hoopes or Bars of Iron, to which fasten three strong Chains: If
my Body thus coffined, lie three days quiet, bury me the fourth day, though
I fear the Earth for my manifold Blasphemies will scarce give entertainment to
my Body. For the first two nights together, let there be fifty Psalms sung
for me, and as many Masses for so many days; which said, she gave up her last
breath. She dead, the brother and sister were careful to perform the mothers
last Will, and did all things accordingly. The first two nights, when the
Quires of Churchmen sung Psalms about the Body, the Devils with much ease
broke open the Church doors, which were bolted, barred, locked, and propt, and
broke two of the Chains by which the Coffin was fastened, but the third
remained steadfast. The third night, about the time when the Cock begins to
crow, the foundation of the Temple seemed to shake with the noise of the Devils
who clamoured at the door: one of the rest, taller in stature and more
terrible in countenance than his fellows, knocked with more violence than
those which attended him, till he had broken the door to shiuers; when
stalking to the Coffin, he called the woman by her name aloud, and bad her
arise and follow him: to whom the dead body answered, I cannot for these
Chains. To whom he answered, Those shall be loosed to thy mischief; when
tearing them asunder as they had been Linkes made of Rushes, he snatched up
the Coffin, and carried it to the Church door, where stood ready a black
Sumpter-horse, loudly neighing, whose hoofes were divided like Eagles tallons,
upon which he laid the body, hurried it away with seeming joy, whilst all
the Quirristers looked on, and so vanished: Her shrikes and eiulations were
heard four miles off. Let this one suffice for many: I come now to Temporal
Punishments.

The Judges called Areopagitae, when they deprehended a Witch, and were to
deliver her to death, if she were with child, stayed the execution till she
were delivered of her Infan^, because they would not punish the innocent with
the delinquent: Aelian. de var. Histor. Lib. 5. The Law to punish Witches
amongst the Persians, was to bring them to a place where their heads were
beaten to pieces betwixt two Rocks: So suffered Gyge, the handmaid to
Parisatides, the mother of Cyrus: Plutarch. in Artaxerxes. Charles the seventh,
king of France (or the Frenchmen) caused Prince Egidius de Raxa, Marshall of
France, to be first hanged, then burnt, because he confessed himself to be a
Witch, and professor of Magic; and withal, to have been the death of an
hundred and twenty children, and women great with child. A Witch of Auerne was
burnt alive, for killing young infants, and salting their flesh and putting
them into Pyes, and baking them for public sale: Fulgos. Lib. 9. cap. 2.
Ioha^nes Bodinus, Lib. Mag. Demonomaniae 4. cap. 5. tells us, That there is a
Law sacred in France, That if any Magician, or Witch, or Soothsayer, or
Mathematician, (that shall go beyond the true rules of Astrology) or
expounder of Dreams, shall frequent the Court, be he never so great in favor,
or potent in office, he shall be immediately degraded from all his honors, and
put to the rack and torture. And this Law is fitting (says he) to be writ in
golden characters upon every Court gate, because there is no greater Pest
extant either to Prince or people, than this viperous brood: therefore (above
our Christian Princes) he commends the Ethnic kings. In the time of Marius,
an Inchantresse (whose name was Martha Martha.
) who pretended to foretell to the Roman Senate the success of the Cimbrian
war, Tacit.
was banished: Plutarch. in Mario. Claudius Caesar condemned a knight of Rome
to death, Plin^ Lib. 29. cap. 3.
and forfeited all his goods to the people, Some say, a Serpents ^gge.
because he wore about him a Cocks egg, as a Charm to dispense with Religion^
and that all the causes which he had in controversy, should (in despite of
the Judges) pass of his side. Even fellows that were scarce of any name or
opinion in the world, that were but suspected of Negromancie, were condemned to
death under Tiberius Caesar. The Emperor Caracalla adjudged all such as but
used enchanted herbs to the curing of Agues and Feauers: Spartian. in
Caracalla. The Scripture says, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live. Bodinus
(contrary to Wyerius, who will scarce believe there be any such, accounting
all those Judges as condemn them to the Stake, or Gallows, no better than
Executioners and Hangmen) he shows diverse probable Reasons why they ought
not to live. Reason 1.
The first is, Because all Witches renounce God and their Religion; Deuteronomy. 13.
now the Law of God says, Whosoever shall forsake the God of Heaven, and
adhere to any other, shall be stoned to death; which punishment the Hebrews
held to be the greatest could be inflicted: 2.
R. Maymon, Lib. 3. The second thing is, That having renounced God and their
Religion, they curse, blaspheme, and provoke the Almighty to anger. Leuit. 24.
The Law says, Whosoever shall blaspheme, their sin shall remain with them;
and whosoever shall take his name in vain or in contempt, shall be punished
with death. 3.
The third thing is, That they plight faith, and make covenant with Devil,
adore him, and sacrifice unto him; as Apuleius testifies of Pamphila Larissana,
a Witch of Thessalie; as likewise a Witch in the Laodunensian suburbs, in the
month of May, 1578. who blushed not to do the like before many witnesses:
Exodus 20.32. Deuteronomy. 13.27. Numb. 25.
now the Law says, Who that shall but incline or bow down to Images (which
the Greeks call (...)) shall be punished with death. The Hebrew word Tistaueb,
and the Chaldaean Fisgud, (which all our Latin Interpreters translate Adorare)
imports as much as to incline, or worship: now these Witches do not only
incline unto him, but inuoke and call upon him. 4.
A fourth thing is (which many have confessed) That they have vowed their
children to the Devil; Leuit. 21. Deuteronomy. 18.
now the Law says, God is inflamed with revenge against all such as shall
offer their children unto Moloch; which Josephus interpretes Priapus, and
Philo, Satanus: but all agree, that by Moloch is signified the Devil and
malignant spirits. 5.
A fifth thing is (gathered out of their own confessions) That they have
sacrificed Infants not yet baptized, to the Devil, and have killed them by
thrusting great pinnes into their heads. Sprangerus testifies, that he
condemned one to the fire, who confessed, that she by such means had been the
death of one and forty children. A sixth thing is, 6.
That they do not only offer children in the manner of sacrifice (against
which the Holy Ghost speaks, Deuteronomy. 18.
That for that sin alone God will extirpe and root out the people) but they
vow them in the womb. A seventh is, 7.
That they are not themselves blasphemers and Idolaters only, but they are tied
by covenant with the Devil, to allure and persuade others to the like
abominations; Deuteronomy. 13.
when the Law teaches, That whosoever shall persuade another to renounce his
Creator, shall be stoned to death. An eight is, 8.
That they not only call upon the Devil, but swear by his name; which is
directly against the Law of God, Ierem. 5.12.9.
which forbids us to swear by any thing save his own Name. A ninth is, 9.
That adulterous Incests are frequent amongst them, for which in all ages they
have been infamous, and of such detestable crimes convicted; so that it has
almost grown to a Proverb, No Magician or Witch, but was either begot and
borne of the father and daughter, or the mother and son: which Catullus in
this Distick expresses; Nam Magus ex Matre, and gnato gignatur oportet
Si vera est Persarum impia Relligio.
Intimating, that if the impious Religion of the Persians were true, Witches of
necessity should be the incestuous issue of the mother and son, or else e
contra. A tenth, 10.
They they are Homicides, and the murderers of Infants; which Sprangerus
observes from their own confessions, and Baptista Porta the Neapolitan, in his
book de Magia: Next, That they kill children before their Baptism, by which
circumstances their offense is made more capital and heinous. The eleventh, 11.
That Witches eat the flesh of Infants, and commonly drink their bloods, in
which they take much delight. To which Horace seems to allude, when he says:
Nue pransae Lamiae vinum puerum extrahat Aluo.
Nor from the stomach of a Witch new dined,
Plucks he a yet 'liue Infant --
If children be wanting, they dig humane bodies from their sepulchers, or
feed upon men that have been executed. To which purpose Lucan writes: --
Laqueum nodosque nocentes
Ore suo rupit, pendentia corpora carpsit,
Abrasit cruces, etc.
The Felons strangling Cord she nothing fears,
But with her teeth the fatal Knot she tears:
The hanging bodies from the Cross she takes,
And shaues the Gallows, of which dust she makes, etc.


Apuleius reports, That coming to Larissa in Thessaly, he was hired for eight
pieces of Gold to watch a dead body but one night, for fear the Witches (of
which in that place there is abundance) should gnaw and devour the flesh of
the party deceased, even to the very bones; which is often found amongst them.
Also, Murder by the Laws of God and man is punishable with death: Deuteronomy. 19.
besides, they that eat man's flesh, or deliver it to be eaten, are not worthy
to live: Cornel. Lib. de Sicarijs. A twelfth is, 12.
That they kill as often by Poisons, as by Powders and Magic Spells: now the Law
says, It is worse to kill by Witchcraft than with the Sword: Lib. 1. de
Malific. A thirteenth is, 13.
That they are the death of Cattle; for which, Augustanus the Magician suffered
death, 1569. A fourteenth, 14.
That they blast the Corn and Grain, and bring barrenness and scarcity,
when there is a hoped plenty and abundance. A fifteenth, 15.
That they have carnal consocietie with the Devil, as it has been approved
by a thousand several confessions. Now all that have made any compact or
covenant with the Devil, if not of all these, yet undoubtedly are guilty of
many, or at least some, and therefore consequently not worthy to live. And so
much for the Punishment of Witches, and other known malefactors: I come now to
the Rewards due to the Virtuous, and first of some noble Ladies, for diverse
excellencies worthy to be remembered.

Of Tirgatao Moeotis, Camiola Turinga, and others.
TIrgatao, Tirgatao Moeotis.
a beautiful and virtuous Lady, was joined in marriage to Hecataeus, king of
those Indians that inhabit near unto the Bosphor, which is an arm of the
Sea, that runs betwixt two coasts. This Hecataeus being cast out of his
kingdom, Satyrus the most potent of these kings, reinstated him in his
Principality; but conditionally, That he would marry his only daughter, and
make her Queen, by putting Tirgatao to death. But he (though forced by the
necessity of the time, and present occasion) yet loving his first wife still,
would not put her to death, according to the covenant, but caused her to be
shut in his most defenced Castle, there to consume the remainder of her life in
perpetual widowhood. The Lady comforted with better hopes, and borne to
fairer fortunes, deceived the eyes of her strict keepers, and by night escaped
out of prison. This being made known to the two kings, the son in law and
the father, they were wonderfully perplexed with the news of her flight, as
fearing if she arrived in her own country, she might accite the people to
her revenge. They therefore pursued her with all diligence and speed, but in
vain: for hiding her self all the day time, and traveling by night through
pathlesse and unfrequented places, at length she arrived amongst the Ixomatae,
which was the country of her own friends and kindred. But finding her father
dead, she married with him that succeeded in the kingdom: by which means now
commanding the Ixomatae, she insinuated into the breasts of the most warlike
people inhabiting about Moeotis, and so levied a brave Army, which she her
self conducted. She first invaded the kingdom of Hecataeus, and infested his
country with many bloody incursions; she next wasted and made spoil of the
kingdom of Satyrus, insomuch that they both were forced with all submisse
entreaties, by ambassadors to sue unto her for peace; to which she assented,
having before as hostage of their truce, received Metrodorus, the son of
Satyrus. But the two kings falsified to her their faith and honor: for Satyrus
dealt with two of his subjects (whom he best trusted) with whom he pretended
heinous displeasure; for which, flying and retiring themselves to her for
refuge, they there attend a convenient opportunity, to insiderate her life.
They submitting to her, her Court becomes their sanctuary. Satyrus sends to
demand the offenders: she by her Letters entreats and mediates their peace and
pardon. These attend their next occasion: the one pretends private conference
with her, and bowing submissely to her, as she enclines her body to attend
him, the other inuades her with his Sword; her fortunate Belt kept the Steel
from entering: Clamor is made, her servants enter, the traitors are apprehended,
and confess all that before had passed betwixt Satyrus and them: Therefore
she commands his son Metrodorus (the Hostage) to be slain, and the two
conpirators with him; gathers another Army, and inuades the Bosphorean Tyrant:
She punishes his perfidiousnesse with Rapes, Murders, Combustions, and all
the calamities of war, till Satyrus himself (oppressed with miseries and
surcharged with grief) expired, whom Gorgippus his son succeeded in the
Principality, but not with any security, till he had acknowledged his Crown
as given to him by her, and with many costly and rich gifts compounded for his
peace: Polyb. Lib. 8. This Lady has a merited name for an invincible courage
and a masculine spirit.

Comiola Turinga.
No less worthy to be remembered, is Comiola Turinga; her history is thus
reported: In that great Navy which Peter king of Sicilie sent against Robert
king of Naples, in the aid of the Lyparitanes, with other Princes and Noblemen,
there was in that fleet one Roland, bastard brother to king Peter. The
Sicilians being defeated by the Neapolitans, Roland (amongst many other
gentlemen) was surprised and cast into prison. Now when the friends and kinsmen
of all such captives had been careful of their release, and almost all of
them were ransomed thence, king Peter blaming the flouth and cowardice of his
subjects the Sicilians, neglected his brother, and would entertain no
discourse that tended to his redemption. Whereupon he was put into a more close
prison, no better than a Dungeon, where he was debarred the benefit of light,
and shortened of his diet, where he spent his time in discontent and misery.
This extremity of his (with the Dukes slacknesse in his release) coming to
the ear of a beautiful young widow of Messana, who had a large Dower from her
parents, and was left infinitely rich by her husband: she pitying his
distressed estate, and withal being somewhat enamored of his person, sent to
him privately by such as she best trusted, to know of him, If he would accept
her as his wife, if she did instantly pay down his ransom. The motion being
made, he seemed ouerioyed, thanked the Heavens for their divine assistance, and
with great willingness accepted of the motion. They are contracted by Proxy,
and she pays ready down two thousand ounces of Gold for his freedom. This
done, and Roland coming back to Messana, he was so far from acknowledging
the Contract, that he would not so much as see her, or confess himself
obliged unto her in the smallest courtesy, who (had it not been for her
charitable love and piety) might have languished in an uncomfortable durance
all the days of his life. Comiola Turinga at this ingratitude much grieved;
for she had not only paid down so great a sum, but that which most
afflicted her, was, that the fame of her marriage being all ouerspread, the
Contract being denied, and by Roland abiured, must at least redound to her
perpetual scorn, if not to the disparagement of her fame and virtue. To salve
both, with what conuenience she could she was advised to accite him into the
Ecclesiastical Court by Process, and to plead the forenamed Contract, and
(which she could easily do) prove it by witness. Which the friends and
kindred of Roland hearing, persuaded him (to shun the common fame which went of
his ingratitude) to reconcile the tongues of evil speakers, and to prevent all
controversies and troubles in Law, to accept of her as one that best deserved
him. With much ado he accepts of the motion. A public confluence of friends
and kindred at an appointed day are assembled, where when the bastard expected
to hear her and her friends solicit him concerning the marriage, she in that
public conuention first ripped up her courtesies, and with what a charitable and
chaste purpose she had done them; next she laid open his barbarous ingratitude,
not to acknowledge them; and lastly, his corrupt and dishonest heart, in lying
to God and her, by denying a contract past in the presence of so many
witnesses: therefore she told him, she now renounced both contract, claim,
or interest in him, accounting it a dishonor unto her to cast her self away
upon one perfidious and a coward. As for marriage, she had now contracted her
self to single chastity, and all the wealth she had, she vowed to the
service of God and his Church: and so left him with a kind of noble disdain,
being by all that saw and heard her constant resolution, as much commended for
her courage, as he condemned for his mutabilitie and cowardice: Fulgos. Lib. 5.
cap. 3. Honor and Reward to Fortitude.
If Lucius Aemulius Regillus in a Nauall fight having defeated Hanniball (then
General for the king Antiochus) was brought into the Temple of Apollo by the
Senate; where first having all his brave service rehearsed by the Herald, or
Crier, with how puissant a Navy he had fought, how many of the enemies ships
he had foundred in the Sea, and how many taken, and brought to Rome; for
which, by the consent of the Fathers, he was granted a Triumph: Liu. Lib. 8.
de Bello Macedon. and Volater. Lib. 13. cap. 3. Anthrop. If Aurelius Alex.
Emperor, for fighting against the Persians, and vanquishing the king Artaxerxes
(whom Herodian in his History calls Artaxaces) for this Act alone (after a
large and learned Encomiastick Oration, made of the excellency of his Valor)
had likewise a public Triumph allowed him by the Senate: Volater. Lib. 23. If
Leocritus the Athenian, and son of Protarchus (being but a private soldier
under the General Olimpiodorus) at the assault of Pyraeum (then guarded and
defenced by Demetrius, the son of Antigonus) because he was the first that
mounted and broke into the Rampire, then called Musaeum, in entering which, he
was slain; yet for this only brave Act of Resolution had all Military
Honors done to his Body, his Shield with his name engraven thereon, with his
valiant Enterprise inscribed, as a thing sacred to perpetual memory, and
dedicated to Jupiter the Deliverer: Pauson. Lib. 1. What praise, what
admiration, and condign Honors may this magnanimous Queen Tyrgatao Meotis
claim, who not in one, but many battles, opposed two potent and puissant
kings; whose martial valor righted her own injuries in person, met them,
braued them, and beat them in field, and after many victorious defeats
vassalled their insolent pride, and subjected them to her own Heroical
mercy? If amongst the Romans, he that in battle had saved but the life of
one citisen, and bestrid him in battle, and in the same conflict had slain
an enemy, was honored with a Ciuicke Crown and Garland; to which, the Golden
Honors, the Murall, and those Wreathes of Dignity that either belonged to the
Camp or the Pulpit, gave place: which as he was tied perpetually to wear, so
all the people were enjoined to give him way, and do him honor; insomuch,
that if he came late to be a spectator of the Sports in the Theater, at his
first appearance in the Orchestra, a place in the Theater only for the
Nobility.
Orchestra, all the Princes and Senators arose, from the highest to the lowest,
and offered him place: How shall we celebrate the ever to be admired
magnanimity of the Amazons, Marpesia, Lampedo, Orythea, Antiope, Penthesilea,
and others of that masculine Virtue and courage? The Archduke Agamemnon,
because Ajax had but fought with Hector (though not vanquished him) caused an
Ox to be sacrificed unto him, rewarding him with the hinder Loins and the
Horns: Homer. Lib. 7. Iliad. and 10. What Immolations then deserved Menalippe,
for combatting Hercules; or Hippolite, who hand to hand encountered Theseus? The
same General presented Achilles for his valor, because he slew Hector
(though, as some write, with the odds of base advantage) with seven
three-footed Pots of Brass, twenty Cauldrons, ten Talents of Gold, twelve
Steeds, and seven beautiful Lesbian Damsels: Idem. How would he have
guerdoned the magnanimity of Te^c^, the wife of Argo^, and Queen of Illyria,
who not only led valiant men in person to the field, but opposed the Roman
Legions in all their might and flourishing time of their Empire, obtaining from
them many glorious Victories? The ordinary soldiers in Rome (even for private
and common services) were guerdoned some with Obsidionall, Nauall, and Ciuicke
Garlands; others, with Lances headed with Gold; some with Iuorie Chayres;
others with Staves of Iuorie; figured Gowns, called Vestes Palmatae, which
were wrought or embroidered all over with Palm trees (such Conquerors used in
War, and Consuls in the time of Peace:) blew Ensigns, for Sea-conquest;
golden Chains, double Corn, double stipendarie Wages, or Pay; and sometimes,
with the dignity of civil Magistracy and Office. Others were presented with
Rings, Bracelets, Flags or Pendants, Coats of Mayle, and golden Vessels: some
were allowed Ouations, others Triumphs, with Laudations, Acclamations,
Gratulations, etc. If these things were allowed to men, only borne for action,
What Celebrations, Dignities, Praises, and Encomi^^s, what rich Chains of
Pearls, and Carkanets of Diamonds, nay Crowns embellished with Carbuncles,
what Pictures, Statues, Sepulchers, and Monuments to eternize their memory (if
it were possible) beyond all posterity) merits Hypsicratea, the wife of
Mithridates; Artemisia, of Manso^^s; Tomyris, Queen of the Scythians; Zenobia,
of the Palmirians; Amalasumh^, of the Goths, who have changed their soft
effeminacies into noble Virilitie, and their feminine weakness into masculine
Valor; in which by following, they have got the start, and by imitating,
excelled. I now proceed to the honor due to Modesty and Temperance, lately
expressed in Comiola Turinga.

Honor due to Temperance.
Otho the fourth, Emperor, being in Florence, and amongst many other
beautiful young Damsels (then in the flower of their age) casting his eye
upon one Galdrata Bertha, Galdrata Bertha.
daughter to a Florentine citizen, whose name was Bellincionus, he spoke
liberally of her beauty in the presence of her father; insomuch, that his
words sauored of great love and affection toward the Virgin: which apprehended
by Billincionus, he told the Emperor, That if his fancy were that way
addicted (and in the presence of the Damsel) that he might freely kiss and
embrace her at his will and pleasure: To whom she instantly replied upon his
words (first desiring the Emperors pardon) That she had made a Vow, that she
would never kiss any man, save him whom she assuredly knew should futurely be
her husband. Which answer the modest Prince took in such good part, as that he
purposed her virtue should not pass without reward: who asking, If she were
yet contracted to any^ and she answering, No; Then (says the Emperor) giu^
me leave to provide thee of a husband: when calling to him one Gu^^o Germanus,
a noble young gentleman, and one in his especial favor, to him he presently
contracted her (a man, as he was approved in Arms and Virtue, so he was
eminent in his Stock and Family, being nobly descended) and gave her for her
Dower all that large Valley which lies beneath the Hill Casentinus, in the
fields that are called Aretini Agri, and made it an Earldom, which Tide he
bestowed on him. And from them two proceeded the famous. Family of the Earls
G^^don^, whose eminence endured many hereditarie successions: Fulgos. Lib. 6.
cap. 1. I could samplifie the Reward due to Temperance, and illustrate it with
as many modest and chaste women, before remembered, as I have Magnanimity in the
Heroike Queens and Warlike Ladies: But to avoid prolixitie (which I labor to
sh^^) let this one suffice for many.

The reward due to Fertility, or many Children, with such as have restored
their decayed Families.
THere was a law amongst the Spartans, that whosoever had three sons that
family should be quit from watching and warding and such common service; but
he that had stored the common weal with five, he claimed immunitie in all
public offices, Aelian. lib. 6. de Var. Histor. Amongst the Persians those
that had the most numerous offspring, were capable of the most honors, to
whom the king yearly sent rich presents, Herodot. lib. 1. Regina.
What merited honors then deserved Regina the daughter of M^scinus Scalliger
and Thadaea Garroriensis, who being married to Prince Bernobonus Viscount of
Mediolanum, had by him four sons and twelve daughters: The first and eldest
was married to Peter king of Cyprus; the second o Lewis Dolphin and first borne
son to the French king; the third to the Duke of Bauaria; the fourth to the
Duke of Austria; the fifth to Vicount Gallen^ius, the sixth to Leopoldus of
Austria, grandfather to Frederick the third Emperor; the seventh to another
Duke of Bauaria; the eighth to Frederick king of Sicilia; the ninth to
Frederick Gonzage; the tenth to Duke Ernestus Monachus; the eleventh to
Frederick his younger brother, the twelfth and last to the Earl of Kent,
eldest son to the king of great Britain, from whose generous offspring most
of the royallest houses of Christendom (such as still flourish in their
pristine honors) claim their descent, so that this fruitful queen may be
called a Cibele or mother of the gods, Bernardus Scardeonus lib. 3. Histor.
Pat. Pliny confers great felicity upon a Lacedemonian Lady called Lampedo,
Lampedo.
because she was the daughter of a king, the wife of a king, and mother to a
king; when a certain rich Lady of Ionia came to Lacena, and with great
boasting and pride showed her, her precious jewels and rich garments, she
pointed to her four fair children whom she had liberally and virtuously
educated, and said, These are treasures only in which modest and discreet
women ought to glory. Plutarch in Apotheg. Luconic. Eumele.
Eumele the wife to Basilius Helenopontamos of Pontabus (as Nazianzenus
testifies) had by him five sons of which three at one time were learned
bishops and stour champions for the Gospel, namely, Gregorius Nissenus,
Basilius Magnus Caesariensis, and Petrus Sebasta, then I blame nor Epaminondas,
who in all his noble exployts and prosperous successes in war, was often
heard to say, That nothing was so pleasing and delightful to him, as that both
his parents were yet alive to participate with him in his honors: he in the
great battle called Lenctricum, had a glorious victory over the
Lacedaemonians, Plutarch in Grec. Apotheg. So Basilius Magnus Bishop of Cesaria,
gloried of nothing so much (with daily thanks to God) as that he was borne of
Christian parents, namely Helenopo^tanus his father and school master, and
Enmele Capadoce his mother, and that he was nourced by Macrina, Macrina.
who had been a zealous and frequent auditor of Gregory Naeocae Soriensis, his
grandfather in that bloody persecution, under the Emperor Maximinus, with his
kinsmen and family retired himself into a Cave in a moate, where with bread
only he miraculously fed himself and the rest for the space of seven years,
and after for the Faith of the Gospel suffered a blessed and glorious
Martyrdom, Licosck, in Theat. Human. Vitae. Saint Hierom commends Paula the
religious Roman matron for her nobility of birth, as being begot by Rogatas a
Gretian, who derived himself from Agamemnon king of Mecene, and royal
General of those famous expeditious against Troy, and borne of Blesilla
Romana, Blesilla.
of the ancient family of the Scipioes and the Gracchi, and was married unto
Toxilius, illustrous in his blood, as claiming his descent from Aeneas and the
Julian pedigree: but nobility of birth not being our own but our ancestors, it
is not my purpose to insist of it any further. It follows that I should speak
something of such as have been the restorers of ancient and decade Families,
even when they were at the last gasp and ready to perish and be as it were
swept from the face of the Earth.

Vital is Michael duke of Venice returning with his weather-beaten Navy out of
Greece, where almost for the space of two years together without cessation he
had opposed Prince Emanuel Constantinopolitanus, being so exhausted, that
scarce Commanders, Marreners, or any nauall protection sufficiently
accommodated was left to bring back his fleet; whether by a pestilentiall
mortallitie, or that Prince Manuell had poisoned the Springs and Fountains,
where the Venetian soldiers furnished themselves with fresh water is not
certain, but most sure it is, besides many other disasters and discommodities,
that which he held to be the greatest, was, that there was not any of male
issue of the Justinian Family left alive, but all of them in that unfortunate
expedition perished to one man, not any of that noble stock suruiuing, by whom
the memory thereof might be restored to posterity: This the Duke Michaell
often pondering with himself in great sadness and sorrow, at length he
bethought him of one Nicholaus, a young man, who had devoted himself to a
sequestered and religious life, and was of the order of the Benedictan Friars;
he had besides, one only daughter whose name was Anna, Anna Veneta.
her he had a great desire to confer upon Nicholaus, so he could any way
admit a dispensation from Alexander then Pope: therefore to that purpose he
earnestly petitioned him, and made great friends to solicit him in that
behalf, who willing to repair the ruins of so noble a family now altogether
spent and wasted, gave approbation touching the marriage, which was accordingly
publicly and with great pomp solemnised. These two, now the only hopes of
that future posterity, had fair and fortunate issue, males and females, who
were no sooner grown to any perfection and disposed of to liberal and
virtuous education, but (which is remarkable in two so young) they conferd
together to this purpose, that since Heaven had blessed them with that for
which marriage was ordained, and the purpose for which the dispensation was
granted (namely issue, and to revive a dying family) that they would with an
unanimous consent, again enter into religious vows and orders, This motion
was betwixt them resolved, and having nobly disposed of their children, he
took upon him holy orders, and retired himself to the monastery of Saint
Nicholas; his wife Anna erected a Nunnerie not far from Torcellus, which she
made sacred to Saint Adrian, how great and almost miraculous was their
abstinence and Piety, that abandoning all worldly pleasures and delights, when
they flowed about them in all abundance, even then vowed themselves to
solitude and heavenly meditations, in which profession they both in a fair and
full age deseased, Egnat, lib. 4. cap. 3. and Marullus in Vita Vitalis. Not
much different from this is that which we read of Pharon Meliensis a noble
Prelat, who with his wife after some years of affectionate consocietie passed
betwixt them, made by a united consent a strict vow of future chastity; she
betook her self to a Nunnerie, he to a Monastery: but after seven
sollitarie winters passed, he was still troubled in his thoughts, for often
calling to remembrance the beauty of his wife, he repented himself of his
former vow, and often solicited her for a private meeting, which she still
denying, and he more and more importuning, at length she yielded to give him
visitation; but the prudent and chaste Lady had her face covered, her eyes
dejected, and presented herself in a base and sordid garment, where with her
entreaties mixed with tears, she so far prevailed with him that without
breach of their promise made to Heaven they took their lasting leave, he still
remaining in his Covent, and she repairing to her Cloister, Marul. lib. 4.
cap. 7. Volateran. writes of Petrus Vrseolus duke of Venice, who after he had
one son by his wife, by their unanimous consent, they vowed perpetual
abstinence from all venerall actions. So likewise Aloysius de Caballis a noble
Venecian with his wife (a Lady derived from the blood of the Patritians) these
two agreed together never to have carnal congression but only for issue sake,
neither would they suffer any motion, temptation, or any word, look, or
gesture that might tend to the least provocation, in so much that (if we may
believe report) the very linen which they wore next them, was so interwoauen
and disposed about them, that when they lay together, with great difficulty
one might touch the others naked body, Egnat. lib. 4. cap. 3. Now what meede
these deserve I am not able to judge, I leave it to his wisdom who is the
rewarder of all goodness and is the searcher of the hearts and reins, and
knows who are Hippocrites, who true prosessors, who pretend devotion merely
for devotion sake, and who profess it for sincere zeal and religious piety.

Of Beauty and the reward thereof.
TO the great and solemn marriage betwixt Peleus (the father of Achilles) and
Thetis, Higinus lib. 1. Fab.
all the gods and goddesses weae invited, saving Eris, i. Discord, who taking
it ill, that she alone of the immortal deities, should either be forgotten or
neglected in that high and solemn conuention, and was not admitted to the
banquet: she casts in amongst them a golden Ball or Apple with this
inscription, Detur pulcherrimae, i. Let this be given to the fairest. This was
no sooner done, but up start the then most potent goddesses every one
assumming to themselves the excellency of Beauty, in so much that snatching
at the Ball, it had almost come to blows, till Jupiter was by them entreated
to end the controversy. But knowing how it would offend his wife to bestow it
upon either of his daughters, and again, if on the one, he must of force
distaste the other; he therefore rather than to sentence partially, willing to
be no judge at all, commanded Mercury to conduct them to the mount Ida, and
there this dissension to be ended by Paris the son of Priam, who then was a
Neateheard and kept cattle in the mountains. These suddenly appearing before
him, and the young man abashed, Mercury cheered him up, told his message from
Jupiter, and withal delivered him the golden prise to be disposed of at his
pleasure, to whom the bashful Neateheard thus answered, How can I (o
Mercury) that am but a mortal man and brought up in all rusticie be a just
and equal censurer of such divine Beauties, such causes ought to be decided
by those that have bin trained up in the vrbanitie of walled towns or the
delicacies of Courts, to both which even from my infancy I have been an alien
and mere stranger, I (alas) have only judgment to distinguish this shee-goat
from that, and which heighfer or the other is the fairer; but for these
celestial beauties, in my eyes they are all infinitely absolute and alike
equal, in so much that I look not upon one but my sight dwells upon her; and
if I transfer mine eyes upon a second, though I be refresht yet I am not
benefited; and if upon a third, I am cloyed with variety, not dispariging any,
but still applauding the present: if I cast mine eye upon her, she is fairest;
if upon, her, she appears no less; if on the last, she equals both the
other; and still that which is nearest seems the best, as if succession bred
excellency. And now I could wish my self like Argus, to be eyes all over,
that the pleasure which I receive from two, might by taking these miraculous
objects from an hundred, at once be multiplied unto me according to the
number, to make my now sacietie a surfeit. Besides, the one is Juno the wife
and sister of Jupiter, the other are Minerua and Venus his two daughters, so
that of necesssitie in gaining one uncertain friend, I shall purchase two most
constant enemies; therefore (says he) I entreat you (o Mercury) so far to
mediate for me to these goddesses, that since but one can conquer, the two
vanquished will not be offended with me, but rather to impute my error (if
any be) to the weakness of my humane sight, than to any premeditated and
pretended spleen or malice. To which every one (trusting to their own
perfections) willingly assented; when Paris thus proceeded. Only one thing I
desire to know, whether it be sufficient for me being a judge to censure of
these features as they are apparelled, or more accuratly to pry into every
linement of their bodies, it be behoouefull for me to see them naked. To whom
Mercury replyde, You being judge, and they now standing at the bar of your
censure, have power to command them at your pleasure: then (says Paris) for
my better satisfaction I desire to see them naked. Mercury then said, Strippe
your selves to your skins, o you goddesses, for it behooues him to see, that
judges: for mine own part I am neither one that sits upon the bench to
censure, nor stand at the bar for witness, therefore whilst you show all, I
will see nothing, but turn my face and look another way. At this Juno first
began, It Is right, o Paris, and see (as most presuming) I first unlace my self,
and behold these are small and slender fingers, blew vayned wrists, white
arms, and fair and delicat shoulders, look upon my round yourie breasts,
proportioned wast, smooth and soft skin; nor do I only boast the splendour
of my amiable face, and clear and p^esent eyes, for the lower thou look
thou will the more commend my feature, for know I am queen and goddess of
marriage, totally, equally, and uniformly fair all over. This said, Paris bad
Venus expose herself to his free view, to which Minerua replyde, Not, o Paris,
before she have unloosed and cast aside that golden and embossed gyrdle; for
she is a Witch, and it is not fit that thou beiug aiudge should be
effacinated by her, neither ought she to have come to this place so neately
accommodated, nor so painted and plastered with colors, temptations rather
beseeming a strumpet than a goddess, when in the deciding of so weighty a
contention it is fitting that all our lineaments should be exposed without
addition, simply and of themselves. To whom Venus replyde, If I be compelled
to put off my virginal gyrdle, that which all young married men use to unloose
from the wastes of their fresh and flourishing brides, before they can enter
into the new Elisium, and of virgins make them women; why do not thou then
Minerua lay by thy helmet, by which (it may be) thou hopest to seem terrible
to the judge, and so awe him to thy will: thou ought to show thy head and
forehead bare as mine is, but perhaps thou think with thy broad and
threatening burgonet, to shadow thy faint and blew eyes, which to thy
pretended beauty will appear no small or ordinary blemish. Then satih
Minerua, There lies my helmet; and Venus, And there my gyrdle; and so they
presented themselves before him all three, naked: at which sight Paris being
extaside, broke forth into this acclamation, Oh Jupiter, thou monster-maker,
and tamer, what spectacle is this? what pleasure? what delight? what
pulchritude? what beauty is this in her? what regal state and majesty? In
the second, what affright? what terror? yet withal, what amiablenesse in
honor? and what sweetness in victory? In the third, what tempting looks and
alluring smiles? what enticing effeminacies and bewitching blandishments, able
to melt iron and soften marble? o who shall then be vanquished, when every one
is wotthie to overcome? I have enough of felicity, for I swim in a vast and
boundless ocean of rapture, and surfeit in a riot of superaboundant delacies.
When no longer able to contain himself from satiating his heigthned appetite
with one of them at least (or had it been possible, with all) he desired that
they would singly appear unto him, as not knowing how justly to determine,
when his two eyes were distracted three ways at once. It was then ordered by
Mercury, that Minerua and Venus should depart for the present, and Juno have
the first hearing, who thus began. Thou have beheld me (o Paris) from the
crown to the heel, neither in all my body can thou find the least blemish,
then judge me the fairest; Scepters, Crowns, and Kingdoms, Potentates,
Empires and Dominions are in my gift: I will first make thee Emperor of all
Asia, of which thy father has but a nooke or corner; and if that satisfy not
thy ambition, Lord and Ruler of the world. Who told her, he would consider of
what she had said, but till he had heard all he could not determine of any
thing, and so dismissed her (assured of the prise, for self love is ever
confident.) Minerua next appeared, and thus accosted him: o thou fair Phrigian
swain, do me this honor, in all Tumults, Conflicts, and Combustions thou
shall ever return victorious and never vanquished, thy brother Hector thou
shall excel in fame, and thy father Priam in honor, in all Combats thou shall
overcome, and in all battails triumph; of a Shepherd I will make thee a
soldier, and to command more armies than thou keep herds. Farther she was
proceeding, when he interrupted her thus; I have no need ( Minerua) of
martial discipline or military prowess: Asia is in peace, Phrigia and Lydia
without disturbance, my fathers Empire fearelesse of hostility, nor do I
despise your great and godlike offers, nor would I have you to despair, but
you may now put on your helmet, for I have sufficiently beheld you all over.
She departed, and smiling Venus lastly presented herself with an a morous
look and moving affability, thus saying, Behold me Paris, look on me
consideratly, and view me in all and every part exactly, let not thine eyes
wander loosely but steadfastly dwell and insist upon every lineament with
judgment. This Face, these Eyes, this Neck, these Arms (and spread them
wide, in which he could not choose but wish himself locked) these Paps, this
Womb, this etc. and what thy eyes see not, let thy thoughts feelingly
apprehend. Have thou not perused me enough? yet consider me further; what are
kingdoms but cares? or thrones but troubles? what are battles but
bloodsheds? or victories but triumphs over slaughter? To love and be beloved is
content, and that conteines a kingdom in it self; to war and here to
vanquish, combat and thus to come off, is honor without harm, and conquest
without cruelty; nor is this feature on which thy eyes dwell with such
admiration, the guerdon proposed thee for my victory: but a Face fairer, Eyes
brighter, Hands whiter, Flesh softer, Skin purer, Hair more imitating gold,
and Lips more lively resembling rubies. Think on such kisses Paris, Hellens,
Hellens of Sparta, she is the daughter of Leda, whom Jupiter in the shape of a
Swanne deflowred; white therefore she must needs be, and tender, as hatched by
so beautiful a byrd. This is that Hellen whom Theseus thought worthy of a
rape, and royal Menelaus of the Pelopidan family, his Hymenaean contract: if
thou fear and doubtest to attain to this superaboundance of happiness, lo
I have two children, Amabilitie and Love, these I will deliver unto thee, who
shall be captains of thy Voyage, under thee their general, Cupid my eldest
shall inflame her, and Amabilitie shall make thee gracious and amiable in her
eyes; I will more over entreat the Graces to be companions with thee in thy
journey. These words were so sweetly delivered by her, and so inflamedly
apprehended by him, that by giving the golden apple to her, she had the glory
to be esteemed the fairest and worthiest. Now what greater reward for Beauty
than to be preferred before Wisdom and Potencie: Reward of Beauty.
Therefore Johannes Sambucus Tyrnabiensis, in his argument to Lucians twentieth
Dialogue inscribed Deorum Iuditium thus writes: Matris Acidaliae iuvenis
deceptus amore
Non curat reliquas, (Caecus) habere Deas
Pallade quidmelius Iunone potentius ipsa,
Preferimus Cipridos munera pruna tamen.
The Phrigian youth with Venus love surprised,
Took of the other goddesses no care:
Pallas, and potent Juno, he despised,
Leaving the good, and great, to choose the fair.


The Beauty of a woman is especially seen in the face, by which we may
conjecture the excellency of the other hidden lineaments of the body; and
therein is many times the pulchritude of the mind illustrated, as in the
bashful eye, modest look, and shamefaced countenance, therefore does the face
deservedly challenge the first seat of Beauty, the Head being the noblest part
of the body, the Will, the Mind, the Memory, the Understanding have their
place and residence, where they exersise their diverse effects and quallities,
therefore though they be in the other parts of the body excellently featured,
though they be Wise, Learned, irreproouable in Life and conversation,
unblemished in their reputation, and every way laudable, yet the Face is the
first thing contemplated; as noble above the rest, and from which all other
excellencies are approved; for when all the rest are masked and hidden, that
only is continually visible, and laid open: and that may be the reason why
most women that are not borne fair, attempt with artificial beauty to seem
fair: Beauty therefore being a Dower of it self, is a Reward in it self.

Of Bounty, Charity, Piety, and other Virtues in Women, with their Rewards.
ONe Berta, Berta.
a Country maid, of the Village of Montaguum, in The Province belonging to
Padua.
Patauia, who having spunne an exquisite fine thread, which was so curiously
twisted, that it was not to be matched by the hands of any: and offering it in
the city to public sale, when none would reach to the price at which she
valued her pain and skill, she thinking it a gift worthy an Empress,
presented it to Bertha, the wife of Henry the fourth, Emperor, who at that
time soiourned in Patauia. She both admiring the excellency of the Work, and
willing with her royal bounty to encourage the plain Wench that wrought it,
commanded her steward to take the Yearne, and go with the maid to Montaguum,
and out of the best soil there, to measure so many acres of ground as that
thread (stretched out in length) would compass: by which her royal bounty,
poor Berta grew suddenly rich, and from a Dowerlesse Virgin became a Match
enquired after by the best men of the Country: insomuch, that from her flowed
the illustrious Patritian Family in Padua, which derive themselves from
Montaguum. This the women of neighbor Villages seeing, they all began to
strive to equal (if not exceed) Berta, at their Wheels and Spindles, and
hoping of the like reward, troubled and oppressed the Empress with
multiplicitie of presents; who causing them all to appear before her at once,
she thus spoke to them: If not in Art, yet Berta was before you in time; I
thank your love, and commend your skill, but she has prevented you of the
blessing. Which saying of hers is still remembered as a Proverb in all that
Country: for when any thing is done unseasonably, or not in due time, they
say, Mon e pui quel tempo, che Berta filaua, i. You come not in the time when
Berta spunne: or as our English Proverb is, You come a day after the Fair.
Bernard. Scardeonus, Lib. 3. Histor. Patau. In which, the Empress expressed
great wisdom; who as she showed a rare bounty (in which men and women come
nearest the Gods, who are the free giuers of all good things) so she knew how
to dispose it; namely, to he^ that came to tender her love: not such as
auariciously presented their Offerings merely for lucre and benefit, for such
come but like fair weather after Harvest. Bounty rewarded.
And how could the Empresses Virtue be better rewarded, than to have her
Bounty outlast her Death, and her Wisdom survive her Dust?

Touching Charity, Bruson. Lib. 2. cap. 21. relates, That a poor beggar
desiring an alms of Lacon, he thus answered him^ If I give thee any things I
make thee a greater beggar, and tho^^ may curse him that first gave thee,
for it was he that made thee one. Amongst the Lacedemonians^ nothing was more
shameful than to beg, being an industrious Nation, hating sloth, and
contenting themselves with little. Notwithstanding, Charity is commendable in
all, and reckoned amongst the best Theological Virtues: neither is it any
fault in such, if their goodness and bounty be not a means to encourage
idleness and sloth in bad people, who make a pretense of want and penury:
therefore commendable it is in any man that is apt to give, to know upon whom
he does bestow. King Archelaus being at a banquet, where such as he
vouchsafed to set at his Table, were wondrous pleasant about him; amongst
others, one that had great familiarity with him, demanunded as a gift, a great
standing bole which the king had then in his hand: which he had no sooner
spoken, but the king called to one that waited at his elbow, to whom he said,
Hold, take this bole and bear it to the Poet Euripides, and tell him I bestow
it on him as my free gift. The other demanding the reason thereof, Archelaus
answered, Thou indeed art only worthy to ask, but not receive, but
Euripides is worthy to receive without asking. In which he nothing abated of
his kingly bounty, only he apprehended how most worthily to dispose it:
Plutarch. in Regum Apotheg. But how this Charity in women is rewarded, I will
only instance Tabitha, spoken of in the Acts; who being dead, Charity
rewarded.
was thought worthy for her former Charity (in relieuing Widows and
Orphants) to have Peter's knees and prayers, to restore her again to life.

Now of the reward of religious Piety, in which many Matrons and godly
martyred Virgins (amongst such as have suffered strange deaths) may be
included, as some by the Sword, some by Fire, others suffocated by Smoke,
stifled in Iakes, shot with Arrows, tortured upon Wheels, scourged with
Whips, seared with Irons, boiled in Caldrons, etc. their Crowns are glory,
their Rewards neither to be expressed by pen, tongue, or apprehension of man.

Looseness of life first converted, and the conversion rewarded, in a
homebred History.
A Conuertite rewarded.
A Civil gentleman (within memory) in the heat of Summer having been walking
alone in the fields, contemplating with himself, and returning back not the
same way he went out, but through another part of the Suburbs, to which he
was a mere stranger, and finding himself extremely athirst, he stepped into
the first house that fairelyest offered it self to him, and called for a Cup
of Beer, seating himself in the first Room next to the street. He had not
well wiped the sweat from his face with his Handkerchiefe, but two or three
young Wenches came skittishly in and out the Room; who seeing him a man of
fashion, and therefore likely to be of means, they thought to make of him some
booty, being (it seems) set on by the Grandam of the house, for as it
proved, it was a common Brothelhouse. The youngest and handsomest amongst the
rest was put upon him: who entreated him, not to be seen below, where every
Porter, C^^^an, and common fellow came to drink, but to take a more convenient
and retired Room. The gentleman suspecting the place (as it was indeed) to be
no better than it should be, and being willing to see some fashions, took her
gentle proffer, and went with her up the stayres: where they two being alone
(and a Bed in the Room) Beer being brought up, she began to offer him more
than common courtesy, being so far from modesty, that she almost
prostituted her self unto him. Which he apprehending, asked her in plain
terms, If these were not mere prouocations to incite him to Lust? which she
as plainly confessed. To whom he replied, That since it was so, he was most
willing to accept of her kind proffer; only for modesty sake, he desired her
to show him into a darker room. To which she assented, and leads him from one
place to another; but he still told her, that none of all these was dark
enough: insomuch, that she began at length somewhat to distaste him, because
in all that time he had not made unto her any friendly proffer. At length she
brought him into a close narrow room, with nothing but a Loope-hole for Light,
and told him, Sir, unless you purpose to go into the Coale-house, this is the
darkest place in the house: How does this please you? To whom he answered,
Unless (thou strumpet) thou can bring me to a place so palpably tenebrious,
into which the eyes of Heaven cannot pierce and see me, thou can not persuade
me to an act so detestable before God and good men: For cannot he that sees
into the hearts and reins of all, behold us here in our wickedness? And
further proceeding, told her the heynousnesse of her sin toward God, that
her prostitution was in sight of him and his Angels, and the everlasting
punishment thereto belonging. Or if (irreligious as she was) she held these
but Dreams and Fables, he bad her consider her estate in this world, and what
her best could be; a Whore: the name odious, the profession abominable;
despised of the indifferent, but quite abandoned of those confirmed in Virtue:
That she was in her self but a mere Leprosy, to destroy her self, and
infect others, a Sink of Sin and Diseases. Or if her extraordinary good
fortune were such, to escape the Spittle and the Surgeon, yet she was a
continual vasall to every Constable and Beadle, never certain of her
Lodging, if not in the Stocks, in the Cage, but the chiefest of her hopes in
Bridewell, etc. To conclude, he read unto her so strict and austere a Lecture,
concerning her base and debosht life, that from an impudent Strumpet, he
wrought her to be a repentant Conuertite. Her Brazen forhead melted at his
fiery zeal, and all those skales of Immodestie (like a Mask plucked off)
fell from her face, and she appeared to him in her former simple and
innocentious life. When further questioning with her of her birth and country,
she freely confessed unto him, That she was borne in the North country, her
father a gentleman, once of fair Revenue; but being impouerished by peevish
Suites in Law, her mother first, and he (whether by age, or grief, she knew
not) soon after died. She being an Orphant, and left distressed, loath to
beg of those whom her Parents had before relieved, finding charity there
cold, and willing rather to appear base any where, than where she was known,
sold such small things as she had, to come up to London with the Carriers:
where she was no sooner allighted at her Inn, but she was hired by this Bawd
(altogether unacquainted with her base course of life) who by degrees trained
her to such base prostitution: but withal protested with tears, that course
of life was hateful unto her; and had she any friend, or kinsman, tha^ could
propose her any means to relinquish that Trade, which in her soul she
detested, she would become a new woman, desiring that one month of her
lewdness might be forgot, for from that hour she protested Chastity all
her life time after. Her apparent tears and seeming penitence much persuading
with the gentleman, he protested, If it lay in him, he would otherwise dispose
of her according to her wishes; and withal charging her, That if he sent unto
her within two or three days with money, to acquit her of the house, that she
would attire her self as modestly as she could possibly, not bringing with
her any one ragge that belonged to that abominable house, or any borrowed
garment in which she had offended, but instantly to repair unto him, at his
first sending: and this being agreed betwixt them, for that time they parted.
The gentleman wondrous careful of his undertaking (because she was now his
new creature) came to a Matron-like gentlewoman, a kinswoman of his afar off
(with whom and her husband he had familiar acquaintance, and by that means
daily access to the house, who had pretty fine children, and were of a fair
revenue) and told her there was a civil maid (a kinswoman of his, lately come
out of the country) who wanted a service, whom if she pleased to entertain,
it might prove a great good to her, and no less courtesy to him. Briefly,
the motion was accepted, she sent for, according to appointment, and (after he
had tutored her in all things which she should answer) accepted, and
entertained. Her modest behauior and fair carriage, with her tender love and
diligence about the children, won her in short time a good opinion of her
master, a greater affection from her mistress, and a general love of the
whole household; insomuch, that within less than a year she was raised from
a Chambermaid, to be Waiting-gentlewoman, and the only bosom friend of her
mistress: who falling sick, even to death, ready to expire her last, so much
doted on her new servant, that she sent for her husband, and besought him (if
it stood with his good liking so to dispose of himself) after her decease to
make that woman his wife, and mother to his children; for one more loving and
careful he should not find, and search England through and through. The
gentlewoman soon after dies, he is left a widower, and the charge of the
whole house committed to our new Conuertite, with the bringing up of his
children. Which she executed with such fidelity, that he casting a more
curious eye upon her youth and beauty, and withal remembering his wives last
words, not knowing for the present how better to dispose of himself (Time,
Place, and Opportunity, all things furthering her preferment) he contracted
himself unto her, and they were soon after married. But before any of these
late passages happened, I must remember you, that instantly upon the preferment
of this young woman, the gentleman who brought her this fortune, adventured all
his means upon a Voyage, which miscarryed (for the ship wherein he sailed,
was taken by the Spaniard, and he almost a tweluemoneth kept prisoner in
Lisbone.) But at length (by what means I know not) being ransomed, he came for
his country, but so poorly and dejected, that he was ashamed to show
himself to any of his friends: for having tried some, and finding their
charity cold, he was loath to make proof of the rest; insomuch, that he
walked by Owle-light, without a Cloak, and scarce had honest rags to cover
him from nakedness, or hide him from shame. It happened, that just upon his
return the old gentleman died too, and left her possessed of eight hundred a
year during the minority of the children, but the thirds howsoever: and
withal (so great and good opinion he had of her) that he made her full
Executor. Now just as she followed the Hearse to the Church (having diverse
suitors before her husbands body was scarce cold) this gentleman by chance
coming by, like the picture of the Prodigal (as I before relate him to you)
she casting her eye aside, had espied him, and presently apprehended him to be
the man he was, and whispering a servant in the ear (willing to be truly
satisfied) bad him to fall into discourse with him, to enquire his name, his
Lodging, with other questions, as she directed him, and so proceeded to the
Funeral; but in any case to speak nothing as from her. The servant fell off
from the Train, and did as he was commanded, and without suspicion of him that
was questioned, brought her true word how all things stood. The next morning
(by her appointment) came a gentleman very early to his Lodging (she having
taught him his Lesson before hand) who desired to speak with him, and first
asked him his name, which (though loath) he told him: the other proceeded, that
if he were the same man he pretended, he had heard of his worth and noble
qualities, and withal, of his casualties at Sea; and not willing that any
gentleman should groan beneath so great a burden, told him there was a
hundred pounds, bad him furnish himself with apparel and other necessaries,
and so was ready to take his leave. The other extasied with so great a
courtesy from a stranger, whom he had not seen before, enforced him back,
to know what reason he had to be so charitable, entreating him to consider what
hope he had of future satisfaction, or at least to resolve him what security
he demanded. The other answered, That for the first, his courtesy was grounded
upon his worth; his satisfaction, was in his acknowledgement; and his
security, in that he knew him honest, and told him some three days after he
would call upon him, when he was habited like himself, to entreat his further
acquaintance, and so presently left him. But troubled in his mind above wonder,
to receive such bounty from a man unknown, when all his kindred and familiar
friends were ashamed of his acquaintance; yet took the benefit of the present
occasion, and suited himself according to his former, not his present
fortunes. When the gentleman came according to promise, he seemed glad to see
this present alteration, and withal entreated him to walk abroad with him to
dinner: he (who could not deny him any thing) seemed willingly to assent, not
once demanding whither. In the mean time, the late widow had provided a great
Feast, whither she had invited all her suitors (who were not few) this
gentleman whom she had employed (and knew no further of her mind) being one of
the chiefest. Meat was upon the Table, the guests ready to sit down; now the
last that came in, were the two new friends late remembered: In comes the widow,
to bid them all welcome. This new made up gentleman ignorant of whatsoever had
before happened, demanded of his friend, If it were not such a woman? who
briefly told him all: How she came a stranger to the house, and what a
fortune by her good demeanure she had in a short time purchased; That she was
now a widow, had such and such means left, and all or most of those gentlemen
(and himself amongst the rest) were suitors, and that their hope was, this day
she would make choice of a husband. Whatsoever he thought, he said nothing for
the present. The widows turn was to place every man according to his degree,
or at least to our own fancy: this new gentleman was neglected, and the
stools being furnished, left standing at a bay window: She took place at the
tables end only, leaving her husbands chair empty, when suddenly starting up,
Me thinks says she, some one in this room might be well spared, for we have
more guests than stools. The gentleman at these words bit his lip, and was
entreated to sit down by his friends, but whilst they were straining
courtesy, she proceeded, Is this a suitor too? no question some that either
has borrowed his clothes, or engaged all his credit for this one new suit, in
hope to gain the widow; but women are now adays grown more wise. By whose
acquaintance came he hither? Mine, answered his friend: then says she, perhaps
he wants a dinner, and has not money to pay for his ordinary: Well, he may sit
down amongst the rest; some of you there make him some small elbow room.
These words made him wish himself again prisoner in Lisbone, or any where,
save where he was. This was sport to the rest, but torture to him, who much
blamed her ingratitude, yet arming him with patience (the rather for his
friends sake who brought him thither) he sat down silent with an ill stomach,
eating as little as he spoke. All were merry at the table, some of them making
him their mirth the rather to please her. A Health went round to the widows
next husband: All pledged it gladly, he enforcedly. At length rising from her
stool: Me thinks (says she) we are all merry, only that gentleman at the
lower end of the Table is melancholy: but I know the reason, it is perhaps
because he is placed so low; but if that be his disease, I have for it a
present remedy: when walking to him where he sat, she plucked him by the
sleeue, desiring him to remove, for she had another place for him. Who
desiring her to torment him no further, refused to rise: but she would needs
enforce him, the rest likewise persuading, as wondering what further sport she
would make with him. Well (says he) I am this day yours, but will be mine
own ever hereafter: And so being drawn by her to the upper end of the chamber
like a Bear to the stake, where her late husbands Chair stood empty: Now Sir
(says she, with a more serious countenance than before) my new husband, sit
here in my old husbands Chair, and bid these your guests welcome. Still he
fretted, and they laughed, as before: when she craving pardon for so abusing his
patience, openly protested, That this meeting was merely for his sake, and to
make them witnesses of their present contract: for if he refused her to wife,
she vowed never to have other husband; acknowledging, that all her fortunes
(next to the Divine Providence) came by his goodness (omitting the former
circumstances) and that she knew no way better to express her gratitude, than
to confer them on him, by whom they first came. Thus the close proved better
than the beginning, and the banquet of Sweetmeats made amends for the harsh
Feast, for they found this last (of all the other passages) to be only serious.
They were there contracted (the suitors witnesses and soon after married. And
thus his virtue and her conversion had one joint Reward.

Cura.
ONe woman I had almost forgotten, but better remember her at last than not at
all; and strange it is I should do so, since she is still present with the
King in his Throne, with the General in the Camp, the Tradsman in his Shop,
and the Plowman in his Cottage, she is with the Scholar in his Study, and
the Statesman in his Closet, she is still at the elbow of every Father or
Mother, and no Family can exist without her. In this my work she has rise
early with me in the Morning, and again sat up with me till past Midnight,
she will leave no man Waking, nor forsake him till she see him fast Sleeping.
This woman's name is, Care, the grandmother of Fears and Doubts, who passing a
river, and finding a vein of bittuminous and clammie Clay (being full of
thoughts) she began to fashion a part thereof to the true semblance and shape
of a man, and deliberating with her self what she had done, and being
enamoured with her late workmanship, and casting how best to dispose of it,
Jove's Herald ( Mercury) coming that way by accident, saluted her, whom she
entreated to be an intercessor to Jupiter in her behalf, to give that picture
life. He at Mercuries entreaties, did so. There was then question made how to
name it, Cura would have it called after her own name, Care; but Jupiter would
not agree to that, but give it his; next, up start Tellus, i. The Earth, and
pleaded the name belonged to her, because from her it first proceeded. The
deciding of this controversy was put to Saturn, who thus ended it: You
Jupiter shall take charge of it, and after death receive the Spirit back that
first gave it; Care, because she first fashioned it, Care shall all the life
time possess it. But because the difference is about the name. Homo vocetur
quia ex humo factus esse videtur, i. Let it be called man because made of the
Earth: And therefore with great elegance Tibull lib. 3. Eleg. 3. thus writes:
Nam grave quid prodest pondus mihi diuitis auri?
Aruaquae si findant pinguia mill boues, etc.
What profit golden heaps weighed by the pound?
Or if a thousand Oxen plow my ground?
What profits me my house? although it stand
On Phrigian collumns, wrought by curious hand;
Dig'd first, and fetched from the Tenarian Mine,
Or else Caristus whether brought from thine?
Or woods, beneath my roof planted for state
Which seem the sacred groves to imitate?
My golden beams and floores with marble pau'd,
Or my Pearle-shinining vessalls so much craved
From the Ericthraean shores? what, all my pride
In wool, that is in Sydonian purple did.
Or what besides, the vulgar sets on fire,
Who still most envy where they most admire.
These but the temporal gifts of Fortune are,
And it is no pomp can free my thoughts from Care.


Rewards due to Philosophers, Orators, and poets.
IN what honor all Philosophers have been of old with Princes and Emperors,
lies next in me to speak of, as Agathe Pithagoricus with Arcesilaus king of
Macedon, Plato, with Dionisius, Aristotle, with Philip, and Alexander, Xeno
Citteius the son of Mnasenus with the Athenians, Theophrastus honored by
Demetrius, Psaleraeus with golden statues, Posidonius entyred to Cneius
Pompeius Magnus, Ariston to Julius Caesar, Zenarchas to Augustus, Appollonius
Tyanaeus to Bardosanes king of Babylon, Dion Prusienis to the Emperor
Traianus, Arrius to Alexander, Heliodorus to Adrianus, Sopater to Constantinus
Magnus, wi^h infinite others, of which it is not necessary now to insist.
Plutarch remembers us in the life of Alexander, That he having taken ten of
these Gymnosphists, So called of Sabbea chief city of Arabia.
that were the cause of the falling off of the Sabbea a people of Arabia, who
had done many outrages to the Macedonians, because they were esteemed
Philosophers, and famous for their ready and accute answers, he therefore to
those ten propounded ten several questions, with this condition, that he who
answered the worst of them should be first slain, and so in order the rest;
and of this he made the eldest judges. Of the first he demanded, Whether in
his judgment he thought there to be more men living or dead? who answered,
Living, because the dead are not. The second, Whether the Earth or the Sea
harbored the greater Monsters? Resp. The Earth, because the Sea is but part
thereof. The third, What beast of all creatures was the most crafty? Resp.
That which to man is best known. The fourth, Why did the Sabbae revolt from
Macedon? Resp. That they might either Live well, or Dye ill. The fifth, Whether
the day was before the night, or the night before the day? Resp. The day, for
one day was before another. The sixth, What was the best way to make a man
generally beloved of all? Resp. To be the best man and no tyrant. The seventh,
How might a man be made a god? Resp. By doing that which a man is not able to
do. The eigth, Whether is Life or Death the stronger? Resp. Life, because it
bears so many disasters. The ninth he demanded, How long he thought a man
to live? Who answered, Just so long as he desired not to see Death. When the
king turning to the judge, bad him give just sentence; he said that one had
answered more impertinently than another: then says the king, thou art the
first that ought to die for so judging. But he replyde, Not so o king
because it was your own condition, that he should suffer first that made the
worst answer. This said, the king dismissed them bounteously and royally
rewarded. If then for ambiguous answers to such slight and yet doubtful
questions, Alexander thought them worthy of such gifts and presents; with what
Memories, what Praises, what Crowns, Collumnes, and Statues ought we to
dignifie and celebrate the names of queen Zenobia? Amalasuntha, Aspatia,
Fuluia, Morata, and others? This Solomon the wisest (not only of kings) but of
men, well knew, when having made proof of the wisdom of Nicaulis Queen of
Aethiopia, he sent her back into her country so liberally furnished and so
royally rewarded. What I have spoke of these may be pertinently applyde to our
women studious in Divinity, Oratorie, and Sophistry, and laboriously
practiced in all other liberal Arts and Sciences; Nor can I more fitly in my
mind conclude this work, than as I begun with goddesses, so to end with good
women: Only of the honor due to Poetesses, because it belongs something to
mine own profession, I will borrow my conclusion from Ovid in his last Elegy
of the first book Amorum, the title is Ad iuuidos quod fama poetarum sit
perennis: Quod mihi liuor edax ignauos obijcis annos?
Ingenij que vocas carmen inerte meum?
Why (eating Envy) do thou as a crime,
Object unto me Sloth, and misspent time?
Tearming the Muse and sacred Numbers vain,
The fruitless issue of an idle brain.
I am not won to spend my youth in war,
By which our predecessors famous are:
It tempt's not me to search the brabling laws,
Or at the bar to quarrel in a cause:
These studies mortal are, and transitory,
When mine shall purchase me eternal glory.
Whilst Ida stands, or Tenedos has name,
Or Symois streams shall run, so long thy fame
( Meonides) shall live, whilst grain shall grow,
Which men with sithe or sicle, reap or mow:
Whilst vineyards grapes, and these grapes yield us wine,
Famous Ascraeus, even so long shall thine.
Battiades, the whole world shall impart,
For what he wants in wit he has in art.
No loss can chance to thy Cothurnate strain,
Oh Saphocles: nor Aratus thy vain.
The honors by the Muses you have wunne,
Shall last, if not outlast both Moon and Sun.
Whilst there is a crafty Servant, or hard Sire,
Fat Bawd, or merry Whore, men shall admire
Menander thee; Ennius, although obscure,
And weighty Accius, you shall both endure.
All shall read Varro that but hear of Greece;
In him, the first ship lancht to fetch the fleece.
Then shall, Lucretius, thy bright fame decay,
When all the world shall perish in one day.
Whilst Rome triumphant over the world shall be,
So long, o Maro, shall the world read thee.
Whilst Cupid shall bear shafts or amorous fire,
So long Tibullus shall thy Muse respire.
Gallus in the East, and Gallus in the West,
With fair Lycoris whom he loved best,
Shall both be famous. Whilst there is Tree, or Stone,
Or Plant, or Herb, or Ground to tread upon,
When Flints consume, and when the Plow shall wast
And be forgot, yet Numbers still must last.
Unto the Muse, even Monarchies must yield,
And glorious Tpiumphs purchased in the field:
To her yield Tagus with thy golden shine,
You Terrhene are, and only she divine.
Let then the vulgar, what is vile admire,
That nothing else save ^anthie dross desire.
Gold hair'd Apollo with full hand shall bring
My flowing cup filled from the Muses spring.
And crowned with myrtle, I shall now be sung,
And be made frequent in each lovers tongue.
Envy the living sole detracts, but Fate
Concluding life, she likewise ends her hate,
And then her rancour is no longer fed,
When living Honor shall maintain us, dead:
And when my Funeral Rites their last fires give,
Then shall the great'st part of my self still live.


And this perpetuity of Fame, which Ovid in giving to others, likewise
attributes to himself, is that which all the truly Noble, Chaste, Wise,
Virtuous, Learned, and Religious Virgins, Wives, and Matrons have proposed as
their just Reward; who lift their thoughts upward, and despising the
Fraileties, Uncertainties, and Vanities of the Earth, aim their Meditations,
Contemplations, and Pious Actions at the sublimities of Heaven.

Opus Excogitatum, Inchoatum, Explicitum, Et a Typographo excusum, inter
septemdecem septimanas.
LAVS DEO.


