The Iron Age: Containing the Rape of Hellen: The siege of Troy: The Combat
betwixt Hector and Ajax: Hector and Troilus slain by Achilles: Achilles slain
by Paris: Ajax and Ulysses contend for the Armor of Achilles: The Death of
Ajax, etc. Written by THOMAS HEYWOOD.

Aut prodesse solent audi Delectare. HECTOR. AJAX.



Printed at London by Nicholas Oaks. 1632.

Drammatis Personae.
Of the party of the Trojans.
King Priam. Hector. Paris. Troilus. Aeneas. Anthenor. Deiphobus. Margareton.
Astianax, Hectors son. Queen Hecuba. Cassandra a Prophetess. Cressida,
Calchas his daughter. Folixina daughter to Priam. Oenon, Paris his first love.
Andromache, Hectors wife. Hectors Armor-bearer. Trojan soldiers.
Of the party of the Grecians.
King Agamemnon General. King Menelaus. King Diomed. Ulysses, King of Ithacus.
Achilles. A Spartan Lord. An Ambassador of Creete. Castor and Pollux, the two
brothers of Hellena. Ajax Duke of Salamine. Thersites a raylor. Queen Hellena.
Calchas, A polles Priest. Patroclus, Achilles his friend. Achilles his
Mermidons. Grecian soldiers. Attendants.
The Iron Age: Containing the Rape of Hellen: The siege of Troy: The Combat
betwixt Hector and Ajax: Hector and Troilus slain by Achilles: Achilles slain
by Paris: Ajax and Ulysses contend for the Armor of Achilles: The Death of
Ajax, etc. Written by THOMAS HEYWOOD.

Aut prodesse solent audi Delectare. TAM ROBVR ^ TAM ROBOR. NI-COLIS ARBOR
IOVIS. 1610.



Printed at London by Nicholas Oaks. 1632.

Drammatis Personae.
Of the party of the Trojans.
King Priam. Hector. Paris. Troilus. Aeneas. Anthenor. Deiphobus. Margareton.
Astianax, Hectors son. Queen Hecuba. Cassandra a Prophetess. Cressida,
Calchas his daughter. Folixina daughter to Priam. Oenon, Paris his first love.
Andromache, Hectors wife. Hectors Armor-bearer. Trojan soldiers.
Of the party of the Grecians.
King Agamemnon General. King Menelaus. King Diomed. Ulysses, King of Ithacus.
Achilles. A Spartan Lord. An Ambassador of Creete. Castor and Pollux, the two
brothers of Hellena. Ajax Duke of Salamine. Thersites a raylor. Queen Hellena.
Calchas, A polles Priest. Patroclus, Achilles his friend. Achilles his
Mermidons. Grecian soldiers. Attendants.
To my Worthy and much Respected Friend, Mr. Thomas Hammon, of Grayes Inn
Esquire.
SIR,
IF the noble Scholar Nichod. Friseelimus, thought that his labor in
Transferring six of Aristophanes his Comedies, out of the Original Greek into
the Roman tongue, was worthy to be dedicated to six several, the most eminent
Princes of his time, for Learning and Judgment: Think it then no disparagment
to you, to undertake as well the Patronage, perusal of this Poem: Which as it
exceedes the strict limits of the ancient Comedy (then in use) inform, so it
transcends them many degrees; both in the fullness of the Scene, and gravity
of the Subject.

The History whereon it is grounded, having been the selected Argument of many
exquisite Poets* For what Pen of note, in one page or other has not remembered
Troy, and bewayl'd the sa^ke, and subversion of so illustrious a City* Which,
although it were situate in Asia, yet out of her ashes has risen, two the
rarest Phoenixes in Europe, namely London and Rom^* ^ir my acquaintance with
your worth, and kn^^^^dge of your judgment, were the chief m^tiues, inducing
me to select you before many others: accept it, I entreat you, as favorably
as he exposes it willingly, who as he has antecedently long, so futurely
ever,

Shall remain yours: Thomas Heywood.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader: The Gold, Silver, and Brass Ages having been many years
^ince in the Press, continuing the History from Jupiters Birth (the son of
Saturn) to the Death of Hercules. This Iron Age (never till now Published,)
begins where the other left, holding on, a plain and direct course, from
the second Rape of Hellen: (For she was in her minority ravished by Theseus the
Friend of Hercules) not only to the utter ruin, and deuastation of Tro^; but
it, with the second Part, stretches to the Deaths of Hellen, and all those
Kings of Greece, who were the undertakers of that Ten years Bloody and fatal
Seige. I presume the reading there of shall not pr^^ue distasteful unto any*
First inregar^ of the Antiquity and Nobleness of the History: Next because it
includes the most things of especial remarke, which have been ingeniously
Commented, and labouriously Recorded, by the Muses Darlings, the Po^ts: And
Times learned Remembraneers; the Histriographers*

Lastly, I desire thee to take notice, that these were the Plays often (and
not with the least applause,) Publickely Acted by two Companies, upon one
Stage at once, and have at sundry times thronged three se^erall Theaters, with
numerous and mighty Auditories, if the grace they had then in the Actings, take
not away the expected luster, hoped for in the Reading, I shall then hold thee
well pleased, and therein, my self fully satisfied; Ever remaining thine as
studious*

Prodesse vt Delectare:

Thomas Heywood.

The Iron Age.
Actus primus, Scoena prima.
Enter King Priamus, Queen Hecuba, Hector, Troilus, Aeneas, Deiphobus, etc.
Priamus. PRinces and Sons of Priam, to this end
We^ called you to this solemn Parleance*
There Is a deuining spirit prompts me still*
That if we new begin Hostility,
The Grecians may be forced to make repair
Of our twice r^in'd walls, and of the rape
Done to our sister fair Hesio^e.
Aeneas. I am my princely Sovereign of your mind,
And can by grounded arguments approve
Your power and potency: what they twice demolish'^,
Is ^ow with strength and beauty reared again.
Your Kingdom grown more populous and rich*
The youth of Troy irregular and untamed,
Covetous of war and martial exercise.
From you and silver tressed Hecuba
Fifty fair sons are lineally derived,
All Asiaes Kings are in your lou^ and league*
Their royalties as of your Empire held*
Hector and Hectors brothers are of power
To fetch your sister from the heart of Greece,
Where she remains embraced by Telamon.

Pria. Aeneas, your advise assents with us.
How stand our sons unto these wars inclined?

Hect. In mine opinion we have no just cause
To raise new tumults, that may live in peace:
War is a fury quickly coniured up,
But not so soon appeased*

Par. What iuster cause*
When the whole world takes note to our disgrace,
Of this our Troy, twice rac't by Hercules.

Troy. And fair Hesione rapt hence to Greece,
Where she still lives coopt up in Salamine.

Hect. Troy, was twice rac't, and Troy deserved that wrack,
The valiant (half Divine bred) Hercules,
Redeemed this Town from black mortality,
And my bright Aunt from death, when he surcharged
The vi^gin fed, Sea Monster with his club.
For my own Grand-fire great La^medon,
Denied the Hero, both the meede proposed,
And most (ungrateful) shut him from the Gates:
Troy therefore drew just ruin on it self:
It Is true, our Aunt was borne away to Greece,
Who with more justice might transport her hence,
Then he whose prise she was? bold Telamon
For ventring first upon the walls of Troy,
Alcides gave her to the Salmine Duke.
Detayning her? whom keeps he but his own?
Were she my prisoner I should do the like.
By Jove she is worth the keeping.

Par. Then of force,
She must be worth the fetching.

Hect. Fe^ch her that list: my reverent King and father*
If you pursue this expedition,
By the vntaunted honor of these arms
that li^e imblazon'd on my burni^h't shield*
It is without good cause, and I divine
Of all your flourishing line, by which the Gods
have rectified your fame above all Kings,
Not one shall live to meat your Sepulcher,
Or trace your funeral Heralds to the Tombs
Of your great Aucestours: oh for your honor
Take not up unjust Arms.

Aene. Prince Hectors words
Will draw on him the imputation
Of fear and cowardesie.

*Troi. Fie brother Hector,
If our Aunts rape, and Troyes destruction^
Be not revenged, their several blemishes
The aged hand of Time can never wipe
From our succession.
'Twill be registered
That all King Priams sons save one were willing
And forward to reuengs them on the Greeks,
Only that Hector durst not.

Hect. Ha, durst not did thou say? effeminate boy*
Go get you to your Sheepe-hooke and your Scrip,
Thou look not like a Soldier, there is no fire
Within thine eyes, nor quills upon thy chinne,
Tell me I dare not? go, rise, get you gone:
Thou Art fitter for young Oenons company
Then for a bench of soldiers: here comes one,
Antenor is returned.

Enter Antenor. Pri. Welcome Antenor, what is the news from Greece?

Ante. News of dishonor to the name of Priam,
Your Highness Sister fair Hesiones
Esteemed there as a st^umpet, and no Queen;
(After complaint) when I proposed your Majesty
would fetch her thence perforce, had you but seen^
With what disdainefull pride, and bitter taunts
They tossed my threats: 'twould have inflamed your splee^^
With more then common rage, never was Princess
So basely used: never Ambassador
With such dishonor sent f om Princes Court,
As was thenfrom that of Telamons,
Of Agamemnons and the Spartan Kings.

Priam. I shall not dye in peace, if these disgraces
Li^c v^reueng'd.

Hect. By Jove we will fetch her thence,
Or make all populous Greece a Wilderness,
Paris a hand, we are friends, now Greece shall find
And thou shall know what mighty Hector dares.
When all th'vnited Kings in Arms shall rue
This base dishonor done to Priams blood.

Par. Hear Gracious sir, my dream in Ida Mount,
Beneath the shadow of a Cedar sleeping.
Celestial Juno, Ve^us, and the Goddess
Borne from the brain of mighty Jupiter.
These three present me with a golden Ball,
On which was writ, Detur pulcherrimae,
Giue't to the fairest: Juno proffers wealth,
Scepters and Crowns: says, she will make me rich*
Next steps forth Pallas with a golden Book,
Says, reach it me, I Will teach the Litterature,
Knowledge and Arts, make thee of all most wise.
Next smiling Venus come, with such a look
Able to rai^sh mankind: thus bespake me,
Make that Ball mine? the fairest Queen that breathes,
I Will i^ requital, cast into thine arms.
How can I stand ag^i^st her golden smiles,
When beauty promised beauty? she preuayl'd:
To her I gave the prise, with which she mounted
Like to a Star from earth shot up to Heaven.
Now if in Greece (as some report) be Ladies
Peerless for beauty, wherefore might not Paris
By Venus aid sail ^ence to Grecia,
And quit the rape of fair Hesion^,
By stealing thence the Queen most beautiful*
That feeds upon the honey of that ay^^?

Pri. That amorous Goddess borne upon the waue^
Assist thee in thy voyage, we will rigge
A royal flee^e to want thee into Greece.
Aeneas with our son Deiphobus,
And other Lords shall bear thee company.
What think our sons Hector and Troylus
Of Paris expedition?

Hect. As an attempt the Heavens have cause to prosper.
Go brother Paris, if thou bring'st a Queen,
Hector will be her Champion; then let us see
What Greek dare fetch her hence.

Pri. Sraight give order
To have his Fleet made ready.

Enter Cassandra with her hair about her ears. Cassan. Stay Priam, Paris
cease, stay Trojan Peers
To p^ot you^ vniu^rsall ^uert^row.
What has poor Troy dese^u'd, that you should kindle
^lames to destroy it?

Pa. What intends Cassandra*

Cass. To quench bright burning Troy, to se^u^e thee,
To save old Priam and his fifty sons.
(The royal'st issue, that e're King I enioy'de)
To keep the ^euerent hairs of Hecuba,
From being torn off by her own sad hands*

Pri. Cassandra's mad.

Cass. You are mad, all Troy is mad^^.
And railes before it is ruin.

Hect. What would my sister?

Cass. Stay this bold youth my brother, who by water
Would sail to b^ing fire which ^^all bu^ne all T^oy.
Stay him, oh stay him* ere the^^ golden roo^es
Melt over our heads before these g^orious Turret^
Be burnt to ashe^. Ere cle^r^ Simois ^treames
Ru^^e with b^oud royal, and Scamander Plain^,
In which Troy ^^ancis be ma^e a Sepu^chre
To bury Troy, and Trojans.

Pri. Away with her, some false deuining spirit
Envying the honor we shall gain from Greece,
Would trouble our designements.

Hect. Royal sir,
Cassandra is a Vestall Prophetess,
And consecrate to Pallas; often inspired,
Then lend her gracious audience.

Troil. So let our Aunt
Be still a slave in Greece, and we your son^^^
Be held as cowards.

Aene. Let Antenors wrongs
Be basely swallowed, and the name of Troy
Be held a word of scorn.

Cass. Then let Troy burn,
Let the Greeks clap their hands, and warm themselves
At this bright Bone-fire: dreamed not Hecuba
The night before this fatal Youth was borne,
That she brought forth a firebrand?

Hecu. It Is most true.

Cass. And when King Priam to the Priest revealed
This ominous dream, he with the Gods consulted,
And from the Oracle did this return,
That the Chi^de borne should stately Islion burn.

^^r. And well the Prophet guest, for my desire
To visi^ Greece, burns with a quenchlesse fire:
Not from this flaming brand shall I be free,
Till I have left rich Troy, and Sparta see.

Cass. Yet Hecuba, ere thou thy Priam loose,
And Priam ere thou loose thy Hecuba,

Pri. Away with her.

Cass. Why speaks not in this case Andromache?
Thou shall loose a Hector, who is yet thine.
Why good Aeneas do thou speech forbear?
Thou hop'st in time another Troy to rear,
When this is sacked, and therefore thou standst mute,
All struck with silence; none assist my suite.

Pri. Force her away and lay her fast in hold.

Cass. Then Troy, no Troy, but ashes; and a place
Where once a City stood: poor Priam, thou
That shall leave fatherless fifty fair sons,
And this thy fruitful Queen, a desolate widow*
And Ilium now no Palace for a King,
But a confused heap of twice burnt brick.
They that thy beauty wondered, shall admire
To see thy Towers de^ac'd with Greekish fire.

[Exit. Pri. Thou art no Sibill, but from fury speak,
Not inspiration we regua^d thee not.
Come valiant sons, we will ^^rst prepare our ships,
And with a royal Fleet well rigged to sea
Seek iu^t revenge for fair Hestone.

Exeunt omnes, manet Paris, to him Oenon who in his g^ign out p^ucks her back.
Oen. Know you not me?

Par. Who art thou?

Oen. View me well.
And what I am, my looks and tears will teach thee*

Par. Oenon? what brought thee hither?

Oen. To see Ida bare
Of her ^all Cedars, to see shipwrights square
The trunks of new feld Pines: Asking the cause,
So many Hatchets, Hammers, Plowes and Sawes
Were thither brought: They began me thus to greet*
With these tall Cedars we must build a fleet
For Paris; who in that must sail to Greece,
To fetch a new wife thence.

Par. And my fair Oenon,
Know that they told truth, for it is decreed
Even by the Gods behest, that I should speed
Upon this new adventure: The Gods all,
That made me judge to give the golden Ball.
Ha^ke, hark, the Sailors cry aboard, aboard;
The Wind blows fair, farewell.

Oenon. Hear me one word.
By our first love, by all our amorous kisses*
Courtings, embraces, and ten thousand blesses
I conjure thee, that thou in Troy may stay.

Par. They cry aboard, and Paris must away.

Oen. What need'st thou plowe the seas to seek a wife*
Having one here, to hazard thy sweet life,
Seeking a Strumpet through wars fiele^ alarmes,
And have so kind a wife lodged in thine arms.

Par. Sweet Oenon, stay me not, unclasp thine hold.

Oen. Not for Troyes crown or all the Sun-gods Gold*
Can thou? oh can thou thy sweet life endanger,
And leave tnine own wife to s^eke out a stranger?

Pa. I can* farewell.

Oen. Oh yet a little stay.

Pa. Let go thine hold, or I shall force my way*

Oen. Oh do but look on me, yet once again.
Though now a Prince, thou wast an humble swain,
And then I was thine Oenon. (Oh sad fate)
I crave thy love, I covet not thy state;
Still ^ am Oenon: still thou Paris ar^
The selfsame man, but not the selfsame heart*

Par. V^tie, or I shall break thy charming band,
N^ptune assist my course: thou Jove my hand.

Exit. Oen. Most cruel, most unkind, had thou thus said
The night before thou had my Maidenhead*
I had been free to choose, and thou to wiue;
Not widdowed now, my husband still alive.

Enter King Menelaus, King Diomed, Thersites, a Lord Ambassador with
Attendants. Mean. King Diomed, Sparta is proud to see you,
Your coming at this time's more seasonable,
In that we have employment for your wisdom
And royal valor.

Diom. The Chritian Scepter now in contr^uersi^
(As this Ambassador has late informed)
Despising that usurping hand, which long
Has against Law and Justice swayd and borne it*
Offers it self to your protection.
Is it not so my Lord?

Embassa. You truly understand our Embasie.

There. Menelaus!

Mean. What says Thersites?

There. That Heaven has many Stars in it, but no eyes*
And cannot see desert. The Goddess Fortune
Is head-winkt, why else should she proffer thee
Another Crown that has one: (Grand Sir Jove)
What a huge heap of business shall thou have,
Having another Kingdom? being in Creete,
Sparta will go to wrack, being in Sparta,
Creete will to ruin: To have more then these
Such a bright Less as Hellen: Hellen? oh!
'Must have an eye to her too, fie, fie, fie,
Poor man how thou wilt be pusl'd!

Mean. Why thinks Thersites my bright Hellens beauty
Is not with her fair virtues equaliz'd?

There. Yes, I think so, and Hellen is a ^ ass,
But thou beleeu'st so too.

Diom. Thersites is a rayler.

There. No, I disclaim't, I am a Counselor*
I have known a fellow matched to a fair wife,
That has had never a Kingdom: thou have two
To look to, (scarce a house) thou many Palaces,
He scarce a Page, and thou a thousand servants:
Yet he having no more, yet had too much
To look to one fair wife.

Diom. Were not the King
Well grounded in the virtues of his Queen,
Thy words Thersites might set odds betwixt them.

Mean. My Hellen? therein am I happiest.
Know Diomed, her beauty I prefer
Before the Crowns of Sparta, and of Creete.
Music! I know my Lady then is coming*
Music within. To gi^e kind welcome to King Diomed,
Strowe in her way sweet powders, burn Perfume,
And where my Hellen treads no feet presume.

There. 'Twere better strowe horne-shauings.

Enter Hellen with waiting Gentlewomen and Servants. Hell. It Is told is this
Ambassador does stay
To take my husband, my dear Lord away.

Men. True Hellen, it is a Kingdom calls me hence.

Hell. A Kingdom! has your Hellen such small grace,
That you prefer a Kingdom before her face?
You value me too cheap, and do not know*
The worth and value of the face you owe.

There. I had rather have a good Calves face.

Hes^. Theseus, that in my nonage did assail me,
And being too young for pastime, thence did hail me:
He, to have had the least part of your bliss
Often proffered me a Kingdom for a kiss.
You surfeit in your pleasures, swim in sport,
But sir, from henoeforth I shall keep^ you short.

Dio. Fair Queen, it is honor calls him hence away,

Hell. What Is that to Hellen, if she will have him stay*
Say I should weep at parting, (which I fear)
Some for ten Kingdoms would not have a tear
Fall from his Hellens eye, but he is unkind,
And cares not though I weep my bright eyes blind.

Enter a Spartan Lord. Sp. L. Great King, we have discovered from the shore
A gallant Fleet of ships, that with full sail
Make toward the Port.

Mean. What number?

Sp. L. Some two and twenty Sail.

Men. Discover them more amply, and make good the Ha^en against them, till we
know the intent of their arrive.

Sp. L. My Royal Lord I shall.

Men. Ambassador this business once blown over,
You shall receive your answer instantly.

Hell. You shall not go and leave your Hellen here,
Can I a Kingdom govern in your absence,
And guide so rude a people as yours is?
How shall I do my Lord, when you are gone,
So many bleake cold nights to lie alone?
Y'haue used me so to fellowship in bed,
That should I leave it, I should soon be dead:
Troth I shall never endure it.

Men. My sweet Hellen,
Was never King blessed with so chaste a wife.

Enter the Spartan Lord. Men. The news? whence is their Fleet?

Sp. L. From Troy.

Men. The General?

Sp. L. Priams son.

Men. Their expedition?

Sp. L. To seek adventures and strange Lands abroad*
And though now weather-beat, yet brauer men,
More rich in Jewels, costlier araide,
Or better featured never eye beheld,
Especially the Prince their General,
Paris of Troy one of King Priams sons.

Hell. Brauer then these our Lacedemons are*

Sp. L. Madam, by much.

Hell. How is the Prince of Troy
To Menelaus mighty Spartans King?

Sp. L. Prince Menelaus is my Sovereign Madam,
But might I freely speak without offense,
(Excepting Menelaus) never breathed
A brauer Gallant then the Trojan Prince.

Men. What Intertainment shall we give these strangers?

Hell. What? but the choice that Lacedemon yields,
If they come brave, our bravery let us show,
That what our Sparta yields, their Troy may know:
Let them not say they found us poor and bare.
Or that our Grecian Ladies are less fair
Then theirs: give them occasion to relate
At their return, how we exceed their stare.

Mean. Hellen has well advised, and for the best
Her counsel with our honor does agree,
All Spartaes pomp is for the Trojans free.

Hell. Oh had I known their Landing one day sooner,
That Hellen might have trimmed up her attire
Against this meeting* then my radiant beauty
I doubt not, might in Troy be termed as fair,
As through all Greece I am reputed rare.

A flourish. Enter Paris, Aeneas, Deiphobus, Antenor, Menelaus and Diomed
embrace Paris and the rest: Paris turns from them and kisseth Hellen, all way
she with her hand puts him back. Hell. It Is not the Spartan fashion thus to
greet
Upon the lips, when royal strangers meet^.
I know not what your Asian Court-ship is.
Oh Jove, how sweetly does this Trojan kiss?

Par. Bear with a stranger Lady* though unknown;
That Is practiced in no fashion save his own.
He that his fault confesses never offends*
Nor can he iniure, that no wrong intends,

Hell. To kiss me! why before so many eyes
The King could do no more: would fortune bring
This stranger there where I have met the King*

Mean. Patience, sweet Hellen, Trojans welcome all,
You shall receive the princeliest entertain
Sparta can yield you, but some late affairs
About the Cretan seepter calls us hence,
That business once determined we are yours,
In the mean time fair Hellen be it your charge
To make their welcome in my absence large.

They all go^ off with a flourish, only Paris and Hellen keep the Stage. Par.
Oh Jove my dream! sweet Venus aid my prayer*
And keep thy word: behold a face more fair
Then thou thy self can show, this is the same
Thou promised me in Ida, this I claim.
Give me this face fair Venus, and that is all
I Will ask in guerdon of the golden Ball.

Hell. Of what rare metal is this Trojan made?
That one poor kiss has power so to persuade,
Here at my lips the sweetness did begin,
And since has past through all my powers within:
Oh kiss me if thou love me once again,
I feel the first kiss thrill through every vein.

Par. Queen I must speak with you,

Hell. Must?

Par. Hellen, I,
I have but two ways to take, to speak, or dye:
Grant my tongue pardon then, or turn your head
And say you will not, and so strike me dead.

Hell. Live and say on, but if your words offend,
If my tongue can destroy, you're near your end.

Par. Oh Jove, that I had now an Angels voice
As you an Angels shape have, that my words
Might sound as spheare-like music in your ear.
That Jove himself whom I must call to witness,
Would now stand forth in person to approve
What I now speak, Hellen, Hellen I love.
Chide me, I care not; tell* your husband, do,
Fearelesse of death, behold, I boldly woe*
For let me live, bright Hellen to enjoy,
Or let me never back resayle to Troy:
For you I came, your fame has hither driven me,
Whom golden Venus has by promise given me.
I loved you ere I saw you by your fame,
Report of your ra^e beauty to Troy came*
But more then brute can tell, or fame emblazon
Are these divine perfections that I gaze on.

Hell. Insolent stranger, is my Name so light
Abroad in Troy, that thou at thefirst sight
Should hope to strum pet us? thinks Priams son,
The Spartan Queen can be so easily won?
Because once Theseus ravished us from hence,
And did to us a kind of violence:
Follows it therefore we are of such price,
That stolen hence once, we should be rauish't twice?

Par. That Theseus stole you hence (by Heaven) I praise him,
And for that act I to the skies will raise him.
That he returned you back by Jove I wonder,
Had I bee^e Theseus, he that should asunder
Have parted us, and snatched you from my bed:
First from my should shoulders have taken this head.
Oh that you were the prize of some great strife,
And he that winnes might claim you as his wife,
Your self should find, and all the world should see
Hellen, a prise alone ordained for me.

Hell. I am not angry; who can angry be
With him that loves her? they that Paris see,
And hears the wonders and rare deeds you boast,
And warlike spoils in which you glory most:
By which you have attaind amongst soldiers grace,
None can believe you that beholds your face.
They that this lovely Trojan see, will say;
He was not made for war, but amorous plays

Pa. Love amorous Paris then.

Hell. My fame to endanger?

Par. I can be secret Lady.

Hell. And a stranger?
Say I should grant thee love, as thou should clime
My long wished bed; if at the appointed time
The Wind should alter, and blow fair for Troy,
Thou must hreake off in amidst of all thy Joy.

Par. Not for great Spartaes Crown, or Asiaes Treasure,
(That exceedes Spartaes) would I loose such pleasure.

Hell. would it were come to that.

Par. Your Husband Menelaus hither bring,
Compare our shapes, our youth and every thing,
I make you Iudgesse, wrong me if you can:
You needs must say I am the properer man.

Hell. I must confess that too.

Par. Then love me Lady.

Hell. Had you then set sail,
When my virginity, and bed to enjoy
A thousand gallant princely Suitors came?
Had I beheld thee first, I here proclaim,
Your feature should have borne me from the rest.
You come too late, and covet goods possessed.

Par. I came from Hellen, Hellens love I crave,
Hellen I love, and Hellen I must have:
Or in this Province where I vent my mones,
I Will beg a Tomb for my exiled bones.

A flourish. Enter. Menelaus, Diomed, Thersites with Sparta^ Lords: Aeneas,
Deiphobus, Antenor, etc. A banquet is brought in. Men. Now Prince of Troy, our
business being over
This day in Lacedemon, you shall feast
Paris, we are proud of such a Princely guest.

There. Thus every man is borne to his own Fate.
Now it raines Horns, let each man shield his Pate.

Hell. This royalty extended to the welcome
Of Priams son, is more then Asiaes King
Would yield unto the grearest Prince of Greece.
What is this Paris whom you honor so?

Men. Why asks my Queen?

Hell. May not this proud* this beauty vanting Trojan,
In a smooth browe hide black and rugged Treason?

Men. He such an one? rather a giddy brain*
A formal traveler. King Di^med
Your censure of this Trojan?

Diom. A Capring, Carpet Knight, a Cushion Lord,
One that has stald his Courtly tricks at home,
And now got lea^e to publish them abroad
Did to a stranger Prince, it could not though
Lea^en my zeal o you: speak the fairest Queen
That ever spoke, this night shall we agree
To con ecrate to pleasure and delights:
Your husband left me charge I should enjoy
All that the Court can yield: if all? then you
I would not for the world, but you should do
All that the King your Lord commands you too:
Your King and husband, you sin doubly still
When you assent not to obey his will:
Speak beauteous Q^eene. No? then it may be
She means by silence to accord with me:
I'^e try that presently, lend me your hand
It Is this I want, and by the Kings command
You are to let me have it: more then this,
Kisseth* her. I want your lips to help me make a kiss.

Hell. Oh Heaven!

Par. Oh love, a joy above all measure,
To touch these lips is more then heavenly pleasure.

Hell. Beshrew your amorous rhetoric that did prove*
My husbands will commanded me to love,
For but for that iniun^tion, Paris know
I would not yield such favors to bestow
On any stranger, but since he commands,
You may take more then either lips or hands.
Do I not blush sweet stranger? if I break
The Laws of modest^, think that I speak,
But with my husbands tongue, for I ^ay still
I would not yield, but to obey his will.

Par. This night then without all suspicion,
The ranishing pleasures of your royal bed
You may a^^oord to Paris: bitter Thersites,
King Diomed, and your servants may suppose
By my late counterfeite distemperature
I aim at no such happiness, alas
I am a puny Courtier, a weak brain,
^ braine-sicke young man; but Deuinest Hellen,
When we get safe to Troy.

Hell. To Troy?

Par. Yes Queen, by all the gods it is decr^ed,
That I should bear you thither; Priam knows it,
And therefore purposely did rigge this Fleet,
To waft me hither; He and Hecuba,
My nine and forty brothers, Princes all
Of Ladies and bright Virgins infinite,
Will meet us in the road of Tenedos*
Then be r^solu'd for I will cast a plot
To bear you safe from hence!

Hell. This Troyan Prince
Will's more then any Prince of Greece dares plead,
And yet I have no power to say him nay:
Well Paris I beshrew you with my heart,
That ever you came to Sparta (by my joy
Queen Hellen lies, and longs to be at Troy:)
Yet use me as you please, you know you have
My dearest love, and therefore cannot crave
What I Will deny; but if reproach and shame
Pursue us, on you Paris light the blame:
I Will wash my hands of all, nor will I yield
But by compulsion to your least demand:
Yet if in lieu of my Kings intertaine,
You bid me to a feast aboard your ship,
And when you have me there, unknown to me
Hoyse sail, weigh Anchor, and bear out to Sea*
I cannot help it, it is not in my power
To let fall sails, or strive with stretching oars
To row me back again: this you may do,
But sooth friend Paris He not yield thereto.

Par. You shall be then compelled, o^ me let all
The danger waiting on this practice fall.

Enter a partan Lord. Sp. L. Castor and ^oll^x your two princely brothers
Are newly Landed, and to morrow next
Purpose for Lacedemon*

Hell. On their approach
He lay my plot to escape away with Paris.
I have it: you sir for some special reason
There coming keep concealed, but when to morrow
You shall perceive me near the water port,
Even when thou see me ready to take Barge.
You apprehend me.

Sp. L. Gracious Queen I do.

Hell. Take that farwell: now my fair princely guest
All that belongs to you's to inuit Queen Hellen
Aboard your ship to morrow.

Par. Spartaes mirror,
Will you vouchsafe to a poor wandering Prince
So much of grace, will your high majesty
Daigne the acceptance of an homely banquet
Aboard his weather beaten Bark?

Hell. No Friend,
The King my husband is from Sparta gone,
And I, til his return, must needs keep home:
Urge me not I entreat, it is in vain
Get me aboard, I Will nere turn back again.

Par. Nor shall you Lady, Sparta nor all Greece
Shall fetch you thence, but Troy shall stand as high
On terms with Greece, as Greece has stood with Troy.

Exeunt Enter the Spartan Lord. Spa. L. This is the VVater-port, the Queens
royal guest, has bound me to attendance, till the Prince and she be ready to
take Water: Methinkes in this there should be some trick or other, she was
once stolen away by Theseus, and this a gallant smooth faced Prince. The Kings
from home, the Queens but a Woman, the Troi^ns ships new trimmed, the wind
stands fair, and the Saylors all ready abo^rd, sweetemeates and wine, good
words and opportunity, and indeed not what? If both parties be pleased, but
pleased or not the music gives warning, are they not now upon their entrance.


Enter in state Paris, Hellen, Diomed, Th^r^i^es, Aeneas, Antenor, Deiphebus,
etc. with Attendants. Sp. L. Health to your M^iesties, your Princely brothers
Castor and Pollux, being within two Leagues
Of this great City, come to visit you.

Hell. My brothers stolen upon us unawares.
Let me intreat^ thee royal Di^med,
And you Thersites, d^ me so much grace,
As give them friendly meeting.

Diom. Queen we shall.

Exeunt. Hell. Our intertainment shall be giu^n aboard,
Where I presume, they shall be welcome guests
To princely Paris.

Pa. As to your self, fair Queen,

Hell. Set forwards then.

Pa. We Will hoyse up sail, near to ^eturne again.

Exeunt the Trojans with a great shout. Enter Castor, Pollux, Diomed,
Thersites* Cast. Our brother Menelaus gone for Creete?

Pol. Our love to see him, makes us loose much time*
Yet all our labor is not vainly spent,
Since we shall see our sister.

Enter the Spartan Lord in have. Sp. L. Princes, the Kings betrayed, all Greece
dishonored, the Queen borne hence, the Trojans have weighed anchor, and with
a prosperous gale they bear from hence:

Shouting and hurling up their caps for joy,
They ^rye farwell to Greece, amayne for Troy.

There. Ha, ha, ha.

Dio. The Queen borne hence, with that smooth traitor Paris.
See princes with what pride they have advanced
The Arms of Tray upon their wa^ing pendants.

Cast. Rage not, but lets resolve what is to be done.

Dio. Let some ride post to Creete for menelaus.

Sp. L. That be my charge.

Dio. VVho'le after him to Sea?

Pol. That will my brother Castor and my self,
And perish there, or bring my sister back.

Dio. Princes be it so, and fairly may you speed:
Whilst I to Agamemnon, great Achilles,
Ulysses, Nestor, Ajax, Idomean,
And all the Kings and Dukes of populous Greece,
Relate the wrongs done by this Rauisher.
Part, and be expeditious*

Exe^nt several ways There. Ha, ha, ha,
I smelt this Sea-rat ere he came a shore, by this he is grawing
Menelaus Cheese, and made a huge hole in it* Ship-dyet plea*
seth above all his Palace banquets, much good do it them:
They are at it without grace by this both bare:
Cuckold? no subject with that name be sorry,
Since Sovereigns may be such in all their glory.

Explicet Actus primus.
Actus secundus Scoena prima.
Enter Troilus and Cresida. Troi. Fair Cresida, by the honor of ^y birth,
As I am Hectors brother, Priams son,
And Troilus best beloved of Hecuba,
As I love Arms and soldiers, I protest,
Thy beauty lives inshrin'd here in my breast.

Cre. As I am Calchas daughter, Cresida,
High Priest to Pallas, she that patrons Troy:
Now sent unto the Delphian Oracle,
To know what shall betide Prince Paris voyage.
I hold the love of Troilus dearer far.
Then to be Queen of Asia.

Troi. Daughter to Calchas and the pride of Troy,
Plight me your hand and heart.

Cre. Fair Heaven I do.
Will Troilus in exchange grant me his too?

Troi. Yes, and fast sealed, you gods, your anger wreak
On him or her, that first this union break.

Cre. So protests Cresida, wretched may they dye,
That'twixt our souls these holy bands untie.

Enter Margaretan one of Priams youngest sons. Marg. My brother Troilus, we
have news from Greece,
Prince Paris is returned.

Troi. And with a prise?

Marg. Asia affoords none such.

Troi. What is she worth our Aunt Hesione?

Cre. Or what might be her name?

Marg. Hellen of Sparta.

Troi. Hellens name
Has scarce been heard in Troy.

Marg. But now her fame
Will be eternized, for a face more fair
Sun never shone on, nor the earth e re bare.
Why stay you here? by this Faris and she
Are landed in the ^ort of Tenedos,
There Priam, Hecuba, Hector, all Troy
Meets the midway to attend the Spartan Queen.

Troi. In that fair Train, my Cresid shall be seen
Of rarer beauty then the Spartan Queen.

A flourish. Enter at one door, Priam, Hecuba, Hector, Troilus, etc. At the
other Paris, Hellen, Aeneas, Antenor, etc. Pri. What Earth, what all mortality
Can in the height of our inventions find
To add to Hellens welcome, Troy shall yield her.
Should Pallas, Patroness of Troy descend,
Priam and Priams wife, and Priams sonne^
Could not afford Her godhead more applause,
Then amply we bestow on Helena?

Hecu. We count you in the number of our daughters,
Nor can we do Queen Hellen greater honor.

Hect. I was not forward to hane Paris sent,
But being returned thou art welcome: I desired not
To have bright Hellen brought, but being landed,
Hector proclaims himself her Champion
Against all the world, and he shall guard thee safe
Despite all opposition.

Par. Hectors word
As Oracle, he will seal it with his sword.

Par. And now my turn eomes to bid Hellen welcome.
You are no stranger here, this is your Troy,
Priam your father, and this Queen your mother:
These be your valiant brothers, all your friends.
Why should a tear fall from these heavenly eyes
Being thus round ingirt with your allies.

Hell. I am I know not where, nor amongst whom,
I know no creature that I see save yon:
I have left my King, my brothers, subjects, friends
For strangers, who should they forsake me now,
I have no husband, father, brother near:

Par. Hane you not all these, is not Paris here?
Hark how the people having Hellen s^ene
Appland th'arri^all of the Spartan Queen:
And millions that your coming have attended,
Amazed swear some Goddess is descended.

Troi. No way you can your eyes or body turn,
But where you walk the Priests shall Incense burn.

Aene. The sacrificed beasts the ground shall beat,
And bright religious fire the Altars heat.

Hect. Nor fear the brute of war or threatening steel^,
United Greece we value not.

Troi. Alone, by Hector is this Town well manned,
^ee like an Army against Greece shall stand.

Par. And who would fear for such a royal wife
To set the universal World at strife:
Bright Hellens name shall live, and nere have end,
When all the world about you shall contend.

Hell. Be as be may, since we are gone thus far,
Proceed we will in spite of threatened war,
Hazard, and dread? both these we nothing hold,
So long as Paris we may thus infold.

Par. My father, mother, brothers, sisters all,
Isli^m and Troy in pomp maiesticall,
Shall solemnize our nuptials. Let that day
In which we espouse the beauteous Hellena,
Be held a holy day, a day of joy
For ever, in the Kalenders of Troy.

Pri. It shall be so, we have already sent
Our high priest Calchas to the Oracle
At Delphos to return us the success,
And a true notice of our future wars,
Whilst we expect his coming, be it our care,
The Spartans second nuptials to prepare.

Exit* Enter after an alarm, King Agamemnon, Menelaus Achilles, A^ax,
Patroclus, Thersites, Calchas, etc. Aga. Thou glory of the Greeks, the great
commander
Of the stout Mirmedons: welcome from Delphos,
What speaks the Oracle? the sack of Troy?
Or the Greeks ruin? say shall we be victors,
Or Priam triumph in our overthrow.

Achi. The god of Delphos sends you joyful news,
Troy shall be sacked, and we be Conquerors:
Upon your helmes wear triple spa^gled plumes:
Let all the lowdest instruments of war,
With stern alarums rowse the monster death,
And march we boldly to the walls of Troy,
Troy shall be sacked and we be conquerors.

Ajax. Thanks for thy news Achilles, by that honor
My father won upon the walls of Troy.
My warlike father Ajax Telam^n;
I would not for the world, Priam should send
Incestious Hellen back on terms of peace.
May smooth Ulysses and bold Diomed*
Whom you have sent on your late Embassy,
Be welcomed as Antenor was to Greece,
Scorned and reuil'd, since the Oracle has said,
Troy shall be sacked, and we be Conquerors.

Achi. King Agamemnon here is a Trojan priest
Was sent by Priam to the Oracle:
The reverent man I welcome, and entreat
The General with these Princes, do the like.

Agam. Welcome to Agamemnon reverent Calchas.

Men. To Menelaus welcome.

Ajax. To Ajax welcome: father can thou fight
As well as pray, if we should want for men?

Call. By prayers I use to fight, and by my counsel
Give aid to Arms.

Ajax. Such as are past arms, father Calchas still,
Say counsels good, but give me strength at will,
When you with all your Counsel, in the field
Meet Hector with his strength, tell me who will yield?

Aga, The strong built walls of stately Tenedos
We have leuel'd with the earth. It now remains
We march along unto the walls of Troy,
And thunder vengeance in King Priams ears,
Had we once answer of our Embassy.

Ajax. I ever held such Embassies as base,
The restitution of our ravished Queen
On terms of parley bars our stern revenge,
And ends our War ere fully it begin.
King Agamemnon no, Ajax says no,
Whose sword as thirsty as the parched earth,
Shall never ride in peace upon his thigh,
Whilst in the town of Troy there breathes a soul
That gave consent unto the Spartans rape:
March, march, and let the thunder of our drums
Strike terror to the City Pergamus.

Achil. The son of Telamon speaks honorably,
We have brought a thousand ship^ to Tenedos,
And every ship full fraught with men at Arms:
And all these armed men with fiery spirits
Sworn to revenge King Menelaus wrongs,
And burn sk ^*kissing Isl^^m to the ground.
Therefore strike up wars Instruments on hye,
And march unto the Town courageously.

In their march they are met by Ulysses and King Diomed, at which they make a
stand. Aga. Princes, what answer touching Hellena?

Di^. What answer but d shonourable term?
Contempt and scorn pearcht on their leaders brows,
By Jove I thought they would have slain us both.
If ever Hellen be redeem d from thence
But by the sack of Troy, say Diomed
Is no true soldier.

Vlyss. Even in the King
There did appear such high maiesticke scorn
Of threatened ruin, that I think himself
Will put on Arms and meet us in the field:
We linger time great Agamemnon, march,
That we may buckle with the pride of Troy.

Aga. Priam so inso^ent, his sons so brave
To intertaine so great Embassadou^s
With such ungentle usage.

Achil. They have a Knight called Hector, on whose valor
They build their proud defiance, if I meet him,
Now by the azurd Arms of that bright goddess
From whom I am descended, with my sword
I Will loppe that limb off, and enforce their pride
Fall at Achilles feet, Hector and I
Must nor both shine at once in wars bright Sky.

^iax When they both meet, the greater dim the less,
Great General, march, Ajax indures not words
So well as blows, in a field glazd with swords.

Enter to them in Arms, Priam, Hector, Troilus, Paris, A^neas, Antenor,
Deiphobus, etc. Pri. Calchas a Traitor?

Par. And amongst the Greeks?

Hect. Base runagate wretch, when we their Tents surprise,
As Hector lives the traitorous Prophet dies.

Aene. Let not remembrance of so base a wretch
Make us forget our safety, the Argiue Kings*
Are landed, and this day rac't Tenedos:
And bid us battle on Scamander Plains.

Tro. Whom we will give a brave and proud affront;
Shall we not brother Hector?

Hect. Troilus yes,
And beat a fire out of their Burgonets
Shall like an earthy Commet blaze toward Heaven
There grow a fixed star in the Firmament
To emblaze our lasting glory: Hark their Drums,
Let our Drums give them parleance.

A parlie. Both Armies have an enter-view. Aga. Is there amongst your troops a
fellon Prince
Called by the name of Paris?

Par. Is there amongst your troops a Knight so bold
Dares meet that Paris single in the field,
And call him fellon?

Hect. Or insulting Greek,
Is there one Telamon, dares set his foot
To Paris (here he stands) and hand to hand
Maintain the wrongs done to Hesione,
As Paris shall the rape of Helena.

Ajax. Know here is one called Ajax Telamon,
Behold him well, son to that Telamon:
Thou feign would see, and he dares set his foot
To Paris or thy self.

Hect. Thou durst not.

Ajax. Dare not?

Hect. Or if thou durst, by this my warlike hand
I Will make thine head fall where thy foot should stand:
And yet I love thee cuze, know thou have parlie'd
With Trojan Hector.

Ajax. Were It thou ten Hectors, yet withal thy might
Thou can not make my head fa^l to my feet,
By Jove thou can not cuze.

Achil. I much have heard
Of such a Knight called by the name of Hector,
If thou be he whose sword has conquered Kingdoms,
Pannonia, ll^yria, and Samothrace,
And to thy fathers Empire added them:
Achilles as a friend wills thee to sheath
Thy war^ike sword, retire from Troyes defenc^
And spare thy precious life, I would not have
A Knight so famed meet an untimely grave.

Hect. I meet thee in that honorable love,
And for thine own sake wish thee safe aboard.
For if thou stayest thou son of Peleus,
I Would have thee know thy fame is not thine own,
But all ingrost for me; not all thy guard
Of warlike Mirmidons can wall i^^a^e
From mighty Hector.

Di^. Shame you not great Lords
To talk so long over your menacing swords?

All Greeks. Alarm then for Gree^e and Helena.

All Trojans. As much for us, for Troy and Hecuba.

A great alarm and excursions, after which, enter Hector and Paris. Hect. Oh
brother Paris, thou have this day lodged
Thy love in Hectors soul, it did me good
To see two Greekssh Knights fall in their blood
Under thy manly arm

Par. My blows weretouches
Unto these ponderous strokes great Hector gave.
Oh that this general quarrel might be ended
In equal opposition, you and I
Against the two most valiant.

Hect. I will try
The virtue of a challenge, in the face
Of all the Greeks I will oppose my self
To single combat, he that takes my gage
Shall feel the force of mighty Hectors rage.

A turn. Both the Armies make ready to join battle, but Hector steps
betwixt them holding up his Lance. Hect. Hear me you warlike Greeks, you see
these fields
Are all did purple with the reeking gore
Of men on both sides slain, you see my sword
Glazed in the sanguine moisture of your friends.
I call the son of Saturn for a witness
To Hectors words I have not met one Grecian
Was able to withstand me, my strong spirit
Would feign be equaled: Is there in your Troops
A Knight, whose breast includes so much of valor
To meet with Hector in a single war?
By Jove I think there is not: If there be?
To Him I make this proffer; if the gods
Shall grant to him the honor of the day,
And I be slain; his be mine honored Ar mes,
To hang for an eternal Monument
Of his great valor, but my mangled body
Send back to Troy, to a red funeral pile.
But if he fall? the armor which he wears
I Will lodge as Trophies on Apolloes shrine,
And yield his body to have funeral rights.
And a fair Monument so nee^e the S^a,
That Merchants flying in their sayle-wing'd ships
Near to the shore in after times may say*
There lies the man Hector of Troy did slay,
And there is my Gantler to make good my challenge.

Men. Will none take up his gage? shall this proud challenge
Be Intertain'd by none? I know you all
Shame to deny, yet fear to undertake it:
The cause is mine, and mine shall be the honor
To combat Hector.

Aga. Menelaus pawse,
Is not Achilles here, stern Ajax here,
And Kingly Diomed* how will they scorn,
That stand upon the honor of their strength,
should you prevent them of this glorious combat.

Par. By Jove I think they dare as well take up
A poisonous Serpent as great Hectors gage.

Aga. Yes Trojan, see thou not Aeacides
Dart emmulous looks on Kingly Diomed,
Least he should stoop to take his Gantlet up.
And see how Diomed eyes warlike Ajax,
Ajax, Ulysses: every one inflamed
To answer Hector.

Achil. Is there any here
Dares stoop whilst great Achilles is in place?

Ajax. I dare.

Dio. And so dare I.

Achil. You are all too weak
To encounter with the mighty Hectors arm,
This combat soly does belong to me.

Ajax Then wherefore do not thou take up the Gantlet?

Achil. To see if thou or any bolder Greek
Dare be so insolent to touch the same,
And bar me of the honor of the combat.

Ajax. By all the gods I dare.

Achil. And all the devils
I Will loppe his hands off that dares touch the gage.

Vlyss. Pray leave this emulous fury: Agamemnon,
To end this difference, and provide a Champion
To answers Hectors honorable challenge
Of nine the most reputed valiant:
Let several Lots be cast into an Helm,
Amongst them all one prise, he to whom Fortune
Shall give the honor: let him straight be armed
To encounter migdty Hector on this plain.

Aga. It shall be so you valiant sons of Priam:
Conduct your warlike Champion to his Tent,
To breath a while, and put his armor on:
No sooner shall the prise be drawn by any,
And our bold Champion armed, but a brave Herald
Shall give you warning by the trumpets sound,
Till when we will retire unto our Tents.
As you unto the Town.

Par. Faint hearted Greeks,
Draw lots to answer such a noble challenge,
Had great Achilles cast his Gauntlet down
Amongst King Priams sons, the weakest of fifty
Would in the heat of flames, or mouth of Hell,
Answer the challenge of so brave a King.

Hect. Greeks to your Tents, to put armor on;
Make have, ^ long to know my Champion.

Exeunt all Flourish. Enter above upon the walls, Priam, Heeuba, Hellena,
Polixena, Aftianax, Margareton. with attendants. Pri. Here from the walls of
Troy, my reverent Queen,
And beauteous Hellen, we will stay to see
The warlicke combat 'twixt our valiant son,
And the Greeks champion. Young Astianax,
Pray that thy father may have Victory.

Asti. Why should you doubt his fortune? whose strong arm
Unhorsed a thousand Knights all in one day;
And think you any one amongst the Greeks
Is able to encounter with his strength?

Pri. But howsoever child, unto the pleasure*
Of the high gods, we must refer the combat.

Enter Paris below. Par. My royal father, Hector in his arms
Sends for your blessing, with the Queen my mother,
And craves your prayers to the all powerful gods,
To grant him victory.

Pri. Blessed may he be with honor, all my orisons
Shall invoke the gods for his success.

Par. I almost had forgot fair Hellena;
Dart me one kiss from these high battlements
To cheer him with: thanks queen these lips are charms
Which who so fights for, is secure from harms.

Heralds on both sides* the two Champions Hector and Ajax appear betwixt the
two Armies. Agam. None pre^^e too near the Champions.

Troi. Heralds on both sides, keep the soldiers back.

Hect. Now Greeks let me behold my Champion.

Ajax. It Is I, thy cosen Ajax Telamon.

Hec. And Cuz, by Jove thou have a brave aspect,
It cheeres my blood to look on such a foe:
I would there ran none of our Trojan blood
Inall thy veins, or that it were divided
From that which thou receiuest from Telamon:
Were I assured our blood possessed one side,
And that the other; by Olimpicke Jove,
I Would thrill my Iauelin at the Gresian moisture,
And spare the Trojan blood: Ajax I love it
Too dear to shed it, I could rather wish
Achilles the half god of your huge army,
Had been my opposite.

Aia. He keeps his Tent
In mournful passion that he mist the combat:
But Hector, I shall give thee cause to say,
There Is in the Greekish host a Knight a Prince,
As Lion hearted, and as Giant strong
As Thetis son: behold my warlicke Target
Of pondrous brass, quilted with seven Ox hides,
Impenetrable, and so full of weight,
That scarce a Grecian (sane my self) can lift it:
Yet can I use it like a Summers fan,
Made of the stately train of Juno's bird:
My sword will bite the hardest Adamant.
I Will with my Iauelin cleave a rock of Marble:
Therefore though great Achilles be not here,
Think not brave cosen Hector but to find,
Achilles equal both in strength and mind.

Alarm, in this combat both having lost their swords and Shields. Hector
takes up a great piece of a Rock, and casts at Ajax; who tears a young Tree
up by the roots, and assailes Hector, at which they are parted by both arms.
Aga. Hold, you have both shed blood too dear to loose,
In single opposition.

Par. Is your Champion,
My cosen Ajax willing to leave combat;
Will he first give the word.

Aia. Sir Paris no,
'Twas Hector challenge, and it is Hectors office,
If we surcease on equal terms of valor,
To give the word.

Hec. Then here is thy cousins hand,
By Jove thou have a lusty pondrous arm:
Thus till we meet again, lets part both friends;
For proof whereof Ajax we will interchange
Somewhat betwixt us, for alliance sake:
Here take this sword and target, trust the blad,
It never deceived his master.

Aia. Take of me
This purple studded belt, I won it cosen
From the most valiant prince of Samothrace:
And wear it for my sake.

Enter an Herald. He. Priam unto the Greekish General
This profer makes. Because these blood-stayn'd fields
Are ouer-spread with slaughter, to take truce
Till all the dead on both sides be interred:
Which if you grant, he here inuites the General,
His nephew Ajax, and the great Achilles,
With twenty of your chief selected Princes,
To banquet with him in his royal Palace:
Those revels ended, then to arms again.

Aga. A truce for burying of the slaughtred bodies
We yield unto: but for our safe return
From Troy and you, what pledges have you found?

Hec. You shall not need more then the faith of Hector
For Priams pledge, King Agamemnon take
My faith and honor, which if Priam break,
I Will break the heart of Troy.

Aga. We Will take your honored word, this night we will part,
To morrow morning when sit hour shall call,
We Will meet King Priam ^eere his Cities wall.

Exeunt. Explicit Actus secundus.
Actus Tertius Scoena prima.
Enter Thersites. There. Brave time, rare change, from fighting now to feasting:
So many heavy blades to fly in pieces
For such a piece of light flesh? what is the reason?
A Less of my complexion, and this feature
Might have bin rapt, and stolen again by Paris,
And none of all this stir for it: but I perceive
Now all the World's turned wenchers, and in time
All wenches will turn witches: but these Trumpets
Proclaim their enter-view.

A flourish. Enter all the Greeks on one side, all the Trojans on the other:
Every Trojan Prince intertaines a Greek, and so march two and two,
discoursing, as being condu^ted by them into the City. There. See here is the
picture of a polliticke state,
They all embrace and hug, yet deadly hate:
They say their are brave Lasses in this Troy.
What if Thersites sprucely smug'd himself,
And strived to hide his hutch-backe: No not I.
It Is held a rule, whom Nature marks in show
And most deformes, they are best armed below.
I Will not conceal my virtues: yet should I venture
To damme my self for painting, fan my face
With a did Ostritch plume, paster my wrinkles
With some old Ladies Trowell, I might pass
Perhaps for some maide-marrian: and some wench
Wanting good eyesight, might perhaps mistake me
For a spruce Courtier: Courtier? tush, I from
My first discretion have abhorred that name,
Still suiting my conditions with my shape,
And do, and will, and can, when all else ^ayle:
Though neither sooth nor speak well: bravely rail,
And that is Thersites humor.

Loud Musi^ke. A long table, and abanquet in state, they are seated, a Trojan
and Greek, Hecuba, Polixena, Cresida, and other Ladies wa^te, Calchas is
present whispering with his Daughter Cresida. Pria. After so much hostility in
steel,
All welcome to this peaceful intertaine.

Aga. Priam we know thee to be honorable,
Although ou^ foe Treason is to be feared
In Pesants not in Princes.

They sit. Hec. Ey so, now ^it a Trojan and a Greek.
Cousin Ai^x near me, you are next in blood,
And near me you shall sit: the strain of honor
That makes you so renowned, sprung from He^i^n^.
It Is part of Hectors blood, your grosser spirits
Less noble are your father Telamons.
Welcome to Troy, and Hector, welcome all:

Ajax. In Troy thy kinsman, but in field thy foe:
Thy welcome Cousin here I pay with thanks,
The truice expired, with buffets blows and knocks.

Hect. For that we love the Cuze.

Achil. Me thinks this Trojan Hector
Out shines Achilles and his polisht honors
Ecclipseth our bright glory, till he^ set
W ee cannot rise.

Par. King Menelaus, we were once your guest,
You now are ours, as welcome unto Troy,
As we to Sparta.

Men. But that these our tongues
Should be as well truce bound as our sharp weapons,
We could be bitter Paris: but have done.

Vlyss. Menelaus is discreet, such heinous wrongs
Should be discoursed by Arms and not by tongues.

Dio. Why does Achilles eye wander that way?

Achil. Is that a Trojan Lady?

Troi. She is.

Achil. From whence?

Pri. Of us.

Achil. Her name?

Pri. Polyxena.

Achil. Polixena? she has m^lted us within,
And has dissolved a spirit of Adamant.
She has done more then Hector and all Troy,
She has subdu'de Achilles.

Call. In one word this Troy shall be sacked and spo^^'d,
For so the gods have told me, Greece shall conquer,
And they be ruined, leave then imminent peril,
And fly to safety.

Cres. From Troilus?

Call. From destruction, take Diomed and live,
Or Troilus and thy death.

Cres. Then Troilus and my ruin.

Call. Is Cresid mad?
Will thou forsake thy father, who for thee and for thy safety has forsook
his Country?


Cres. Must then this City perish?

Call. Troy must fall.

Cres. Alas for Troy and Troilus.

Call. Love King Diomed
A Prince and valiant, which made Empha^^s
To his Imperial style, line Diomeds Queen,
Be brief, say quickly will thou? is it done?

Cres. Diomed and you i will follow, Troilus shun.

Troi. Be It Ajax, or Achilles, that Greek ly^s
Who speaks it, i will maintain it on his person.

Ajax. Ha Ajax!

Achil. Achilles!

Dio. We speak it, and dares Troilus fay we lie?

Troi. And wear it Diomed.

Dio. Dar'ft thou make it good?

Troi. On Diomed, or the boldest Greek
That ever manac'd Troy excepting none.

All Greeks. None?

All Trojans. None.

Hec. Excepting none.

Aga. Kings of Greece.

Pri. Princes of Troy.

Achil. Achilles bafled?

Ajax. And great Ajax bran'd?

Hect. If great Achilles, Ajax, or the Devil brave Troilus, he shall brave and
buffer thee.


P^i. Sonn^^.

Aga. Fellow Kings.

Pri. As we are Priam and your father.

Aga. As we are Agamemnon General
Turn not this banquet to a Centaus feast,
If their be strife debate it in fair terms,
Show your selnes governed Princes.

Achil. We are appeas*d.

Ajax. We satisfied, if Hector be so.

Aga. How grew this strife?

Hect I know not, only this I know.
Troilus will maintain nothing against his honor,
And so far, be it through the heart of Greece,
Hector will back him.

Par. So will Paris too.

Pri. Mildly discourse your wrongs, fair Princes do^.

Troi. King Diomed maintains his valor thus,
He says it was his Lance dismounted Troilus,
And not the stumbling on the breathless course
Of one new slain that feld me.

Par. It Is false.

Men. It Is true.

^ar. It was my fortune to make good that field,
And he fell just before me, Diomed then
Was not within six spears length of the place.

Men. How Trojan rauisher?

Par. Call me not Cuckold maker,
They all ris^* I care not what you term me.

Men. I cannot brook this wrong.

Par. Say thou me so mad Greek?

Pri. Paris.

Aga. Govern you Kingdoms Lords, and cannot sway
Your own affection?

Pri. Paris, forbeate.
Mildly discourse, and gently we shall hear.

Par. I say King Diomed unhorsed not Troilus.

Dio. How came I by his horse then?

Par. As the vnbackt courser having lost his rider,
Gallopt about the field you met with him,
And caught him by the rain.

Troi. Here was a goodly act
To boast on, and send word to Cresida.

Dio. Was no Prince near when I encountered Troilus?

Men. I was, and saw the spear of Diomed
Tumble down Troylus but peruse his armor*
The dint's still in the vainbrace.

Aga. Be It so or not so, at this time forbear
To urge extremes. Kings let this health go round,
Pledge me King Priam in a cupful crowned.

Hec. Now after banquet, (...) Music strike
A pirhicke strain, we are not all for war,
Soldiers their stormy spirits can appease,
And sometimes play the Courtiers when they please.

A lofty dance of sixteen Princes, half Trojans half Grecians. Pri. I have
observed Achilles, and his eye
Dwells on the face of fair Polixena.

Aia. Why is not Hellen here at this high feast?
I have sweat many a drop of blood for her,
Ye^ never saw her face.

Achi I could love Hector, what is our cause of quarrel?
For Hellens rape? that rape has cost already
Thousands of souls, why might not this contention
'Twixt Paris and the Spartan King be ended,
And we leave Troy with honor.

Aia. Achilles how?

Achi. Fetch Hellen hither, set her in the midst
Of this brave ring of Princes, Paris here,
And Menelaus here: she betwixt both:
They court her ore again, whom she elects
Before these Kings, let him enjoy her still,
For who would keep a woman against her will?

Men. The names of wife and husband, th'interchange
Of our two bloods in young Hermione,
To whom we are joint parents, Hellens honor
All plead on my part, I am pleased to stand
To great Achilles motion.

Par. So are we.
All that I have for comfort is but this,
That in the day I show the properer man,
Ith'night I please her better then he can.

Hec. Are all the Greecian Kings agreed to this?

All. We are, we are.

Hec. Place the two riuals then, each bide his fate*
And usher in bright Hellen in all state.

The Kings promiscuously take their places, Paris and Menelaus are seated
opposite, Hellen is brought in betwixt them by Hecuba and the Ladies. Hell. Oh
that I were (but Hellen) any thing*
Or might have any object in my eye
Save Menelaus: when on him I gaze,
My error chides me, I my shame emblaze.

Mean. Oh Hellen, in thy cheek thy guilt appears,
More I would speak, but words are drowned in tears,

Aia. A gallant Queen, for such a royal friend
What mortal man would not with Jove contend?

Mean. Hellen the time was I might call thee wife,
But that stile's changed; I* thou thy self art changed
From what thou wast: and (most inconstant Dame)
Have nothing left thee, sa^e thy face and name.

Pa. And I both these have: have thou not confessed
Fair Hellen, thy exchange was for the best.

Mean. What can our Sparta value?

Pa. Troy.

Mean. You err.

Pa. who breathes that Sparta would before Troy prefer.

Mean. Thou have left thy father Tendarus.

Pa. To gain
King Priam, Lord of all this princely train.

Mean. Thy mother Lada thou have left who mournes*
And with her piteous tears laments thy loss:
Cannot this move thee?

Hell. Oh I have left my mother.

Pa. No Hellen, but exchanged her for another:
Poor L^da, for rich He^uba, a ^are Queen
For the great Asian Empress.

Men. From Castor and from Poll^x thou have ranged
Thy natural brothers.

Hell. True, true.

Par. No, but changed,
For Hector, Troilus, and the royal store
Of eight and forty valiant brothers more.

Men. If nothing else can move thee Helena,
Think of our daughter young Hermione.

Hell. My dear Hermione.

Men. Can thou call her dear*
And leave that issue which thy womb did bear?
She Is ours betwixt us, can thou?

Par. Can she? knowing,
A sweeter babe within her sweet womb growing
Begot last night by Paris.

Men. Look this way Hellen, see my arms spread wide,
I am thine husband, thou my Spartan bride.

Hell. That way?

Par. My Hellen, this way turn thy sight,
These are the arms in which thou layest last night.

Hell. Oh how this Trojan tempts me!

Men. This way wife,
Thou shall save many a Greeks and Trojans life*

Hell. It Is true, I know it.

Par. This way turn thine head,
This is the path that leads unto our bed.

Hell. And it is a sweet smooth path.

Men. Here.

Par. Here.

Men. Take this way Hellen, this is plain and eue^.

Par. That is the way to hell, but this to Heaven:
Bright Comet s^ine this way.

Men. Clear star shoot this*
Here honor dwells.

Par. Here many a thousand kiss.

Hell. That way I should, because I know it is (...)

Men. Welcome.

Hell. But I Will this way for Paris kisses sweeter.

Par. And may I dye an Eunuch if ere morn
I quit thee not.

Men. I cannot brook this scorn,
Grecians to Arms.

Hect. Then Greece from Troy divide,
This difference arms, not language most decide.

All Greeks. Come to our Tents.

All Trojans. And we to man the town.

Hect. These Tents shall swim in blood.

Greeks. Blood Troy shall drown.

Exeunt diverse ways. Achil. Yet shall no stroke fall from Achilles arm,
Fair Polixena, so powerful is thy charm.

Alarm. Enter Troilus and Diomed. Troi. King Diomed!

Dio. My rival in the love of Cresida.

Troi. False Cresida, injurious Diomed.
Now shall I prove in hostile enter-change
Of warlike blows that thou art all unworthy
The love of Cresid.

Dio. Why came thou not on Horseback*
That Diomed once again dismounting thee
Might greet his Lady with another course
Won from the hand of Troilus.

Troi. Diomed,
By the true love I bear that trothlesse Dame
I Will win thee, and send thy Horse and Armor
Unto the Tent of Cresid guard thy head,
This day by me thou shall be captive led.

Alarm. They fight and are parted by the army* Diomed loses his Helmet. Troi
Another Horse for Diomed to fly,
He had never greater need then now to run.
Though he be fled yet Troilus this is thine.
My Steed he got by sleight, I this by force.
I Will send her this to whom he sent my horse.

Enter Aeneas and Achilles reading a Letter. Achil. Is this the answer of the
note I sent
To royal Priam and Queen Hecuba,
Touching their daughter bright Polixena?

Aene. Behold Queen Hecubaes hand, King Priams seal,
With the consent of fair Polixena,
Conditioned thus, Achilles shall forbear
To damage Troy.

Achi. Return this answer back,
Tell Priam that Achilles Arme's benumbed,
And cannot lift a weapon against Troy.
Say to Queen Hecuba we are her son,
And not Achilles, nor one Mirmidon
Shall give her least affront, as for the Lady
Bid her presume, we henceforth are her Knight,
And but for her, Achilles scorns to fight.

Aene. Then thus says Priam, but restrain thy powers,
And as he is a King, his daughter's yours.

Achi. Farewell.

Exit. Alarm. Enter Ajax. Ajax. Achilles, where is Achilles, what unarmed,
when all the Champaigne where our battles ioyns,
^s made a standing poole of Greekish blood*
Where horses plung d up to the saddle skirts*
And men above the waste wade for their lines,
And can thou keep thy Tent?

Achi. My Lute Patroclus.

A great Alarm. Ente^ Aga^lemnon. Aga. Let Greeks, kill Greeks, let us bend
unnatural arms
Against our own breasts, ere the conquering Trojans
Have all the honor of this glorious day.
Can our great Champion touch a womanish Lute,
And hear the groans of twenty thousand souls
Gasping their last breath?

Achi. I can.

Alarume. Enter Me^elaus* Rescue, some rescue, the red field is strowd
With Hectors honors and young Troilus spoils.
Achi. Yet all this moves not me.

Alatum. Enter Ulysses. Vlyss. How long has great Achilles bin surnamed Coward
in Troy, that Hector, Troilus, Paris, have all that name so current in the^r
mouths?

I ever held him valiant, yet will Achilles fight?

Achi. Ulysses, no,
Beneath this globe Achilles hath^o foe.

Vlyss. Then here unarmed be slain, think thou they will spare
Thee more then us?

Ajax. Or if thou will not arm thee,
Let thy Patroclus lead thy Mirmidons,
And wear thy Armor.

Vlyss. Thy Armor is sufficient*
Without thy presence being feared in Troy.

Achi. To save our oath and keep our Tents from sack,
Patroclus don our Arms, lead forth our guard,
And wearing them by no Prince be out-dar'd.

Patro. Achilles honors me, what heart can fear,
And great Achilles sword proof Armor wear?

Exeunt all the Princes, enter Thersites. There. Where Is this great sword and
buckler man of Greece?
We shall have him one of sneakes noise,
And come peaking into the Tents of the Greeks,
With will you have any music Gentlemen.

Achi. Base groom, I Will tear thy flesh like falling Snow*

There. If I had Hectors face thou durst not do it.

Achi. Durst not?

There. Durst not, he is in the field, thou in thy Tent,
Hector playing upon the Greekish burgonets,
Achilles fingring his effeminate Lute.
And now because thou durst not meet him in the field, thou have counterfeited
an humor of love. Achilles?

Thou the Champion of Greece, a mere bug-beare* a scar-crow, a Hobbyhorse.


Achi. Ulysses taught thee this, deformed slave.

There. Coward thou durst not do this to Hector.

Achi. On thee I Will practice, til I meet with him.

The. Ajax is valiant, and in the throng of the Trojans,
Achilles is turned Fiddler in the Tents of
The Grecians.

Alarm. Enter Diomed wounded, bringing in Patroclus dying. Dio. Look here
Achilles.

Achi. Patroclus?

Pat. This wound great Hector gave:
Revenge my death, before I meets my grave.

Enter Ulysses and Ajax wounded. Vlis. Yet will Achilles fight? see Ajax
wounded,
Two hundred of thy warlike Mirmedons
Thou have lost this day.

Aia. Let Us beat him to the field.

Achi. Ha?

Aia. Had I lost a Patroclus, a dear friend
As thou have dove, I would have doud these arms
In which he dyed, sprung through the Trojan host,
And ma^ger opposition, let the blow
Or by the same hand died: come join with me,
And we without this picture, statue of Greece,
This shadow of Achilles, will once more
Invade the Trojan host.

Achi. Ajax?

Aia. Achilles?

Achi. We owe thee for this scorn.

Aia. I scorn that debt:
Thou have not fought with Hector.

Achi. My honor and my oath both combat in me:
But lone swayes most.

Alarm. Enter Menelaus and Agamemnon. Men. Our ships are fired, five hundred
gallant vessels*
Burnt in the Sea, half of our Fleet destroyed,
Without some present rescue.

Achi. Ha, ha, ha.

Aga. Does no man ask where is this double fire,
That two ways flies toward heaven?
Upon the right our royal Navy burns,
Upon the left, Achilles Tents on fire.

Achi. Our Tent?

Aga. By Jove thy Tent, and all thy Mirmedons,
Have not the power to quench it: yet great Hector
Has shed more blood this day, then would have served
To quench, both Fleet and Tent.

Achi. My sword and armor:
Polixena, thy love we will lay by,
Till by this hand, that Trojan Hector dye.

Aia. I knew he must be fired out.

Exit. Alarm. Enter Hector, Paris, Troilus, Aeneas, with burning staves and
fire-bals. All the Trojans. Strike, stab, wound, kill, toss firebrands, and
make way.
Hector of Troy, and a victorious day.

Hec. Well fought brave brothers.

Enter Ajax. ^a. What Is he?

Troi. It Is Ajax, down with him.

Hec. No man presume to dart a feather at him
Whilst we have odds: cosen if thou seek combat?
S^e we stand single, not one Trojan here,
Shall lay a violent hand upon thy life,
Save we our self.

Aia. Cosen thou art honorable,
I now must both entreat and conjure thee*
For my old Uncle Priams sake, his sister
Hesione my mother, and thine Aunt:
This day leave thine advantage, spare our Fleet,
And let us quench our Tents, only this day
Stay thy Victorious hand, it is Ajax pleades*
Who but of Jove has never begged before,
And save of Jove, will not entreat again*

Al Trojans. Burn, still more fire.

Hect. Ple quench it with his blood
That adds one spark unto this kindled flame*
My cousin shall not for Hesiones sake
Be ought denide of Hector, she is our Aunt:
Thou, then this day have saved the Grecian Fleet:
Let Us sound retreat, whose charge made al Greece quak,
We spare whole thousands for one Ajax sake.

A Retreat sounded. Exeunt the Trojans. Aia. Worthiest a live thou have,
Greece was this day
At her last cast, had they pursude advantage:
But I divine, hereafter from this hour,
We never more shall shrink beneath their power.

Exit. Explicit Actus tertius.
Actus Quartus Scoena prima.
Enter Hector, Troilus, Paris, Aen^as, Hectors armor bearer, with others. Hec.
My armor, and my trusty Galatee,
The proudest steed that ever rider backed,
Or with his hoofes beat thunder from the earth,
The Sun begins to mount the Eastern hill,
And we not yet in field: Lords yesterday
We slipped a brave advantage, else these ships
That floate now in the Samothracian road,
And with their wauing pendants menace Troy,
Had with their flames reflecting from the Sea,
Gilt those high towers, which now they proudly brave.

Troi. On then; Achilles is unconquered yet,
Great Agamemnon and the Spartan King,
Ajax the bigge-bond Duke of Salamine,
With him that with his Lance made Kenus bleed,
The bold, (but ever rash) King Diome^.
To lead these captiu^ through Scamander Plains*
That were a task worth Hector.

Par: Why not us?
Yet most becoming him, come then Aeneas,
Let each Pick one of these brave Champions out
And single him a captive.

Aene. 'Twer^ an enterprise
That would deserve a lasting Chronicle:
Lead on renowned Hector.

Hect. Vnnimble slave,
Dispatch, make haft, I would be first in field,
And now I mustbe called on.

Enter Andromache and young Astianax. Andro. Oh stay dear Lord, my royal
husband stay*
Cast by thy shield, fellow uncase his arms,
Knock off the riuets, lay that baldricke by,
But this one day rest with Andromachs.

Hec. What meanest thou woman?

Andro. To save my hououred Lord
From a sad fate, for if this ominous day,
This day disastrous, thou appear'st in field
I never more shall see thee.

Hec. Fond Andromache.
Give me some reason for it.

Andro. A fearful dream,
This night me thought I saw thee amongst the Greeks
Round girt with squadrons of thine enemies*
All which their Iaueli^s thrild against thy breast,
And stuck them in thy bosom.

Hec. So many Squadrons,
And all their darts quiuerd in Hectors breast,
Some gla^c'^ upon mine armor, did they not?

Par. Did none of all these darts rebound from Hector
And hit thee sister, for (my Less) I know,
Thou haft been often hit by thiine Hector so.

Andro. Oh do not jest my husband to his death*
I wak't and slept, and slept and wak't again:
But both my slumbers and my sound sleeps
Met in this one maine truth, if thou this day
Affront their Army or oppose their fleet,
After this day we never more shall meet.

Hect. Trust not deceptious visions, dream, are fables,
Adulterate Scenes of Anticke forgeries
Played upon idle brains, come Lords to horse*
To keep me from the field, dreams have no force.

Andro. Troilus, Aeneas, Paris, young Astia^ax,
Hang on thy fathers armor, stay his speed.

Asti. Father, sweet father do not fight to day.

Hect. Help to take off these burrs, they trouble me.

Andro. Hold, hold thy father, if thou can not kneel,
Yet with thy tears entreat him stay at home.

Asti. I Will hang upon you, you shall beat me father
Before I let you go.

Hect. How boy? I Will whippe you if you stir a foot,
Go get you to your mother.

Pa. Come to horse.

Enter Priam, Hecuba, Hellen, etc. Pri. Hector, I charge thee by thi^e honor
stay,
Go not this day to battle.

Hect. By all the gods
Andromache, thou do abate my Ipue
To win me from my glory.

Hec. From thy death.
Troilus, persuade thy brother, daughter Hellen*
Speak to thy Paris* to entreat him too.

Hell. Paris sweet husband.

Pa. Leave your cunning Hellen.
My brother shall to the field.

Hell. But by this kiss thou shall ^ot.

Pa. Now have not I the heart to say her nay:
This kiss has overcome me.

Andro. My dearest love,
Pity your wife, your son, your father, all
These live beneath the safeguard of that arm*
Pity in us whole Troy all ready doomed
To sink beneath your ruin*

Pri. If thou fall,
Who then shall stand? Troy shall consume with fire
(That yet remains in thee) we perish all,
Or which is worse, led captine into Greece:
Therefore dear Hector, cast thy armor off.

Andro. Husband.

Hecu. Son.

Hell. Brother.

Hect^ By Jove I am resolved.

Andro. Oh all ye gods!

Hect. Not all the diuell^
Could half torment me like these women tongues!

Pa. At my entreaty, and for Hellens love,
Leave us to bear the fortunes of this day,
Here Is Troilus and my self will make them swear*
Ere the fight end there are two Hectors here.

Aene. Besides Aene^s, and Deiphebus
Young Margareton, and a thousand more
Sworn to set fire on all their Tents this day,
Then Hector for this once resolve to stay.

Hect. To horse then Paris, do not linger time;

Pa. To horse, come brother Troilus.

Hect* Watch Margareton, if the youthful Prince
Venture beyond his strength, let him have rescue.

Troi. He shall be all our charge.

Pri* Hector let us mount upon the walls of Troy,
And thence surueigh the battle.

Hect. Well be it so.
But if one Trojan shall for succor cry*
I Will leave the walls and to his rescue fly*

Exit. Enter Troilus and Diomed after an alarm. Troi. King Diomed.

Dio. Cresids first ^oue*

Troi. Yes Diomed and her last,
I*le live to love her when thy life is past.

Enter Menelaus both upon Troilus. Men. Hold Trojan, for no Greek must be
disarmed:

Enter Paris. Pa. Unmanly odds, King Menelaus turn
Thy face this way, it is Trojan Paris calls*

Men. Of all that breath, I love that Paris tongue
When it shall call to Arms: Now one shall down.

Alarm. Menelaus falls. Par. Thou keep'st thy word, for thou art down indeed.
Yet by the sword of Paris shall not dye.
I slew thy fame when I first stole thy Queen,
And therefore Spartan will now spare thy life:
Achilles, Diomed, Ajax, one of three
Were noble prise, thou art no spoil for me.

Alarm. Enter above Priam, Hector, A^tianax, Hecuba, Hellen, etc. Below
Achilles and Margareton. Achil. If thou be noble by thy blood and valor,
Tell me if Hector be in field this day.

Marg. Thy coniuration has a double spell,
Hector is not in field, but here I stand
Thy warlike opposite.

Achi* Thou art young and weak, retire and spare thy life.

Mar. I Am Hectors brother, none of Hectors blood
Did ever yet retreite.

Achi. If Hectors friend,
Here must thy life and glory both have end.

Achilles kills him. Hec. Oh father, see where Margareton Iyes,
Your son, my brother by Achilles slain.

Pri. Thy brother Troylus will revenge his death:
But Hector shall not move.

Hec. Troylus nor all the Trojans in the field
Can make their swords bite on Achilles shield:
It Is none but Hector must revenge his death.

Pri. But not this day.

Hect. Before the Sun decline,
That terror of the earth I Will make divine.

Exit from the walls. Alarm* Enter Hector beating before him Achilles
Mermidons. Hect. Thus flies the dust before the Northern winds,
And turns to Attoms dancing in the air,
So from the force of our victorious arm,
Fly armed squadrons of the boldest Greeks,
And mated at the terror of our name,
So clear the field before me, no man's favored:
The blood of three brave Princes in my rage,
I have sacrificed to Margaritons soul.
Ajax Oilaeus, Ajax Telamon,
Merionus, Menelaus, Idomea,
Archdukes and Kings have shrunk beneath this arm,
Besides a thousand Knights have fallen this day
Beneath the fury of my pondrous blows:
And not the least of my victorious spoils,
Quiuer'd my Iauelin through the brawny thigh
Of strong Achilles, and I seek him still,
Once more to tug with him: my sword and breath
Assist me still, till one drop down indeath.

Enter Achilles with his guard of Mermidons. Achi. Come cast your selves into a
ring of terror,
About this warlike Prince, by whom I bleed.

Hec. What means the glory of the Grecian host,
Thus to besiege me with his Mermidons?
And keep aloof himself.

Achil. That shall my Lance
In bloody letters text upon thy breast,
For young Patrocsus death, for my dishonours,
For thousand spoils, and for that infinite wrack
Our Army has endured only by thee*
Thy life must yield me satisfaction.

Hec. My life? and welcome, by Apolloes fire*
I never ventred blood with more content,
Thenagainst thee Achilles, come prepare.

Achil. For eminent death, you of my warlike guard*
My Mermidons, for slaughters most renowned,
Now sworn to my designements, your s^eele polaxes,
Fix all at once, and girt him round with wounds.

Hec. Dishonorable Greek, Hecter nere deal
On base advantage, or ever life his sword
Oner a quaking foe, but as a spoil
Unworthy us, still left him to his fear*
No^ on the man, whom singly I struke down,
Have I redoubled blows, my valor still
Oppo^de against a standing enemy.
T^^^ have I twice unhorsed, and when I might
Have sla^ne thee groueling, left thee to the field,
Thine armor and thy shield impenetrable,
Wrought by the god of Lemnos in his forge
By ar^e di^ine, with the whole world engraven,
I have through piere't, and still it wears my skarres:
Forget not how last day, even in thy tent
I fea^ted my good sword, and might have flung
My bals of wildfire round about your Fleet,
To have sent up your Greekish pride in flames,
Which would have fixed a star in that high Orb,
To memorize to all succeeding times
Our glories and your shames, yet this I spared,
And shall I now be slain by treachery?

Achi Tell him your answer on your weapons points,
Upon him my brave soldiers.

Hec. Come you ^^aues,
Before I fall, I Will make some food forgiaues,
That gape to swallow cowards* ceaze you dogs*
Upon a Lion with your armed phangs*
And bare me bravely, where I touch I kill,
And where I fasten rear body from soul,
And soul from hope of rest: all Greece shall know,
Blood must run wast in Hectors overthrow.

Alarm. Hector falls slain by the Mermidons, then Achilles wounds him with his
Lance. Achi. Farewell the nob'est spirit that ere breathed
In any terrene mansion: Take up his body
And bear it to my Tent* I Will straight to horse,
And at his fetlockes to my greater glory,
I Will dragge his mangled trunk that Grecians all,
May deaf the world with shouts, at Hectors fall.

Enter Priam, Aeneas, Troilus, Paris. Pri. Black fate, black day, be never
Kallendred
Hereafter in the number of the year,
The Planets cease to work, the Spheres to move,
The Sun in his meridian course to shine,
Perpetual darkness ouerwhelme the day,
In which is fallen the pride of Asia.

Troi. Rot may that hand.
And every joint drop peece-meale from his arm,
That took such base ^duantage on a worthy,
Who all advantage scorned.

Pa. Yet though his life they have basely taken away,
His body we have rescued mauger Greece.
And Paris, I the meanest of Priams sons,
Have made as many Mermidons weep blood,
As had least finger in the Worthies fall.

Pri. What but his death could thus have armed ^y hand,
Or drown decreeped Priam to the field:
That star is shot, his luster quite eclipsed:
And shall we now, surrender Hellena?

Pa* Not till Achilles lie as dead as Hector*
And Ajax by Achilles, no^ whilst I^li^^
Has one stone reared upon another back
To ouer-looke these walls, or these high wal^
To ouer-peere the plain.

Troi. Contrary Elements,
The warring meteors* Hell and Eliziu^
Are not so much opposed, as Troy and Greece,
For Hector, Hectors death.

Par. A most sad Funeral
Will his in Troy be, where shall scarce an eye
Of twice two hundred thousand be found dry:
These obets once past over, which we desire,
Those eyes that now shed water, shall speak fire.

Aene. Now found retreat.

Pri. We back to Troy return,
Where every soul in funeral black shall mourn.

Exit. Par. Hector is dead, and yet my brother Troilus
A second terror to the Greeks still lives.
In him there is hope since all his Mermidons
Having felt his fury, fly even at his name.
But must the proud Achilles still insult
And triumph in the glory of base deeds?
No, Hector he destroyed by treachery,
And he must dye by craft. But Priams temper
Will nere be brought to any base revenge:
A woman is most subject unto spleen,
And I will use the brain of Hecuba:
This bloody son of Thetis does still doat
Upon the beauty of Polexina;
And that is the base we now must build upon.
My mother has by secret letters wrought him
Once more to abandon both the field and arms:
The plot is cast, which if it well succeed^,
He that is of blood insatiate, must nextbleed.

Exit Achilles discovered in his Tent, about him his ^leeding Mermidons,
himself wounded, and with him Vilisses. Vlis. Why will not great Achilles don
his Arms,
And rowse his bleeding Mirmidons? shall Troilus
March back to Troy with armor, sword, and lance,
All did in Grecian blood? shall aged ^riam
Boast in fair Islium that the son of Thetis,
Whose warlike spear pierced mighty Hectors bre^^,
Lies like a coward slumbring in his Tent,
Because he fears young Troilus.

Achi. Pardon me,
Ulysses, here is a Brief^ from Hecuba,
Wherein she vows, if I but kill one Trojan,
I never shall enjoy Polixena.

Vlis. But thinks Achilles, if the Greeks be slain,
And forced perforce to march away from Troy,
That he shall then enjoy Polixena?
No, it is King Priams subtilty, whilst thou
Sleep'st in thy Tent, Troilus through all our Troops
Makes Lanes of slaughtered bodies, and will toss
His Balls of wildfire as great Hect^r did
Over all our nauall forces: But did this Prince
Lie breathless bleeding at Achilles feet,
Dispairing Priam would to make his peace
Make humbly tender of P^lixena,
And be much proud to call Achilles son?

Achi. Were Troilus slain?

Vlis. Who else deals wounds so thick and fast as he,
They call him Hectors ghost, he glides so quick
Through our Battalions: If he beat us hence,
And we be then compelled to su^ to them?
It will be answered, that great Hectors deaths-man
Shall never wedd his sister: Hectors son
Will never kneel to him, by whose strong hand
His father fell; but were young Troilus slain,
And Priams sons sent wounded from the field,
Troy then would stoop, and send Polixena
Even to Achilles Tent.

Achi. My sword and armor*
Arise my bleeding ministers of death,
I Will feast you with an Ocean of blood-royall^*
Ulysses, ere this Sun fall from the skies,
By this right hand the warlike Troilus dies.

Alarm. Enter Troilus and ^hersites. There. Hold if thou be a man.

Troi. Stand if thou be a soldier, do not ^^rinke.

There. Art not thou Troilus, young and lusty Troilus.

Troi. I am, what then?

There. And I Thersites, lame and impotent,
What honor can thou get by killing me?
I cannot fight.

Troi. What make thou in the field then?

There. I came to laugh at madmen, thou art one*
The Trojans are all mad, so are the Greeks
To kill so many thousands for one drabbe,
For Hellen: a light thing, do thou turn wise
And kill no more; I since these wars began
Shed not one drop of blood.

Troi. But proud Achilles
Slew my bold brother, and you Grecians all
Shall perish for the noble Hectors fall.

There. Hold, the Pox take thee hold, whilst I have breath,
I am bound to curse thy fingers.

Enter Achilles with his Mirmidons, after Troilus has beaten Thersites.
*Achil. I might have slain young Troilus when his sword
Late sparkled fire out of the Spartans helm,
But that had ^tild my fame, but I will trace him
Through the whole Army, when I meet the Trojan
Breathless and faint: I*le thunder on his crest
Some valor, but advantage likes me best.

Enter Troilus. Tr^^. Let Cowards fight with Cowards, and both fear*
The base Thersites is no match for me,
Oppose me^ to the proudest he in field,
Most eminent i^ Arms and best approved*
To make the thirsty after blood to bleed.
And that is the proud Achilles.

Achi. Who names us?

Troi. Fa^e, thou have now before me set the man
Whom I most sought, to thee whom I will offe^
To appease Hectors ghost a sacrifice.
You widdowed Matrons who now mourn in tears,
And all you watery eyes surcease to weep.
Fathers that in this war have lost your sons,
And sons your fathers, by Achilles hand;
No more lament upon their funeral Arms,
But from this day rejoice: posterity
From age to age this to succession tell,
He falls by Troilus, by whom Hector f^ll.

Achi. Hectors sad fate betyde him, soldiers on*
Both brothers show like mercy, thy vain sound
That boasted lies now leuel'd with the ground.

Troilus is slain by him and the Mirmidons. Enter Thersites. There. Achilles!

Achi. What Is he? Thersites*

There. Thou art a coward.

Achi. Have I not saved thy life, and slain proud Troilus
By whom the Greeks lie pilde in breathless heaps?

There. Yes when he was out of breath so thou slewest He^to^
Girt with thy Mirmidons.

Achi. Dogged Thersites,
I Will cleave thee to thy Navel if thou op'st
Thy venomous Iawe^.

There. Do, do, good Dog-killer.

Achi. You slave.

There. I am out of breath now too, else bug-bate Greek
Thou durst not to have touched me.

Achilles beats him off, retreat sounded. Enter Agamem^on* Ajax, Ulysses,
etc. all the other but Paris. Agam* To whom do thou address thine Embasie?

Par. To Achilles.

Aga. And not the General? It concerns our place
To hear King Priams embasie.

Pa. Let me have passage to Achilles Tent,
There Agamemnon (if you please) may hear
What Priam sends to your great Champion.

Aga. Let it be so,

Ajax. The General wrongs that honor
We Princes in our love confer on him.
Had I the imperial mandat in my mouth,
I would not loose one jot of my command
For all the proud Achilles's on earth,
Take him at best he is but a fellow peer,
And should lift his head above the Clouds
I hold my self his equal.

Enter Achilles from his Tent. Achi. Vntuterd Ajax.

Aia. Who spoke that word?

Achi. 'Twas I Achilles, let the son of Priam
Be private with us.

Aga. It belongs to us
To be partakers of his Embasie.

Achi. Dismiss then our Inferiors, you Ulysses
Are welcome, Menelaus, Diomed.
Let Ajax stay without, and know his duty.

Exit. Ajax. Duty? Oh you gods!
Ha? in what Dialect spoke he that language
Which Greece yet never knew, we owe to him?
I Will after him and dragge him from his Tent,
And teach the insolent, manners: Give me way.
Ulysses, thou and all the world shall know,
That save the obedience that I owe the gods,
And duty to my father Telamon,
Ajax knows none, no not to Agamemnon:
For what he has of mee's my courtesy,
What he claims else, or the proud'st Greek that breaths,
I Will pay him in the poor'st and basest scorn
Contempt was ere expressed in.

Vlis. Ajax you are too bold with great Achilles,
You bear your self more equal then you ought,
With one so trophy'd.

Aia. Bold? oh my merits,
Are you so soon forgot? why King of Ithaca,
What has this Toy (above so talked of) done,
Saving slain Hector, which at best received
Was but scarce fairly, which the common tongues,
Voices, with base advantage.

Vlis. Yes, Prince Troilus
Surnamed the second Hector, lies imbak'd
In his cold blood, slain by Achilles hand:
The stream of glory now runs all toward him:
Achilles looks for it Ajax.

Aia. But when Achilles slumbred in his Tent,
Or waking with his Lute courted the air;
Then Ajax did not bear himself too bold
With this great Champion: when I saved our Fleet
From Hectors wildfire, I deserved some praise,
But then your tongues were mute.

Vlis. You in these times
Did not affect ostent, but still went on:
But Thetis son looks for a world of sound*
To spread his attributes.

Aia. The proud Achilles
Shall no^ outshine me long, in the next battle,
If to kill Trojans be to dim his praise,
I Will quench his luster by my bloody rays.

Enter Agamemnon, Achilles, Diomed, Menelaus and Paris, etc. Pa. Shall I
return that answer to King Priam?

Achi. Say in the morning we will visit him:
So bear our kind regreetes to Hec^ba.

Aia. But will Achilles trust himself with Priam,
Whose warlike sons were by his valor slain?

Achi. Priam is honorable, see here is his hand,
His Q^eene religious* and behold her name:
P^lixena divine, read here, her vows*
Honor, religions, and divinity,
All jointly promising Achilles safety:
Paris, you hear our answer, so return it.

Pa. We shall receive Achilles with all honor.

Ex^t. Mean. Were I Achilles and had slain great Hector*
With valiant Troilus, Priams best loved sons,
I for the brightest Lady in all Asia,
Would not so trust my person with the father.

Achi. I am resolved, Ulysses you once told me
Priam would sleep if Troilus once were slain*

Vlyss. And I dare gage my life, the reverent King
Intends no treason to Achilles person,
But merely by this honorable League,
To draw our warlike Champion from the field.

Achi. But we will deceive his hopes: f^are not great Kings,
When ^o my Tent I bring Polixena:
The sooner Troy lies level with the ground.
You understand me Lords; shall I entreat you
Associate me unto the sacred Temple
Of Di^ine Phoebus?

Aga. In me these Kings shall answer, we in peace
Will bring Achilles to A^olloes shrine,
Provided, Priam ^re we enter Troy,
Will give us hostage for our safe return.

Achi. My honored hand with his.

Exe^nt. Enter Paris and Hecuba. Hecu. Oh Paris, till Achilles lie as dead,
As did thy brother Hector at his feet,
His body hackt with as many wounds,
As was thy brother Troilus when he fell.
I neu^r, neu^r shall have peace with Heaven,
Or take thee for their brother, or my son.

Par. Mother I hate Achilles more then you;
But I have heard he is invulnerable:
His mother Thetis from the Oracle
Receiving answer, he should dye at Troy*
(Being yet a child,) and to prevent that fate,
She dipped him in the Sea, all save the heel:
These parts she drencht, remain impen^trable;
But what her dainty hand (forbore to drown)
As loath to feel the coldness of the wave,
That, and that only may be pierced with steel.
Now since I know his fellow Kings intend,
To be his guard to Islium: what is my rage?
Or this my weapon to destroy a Prince,
Whose fle^h no sword can bite off.

Hecu. Have I not heard thee Paris, praise thy self
For skill in Archery? have I not seen
A shaft sent level from thy constant hand,
Command the mark at pleasure? may not thou
With such an arrow, and the selfsame bow,
Wound proud Achilles in that vndrencht part,
And by his heel draw lines blood from his heart?

Par. Well thought on, the rare cunning of this hand*
None save the powers immortal can with stand:
When in the Temple he shall think to embrace
My sister Polixena. I Will strike him there.
The Greeks are entered Troy. Let Us fill the train
To avoid suspect, and now my shaft and bow,
Greece from my hand, rec^iue thine overthrow*

Enter at one door Priam, Hecuba, Paris, Aeneas, Antenor, Deiphobus, Hellena,
and Polixena. At the other, Agamemnon, Achilles, Menela^s, Ulysses, Diomed,
Thersites, and Ajax. They interchange embraces, Polixena is given to Achilles,
etc. Pri. Though the damage you have done to Troy,
Might cease our arms, and arm our brows with wrat^,
Yet with a smooth front, and heart vnseigned,
Now bid Achilles welcome; welcome all
Before these Kings, and in the sight of Hellen,
The dearest of my daughters Polixen
I tender thee: on to Apolloes shrine,
The flamin stays: these nuptial rights once past,
You of our best varieties shall taste.

Exeunt* Paris fetches his Bow and arrows. Par. My bow! now thou great god of
Archery,
The Patron of our action and our vows,
Direct my shaft to wound bright Thetis son,
And let it not offend thy deity,
That in thy Temple I exhaust his blood,
Without respect of place, revenge seems good.

Exit. A great cry within. Enter Paris: Par. It Is done, Achilles bleedes,
immortal powers
Clap hands, and smile to see the Greek fall dead,
By whom the valiant Hectors blood was shed.

Enter all the Trojans, and the Greeks bringing in Achilles with an arrow
through his h^ele. Aga. Priam, thou have dishonourably broake
The Laws of Arms.

Pri. By all the gods I vow,
I was a stranger to this horrid act:
It never came from Priam.

Vlyss. Call for your Surgeon then to stop his wound.

Mean. For if he dye, it will be registered
For ever to thy shame.

Pri. A Surgeon there.

Achi. It is in vain for live, that god of Physic^e
We Grecians honor in a Serpents shape;
He could not stanch my blood: know fellow Kings
My mother Thetis by whose heavenly wisdom,
My other parts were made invulnerable.
Could not of all the gods obtain that grace,
But that my blood, vented as now it is,
The wound should be incureable: what Coward
That durst not look Achiles in the face,
Has found my lives blood in this speeding place?

Par. 'Twas I, 'twas Paris.

Ajax. 'Twas a milke-sop then.

Diom. A Traitor to all Valor.

Par. Did not this bleeding Greek kill valiaht Hector*
Incompast with his Guard of Mermidons?

Pri. Degenerate Paris, not old Priams son,
Thou never took'st thy treacherous blood from me*

Aia. How cheeres Achiles, though thy too much pride
Which held the heart of Ajax from thy love,
He Will be the foremost to revenge thy death.

Achil. Gramercy noble Ajax, Agame^^non,
Ulysses, Diomed, I feel my ^^rength
Begins to fail, let me have burial,
And then to Arms, revenge Achilles death:
Or if proud Troy remain i^uincible,
To Lycomedes send to youthful Pirhus,
My son begot on bright Dedamia;
And let him force his vengeance through the hearts
Of these, by whom his father was betrayed.
I faint, may every drop of blood I shed,
Exhald by Phoebus, pu^rifie the air,
That every soul in Asia that draws breath,
May poisoned dye for great Achilles death.

Aga. He Is dead, the pride of all our Grecian army*

Vlyss. Will Priam let us bear his body hence?

Par. Yes, and not drag it 'bout the walls of Troy.
As he did Hectors basely.

Pri. Take it, withal truce, time to bury it.

Aga. Come Princes, on your shoulders bear him then,
Brauest of soldiers, and the best of men.

They bear him off. And to Priam enter Aeneas. Aene. Where Is mighty Priam?

Pri. What Is the news Aeneas?

Aene. Such as will make your highness doff your age
And be as youthful spirited as the Spring:
Penthisilea Queen of Amazons,
With mighty troops of Virgin warriers,
Gallant Veragoes, for the love of Hector,
And to revenge his death, are entered Troy.
May it please you, to receive the Scitbean Queen.

Pri. What Troy can yield, or Priam can express,
The Amazonian Princess shall partake:
Come Hecuba, and Ladies, let us prepare,
To bid her friendly welcome to this war.

Explicit Actus quartus.
Actus Quintus Scoena prima.
Enter Thersites with Soldiers, bringing in a table, with chayres and stools
placed about it. There. Come, come, spread, spread, up with the pulpets straight,
Seats for the Judges, all the Kings of Greece.
Why when you lazy drudges? Is this place
For a whole Jury royal? where is the Armor,
The prize for which the crafty Fex Ulysses,
And mad Bull Ajax, must this day contend?
What, is all ready? rare world* when insteade
Of smooth tong'd Lawyers, Soldiers now must plead.

Loud Music. Enter all the Kings of Greece, the Armor of Achilles, borne
betwixt Ulysses and Ajax, and placed upon the table, the Princes seat
themselves, a chair is placed as either end of the Stage, the one for Ajax,
the other for* ^lysses* Aga. This Sessions valiant Duke of S^lamine,
And King of Ithaca was called for you:
Since great Achilles armor is the prise,
Due to the worthier, here before these Kings,
And in the face of all the multitude,
You are appointed for your several pleaes,
That prince who to these arms can prove most right,
Shall wear his purchase in the armies sight.

Aia. If to the worthiest they belong to me:
Could you select amongst all this throng of Princes,
None worthier then Ulysses, to contend
With Ajax? and in view of all our Navy,
Of all these tall ships, gilt with Hectors flames*
Which when Ulysses fled into his tent,
I, I exti^guisht, these twelve hundred ships
I saved at once, deserved Achilles arms,
Laertes son may think it grace enough,
That though he miss his aim, he may be said
To have strove with Ajax: Ajax who excels
As much in arms, as he in eloquence.
My hands perform more then his tongue can speak,
Act more then he can talk: were I less valiant,
And had but half my vigor (like him) weak,
My royal birth would for this armor speak.
Duke Telamon, that in the Argoe sailed
To Calchos: and in Isliums second sack,
First reared Alcides colors on the Walls
My father was: His father Eacus,
On of the three that judge infernal souls;
And Eacus was son to Jupiter.
Thus am I third from Jove; besides Achilles
By marriage was my brother, and I crave,
Since he is dead my brothers arms to have.
What has Ulysses with our Kin to do?
Being a stranger, not of Peleus blood:
Grave Heroes, if not honor, prize my merit,
I plead both worth and blood, these arms to inherit.

Mean. Bele^ue me, two sound pleas on Ajax part,
I fear the prize will be conferred on him.

Dio. His arguments are maxims, and sound proofs
To win him way, into the soldiers hearts.

Agam. Let him proceed.

Aia Because I hasted to the siege of Troy,
When he feigned madness, must he wear these arms?
When in the Phalanx, with old Nestor charging,
Thou at the name of Hector fledst the field,
And left the good old man incompast round,
Calling aloud Ulysses, Ulysses ^tay,
The more he cried the more thou made thy way*
Prince Diomed you saw it, and vpbrayded
This Ithacans base flight, but see Heavens Justice.
Old Nestor escaped, great Hector was not there;
But meets Ulysses, as he fled from Hector,
He that but late denide help, now wants help,
For at the sight of Hector down he falls,
And cries aloud for aid, I came, and saw thee
Quaking with terror under Hectors arm,
The pondrous blow I took upon my Targe,
And as the least of all my noble deeds,
Saved these faint limbs from slaughter, which now sue,
To don these glorious arms, nor do I blame thee
Forfearing Hector: what is he of Greece
That saving Ajax, quakt not at his name?
Yet did I meet that Hector guil'd in blood
Of Grecian Princes, fought with him so long,
Till all the host deaft with our horrid strokes,
Begirt us with amazement: will thou know
My honor in this combat? it was this,
I was not conquered: if thou still contendest?
Imagine but that field, the Time, the foes,
Hector alive, thee quaking at his feet,
And Ajax interposing his broad shield
'Twixt death and thee, and thou the arms must yield.

Diom. What can the wise Ulysses, say to this?
Ajax preuailes much with the multitude,
The general murmur does accord with him.

Men. I ever thought the son of Telamon
Did better merit the Achillean Arms
Then the Dulichian King.

Agam. Forbear to censure.
Till both be fully heard.

Ajax. Me thinks grave Heroes, you should seek an Ajax
To wear these Arms, not let these Arms be sought
By Ajax: what has slye Ulysses done
To counteruaile my acts? killed unarmed Rhesus,
And set on sleepie Dolon in the night,
Stolen the Palladium from the Trojan Fane.
Oh brave exploits; nor have thou these performed
Without the help of warlike Diomed:
So you betwixt you should divide these spoils.
Alas thou know not what thou seekst, fond man,
Thou that fightst all by craft and in the night
The radiant splendour of this burnisht Helm
Shining in darkness, as the Sun by day,
Thy theeuish spoils and ambush would betray.
Thy politic head's too weak to bear this caske,
This massy Helm; thou can not mount his Spear,
His warlike shield that bears the world engraven
Will tire thine arm, fool thou do ask a Spear,
A shield a caske, thou haft not strength to wear.
Now if these Kings, or the vain peoples error
So far should err from truth to give them thee,
Twould be a mea nes to make thee sooner dye:
The weight would lagge thee that art wont to fly:
Thou haft a shield vnscar'd, my seuen-fold Targe
With thousand gashes peece-meald from mine arm,
And none but that would fit me: To conclude,
Go bear these Arms for which we two contend
Into the mid-ranks of our enemies,
And bid us fetch them thence, and he to wear them
By whom this royal Armor can be won,
I had rather fight then talk, so I have done.

A loud shout within crying Ajax, Ajax: Vlis. If with your prayers oh Grecian
Kings, my vows
Might have prevailed with Heaven, there had bin then
No such contention, thou had kept thine Arms,
And we Achilies thee: But since the Fates
Have taken him from us, who has now more right
To claim these Arms he dead, then he that gave them
Unto Achilles living? nor great Princes,
Let that smooth eloquence, yon fellow scorns,
(If it be any) b^e rejected now,
And hurt his master, which so many times
Has profited whole Greece, if we plead blood
Which is not ours, but all our Ancestors.
Laertes was my father, his Arcesius,
His Jove, from whom I am third: beside I claim
A second godhead by my mothers name.
What do we talk of birth? If birth should bear them,
His father being nearer Jove then he
Should wear this honor, or if next of blood,
A^hilles father Peleus should enjoy them,
Or his son Pirhus; but we plead not kindred,
Or near propinquity: let* alliance rest,
His be the Armor that deserves it best.
Achilles mother Thetis being foretold
Her son should die at Troy, concealed him from us
In habit of a Lady, to this siege
I brought him, therefore challenge all his deeds
As by Ulysses done: 'Twas I sacked Thebes,
Chris^^s, and Scylla, with Lernessus walls,
I Troilus and renowned Hector slew:
First with this Helmet I adorned his head,
He gave it living, who demands it dead?

Dio. It Is true, for like a Peddler being disguised,
And coming where Achilles spent his youth
In womanish habit, the young Ladies they
Look on his Glasses, Jewels and fine toys:
He had a Bow too much Achilles drew,
So by his strength the Ithacan him knew.
Had Ajax gone, Achilles then had stay*
Hector still lived, our ransack't Tents to invade:
What can thou do but barely fight? no more;
I can both fight and counsel, I direct
The manner of our battles, and propose
For victual and munition, to supply
The universal host, cheer up the soldiers
To endure a tedious siege, when all the Army
Cried let us away for Greece, and raised their Tents.
Ajax amongst the foremost had trust up
His bag and baggage: when I rated him,
And them, and all, and by my Oratory
Persuaded their retreat: What Greece has won
From Troy since then, is by Ulysses done.
Behold my wounds oh Grecians, and judge you
If they be cowards marks they are in my breast:
Let boasting Ajax show such noble skarres.
These Grecian Heroes took I in your wars.
I grant he fought with Hector, 'twas well done,
Where thou deseru'st well I will give thee due,
But what was the success of that great day?
Hector of Troy unwounded went away.

Men. Now sure the prise will to Ulysses fall,
The murmuring soldiers mutter his deserts,
Preferring him fore Ajax: hear the rest.

Vlis. But oh Achilles, when I view these Arms,
I cannot but lament thine obsequies:
Thou wall of Greece, when thou wast basely slain
I took thee on my soldiers, and from Troy
Bore thee then a^m'd in the abillements
I once more seek to bear, behold that shield*
It Is a description Cosmograph^call
Ofall the Earth, the Air, the Sea and Heaven*
What are the Hyades? or grim Orion;
He p^eads, or what is Arcton? thy rude hand
Would lift a shield, thou can not under stand:
To omit my deeds of Arms, which all these know
Better then I can speak. When in the night
I venter'd through Troyes gates, and from the Temple
Raped the Palladium, then I conquered Troy,
Troy whilst that stood could never be subdued,
In that I brought away their gods, their honors,
Troyes ruin and the triumphs of whole Greece.
What has blunt Ajax done to conteruaile
This one of mine? He did with Hector fight,
I ten years war have ended in one night.
What Ajax did was but by my direction,
My counsel fought in him, and all his honors
(If they be any,) he may thank me for
What he has done, was since his flight I stayed,
I therefore claim these Arms: so I have said.

A shout within Ulysses, Ulysses. The Princes rise. Agam. Such is the clamor
of the multitude,
And such Ulysses are your great deserts,
That those rich Arms are thine, the prize enjoy

Vl^s. To the defense of Greece and sack of Troy.

Dio. Come Princes, now this striffe is well determined.

Men. To see how eloqu^nce the people charms,
Ulysses by his tongue has gained these Arms.

Agam. Counsel preuailes above strength, Heralds proclaim
Through the whole Camp Ulysses glorious name.

Exeunt. The Arms borne in triumph before Ulysses* Ajax. What dream'st thou
Ajax?
Or is this object real that I see,
Which topsiturnes my brain, base Ithaca
To sway desert thus: Oh that such rich Troophies
Should cloth a cowards back, nor is it strange;
I Will go turn coward too, and henceforth plot,
Turn politicians all, all politicians.
A rush for valor, valor? this is the difference
*Twixt the bold warrier, and the cunning states*man,
The first seeks honor, and the last his health:
The valiant hoord the knocks, the wise the wealth.
It was a gallant Armor, Ajax limbs
Would have become it bravely; the disgrace
Of loosing such an Armor by contention,
Will live to all posterity, and the shame
In Stigian Lethe drown great Ajax name.
Oh that I had here my base opposite,
In the Achi^lean Armor briskly clad,
Vulcan that wrought it out of gadds of Steel
With his Ciclopian hammers, never made
Such noise upon his Anvile forging it,
Then these my armed fists in Ulysses wrack,
To mould it new upon the cowards back.

Enter Thersites. There. Why how now mad Greek?

Aia. And art thou come Ulysses? thus, and thus
I Will hammer on thy proof steeled Burganet.

Aia. Hold Ajax, hold, the devil take thee, hold;
I am Thersites, hell rot thy fingers off.

Aia. But art not thou Ulysses?

There: No I tell thee.

Aia. And is not thine head armed?

There. Hells plagues confound thee, no; thou think thou
Have Menelaus head in hand, I am Thersites.

Aia. Thersites? Can thou rail?

There. Oh yes, yes; better then fight.

Aia. And curse?

There. Better then either: ^arely.

Aia. And spit thy venom in the face of Greece?

There. Admirably.

Aia. Do, do, let us hear, ^prothee for heavens sake do*

There. With whom shall I begin?

Aia. Begin with the head.

There. Then have at thee Menelaus, thou art a king and a --
No more, bu^ if on any, rail on me.
Desert should still be snarl'd at, vice p^sse free.

There. Who thou the son of Telamon, thou art a fool,
An Ass, a very block. What make thou here at
Troy to aid a Cuckold, being a Bachelour?
Paris has stolen no wife of thine: if Ajax
Had been ought but the worst of these, he might
Have kept his Country, solac'd his father, and
Comforted his mother: what thanks have thou
For spending thy means, hazarding thy soldiers?
Wasting thy youth, loosing thy blood,
Indangering thy life? and all for a --

Ajax. Peace.

There. Yes peace for shame,
But what thanks have thou for all thy travail?
Ulysses has the armor, and what art thou now
Reckoned? a good moyle, a horse that knows
Not his own strength, an Ass fit for service,
And good for burdens, to carry gold, and to
Feed on thistles: farewell Coxe-combe. I shall be
Held to be a Cock of the same dunghill,
For bearing thee company so long,
I Will to Ulysses.

Aia. Base slave, thou art for Cowards, not for men
I Will stown'd thee if thou come not back again:
This vantage have the valiant of the base,
Death, which they coldly fear, we boldly embrace.
Help me to rail on them too, or thou dyest.

There. Do It then, whilst it is hot.

Aia. What Is Agamemnon our great General?

There. A blind Justice, and I would he had kissed
Fortunes blind cheeks, when he could not see
To do thee Justice.

Aia. Well, and what is Menelaus?

There. A King and a Cuckold, and a horne*plague
Consume him.

Aia. Amen. What Is Diomed? he sat on the bench too.

There. A very bench-whistler* and loves Cresida.
Hell and confusion swallow him.

Aia. Amen. Amongst these what is Th^^sites?

There. A Rogue, a railing Rogue, a Cu^r, a barking
Dog, the Pox take me else.

Aia. Amen. But what is Ulysses my base adversary?

There. A damned pollitician, Scilla and Charibdis swallow him*

Aia. And greedily devour him.

There. And utterly consume him*

Aia. And eat up his posterity.

There. And rot out his memory:

Aia. In endless infamy.

There. And everlasting obliquie.

Both. Amen.

Aia. Enough, no more: shall he the Arms ini^^.
And we the shame? away Thersites, fly,
Our prayers now said, we must prepare to dye.

There. Dye, and with them be damned.

Exit. Enter over the Stage all the Grecian Princes, courting and applauding
Ulysses, not minding Ajax. Aia. Not look on Ajax? Ajax Telamon,
He that at once saved all your ships from fire,
Not look on me? ha? are these hands? this sword?
Which made the fame of Troy great Hector shrink
Below the ruins of an abject scorn?
Slighted? so slighted? what base thing am I,
To c^eepe ^o so dull Greek, whom fame or blood
Has rair'd one step above? Jove, see this;
And laugh old Grand-sir: Ha, ha, ha, by hell
I Will shake thy Kingdom for it: not look on Ajax?
The triple headed-dog, the whippes of Steel,
The ravenous Vulture, and the restless stone
Are all mere fables; here is a trusty sword,
It Is mine, mine own, who claims this from me? ha?
Cowards and shallow witted fools have slept
Amidst an armed troop safe and secure
Under this guard: nay Agamemnon too.
But see, see from yon Sea, a shoale of sands
Come rolling on, trick't up in brisled finnes
Of Porposses and Dog-fish ho my sword,
I will encounter them, they come from Greece,
And bring a poisonous breath from Ithaca
Tempered with false Ulysses gall, ^oh, ^oh;
It stinks of's wifes chaste vrinall, look, look
By yonder wood, how s^iely in the skirts
March policy and the devil, on, I fear you not:
Dare you not yet? not one to fight with me:
Who then? what is he must cope with Ajax?
Echo. Ajax?

Aia. Well said old boy, wa'st Nestor my brave Lad?
I Will doot, I Will doot, come my fine cutting blade,
Make me immortal: lively fountain sprout,
Sprout out, yet with more life, brave glorious stream
Grow to a Tide, and sink the Grecian fleet
In seas of Ajax blood: so ho, so ho.
Lure back my soul again, which in amaze
Gropes for a perch to rest on: Heart, great heart
Swell bigger yet and spl^t, know gods, know men,
Furies, enraged Spirits, Tortures all,
Ajax by none could but by Ajax fall.

He kills himself. Enter on the one part Agamemnon, Ulysses, Menelaus, Diomed,
with the body of Hector borne by Grecian soldiers: On the other part, Priam,
Paris, Deiphebus, Aeneas, Anthenor, with the body of Achilles borne by Trojan
soldiers, they interchange them, and so with traling the Colors on both sides
depart* Thersites only stays behind and concludes. The Epilogue.
There. A sweet exchange of Treasure, term't I may*
Even earth for ashes, and mere dust for clay:
Let Ajax kill himself, and say 'twas brave
Hector, a worthy Call, yet could not save
Poor fool his Coxcombe: Achilles bear him hye,
And Troilus boldly, all these brave ones dye.
Ha, ha, judge you; Is it not better far
To keep our selves in breath, and linger war:
Had all these fought as I Have done, such my care
Has been on both sides, that presume I dare,
These had with thousands more suruiu'd: Judge th'hoast,
I shed no blood, no blood at all have lost:
They shall not see young Pirhus, nor the Queen
Penthiselea, which had they but been
As wise as I, they might: nor Sinon, he
Famous of all men, to be most like me.
Nor after these, Orestes, and his mother
Pillades Egistus with a many other
Our second part does promise: These if I fail,
As I on them; you on Thersites rail.

Explicit Actus Quintus.
FJNJS.
TAM ROBVR ^ TAM ROBOR. NI-COLIS ARBOR IOVIS. 1610.



LONDON. Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1632.

THE Second Part of the Iron Age Which contains the death of Penthesilea,
Paris Priam, and Hecuba: The burning of Troy: The deaths of Agamemnon,
Menelaus, Clitemnestra, Hellena, Orestes, Egistus, Pillades, King Diomed,
Pyrhus, Cethus, Synon, Thersites, etc. Written by THOMAS HEYWOOD.

Aut prodesse solent aut Delectare.

Printed at London by Nicholas Oaks. 1632.

Drammatis personae.
New persons not presented in the former part of this History.
Pyrhus the son of Achilles, surnamed Neoptolemus. Synon a perin^ed Greek,
by whose tears Troy was set on fire. Chorebus a Prince, who came to the wars
for the love of Cassandra. Laocoon, a priest of Apollo. Polites, a young son
of King Priam, and Queen Hecuba. A Trojan Citizen. and his wife. A second
Trojan. Soldiers of Greece. Soldiers of Troy. The Ghost of Hector. A Lord of
Mycena. A Guard. Penthesilea Queen of the Amazons, with her train of
Viragoes. Cethus son to King Naulus, and brother of Palamides. Pillades the
friend of Orestes. Orestes son to King Agamemnon, and his Queen
Clitemnestra. Electra, sister to Orestes. Hermione daughter to King Menelaus
and Q. Hellen. Clitemnestra wife and Queen to Agamemnon. Eg^stus a favorite to
Queen Clitemnestra. The Priest of Apollo* Attendants.
To the Reader.
COurteous Reader: I commend unto thee an entire History, from Jupiter and
Saturn, to the v^ter subversion of Troy* with a faithful account of the
Deaths of all these Princes of Greece, who had hand in the Fate thereof,
(Ulysses only excepted, to whom belongs a further History.) Read freely, and
censure favorably. These Ages have been long since Writ, and suited with the
Time then: I know not how they may beereceiued in this Age, where nothing but
Satirica Dictaeria, and Comica Scommata are now inrequest: For mine own part,
I never affected either* when they stretched to the abuse of any person
public, or private. If the three former Ages (now out of Print,) be added to
these (as I am promised) to make up an handsome Volumne; I purpose (Deo
Assistente,) to illustrate the whole Work, with an Explanation of all he
difficulties, and an Historical Comment of every hard name, which may appear
obscure or intricate to such as are not frequent in Poetry: Which (as the rest)
I shall freely deuote to thy favorable perusal, in this as all the rest
industrious to thy pleasure and profit:

Thomas Heywood

Tomy Worthy and much Respected Friend, Mr. Thomas Mannering Esquire.
Worthy Sir,
ANd my much respected Friend: The Impression of your Love, after so many
years acknowledgment, inforceth me that I cannot choose, but in my best
recollection, to number you in the File and List of my best and cho ycest
Wellwishers. True it is, that my unable merit has ever come much short of your
ample acknowledgement: Howsoe^er, though you be now absent in the Country,
upon a necessary retyrement; yet let this witness in my behalf, that you are
not altogether unremembered in the City: Nor take it unkindly at my hands that
I hauereserued your name to the Catastrophe and conclusion of this Work: Since
being Scoena nouissima, It must be consequently the fresher in memory; as you
have had ever a charitable and indulgent censure of such poor pieces of mine,
as have come accedentally unto your view. So I entreat you now, (as one better
able to judge, then I to determine) to receive into your favorable patronage,
this second part of the Iron Age. I much deceive my self, if J heard you not
once commend it, when you saw it Acted; if you persist in the same opinion,
when you shall spare some sorted hours to hear it read, in your pains, I
shall hold my self much pleased: over remaining

Yours, not to be changed: Thomas Heywood.

The second Part of the IRON AGE: With the Destruction of TROY.
Enter Agamemnon, Menelaus, Ulysses, Diomed, Thersites. Drum, Colors,
Soldiers, etc. Agamemnon. YOu Terrors of the Asian Monarchy,
And Europes glory: Warlike Lords of Greece:
Although the great Prince of the Mirmidons,
And arme-strong Ajax, our best Champions,
Be by the gods bereft us: yet now comes
A Phoenix out of their cold ashes rising:
Pyrhus, surnamed Neoptolemus:
On whom for his deceased fathers sake,
We must bestow some honors. Menelaus,
Ulysses, Diomed, give the Prince meeting,
And be his conduct to the General.

A flourish. Enter the Kings before named, bringing in Pyrhus, Synon, with
attendants. Aga. Pyrhus kneel down, we girt thee with this sword,
It was thy fathers. In his warlike hand
It has cleft Trojans to the navel down,
Pared heads off faster then the harvest Sith
Does the thin stalks, or bending ears of grain:
Wear it, and draw it to revenge his death.
Princes, perform your several ceremonies.

Di^. These golden spurs I fasten to thine heels,
The same thy warlike father won in field,
When Hector tide with thonges to his steeds fet-locks,
Was drag d about the high built walls of Troy.

Vlis. This Armor, and this plumed Burgonet,
In which thy father, like a rampier'd wall,
Opposde the fury of his enemies,
(By general consent of all these Princes
Attributed to me) lo I surrender
To youthful Neoptolemus, wear it Prince,
Not all the world yeeldes a more strong defense.

Mean. Achilles Tent, his Treasure, and his jewels,
We have reserved, enjoy them noble Pyrhus;
And lastly his strong guard of Mirmidons,
And with the honor he with these have won,
His Sword, Spurs, Armor, Guard, Pauileon,
Be by his valiant son much dignified.

Pyr. Before I touch the handle of his sword,
Or to my Knightly spurs direct my eyes,
Lace this rich Armor to my youthful sides,
Or roof mine head within this warlike Tent,
Make proof of this his plumed Burgonet,
Or take on me the leading of his Guard:
Witness you Grecian Princes, what I vow:
By Saturnes son, the sire of Aeacus,
Begot on fair Europa; by their issue,
The second Judge, placed on the infernal bench
I will descend to Peleus, and from him,
Even to my natural father, with whose honors
I join my mother Deidamiaes
And in my venge^ull oath include them all,
Till Priam be compelled to shut his Gates
For want of men: ^le be as merci^esse
As untamed Lions, and the flesh-fed Bears,
Blood shall look brighter in young Pyrhus eyes
Then disso^u^d Crystal, till o^d Priams hairs
Be died in goare: till Hecub's ^euerent locks
Be gu^'d in slaughter; all their son^es and daughters,
Subjects, and City quite confused in ruin,
Bow to our merciles^e fury: I Will not leave
This black and fatal siege; and this I ^weare
As I am Prince, and great Achille^ heir.

Aga. Even in thy looks I read the sack of Troy,
And ^riams Tragedy: welcome sweet Pyrhus,
And welcome you his warlike followers.

Syn. where be these Trojans? I would feign behold
Their winged battalions grapple? I would see
The battered center fiye about their ears
In clouds of dust: I would have horses hoofes
Beat thunder out of earth: the chariot Trees
I would see drowned in blood, Scamander plains
Ore-spread with intrailes baked in blood and dust:
With terror I would have this day as black,
As when Hyperion leaping from his Sphere,
Cast ugly darkness from his Chariot wheels,
And in this veiled confusion the faint Trojans
Beat back into the Yowne: I Would see their Gates
Entered, and fire by their high Battlements
Climing toward heaven: the pauement of th'streets
I Would see pau'd ore with faces: infants tossed
On Lances points: big-bellied Ladies flung
From out their casements: I Would have all their souls
Set upon wings, and Troy, no Troy, but fire,
As if ten thousand Comets joined in one,
To close the world in red confusion.

Py. Well spoke bold Synon; and my Lords of Greece,
This fellow boasts no more then with his sword,
He will adventure for, and should that ^ayle,
He Will set his brain to work. I tell you Princes,
My Grandsire Lycomedes has made proof
Of Synons policies, state-quaking proiects
Are hand-maides to his brain; and he has spirit
To drive his plots even to the door of Death,
With rare effects, and then not all the world
Affoords a villain more incomparable,
Then Synon my attendant. Warlike Princes,
I speak this to his praise: and I profess
My self as stern, bloody, and merciless.

There. I have not heard a brauer Character
Given to a Greek: and had he but my railing*
He were a man complete.

Syn. Sure there is something
Above a common man in yon same fellow,
Whom nature has so marked, and were his mind
As crooked as his body, he were one
I could be much in love with.

There. He has a feature
That I could court, nay will: I would not loose
His friendship and acquaintance for the world.
Me thinks you are a comely Gentleman.

Syn. I ever held my self so: and mine eye
Gives you no less: of all the Grecians here
Thou haft a face like mine, that fears no weather*
A shape that war it self cannot deforme:
I best love such complexions.

There. By the gods
We have two meeting souls: be my sweet Vrchin*

Syn. I will,
An thou shall be mine ugly Toade.

There. A match: be we hence forth brothers and friends.

Syn. Embrace then friend and brother: my dear Toade*

There. My amiable Vrchin.

Pyr. I long for work, will not these Trojans come,
To welcome Pyrhus, great Achilles son?

Vlyss. Their drums proclayme them ready for the field.

Enter Priam, Paris, Penthesilea, and her train o^ Viragoes, Aeneas, Chorebus,
Laocoon, Anthenor, etc. Aga. Perhaps King Priam has not yet related
The news of Neoptolemus arrive,
That he presumes thus, weakened as he is,
To open his Gates, and meet us in the field.

Pyr. It Is like he has, because for want of men
He brings a troop of Women to the field:
Most sure he thinks, we (like our warlike father)
Will be ensnared with beauty: Priam no,
We for his death, are sworn vain beauties foe.

Penth. Artthou Achilles son, beneath whose hand
Assisted by his bloody Mirmidons,
The valiant Hector fell?

Pyr. Woman I am.

Penth. Thou should be then a Coward.

Pyr. How?

Penth. Even so:
Thy father was a foe dishonorable*
And so the world reputes him.

Pyr. By all the gods --

Pent. Swear not, for ere the closure of the battle,
If both the Generals please, with my good sword,
In single combat I Will make good my word.

Pyr. O that thou were a man! but women's tongues
Are priuiledg'd: come Priam, all his sons,
The whole remain of fifty, I Will make good
My fathers honor against sufficient odds.
But for these scoulds, we leave them to their sex*
What make they amongst ^ouldiers.

Penth. Scorn not prou^ Pyrhus
Our presence in the field; I tell thee Prince,
I am a Queen, the Queen of Amazons,
A warlike Nation disciplined in Arms.

Pyr. Are you those Harlots famous through the wo^ld,
That have usurped a Kingdom to your selaes,
And pent your sweet hearts in a barren isle,
Where your adulterate sportes are exercised.

Pent. Curb thy irregular tongue: we are those women
That practice arms, by which we purchase fame.
All the year long, only three months excepted,
Those wherein Phoebus drives his Chariot,
In height of splendour through the burning Cancer,
The fiery Lion, and the Virgins sign:
Then we forsake our Sunburned Continent,
And in a cooler clime, sport with our men,
And then return* if we have issue male,
We nurse them up, then send them to their Fathers.
If females, we then keep them, and with irons
Their right paps we sear off, with better ease
To couch their spears, and practice feats of arms.
We are those women, who expelled our Land
By Aegypts Tyrant: Conquered Asia,
Egypt and Cappadocia: these two Ladies
Descend from Men^lippe and Hyppolita,
Who in Antiopes reign* fou^ht hand to hand
With Hercules and Theseus; we are those
That came for love of hector to the field,
And (being murdered) to revenge his death.

Py. Then welcome Amazonians, as I live
I love you though I hate you: but beware,
Hate will out-way my love, and i will not spare
Your ^usl ind squadrons: for my fathers fall,
Trojans, and Amazonians perish all.

Ex^unt. Alarm. Enter Pyrhus and Penthesilea. Py. Now Queen of Amazons, by
the strong spirit
Achilles left his son, I let thee know
My father was an honorable Foe.

Pent. Defiance Pyrhus, i will to death proclaim,
Hector was by Achilles basely slain:
And on his sons head, with my keen edged sword,
And th^^dring strokes, I wll make good my word.

Alarm. They are both wounded, and divided by the two armies, who confusedly
come betwixt them: to Pyrhus enter Agamemnon, Ulysses, and Menelaus. Vlis.
What? wounded noble Pirhus?

Pyr. Wounded? no,
I have not met one that can raze the skin
Of great Achilles son.

Aga. Yet blood drops from your arm.

Pyr. Not possible!
It Is sure the blood of some slain enemy.
Come lets us break into the battles center,
And to it pel mel.

Mean. But Neoptolemus,
We prise thy safety more then all advantage:
Retire thy self to have thy wounds bound up,

Pyr. Cowards fear death,
I Will venge my blood, though with the loss of breath.
Alarm. Enter Paris. Art thou a madman fellow, that aduenturest
So near the blood of Neoptolemus,
Whose smallest drop must cost a Trojans life.

Par. Art thou the bleeding ^s^ue of that Greek?
I, in revenge of noble Hectors death,
Slew in Apolloes Temple.

Pyr. Art thou then
That coward and effeminate Trojan boy.

Pa. Arm wounded Greek, I slew the false Achilles,
An act which I am proud of.

Aga. Fall on the murderer,
And flake him smaller then the Lybean sand.

Pyr. If any but my self offer one blow,
I Will on the Trojans party oppose him.
Come Paris, though against the odds of breath,
Achilles wounded son, will venge his death.

Paris is slain by Pyrhus. A retreat sounded. Enter then King Diomed, and
Synon. Dio. Why sound the Trojans this retreat?

Syn Paris is ^^ayne, and Penthisilea
Wounded by Pyrhus.

Dio. Come then Synon
Go with me to my Tent, this night we will revel
With beauteous Cressida.

Syn. Not I, I hate all women, painted beauty
And I am opposites: I love thee less
Because thou doat'st on Trojan Cressida.

Dio. She Is worthy of our love: I tell thee Synon,
She is both constant, wise, and beautiful.

Syn. She Is neither constant, wise, nor beautiful,
I Will prove it Diomed: four Elements
Meet in the structure of that Cressida,
Of which there is not one pure: she is compact
Merely of blood, of bones and rotten flesh,
Which makes her Leaprous, where the Sun exhales
The moist complexion, it does putrify
The region of the air: there is then another,
Sometimes the Sun sits muffled in his Cave,
Whilst from the Clouds fly hideous showers of rain,
Which sweepes the earths corruption into Brooks,
Brooks into rivers, Rivers send their tribute,
As they receive it to their Sovereign
The seething Ocean: Thus Earth, Air, and Water,
Are all infected, she then framed of these,
Can she be beautefull? No Diomed,
If they seem fair, they have the help of Art,
By nature they are ugly.

Dio. Leave this detraction.

Syn. Now for this Cressids wisdom, is she wise,
Who would forsake her birthright, her b^aue friend,
The constant Troylus, for King Diomed;
To trust the faith of Greeks, and to love thee
That art to Troy a professed enemy?

Dio. Ca^^t thou disprove her constancy?

Syn. I can.
Never was woman constant to one man:
For proof, do thou but put into one scale
A feather, in the other Cressids truth,
The feather shall down weigh it: Diomed
Will thou believe me, if I win not Cressid
To be my sweet heart: yet have no such face,
No such proportion, to bewitch a Lady*
I never practiced court-ship, but am blunt;
Nor can I file my tongue: yet if I win not
The most chaste woman, I will cut it out.
Shall I make proof with her?

Enter Cressida. Dio. There she comes,
Affront her Synon, I Will withdraw unseen*

Syn. A gallant Lady, who but such a villain*
As Synon would betray her: but my vow
Is past, for she is a Trojan. Cressida,
You are well incountred: whether away sweet Lady?

Cres. To meet with Kingly Diomed, and with kisses
Conduct him to his Tent.

Syn. It Is kindly done:
You love King Diomed then?

Cres. As mine own life.

Syn. What see thou in him that is worth thy love*

Cres. He Is of a fair and comely personage.

Syn. Personage? ha, ha.
I prithee look on me* and view me well,
And thou will find some difference.

Cres. True, more odds
Twixt him and thee, then betwixt Mercury
And limping V^^can.

Syn. Yetas fair a blowse
As you, sweet Lady, wedded with that Smith*
And bedded too, a black complexion
Is always precious in a woman's eye:
Leave Diomed, and love me Cressida.

Cres. Thee.

Syn. Me.

Cres. Deformity forbear, I will to Diomed
Make known thine insolence.

Syn. I care not, for I, not desire to live,
If not beloved of Cressid: tell the King
If he stood by, I would not spare a word.
For thine own part, rare goddess, I adore thee,
And owe thee divine reverence: Diomed
Indeed's Aetolians King, and has a Queen.

Cres. A Queen?

Syn. A Queen, that shall hereafter question thee:
Or can thou think he loves thee really
Being a Trojan, but for present use:
Can Greeks love Trojans, are they not all sworn
To do them outrage?

Cres. How can thou then love me?

Syn. I am a pollitician, oaths with me
Are but the tools I work with, I may break
An oath by my profession. Hear me further,
Think thou King Diomed, forgets thy breach
Of love with Troylus? Ey or that he hopes
Thou can be constant to a second friend,
That wast so false unto thy first beloved.

Cres. Syn^n thou art deceived `thou know I never
Had left Prince Troylus, but by the command
Of my old father Calchas.

Syn. Then love Diomed;
Yes, do so still, but Cressid mark the end*
If ever he transport thee to Ae^olia,
His Queen will bid thee welcome with a vengance:
Have thou more eyes then these? she will fall to work*
For such an other Vixen thou nere knew*
Come Cressida be wise.

Cres. What shall I do?

Syn. Love me, love Synon.

Cres. Synon loves not me*

Syn. I Will swear I do.

Cres. I heard thee say, that thou would break thine oath*

Syn. Then I Will not swear, because I will not break it:
But yet I love thee Cressida, love me,
I Will leave the wars vnfinisht, Troy vnsackt;
And to my native Country bear thee hence:
Nay wench I Will do it; come kiss me Cressida.

Cres. Well, you may use your pleasure;
But good Synon keep this from Diomed.

Enter King Diomed. Dio. Oh perjured strumpet,
Is this thy faith? now Synon I Will believe
There is no truth in women.

Cres. Am ^ betrayed? oh thou base ugly villain,
I Will pull thine eyes out.

Syn. Ha, ha, King Diomed,
Did I not tell thee what thy sweet heart was.

Cres. Thou art a Traitor to all woman kind.

Syn. I am, and naught more grieves me then to
Think, a woman was my mother.

Cres. A villain.

Syn. Right.

Cres. A Devil.

Syn. Little better.

Dio. Go get you back to Troy, away, begone,
You shall no more be my Companion.

Syn. And now fair ^roian Weather-hen adieu*
And when thou next love, think to be more true*

Exit. Cres. Oh all you powers, above look down and see*
How I am punished for my perjury.

Alarm. Enter Penthesilea with her Amazonians. Penth. Stay, what sad Lady's
this? whence are you woman?
Of Troy or Greece?

Cres. I was of Troy till lone drew me from thence,
But since have soiourn'd in the Tents of Greece,
With Diomed King of Etolin:
Oh had I never known him.

Pent. Would you trust
You honor amongst strangers? but sweet Lady
Discourse your wrongs.

Cres. I was betrayed:
It shames me to relate the circumstance,
By a false Greek, one that does hate our sex,
One Synon, if you meet him in the battle,
I with my tears entreat you be revenged.

Pent. How might we know him?

Cres. His visage swart, and earthy ore his shoulder
Hangs locks of hair, black as the Ravens phunes:
His eyes down looking, you shall hardly see
One in whose shape appears more treachery.

Pent. We loose much time: Lady haft you to Troy,
And if we meet a fellow in the battle
Of your description, by our honored names,
We Will have his blood to recompense our shames.

Alarm. Enter Thersites. Amaz. By her description this should be the man

There. Compast with smockes and long coats:
Now you whoores.

Pent. Is thy name Synon?

There. No, but I know Synon.
He is my friend and brother.

Ama. For Synons sake, prepare thy self for ^aughter*

Enter Synon. Syn. He* who names Synon?

There. Brother thou nere could come in better time:
See, see, how I am rounded.

Pent. Were ever such a pair of Devils feene?
They are so like, they needs must be allied.

Syn. What can their Dammes say to us?

Pent. You betray Ladies, envy all our sex,
And that you now shall pay for girt him round.

Syn. I recan^ nothing, (...) me sweet faced brother:
And now you witches* ^arlets, drabes, and queanes,
We Will cut you all to fragments.

Alarm. Synon and hersites beaten off by the Amazons. Pyrhus enters, fights
with Penthesilea, after this a retreat sounded, then enters Menelaus,
Aganieninon, Ulysses, Diomed. Aga. The Trojans sound retreat.

Vliss. Who saw young Pyrhus?

Mean. I fear his too much rage has spurred him on
Too far amongst the Amazonian troops.

Enter Synon and Ther^ites. Syn. Why stand you idle here, and let the Trojans
Lead warlike Pyrhus prisoner to the Town.

Agam. How Pyrhus prisoner?

There. We saw him compast by the Amazous:
Penthesil^^ with her bustain troops.
Laid load upon his Helm.

Vliss. Then this retreat
Upon the sudden argues that they lead him
Captive to Troy.

Enter Pyrhus. Pyr. Courage brave Princes, I have got a prise
Worthy the purchase, on my Lances point
Sits pearcht the Amazonians lopt off head,
Upon my warlike sword her bleeding arm,
At sight of which the Trojans sound retreat:
The honor of this day belongs to us.

Omnes. To none but Neoptolemus.

Pyr. Synon you played the coward: so Thersites.

There. If not so.
I had not lived to see Troyes overthrow

Syn. When did thou ever see a villain valiant?
What Is past remember not, but what is to come:
Priam has shut his Gates, and will no more
Meet him in arms: can you with all your valor
Glide through the walls, if not what are you nearer
For all your Ten years siege?

Pyr. It Is true, some stratagem to enter Troy
Were admirable: for Princes till I see
The Temple burn wherein my father did,
And Troy no Troy but ashes; my revenge
Will have no stern aspect, till I behold
Troyes ground-sils swim in pooles of crimson goare
Ramnusia's Alter filled with flowing helmes
Of blood and brains: Priam and Hecuba
Dragged by this hand to death, and this my sword
Ra^ish the breast of fair Polixena,
I shall not think my fathers death revenged.

Aga. To him that can contriue
A stratagem by which to enter Troy,
I Will give the whole spoil of Apolloes Temple.

Mean. I my rich Tent.

Vlis. I the Palladium that I brought from Troy.

Dio. I all my birthright in Aetoli^.

Syn. Peace, it is here: I have it.

Pyr. I Will hug thee Synon.

Syn. Touch me not, away:
There're more hammers beating in my brain
Then ever touched Vulcans Anuile, more Ideaes
Then Attomes, Embrions innumerable*
Growing to perfect shape; and now it is good.
Call for Endimions bastard, where is Epeus?
I Will set him straight a work.

Pyr. Upon some Engine Synon.

Syn. A horse, a horse.

Pyr. Ten Kingdoms for a horse to enter Troy.

Syn. Stay, let me see:
Ulysses you have the Palladium.

Vlis. I have so.

Syn. Call for Epeus then, the General
Has no command in him.

Agam. Lets know the project.

Syn. And that Palladium stood in Pall^ Temple,
And Consecrate to her.

Vlis. It did so.

Syn. Call for Epeus then.

Pyr. Lets hear what thou intendest.

Syn. I Will have an Horse built with so huge a bulk,
As shall contain a thousand men in Arms.

Pyr. And enter Troy with that?

Syn. Do It you, you trouble mine invention,
I am grown muddy with your interruption:
Good young man lend more patience, hear me out:
This Engine framed, and stuffed with armed Gre^kes.
(Will you take down your Tents, march back to Tenedos?)

Pyr. What shall the Horse do then?

Syn. Not gallop as your tongue does: good Ulysses
Lend me your apprehension; when the Trojans
Find you are gone aboard, they will straight suppose
You Will not weigh Anchor: till the gods inform you
Of your success at Sea: if then a villain
Can drive into their ears, the goddess Pallas
Offended for her stolen Palladium:
(Will you erect this Machine to her honor?)
Withal that were it brought into her Temple,
It would retain the gilt Palladiums virtue.
Might not the forged tale move aged Priam,
To hale this Engine presently to Troy,
Pull down his walls for entrance, leave a breach
Where in the dead of night, all your whole Army
May enter, take them sleeping in their beds,
And put them all to sword.

Agam. It Is rare!

Pyr. It Is admirable, I will adventure
My person in the Horse.

Syn. Do so, and get a thousand spirits more.
King Agamemnon, if you like the project,
Down with your Tent.

Agam. Synon, we will,

Syn. I Will set a lightvpon the walls of Troy
Shall give the summous when you shall return*
About it Princes: Pyrhus get you men
In readiness, I will expose my self
To bewitch Priam with a weeping tale,
I cannot to the life describe in words,
What I Will express in action.

Agam. Down with our Tents.

Pyr. I Will to pick out bold Greeks to fill the horse:
Shine bright you lamps of Heaueu, for ere't be long
We Will dim your radiant beams with flaming lights
And bloody meteors, from Troyes burning streets.

Syn. Such sights are glorious sparks in Synons eyes,
Who longs to feast the Devil with Tragedies.

Explicit Actus primus.
Actus Secundus: Scoena prima.
Enter Aeneas, and Chorebus. Aenea^^ The Grecians gone?

Cho. All their tents raised, their ten years siege remoon'd*
Now Troy may rest securely.

Aene. They may report at their return to Greece
The welcome they have had: what have they won?
But wounds, Times loss, shame, and confussion.

Enter K. Priam, Anthenor, young Polytes, Polixena, Hecuba, and Hellen, with
attendance. Pri. We now are Lord of our own Territories,
Ten years kept from us by th'inuading Greeks*
Now we may freely take a full survey
Of all Scamander plain, drunk with the mixture
Of th'opposite bloods of Trojans and of Greeks.

Hecu. And royal Husband we have cause to joy,
That after so long siege the Greeks are f^ed,
And you in peace may rest your aged head.

Aene. Upon this East Side stood Ulysses Tent,
The polliticke Greek.

Cho. There was old Nestors quarter,
And Agamemnons that; the General.

Pria. Upon the north-side of the field, Achilles
That bloody Greek pitched, and upon this plain,
I well remember, was my Hector slain.

Hell. This empty place being South from all the rest,
The valiant Diomed has often made good,
And here, even here, his rich Pauillion stood.

Hecu. But here, even here, near to Duke Ajax tent,
Round girt with Mirmidons, my Troilus fell.

Cho. Then was this place a standing Lake of blood,
Part of which moisture the bright Sun exhald;
And part the thirsty earth has quaft to Mars:
But now the swords on either part are sheathed,
And after ten years tumults wars surcease,
They layding their ships home with shameful peace.

Pria. For which we will praise the gods, banquet and feast,
Since by their flight, our glorious fame's increast.

The Horse is discovered. Aene. Soft, what huge Engine's that left on the
strond,
That bears the shape and figure of an Horse.

Cho. What, shall we hew it peace-meale with our swords?

Pria. Oh be not rash, sure it is some mystery
That this great Architecture does include.

Cho. But mine opinion is, this Steedes huge bulk
Is stuffed with Greekish guile.

Aene. I rather think
It is some monumentall Edifice
Unto the goddess Pallas consecrate:
Then spare your fury.

Enter Laocoon with a Iauelin. La^. Why stand you gazing at this horrid craft,
Forged by the fly Ulysses, is his brain
Unknown in Troy? or can you look for safety
From those who ten years have besieged your walls?
Either this huge swollen bulk is big with soldiers,
Longing to be delivered of armed Greeks,
Whose monstrous fatal and abhorred birth,
Will be Troyes ruin: else this hill of timber
This horse-like structure stabled up in Troy,
Will spurn down these our walls, our towers demolish,
Which it shall never: come you Trojan youth
That love the public safety, no proud Greek
Upon this Steedes back, over 'Troyes wall shall ride.
First with this Iauelin I Will transpearce his side.

Pria. What means Laoooon?

Aene. Princes stay his fury.

Lao. Hark Trojans, if a iarring noise of Arms,
Sighed not throw these deep Cauernes, I devine
This gluttenous womb has swallowed a whole band
Of men in steel, then with your swords and glaues
Rip up his tough sides, and imbowell him,
That we may prove how they have lined his intrailes.

Enter two soldiers bringing in Synon bound. Soul. Stay, and proceed, no
further in your rage,
Till we have learnt some novel from this Greek,
Whom in a ditch we found fast giu'd and bound.

Pria. Laocoon cease thy violence till we know
From that poor Grecian, what that Machine means.

Syn. Oh me, (of all on earth most miserable,)
Whom neither Heavens will succor, earth preserve,
Nor seas keep safe, I, whom the Heavens despise,
The Earth abandnos, and the Seas disdain:
Where shall I shroud me? whom, but now the Greeks
Threatened with vengeance; and escaped from them,
Fallen now into the hands of Trojans, menacing death:
The world affoords no place, to wretched Synon,
Of comfort, for where ere I fix my foot,
I tread upon my grave: the four vast corners
Of this large Universe, in all their rooms
And spacious emptiness, will not afford me
My bodies length of rest: where ere I fly,
Or stay, or turn, Death's th'obiect of mine eye!

Pria. What art thou? or whence come thou? briefly speak?
Thou wretched man, thou moou'st us with thy tears:
Unbind him soldiers.

Syn. Shall I deny my self to be of Greece?
Because I am brought Captive into Troy?
No Synon cannot lie: Heaven, Earth, and Sea,
From all which I am outcast, witness with me
That Synon cannot lie: thrice damned Ulysses,
The black-hair'd Pyrhus, and horned Menelaus
Grook-back'd Thersites, luxurious Di^med,
And all the rabble of detested Greeks,
I call to witness, Synon cannot lie.
Could I have oiled my tongue, and cring'd my ham,
Suppled mine humble knee to croutch and bend,
Heau'd at my bonnet, shrugg'd my shoulders thus,
Grin'd in their faces, Synon then had stood,
Whom now this hour must stue in his own blood.

Aene. The perfect image of a wretched creature,
His speeches beg remorse.

Pria. Alas good man,
Shake off the timorous fear of servile death,
Though amongst us Trojans, and thy self a Greek,
Thou art not now amongst thine enemies,
Thy life I Will warrant, only let us know
What this Horse means.

Syn. Greece I renounce thee, thou have thrown me off,
Fair Troy ^ am thy creature. Now I Will unrip
Ulysses craft, my fatal enemy.
Who sold to death the Duke Palamides,
My Kinsman Trojans (though in garments torn)
Synon stands here, yet is he nobly borne:
For that known murder did I haint his Tent
With railing menaces, horrible exclaimes,
Many a blacke-saint, of wishes, oaths, and curses
Have I sung at his window, then demanding
Justice of Agamemnon, Diomed,
Duke Nestor with the other Lords of Greece,
For murder of the Prince Palamides,
And being denide it in my most vexation,
My bitter tongue spared not to bark at them:
For this I was observed, looked through and through
Ulysses brain had marked me, for my tongue
And fatted me for death by Calchas means,
He wrought so far that I should have bin offered
Unto the gods for sacrifice, the Priest
Lifting his hand aloft to strike me dead,
I lept down from the Altar, and so fled,
Pursuit and search was made, but I lay safe
In a thick tuft of sedge, till I was found
By these your soldiers, who thus brought me bound.

Pria. Thou now art free secured from all their tyrannys
Now tell us what is the meaning of this Horse?
Why have they left him here, themselves being gone?

Syn. My new released hands, thus I heave on hye,
Witness you gods, that Synon cannot lie,
But as a new adopted Trojan now
By Priams grace; I here protest by Jove,
By these eternal fires that spangle Heaven,
The Alter, and that sacrificing sword,
Beneath whose stroke I lay, since my base Country
Casts me away to death, I am now borne
A son of Troy: not Hector whilst he lived
More dammag'd Greece by his all wounding arm,
Then I by my discovery: Well, you know
How the Greeks honor Pallas, who inceast
Because Vl^sses the Palladium stole
Out of her Temple, and her Warders slew,
In rage she threatened ruin to all Greece:
Therefore to her has Calchas built this Horse.
(Greece pardon me, and all my Country gods
Be deaf to Synons tale, and let it be
Henceforth forgot that I was borne in Greece,
Least times to come record what I reveal,
The black confusion of my Native weal.

Priam. And what is that Synon?

Syn. Where left I? at the Horse, built of that size,
Le^ast you should give it entrance at your Gates:
For know should your ^ude hands da^e to prophan
This gift sacred to Pallas; Rots and diseases,
Pests and infections shall depopulate you,
And in a small short season, they returning,
Shall see thy subjects slain, fair Troy bright burning.
I Am even with thee Ulysses, and my breath
Strikes all Greece home for my intended death.

Pria. Thanks Synon, we shall bounteously reward thee,

Aene. And see my Liege, to make good his report,
Laocoon, he that with his Iauelin pierst
This gift of Pallas, round embraced with Snakes,
That wind their trains about his wounded wast,
And for his late presumption sting him dead.

Pria. We have not seen so strange a prodigy,
Laocoon has offended all the gods,
In his profane attempt.

Syn. Then lend your helping hands,
To lift up that Pallad an monument
Into Troyes City: Leauers, Cables, Cords.

Cho. It cannot enter through the City Gates.

Syn. Down with the walls then.

Cho. These walls that ten years have defended Troy,
For all their service shall we ruin them.

Syn. But this shall not defend you for ten years,
But make your Town impregnable for ever.

Pria. Down with the walls then, each man lend a hand.

Cho. I hear a noise of Armor.

Aene. Ha, what is that?

Cho. I fear some treason in that Horse enclosed:
Nor will I lend an hand to hale him in.

Omnes. Down with the Walls.

Aene. And Trojans now after your ten years toil,
Days battles, the fields trouble, and nights watch,
This is the first of all your rest, feast, banquet, joy and play,
Pallas is ours, the Greeks say^'d hence away.

Pria. Here we release all Centries and commit
Our broken walls to her Celestial guard:
We will rew^^d thee Synon, the Greeks gone,
Prian. may ^ est his age, in his soft throne.

Exe. Syn. S^, so, so,
S^non I hope shall warm his hands annon,
A^ a bright goodly bone-fire: Here Is the Key
Unto this Macnine by Ep^us built,
Which has already with his brazen breast,
Tilt ed Tro^es wall down, and annon being drunk
With the best blood of Greece, in dead of night
Having surcharged his stomach, will spew out
A thousand men in Arms: sweet midnight come,
I long to mask me in thy sable Wings,
That I may do some mischief and black deeds:
We shall have rare sport, admirable spoil,
Cutting of throats, with stabbing, wounding, killing
Some dead a sleep, and some half sleep, half wakes
Some dancing Antickes in their bloody shirts,
To which their wives cries, and their infants shreeks,
Play music, brave mirth, pleasing harmony:
Then having spitt young children on our spears,
We Will roast them at the scorching flames of Troy:
Fly swift you winged minutes till you catch
That long-wisht hour of stilnes: in which Troy
Sleeps her last sleep, made drunk with wine and joy.
In the receiving of this fatal Steed,
Sick Troy this day has swallowed such a pill,
Shall search her intrayles, and her ^iues blood spill.

Exit. Enter Agamemnon, Menelaus, Ulysses, with soldiers in a soft march,
without noise. Aga. Soft, soft, and let your stillness suite with night,
Fair Phebe keep thy silver splendour in,
And be not seen to night.

Mean. Were Phebe in my case,
She soon would blush to show her horned face.

Vliss. We would not have a star cast it is clear eye
On our dark enterprise: too fast: so, still.
Here Ambush, till you see the flaming Torch,
Synon this night upon the walls of Troy,
Will toss about his ears, as a true signal,
The great Epean structure is received,
And we may find safe entrance by the breach.

Aga. A stand, the word through all the Regiment,

Mean. A stand.

Enter Synon with a torch above. Syn. Thy everlasting sleep sleep careless
Troy,
This horrid night buried in Wine and mirth,
This fatal Horse spurred by the brain of Synon,
Has lept ore Troys high bulwarks great with Greeks,
Four times in raising up the monument,
A shaking sound of Armor harshly iar'd
In all the Princes ears, and had they not
Been drunk in Synons tears, they would found our guile.
It is now midnight. The black darkness fallen,
And rould over all the world, as well the Poles,
As the great Ocean, and the earth: now is the time
For tragic slaughter, clad in gules and sables,
To spring out of Hels jaws, and play strange reakes
In sleepy Troy, this bright and flaming brand
Which I so often gire about mine ears,
Is signal for the Armies quick return,
And make proud Islium like my bright torch burn,
Wink all you eyes of Heaven, or you shall be
Blood-shot to view Troyes dismal Tragedy.

Exit. Aga. The signals on the wa^: forward brave soldiers,
The Horse is entered, Synons Tale believed.
And we this night shall see the sack of Troy.

Men. March on then, the black darkness couers us,
And we without suspicion easily may
Disperse our selves about these high built walls:

Vlis. Now with a soft march enter at this breach
But give no token of a loud Alarm,
Till we have met with Pyrhus and the rest,
Whom the Steedes bulk includes.

They march softly in at one door, and present^^ in at another. Enter Synon
with a stealing pa^e, holding the key in his hand. Syn. Soft, soft, ey so,
hereafter Ages tell,
How Synons key unlocked the gates of Hell.

Pyrhus, Diomed, and the rest, leap from out the Horse. And as if groping in
the dark, meet with Agamemnon and the rest: who after knowledge embrace.
Pyrhus. The General?

Agam. Pyrhus?

Dio. Menelaus?

Mean. Diomed?

There. My Vrchin?

Syn. What my Toade?

Pyr. Well met in Troy great Lords.

Vlis. Where are we now?

Sy. In the high street, nere to the Church of Pallas,
And this you past, the gate called Dardanus.

Pyr. Then here begins Troyes fatal tragedy:
Princes of Greece, at once vnsheath your swords,
And hear protest with Neoptolemus,
By our fore-father Peleus, grandam Thet^s,
The Emperious goddess of the Sea, that made
Achilles, save in th'heele, invulnerable,
And by my father great Aeacides,
His glorious name, his Armor which I wear,
His bloody wounds, and his black sepulcher;
I here abjure all respite, mercy, sleep,
Until this City be a place confused:
This murall girdle that begirts it round
A Cawsey for the Greeks to trample on,
The place a stone-heape swimming in an Ocean
Of Trojan blood, which shall from far appear
Like an high Rock in the red Sea.

Syn. A brave show,
To see full Boats in blood of Trojans row,
And the poor laboring Snakes with arms spread swimms
In lukewarm blood of their allies and kin.

Men. Whence must this Ocean flow?
From thousand Springs
Of gentle and ignoble, base and Kings.

Pyr. Set on then, none retire;
Wave in the one hand steel, in the other fire.
Loud Drums and Trumpets ring Troyes fatal peale,
That now lies drawing on, the word be vengeance,
Alarm, at that watchword fire, and kill,
And wide-mouthed Orchus with whole legions fill*

Aloude Alarm. Enter a Trojan in his nightgowne all unready. Tro. It Was an
alarm sure that frighted me
In my dead sleep, 'twas near the Dardan port:
Jove grant that all be well.

Enter his wife as from bed. Wife. Oh Heaven! what tumult's this
That hurryes through the fatal streets of Troy*
I fear some treason.

Tro. Stay Wife, lay thine ear
Unto the ground and list, if we can gather
Of what condition this strange vproare is
That riots at this late unseasoned hour?
Sure it is the noise of war, whence should it grow?
The Greeks are sailed hence, Troy needs fear no foe.

Wife. The horrid stir comes on this way toward us.

Troi. Oh whither shall we turn?

A great cry within. Alarm, Enter Pyrhus with the rest their weapons draw and
torches. Wife. Oh save me husband.

Troi. Succor me dear wife.

Omnes. Vengeance for Greece and Neoptolemus.

Pyr. So fly the word along, dye old and young,
Mourn Troy in ashes for Achilles loss,
Steel in one hand, in the other firebrarnds toss.

Exeunt: Enter Chorebus at one door, at another Aeneas with their weapons
drawn. Cho. This horrid clamor that has called me up
From my deep rest, much, much amazeth me;
It Is on the right hand, now upon the left,
It goes before me and it follows me:
Oh Jove expound the meaning of this horror
Which the dark midnight makes more terrible.

Aene. this street is clear, but now I climbed a Turret,
And I might well difcernel alfe Troy in fire,
And by the flame the burnis^t Helmets glister
Of men in Arms, whence Jove Olympicke knows.

Enter a second Trojan. 2. Tro. Where shall I hide me? Treason, Troyes betrayed;
The fatal horse was full of armed Greeks.

Chore. Of Greeks? damned Synon.

2. Tro. Prince Chorebus fly,
Fly great Aeneas.

Cho. Which way? where? or how?
Are we not rounded with a quick-set hedge
Of pointed steel? are not the gates possessed
And strongly manned with Greeks? death every where,
Then whither should we fly?

Aene. Into the throng.
Where blows are dealt, where our inflamed Turrets
Burn with most fury.

Cho. Nobly speaks Aeneas.

Aene. Then whither flames, and furies, shreiks and clamors,
Death, danger, and the devils hurry us,
Thither will we: follow where I shall lead,
Thousands shall fall by us ere we be dead.

Enter Thersites with other Greeks. There. Charge on these naked Trojans, and
cry thus,
Vengeance for Greece and Neoptolemus.

Cho. Charge on these armed Grecians, and thus cry,
We may yet live to see ten thousand dye.
They charge the Greeks and kill them, Thersites runs away.

Cho. Well fought brave spirits in our utter ruin,
We are Conquerours yet: let us don these Greekish habits,
And mix our selves amongst their Armed ranks;
So unexpected murder all we meet:
The darkness will assist our enterprise.
These Greekish Arms this night by Trojans Worn
Shall to the fall of many Grecians turn.

Enter all the Greeks. Omnes. Burn fire, and kill, as you wound cry thus,
Vengeance for Greece and Neoptolemus.

Exeunt. Enter Aeneas followed by Hectors ghost Aene. What art thou that with
such a grim aspect,
In this black night so dark and turbulent,
Haunts me in every corner of my house
Which yet burns over mine ears?

Hect. Do thou not know me?
Or can Aeneas so forget his friend?
This face did fright Achilles in the field,
And when I shook these locks, now knotted all,
As baked in blood; all Greece has quak't and trembled.
Look on mine Heels, and thou may see those thongs
By which so often I was dragged 'bout Troy,
My body made an universal Wound
By the unnumbered hands of Mirmidons,
This the hand that tossed so many wildfire balls
Into the Arg^ue fleet, and this the body
That decked in Ajax and Ac illes spoils
Rid from the fields triumphant through Troy.

Aene. Prince Hector?

Hect. Hence Aeneas post from Troy,
Rear that abroad the gods at home destroy.
The City burns, Priam and Priams glory
Is all expired, and tumbled headlong down:
Cassandraes long neglected prophesies
This night fulfils. If either strength or might
Could have protected Troy, this hand, this arms
That saved it often, had kept it still from harm.
But Troy is doomed, here gins the fatal Story
Of her sad sack and fall of all her glory.
Away, and bear thy Country gods along,
Thousands shall issue from thy sacred seed,
Cities more rich then this the Grecian spoil,
In after times shall thy successors build,
Where Hectors name shall live eternally.
One Romulus, another Brute shall rear,
These shall nor Honors, nor just Rectors want,
Lumbardies room, great Britains Troy-nouant.
Heu fuge nate Dea, teque his pater eripe flammis;
Hostis habet muros, ruit alto a culmine Troia
Sacra, suosque tibi commendat Troia penates
Hos cape fatorum comites, his moenia quaere
Magna: pererrato statues quae denique pont^.

Exit. Aene. Soft lie thy bones and sweetly may they rest
Thou wonder of all worthyes, but Troy burns:
Thousands of Trojan Corses block the streets,
Some flying fall, and some their killers kill:
Where shall I meet thee death? before I fly,
Some Conquerours yet, shall bravely conquered die.

Exit. Explicit Actus secundus.
Acius Secundus: Scoena prima.
Enter Priam in his night-gowne and slippers, after him Hecuba, Hellena,
Andromache, Hellena, Cassandra, Polyxena, Polites, Astianax. An Alarm. All La.
Oh help us father Priam, Oh the Greeks.

Fri. I have done more then age would suffer me
They have tilted masts against my Palace gates,
And burst them open.

All La. Oh father Priam, whether shall we fly?

Pri. We are incompast round with sword and fire,
Alas Daughters, alas my young Astianax.

All La. Oh heaven, they come, where may we hide us safe?

Pri. Safety and help are both fled out of Troy,
And left behind nothing but massacre:
My Palace is surprised my guard all slain,
My self am wounded, but more with your shreeks,
Then by the swords of Grecians: come let us fly.
Unto the sacred Altar of the gods.

All La. May we be safe there father?

Pri. Safe? Oh no;
Safety is fled. Death has our lives in chase,
And since we needs must dye, let us choose this place.

Exeunt Alarm. Enter at the one door Hellen, at the other Cresida. Cres.
Whither runs Hellen?

Hell. Whither should I fly?

Cres. See, Troy is not it self, oh wretched Hellen!
To shun the Greeks to run into the fire,
Or flying fire, perish by Greekish steel:
Which had thou rather choose?

Hell. Death, in what shape soever he appears
To me is welcome, I Will no longer shun him;
But here with Cresida abide him: here,
Oh, why was Hellen at the first so fair,
To be come subject to so foul an end?
Or how has Cresids beauty sinned against Heaven,
That it is branded thus with leprosy?

Cres. I in conceit thought that I might contend
Against Heavens splendour, I did once suppose,
There was no beauty but in Cresids looks,
But in her eyes no pure divinity:
But now behold me Hellen.

Hell. In her I see
All beauties frailty, and this object makes
All fairness to show ugly in it self:
But to see breathless Virgins pil'd on heap,
What less can Hellen do then curse these Stars
That shined so bright at her nativity,
And with her nails tear out these shining balls
That have set Troy on fire?

Enter Pyrhus, Agamemnon, Menelaus, etc. Pyr. Pierce all the Trojan Ladies with
your swords,
Least amongst them you might spare Polixena.

Agam. Stay, I should know that face, it is Helena?

Mean. My Queen?

Hell. I am not Hellen, but Polixena:
Therefore reuengfull Neoptolemus
Do Justice on me for thy fathers death.

Pyr. Polixena? by all Achilles honors
I Will part thee limb from limb.

Cres. Pyrhus forbear,
It Is the Spartan Queen.

Men. If Hellen, the adultorous strumpet dies,
I Will be her deaths-man.

Hell. Strike home Menelaus,
Death from thy hand is welcome.

Aga. Hold I say,
She Is Clitemnestras sister, for her sake
Hellen shall live, and Kingly Menelaus
Receive her into favor.

Pyr. Agamemnon
Is too remiss, I have sworn all blood to spill
I meet with, and this one will Pyrhus kill.

Men. And I this other.

Aga. For our sake Menelaus let her live.
Was not our sister borne against her will
From Sparta? for that wrong done by the Trojans
Does not Troy burn? and are not all our swords
Stained in the blood of Paris slaughtered friends?
You shall be reconciled to Helend,
And bear her back to Greece.

Enter Thersites. There. Hellen at shrift* alas poor penitent Queen,
Do hear me Menelaus? pardon her,
Take her again to Sparta, thou wilt else want
So kind a bedfellow.

Men. Take back my shame?

There. Yes for thy pleasure.
There Is in the world as rich and honorable
As thou, who lend the pleasures of their bed
To others, and then take them back again
As they can get them.

Men, My brow shall never bear
Such Characters of shame.

There, Thy brows bears horns already, but who sees them?
When thou return'st to Sparta, some will think
Thou art a Cuckold, but who is it dare say so?
Thou art a King, thy sins are clouded over,
Where poor men's faults by tongues are made much more.
Of all men living, Kings are last shall hear
Of their dishonours.

^ga. What inferior Beast
Dares tell the Lion of his Tyranny,
Who is not torn asunder with his paws?
The King of Sparta therefore needs not fear
The tongues of subjects bid our sister rise
To safety in thine arms.

There. Do Menelaus.

Mean. But will my Hellen then by future virtue
Redeem her long lost honor?

Hell. If with tears
The Heavens may be appeased for Hellens sins,
They shall have penitent showers: If Menclans
May with the spirit of love be satisfied,
He ten times rectify my forfet honor
Before I tonch his bed.

Men. Arise then Hellen, Menclans arms
Thus welcome thee to safety.

There. Ha, ha, ha,
Why this is well, for he that is borne to dye
A branded Cuckhold, huggs his destiny:
Go, get you after Pyrhus to the slaughter,
I Will look to Hellen.

Aga. Conueigh her to our guard.

Exit. There. Hellen, hereafter see thou proou'st more wise,
If not more honest, yet be more precise,

Exit. Enter Prince Chorebus with other Trojans in Greekish habits. Cho. These
shapes thrive well, we have guilt our Greeki^ arm^
With blood of their own nation* some we have sent
To everlasting darkness, some repulst
Back to their ships: some we have made to fly
Into their horses bulk, whence Pyrhus first
Lept down upon his spear.

Enter Synon, Thersites, and the Greeks dragging in Cassandra. Syn, Come
soldiers, this is stately tragical,
The Greeks wade up even to the brawny thighs
In lukewarm blood of our despoyled foes.
Above Melpomene's huge buskind top
We plunge at every stepp, and bravely fought
By Troyes bright burning flame: that is now our light.

There. More of our valiant mates, let us join with them,
This street yet's unassaulted and vnfir'd:
Some balls of wildfire straight, and hurl this Lady
Into the fury of the burning flame.

Cho. My wife Cassandra?

Syn. Courage, let none escape
Fire, vengeance, blood, death, murder, spoil and rape.

Cho. All these on Greece and twenty thousand more,
Till they like Troy be drowned in tears and goare.

Chorebus and therest beat off the Greeks, and rescue Cassandra. Cass. From
Greeks to Greeks, from fire kept for the sword, From one death to another.

Cho. Cassandra no.

Cass. My Lord the Prince Chorebus?

Cho. Yes the same,
Who has preserved thee both from sword and flame.

Enter Aeneas with his father, who taking Chorebus for a Grecian by reason of
his habit, fights with him and kills him. Aene. More Greeks and see Cassandra
captive made,
Assault them Troiaus, rescue the fair Princess;
This way dear father mount my back again.

Cass. Oh false Aeneas, thou have slain thy friend:
Many a Greek (thus shapt) he sent to hell,
And being a Trojan by a Trojan fell.

Aene. He died not by my hand, but his own fate.

Cass. And I forgive thee good Aeneas, fly,
Thou shall survive, but Troy and we must fall:
The hope of all our future memories
Are stored in thee, take up thy sacred load
Reverent Anchises bedridden through his age,
We are all doomed, fair Troy must perish here,
But thou art borne a greater Troy to rear.

Aene. The Heavens have hand in all things, to their pleasure
We must subscribe: Creusa, where is my wife?
In loosing her I save but half my life.
Come reverent father, on my shoulders mount,
Though thousand dangers dog us at the heels,
Yet will we force our passage.

Exeunt. King Priam discovered kneeling at the Altar, with him Hecuba,
Polixena, Andromache, Aftianax: to them enter Pyrhus, and all the Greeks,
Pyrhus killing Polytes Priams son before the Altar. Pyr. Still let your
voices to hye Heaven aspire
For Pyrhus vengeance, murdring steel and fire.

All the Ladies. Oh, oh.

Pri. My son Polytes? oh thou more hard hearted
Then fatal Pyrhus or his fathers guard,
That in the shadow of this sacred place
Durst sprinke the child's blood in the fathers face.

Pyr. Priam? thanks sweet revenge, through swords and armor,
Through mures, and Counter-mures of men and steel;
Through many a corner, and blind entries mouth
I have followed this thy bleeding son to death,
Whose swift persuite has traind me to this Altar
To be revenged on thee for the sad fate
Of great Achilles.

Pri. Thou art Pyrhus then?

Pyr. My acts shall speak my name,
I am that Pyrhus who did mount you Horse
Hyding mine armor in his deep vast bulk,
The first that lept out of his spacious side,
And tossed consuming fire in every street,
Which climbed, as if it meant to meet the stars,
I am that Pyrhus before whom Troy falls:
Before whom all the Vanes and Pinacles
Bend their high tops, and from the battlements
On which they stand, break their aspiring necks.
The proudest roof and most imperious spyre
Has vaild to us and our all wasting fire.

Pri. Pyrhus, I know thee for my destined plague,
I know the gods have left us to our weakness,
I see our glories ended and extinct,
And I stand ready to abide their doom;
Only for pity and for pieties sake
Be gracious to these Ladies.

Syn. Pyrhus no,
Such grace as they did to Achilles show,
Let them all taste; let grace be far exiled,
Kill from the elder to the sucking child.

Pri. He Is prone enough to mischief of himself,
Spur not that fury on which ^unnes too fast,
Nor add thou to old Priams misery
Which scarce can be augmented it is so great.

Pyr. Dye in thy tortures then.

Hecu. Oh spare his life.

^sti. Good man kill not my Grandsire.

Pri. Good man do.

Hecu. Kill me for him.

Asti. No, she is my Grandam too,
Indeed she is a good woman, choose some other
If you must needs kill.

Pyr. This then.

Asti. She Is my Mother, you shall not hurt her.

Pri. This boy had a father,
Hector his name, who had he lived to see
A sword bent against his wife, this Queen, or me,
He would have made all Greece as hot to hold him
As burning Troy is now to shelter us.

Asti. Good Grandsire weep not, Grandam, Mother, Aunt
Alas, what mean you? If you be good men
Put up your swords and help to quench these flames,
Or if in killing you such pleasure have,
Practice on him, kill that ill favored knave.

Syn. Me bratt?

Pyr. Ulysses, Agancemnon. Menelaus,
Synon, Thersites, and you valiant Greeks;
Behold the vengeance wrathful Pyrhus takes
On Priams body for Achilles death:
Synon, take thou that Siren Polixene,
And hew her peece-meale on my fathers Tomb.
Thersites, make the womb of fifty Princes
A royal sheath for thy victorious blade:
Diomed, let Cassandra dye by thee,
And Agamemnon kill Andromache:
And as my sword through Priams bulk shall fly,
Let them in death consort him, and so dye.

There. When, when, for Jove's sake when?

Syn. Some expeditious fate this motion further,
Me thinks it is long since that I did a murder.

Pri. Oh Heaven, oh Jove, Stars, Planets, fortune, fate,
To think what I have been, and what am now;
Father of fifty brave Heroic sons,
But now no Father, for they all are slain.
Queen Hecuba the Mother of so many,
But now no Mother: for her barren womb
Has not one child to show, these fatal wars
Have eat up all our issue.

Asti. My dear Father,
And all my pri^cely Uncles.

Andr. My dear Husband,
And all my royal brothers.

Hecu. Worthy Hector,
And all my valiant sons.

Pri. And now that Priam that commanded Asia,
And sat enthroned above the Kings of Gre^ce,
Whose dreaded Nany scowerd the Hellespont,
Sees the rich towers he built now burnt to ashes:
The stately walls he reard, leuel'd and euen'd;
His Treasures rifled and his people spoiled:
All that he has on earth beneath the Sun
Bereft him, saving his own life and these,
And my poor life with these, are (as you see)
Worse then the rest: they dead, we dying be.
Strike my stern foe, and prove in this my friend,
One blow my universal cares shall end.

Pyr. And that blow Pirhus strikes, at once strike all.

Syn. Why so, so, this was stately tragical.

They are all fl^ine at once. Asti. Where shall I hide me?

Pyr. So nimble Hectors bastard?
My father slew thy father, I the son:
Thus will I toss thy carkas up on hie,
The brat above his fathers fame shall fly.

He tosseth him about his head and kills him. Syn. No, somewhat does remain,
Alarm still, the peoples not all slain,
Let not one soul survive.

Pyr. Then Trumpets sound
Till burning Troy in Trojan blood be drowned.

Exeunt The Alarm continued, shreiks and clamours are heard within. Enter with
Drum, Colors, and Soldiers Agamemnon, Pyrhus, Ulysses, Diomed, Menelaus,
Hellen, Thersites, Synon, etc. Pyr. What more remains t'accomplish our revenge?
The proudest Nation that great Asia nursed
Is now extinct in Lethe.

Mean. All by Hellen,
Oh had that tempting beauty never been borne,
By whom so many worthies now lie dead.

Syn. A hot Pest take the strumpet.

There. And a mischief.

Syn. It Was this hot whore that set all Troy a fire.

Hell. Forgive me Pyrhus for thy fathers death,
Troy for thy sack, King Priam for thy sons,
Greece for an infinite slaughter, and you Husband or all your nuptial wrongs,
King Menelaus,
^inust confess, my inconsiderate deed
Have made a world of valiant hearts to bleed.

Dio. What, note is that which Pyrhus eye dwells on?

Pyr. The perfect number
Of Greeks and Trojans slain on either part.
The siege ten years, ten months, ten days endured,
In which there perish't of the Greeks before Troy
Eight hundred thousand and six thousand fighting men:
Of Trojans fell six hundred six and fifty thousand,
All soldiers; besides women, children, babes,
Whom this night massacred.

Hell. All these I slew.

Syn. Nay, some this hand sent packing, that is not true.

Vlys. Aeneas, with twenty two ships well furnished,
(The self same ships in which young Paris sailed
When he from Sparta stole fair Helena,)
Is fled to Sea.

Dio. Anthen^r with five hundred Trojans more Escaped through the gate called
Dardan.

Pyr. Let them go,
That of Troyes sack the world by them may know,
Where above thirty brave Heroic Kings
Have breathed their last: befides inferior Princes,
Barons and Knights, eighteen imperial Monarchs
With his own hands renowned Hector slew:
My father besides Troilus and that Hector,
Eight famous Kings that came in aid of Troy.
Three Trojan Paris with his Arrows slew,
Of which one was my father: Diomed
Four Monarchs with his bright sword sent to death.
Our self the warlike Queen of Aemazons,
And aged Priam.

There. Bravely boast he can,
A wretched woman and a weak old man.

Pyr. And now Troyes wars sre ended, we in peace
With glorious conquest to sail back to Greece.
Their Nation's vanished like their Cities smoke,
Our enemies are all ashes: worlds to come
Shall Cronicle our pitiless revenge
In Books of Brass and leaves of Adamant.
Toward Greece victorious Leaders, our toyle's past;
Troy and Troyes people we have burned in flames,
And of them both left nothing but their names.

Exeunt* Explicit Actus tertius.
Actus Quartus: Scoena prima.
Enter Prince Cethus the son of King Naulus, and brother to Palamides. Ceth.
With wondrous joy they say, the Greeks return
With Triumphs and ouations piercing Heaven,
Where e're they set but foot loud Paeans sung,
And Oades to spheare-like Notes tuned in their praise:
Whilst Cethus like a forlorn shadow walks
Dispis'd, disgraced, neglected and debosht;
Playing his melancholy, cares and sorrows
On his discordant Hart-strings. Oh my fate!
Shall I, that have this body and this brain,
A royalty stamped on me in my birth:
Whose wrongs have been of mark through all the World
Troubling each ear, and being disputable
By every tongue that has been taught to speak,
Even in the mouths of Babes, all rating me
Of cowardesie and sloth: sleep, an occasion
Being fairly offered? No, awake revenge,
I Will bring the now to action.

Enter Pilades. Pil. Hear you the news

Ceth. Orestes friend, the noble Filades?
Instruct mine ignorance, I know of none.

Pil. This day the Prince, great Agamem^nons heir^
Orestes whom you truly call your friend,
Betroths the young and fair Hermione
Daugh^er to beauteous Hellen.

Ceth Hymen's joys.
Crown them with all true pleasure.

Pil. Shall we have your presence at the Contract?

Ceth. Who Is within?

Pil. Only Egistus, Clitemnestras friend,
The Q^eene and fair Electra.

Ceth. Witness enough,
Then spare me for this time good Pilades,
We^'le owe them greater service.

Pyl. But t^s a duty that I owe my friend,
My absence would distaste him.

Exit. Ceth. Fare you well.
Do, do, contract and marry, aim at Heaven,
But Hell is that they plunge in: Oh Palamedes
My basely betrayed brother, sold at Troy
As we would cheapen Horses, yet a Prince:
A Prince? nay General of the Greekish host.
Emperor and Keyser, chose to that command
By a full ^Iury of Kings, and by them rated
The prime and worthiest: who being far from equal
Could find in whole Greece no competitor.
Yet this peculiar man, this God of men,
By false Ulysses and Atreus sons
Agamemnon and Menelaus, basely supplanted;
Who, for they would confer amongst themselnes
The sovereignty forged letters sent from Troy,
And coin withal marked with King Priams stamp,
As if this father of his fame and Nation
Whose only ends were aymd to honor Greece
Would have betrayde his people: this suggested,
My brother was arraigned, conuist, condemn*d;
For which I have vowed the universal ruin
Of all the Kings of that corrupted bench.
Palamides thy blood in Asia shed
Shall make all Europe mourn since thou art dead.

Enter Egistus, Clitemnestra, Orestes, Pilades, Hermione, and Electra. Cli.
Meeenaes King and Sparta's would be proud
To see this happy and blessed union made
Between their royal Familyes.

Orest. This fair Virgin,
Second from Laeda to whom Jove vouchsa^'t
The strict Embrace of his immortal arm,
Unspotted with her mothers prostitution,
We Will thus receive.

Hermi. May my chaste innocence
Break through the Cloud which has eclipsed her fame*
Whose luster may outshine my mothers fraileties,
And they through m^ may be forgot in Greece.

Egi. Hermione, your words taste of your breeding
Under this Queen your fair and Princely Aunt,
were young Electra but so well bestowed,
Great A gamemnon in so brave a match
Would think himself more graced, then in fruition
Of all the foreign Trophies.

Ceth. May she prove?
A whore like to her Mother: Prince Orestes,
And you bright Lady Spartans second light,
May all the virtues of this potent Queen
Take life in you, to prove hereditary
That the great Archduke crowned with fame and honor.
In his return may add a surplusadge
To his already surfeit: find his bed
By this adultresse basely strumpetted,
And make the Down they lie on quaffe their blood.

Orest. How do you fair Electra in your judgment
Applaude your brothers choice?

Elect. As of a contract.
Made by the gods above, and now by Princes
Here ratified on earth.

Orest. I would my friend
Were to you sister, but as fast betrothed
As I to Hellens daughter: But dear Pilades,
It Is Time must perfect all things.

Pil. Madam you hear*
This motion from your brother.

Elect. And I crave
Time to consider on it.

Orest. It Is on foot,
Pursue it then with all advantages,
Command my free assistance to begin*
Had you Electra friend, as I Hermione;
We were at first as foreign as you two,
And every way as strange, but opportunity
That has united us, may make you one.
After some amorous parliance, let us now
Unto the Temple and there sacrifice
Unto the gods, that Greece* no more may mourn^
But glory iu our fathers safe return*

Egist, His safety is our danger* for know Madam*
Our love has bin too public.

Ceth. That Is the ground
On which to build my project.

Cli. Grant it has.
Cannot a more then nine years widdow-head
Excuse me being a woman? thinks the King
We can forget that lesson in our age,
Which was by him first taught us in our youth?
Or was it his aim to show us choice delights,
Then bar us their fruition? First to taste
Our pallat, next to make us appetite;
And when our stomachs are prepared and sharpened
For Costly vionds placed before our eyes,
Then to remove the table? he is unkind;
And as he has dealt with us, so must find.

Enter Synon. Syn. The Queen? to her my speed is.

Cli. Speak on soldier.

Syn. I am the herald of most happy news,
Troy with the earth is leueld, sacked, and burnt;
Priam with all his memory extinct,
Queen, daughters, sons, and subjects ruined all.
Now like the vapor of their Cities smoke,
And of them no more found: And Madam now
The King your Lord, the Elder of the Atryd's,
Duke of the puissant and all conquering Host,
His temples archt in a victorious orb,
And wreth'd in all the glories earth can yield
Is landed in Mycene a Conquer our.

Ceth. How could they escape those fierce fires Naulus made
In vengeance of his son Palamides
To split their cursed Fleet upon the rocks.

Cli. Make repetition of their joys again,
Being things that I cannot ^^eare too often*
And add to them: Is Menelaus safe
My husbands brother? Hellen how fares she?
Or is she thence repurchast? fill mine ears
With such sweet Tones, it is all I can desire.

Syn. Take your full longing then, for though the Seas
With tempests, storms, rocks, shipwracks, shelues and sands
More dammag'd them then all the Trojan siege.
Although the Beacons fired to draw their Fleet
Distressed and dispersed upon the rocks
Sunk many a goodly bottom: Yet the General
Escaped by the hand of Jove, with him King Diomed,
Ulysses, and great Neoptolimus,
With Spartan Menelaus late attend
With beauteous Hellen cause of all these broils:
All these attend upon the General
To bring him home victorious, and this night
Will lodge in the Kings Palace,

Cli. Soldier thanks,
These twice five years I have a widow been,
Thy news have now new married me: give order
For the Kings intertainment, all the state
Mycene can yield shall freely be exposed
In honor of these Princes: your great have
Does ask some rest, therefore repose your self,
And for your fortunate news expect reward.

Syn. The Queen is royal.

Ceth. And now to that devil
Which I must conjure up: Is the Queen mad?
Or thou Egistus sottish? see you not
The stake and scaffold, nay the Hangman too;
And will you blindfold run upon your deaths
When there is way to'scape them?

Egist. What horrid fright
Is this proposed by Cethus?

Ceth. The King's returned,
And does not your veins gush out of your temples
In sanguine blushes? are not your adulteries
Famous as Hellens? nay, more infamous,
There was a rape to countenance what she did,
You naught save corrupt lust and idleness:
It Is blab'd in the City, talked on in the Court,
All tongues surcharged, all eyes are fixed on you,
To see what fearful vengeance he will take
For that your prostitution.

Cli. He Is a King.

Ceth. True Clitemnestra, so he went from hence,
But is returned a Tyrant flesht in blood:
Think thou that he who queld his foes abroad,
Will spare at home domestic enemies?
That was so prone to punish others wrongs,
And can forget his own?

Cli, If Menelaus
Have pardoned Hellen, may not he his brother
Make Spartaes King his noble president,
To do the like to me?

Ceth. Tush shallow Queen,
How you mistake; see imminent fate affront you,
And will not shun it coming? If his brother
Be branded as a scandal to the world,
What consequence is it that he will groan
Under the self same burden? rather think
He has proposed a vengeance dire and horrid
To terrif^e, not countenance such misdeeds:
And this must fall on you, lest time to come
Should Chronicle his family for a brood
Of Cuckolds and of Strumpets:

Egist. This thy language
Strikes me with horror.

Cli. And affrights me too.

Ceth. Is he not King? has he not Linxes eyes,
And Giants arms, the first to see far off,
The last as far to punish? was he so poor
In friends at home, to lea^e no Argus here
To keep his eyes still waking? think it not
But that he knew the treason of his bed,
He had not fair Briscis snatched perforce
From the arms of great Achilles.

Cli. That I heard.

Ceth. Why has he a new mistress brought from Troy,
But to state her in Clitemnestraes stead,
And make her Micenes Qucene whilst you poor wretches
Like malefactors suffer, marked for the Stag
And most ridiculous spectacles.

Cli. You show the danger,
But teach us no prevention*

Egist. See before us
The objects of our fears and difficulties,
But not the way to avoid them.

Ceth. Hear me then,
Prevent your death's by his.

Cli. How? kill the King?
So we heap sin on sin and basely add
Unto adultery murder.

Ceth. Per scelus semper tutum sceleribus it er.
Boldly you have begun, and being once in,
Blood will cure lust, and mischief phisieke sin.

Cli. Perhaps our guilt lies hid.

Ceth. In a Kings Palace
Can lust in such great persons be conceald?

Cli. The first offense repents me, and to that
I should but add a greater.

Ceth. Perish, do.
Or what concerns this me? I shall be safe,
I have strumpetted no Agamemnons Queen,
Nor bastarded the issue of the Atrides:
Or why should I thus labor their securities
Who study not their own?

Egist. Resolve then Queen,
The Kings austeere, and will extend his Justice
Unto some sad example.

Cli. Oh but my husband.

Ceth. After ten years widdow-hood
Can Clitemnestra think of such a name?

Cli. You have half wone me, when shall this be done?

Ceth. When but this night? delays are ominous:
Ere he have time to think upon his wrongs,
Or find a tongue to whisper, ere suspicion
Can further be instructed or least censure,
To call his wrongs in question: instantly,
Even in his height of joy, fullness of complement
With the Argiue Kings: whilst cups are brim'd with healths,
Whilst iealousies are drowned in Bacchus boles.
This night before he sleep, or that his pillowe
Can give him the least counsel, ere he can spare
A minute for the smallest intelligence,
Or moment to consider: I have done
If you have either grace in apprehension
Or spirit in performance.

Egist. I have both,
What answers Clitemnestra?

Cli. I am swayd,
And though I know there is difference of Justice
In Princes sitting on the skarlethench,
And husbands dallying in the private bed:
I Will hold him as one sits upon my life,
Not one that lies enclosed within mine arms;
He Is now my Judge, not Husband, here I vow
Assistance in his death.

Ceth. And so survive
Secure and fortunate.

Egist. This night?

Cli. It Is done.

Ceth. The project I have cast with all security.
And safety for your person: smooth your brows,
And let there shine a welcome in your looks
At the Kings intertainment: nay begone,
By this time you are expected; what remains
Is mine in form, but yours in action.
Exeunt. Now father style me a most worthy son
Palamides, a brother, what neither fires,
Nor rocks could do, what neither Neptunes rage,
Nor Mars his fury, what the turbulent Seas,
Nor the combustious Land* that Cethus can:
He that succeedes my brother in his rule,
Shall first succeed in death: none that had hand
Or voice in his subversion that shall stand.

Exit: Enter Thersites and Synon. There. Well met on Land kind brother, we are
now
Victorious: let us be proud on it.

Syn. Thou say true,
We are Conquerours in our basest cowardice,
We had not been here else.

There. Valiant Hector,
Achilles, Troilus, Paris, Ajax too.
They are all fallen, we stand.

Syn. Yes, and will stiff
When all the Grecian Princes that survive
Are crampt and ham-string'd.

There. Wast thou not sea-sicke brother?

Syn. Horribly, and feared
In the rough seas to have disgorg'd my heart,
And there to have fed Haddocks.

There. Trojans were fellows
In all their fury to be parlied with:
But with the tempests, gusts, and Furicanes,
The warring winds, the billows, rocks and fires
There was no talking: these few times we prayed,
The gods would hear no reason.

Syn. It Was because
The billows with their roaring, and the winds
Did with their. whistling keep them from their ears:
But now all is hushed, could we find time to pray,
They might find time to hear us.

There. Shall we be
Spectators of the royal inter-view
Betwixt the King and Queen?

Syn. Ten years diuorst
Should challenge a kind meeting, let us observe
The form and state of this Court-complement,
(things I did never trade with:) Hark loud music
Gives warning of their coming.

Loud music. Enter at one door Agamemnon, Ulysses, Diomed, Pyrhus, Menelaus:
Synon and Thersites falling into their train. At the other Egistus,
Clitemnestra, Cethus, Orestes, Pylades, Hermione, Electra, etc. Aga. Unto our
Country and our Houshold-gods
We are at length returned, trophied with honors,
With Troyes subversion and rich Asiaes spoils,
This is a sacred day.

Egist. Such Troy had once.

Aga. Unto the gods wel'e sacrifice.

Ceth. So Priam fell
Before the holy Altar.

Aga. This City is not Troy.

Ceth. Where Hellen treades,
I hold the place no better.

Aga. See our Queen,
Orestes and Electra, for our sake.
Princes of Greece daigne them your best salutes*
Dear Clitemnestra.

Clit. Royal King and Husband.

After their salute. All the rest complement as strangers, but especially
Pyrhus and Orestes* Aga. What Is he that kneeles so close unto our Queen^

Clit. Egistus and your servant.

Aga. He was young
When we at first set sail from Aulis Gulf,
Now grown from my remembrance: we shall ^^ude
Fit time to search him further,

Ceth. Mark you that.

Egist. Yes, and it touched me deeply.

Mean. Our sister, and this young Hermione,
Daughter to us and Hellen.

There. Prity puppy.
Ofsuch a common brach.

Men. Young Neoptolem^s,
This is the Lady promised you at Troy,
For your great service done there: she is your own,
Freely embrace her then.

Syn. I see we are like
To have a jolly kindred.

Orest. Pyrhus, enjoy
Her whom I have in contract?

Pyr. Beauteous Lady,
The great'st ambition Pyrhus aims at now,
Is how to know you farther.
Has been so mighty to revenge the wrongs
Of my fair mother, can from Hermione
Challenge no less then welcome.

Orest. Oh you gods,
Pyrhus, thou were more safe inburning Troy
With horror, fury blood, fires, foes about the^.
Then in my fathers court.

Ceth. Another Collumne
On which to build my slaughters. Patience Prince,
This is no time for braues and Menaces,
I further shall instruct you.

Orest. I have done.

There. See now the two Queens meet, and smack in public,
That often have ki^^ in corners*

Syn. Ther^^tes?
Thou art grown a monster, a strange thing searse knowns
Amongst soldiers, wives and daughters.

There. They are two sisters.

Syn. Yes, and the two King-brothers royally
Between them two cornuted*

There. We are to loud.

Dio. Princes of Greece, fi^ce we have done a duty
To see our General mid*st his people safe,
And after many dreadful wars abroad
In peace at home. It Is fit we should disperse
Unto our several Countries instantly,
I purpose for Aetolia, where my Queen
With longing waits my coming.

Aga. Not King Di^med,
Till you have seen Me^ana's pomp and stat^
In ampliest royalty expressed at full,
Both tasted of our feasts and Princely gifts.
The fair Aegiale, who has so long
^orborne your presence, will not I presume
Deny to spare you to us some few days,
To add to the years number, though not as General
Yet will I lay on you a friends command*
Which must not be deny'de.

Dio. Great Agamemnon
With me was ever powerful, I am his.

Cli. And now fair sister welcome back from Troy,
Be ever henceforth Spartaes.

Hei. Your great care
In my enforced absence (gracious Queen)
Expressed unto my dear Hermione,
Has much obliged me to you. Oh my fate,
How swift time runs: Orestes grown a man,
Whom I left in the Cradle! Young Electra
Then (as I take it) scarce borne, and now grown ripe,
Even ready for an husband!

Syn. In whose absence
If but one handsome sweete-heart come in place,
She Will not turn tail for it, if she do^ but take
After mine old Naunt Hellen.

Enter a Lord. Lord. The great and solemn preparation
Of the Court, state and glory mighty Princes,
Attend for you within.

Aga. All are consecrated
Unto your royal welcomes, enter then,
We Will feast like earthy gods, or god-like men*

Lo^d music. They possess the Stage in all state, ^^thus stays behind.
Ceth. My brain about again, for thou have found
New project now to work on, and it is here,
Orestes has received Hermione
From Clitemnestra's hand, her sonle is his*
And he her Genius, two combind in one:
Yet she is by the fathers Oath conferd
On Pyrhus, which shallbreede a stormy flawe
Never to be peec't again, but by the deaths
Of the two hopeful youths: perhaps the hazard
Of all these Kings if my revenge strike home.
(Of that at leisure) but the bloody stage
On which to act, General this night is thine,
Thou lie down mortal, who must rise divine.

Enter Orestes to Cethus. Music and healthing within. Orest. Oh Cethus what is
this music unto me,
That are composed of discords? what are healths
To him that is struck heart-sicke? all those joys
Whose leaders seem to pierce against the roofes
Of these high structures, to him that is struct down
Half way below the Center?

Ceth. Were you lower,
Yet here is a hand can raise you, deeper cast
Then to the lowest Abisme: It lies in me
To advance you to the height of happiness,
Where you shall live eternil'd from the reach
Of any humane malice.

Orest. Had thou seen
Her, in whose breast my heart was paradis'd,
Kissed, courted, and embraced.

Ceth. By Pyrhus.

Orest* Him:
What passionate and in^idiating looks
He cast on her, as if in scorn of me:
Shall he enjoy my birthright, or inheri^e
Where I am heir apparent? shall he usurp*
Or plead my interest, where I am possessed?
Rule where I reign? where I am stated, sit?
Brave me in my peculiar Sovereignty?

Ceth. He must not, shall not.

Orest. Show me to depose.
The proud Usurper then.

Ceth. Prince, make it my charge.
In the mean time, from your distracted from
Exile all discontent, let not least ra^e
Reign in your eye, or harshne^^e in your tongue,
Smooth waters are still deep'st* wa^te on the King,
And be no stranger to your mothers eye,
Or foreign to your Kindred: the feast spent,
And night with it: the morrow shall beget
Project of more import (scarce thought on now.)

Orest. I build upon thy Counsel.

Exit Orestes. Ceth. Which has proou'd,
Fixed as a rock, still constant, and vnmoou'd.

Enter Egistus. Egist. What ^ethus here? why no such matter now
No cause of fear, or least suspicion.

Ceth. Your reason?

Egist. Tush, presume it, we are safe.

Ceth. Observe it, they are still securest, whom
The Devil drives to ruin.

Egist. Hark, their healths
Carrowsing to the Generals Victories,
In all thy heat of joy, and fire of wine,
No spark of iealously, all the Argument
Of their discourse, what they have done at Troy.
Still health on health, and the great General
So far from seeming to have least distaste,
That in all affable terms he courts his Queen,
Nay more, cuts off all banquet Ceremonies,
To hasten his bed-pleasures, as if times distance
Betwixt his board and pallade, seemed more tedious
Then all his Ten years siege.

Ceth. Go, lost man,
Sink on firm ground, be shipwrackt in a Calm.
These healthes are to your ruins, his revenge:
Has not Egistus read of a disease
Where men dye laughing: others that have drunk
Poison in steed of Cordials, perish so?
To dye it is nothing, since it is all men due:
But wretchedly to suffer, fall vnpittied,
Vnpittied? nay derided, moekt, and cursed:
To dye as a base Traitor, and a Thief,
The adulterator of his Sovereigns bed,
The poison of the Atred^^ family,
And scandal of his issue, so to dye?

Egi. Egistus will prevent, he by this hand
Must fall, before whom all Asia could not stand.

Ceth. The banquet is broke up, sleep calls to rest,
And mid-nights hour for murder, still shows best*

Exit. Loud music. Enter Egistus with his sword drawn, hides himself in
the chamber behind the Bed-curtaines: all the Kings come next in, conducting
the General and his Queen to their Lodging, and after some complement leave
them, enery one with torches vshered to their several chambers, etc. Aga.
Methinkes this night, we Clitemnestra meet,
At a new bridal; all Attendants leave us,
We now are only for bed-priuacies.

Cli. Great sir, I that so long have bin your widow,
Will be this night your hand-mayde.

Aga. You told me, Queen,
Orestes was a cunning horseman grown:
It pleased me much to hear it.

Cli. Greece reports
No Centare can ride better*

Aga. And young Electra,
In all the indowments that may best become
A Princess of her breeding, most complete.

Cli. It was in your long absence, all my care,
(Being my charge) that you at your return
Might find them to your wishes,

Aga. Thanks for that.

Cli. How cunningly he seems to carry it*
But we must find prevention.

Aga. Who Is without there?

Cli. Why started you?

Aga. Not all the Asian Legions, no not Hector
Armed with his bals of wildfire, had the power
To shake me like this tremor: Is our Palace
Less safe in Greece, amidst our subjects here,
Then were our Tents in Asia?

Cli. Where, if not here in Clitemnestraes arms,
Can safety dwell?

Aga. And fair Queen, it should be so.

Cli. But why sir cast you such suspicious eyes
About your Chamber? are we not alone?
Or will you to the private sweetes of night,
Call tell tale witness?

Aga. Now it is gone again. Shall we to rest?

Cli. So please you royal Sir.

Aga. How hard this Down feels, like a monument
Cut out of marble. Beds resemble Graves,
And these me-thinkes appear like winding sheets,
Prepared for corses.

Cli. Oh how ominously
Do you presage: you much affright me sir
In this our long-wisht meeting.

Aga. All Is shook off.
I now am armed for pleasure: you commended
Late one Egistus to me, prithee Queen
Of what condition is he?

They both wound him, at which there is a great thunder crack. Egist. Tyrant
this.

Cli. And I am thus his second.

Aga. Treason, murder, Treason:
This shows, we Princes are no more then men.
Thanks Iou^ it is fit when Monarchs fall by Treason,
Thunder to al^ the world, would show some reason.
he dies.
Egi. The deed is done, lets fly to some strong Cittadell,
For our more safety.

Cli. He thus made divine:
Now my Egistus, I am soly thine.

Exeunt. Anoyse of vproare within. Enter all the Kings with other Servants
half unready, as newly started from their Beds. Orestes, Hermione, Pillades,
Electra, etc. Mean. What strange tumultuous noise is this so late*
To rouse us from our beds?

Pyr. Prodigious sure,
Sin^^ it is confirmed by Thunder.

Orest. In mine ears
Did never sound seem half to terrible.

Hell. Nor to your eyes, as this sad object is,
See great Atrides groueling.

Ceth. What damned Villain
Was auther of this project?

Omnes. Horrid sight.

Ore. Rest you amazed all, as thunder struke,
And without sense or motion Apoplext,
And only hear me speak: Orestes, he
Who as if marbled by Medusaes head,
Has not one tear to fall, or sigh to spend,
Till I find out the murderer, and on him
Inflict remarkable vengance: for I vow
Were it my father, brother, or his Queen,
Had thou my weeping sister hand in it.
If he? whom equal, (if not rankt above)
I ever did, and shall love Pylades?
Were she whose womb did bear me, where I l^y
Full nine months bedded ere I saw the Sun,
Or the most abject Traitor under Heaven,
Their doomes were all alike, and this I vow.
Now you whom this silent and speechless King
Has often commanded, this now senseless brain
As often directed, this now strengthlesse hand
More often protected in a war, that shall
Be to all times example: Lend your shoulders
To bear him, who has kept you all in life,
This is a black and mourning funeral right,
Deeds of this nature must be thoroughly searched,
Nay be revenged: the gods have said it is good,
The morning Sun shall rise and bl^sh in blood.

They bear him off with a sad and funeral march, etc. Explicit Actus quartus.
Actus Quintus: Scoena prima.
Enter Pyrhus, Hermione, Thersites, and Synon. Pyr. Sweet Lady, can you love:

Her. Forbear my Lord,
Can such a thing as love be once named here,
Where every Marble that supports this roof,
In emulation does vye tears with us?
Nay where the wounds of such a mighty King
Have yet scarce bled their last.

Pyr. Tush fair Hermione,
These sights that seem to Iadies terrible,
Are common to us soldiers; when from field returning
All smeared in blood, where Dukes and Kings li^ slain,
Yet in our Tents at midnight it frights not us
From courting a sweet Mistress.

Syn. He says right,
And note of this how I can poetise:
This his great father of his Love desired.
When from the slaughter of his foes retired
He doft his Cushes and unarmed his head,
To tumble with her on a soft day bed:
It did rejoice Brisoi^ to embrace
His bruised arms, and kiss his blood-stained face.
These hands which he so often did imbrew
In blood of warlike Trojans whom he slew,
Were then employed to tickle, touch and feel,
And shake a Lance that had no print of steel.

There. Continue in that ve^^e, I Will feed thy Muse
With Crafi^h, Praunes and Lobsters.

Her. You brought these of purpose to abuse m^e.

Pyr. Peace Thersites,
And Synon you no more.

Syn. We see by Agamemnon all are mortal,
And I but show his niece Hermione
The way of all flesh.

There. It Is an easy path,
(The Mother and the Aunt have troad it both)
If she have wit to follow.

Enter Ulysses, Menelaus, Diomed with others. Mean. If it beso, Egistus is a
traitor,
And she no more our sister.

Vlys. It Is not possible
A Queen of her high birth and parentage
Should have such base hand in her husbands death,
Her husband and her sovereign.

Dio. Double treason,
Could it be proou'd against her.

Men. It appears
So far against humanity and nature
We dare not once suspect it, but till proof
Explain it further, hold it in suspense.

Vlys. Oh but their sudden flight and fortifying.

Mean. These are indeed presumptions, but leave that
To a most strict inquiry even for reverence
Of Majesty and Honor to all Queens,
For love of us because she was our sister,
Both for Orestes and Electra's sake
Whose births are branded in so foul a deed
Till we examine further circumstances
Spare your seuerer censures.

Vlis. It Is a business
That least concerns us, but for Honors sake
And that he was our General.

Mean. What, prince ly Pyrhus courting our fair daughter?

Her. Yes sir, but in a time unseasonable
Even as the suite it self is.

Mean. All delays
Shall be cut off and she be swayd by us.
These Royal Princes ere they leave Mycone,
Shall see these ^uptiall rights solemnized,
We Will keep our faith with Pyrhus.

Pyr. We our vows
As constant to the bright Hermione.
First see the royal General here interred
And buried like a soldier, it is his due:
To question of his death concerns not us,
We leave it to Heavens justice and revenge.
The rights performed with fair Hermione,
Then to our several Countries each man post,
Captains disperse still when the General's lost.

Enter Cethus, Orestes, and Pylades. disguised. Exeunt Ore. Egistus? and our
Mother?

Ceth. Am I Cethus,
Are you Orestes, and this Pyllades,
So sure they were his murderers: this disguise
Will suite an act of death, full to the life
He stands upon a strict and secure guard,
I have plotted your admittance, it will take
Doubt not, it cannot fail, I have cast it so.

Ore. As sent from Menelaus?

Ceth. Whose name else
Can break through such strong guards, where fear and guilt
Keep hourly watch?

Ore. It is enough, I haue't,
And thou the faithful'st of all friends dear Pillades,
Do but assist me in my vowed revenge
And enjoy fair Electra.

Pyl. Next your friendship
It is the prise ^ayme at, I am yours.

Ceth. What slip you time and opportunity,
Or look you after dreams?

Ore. I am a wake.
And to send them to their eternal sleep.
In expedition there is still success,
In all delays defect: the traitor dies
Were he in league with all the destinies.
Exe. Pilad. Orest. And it is a fruitful year for villainy,
And I a thrining Farmer. In this interim
I have more plots on foot: King Menelaus:
I have incenc'd against proud Diom^d*
Fyrhus against Orestes, he against him,
Ulysses without parralell for wit
Against them all: so that the first combustion
Shall burn them up to ashes. Oh Palamides,
So dear was both thy love and memory,
Not Hellen by her whoredom caused more blood
Streaming from Princes breasts, then Cethus shall
(Brother) for thine untimely funeral.

Exit. Enter Egistus, Clitemnestra with a strong guard. Egist. Let none presume
to dare into our presence
Or pass our guard, but such well known to us and to our Queen.

Guard. The charge has past us round*

Egist. When sins of such hye nature against us rise,
It Is fit we should be kept with heedfull eyes.

Cli. Presume it my Egistus, we are safe,
The Fort wherein we live impregnable:
Or say we were surprised by stratagem,
Or should expose our lives unto the censure
Of Law and Justice, even in these extremes
There were not the least fear of difficulty.

Egist. Your reason Madam.

Cli. Whom does this concern
But our own blood? should Pyrhus grow enraged*
I have at hand my niece Hermione
To calm his fury: what does this belong to
Ulysses, or Aetolian Diomed?
Are they not strangers? If it come in question
By Menelaus, is he not our brother*
Our sister Hellen in his bosom sleeps,
And can with him do all things, fear not then,
We are every way secure.

Egist. Oh but Orestes
His ey's to me like lightning, and his arm
Up heau'd thus, shows like Jones thunderbolt
Aimed against lust and murder.

Cli. He Is our son,
The filial duty that is hereditary
Unto a mothers name preuents these fears:
Electra's young, and childish Pilades
Swai'd by his friend: It rests, could we but work
Hellen and Menelaus to our faction,
Egistus should be stated in Mycene,
We live his Queen and bride.

Egist. Feare's still suspicious.

Enter one of the guard. Guard. A Letter sir.

Egi. From whence?

Guard. It Is superscrib'd from the great Spartae's King,
And the Queen Hellen.

Egi. Who the messenger?

Guard. Two Gentlemen who much importune you
For speedy answer.

Egi. Bid them wait without,
Now fates prove but propitious, then my kingdom
I shall presume established.

Cli. There Is no fear,
Orestes once remoou'd, and that is my charge
Either by sword or poison.

Egi. See fair Queen,
Read what your brother writes, by this we are
Eternis'd in our happiness, and our lives
Rooted in sweet security.

The Queen reads. Cli. We not suspect you in our brothers death,
A deed too base for any Noble breast.
Therefore in this necessity of state,
And knowing in this forced vacancy
So great a kingdom cannot want a guide:
The sovereignty we thought good to confer
On Clitemnestra, or whatsubstiture
She in her best discretion shall think fit,
The united Kings of Greece ^aue thus decre^d.
Your brother Menelaus.

Egist. We are happied ever.

Cli. A joy ratified*
And subject to no change.

Egist. Call in the messengers,
Orestes and Electra once remoon'd,
We have no rival, no competitor,
Therefore no jealousy at all.

Cli. None, none.
The gods have with these Kings of Greece agreed
In his supplanting and instating thee,
Thee my most dear Egistus.

Orestes and Pyllades disguised are conducted in. Egist. You the men?

Ore. Those, whom the Spartan King made special choice of
To trust this great affair with.

Egist. And you are welcome,
But are you men of action: such I mean,
As have been Soldiers bred, whose eyes inured
To slaughter and combustions: at the like
Would not change face, or tremble?

Pil. They that to see
Legs, arms, and heads strowed on Scamander Plain,
Kings by the common soldiers stewed in goare,
And three parts hid with their imboweld Steedes,
Shadowing their mangled bodies from the Sun,
As if above the earth to bury them:
They that to see an Asian Potentate
Killed at the holy Altar, his own blood
Mixed with his sons and daughters, Towers demolisht
Crushing whole thousands, of each sex and age
Beneath their ruins: and these horrid sights
Lighted by scathe- fires, they that have beheld
These and more dreadful objects; can their eyes
Move at a private slaughter?

Cli. You Are for us,
Will you for hire, for favor, or advancement,
(Now wars are done) to be made great in Court,
And undertake that one man easily spared
Amongst so many millions (now suruiuing)
That such a creature, no way necessary
But a mere burden to the world we live in,
He might no longer live?

Ore. But name the man,
And as I love Egistus, honor you
And all that glory in such noble deeds.
Be what he will; he is lost.

Egist. Orestes, then?

Ore. Is there none then the world so well may spare
As young Orestes? He to do it?

He kills Egistus, first discovering himself. Egist. Vain world farewell,
My hopes withal, no building long has stood
Whose slight foundation has bin laid in blood.

Cli. I Will dye upon his bosom.

Ore. Secure the Fort my dear friend Pillades,
And to your utmost pacify the guard:
Tell them we are Orestes and their Prince,
And what we did was to revenge the death
Of their dead Lord and Soueraig^e*

Pil. Sir i will do it.

Exit. Cli. Oh me, that thinking to have caught at Heaven,
Am plunged into an hell of misery.
Egistus dead? what comfort can I have,
One foot Enthroned, the the other in the grave.

Ore. Can you find tears for such an abject Groom,
That had not for an husband one to shed?
Oh monstrous, monstrous woman ^ is this carrion,
Is this dead Dog, (Dog said I?) nay what is worse,
Worthy the sigh or mourning of a Queen,
When a King lies vnpittied?

Cli. Thou a son?

Ore. The name I am ashamed of: oh Agamemnon,
How sacred is thy name and memory!
Whose acts shall fill all foreign Chronicles
With admiration, and most happy he
That can with greatest Art but book thy deeds:
Yet whilst this rottenness, this gangreen'd flesh
Whose carkas is as odious as his name
Shall stinking lie, able to breed a Pest,
He with a Princess tears to be imbalm'd,
And a King lie neglected?

Cli. Bastard.

Ore. If I be,
Damned be the whore my Mother, I, I am sure
Nor my dead father had no hand in i^.

Cli. Oh that I could but lengthen out my years
Only to spend in ^urses.

Ore. Upon whom?

Cli. On whom but thee for my Egistus death?

Ore. And I could wish my self a Nestur^ age
To curse both him and thee for my dead father.

Cli. Do thou accuse me for thy fathers death?

Ore. Indeed 'twould ill become me being a son,
But were I sure it were so, then I durst;
Nay, more then that, revenge it.

Cli. Upon me?

Ore. Were all the mothers of the earth in one,
All Empresses and Queens cast in one mould,
And I unto that one a only son,
My sword should ravish that incestuous breast
Of nature, and of state*

Cli. I am as innocent of that black deed,
As was this guiltless Gentleman here dead.

Orest. Oh all you powers of Heaven I invoke,
And if you will not hear me, let Hell do it:
Give me some sig^e from either feinds or angel,
I call you both as te^tates.
Enter the Ghost of Agamemnon, poynting unto his wounds: and then to Egistus
and the Queen, who were his murderers, which done, he vanishes. Godlike
shape,
Have you (my father) left the Elysium fields,
Where all the ancient Heroes line in bliss,
To bring your self that sacred testimony,
To crown my approbation: Lady see.

Cli. See what? thy former murder makes thee mad,

Orest. Rest Ghost in peace, I now am satisfied,
And need no further witness: saw you nothing?

Cli. What should I see save this sad spectacle,
Which blood-shootes both mine eyes.

Orest. And nothing else?

Cli. Nothing.

Orest. Mine eyes are clearer sighted then, and see
Into thy bosom. Murdresse.

Cli. How?

Orest. Incestuous strumpet, whose adulteries,
When Treason could not hide, thou thoughts to cover,
With most inhumane murder.

Cli. Meaning us?

Orest. Then, monster, thou did first instruct mine hand,
How to write blood, when being a Wife and Queen,
Thou kildst a King and husband, and have taught
Me being a son, how to destroy a mother.

He wounds her. Cli. Oh most unnatural.

Orest. That I learnt of thee.

Cli. Unheard of cruelty, but heavens are ^ust.
And all remarkable sins punish with mark,
One mischief still another does beger,
Adultery murder: I am lost, undone.

She dies. Orest. Being no wife, Orestes is no son.

Enter Cethus and Pillades with the guard. Pil. The guard all stand for you,
acknowledging
Orestes Prince and King.

Orest. I now am neither.

Ceth. What obiect's this? Queen Clitemnestra s^aine?

Pil. I hope no sons hand in it

Orest. Orestes did it,
The other title's lost.

Ceth. All my plots take
Seyond my apprehe^sion.

Pil. This is an age
Of nothing but portents and prodigies.

Orest. The fathers hand as deep was in her death
As was the sons, he pointed, and I struck:
Was he not then as unkind to a Wife,
As I was to a Mother?

Pil. Oh my friend,
What have you done?

Orest. There is a Plasma, or deep pit
Just in the Center fixed for Parricides,
I Will keep my Court there, and Erinnis, she
In stead of Hebe, shall attend my Cup,
Charon the Ferri-man of Hell shall be
My Ganimed.

Pil. The Prince is sure distracted.

Ceth. New project still for me.

Orest. I Will have a guard of Furies which shall light me
Unto my nuptial bed with funeral Teades,
The ^atall sisters shall my hand-maides b^e,
And wait upon the fair Hermione.

Ceth. Hermione? she is betrothed to Pyrhus,
And (mourning for your absence) all the way
Unto the Temple she will strowe with tears.

Orest. Ha? Pyrhus rape my dear Hermione?
He that shall dare to interpose my purpose*
Or cross me in mine Hymineall rights,
I Will make him lie as flat on the cold earth
As does this hound Egistus.

Ceth. And I would so.

Orest. Would? ^ay I will, his father woare a smocks,
And in that shape raped Deiadamia.
He shall not use my Loueso, oh my Mother;
Friend take that object hence.

Ceth. But you Hermione,

Orest. My hand's yet deep in blood, but to the wrist,
It shall shall be to the elbowe: gods, nor men,
Angels, nor Furies shall my rage withstand,
Not the grave Honor of the assembled Kings,
Not Reverence of the Altar, nor the Priest:
No superstition shall my fury slay*
Till Pyrhus from the earth be swept away,

Exit. Ceth. Pillades attend your friend.

Pil. He Is all my charge,
My life and his are twins.

Ceth. Their mines are countermin'd, Cethus, thy fall
Is either plotted, or to blow up all.

Exit. Enter Synon and Thersites. Syn. My head aches brother.

There. What a batchiler,
And troubled with the Spartan Kings disease?

Syn. No, there is a wedding breeding in my brain,
Pyrhus the Bridegroom: thou strange creature woman*
To what may I compare thee?

There. Can thou devise ought bad enough?

Syn. It Is said they look like Angels, and of light*
But for the most part, such light Angels prove,
Ten hundred thousand of their honesties
Will scarce weigh eleauen Dragmaes.

There. Clite^nestra,
And Hellen for example.

Syn. Young Hermi^ne
Has face from both.

There. The sharp shrewes nose, they hate hereditary.

Syn. Thersites, I commend that fellows wit
Proffred a wife young, beautiful and rich,
Only one fault she had, she wanted brain:
Who answered in a creature of that sex,
I nere desire more wisdom; then to know
Her husbands bed from another.

There. I commend him,
But it is not in the Atrides family,
To find out such a woman.

An Altar set fo^rth, Enter Pyrhus Lending Hermione as a bride, Menelaus,
Ulysses, Diomed. A great train, Pyrhus and Hermione kneel at the altar. Syn.
See now the sacred nuptial rights proceed*
The Priests prepare the Alter.

Fyr. Hymen to whom my vows I consecrate
As all my love. To thee Hermione,
Whom in the presence of these Argiue Kings,
I hear contract, be thou auspitious to us:
This flamming substitute to Saturnes son,
Within whose sacred Temple we are rooft*
And before all these high Celestial gods
And goddesses, in whose eyes now we kneel:
Especially you I^n^ Queen of marriage,
And fair Lucina, who have child-births charge,
Your favors I inuoake: Let your chaste fires
Dry up this Virgins tears; make her so fruitful
That in her issue great Achilles name
And fame withal, may live eternally*
Proceed Priest to your other Ceremonies*

Enter Orestes, Cethes, and Pilades, with the guard, all their weapons drawn,
Orestes (...) (...) Pyrhus. Orest. Priam before the holy Alter fell,
Before the Alter bid thy life farewell:
Rescue Hermione.

Pyr. Achilles son
Cannot reuengelesse dye, then witness all,
Blood must flow high where such great Princes fall.

Pil. Orestes is in danger.

Mean. Save Prince Pyrhus.

Cethus whispers with Diomed. Ceth. This plot was laid
Both for your life and Kingdom.

Dio. Menelaus: shall never bear it so.

Vlys. Fie Thersites,
Thy sword against me.

There. Curse upon all whoores.

A confused scuffle, in which Orestes kills Pyrhus: Pyrhus, Orestes: Cethus
wounds Pillades, Diomed, Menelaus, Ulysses, Thersites, etc. All fall dead sane
Ulysses, who bears thence Hermione: which done, Cethus rises up from the
dead bodies and speaks. Ceth. What all asleep? and are these gossiping
tongues,
That boasted naught faue War and Victory,
Now mute and silent? Oh thou ugly rogue,
Where Is now thy railing? and thou parracide,
Thy madness is now tamed, thou need'st no chains
To bring thee to thy wits, darkness has don't.
This Diomed? who dared to encounter Mars,
And said to wound fair Venus in the hand:
Where Is your valor now? Aegiale,
Unless (as some say) she be better stored,
Is like to lie without a bedfellow:
Rise Pillades, and help to awake thy friend,
What does your friendship sleep now? Menelaus
Hellen's with a new sweete-heart ith'next room,
Will thou be still a Cuckold? wink at errors
As pandors do and wittoles? Cethus now
Be crowned in Hystory for a revenge,
Which in the former World wants president:
Methinks, as when the Giants warr'd'gainst heaven,
And dared for primacy with Jove himself*
He darting against their mountains thunder-boles*
Which shattred them to pieces: the war done,
I like the great Olimpicke Jupiter,
Walk ore my ruins, tread upon my spoils
With majesty, I pace upon this floor
Pan'd with the trunkes of Kings and Potentates,
For what lesle could have sated my revenge?
This arch-rogue fallen amongst them? he whose eie^
Had the preposterous virtue to fire Troy.
Now is thy black soul for thy periuries
Swimming in red damnation.

Synon who had before counterfeited death, rises up, and answers. Syn. Sir,
not yet,
All policies live not in Cethus brain,
Synon has share, and know if thou have craft,
I have reserved some cunning: see my body
Free and untouched from wounds.

Ceth. Speak, shall we then
Divide these dead betwix^ us, and both live?

Syn. If two Suns cannot shine within one sphere,
Then why should two arch-villaines? thou have discovered
Projects almost beyond me, and for which
I have ingrost a mortal envy here,
I will be sole, or none.

Ceth. Cease then to be,
That I may live without Competitor.
Cause Synons name be rae'd out of the World,
And only mine remembered.

Syn. Thine's but frailty,
My ^ame shall be immortal; made more glorious
In treading upon thee, as thou on these;
^^oope thou my Underling.

Ceth. I still shall stand
They fight, and kill one another. Rooted.

Syn. And yet cut down by Synons hand.

Ceth. I now am dust like these.

Syn. One single fight
Ends him, who millions ruined in one night.

Enter Hellena, Electra, and Hermione. Her. Can you behold this slaughter?

Hell. Yes, and dye
Atsight of it: for why should Hellen live*
Hellen the cause of all these Princes deaths*
Cease to lament, reach me my Glass Hermione,
Sweet Orphant do; thy fathers dead already,
Nor will the fates lend thee a mother long.
Enter Hermione with a looking glass, then exit. Thanks, and so leave me. Was
this wrinkled forehead
When 'twas at best, worth half so many lives?
Where is that beauty? lives it in this face
Which has set two parts of the World at war,
Been ruin of the Asian Monarchy,
And almost this of Europe? this the beauty
That launched a thousand ships from Aulis gulf?
In such a poor repurchase, now decade?
See fair ones, what a little Time can do;
Who that considers when a seed is sown,
How long it is ere it appear from the earth,
Then ere it stalk, and after ere it blade,
Next ere it spread in leaves, then bud, then flower:
What care in watring, and in weeding took,
Yet crop it to our use: the beauties done,
And smell: they scarce last betwixt Sun and Sun*
Then why should these my blastings still survive,
Such royal ruins: or I longer live,
Then to be termed Hellen the beautiful.
I am grown old, and Death is ages due,
When Courtiers sooth, our glasses will tell true.
My beauty made me pitied, and still loved,
But that decayed, the worlds assured hate
Is all my dowre, then Hellen yield to fate*
Here Is that, my soul and body must divide,
The guerdon of Adultery, Lust, and Pride.
She strangles her self
Enter Vlysse^. Vlys. In thee they are punish t: of all these Princes,
And infinite numbers that opposed Troy,
And came in Hellens quarrel (save my self).
Not one suruies, (thanks to the immortal powers)
And I am purposde now to acquire by Sea,
My Kingdom and my dear Penelope,
And since I am the man soly reserved,
Accept me for the Authors Epilogue.
If he have been two bloody? it is the Story,
Truth claims excuse, and seeks no farther glory,
Or if you think he has done your patience wrong
(In teadious Scenes) by keeping you so long,
Much matter in few words, he bad me say
Are hard to express, that lengthned out his Play.

Explicit Actus quintus.
Here ends the whole History of the destruction of Troy.
FINIS.

