THE ROYAL KING, AND The Loyal Subject.

As it has been Acted with great Applause by the Queens Majesty's Servants.

Aut prodesse solent, aut delectare. --

Written by Thomas Heywood.

LONDON, Printed by Nich. and John Oaks for James Becket, and are to be fold at
his shop at the inner Temple near the Gate. 1637.

The Prologue to the Stage.
To give content to this most curious Age,
The gods themselves we' have brought down to the Stage,
And figured them in Planets, made even Hell
Deliver up the Furies, by no spell,
(Saving the Muses rapture) further, we
Have traffickt by their help; no History
We have left unrifled, our Pens have, been dipped
As well in opening each hid Manuscript,
As Tracts more vulgar, whether read, or sung
In our domesticke, or more foreign tongue:
Of Faiery Elves, Nymphs of the Sea, and Land;
The Lawnes and Groves, no number can be scanned
Which we have not given feet to, nay it is known,
That when our Chronicles have barren grown
Of Story, we have all Invention stretched,
Dived low as to the Center, and then reached
Unto the Primum mobile above:
(Nor escaped things intermediate) for your love,
These have been Acted often, all have past
Censure; of which some live, and some are cast:
For this in agitation, stay the end,
Though nothing please, yet nothing can offend.
Dramatis Personae.
THe King of England. The Prince of England. The Lord Martial. Captain
Bonvile. The Earl of Chester. Corporal Cock. The Lord Lacy. Lansprisado
Match. The Lord Clinton. The Clown. The Lord Audley. A Welch-man. The Lord
Bonvile. An Host of the ordinary The Princess. Four young Gallants at the
ordinary. Isabella the Martials eldest Daughter. A Servant. Margaret, the
Martials younger Daughter. A Bawd. The Lady Mary Audley. Two Courtezans. Two
Gentlemen in a Brothel-house. Attendants, etc.
The Royal King, AND The Loyal Subject.
Actus primus,
Scena prima.
Enter the King of England, the Lord Lacy, Clinton, Chester, and the Martial,
Audley, and Bonvile. King. THus from the holy Wars are we returned,
To, slumber in the Summer of soft peace,
Since those proud enemies that late blaspheamd
And spit their furies in the face of Heaven,
Are now laid low in dust.

Chester. Dread Sovereign.
The Heavens have showed their bounty unto us,
In guarding your most dear and isacred life
From opposite hatred, and that imminent peril
To which you were engaged.

Clinton. When in one batt^ile you were twice unhorst,
Guirt with the opposite ranks of Infidels,
That had not timely res^^e come from Heaven,
Mortal assistance had been used in vain.

King. Ey, now you load me with a surplu^^^dge^,
Of comprlesse debe^^ this thrice (...) (...)
My noble Martial, twice that pe^llous day^
Did he bestride me, and beneath his Targe.
Me thought that instant did I lie as safe
As in my best and strongest Cittadell;
The whilst his bright Sword like the Bolt of Jove,
Pierced the steele-crests of barbarous Insidels,
And flatted them with earth; although my Subject,
Yet in this one thing thou have proved my Lord:
For when my life was forfeit to the Wars,
Thou by thy valor did redeem it freely,
And gav'st it me, whilst thou ingag'st thy life:
For which if ever by like chance of War,
Laws forfeiture, or our prerogative,
Thy life come in like danger, here we swear
By our earths honors, and our hopes divine,
As thou for us, we will ours engage for thine.

Mart. You give my Lord, to Duty Attributes
Too high for her submisse humility:
I am your vassal, and ten thousand lives
Of equal rank with mine, subjects and servants,
Be over-rated if compared with yours.

King. When I forget thee, may my operant parts
Each one forget their office: We create ^hee
Next to our self of power, we but except
The name of King, all other dignities
We will communicate to thee our friend.

Mart. May I no longer use these Roy alties,
Or have the power to enjoy them, the^ I wholly
Devote them to your service.

Prince. Noble Martial,
If I survive Englands Inheritance,
Or ever live to sit on Jacobs Stone,
Thy love shall with my Crown be hereditary.

Mart. And gracious Prince, since Heaven has bin as liberal
To grace me with your favor, as my birth
Was to endow me richly; all your graces
Shall with my great and ample revenues
Be ever to your virtues serviceable.

King. We know it. and have been observers long
Of thy choice virtues neither could we yet
Fasten that love on thee, which came not home
With double use and ample recompense.

Clint. These graces are beyond dimension,
They have nor height, nor depth, uncircumscrib'd,
And without bounds. He like abroad armed tree
O're-shadows us, and throw his spacious bows,
We that grow under cannot see the Sun,
Nor taste the cheerful warmth of his bright beams.
These branches we must loppe by fire or Thunder,
Or by his shadowy a^mes be still kept under.

Chest. I was borne Eagle-fighted, and to gaze
In the Suns forehead; I will brook no cloud
To stand betwixt me and his glorious fire,
I Will have f^ll light, or none; either foare high,
Or else sink low; my ominous Fate is ca^t,
Or to be first, or of all abjects last.

King. You shall renowned Martial feast for us
The Ambassadors that come from foreign Lands,
To gratulate our famous victories.

Mar. I shall my Lord, and give them intertainment
To Englands honor, and to suite the place
Of which I bear the name.

King. We doubt it not:
We understand Lords, in these tedious wars
Some forward spirits have been at great expense
To furnish them like noble Gentlemen;
And many spent most part of their revenues
In honor of their Country, some undone
In pursuit of th^se wars: now if such come
For their relief by suite petitionary,
Let them have gracious hearing, and supply
Or by our service, or our Treasury

Audley. I have one Kinsman has spent all his land,
And is returned a beggar, and so tattered,
As that I can but blush to acknowledge him:
But in the Wars he spent it, and for me,
Wars shall relieve him. He was a noble Heir,
But what these lost, let other Wars repair.

King. Lords all, once more we greet your safe return,
With general welcome, we invite you all
To feast with us, and joy what we have wo^^e,
Happiest in these, our Martial, and our son.
Exit.
Enter the Clown and a Welch-man. Clown. It soemes thou have not been in the
Wars my Friend, but art new come up to London.


Welsh. Heaven please thee from all his mercies, and his graces: It was told us
in Wales, that you have great pigge Organ in Paul's, and pigger by a great deal
than our Organ at Rixam, which made me make my travels and my journies on the
pare hoof up to London, to have resolutions and certifications in that
pisinesse, that when I venturne into my Countries and habitations, I may give
notice to mine Uncle, Rice ap Davy, ap Morgan, ap Evan, ap Jones, ap Geffrey. I
pray where apout stands Paul's Church, can you tell her?


Clo^^^. Overy easily; stand with thy face that way, and follow thy nose, and
thou will be there presently. But do thou hear Brittan, take my word, our
Organ of Powles is much bigger and better than yours of Rixam, by as much as
Powles Church is bigger and better than Saint Pancridge.


Welsh. Awe man, you prittle and prattle nothing but leasings and untruths: now
will you but ^ase your posteriors a little, and I will quickly show you your
Organ of Paul's.


Clown. Very good, I like your demonstration well; but do thou think your
Organ of Rixam can compare with ours for all that?


Welsh. Lend me but your ears and your apprehensions, and I will make you
easily to acknowledge your errors.


Clown. But first show me your case in which you carry your two pair of
Organs, sure those flops will not hold them: but in the mean time walk with me
to the next red Lettice, and I will give thee two Cannes, and wet thine
Organ-pipes well I warrant thee.


Welsh. I will take your courtesies, and if ever I shall meet you in Glamorgan,
or Rednock-shire, I will make bold to requite some part of your kindnesses.


A loud winding of Horns within. Clown. The very noise of that Horn has
frighted my courtesy, but all is one, farewell for this time, and at our next
meeting ten to one I will be as good as my word.


Welsh. Say you so man, why then Cad keep you from all his mercies, and good
fortunes, and make us all his servants.


Sound again. Enter the King, Martial, etc. King. Come, we will to the c^ace,
be near us Martial,
I Will try to day which of our two good steeds
Can speed it best; let the most swift take both.

Mar. So please your Grace, but I shall surely loose;
Yours is the best for proof, though mine for show.

King. That will we try, the wager grows not deep
Equals the lay, and what we win, we will keep,
Mount, mount.

Exeunt. Chester. Greater and greater still, no plot, no trick
To have him quite removed from the Kings Grace,
To slander him?

Clin. The King will lend no ear
To any just complaint that is made of him;
What can our ^ andals do then?

Chest. Challenge him
Of Treason then, and that may happily call
His Loyalty into suspect and question,
Which on the King at (...) will breed a coldness,
If not a deadness of affection.

Clint. Of Treason? say he crave the combat then,
For that is the least he can; which of us two
Shall combat him? I know his blows too well,
Not I.

Chest. I should be loath.

Clin. How do you relish this?
His virtue and his bounty won him grace,
On that we will build to ruin all his favors,
And work him to disgrace.

Chest. Pray teach me how?

Clin. First, praise him to the King, give all his virtues
Double their due, add unto every thing,
Ey, and Hyperb lize in all his deeds:
Let his known virtues be the common Theme
Of our discourse to stale him, rate his worth,
To equalize, if not to exceed the King:
This cannot but beget distaste at least.

Chest. But further.

Clin. Thus; then fall off from his praise,
And question his best deeds, as it may be
His noble bounty is but popular grace,
And his humility but inward pride:
His vulgar ^^^^age and applause abroad,
A way to climb and seat himself aloft,
You understand me?

Chest. Fully; come to horse,
Horns. And as we ride, our further plots digest,
To find what may disturb, what aid us best.
Exit.
Enter Martial, and Servant. Mar. Spur to the King, his steed's unshod
before,
The ways be stony, and he will spoil his beast:
Here take these shoes and hammer, brought of purpose
For mine own use.

Serve. My Lord, have you pluck'e the shoes off from your own horse, to set
them on anothers^ a thousand to one but you will spoil your own Guelding
quite.


Mar. No matter, do as I command thee sirrah;
Hollow him straight, I know he loves that horse,
And would not ride him bare for any gold.

Serve. Your horse is as good as his I am sure, and I think you love him as well.


Mar. No matter, if he ask thee where thou had them,
Tell him, thou broughtst them with thee for my use.
Away, I Will gallop after, and over-take thee.

Serve. Put your shoes on another horses feet, and let your own go
barefoot? a jest indeed.


Mar. The King affects both his good horse and Game, I Will help to further both.


Enter the King, and Martial: Wind horns. King. You have fetched me up at
length, that is to your fortune,
Or my misfortune, for I lost a shoe.
Martial you ride well furnished to the field,

Mar. My Lord, so Horsemen should and I am glad
My man was so well furnished, and the rather
Since we are far from help; my man is cunning,
Your Highne^^e to his skill may trust your horse.

King. Thou could not have presented me a gift
I could have tasted better, for that beast
I much esteem: you were out-stript at length.

Mar. Till I was forced to alight, my horse with yours Kept equal speed.


Enter the Lords. King. Our Lords? now Gentlemen,
How do you like the Chase?

Audl. 'Twas excellent.

King. Had not my horse been by mischance unshod,
My Martial here and I had led you ^till.

Chest. You were the better horst.

King. And you the worst,
Witness the hugeness of your way behind:
Is not my horse yet shod?

Serve. He is my Lord.

King. Then let us mount again.

Clin. Your horse my Lord, is not in state to ride,
He wants two shoes before.

King. Whose does, the Martials?

Mart. Often such mischance; happen.

King. Were you furnished
For us, and for your self kept no supply?

Mar. So I may have my Lord to furnish you,
I care not how my self want.

King. Apprehension help me, for every circumstance apply
Thou have done me an unwonted courtesy;
You spied my loss first.

Mar. I did my Lord.


King. And then alighted.


Mar. True.


King. Upon my life it is so,
To unshooe thine own good steed, and furnish mine,
Was It not? upon thy life resolve me true.

Mar. What I have done my Lord, I did to you.


King. You will exceed me still, and yet my courtesy
Shall rank with thine; for this great duty shown,
I pay thee thus, both steeds are now thine own.

Clint. They wager love.

Mar. The best thing I can do
In me is duty; the worst, Grace in you.

King. The art ours; come mount, we wi^ return to Court,
To order the great Turnament prepared
To do our son grace; in which we entreat
Martial, your aid, because your skill is great.
Exit
Enter Corporal and Cock ragged. Corpor. We have visited all our familiars,
is it not now time that we revisite our Captain?


Cock. With all my heart good Corporal, but it had not bin amiss, if we had
gone to Burchen-lane first to have suited us: and yet it is a credit for a man
of the ^word to go threadbare, because by his apparel he may be taken to be
an old Soldier.


Corp. Cock, thy father was a fresh water soldier, thou are not; Thou have
been powdered, witness thy f^axe and touch-box.


Enter Match. Cock. But who comes yonder, my Match? I am glad I have met thee.


Match. I knew Cock, at one time or other thou would meet with thy Match.
What, shall we go to my Captains lodging?


Enter Captain extreme ragged. Corp. Spare that pains, yonder he appears in
his colors.

Capt. Fortun' de la guere; I that have flourisht, no colors like me, nay, no
Trumpet thou in his highest key, have nothing now but rags to flourish; I
that have faced the enemy, have not so much as any facing left me: were my
suite but as well pointed as I have seen some, and stood I but in the midst of
my followers, I might say I had nothing about me but tagge and ragge. I am
descended nobly; for I am descended so low, that all the clothes of my back
are scarce worth a Noble: I was borne to thousands, and yet a thousand to one,
they will now scarce acknowledge me where I was borne.


Corp. Health to our worthy Captain,


Capt. Thanks my most worthy soldiers; and yet if I should examine your worths,
what at the most could all you make?


Corp. I would not have your Worship to examine our outsides.


Capt. And for your insides I Will pass my word.


Cock. Cannot all your worships credit afford you a new suit?


Cap. Credit me, no; my revenues were a thousand a year, part of which I
lavish'^ amongst gallants, riotted in Tavernes, havockt in Ordinaries; and when
my estate began ^o ebb, as my last refuge, I laid all my hopes upon the last
wars, but failing there, (as the world imagins) I am returned as you see. The
King has promised supply and relief to all that have spent their estates in
his expeditions, but many like my self have been borne to be poor, that
scorn to be beggars; as many have been borne to be rich, that can never leave
it; the truth is, I am my self as my proceedings will express me further.


Cor. Will you cashiere us Captain, or shall we follow your future fortunes?


Capt. You shall not leave me; my purpose is to try the humors of all my
friends, my Allies, my ancient associates, and see how they will respect me in
my supposed poverty: though I loose their acquaintance, I will loose none of my
retinew. How say you Gentlemen, will you copart with me in this my
dejectedness?


Corp. As I am Corporal, so will I prove true Squire to thy body.


Cock. And as I am true Cock, so will I crow at thy service, wait on thee
with a comb for thy head, with fire to thy Piece, with water to thy hands, and
be cock sure in any employment whatsoever.


Match. And as I am true Match, I shall scorn that any of them shall
o're-match me in duty.


Capt. Attend me then; if I rise, you shall ascend; if fall, I will lie flat
with you. First then I will make some trial of my Friends at the Court, and in
good time: here is the King.


Sound, Enter the King discoursing with Chester, and Clinton, Audley, and
Bonvile. King. You have persuaded much, and I begin
To censure strangel, of his emulous love.

Chest. Further my Lord, what can his smoothness mean,
His courtesy, and his humility,
But as fly baits to catch the peoples hearts,
And weane them from your love.

Clin. Does he not strive
In all things to exceed your courtesy,
Of purpose to outshine your Royal deeds,
And daze I your brightness, that himself may shine?
Is he not only popular my Liege?
Is not the peoples suffrage sole to him,
Whilst they neglect your fame, his train does equal,
If not exceed yours, still his Chamber thronged
With store of suitors: where the Martial lies,
There is the Court, all eyes are bent on him,
And on his glories; there is no Theme abroad,
But how he saved you from the Pagans sword,
How his sole hand swayes, guides, and guards the Realm.

Chest. Think but my Lord on his last game at Chesse,
'I was his past odds, but when he saw you moov'd,
With what a sly neglect he lost the mate,
Only to make you bound to'him.

Clin. For all the favors, graces, honors, loves
Bestowed upon him from your bounteous hand,
His cunning was to think to quit you all,
And pay you with a horse-shooe.

Chest. In the Turnament
Made by the Prince your son, when he was Peerless,
And without equal, this ambitious Martial
Strives to exceed, and did; but when he saw
Your Highness moov'd to see the Prince disgraced,
He lost the Prize; but how? that all the people
Might see it given, not forfiet, which did add
Rather than derogate: briefly my Lord,
His courtesy is all ambition.

King. And well it may be; is he not our vassal?
Why should the Martial then contend with us.
To exceed in any virtue? we observe him.
His popularity, how affable
He Is to the people; his Hospitality,
Which adds unto his love; his forwardness,
To entertain Ambassadors, and feast them,
Which though he do '^ upon his proper charge,
And for our honor, yet it may be thought
A smoothness, and a cunning, to grow great;
It must be so. A project we intend
To prove him faithless, or a perfect friend.
Exit.
Chest. It takes, these jealous thoughts we must pursue,
And to his late doubts still add something new.

Cap. Your speech being ended, now comes in my cue.
My honorable Lord.

Chest. What begger's this?

Cap. Beggar my Lord? I never begged of you:
But were I a beggar, I might be a Courtiers fellow:
Could I beg suites my Lord as well as you,
I need not go thus clad; or were you free
From begging as I am, you might rank me.

Chest. Comparisons? Away.
Exit.
Cap. Folly and pride
In Silks and Lace their imperfections show,
But let p^re virtue come in garments torn
To beg relief she gets a courtly scorn:
My Lord you know me?

Clin. I have seen that face.

Cap. Why it is the same it was, it is no changeling,
It bears the selfsame front; it is not like yours,
Paled with the least disgrace, or past with bragges,
That smiles upon gay clothes, and frowns on rags.
Mine Is steadfast as the Sun, and free as (...);
Whose equal eyes look upon want and state.

Clin. And does not mine so too? Pray w^at's your business?


Cap. Only that you would know me: the Kings favor has made you a Baron, and
the Kings wars have made me a bare one: there is less difference in the
Accent of the word, than in the cost of our weeds: This is the same face you
were once acquainted with though not the same habit: I could know your face,
though your diseased body were wrapped in sheepe-skins.


Clin. This fellow offends me.


Cap. Go churl, pas^e free, Thou know my forfeit lands, though forget'st
me: Nay, you would be going too, you are as aff^aid of a torn suite, as a
younger brother of a Sergeant, a rich corne-master of a plentiful year, or a
troublesome Attorney to hear of suits put to compremize.

Sir. I must challenge you, you are my kinsman;
My Grandsir was the first that raised the name
Of Bonvile to this height, but Lord to see
That you are grown a Lord, and know not me.

Bonv. Cousin, I know you, you have bin an unthri^t,
And lavisht what you had; had I so done,
I might have ^bb'd like you, where I now flow.

Cap. Yet I can purchase that, which all the wealth you have will never win
you.


Bon. And what is that I pray?

Cap. Wit: is the word strange to you, wit?

Bon. Whither will thou?

Cap. True,
Wit will to many e^eit come to you.

Bon. Feed you upon your purchase, I Will keep mine.

Cap. Have you the wit to do it?

Cap. I have wit to buy,
And you to sell, which is the greater gain?
Cousin I Will keep my wealth, keep you your brain.

Cap. The wealth of Mydas choke thee ere thou art old,
And even the bread thou feed'st on change to gold.
My Lord, you hear how I pray for my Kindred,
I have a little more charity for my friend: with you
I have some b^sinesse.

And. I am in haste now.

Cap. I pray you stay.

Audl. Not now indeed.

Cap. Pardon, for here is no way
Before you hear me.

And. Prithee be brief.

Cap. Your daughter lives I hope.

And. What Is that to thee?

Cap. Somewhat 'twill prove, e^ and concerning me;
Before I laid my fortunes on these wars.
And was in hope to thrive, by your con^ent,
Nay, by your motion our united hearts
Were made more firm by contract; well you know
We were betrothed.

And. Sir, I remember't not.

Cap. I do, and thus proceed:
I was in hope to have raised my fortunes high,
And with them to have pulled her by degrees
Unto that eminence at which I aim:
I venter'd for it, but instead of wealth
I purchased naught but wounds. Honor I had,
And the repute of valor; but my Lord,
These simply of themselves are naked Titles,
Respectlesse, without price, and bombast wealth,
And to the purblind world show seeming bad,
Behold in me their shapes, they thus go clad.

And. You said you would be brief.

Cap. All that I had,
I spent upon my Soldiers, we took no spoil.
The wars have grated on me even to this
That you now see: Now my last refuge is,
To raise my self by her.

And. And spend her means
As thou have done thine own vile unthrift? no,
I know no Contract.

Cap. I have one to show.

And. No matter; think thou that I Will vent my bags
To suite in Satin him that Jets in rags?
Exit.
Cap. The world's all of one heart, this blaze I can,
All love the money, none esteems the man.
These be our friends at Court, and fine ones too,
Are they not pray? where be our followers?

Cock. Here noble Captain.


Cap. You see how our friends grace us, what hopes we have to prefer you?


Corp. I see sufficient: Captain, I will discharge my self, I mean to seek
elsewhere for preferment.


Cap. All leave me if you please; but him that stays, If e're I mount, I Will
with my fortunes raise.


Match. Captain, I desire your pas^e, I mean to march along with my Corporal.


Cap. Will thou go too?


Cock. I leave you? who I? for a little diversity, for a wet storm? no Sir,
though your outsides fallaway, I Will cleave as close to you as your linings.


Cap. Gramercy yet, away without reply?


Corp. Futre for thy base service.


Cap. Away, sfoot how am I fallen out of my humor? and yet this strangeness of
my nearest friends and alliance deserves a little cotemplating; is it possible,
that even Lords, that have the best educating, whose ears are frequent to the
most fluent discourse, that live in the very brain of the Land, the Court,
that these should be gulled with shadows, and not be able to distinguish a man
when they see him; thou know me, yet these do not.


Cock. Why may not a poor man have as good eyes as another? their ears indeed
may be larger than mine, but I can see as far without spectacles as the best
Lord in the land.


Cap. These superficial Lords that think every thing to be as it appears,
they never question a man's wit, his discretion, his language, his inward
virtues, but as he seems, he passes.


Cock. I warrant if I should look like an Ass,
They would take me for one too.

Cap. The next I try is my betrothed, if she acknowledge this hand that has
received hers, this heart, this face, and knows the person from the garment, I
shall say, Woman, there is more virtue in thee than Man.


Cock. There Is no question of that; for they say, they will hold out better:
But Sir, if we be no better habited, I make a question how we shall get in at
the Court-gate; for I Will assure you your fashion is not in request at the Court.


Cap. My virtue is not to be imitated; I Will hold my purpose though I be kept
back, and venture lashing in the Porters Lodge. Come, follow me, I will go see
my Mistress, Though guirt with all the Ladies of the court:

Though ragged Virtue often may be kept out,
No grate so strongly kept above the Center,
But Asses with gold laden, free may en^er.

Actus Secundus,
Scena Secunda.
Enter the Prince, the Princess, the Martial, and the Lady Mary Audley.
Prince. Lord Martial, we are much in debt to you,
For by your favor we obtained the prize
In the last Tourney: we acknowledge it.

Mar. I could not love my Sovereign Gracious Prince,
Without extent of duty to the son.

Princess. 'Twas nobly plied on both sides, both had honor;
Yet brother to be modest in your praise,
You had the best.

Prince. You please to grace me Sister.
Martial, I hear you are a widdower late:
How long is it since your bea^teous Countess died?

Mar. My Lord, you make me now unsoldier-like
For get the name of Martial, to become
A passionate husband; her remembrance draws
Tears from mine eyes: she died some three Months since,
Good Lady she is now gone.

Princess. A kind Husband
I Will warrant him: if e're I chance to bride,
Heaven grant I find no worse.

Prince. Have you no children by her?

Mar. Two sweet Girls,
Now all my hopes and solace of this earth,
Whom next the zeal I owe unto my King,
I pri^e above the world.

Prince. Why noble Sir,
Are they not brought up to be trained at Court,
To attend our Sister?

Mar. They are young and tender,
And e're I teach them fas^ion, I would gladly
Train them in virtue, and to arm their youth
Against the smooth and amo^ous baits of Court.

Princess. As kind a Father as a Husband now:
If e're I chance to wedde, such Heaven grant me.

Prince. Why Heaven may hear your prayer: here is one
I warrant that dreams not on a Husband.

Princess. Ye^ e're long
She may both dream, and speak as much as I.
No question but she thinks as much already;
And were here voice and her election free,
She would not stick to say this man for me.

Prince. You make the Lady blush.

Princess. Why to change face,
They say in mod^st Maids are signs of grace:
Yet many that like her hold down the head,
Will never change color when they are once in bed.

Prince. You Will put the Lady out of countenance quite.

Princess. Not out of heart; for all of her complexion,
Show in their face the fire of their affection:
And even the modest wives, this know we too,
Often blush to speak what is no shame to do.

Mar. Lady, the Princess does but try your spirit,
And prove your cheek, yet do not take it ^ll,
He Will one day come will act the Husbands part.

Enter Captain and Cock. Princess. Here enters one, I hope it be not he.


Cap. Attend me sirrah into the presence, and if any of the Guard repulse thee,
regard him not.


Cock. I Will march where my Captain leads, were into the Presence of the
great Termagaunt.


Cap. My duty to the Prince, Madam your favor, Lord Martial, yours.


Prince. What will the fellow do?


Cap. Lady, your lip.


Princess. My Lord, how like you this?
She Would blush to speak, that does not blush to kiss.

Cock. Well said Mistress.


Prince. A good bold fellow.


Cap. You are not ashamed to acknowledge me in this good company: I have
brought thee all that the wars have left of me; were I better worth, 'twere
all thine; thou can have no more of the Cat but his skin, I have brought
thee home the same eyes that first saw thee, the same tongue that first courted
thee, the same hand that first contracted thee, and the same heart that first
affected thee: More I have not, less I cannot: nay quickly sweet W^nch, and
let me know what to trust to.


Lady Mary. Were you more worth, I could not love you more,
Or less, affect you less; you have brought me home
All that I love, your self, and you are welcome.
I gave no faith to Money, but a Man,
And that I cannot loose possessing you:
It Is not the robe or garment^l affect,
For who would marry with a suite of clothes?
Diamonds, though ^^tin Lead, retain their worth,
And leaden Knives may have a golden sheath.
My love is to the Jewel, not the Case,
And you my jewel are.

Cap. Why god amerey Wench: come sirrah.

Exit.
Cock Here Is a short horse soon curryed.


Princess. Is this your sweetheart? I had need wish you much joy, for I see
but a little toward: Where did you take him up by the hye-way, or did you not
fall in love with him hanging on a Gibbet?


Prince. What is he for Heavens sake? can no man give him his true character?


Mar. I can my Lord, he is of a noble House,
A Bonvile, and great H^^re; but being profuse,
And lavish in his nonage, spent the most
Of his known means, and hoping now at last
To raise his fortunes by the wars now ceast,
His hopes have fail^d him, yet we know him valiant
And fortunate in service. One whose mind
No fortune can deject, no favor raise
Above his virtues pitch.

Prince. If he be such,
We Will move the King in his behalf, and help
To cherish his good parts.

Enter Chester. Chest. My Lord the Prince,
The King calls for you; for he dines to day
In the great Hall with great solemnity,
And his best state: Lord Martial, you this day
Must use your place, and wait, so all the Lords.

Prince. Come, we will go see the King.


Mar. I shall attend your Grace.

Exit.
Princess. And in faith Lady can you be in love with this ragge of honor?


Lady Ma. Madam, you know I am my Fathers heir,
My possibilities may raise his hopes
To their first height: should I despise my hand
In a torn glove, or taste a poisonous draught
Because presented in a Cup of Gold?
Virtue will last when wealth flies, and is gone:
Let me drink Nectar though in earth or stone.

Princess. But say your Father now, as many Fathers are, prove a true
worldling, and rather than bestow thee on one dejected, dis-inherite thee? how
then?


Laay Ma. My Father is my Father, but my Husband,
He is my self: my resolution is
To profess constancy, and keep mine honor;
And rather than to Queen it where I hate,
Beg where I love: I wish no better fate.

Princess. By my faith good counsel; if I live long enough, It may be I may
have the grace to follow it.

Exit.
Sound: enter two banquets brought forth, at one the King and the Prince in
their State, at the other the Lords: the Martial with his Staff and Key, and
other offices borne before him to wait on the King. King. This Anniversary do
we yearly keep
In memory of our late victories.
In joy of which we make a public feast,
And banquet all our P^eres thus openly.
Sit Lords, those only we appoint to wait,
Attend us for this day: and now to crown
Our Festival, we will begin this health.
Who Is that so near ou^elbow? Martial? you?
Stand off we wish you, further.

Mar. Me my Lord?

King. Ey you my Lord.

Mar. Your Highness will's a law,
I shall obey.

King. You are too near us yet: what are we King,
Or have we countermanders?

Chest. Note you that?


Clint. Now it begins.


Mar. I fear some Sycophants
Have dealt ignobly with us to the King:
No matter I am armed with innocence,
And that dares front all danger.

King. Lords this Health:
The King drinks, they all stand. See it go round, 'twas to our victory.

Mar. With pardon, can your Highness that remember, And so forget me?


King. Thou do prompt me well,
You are our Martial.

Mar. I have used that place.

King. Your Staff? support it, and resolve me thus:
Which of yon Lords there seated at the board,
Have thou been most in opposition with?
Or whom do thou least favor?

Mar. I love all:
But should you ask me who has wronged me most,
Then should I point out Chester.

King. Chester then,
Bear him that Staff, giv't up into his hand,
Say, I commend me to him by the name
Of our High Martial; take your place below,
And let him wait on us: what do you pause?
Or shall we twice command?

Mar. I Will do it my Lord:
Chester, the King commends his love to you,
And by my mouth he styles you by the name
Of his High Martial, which this Staff of Office
Makes good to you; my place I thus resign,
And giv't up freely as it first was mine.
You must attend the King, it is a place
Of honor Chester, and of great command,
Use it with no less modesty than he
That late enjoyed it, and resignes it thee.

Chest. I need not your instruction; the Kings bounty
Bestows it freely, and I take my place.

Mar. And I mine here, th'allegeance that I owe him
Bids me accept it, were it yet more low.

King. Attend us Chester, wait upon our Cup,
It is an honor due to you this day.

Chest. I shall my Lord.

Clin. Oh my Lord you are welcome, we have not had your company amongst us
long.


Mar. You ever had my heart, though the Kings service
Commanded still my person: I am eased
Of a great burden so the King rest pleased.

And. I have not seen a man has borne his disgrace with more patience;
especially to be forced with his own hand to deliver up his honors to his
enemy.


Bonv. It would have troubled me, I should not brook it.


King. Command you fellow give his golden Key
To the Lord Clinton; henceforth we debar him
Access unto our Chamber, see it done.

Chest. The King commands you to give up your Key
Unto that Lord that neares you: henceforth Sir,
You to his person are denied access,
But when the King commands.

Mar. Say to my Liege,
The proudest foe he has, were he an Emperor,
Should not have forced the least of these from me:
But I acknowledge these, and all I have,
To be sole his; my life too, which as willingly
To please him I will send: I thank his Highness
That sees so into my debility,
That he has care to ease me of these loads
That have oppressed me long; so Sir it is done:
Come Lords, now let us be merry, and drink round,
After great tempests we a calm have found.

And. This Lord is of an unwonted constancy, He entertaines his disgraces as
merrily as a man dies that is tickled to death.


King. Cannot all this stir his impatience up?
I Will search his breast but I will find his gaul:
Command him give his Staff of Council up,
We will bestow it elsewhere where we please.

Chest. The King would have you to forbear the Council, And to give up your
Staff.


Mar. I shall turn man,
Kings cannot force to bear more than we can.

Chest. Sir, are you moov'd?

Mar. Those that are wronged may speak:
My Lord, I let you know my innocence,
And that my true and unstained Loyalty
Deserves not this disgrace: none ever bore
Like eminence with me that has discharged it
With better zeal and conscience: for my service
Let my wounds witnes^e, I have some to show;
That had I not my body interposed,
Had been your skarres: all my deserved honors
You have bestowed upon my enemies,
Ey such as have whole skins, --
And never bled but for their ease and health.
You might with as much lustice take my life^
As seize my honors: howsoever my Lord
Give me free leave to speak but as I find,
I ever have been true, you now unkind.

King. Will you contest?
What have you Sir that is not held from us?
Or what can your own virtue purchase you
Without our grace? Are not your fortunes, favors,
And your revenewes ours? where should they end
But where they first began? have we not power
To give our own? or must we ask your counsel,
To grace where you appoint? need we a Guardian,
Or a^me you at the place?

Mar. Oh my dread King,
It sorrows me that you misprize my love,
And with more freedom I could part with life
Than with your Grace: my offices alas,
They were my troubles, but to want your favors,
That only thus afflicts my loyal thoughts,
And makes me bold to term your Grace unkind.

King. Sir, we command you to abandon Court,
And take it as a favor that we now
Not question of your life; without reply
Leave us.

Mar. I Will leave the Court as I would leave my burden,
But from your Highness in this kind to part,
Is as my body should fortake my heart.
Exit.
King. Shall we not be ourselfe, or shall we brook
Competitors in reign? act what we do
By other men's appointment? he being gone,
We are unrivaled; we will be sole, or none.

Prince. The Martiall's gone in discontent my Liege.


King. Pleased, or not pleased, if we be Englands King,
And mightiest in the Sphere in which we moove,
We Will shine alone, this Phaeton cast down,
We Will state us now midst of our best affected:
Our new created Martial first lead on,
Whose Loyalty we now must build upon.
Exit.
Enter Captain and Clown. Cap. Sir, now attend me, I Will to the Ordinary,
And see if any of my ancient friends will take note of me.
Where Is the good man? within?

Clown. There Is none dwells here; you may speak with the Master of the house if
you will.


Enter the Host. Crown. Captain, Captain, I have descri'd an Host.


Cap. An Host? where? which way march they?


Clown. Mine Host of the house, see where he marches.


Cap. Here take my cloak, what is it not Dinnertime? Are there no gallants
come yet?


Host. Why Sir, do you mean to dine here to day?


Cap. Here do I mean to cranch, to munch, to eat, To feed, and be fat my
fine Cullapolis.


Host. You must pardon me Sir, my house intertaines none but Gentlemen; if you
will stand at gate, when Dinner's done, I Will help you to some fragments.


Cap. Sirrah, if your house be free for Gentlemen, it is fit for me; thou see
I keep my man, I Have Crowns to spend with him that is bravest here: I Will keep
my room in spite of Silks and Sattins.


Host. I would I were well rid of this ragge-muffin.


Enter two Gentlemen. 1. Gent. How goes the day?


2. Gent. It cannot yet be old, because I see no more gallants come.


1. Gent. Mine Host, what is here?


Host. A Tatterdemalean, that stays to sit at the Ordinary to day.


2. Gent. Do know him?


Host. I did when he was flush, and had the Crowns; but since he grew poor,
he is worn quite out of my remembrance. He is a decayed Captain, and his name
is Bonvile.


1. Gent. I would he would leave this place, and rank himself with his
companions.


Enter two more. 2. Gent. Morrow Gentlemen.


3. Gent. The morning's past, ^tis midday at the least.


4. Gent. What is the room so empty?


Host. And please your Worships.
Here Is more by one than it can well receive.

3. Gent. What Tatter's that that walks there?


4. Gent. If he will not leave the room, kick him down stairs.


Cap. There Is never a silken outside in this company
That dares present a foot to do that office:
I Will toss that heel a yard above his head
That offers but a spurn.

1. Gent. Can we not be private?

Cap. I am a man like you perhaps well bred,
Nor want I coin, for hark, my pockets chinke:
I keep my man to attend me more perhaps,
Than some can do that go in costlier Silk
Are you so fearful of a ragged suite?
They were first paid for e're they were put on;
A man may question whether yours were so.
Who kicks first, ha, come; have you mind to game?
I Will cast, or set at thus much; will you card
A rest for this? no? then let us to dinner:
Come serve in meat.

1. Gent. Mine Host, prithee put this fellow out of the room, And let him not
drop his shooe-clouts here.


2. Gent. Sfoot do thou mean we shall go louzie out of the house?


3. Gent. If he will not go out by fair means, Send for a Constable.


4. Gent. And send him to Bridewell Ordinary; whipping cheer is best for him.


Host. Nay pray sir leave my house, you see the Gentlemen will not endure your
company.


Cap. Mine Host, thou knewst me in my flourishing prime:
I was the first brought custom to thine house,
Most of my means I spent here to enrich thee;
And to set thee up, I Have cast down my self.

Host. I remember sir some such matter, but you see the times change. Nay, will
you leave the Gentlemen?


Cap. The Lease of this house had thou not from me?
Did I not give thee both the Fine and Rent?

Host. I must needs say you were bountiful when you had it, but in troth sir,
if you will not be gone, J shall be forced to turn you out by the head and
shoulders.


Cap. And is not all this worth the trusting for an Ordinary?

Host. Nay if you prate, I shall use you somewhat extraordinary.

Gent. Down with the Rogue.

Cap. Since you hate calmes, and will move stormy weather,
Now Host and guest shall all down stairs together.

Clown. Ah well done Master, tickle them noble Captain.

Cap. Come Cock I have took some of their stomachs away from them before
Dinner.


Enter the Martial with his two men, and his two Daughters. Mar. We are at
peace now, and in threatened death
We do enjoy new life: my only comforts,
The image of my late deceased wife,
Now have I time to surfeit on your sight,
Which Court-imployments have debarred me long.
Oh Fortune, thou did threaten misery,
And thou have paid me comfort; need we ought
That we should seek the suffrage of the Court?
Are we not rich? are we not w^ll revenew'd?
Are not the Countrey-pleasures far more sweet
Than the Court-cares? Instead of balling suitors
Our ears receive the music of the Hound;
For mounting pride and lofty ambition,
We in the Air behold the Falcons Tower,
And in that Moral mock those that aspire.
Oh^ my good King, instead of threat and wrong,
Thou have brought me rest which I have wished so long.

Isabella. Sir we have long been Orphans in the Country,
Whilst you still followed your affairs at Court;
We heard we had a Father by our Guardian,
But scarce till now could we enjoy your sight.

Katherine. Nor let it seem offencive to your love,
That we in your retirement should take pride,
The King in this pursues our greater happiness,
And quickens most where he would most destroy.

Mar. You are mine own sweet girls 'and in your virtues
I place my sole bliss; you are all my honors,
My favors, state, and offices at Court:
What are you not? Let the King take my lands,
And my possession, and but leave me you,
He leaves me rich; more would I not desire,
And less he cannot grant.

Enter a servant. Serve. One from the King
Attends your honor, and his urgency
Craves quick dispatch.

Mar. Ladies withdraw a little,
I long to know what mischiefe's now afoot;
We Will front it be it death, ey and march toward it.
A Chair, admit the Herald, let him in;
We are arm'd' against what can come, our breast is true,
And that is one Maxim, what is forced is wrong,
We can both keep our heart and guide our tongue.

Enter the servant ushering in Chester. Chest. Sir, the King greets you, and
commands you effect
His will in this you know the Character.

Mar. My good Lord Martial you are welcome hither,
These Lines I kiss because they came from him.

Chest. You Will like the letter better than the style:
Ha, change your face? is your blood moov'd to the tide,
Or ebbes it to your heart?

Mar. Thou have two Daughters,
He reads. Fair by report her whom thou love b^st
Send to the Court^ it is thy Kings behest,
Do this on thy allegiance,

Chest: Sir your Answer?

Mar. I pray Sir deal with men in ^isery
Like one that may himself be miserable:
Insult not too much upon men distressed,
Play not too much upon my wretchedness;
The noble minds still will not when they can.

Chest. I cannot st^ for answer pray be brief.

Mar. You are more welcome than your message Sir,
And yet that is welcome coming from my King;
Pray Sir forbear me, it is the Kings command,
And you shall know mine answer instantly^
Receive him nobly.

Chest. I shall wait your pleasure.

Mar. Malice, revenge, displeasure envy, have,
I had thought that you had only dwelt at Court,
And that the Country had been clear and free:
But from Kings wraths no place I find is safe
My fairest daughter? had the King commanded
One of my hands, I had sent it willingly;
But her! yet Kings must not be dal^^d with,
Somewhat I must ^esolve to breed of force
Treason or to my blood, or to my King,
False Father or false or Subject I must prove,
Be true to him I serve other I love,
Somewhat I must: my Daugh^^rs, call them in:
Enter one ushering the Ladies. Leave them and us.
Ladies I must be blunt, the King's displeased
And hearing of two children whom I love,
My patience and my loyalty to try,
Commands that she whom I love best must dye.

Isab Dye? alas chat's nothing; must nor all men so?
And does not Heaven crown martyred innocence?
I was afraid my Lord the King had seen
To have strumpetted the (...) for often of your blood:
An innocent death my Lord is crown of rest,
Then let me dye as her whom you love best.

Kath. If but to dye, prove that you love me then;
Death were most welcome to confirm your love.
Alas my Sister she: has not the heart^
To look upon a rough To(...) face:
I am bold and con^tant, and my courage great;
As token of your love then point out me.

Mar. Alas my girl^ for greater ills prepare,
Death would end yours and somewhat (...) my sorrows:
What I must spe ke, contains ^^avens greatest curse,
Search all the world, you can find naught so ill.

Isab. Speak't at once.

Mar. Her whom I best affect.
The King intends to strumpet.

Kath. Bless me Heaven!

Mar. Should he,

Kath. By all my joys I Will sooner dye
Then suffer it.

Isab. And so by Heaven will I.

Mar. Now you are mine indeed, who would forgo
One of these jemmes so fine, and valued so?
But passion give me leave, the King commands,
I must obey. The fairest he sent for;
None of my daughters have been seen at Court,
Nor has the ambitious Chester viewed them yet:
My eldest then shall go, come hither girl;
I send thee, (Heaven knows) whether to thy death
Or to thine honor; though he envy me,
Yet in himself the King is honorable,
And will not stretch his malice to my child.
The worst I fear, and yet the best I hope.
I charge thee then even by a fathers name,
If the King daine to take thee to his bed
By name of Queen, if thou perceiv'st thy self
To be with child, conceal it even from him;
Next, when thou find'st him affable and free,
Find out some talk about thy Sister here,
As thus; thy Father sent thee but in jest,
Thy Sister's fairest, and I love her best.

Isab. It may incense the King.

Mar. What I intend
Is to my self, inquire no further of it.

Isab. I shall perform your will, and thus resolved
To be a Martyr e're a Concubine.
But if the King afford me further favor,
In my close bosom your last words I Will place.

Mar. Sister and Sister part, be you not seen,
Bid her farewell, a Martyr or a Queen.
They cannot speak for tears, alas for woe,
That force should part Sister and Sister thus,
And that the Child and Father of one heart,
Comands and powerful threats should thus divide.
But Chester stays, within there?

Enter servant. Serve. My Lord?

Mar. Have you received Earl Chester honorably?

Serve. The noblest welcome that the house could yield
He has had my Lord, nothing was held too dear:
He much extolls your bounty.

Mar. Usher h^min, we are now ready for him.

Serve. I shall my Lord.

Enter Chester, Chest. Sir, I have sta^'d your leisure, now your Answer?

Mar. That I obey, the fairest of my girls
I send the King.

Chest. I easily can believe
That this the fairest is, her like in Court
Lives not; she is a Present for a King.

Mar. Say to the King I give her but conditionally,
That if he like not this fairest of the two,
Unstained he will his gift send back again.

Chest. I shall, come Lady.

Mar. My Lord, I do not load you with commends
And duties which I could do to the King:
I know your love your memory may fail you,
And you them all may scatter by the way.
Do thou a Fathers duty thus in tears,
And send me how thou speed'st to free these fears.

Exeunt. Actus tertius.
Enter Clown and the Lady Mary. Mary. Came you from him?


Clown. Yes if it please your Maidenship; my Master sends you word he is the
old man, and his suite is the old suite still, and his clothes the old clothes:
He scorns to be a change ling, or a shifter; he fears nothing but this, that
he shall fall into the Lord your fathers hands for want of reparations.


Mary. We know thy meaning, here bear him this gold,
And bid him suite him like the man he was,
Bid him to face the proudest he in Court;
He shall not want whilst we have.

Clown. That was out of my Commission Lady, Gold tempts, I have commandment
not to touch it; it is another thing he aims at: it is a thing, but I know not
what manner of thing; but something it is, and he vows not to shift a shirt
till he be further resolved: he only sends you Commendations, and withal to
know if you would stand to your word.


Mary. He wrongs me to cast doubts:
Tell him I am the ^ame I ever was,
And ever will continue as I am.
But that he should disdain this courtesy
Being in want, and coming too from me,
Does somewhat trouble me.

Clown. We want Madam? you are deceived, we have store, of rags; plenty, of
tatters; abo^ndance, of jagges; huge rents, witness our breeches; ground
enough to command, for we can walk where we will, none will bid us to Dinner;
houses rent-free, and goodly ones to choose where we will; the Martialsie, the
Counter, Newgate, Bridewell; and would a man desire to dwell in stronger
buildings? and can you say that we are in want? No Lady, my Captain wants
nothing but your love, and that he entreats you to send by me the bearer.


Mary. I do, with all the best affection
A Virgin can bestow upon her friend.

Clown. I dare swear he is an honest man, but I dare not say he is a true man.


Mary. How, not a true man?


Clown. No; for he has sworn to steal you away, and thus I prove it: if he
steal you away, I am sure you will not go naked; he cannot steal you, but he
must steal the clothes you have on; and he that steals apparel, what is he
but a Thief? and he that is a Thief cannot be a true man Ergo.


Mary. That is not theft when men but steal their own,
And I am his, witness this Diamond,
Which bear him, and thus say, that no disaster
Shall ever part me from his company.

Clown. I shall bear this with as good will as you would bear him, Vtcung
volumus.


Mary. What are we but our words? when they are past,
Faith should succeed, and that should ever last.
My Father?

Enter Audley. And. Wots thou who is returned,
The unthrift Bonvile, ragged as a scarre-crow,
The Wars have gnawed his garments to the skin:
I met him, and he told me of a Contract.

Mary. Sir, such a thing there was.

And. Upon condition if he came rich.

Mary. I heard no such exception.

And. Thou do not mean to marry with a beggar?

Mary. Unless he be a Gentleman, and Bonvile
Is by his birth no less.

And. Such only gentile are, that can maintain Gentily.

Mary. Why, should your state fail you,
Can it from you your honors take away?
Whilst your Allegiance holds, what need you more,
You ever shall be noble although poor.

And. They are noble that have nobles; gentle they
That appear such.

Mary. Indeed so worldlings say:
But virtuous men prove they are only dear
That all their riches can about them bear.

Sound: Enter the King, Clinton, Bonvile, Prince, Princess. King. Is not Earl
Chester
Returned yet with an answer from the Martial?

Prince. Not yet my Lord.

King. For such contention we now scorn revenge,
Wee' le try the utmost of his patience now:
He would exceed our love, if it appear,
He will hold nothing for his King too dear.

And. Earl Chester is returned.

Enter Chester and Isabella. King. Have brought her Chester?

Chest. Her whom her father the most fair esteems,
He has sent by me, only with this request,
That if his free gift do not like your Highness,
You Will send her back untoucht to his embrace.

King. I fear we shall not, she app^ares too fair,
So straightly to part with: what is he would
Attempt such virgin-modesty to stain
By hopes of honor, flatteries, or constraint?
How do you like her? your opinions Lords?

Prince. A beauteous Lady, one that has no peer
In the whole Court.

King. Therefore I hold her precious.

Princess. A fairer face in Court who ever saw?
Her beaut, would become the name of Queen.

Clin. One of more state or shape where shall we find?

And. Her modesty does do her beauty grace,
Both in her cheek have chus'd a soveraign^ ^^ate.

King. You have past censure Lady, now you're mine,
And by your Fathers free gift you are so,
To make, or mar; to keep or bestow.

Isab. It glads me I am present to a King,
Whom I have always heard my father term
Royal in all things; virtuous, modest, chaste;
And to have one free attribute besides,
Which even the greatest Emperor need not scome,
Honest; to you if you be such my Liege,
A Virgins love I prostrate, and a heart
That wishes you all goodness with the duty
Of a true subject, and a noble father;
Then mighty Prince report your subject noble,
Since all those virtues you receive in me.

King. Thou have overcome us all; that thou have termed us,
We Will strive to be, and to make good those attributes
Thou have bestowed upon us, rise our Queen,
Thy virtue has took off the threatening edge
Of our intended hate: though thou art ours
Both by free gift and duty, which we challenge
As from a subject; though our power could stretch
To thy dishonor, we proclaim thee freed,
And in this grace thy father we exceed.

Prince. The King in this shows honor. Princes still
Should be the Lords of their own appetites,
And cherish virtue.

King. Have ^ your applause?

Bon. Your Highness shows both Royalty and Judgment
In vour fair choice.

King. Are your opinions so?

And. Far be it mighty King we should distaste
Where you so well affect.

Princess. For grace and feature
England affords not a more complete Virgin.

Clin. Were she not the Martials daughter,
I Would term her worthy for my Sovereigns Bride.

Chest. Ey that is the grief.

King. This kiss then be the Seal,
Thou art our Queen, and now art only mine.

Isab. May I become your vassal and your Handmaid,
Titles but equal to my humble birth:
But since your Grace a higher title daines,
Envy must needs obey where power compells.
Give expeditious order for the Rites
Of these our present Nuptials which shall be
Done with all State and due solemnity;
And Martial in this business thou shall find
Thy self defective, and not us unkind.

Enter servant. Serve. Health to your Highness.

King. Whence? Ser. From my sad Master,
Your Martial once, now your dejected vassal,
And thus he bid me say: If the King daine
To grace my daughter with the style of Queen,
To give you then this Casket which contains
A double dower; half of this mighty sum
He out of his revenewes had afforded,
Had she bin match but to a Barons bed;
But since your Highness daines her for your Bride,
And his Alliance scorns not to disdain,
He says a double dower is due to you.

King. He strives to exceed us still; this emulation
Begets our hate, and questions him of life.
This Dower we take, his Daughter entertain,
But him we never shall receive to grace.
Bear not from us so much as love or thanks:
We only strive in all our actions
To be held peerless for our courtesy
And Royal bounty, which appears the worse,
Since he a Subject would precede his Prince:
And did we not his Daughter dearly love,
We Would send her back with scorn, and b^se neglect
But her we love, though him in heart despise,
Pay him that thanks for all his courtesies.

Serve. In this employment I will strive to do^
The office of a subject, and of servant too.

King. Since to that emulous Lord we have sent our hate,
Come to our Nuptials let^s pass on in state.
Exit^
Enter Captain and Clown. Cap. The humors of Court, City, Camp, and
Country I have trac't, and in them can find no man, but money; all subscribe
to this Motto, Malo pecuniam viro. Oh poverty, thou are esteemed a sin worse
than whoredom, gluttony, extortion, or usury:

And earthy gold, thou art preferred before Heaven.
Let but a poor man in a threadbare suite,
Or ragged as I am, appear at Court,
The fine-nos'd Courtiers will not sent him; no,
They shun the way as if they met the Pest:
Or if he have a suite, it strikes them deaf,
They cannot hear of that side.

Clown. Come to the City, the Habberdasher will sooner call us block heads,
than block us; come to the Sempsters, unless we will give them money, we
cannot enter into their bands: though we have the Law of our sides, yet we may
walk through Burchin-lane and be nonsuited: come barefoot to a Shoemaker,
though he be a Constable, he will not put us into his Stocks; though the
Girdler be my brother, yet he will not let his leather embrace me; come to the
Glover, his gloves are either so little that I cannot pluck them on, or so
great that I cannot compass. And for the Camp, there is honor cut out of the
whole piece, but not a ragge of money.


Cap. The Country has alliance with the rest: my purpose is now I have so
thoroughly made proof of the humors of men, I will next assay the dispositions
of women, not of the choicest, but of those whom we call good wenches.


Clown. Pray Master if you go to a house of good fellowship, give me
something to spend upon my Cockatrice; if I have nothing about me, I shall
never get in.


Cap. There Is for you sirrah; does not the world wonder I should be so flush of
money, and so bare in clothes? the reason of this I shall give account for
hereafter: But to our purpose, here they say dwells my Lady Bawdy-face, here
will we knock.


Enter Bawd. Bawd. Who Is there? what would you have? ha?


Cap. Sweet Lady we would enter; nay by your leave.


Bawd. Enter? where? here be no breaches for you to enter truly.


Cap. And yet we are soldiers, and have venter'd upon as hot service as this
place affords any.


Bawd. Away you base companions, we have no breaches for such tattered
breeches, we have no patches to suite with your rags.


Cap. Nay, pray give way.


Bawd. Away you rogues, do you come to shake your rags here? do you think
we can vent our ware without money you rascals? get you from my door you
beggarly companions, or I Will wash you hence with hot scalding water.


Clown. Nay I warrant her, wenches can afford her that at all times.


Bawd. Do I keep house to entertain Tatterdemaleans with a Pox, you will be
gone?


Cap. We must forbear, the gallants are out of patience, stand aside.


Enter two Gentlemen. 1. Gent. I would feign go in, but I have spent all my
money.


2. Gent. No matter, they shall not know so much till we get in, and then let
me alone, I Will not out till I be fired out.


1. Gent. Then let us set a good face of the matter, By your leave Lady.


Bawd. You're welcome Gentlemen.


1. Gent. What fellows be yon?


Bawd. Two poor soldiers that came for an alms and please you, that stay for
some reversions; there is none such come into my house I warrant you.


2. Gent. Save you sweet Lady.


Bawd. Where be those kitchinstuffes here, shall we have no attendants? show
these Gentlemen into a close room, with a standing bed in it, and a truckle
too; you are welcome Gentlemen.


Cap. It Is general through the world, each state esteems A man not what he is,
but what he seems:

The purest flesh raged can no entrance have,
But It'ch and all disease if it come brave,
Wide open stand the gates of lust and sin,
And those at which the wide world enters in.
Madam, to be short, I must have a wench, though I am ragged outward, I am rich
inward: here is a brace of Angels for you, let me have a pretty wench, I Will be
as bountiful to her.


Bawd. Your Worsh p's very heartily welcome: where is Sis? Where Is Joyce? the
best room in the house for the Gentleman: call Mistress Priscilla, and bid her
keep the Gentleman company.


Cap. I^le make bold to enter.


Bawd. Your Worship's most lovingly welcome: let the Gentleman have attendance,
and clean linen it he need any; whither would you, you rogue?


Clown. Marry I would after my Master.


Bawd. Thy Master? why is yon raggamuffin able to keep a man?


Clown. Ey that he is able to keep a man, and himself too.


Bawd. Then that man must be able to pay for himself too, or else he may cool
his heels without if his appetite be hot.


Clown. Then shall I not go in?


Bawd. No by my Mayden-head shall you not, nor any such beggarly companion shall
enter here, but he shall come through me too.


Shakes a purse. Clown. No? what remedy? ha, ha; he that rings at a door with
such a Bell, and cannot enter? Well, if there be no remedy, I Will even stay
without.


Bawd. Oh me! is it you Sir? and are so strong to stand at the door? Pray will
you come near? your Master is new gone in before: Lord, Lord, that you would
not enter without trusting! you were even as far out of my remembrance as one
that I had never seen before.


Clown. I cannot blame you to forget me, for I think this be the first time of
^ur meeting.


Bawd. What would you have Sir?


Clown. Nothing as they say, but a congratulation for our first acquaintance.
I have it here old bully bottom, I have it here.


Bawd. I have it here too: nay, pray sir come in, I am loath to kiss at door,
for fear my neighbors should see.


Clown. Speak, shall you and ^ condogge together?
I Will pay you to a hair.

Bawd. Nay, I beseech you sir, come in: a Gentleman, and stand at door? I Will
lead the way, and you shall come behind.


Clown. No, no; I will not salute you after the Italian fashion: I Will enter
before.


Bawd. Most lovingly, pray draw the latch sir.

Exit.
Enter the two Gentlemen with the two wenches. 1. Gent. Nay faith sweet rogue
thou shall trust me for once.


1. Whore. Trust you? come up, can'^t thou pay the hackny for the hire of a
horse, and think thou to breath me upon trust?


1. Genesis Thou bid'st me come up, and shall I not ride?


1. Whore. Yes the gallows as soon.


2. Whore. A Gentleman, and have no money? marry you make a most knightly offer.


2. Gent. How? to offer thee no money?


2. Whore. How can they offer that have none?


2. Gent. I Will either give thee ware or money, that is as good.


2. Whore. Ey but sir, I Will deal with no such chapmen.


Enter Bawd, Captain, and Clown. Bawd. What Is the matter here? ha? can you
not agree about the bargain?


1. Whore. Here Is Gallants would have us breathed, and forsooth they have no
money.


2. Whore. They think belike, diet, lodging, ruffes, clothes, and
holland-smocks can ^^l be had without money, and a disease, if we should catch
it, Heaven bless us, can be cured without money.


Bawd. That Is fine in faith: if my beds be shaken out of their ^o^nts, or my
cords broken, must not the Ioyner and the Rope-maker both have money? if my
rags be rubbed out with your toes, can they be repaired without money? if my
linnenbe foul'd, can I pay my landresse without money? besides, we must have so
^thing to maintain our broken windows I hope; the Glazier will not mend the^
without money.


1. Gent. Come, come let us run a score for once.


Bawd. You shall not score of my tally, out of my doors.


Enter Captain. Cap. Why shall we not be bosomed? have we paid, and must we
not have wenches?


Bawd. You shall have the choicest of my house gentlemen.


1. Gent. Who, those Rascals?


Bawd. They be Rascals that have no money; those be Gentlemen that have
Crowns; these are they that pay the Ioyner, the rope-maker, the Vpholster, the
Laundrer, the Glazier; will you get you out of my doors, or shall we scold
you hence?


Clown. That you shall never by thrusting them out of doors.


1. Gent. Who but a mad man would be so base as to be hired, much more to hire
one of those bruitists, that make no difference betwixt a Gentleman and a
beggar, nay, I have seen enough to be soon entreated.


2. Gent. You shall not need to fear me, I am gone:

He Is past before, nor will I stay behind;
I have seen enough to loath all your sisterhood.

Bawd. Marry farewell frost. Now Sir, will you make your choice, and your man
after?


Cap. I Will have both, these are mine.


Clown. Go you then with your pair of Whores, I Will go with this old skuller
that first plied me.


Bawd. I see thou love to go by water; come, shall we dally together? sit
upon my knee my sweet boy, what money have thou in thy purse? will thou bestow
this upon me my sweet chicke?


Clown. I Will see what I shall have first for my money by your favor.


1. Whore. And shall I have this?


2. Whore. And I this?


Cap. Both these are mine, we are agreed then? But I am ashamed, being such a
tattered rogue, to lie with two such fine gentlewomen; besides, to tell you
truly, I am louzie.


1. Whore. No matter, thou shall have a clean shirt, and but pay for the
washing, and thy clothes shall in the mean time be cast into an Oven.


Cap. But I have a worse fault, my skinne's not perfect; What should I say I am?


2. Whore. Itchy? Oh thou shall have Brimstone and Butter.


Cap. Worse than all these, my body is diseased, I shall infect yours.


1. Whore. If we come by any mischance, thou have money to pay for the cure:
come, shall's withdraw into the next chamber?


Cap. You are not women, you are devils both,
And that your Damme; my body save in wars,
Is yet unskarr'd, nor shall it be with you.
Say the last leacher that embraced you here,
And folded in his arms your rottenness,
Had been all these, would you not all that filth
Vomit on me? or who would buy diseases,
And make his body for a Spittle fit,
That may walk sound? I came to school you Whore,
Not to corrupt you; for what need I that
When you are all corruption; be he lame,
Have he no Nose, be all his body stung
With the French Fly, with the Sarpego dried:
Be he a Lazar, or a Leper, bring
Coin in his fist, he shall embrace your lust
Before the purest flesh that sues of trust.

Bawd. What Diogenes have we here? I warrant the Cinnicke himself said not so
much when he was seen to come out of a Bawdy house.


Cap. He shamed not to come out, but held it sin
Not to be pardoned to be seen go in.
But I Will be modest: nay, nay, keep your Gold
To cure those hot diseases you have got,
And being once clear, betake you to one man,
And study to be honest, that is my counsel:
You have brought many like you Gentlemen
That jet in Silks, to go thus ragg'd like us,
Which did they own our thoughts, these rags would change
To shine as we shall, though you think it strange.
Come, come, this house is infected, shall we go?

Clown. Why Sir, shall I have no sport for my money, but even a snatch and
away?


Cap. Leave me, and leave me ever, and observe
This rule from me, where there is lodged a Whore,
Think the Plagues cross is set upon that door.

Clown. Then Lord have mercy upon us: where have we been?


The Clown goes learing away, and shaking his head. Bawd. Hist, hist; here is
a railing companion indeed.


1. Whore. I know not what you call a railing companion: but such another
discourse would make me go near to turn honest.


Bawd. Nay, if you be in that mind, I Will send for your love: the plague in my
house? the Pox is as soon: I am sure there was never man yet that had Lord
have mercy upon us in his mind, that would ever enter here: Nay will you go?


Sound, enter the King, Prince, Princess, all the Lords, the Queen, etc.
King. Before you all I here acknowledge Lords,
I never held me happy but in this
My virtuous choice, in having your applause,
Methinks I had the sweet consent of Heaven.

Princess. This noble Lady, now my royal Mother,
Has by her love to you, regard to us,
And courteous affability to all,
Attained the general suffrage of the Realm,

Princess. Her modest carriage shall be rules to me,
Her words instructions, her behavior precepts,
Which I shall ever study to observe.

Queen. I feel my body growing by the King,
And I am quick although he know it not;
Now comes my fathers last injunction
To my remembrance, which I must fulfill,
Although a Queen, I am his daughter still.

King. Lords, and the rest forbear us till we call,
A chair first, and another for our Queen,
Some private conference we intend with her:
Now leave us.

Exeunt Lords. King. My fairest Isabella, the choi^e jewel
That I wear next my heart; I cannot hide
My love to thee, it is like the Sun invelopt
In watery clouds, whose glory will break through,
And spite opposure, seornes to be concealed;
Saving one thing, ask what my kingdom yields.
And it is freely thine.

Queen. What Is that my Lord?

King. I cannot speak it without some distaste
To thee my Queen, yet if thy heart be ours
Name it not to me.

Queen. I am only yours.

King. Beg not thy fathers free repeal to Court,
And to those offices we have bestowed,
Save this, my Kingdom, and what it contains,
Is thy wills subject.

Queen. You are my King, and Husband;
The first includes allegiance, the next duty,
Both these have power above a Fathers name,
Though as a daughter I could wish it done,
Yet since it stands against your Royal pleasure,
I have no suite that way.

King. Thou now hast-thrust thy hand into my bosom,
And we are one: Thy beauty, oh thy beauty!
Never was King blessed with so fair a wife.
I do not blame thy Father to prefer
Thee' fore thy sister both in love and face,
Since Europe yields not one of equal grace:
Why smiles my love?

Queen. As knowing one so fair,
With whom my pale cheek never durst compare:
Had you but seen my Sister, you would say,
To her the blushing Corrall should give way:
For her cheek stains it; Lillies to her brow
Must yield their Ivory whiteness, and allow
Themselves overcome. If e're you saw the sky
When it was clear'st, it never could come nigh
Her Azure veins in color; she is much clearer,
Ey, and her love much to my Father dearer.

King. We by our noble Martial made request
For the most fair, and her whom he best loved:
Durst he delude us?

Queen. What I speak is true,
So will your self say when she comes in place.

King. Our love to thee shall not or'ecome that hate
We owe thy Father, though thou be our Queen.

Queen. He keeps her as his Treasure, locks her safe
Within his arms: he only minded me
As one he loved not, but thought merely lost.

King. Thou art lost indeed, for thou have lost my heart,
Nor shall thou keep it longet: all my love
Is swallowed in the spleen I bear thy Father,
And in this deep disgrace put on his King,
Which we will revenge.

Enter Prince, Princess, Chester, Clinton, Bonvile, and Audley. King. It shall
be thus:
Chester bear hence this Lady to her Father
As one unworthy us, with her that dower
The double dower he by his servant sent:
Thy tears nor knee shall once prevail with us.
As thou art loyal, without further language
Depart our presence, we will not hear thee speak.

Chest. What shall I further say?

King. Command him on his life to send to Court
His the other Daughter, and at our first summons,
Lest we proclaim him Traitor: this see done
On thy Allegiance.

Chest. Now the goal is ours.

King. None dare to censure or examine this,
That we shall hold our friend, or of our blood:
Subjects that dare against their Kings contend,
Hurl themselves down whilst others hie ascend.
Exit.
Actus quartus.
Enter the Martial and his daughter Katherine, Mar. I see the King is truly
honorable:
All my disgraces and disparagements
He has made good to me in this to queen my child,
And which more glads me, with such ardency
He seems to affect her, and to hold her dear,
That nothing's valued, if compared with her.
Now Heaven whilst thou this second happiness
And bliss wilt lend me, I shall still grow great
In my content, opinion, and my fate,
In spite of whisperers, and Court-flatterers.

Kath. Had you best loved my Sister, and less me,
I had been Queen before her; but she venter'd
For her preferment, therefore it is her due;
Out of our fears and loves her honors grew.

Mar. Whilst I may keep thy beauty in mine eye,
And with her new raised fortunes fill mine ear,
I second none in bliss; she is my Court comfort,
Thou my home happiness: in these two blessed,
Heaven has inrich't me with a crown of rest.

Kath. Nor do I cover greater Royalties
Than to enjoy your presence, and your love,
The best of these I prize above all fortunes,
Nor would I change them for my Sisters state.

Mar. Herbeauty and her virtues mixed, have won
The King my Sovereign to be termed my son.

Enter Servant. Ser. Earl Chester, with the Queen your princely daughter
Are without train alighted at the gate,
And by this entered.

Mar. Thou have troubled me,
And with a thousand thoughts at once perplex't
My affrighted heart: adm^t them; soft, not yet;
What might this mean? my daughter in the charge
Of him that is my greatest opposite,
And without train, such as becomes a Queen?
More tempest toward Kate? from which sweet child,
If I may keept thee, may it on my head
Power all his wrath, even till it strike me dead.

Kath. Rather, my Lord, your Royal life to free,
All his stern fury let him shower on me.

Ser. My Lord shall I admit them?

Mar. Prithee stay,
Fate threatens us, I would devise a means
To shun it if we might: thou shall withdraw,
To his Daughter. And not be seen; something we must devise
To guard our selves, and stand our opposites:
Go keep your chamber, now let Chester in.

Serve. I shall my Lord.

Mar. My Loyalty for me, that keep me still;
A Tower of safety, and a shield' against Fate.

Enter the servant ushering Chester and the Queen. Chest. The King thy
daughter has in scorn sent back.

Mar. Pause there, and as y are noble answer me
E're you proceed but to one question.

Chest. Propound it.

Mar. Whence might this dis^aste arise?
From any loose demeanor wanton carriage,
Spouse-breach, or disobedience in my daughter?
If so, I Will not receive her, she is not mine.

Queen. That let mine enemy speak, for in this kind
I would be tax't by such.

Chest. Upon my soul
There is no guilt in her.

Mar. Be It but his humor,
Thou Art welcome, both my daughter and my Queen;
In this my Palace thou shall reign alone,
I Will keep thy state, and make these arms thy Throne:
Whilst thou art chaste, thy style with thee shall stay,
And reign, though none but I and mine obey.
What can you further speak?

Chest. Her double Dower
The King returns thee.

Mar. We accept it, see,
It shall maintain her port even with her name,
Being my Kings wife, so will I love his Grace,
She shall not want, will double this maintain her.

Chest. Being thus discharged of her, I from the King
Command thee send thy fairer Girl to Court,
She that is at home, with her to act his pleasure.

Mar. Sir, you were sent to challenge, not to kill;
These are not threats, but blows, they wound, they wound.

Chest. If Treasons imputation thou will shun,
And not incur the forfeit of thy life,
Let the Kings will take place.

Mar. You have my offices,
Would you had now my grief; but that alone
I must endure: would thou had both, or none.
Sentence of death when it is mildly spoke,
Hal^e promises life; but when your doom you mix
With such rough threats, what is it but twice to kill?
You tyrannize Earl Chester.

Chest. Will you send her?

Mar. That you shall know anon. Tell me my Queen,
How grew this quarrel 'tweene the King and thee?

Queen. By you was never Lady more beloved,
Or wife more constant than I was to him:
Have you forgot your charge, when I perceived
My self so grown, I could no longer hide
My greatness, I began to speak the beauties
Of my fair Sister, and how much she excelled,
And that you sent me thither as a jest,
That she was fairest, and you loved her best?

Mar. Enough; thou art sure with child, and near thy time

Queen. Nothing more sure.

Mar. Then that from hence shall grow
A salve for all our late indignities:
Pray do my humble duty to the King.
And thus excuse me, that my daughter's sick,
Craz^d, and weak, and that her native beauty
Is much decayed; and should she travel now,
Before recovered, 'tw^ uld engage her life
To too much danger: when she has ability
And strength to journey, I will send her safe
Unto my King; this as I am a subject,
And loyal to his Highness.

Chest. Your excuse
Has ground from love and reason:
This your answer I shall return to the King.

Mar. With all my thanks:
That since my daughter does distaste his bed,
He has sent her back, and home to me her father,
His pleasure I withstand not, but return
My zeal, and these do not forget I pray.

Chest. I shall your words have perfect, and repeat them Unto the King.


Mar. I should disgrace her beauty
To send it maimed and wayning; but when she
Attaines her perfectness, then shall appear
The brightest star fixed in your Courtly Sphere.

Chest. The King shall know as much.

Mar. It is my purpose,
All my attempts to this one head to draw,
Once more in courtesies to overcome the King.
Come beauteous Queen, and thy fair Sister cheer,
Whom this sad news will both amaze and fear.

Exeunt. Enter Bonvile in all his bravery, and his man in a new livery. Cap.
Sirrah, are all my lands out of morgage, and my deeds redeemed?


Clown. I cannot tell that Sir; but we have had whole chest-fulls of writings
brought home to our house.


Cap. Why then it is done, I am possessed again
Of all my Fathers ancient revenues.

Clown. But how came you by all this money to buy these new suits? methinks we
are not the men we were.


Cap. Questionless that;. for now those that before despised us, and our
company, at meeting give us the bonjour.

Oh Heaven, thou ever art Virtues sole Patron,
And wilt not let it sink: all my known fortunes
I had engaged at home, or spent abroad:
But in the wars, when I was held quite bankrupt
Of all good happ, it was my chance to quarter
In such a house when we had sacked a Town,
That yielded me inestimable store
Of gold and jewels, those I kept till now
Unknown to any, pleading poverty,
Only to try the humor of my friends;
Which I have proov'd, and now know how to find
Fixed upon wealth, to want unnatural.

Enter Match and Touch-boxe. Clown. See Sir, yonder are my old fellows, Match
and Touch box; I do not think but they come to offer their service to you.


Touch. Save thee noble Captain, hearing of thy good fortunes, and
advancement, I am come to offer my self to be partaker of the same, and to
follow thee in the same colors that thou have suited the rest of thy servants.


Clown. God-a-mercy horse, you shall not stand to my livery.


Match You see our old clothes stick by us still, good Captain see us new
molded.


Cap. You are flies, away; they that my Winter fled,
Shall not my Summer taste: they only merit
A happy harbor, that through stormy Seas
Hazard their Barks, not they that sail with ease.
You taste none of my fortunes.

Clown. Corporal, you see this Livery? if you had stay, d by it, we had been
both cut out of a piece: Match, if you had not left us, you had been one of
this guard: Go, away, betake you to the end of the Town; let me find you
between Woods close-stile and Iflington, with will it please your Worship to
bestow the price of two Cannes upon a poor soldier, that has served in the
face of the Souldan, and so forth, Apage, away, I scorn to be fellow to any
that will leave their Masters in adversity: if he entertain you, he shall turn
away me, that is certain.


Match. Then good your Worship bestow something upon a poor soldier, I
protest --


Clown. Lo, I have taught him his lesson already; I knew where I should have
you?


Cap. There Is first to make you beggars; for to that all such must come that
leave their Masters poor. Begone, and never let me see you more.


Touch. God be with you good Captain: come Match, let us betake us to our
randevous at some out end of the City.


Cap. He makes a beggar first that first relieves him;
Not Usurers make more beggars where they live,
Than charit^blemen that use to give.

Clown. Here comes a Lord.

Enter Clinton. Clin. I am glad to see you Sir.

Cap. You know me now? your Worship's wondrous wise,
You could not know me in my last disguise.

Clin. Lord God you were so changed.

Cap. So am I now
From what I was of late: you can allow
This habit well, but put my the other on,
No congie then, your Lordship must be gone.
You are my Summer-friend.

Enter Bonvile^ Bonv. Cousin, well met.

Cap. You should have said well found^
For I was lost but late, dead, under ground
Our Kindred was: when I redeemed my Land,
They both revived, and both before you stand,

Bon. Well, well, I know you now.

Cap. And why not then?
I am the same without all difference; when
You saw me last, I was as rich, as good,
Have no additions since of name, or blood;
Only because I wore a threadbare suite,
I was not worthy of a poor salute.
A few good clothes put on with small adoo,
Purchase your knowledge, and your kindred too.
You are my silken Uncle: oh my Lord,

Enter Audley and his Daughter. You are not in haste now?
And. I have time to stay,
To ask you how you do, being glad to hear
Of your good fortune, your repurchast lands,
And state much amplified.

Cap. All this is true;
Ey but my Lord, let me examine you:
Remember you a Contract that once past
Betwixt me and your daughter? here she stands.

And. Sir, since you did vnmorgage all your means,
It came into my thoughts; trust me, before
I could not called to mind.

Cap. Oh men's weak strength,
That aim at worlds, when they but their mere length
Must at their end enjoy: Thou then art mine,
Of all that I have proov'd in poverty,
The only test of virtue: what are these?
Though they be Lords, but worldlings, men all earth.
Thou art above them; virtuous, that is divine;
Only thy heart is noble, therefore mine.

Mary. And to be yours is to be what I wish;
You were to me as welcome in your rags,
As in these Silks. I never did examine
The out side of a man, but I begin
To censure first of that which grows within.

Cap. Only for that I love thee: These are Lords
That have bought Titles. Men may merchandise
Wares, ey, and traffic all commodities
From Sea to Sea, ey and from shore to shore,
But in my thoughts, of all things that are sold,
It Is pity Honor should be bought for gold.
It cuts off all desert.

Enter the Host. Clown. Master, who is here? mine Host of the Ordinary?


Cap. Your business sir? what by petition?


Host. Fallen to a little decay by trusting, and knowing your Worship ever a
bountiful young Gentleman, I make bold to make my wants first known to you.


Cap. Pray what is your suite?


Host. Only for a cast suite, or some small remuneration.


Cap. And thou shall have the suite I last put off: Fetch it me Cock.


Cock. I shall Sir.


Cap. Fallen to decay? I Will fit you in your kind.


Cock. I have a suite to you Sir, and this it is.


Cap. In this suit came I to thine Ordinary,
In this thou would have thrust me out of doors,
Therefore with this that then proclaimed me poor,
I Will salve thy wants, nor will I give thee more.
Base worldlings, that despise all such as need;
Who to the needy beggar are still dumb,
Not knowing unto what themselves may come.

Host. I have a cold suite on it if I be forced to wear it in winter. I bid
your worship farewell.


Clown. So should all that keep Ordinaries, bid their guests farewell, though
their entertainment be never so ill. Well sir, I take you but for an ordinary
fellow, and so I leave you. Master, who will not say that you are a brave
fellow, and a most noble Captain, that with a word or two can discomfit an
Host.


Cap. I know you, therefore know to rate your worths
Both to their height and depth, their true dimensions
I understand; for I have tried them all:
(...) thou art of anoth^r element,
A mirror of thy ^ex^, that can distinguish
Virtue from wealth, thee as my own I elect,
And these according to themselves despise.
A Courtier henceforth I my self profess,
And thee my wife, thou have deserved no less.

Enter the King, the Prince, and the Princess, and Chester. King. No news yet
from our Martial? we three months
Have stayed his leisure, but receive not yet
That daughter we sent for.

Prince. She peradventure
Has not her strength recovered, or her beauty
Lost by her sickness, to the full regained.

Chest. Upon my life my Lord, when she is perfect,
And has received her full ability,
She shall attend your pleasure.

Princess. But your Queen,
That virtuous Lady, when I think on her,
I can but grieve at her dejectedness.

King. Heaven knows I love her above all the world,
And but her Father, this contends with us
When we in all our actious strive to exceed:
We could not brook her absence half so long.
But we will try his patience to the full.

Enter Bonvile, Audley, Captain, Clinton, Mary the Clown. Cap. My prostrate
duty to the King my Master
I here present.

Prince. This is the Gentleman
Commended for his valor in your wars,
Whose ruined fortunes I made suite to raise:
I would entreat your Highness to respect him.

King. All his proceedings we partake at large,
Know both his fall and height; we shall regard him
Even with his worth: be near us, of our chamber.
Sir, we shall use your wisdom, and prefer it
According to your worth. Be this your hope
We know you.

Cap. Only in that I am happy.

Enter the Servant. Serve. Health to your Majesty.

King. Whence?

Serve. From my Master,
The pOOrest subject that your land contains,
Rich only in his truth and loyalty.

King. Speak, has he sent his daughter?

Serve. Yes my Liege,
He has sent his daughters, please you rest satisfied,
And patiently peruse what he has sent.

King. We are full of expectations, pray admit
Those Presents that he means to greet us with.

Serve. You shall my Lord.

Sound, enter with two Gentlemen-ushers before them, the Queen crowned, her
sister to attend her as her waiting-maid, with a train. Serve. Your Queen and
wise crowned with a wreath of gold
Of his own charge, with that this double dower
Doubled again, and guarded with this train
Of Gentlewomen according to her state,
My Lord presents you: this his younger daughter,
He has bestowed a hand-maide to your Queen,
A place that may become her, were she child
Unto your greatest Peer; had he had more,
More had he sent; these worthless as they be,
He humbly craves you would receive by me.

King. His bounty has no limit, but my Queen!
Her bright aspect so much persuades with me,
It charms me more than his humility.
Arise in grace, and sweet, forget your wrong.

Queen. My joys unspeakable can find no tongue
To express my true hearts meaning.

King. Beauteous Maid,
You are our Sister, and that royal Title
From all disgrace your freedom shall proclaim.

Kath. I find your Grace the same my noble Father
Has still reported you; royal in all,
By whom the virtuous rise, th ^ignoble fall.

Prince. I have not seen a Lady more complete;
Her modesty and beauty, both are matchless.

King. Am I a King, and must be exceeded still?
Or shall a subject say that we can owe?
His bounty we will equal, and exceed;
We have power to better what in him's but well.
Your free opinions Lords, is not this Lady
The fairer of the twain? how durst our subject
Then dally with us in that high design?

Chest. With pardon of the Queen, she is paralelled
By her fair Sister.

Clin. Were my censure free,
I durst say bettered.

Prince. Were it put to me,
I should avow she, not the Queen alone
Excells in grace: but all that I have seen --

King. Do love her?

Prince. As my honor, or my life.

King. Her whom thou so much praisest, take to wise.

Prince. You bless my youth.

Kate. And strive to eternize me.

Queen. Nor in this joy have I the meanest part,
Now does your Grace your inward love express
To me, and mine.

King. I never meant thee less:
Thy Sister and thy daughter freely embrace,
That next thee has our Kingdoms second place,
How say you Lords, have we requited well
Our subjects bounty? are we in his debt?

And. Your Highness is in courtesy invincible.

Bonv. And bountiful beyond comparison.

Chest. This must not hold, prevention out of hand,
For if the Martial rise, we stand not long.

Clin. Our wits must then to work.

Chest. They must of force.
This is not that to which our fortunes trust.

King. Let then our subject know his King has power
To vanquish him in all degrees of honor,
And he must now confess him self excelled:
With what can Heaven or Earth his want supply
To equal this our latest courtesy?
We have the day, we rise, and he must fall
As one subdued.

Serve. His Highness knows not all,
One special gift he has reserved in store,
May happily make your Grace contend no more.

King. No sir? think you your Master will yet yield?
And leave to us the honor of the day?
I wish him here but this last sight to see,
To make him us acknowledge.

Serve. On my knee
One boon I have to beg.

King. Speak, let me know
Thy utmost suite.

Serve. My noble Master stays
Not far from Court, and durst he be so ambitious
As but to appear before you, and present you
With a rich gift exceeding all have past,
The only perfect token of his zeal,
He would himself perpetually hold vanquished
In all degrees of love and courtesy.

King. For our Queens love, and our fair daughters sake,
We do not much care if we grant him that.
Admit him, and his presence urge with speed;
Well may he imitate, but not exceed.

Chest. I fear our fall: if once the Martial rise,
Down, down must we.

Clin. Therefore devise some plot
His favor to prevent.

Chest. Leave it to me.

King. Lords, we are proud of this our unity,
Double Alliance, of our sons fair choice,
Since it is applauded by your general voice;
The rather since so matchless is our Grace,
That force perforce our subject must give place.

Enter the Martial, with a rich Cradle borne after him by two Servants. Mar.
Not to contend, but to express a duty
Of zeal and homage I present your grace
With a rich jewel, which can only value
These royal honors to my Daughters done.

King. Value our bounty? should thou sell thy self
Even to thy skin, thou could not rate it truly.

Mar. My Liege, I cannot, but in liew and part,
Though not in satisfaction, I make bold
To tender you this Present.

King. What Is the project?
Here Is cost and art, and amply both expressed,
I have not viewed the like.

Prince. It Is wondrous rare,
I have not seen a Model richlier framed.

Princess. Or for the quantity better contrived:
This Lord in all his actions is still noble,
Exceeding all requital.

King. It Is a brave outside.

Mar. This that you see my Lord is nothing yet;
More than its worth it has commended bin:
This is the case, the jewel lies within,
Pleases your Grace t'unvaile it.

King. Yes, I will:
But e're I open it my Lord, I doubt
The wealth within not equals that without.

King. What have we here?

Mar. A jewel I should rate,
Were it mine own, above your Crown and Scepter,

King. A child?

Mar. A Prince, one of your royal blood:
Behold him King, my grandchild, and thy son,
Truly descended from thy Queen and thee,
The Image of thy self.

King. How can this be?

Queen. My royal Liege and Husband, view him well,
If your own favor you can call to mind,
Behold it in this Infant, limn'd to the life;
He Is yours and mine, no kindred can be nearer.

King. To this rich jewel I hold nothing equal,
I know thee virtuous, and thy father loyal;
But should I doubt both, yet this royal Infant
Has such affection in my heart impressed,
That it assures him mine: my noble subject,
Thou have at length overcome me, and I now
Shall ever, ever hold me vanquished.
Had thou sought Earth or Sea, and from them both
Extracted that which was most precious held,
Thou nothing could have found to equal this,
This, the mixed Image of my Queen and me;
Here then shall all my emulation end,
O recome by thee our subject, and our friend.

Mar. Your vassal, and your servant, that have strove
Only to love you, and your royal favors:
Not to requite, for that I never can;
But to acknowledge, and in what I may
To express my gratitude.

King. Thine is the conquest:
But shall I gee't over thus? it is in my head
How I this lost days honor shall regaine,
A gift as great as rich I have in store,
With which to gratify our subjects love,
And of a value unrequitable:
Thou have given me a Grandchild, and a son,
A royal in^ant, and to me most dear,
Yet to surpass thee in this emulous strife,
I give thee here a daughter and a wife.
Now must thou needs confess the conquest won
By me thy King, thy Father, and thy son.

Mar. Your father, son, and subject quite surpast,
Yields himself vanquished and overcome at length.

Princess. You have not my consent yet.

Mar. Madam, no;
The king does this, his bounty to express.
Your love is to your self, and therefore free,
Bestow it where you please.

Princess. Why then on thee:
He that the Father does so much respect,
Should not methinks the daughters love despise.
It Is good for Maids take Husbands when they may.
Heaven knows how long we may be forced to stay.

King. Now Lords, these Nuptials we will solemnize
In all high state, in which we will include
Yours noble Bonvile, and with masks and revells
Sport out the tedious nights, each hand his Bride
Doubly by us from either part allied.

Enter Clown. Cock. Why this is as it should be; now do I smell Courtier
already, I feel the Soldier steal out of me by degrees, for Soldier and
Courtier can hardly dwell both together in one bosom. I have a kind of fawning
humor creeping upon me as soon as I but looked into the Court-gate; and now
could I take a bribe, if any would be so foolish to gee't me. Now farewell
Gunpowder, I must change thee into Damask-powder; for if I offer but to smell
like a soldier, the Courtiers will stop their noses when they pass by me. My
^aske I must change to a Cap and a Feather, my Bandileero to a Skarfe to hang
my Sword in, and indeed, fashion my self wholly to the humors of the time.
My Piece I must alter to a Poynado, and my Pike to a Pickadevant: only this is
my comfort, that our provant will be better here in the Court than in the
Camp: there we did use to lie hard, and seldom: here I must practice to lie
extremely, and often: But whilst I am trifling here, I shall loose the fight
of the Solemnity: The Prince is married, and the Martiall's married, and my
Master's married, there will be simple doings at night. Well, I must hence, for
I believe, the King, the Queen, and the rest of the Lords will use this place
for their revells. Dixi.


Actus Quintus.
Enter Clinton and Chester. Clin. And why so sad my Lord?

Chest. I am all dullness,
There Is no life in me, I have lost my spirit,
And fluence of my brain: observe you not
In what a height you fellow now resides
That was so late dejected; trebly grafted
Into the Royal blood? what can succeed,
But that we all our honors must resign,
And he of them be repossest again?

Clin. The Marriages indeed are celebrated.

Chest. And they have all our pointed stratagems
Turned back upon our selves.

Clin. What, no prevention?

Chest. His Basses are so fixed he cannot shrink,
Being so many ways ingrast and planted
In the Kings blood: but our supporters stand
As shook with Earthquakes, or else built on sand.

Enter Audley and Bonvile. And. My Lords attend the King, and clear this
chamber,
For this nights revells it is the place prepared.

Bon. Your duties Lords, the King's upon his entrance.

Enter the King, the Queen, the Prince, his wife, the Martial and the
Princess. King. Ey, so 'tmust be, each man hand his own:
For I am where I love; we are even coupled,
Some Music then.

Princess. Here Is one falls off from me.

King. How now my Lord, dejected in your looks?
Or does our sports distaste you?

Mar. Pardon me,
I cannot dance my Liege.

King. You can look on:
My Lord, you take his place, we will have a measure,
And I will lead it; bid the Music stricke.

Ameasure: in the midst the Martial goes discontented away. So, well done
Ladies: but we miss the Husband
To our fair Daughter, what is become of him?
Chest. Gone discontented hence.

King. What might this mean?
Does he distaste his Bride, or envy us
That are degree'd above him? where is our Queen?

Queen. My Liege?

King. You shall unto him instantly,
Attended with a beauteous train of Ladies,
And to his Chamber bear his princely Bride.
Bonvile, take you her royal Dower along,
You shall receive it of our Treasurer.

Cap. I shall my Lord.

King. Usher the Queen and Ladies, be their guide,
That done, each one to bed with his fair Bride.

Enter Martial. Mar. I am so high, that when I look but down,
To see how far the earth is under me,
It quakes my body, and quite chills my blood:
And in my fear although I stand secure,
I am like him that falls. I but a subject,
And married to the Daughter of the King,
Though some may think me happy in this match,
To me it is fearful: who would have a wife
Above him in command, to embrace with awe,
Whom to displease, is to distaste the King?
It is to have a Mi^tris, not a wife,
A Queen, and not a subjects bedfellow.
State I could wish abroad to crown my head,
But never yet loved Empire in my bed.

Enter servant. Serve. The Queen your daughter with your princely Bride,
And other Ladies, make way toward your chamber.

Mar. It Is open to receive them, pray them in.

Enter Bonvile, the Queen, the Princess, etc. Queen. My Lord the King
commends his love to you
In your fair Bride, whom royally conducted
He has sent to be the partner of your bed.

Mar. Whom we receive in the arms of gratitude,
Duty to him, and nuptial love to her.

Prince. It Is well they brought me, trust me my dear Lord,
I should have scarce had face to have come my self;
But yet their boldness mixed with mine together,
Makes me to venture I yet scarce know whither.

Mar. It Is to our Nuptial bed.

Princess. Ey so they say,
But unto me it is a pach unknown;
Yet that which cheeres me, I shall do no more
Than those, and such as I, have done before.
Sure it is a thing that must, though without skill,
Even when you please, I am ready for your will.

Cap. With her the King has sent this princely dower,
In which his love and bounty he commends.

Mar. You are noble Sir, and honor waits on you
To crown your future fortunes: for that Casket,
Her beauty and her birth are dower sufficient
For me a subject.
I cannot think so much good to my King
As I am owing for her single self:
Then with all d^ty pray return that sum.
Her dower is in her self, and that l'le keep
Which in these lo^ all arms this night shall sleep:
That is the Kings, with that this jewel too,
I think her cheap bought at that easy rate;
My second duty in that gif^^ommend,
Were I worth more, more I have will to send.

Cap. An Emperor cannot show more Royalty
Than this brave Peer, he is all magnificent:
I shall with the best eloquence I have,
Make known your thoughts.

Mar. To all at once good night:
Save this my beauteous Bride, no wealth I prize,
That has my heart took captive in her eyes.
Lights for the Queen and Ladies, night grows old,
I count my Virtue treasure, not my Gold.

Exeunt diverse ways. Enter Clinton to the Earl Chester in his study. Clin.
What not at rest my Lord?

Chest. Why who can sleep
That has a laboring brain, and sees from far
So many storms and tempests threaten him?
It is not in my element to do it.

Clin. Find you no project yet how to remove him?

Chest. None, none, and therefore can I find no rest.

Clin. It grows toward day.

Chest. That day is night to me,
Whilst you Sun shines: I had this even some conference
In private with the King, in which I urged
The Martialls discontent, withal inferred,
That by his look the Princess he despised:
The King changed face: and could we second this
By any new conjecture, there were hope.
To draw him in displeasure.

Clin. Watch advantage,
And as you find the humor of the King,
Work it unto the Martialls deep disgrace:
But soft the Prince.

Enter the Prince and Katherine. Kath. So early up, how did you like your rest?

Prince. I found my most rest in my most unrest;
A little sleep serves a new married man:
The first night of his brydalls I have made you
A Woman of a Maid.

Kath. You were up
Both late and early.

Prince. Why you were abroad
Before the Sun was up, and the most wise
Do say it is healthful still betimes to rise.
Good day.

Chest. In one, ten thousand.

Prince. Lords, you have not seen
The King to day? it was his custom ever
Still to be stirring early with the Sun;
But here is his Majesty.

Enter Captain and the King, Audley, and Bonvile. King. Not all your smooth
and cunning Oratory
Can color so his pride, but we esteem him
A flattering Traitor, one that scorns our love,
And in disdain sent back our Daughters Dower:
Your Judgment Lords?

Chest. Has he refused the Princess?

King. No; but her Dower sent back, and insolently;
Her whom we gave, he with a gift would buy,
A jewel; shall we merchandise our Daughter,
As one not able to bestow her nobly,
But that our poverty must force us sell her?

Cap. Your Highness much mispriseth his intent,
For he had no such thought.

King. We know his pride,
Which his ambition can no longer shadow.

Chest. Your Highness might do well to call in question
His insolence and to arraigne him fort.

King. Be you his Judges Bonvile, Audley, you:
Command him straight on his Allegiance,
To make appearance, and to answer us
Before our Lords of his contempt and scorn.

(...) Shall we command him hither?

King. From his bed,
And if convicted, he shall surely pay for it.

And. We shall my Lord.

Chest. Arraigne him on the sudden, e're it provied;
Le him not dream upon evasive shft^s,
But take him unprepared.

Clin. Shall we command
A Bar, and call a Jury of his Peers,
Whilst Chester, that enjoyes the place of Martial,
Objects such Allegations against his life,
As he has drawn out of his rude demeanor?

King. It shall be so; a Bar, and instantly
We will our self in person hear him speak,
And see what ^ust excuse he can produce
For his contempt.

Prince. My gracious Lord and Father,
What he has done to you, proceeds of honor,
Not of disdain, or scorn; he is truly noble:
And if a Regal bounty be a sin
In any subject, he is only guilty
Of that true virtue.

Cap. Saw your Majesty
With what an humble zeal, and prostrate love
He did retender your fair Daugthers Dower,
You would not his intent thus misreceive.

Chest. It Is humble pride, and mere hypocrisy
To blind the King, it is but ambitious zeal,
And a dissembling cunning to aspire.

Kath. My Father called in question for his life?
Oh let not me a sad spectator be
Of such a dismal object.

Prince. Nor will I,
But leave them to their hated cruelty.

King. This is no place for Ladies, we allow
Her absence; of the rest let none depart,
Till we have searched the cunning of his heart.

A Bar set out, the King and Chester, with Clinton, and the Prince, and
Captain take their seats, Audley and Bonvile bring him to the Bar as out of
his bed, then take their seats. Mar. A Bar, a Judgment seat, and Jury set?
Yet cannot all this daunt our innocence.

Chest. You have disloyally sought to exceed
The King your Sovereign, and his royal deeds
To blemish, which your fellow Peers thus conster,
That strengthened by th'alliance of the King,
And better armed by the peoples love,
You may prove danngerous.
In policy of state to quench the sparks
Before they grow to flame, and top your height,
Before your spacious branches spread too far,
What to this general motion can you say,
Before we tax you with particulars?

Mar. With reverence to the State before which I stand,
That you my Lord of Chester appear shallow,
To think my actions can disgrace the Kings,
As if the luster of a petty Star
Should with the Moon compare: Alas, my deeds
Conferred with his, are like a Candles light
To outshine the mid-dayes glory. Can the King
The glorious mirror of all gratitude,
Condemn that virtue in another bosom,
Which in his own shines so transparantly?
Oh pardon me, mere virtue is my end,
Whose pitch the King does many times transcend.

Clin. To tax you more succinctly, you have first
Abused the King in sending to the Court
Your daughter less fair, and the least beloved.

And. And that includes contempt most barbarous,
Which you in that unsubject-like expressed:
Your former emulations we omit.
As things that may find tolerable excuse,
And are indeed not matters capital:
But to the best and greatest, when the King,
Out of his bounty and magnificence
Vouc^saft to style thee with the name of son,
Being but a subject, with contorted brows
And looks of scorn you took his courtesy,
And in contempt sent back the Princess dower.

Chest. Most true; a grounded proposition
To question you of life.

Mar. My life my lords?
It pleases me, that the King in person daines
To grace my cause with his Majesticke ear:
You plead for me in this, and speak my excuse.
I have but two in all,
He sent for one, and he received them both,
With them a sweet and lovely Prince to boot;
Who ever lost, I am sure the King has won
At once, a wife, a daughter, and a son.

Bonv. It Is true my Lord, we all can witness it.

Mar. He that my discontent objects to me,
With the fair Princess speaks uncertainly.
The man judicious such for fools allows,
As have their inward hearts drawn in their brows:
Is there in all that bench a man so honest
That can in this be discontent with me?
I charge you all; those favors I receive
From his high Majesty, I swallow not
With greedy appetite, perhaps like you:
When I am graced, it comes with awe and fear,
Lest I offend that Prince that holds me dear.
That for my brow.

Chest. But for your scornful sending
Of the fair Princess dower back to the King,
How can you answer that?

Mar. Why Chester thus:
I am a man, though subject; if the meanest
Lord over his wife; why should that privilege
Be only bard me? should I wive an Empress,
And take her dowerlesse, should we love, or hate,
In that my bounty equals her estate.
Witness that Judge above you, I esteem
The Princess dearly, and yet married her
But as my wife, for which I am infinitely
Bound to the King: why should I grow engaged
Above my power, since this my Lords you know,
The less we run in debt, the less we owe.
Give me my thoughts, and score you on I pray,
I wish no more than I have means to pay.

Chest. Shall we my Lord his actions censure freely?

King. And sentence them.

And. A Persian History
I read of late, how the great Sophy once
Flying a noble Falcon at the Herne,
In comes by chance an Eagle sousing by,
Which when the Hawke espyes, leaves her first game,
And boldly v^nters on the King of Birds;
Long tug'd they in the Air, till at the length
The Falcon better breathed, seized on the Eagle,
And struck it dead: The Barons praised the Bird,
And for her courage she was peerless held.
The Emperor, after some deliberate thoughts,
Made him no less: he caused a Crown of gold
To be new framed, and fitted to her head
In honor of her courage: Then the Bird
With great applause was to the marketplace
In tri ^mph borne, where, when her utmost worth
Had been proclaimed, the common Executioner
First b^ the ^ings command took off her Crown,
And after with a sword struck off her head,
As one no better than a noble Traitor
Unto the King of Birds.

Chest. ^his use we make
From this your ancient Persian History,
That you a noble and a courteous Peer,
Praised for your hospital virtues and high bounty,
Shall be first crowned with Laurel to your worth:
But since you durst against your Sovereign
Oppose your self, you by your pride misled,
Shall as a noble Traitor loose your head.

King. That Sentence we confirm, and it shall stand
Irrevocable by our straight command.

Mar. I am glad my Liege I have a life yet left,
In which to show my bounty, even in that
I will be liberal, and spend it for you;
Take it, it is the last jewel that I have,
In liew of which oh grant me but a grave.

King. A Laurel wreath, a scaffold, and a block,
Our self will see the Execution done:
Only thy life is ours, thy goods are free.

Mar. My Lord, you are the life of courtesy,
And you are kind unto me above measure,
To give away what might enrich your self.
Since they are mine, I will bestow them thus:
The best of those that were so late but yours,
My jewels, I, by will, restore you back,
You shall receive them separate from the rest:
To you the Kings son, and by marriage mine,
On you I will bestow my Armory,
Stables of Horse, and weapons for the wars,
I know you love a Soldier: to the Princess,
And my two Daughters I give equal portions
From my revenue; but if my fair wife
Prove, and produce a Male-child, him I make
My universal Heir, but if a Female,
Her Dower is with the rest proportionable.
The next I give, it is my Soul to Heaven,
Where my Creator reigns: my words thus end,
Body to Earth, my Soul to Heaven ascend.

Enter the Queen, Katherine, the Princess, and the other Lady. Princess.
Stay.

Queen. Hold

Kath. Executioner forbear.

Queen. Hear me a Daughter for a Father plead.

Princess. Oh Father, hear me for my Husbands life,
Doubly allied, I am his Niece and Wife.

Kath. Oh Father hear me, for a Father crave.

Queen. Than sentence him oh let me perish rather;
I plead for him that is both my son and Father.

Kath. Oh make your mercy to this prisoner free.

Queen. Father to us.

Princess. And Husband unto me.

King. Hence with the^e womanish clamours.

Prince. Unto these
Let me my Liege presume to add another,
Behold him kneel that is your son and brother.

Kath. Your Sister and your Daughter great King hear.

Princess. Your Mother and your Daughter.

Queen. Or like dear,
Your Queen and Sister.

Princess. Speak, what has he done?

Prince. Who ever saw a father on a son
Give sentence? or my Royal Lord, which rather
Adds to your guilt, a son condemn the father?

Chest. My Liege, command them hence, they but disturb
The Traitor in his death.

King. A Traytor's he
That dares so term him, Chester, we mean thee:
Our best of subjects, with our height of grace
We wedde thee to us, in this strict embrace
Thy virtues, bounties, envied courtesies;
Thy courage, and thy constancy in death,
Thy love and Loyalty to the end continued,
More than their clamorous importunities
Prevail with us: then as our best and greatest,
Not to exceed, but equal thee in love,
To end between us this Heroic strife,
Accept what we most pecioushold, thy Life.

Mar. Which as your gift ^'le keep, till Heaven and Nature
Confine it hence, and always it expose
Unto your love and service; I never loved it,
Bnt since'twas yours, and by your gift now mine.

King. I observe in thee
The substance of all perfect Loyalty;
In you save flattery, envy, hate, and pride
Nothing, or ought to goodness that is allied;
Resign those places that belong to him,
Better than so borne noble, be unborne.
Till you your hearts can fashion to your faces,
We here suspend you from your styles and places.

Prince. A royal doom.

King. Once more from us receive
Thy beauteous Bride, as we will hand our Queen:
The Prince already is possessed of his.
Nay Bonvile, as your Bridals were together,
So follow in your rank, and by the style
Of a Lord Baron, you are now no less
If you dare take our word: Our Funerals thus
We Will turn to feasting, and our blood to wines
Of most choice taste pressed, from the purest Grape.
Our noble Martial, kinsman, and our friend,
In our two virtues after times shall sing,
A Loyal Subject, and a Royal King.

The Epilogue to the Reader.
THat this Play's old, it is true, but now if any
Should for that cause despise it, we have many
Reasons, both just and pregnant, to maintain
Antiquity, and those too, not al vain.
We know (and not long since) there was a time,
Strong lines were not looked after, but if rhyme,
Othen 'twas excellent: who but believes,
But Doublets with stuffed bellies and big sleeves,
And those Trunke-hose, which now the age does scorn,
Were all in fashion, and with frequence worn;
And what is now out of date, who is it can tell,
But it may come in fashion, and suit well?
With rigor therefore judge not, but with reason,
Since what you read was fitted to that season.
FINIS.

