A MARRIAGE TRIVMPHE.

SOLEMNIZED IN AN EPITHALAMIVM, In Memory of the happy Nuptials betwixt the
High and Mighty Prince Count PALATINE. And the most Excellent Princess the
Lady ELIZABETH.

Written By THOMAS HEYWOOD.

Tufestas Hymenas (...), tu Gratiaflores, Elige, tu geminas Co(...)dianecte
Coronas.

LONDON Printed for Edward Merchant, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
Churchyard over against the Cross.

1613.

To the most Excellent, and most admired Princess the Lady ELIZABETH.
WHom Heaven with all Choice Graces has endowed,
Whom both the Angels praise, and men admire:
On whom her Maker has his bounty showed,
Where nothing wants that mortal can desire.
Whose beauties are as far beyond compare,
As are her inward virtues of the mind,
But in that height vnmatchably so rare
We on the Earth her equal cannot find.
Her Parents Joy, the Peers selected pleasure,
The peoples admiration, Kingdoms wonder,
Of foreign climes the praise, of ours the treasure,
May this days sacred union never sunder.
That whilst we daily of high Heaven importune,
We may be in your Royal issue blessed:
You may still grow in beauty, virtue, fortune,
So with your fame our joys may be increast.
Prove thou a Prophet, Muse, say it is decreed,
All Christendom shall flourish in your seed.
Your Graces most humbly devoted, Thomas Heywood.

An Epithilamion, OR NVPTIALL SONG,
CONSECRATED TO THE HAPPY MEMORY OF THE ROYAL AND MAGNIFICENT Espousals betwixt
the High and Mighty Prince FREDERICK the Fifth, Count Palatine, Duke of
Bauaria, Prince Elector to the Empire, etc. and Knight of the most Honorable
Order of the Garter; and the most Excellent, and euery-way accomplished
Princess the Lady ELIZABETH, sole daughter to the High and most Puissant
JAMES, by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, etc.
Defender of the Faith, and the most Virtuous, and Admirable Lady, Queen ANNE.

Now the wet Winter of our tears are past,
And see, the cheerful Spring appears at last,
Now we may calculate by the Welkins rack
Aeolus has chaste the Clouds that were so black:
And they are beyond the Hiperboreans run
That have so late eclipst Great Britains Son.
O thou my Muse; that whilome maskt in sable,
Exclaiming on the fates and chance unstable,
Accusing Physic, and her want of skill,
And Natures hard-heart, that her own would kill:
On Death, and his fell tyranny exclaiming;
Chance, Fortune, Destiny, and all things blaming;
Inueighing against hours, days, months, and time,
That cropped so sweet a blossom in his prime.
Against Mortality, that could not save
So choice a Gemme from th'all-deuouring grave;
But most against the cause, Britains Transgressions,
That so soon called him to that heavenly Sessions.
Where from this earthy Mansion being translated,
He now for ay remains a Prince instated.
No more let us our ancient griefs pursue,
Or the swift torrent of our tears renew.
No more let us with clamors fill the sky.
Or make th'heauens echo to each dole full cry.
No more disturb his soft sleep, since it is best
We wake him not from his eternal rest.
Yet who could blame my Muse, that did lament
To see so fair a branch, so rudely rent
From such a stately, and broad-bearing tree,
That might have borne like fruit? For who to see
So rich a treasure in a moment wasted,
Such goodly fruit, not fully ripe, yet blasted,
So rich a roab, so soon dispoild as worn,
Such general hopes des^roid as soon as borne,
But with impartial judgments must confess,
No Muse, that can sing, but could shrieke no less?
Those that love day, must think it much too soon,
To see the glorious Sun to set at noone.
And none but such as hate the cherefull light,
(Murderers and Th(...)es) at midday with it night.
Is it because we break the Gods decree,
That Tantalus we are punished like to thee:
Thou that their secrets durst presume to tell,
Art with perpetual hunger plagued in hell;
Yet sundry delicates before thee stand,
Which thou may reach, not compass with thy hand.
So have the Gods dealt with us, for some crime,
To let us see the glory of our time,
As a fair mark, at which the world might gaze,
And put the wondering Nations in a maze.
But as we stretch our hands to reach our joy,
They snatch it hence, and all our hopes destroy.
But now my Muse, shake off this gloomy sorrow,
And a bright saffron roab from Mymen borrow.
Thou that before in Ravens plumes did sing,
Now get thee feathers from the Swans white wing,
And take an equal flight with Venus Doves,
To tune soft lays of Nuptials, and sweet Loves.
For now me thinks I youthful Tython see,
The day Aurora, that he married thee.
The expected hour was come, the Matrons shine
In glistring roabes; the old men, as if Divine,
Apparreld in rich purple; them between, (seen.
The sprightly Youths, and beauteous Nymphs are
At length the blushing Bride comes with her hair
Disheuel'd'bout her shoulders; none so fair
In all that Beuie, though it might appear,
The choycest beauties were assembled there.
She enters with a sweet commanding grace,
Her very presence paradic'd the place:
Her modest blush amongst the Ladies spread
And cast on all their Cheeks a shame-fast red.
How could they choose, their looks that seem divine
Before she came, eclipst are at her shine?
They all are darkened when she 'gins t'appeare,
And spread her beams in her Illustrious sphere:
All eyes are fixed on her, the youthful fry,
Amazed stand at her great Majesty.
The Nymphs and Maids, both envy and admire
Her matchless beauty, state, and rich attire.
The grauer Matrons stand amazed with wonder,
The Fathers, as if struck with Jove's sharp thunder
Confounded are, as never having seen
In their long trace of years, so fair a Queen.
Not Hecuba, when Priam came to Thrace,
To court her for his Queen, could give the place.
Such ornament: not Spartan Hellen knew,
To attire her person in a form so true.
Had Perseus in his airy progress spide
This picture to the marble rock fast tide,
For her he would have fought, and as a pray
To the Sea Monster, left Andromeda.
Had Paris seen her, he had nere crossed the flood,
Hellen had been vnrapte, Troy still had stood.
Had Thetis son beheld her when he saw
Polyxena, nothing should him withdraw
From dreadful battle: he had shined in steel,
And not unarmed been wounded in the heel?
Had Juno, Venus, or Minerua, when
They strove for maistery, seen this Lady, then
As vanquished, they had left to her the Ball,
Which from his starry throne great Jove let fall.
But wherefore on her glories do I dwell,
Whose state my Muse unable is to tell?
To a bright Iuory Chair the Bride they bring,
Whilst all the people Io Paean sing.
Now see from forth another stately Arch,
Of the great palace, the brave Bridegroom march,
A lovely youth, upon whose face appears
True signs of manhood; yet he for his years
And beauty, such a general name has won,
They take him all, for Venus, or her son.
A mixed grace he in his visage wore,
And but his habit showed what sex he bore
The quickest sighted eye might have mistook,
Having female beauty in a manly look.
Such luster in Adonis cheek did move,
When he was haunted by the Queen of love:
So looked Hypolitus when clad in green,
He was often Courted by the Athenian Queen.
Such grace Hypomanes in public wan,
That day he with the swift Atlanta ran.
So shined Perithous amongst the rest,
When among the Centaurs Jove's son graced the feast.
Such seemed the Idean shepherd in the eye
Of fair Oenone, when she saw him lie
Upon a Violet bank: Such did appear
Young Itis, unto Galatea dear.
Such Ciparissus seemed, so sweet so fair,
For whom Apollo left his fiery Chair.
A curious Roabe athwart his shoulders fell,
By some laborious hand Imbroidered well:
Cunning Arachne could no better weaue,
Nor Pallas, should the heavens she once more leave:
The color was of Elementall blew
Spotted with golden Stars: here Comets flew
With blazing trains, some great appeard, some small,
Some were so wrought that they might seem to fall,
And shooting toward the earth as darting fire,
Even in their hottest fury did expire:
Yet in their golden course the way they went,
They seemed to guild the Azure Firmament.
You might in this discoulered Roabe perceive
The Galaxia a more brightness leave
Then the other parts of heaven, because so fair
Cassiopeia spreads her glistering hair.
There the quicke-sighted Eagle shines, and Swanne,
And the Argoe that the Fleece of Colchos wanne.
Sagitarius threats the Scorpion to have slain,
Who against him shakes his poisonous starry train.
With six bright lamps does the bold Ce^taure stand,
Threatening the Twins, who hold in every hand
Bright bals of fire, eighteen they be in number,
That if the Centaur stir, his force to cumber.
The Northen Waggoner stands next in roll,
Who^ Perseus with his Shield, frights bout the Pole.
The wandering Sporades among these appear,
Which makes the Galaxia shine more clear
Then the other parts of heaven, this Thetis wrought
And as a present to the Bridegroom brought:
For who could place them in there rancks more true
Then she, that every night takes a full view
(From top of Neptunes Tarras) how they stand,
How move, rise, set, or how the Seas command?
This Mantle does the Bride-groomes body graspe
Buckled about him with a golden claspe.
And as when Lucifer lifts from the waves
His glorious head, the Stars about him braues,
Who when he moves his sacred front on high,
Seem in their (almost wasted) oil to die,
And give him all the glory; with a Crest
As bright as his appears amongst the rest.
This lovely Youth: with many a comely stride
He preaceth toward the place where sits his Bride,
Then bows to her, she blusheth as he bends
And honors low, his fair hand he extends
To ceaze her Iuory Palm, which as he warmes,
She breathes into him many thousand charms
Of loves, affections, zeal, cordial desires,
Chaste wishes, pleasures, mixed with deep suspires,
Passions, distractions, ecstasies, amazes,
All these he feels, when on her eyes he gazes:
Till further boldned by a blushing smile,
He leaves his trance, and she discends the while
Yet was all silence, till at this glad close,
Through all the place, a whispering murmr rose:
Some his perfection, some her beauty praise,
And both above the highest degree would raise
To exceed all comparison, some swear
Two such bright Comets, never graced that Sphere,
And as they walk the Virgins strew the way
With Costmary, and sweet Angelica.
With Spyknard, Margerom, and Camomile,
Time, Buglosse, Lauender, and Pimpernell,
Strawbery leaves, Sauory; and Eglantine
With Endive, Holy-thistle, Sops in Wine,
Smallage, Balm, Germander, Basell and Lilly,
The Pinke, the Flower-de-luce and Daffadilly,
The Gilliflowre, Carnation, white and red,
With various spots and stains enameled,
The Purple Violet, Paunce, and Hearts-ease,
And every flower that smell, or sight, can please:
The yellow Marigold, the Suns own flower,
Pagle, and Pinke, that deck fair Floraes Bower,
The Dasie, Cowslip, Wal-flower, Columbine;
With the broad-leaues late cropped from Bacchus vine,
Besides a thousand other fragrant poses
Of Wood-bine, Rosemary, and sundry Roses:
Next in their way, some precious garments strew,
Some scatter-gold wrought Arras where they go:
Others before them costly presents cast,
Of Iuory, Corrall, and of Pearl: the last
Bring Gold and Jewels: one presents a Crown
Unto the Bride, and gives it as her own.
Diverse contend where this rich metal grew,
In Phillipine, in Ophir, or Peru:
Or the Malluccoes: this a Carcanet
Bestows, with precious stones of all kind set
Of luster and of beauty, here was found
The hardest, and most quick, the Diamond,
The Ruby, of a perfect light and life,
The Saphir and the Emerald, at strife,
Which can express unto the eye more true,
The one a grasse-greene, the other perfect blew,
Here the discolored Opal fair did shine,
And Onix deep, dig'd from the Rocky Mine,
The Topas which, some say, abides the fire,
And Sardonix; what is he can desire
A stone that is wanting as they walk along
The Batchelers, and Virgins with this Song
Tuned to their aptest Instruments, thus greet
Their Naptiall ^oyes, with strings and voices sweet
The Epithilamion.
YOu fairest of your sexes how shall we
S(...) you, that seem on earth to be divine,
Unless the Musical Apollo he,
And she the fairest of the Muses nine,
Not Daphne turned into a Laurel tree
So bright could be
So fair, so free
Not Ariadne crowned so clear can shine
Can Venus yoaked Swannes so white appear?
Or half so lovely when you two embrace?
Are not his parts admired every where,
His sweet proportion, feature, shape, and face?
Or like her Iris in her arched Sphere,
Or Hebe clear
To Juno necre?
To match this Lady in her comely grace.
Why should we these to Venus Doves compare,
Since in blancht whitenes, they their plumes exceed,
Or to the Alpine Mountains, when they are
Clothed in Snow, since monstrous beasts they breed
Why should we to white marble pillars dare
Set two so fair
In all things rare,
Since save disgrace comparisons naught breed.
Unto your selves, your selves, then we must say,
We only may compare: Heaven, Sea nor Earth
Can parralell the virtues every way;
Your names, your styles; your honors, and your birth
On to the Temple then, why do we stay?
Use no delay,
Loose no more day,
By this blessed union add unto our mirth
Charis that strewes fair Venus Couch with flowers
^oyne with the other graces to attend you,
The Muses and their Influence to your dowres,
Angels and Cherubs from all ills defend you,
The Gods into your laps reign plenteous showers,
All heavenly powers
Add to your hours, (you.
Heavens graces, and earths gifts that may commend
Minerua, that of Chastity has care,
And Juno that of marriage takes regard,
The happy fortunes of these two prepare,
And let from them no comforts be debarred,
Bless them with Issue, and a Royal Heir,
Lucina fair,
Let one so rare
In all her future thro's be gently hard.
Prove thou fair fortune in thy bounties free
Be all the happiest Seasons henceforth shown
Temperate and calm, and full of mirthfull glee,
All joys and comforts challenge as your own,
What grace and good we can but wish to be,
May You and She
As heavens agree.
Enjoy in your most happy prosperous Crown,
So shall the Swaynes and Nymphs choice presents
With yearly offering to this sacred shrine (bring,
So shall our Annual festiues praise the Spring,
In which, two plants of such great hope combine,
For ever this bright day eternizing,
Timbrels shall ring
Whilst we still sing
O Hymen, Hymen, be thou still divine.
But whether am I carried, if such State
Young Tython and Aurora celebrate:
What shall be then at this uniting done?
Since in his noone-tide progress, the bright Sun
Has never seen their Equals? what blessed muse
Shall I inuoke, or whose assistance use?
What accent, in what number, or what strain?
Shall I the weakness of my skill complain?
Oh were I by the clear Begosian Fount,
Which Perseus Steed made, when he began to Mount,
Where his heel stroke, first grew the sacred Well,
By which Jove's daughters, the nine sisters dwell:
Or were I laid in Aganippes Spring,
Where Pallas often discends to hear them sing.
Or might I come to wash my Temples clean,
In the pure drops of learned Hypotrene:
I might have then some hope to be inspired,
And mount the height I have so long desired:
Yet howsoever, I will presume to sing
And foare according to my strength and wing,
Then now, o Hymen don thy brightest weed
That all things may successively succeed
At these high Nuptials, spread thy golden hair,
And let no spot upon thy Robes appear,
No wrinckle in thy front, which may presage
The least sad chance, as at the marriage
Of Orpheus and Euridice, when thou
Wor'st storms and tempests in thy angry brow.
Or when the father of the two Atrides,
Or their bold sons, contracted first their Brides.
Or when Minerua's Champion Diomed,
That wounded Venus in the hand, was sped;
For which the Goddess cursed him, and then swear
To leave his bed adulterate without heir.
Or when King Ceix with Alcione met,
When at the Nuptial table thou wast set,
Thou would not lend the feast one gentle smile,
But discontentedly sat'st all the while.
Nor as when first the Trojan shepherd took
Oenone and soon after her forsook
O put not on that habit thou then wore,
When first fair Phedra to Duke Theseus swore!
But bring with thee that bright and cheerful face,
As when Alcest, Admetus did embrace.
Chaste Alcest, who to keep him from the grave,
Offered her life, her husbands life to save.
Not Portia, whom the Romans so admire,
Who for the love of Brutus swallowed fire.
Not Romes great'st honor, and Collatiums pride
For chastity, that by her own hand died
Can equal this Alcest: but must give place,
In all perfection, beauty, fame, and face,
Appear in those fair colors without stame,
As when Ulysses did the chaste love gain
Of his Penelope, who twice ten years
Expects the absence of her Lord in tears;
Who^ neither threats, entreats, nor crowns can move
To attend the motives to intemperate love.
In him all virtues so united are,
Neither loves blandishments, nor storms of war,
No Circe, Syrtes, or Charibdis deep,
Can from the bosom of his chaste wife keep.
Oh deck thee in thy best and hollowedst robe
That ere was seen upon this earthly globe!
More proudly dight, then when the Gods did strive
To grace thy pomp, when Jove did Juno wiue,
When the great thunderer gave thee a bright crown
And Pallas with her needle wrought thy gown:
When Neptune through his billowy concaue sought
And for thee a rich S(...)g'd found and bought,
When Phoebus on thy forehead fixed his rays,
And taught thee from his harp, sweet Nuptial lays.
When Venus to their bounties added pleasure,
And Pluto from God Mammon, gave thee treasure.
When Mercury gave fluence to thy tongue,
To have the Epithilamion sweetly sung:
When Juno to thy presence added state,
And Cinthia, though that night she sat up late,
To watch Endimion, by her beams so bright,
In The Oceans bottom spide a stone give light,
A glorious shining Carbuncle, and that
She gave thee, and thou pindst it in thy hat:
When the God Mars gave thee, not least of all,
The richest armor in his Arcenall:
When Hebe filled thee Nectar for thy taste,
Which from the Crystal Conduits run so fast.
Nor did lame Vulcan come behind in cost,
An anticke robe with gold richly imbost (wedge;
With Goldsmiths work, and hammered from the
With curious art, deep fringed about the edge
He did present thee, (pompous to behold)
Berontes and Pyragmon wrought in gold,
And left their plates of steel, to show no dearth
Of love to thee: thou from our mother earth
Had a gift too, of all the fruits that grow
She filled her Cornucopia, and did bestow
By fertile Ceres hand, to please thy taste
A plenteous largess; as in heaven thou (...)
At those great bridals, with like pomp and state,
The Rites of these high Nuptials consecrate.
Whom all our populous united Nation
Attended long, with joyful expectation,
Whom the empire of great Britain wished to see,
And The Emperor to receive with Majesty.
Whom the Peers ardently crave to behold,
And the glad Nobles in their arms t'infold,
Whom all the Nations in his way admired,
Whose presence the rich Court so long desired,
Whom London with applause wished to embrace,
(The Chamber of the King, and best loved place)
Whom at his landing from the troublous maine,
The people stand on shore to entertain,
And with glad shouts, and loud applauses bring,
Even to the presence of the potent King.
Behold that Prince, the Empires prime Elector,
Of the religious Protestants protector,
The high and mighty Palsgraue of the Rhyne,
Duke of Bauaria, and Count Palatyne,
With Titles equal, laterally allied
To Mars his brood, the Soldiers chiefest pride,
That from the triple-headed Gerion have
Kept from a timelesse and abortiue grave
Fair Belgia, and her seventeen daughters, all,
Doomed to a sad and mournful funeral;
Yet each of these in former times have been
A beauteous Lady, and a flourishing Queen.
Now when their widowed eyes are drowned in tears,
And by the Hesperian Giant fraught with fears,
They are freed from slaughter, and restored again
To their first height by his triumphant strain,
A youth so lovely, that even beasts of Chase,
Staid by the way, to gaze him in the face.
The wildest birds, his beauty to espy
Sit round about him, and before-him fly,
And with their chirping tunes bear him along,
As if to greet him with a Nuptial song.
But when they saw he was imbark't, return
As loath to leave him, and together mourn.
Chanting unto themselves unpleasant notes,
And full of discords from their pretty throtes.
Now lancht into the deep, see by the way,
About his ship the unwieldy Porpoise play:
The Dolphin has quite left the Southern Seas,
And with a thousand colors seeks to please
The Princes eye, changing as often his hue,
As he does wish him joys; Behold in view,
Where shoots the little Envious Remora,
Thinking his swift ship under sail to stay.
O stop her prosperous course. But when she saw
A face so full of beauty, mixed with awe,
Upon the hatches, shamed what she had done,
Her head she does below the Channels run,
No boisterous Whale above the waves appears
The Seas to trouble^ whilst the Pilo^steeres,
The huge Leuia^ dwells in the deepes,
And wrapped in waters, with his femall sleeps,
As loath to move a tempest: Thus at last
He in a prosperous calm the Seas has past;
Neptune mean time, in Amphitrites bower,
Invited to a banquet, for her dowre
By churlish old Oceanus denide
That paid her not, since she was first his bride:
She knowing Neptune powerful, as he is wise,
Entreats him this old Jar to comprimise,
This difference held so long the God of Seas,
Who being made Vmpire, sought both parts to please,
That whilst he in fair Thetis Palace staid,
The Prince was past, without his marine aid
This when he knew, that one so young, so fair,
Of whom the other Gods had took such care
In his safe waftage, and that he alone
Of all his choice gems, had afforded none,
Of which his wealthy channels as full stored,
Grieuing so puissant and so great a Lord
Should pass his waterie Kingdoms, and not taste
Part of his bounty, up he starts in have,
Mounts on his Seahorse, and his Trydent takes,
Which all enraged, about his Crest he shakes.
And calling Triton from his concaue shell
Bids him through all the deeps his fury tell;
That since no Merchant to the Indies traded
Whose wealthy ships, with drugs and spices laded,
Had made the very Oceans back to bend;
Since he had suffered them from end to end
To voyage his large Empire, as secure
As in the safest o^^^, where they assure
Themselves at rest; since they for all the gold
Pangeans fraughts them: with great sums untold,
Pearls, Stones, Silks, Sweet-perfumes and Ambergris,
With profits richer far then Iasons fleece;
Since neither Merchant, nor yet Man of war,
Poor Fisherman, or such as reckoned are
Sons of the Sea, or Bastards, Pirates fell,
For all the wealth in which the Seas excel,
And they have thriued so richly, would make known
This news to him, they now shall taste his frown.
Straight the four brothers from their brazen caves
Aeolus unlocks, who shake above the waves
Their flaggie plumes, and as they rise or fall
They hatch huge tempests: still does Neptune call
To make a turbulent Sea. Triton shrils loud
T'Inuoke the help of every stormy clowd
They all conspire in horror, at new war;
Mean time the four seditious brothers jarre.
The South wind brings with him his spightful showers,
And against the cold and stormy Boreas powers
His spitting waters, in whose foul disgrace
His gusts return them back in Austers face,
Bleake Aquilo still with the West-wind cross,
Mountains of waves against his foe does toss;
And he as much at him: in this fierce brall
Poor ships are shaken, some are forced to fall
So low, that they black Orcus may epsy,
And suddenly are bandied up so high,
As if the Bark with tackles, masts, and shrouds,
Jove would like the Argoe, snatch above the clouds.
No marvel, we so many wracks to hear,
Since Neptune has of late been so austeare;
So many ships being foundred, split and lost,
So many wrackt-men, cast on every Coast;
So many, that my passionate tears inforces,
Since all the Seas seemed to be shor'd with coarses.
Long Neptunes fury lasted, made great spoil,
And wrackes at Sea, for still the billows boil
With wrath and vengeance, till the Queen of love
Borne of the frothie waves, this suit began move,
That since the high solemnity drew near
Of this fair Couple, to the Gods so dear,
As Heaven and Earth did in their joys agree,
So at the last would his calmed waves and he.
These words of hers great Neptune did appease;
So with his Trident straight he calmed the Seas.
Now Is the glad day, how can it other be
But a presage of all prosperity!
The early hours that from her Roseat bed
Aurora call, the night have banished:
And envying she so long has soiournd here,
They chase the Hag from off this Hemisphere.
Who when she but espies the peep of day;
Wrapped in her mistie darkness, speeds away
To the Cymerians, were she means to dwell
And hide her horrid darksome front in Hell:
But ere her black and cloudie face she steeps,
The stars from off Heavens azured floare she sweeps,
And will not let them see the glorious Bride,
Whose presence was her hated looks denide.
This day, Apollo in his orb of fire
Ryseth before his hour, her face t'admire;
And in mere joy that he may gaze his fill,
He capers as he mounts th'Olympique hill:
The morning blusheth guilty of the wrong
That she has kept his steedes vntrac't so long,
And such deep sorrows in her eyes appears
That all the World she waters with her tears.
But when this universal joy she calls
To her remembrance, tears no more she falls,
But for the glistering Rays of Phoebus seeks (cheeks,
With whose bright beams she dries her blubbred
The monstrous Signs by which the Sun must pass
Guild with his glittering streakes their scalles of brass.
Phoebus as often, as he has past the line
Has never seen them in such glory shine:
And all to grace these Nuptials. Jove's high Court
Is against this day new starr'd (as some report)
With stones and gems, and all the Gods attired
In there best pomp to make this day admired.
The Seasons have preferred the youthful Spring
To be at this high states solemnizing:
Who lest he should be wanting at that day
Brings February in, attyred like May,
And has for have to show his glorious prime
Stepped over two months, and come before his time:
And that is the cause, no strange preposterous thing,
That we this year have such a forward Spring.
The Summer now is busied with her seed
Which quickening in the Earth begins to breed;
And being sickish cannot well be spared.
Autumn in beggars rags attired, not dared
Intrude into so brave a pompous train.
Old Winter clad in high furs, showers of rain
Appearing in his eyes, who still does go
In a rug gown ashied with flakes of snow,
Shiuering with cold, at whose long dangling beard
Hangs Isickles, with hoarie frosts made hard,
Dares not approach, nor in that Center move,
Where lives so sweet a Summer of warm love.
Therefore by Ianus double face he is past
Retyring by December, speeding fast
Backward, with more then common aged speed,
Most willing that the fresh Spring should succeed
With cheerful looks, and his green dangling hair,
Winters most wastefull Ruins to repair.
But oh lean Lent, why should thy pale lancke cheeks
Threaten a sudden dearth for seven spare weeks
After this surplusage; but that the God,
That swayes the Ocean with his three-tin'd rod,
Would feast these Nuptials with his various cheer,
And nothing think, that the Sea holds, too dear?
Because that as the Heavens gave free assent,
With The Earth to fill these Bridals with content,
Even so the Seas their bounties would afford
With seasonable Cates to Crown their board.
Bacchus has cut his most delicious Vine,
And sent it through his swiftest River Rhine,
Least to these Bridals it might come too late,
Which Britain with such joy does celebrate.
What Plannet, Star, Fate, Influence, or Spheere,
But in their operative powers hold dear
These fair Espousals? Is there virtue, grace,
Or any goodness, but does claim chief place
In these great triumphs? Can the Heavens afford
Blessings that do not Crown this bridal board?
Can man devise, or of the Gods importune
A choice selected good, or special fortune,
Which here is not frequent? amongst the Saints divine,
Be ever henceforth crowned Saint Valentine.
Of all thy hallowings, let not this be least,
That thy Saints day is honored with this feast.
Thou have the favor to lead in the Spring,
And to thy feastiue Eve, the birds first sing,
With joy that Winter does the Earth for sake:
Upon this day, they each one choose his make.
Couple in paires, and first begin t'inquire
Where they may perch, to quench the raging fire
Of their hot loves, where they may safely build
And from the bitter storms their young ones shield,
Until there naked bodies be full plumed,
And that with their fledgd wings they have assumed
Courage and strength, that when the season's fair
They with their careful Dams may prove the Air.
Learn every of you a new Nuptial Lay
To Solemnize the triumphs of this day:
Your mourneful strains to sadder fates assign.
Now with glad notes salute Saint Valentine.
For in this sacred, and melodious quire,
The Angels will bear part, it is their desire
To have this combination shrild so hie
That Heaven may Echo with the melody.
And now me thinks, I from a Cherubs tongue
Hear this applausiue Hymn most sweetly sung.
A Nuptial Hymn.
Now Is the glad and cheerful day,
Phoebus does his beams display,
And the fair Bride forth to lead
Makes his torch their Nuptial Tead,
O thou Apollo bright
Lend us thy cherefull light,
That thy glorious Orb of fire
We more freely may admire.
But when seated in thy pride
Thou behold'st the lovely Bride,
Envy not when thou do find
Thy one eye by her two strokeblind:
Thou art eclipst this day
By a new Cynthia.
Who though on earth she keep her Sphere
Yet shines as fair, as bright, as clear.
If in clouds thou mask thy face
Blushing at thy own disgrace:
Or cast aside thy glistering Rays
When she once her eyes displayes^
We shall neglect thee quite,
Thy power, thy heat, thy light.
Nor shall we miss thee being gone
Having two Suns for thy one.
T'seemes when I this couple see,
Thy Sister I behold and thee,
When you both were nursed long while
By L^^^^ in D^^^s Isle
But the fair Sun and Moon
Were there delivered soon,
Just as I see these two graced
On Earth: So you in Heaven were placed.
Equally shine in the Spheres
In like beauty, and like years:
No sinister fate betide
The fair Bridgroome, and the Bride
O, never may black cloud
Two such bright lusters shroud
From the Worlds Eye, but still shine
Till fate make you both divine.
He a Prince is, gravely young,
Catoes head, and Tullies tongue,
Nereus shape, Ulysses brain;
Had he with these Nestors rain.
Inioying all the rest
Of heaven (that we request)
That they likewise would afford,
To manage these a Hectors sword.
Had great Jove beheld this Queen,
When Europa first was seen,
Over the Seas he had not brought her,
Nor Aegenor left his daughter.
Europe that spacious ground
Through the World so renowned
Had lost her style, and ere her death
It had been called Elizabeth.
Had she then lived, Danae should
Have di'd an Ancresse; showers of gold
Had not rained down her to Entrap,
All had been powered in your lap.
Io had never been
The great Egyptian Queen,
But for a Godesse after death
They had adored Elizabeth.
Could a fairer Saint be shrin'd
Worthier to be deuin'd?
You equal her, in virtues fame,
From whom you received your name:
Englands once shining star
Whose bright beams spread so far,
Who but did lament the death
Of that good Queen Elizabeth?
To none I better may compare
Your sweet self then one so rare:
Like graced you are from above,
You succeed her in her love.
As you enjoy her name:
Likewise possess her fame.
For that alone lives after death;
So shall the name Elizabeth.
Whilst the Flower de Luyce we see
With our Lions quartered be,
The white Lion keep his place.
David's Harp retain his grace;
Whilst these united are,
Despite all foreign war,
Four great Kingdoms after death
Shall memorise Elizabeth.
May that name be raised hie,
Nor in the femall issue die:
A joyful and glad mother prove,
Protected by the Powers above,
That from the Royal line
Which this day does combine
With a brave Prince; no fate, no death,
Extinguish may Elizabeth.
May the Branches spread so far,
Famous both in peace and war,
That the Roman Eagle may
Be Instated some blessed day,
Despite of Romes proud brags,
Within our English flags,
To revive you after death,
That we may praise Elizabeth.
That when your hie Crest is borne
By the fair white Unicorn,
The Wild-man, the Greyhound, and
Fierce Dragon, that supporters stand,
With Lions red and white,
Which with the Harp unite:
Then the Faulcon joined with these
May the Roman Eagle seize.
All the Nymphs straw sundry poses
Made of Red, and of white Roses:
On her Bed wait all the Graces:
Maide^ to (...)
^
In ti(...)
To (...)
Frederick and (...)
One p(...)s, (...)
FINIS

