The VVise-woman Of HOGSDON.

A COMEDY.

As it has been sundry times Acted with great Applause.

Written by THO: HEYWOOD.

Aut prodesse solent, aut Delectare --
LONDON,

Printed by M. P. for Henry Shephard, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Chancerie-Lane, at the Sign of the Bible, between Serjeants-Inne and
Fleet Street. 1638.

Drammatis Personae.
Young Chartley, A wildheaded Gentleman. Boyster, a blunt fellow. Sencer, a
conceited Gentleman. Haringfield, a Civil Gentleman. Luce, a Gold-Smithes
Daughter. Luce's Father, a GoldSmith. Joseph, the Goldsmiths: Apprentice. Old
Master Chartley. Young Chartleyes man. Old Charleyes man. Sir Harry, A Knight,
who is no piece of a Scholar. Gratiana, Sir Harryes Daughter. Taber, Sir
Harryes man. Sir Boniface, ^n ignorant Pedant, or Schoolmaster. The Wisewoman
of Hogs^^n, who bears the name of the Dramma. A Countryman, Clyent to the
Wisewoman. A Kitchin-mayd, and two Citizens Wives, that come to the Wisewoman
for counsel.
THE WISE-VVOMAN OF HOGSDON.
Actus primus, Scena prima.
Enter, as newly come from play, four young Gentle^^^, Master Chartley, Master
Sencer, M. Boyster; and Master Haringfield. Chartley. PRice of my life: now if
the Devil have bones, these Dyce are made of his. Was ever such a cast seen
in this Age? Could any Gull in Europe (saving my self) fling such a cast?


Boyster. Eye.


(...). No.


Boyster. Yes.


Chart. But I say no: I have lost an hundred pound,
And I will have my saying.

Boyst. I have lost an other hundred, I Will have mine.
Ey, yes, I flung a worse: a worse by (...).

Chart. I cry you mercy (...), loosers may speak,
I Will not except against you: but let me see
Which of these two that pocket (...) our (...)
Dares contradict me?

Sencer. Sir, not I:
I say you have had bad casting.

Haring. So ^ay I.


Chart. I say this Hatt's not made of (...)
Which of you all dares say the contrary?

(...). It may be (...).


(...). Very likely (...) Beaver.


Chart. (...) would feign (...) a (...) with (...), to get (...) of (...) money
again; but the (...) they have (...) wise to part with it.

I say it is not black.


(...). So say we too.


Boyst. (...) false: his Cap's of Wool, *it is black, and Wool, and Wool and
black.


Chart. I have naught to say to losers.
Have I nothing left to set at a Cast? Ey finger,
Must you be (...) in gold, and not a (...) of silver in my (...)?
A Bale of fresh Dice. Hoe, come at this Ring.

Sencer. Fie M. (...), it is time to (...) over.


Chart. That Is the Winners phrase: Hold me play; Or he that has uncrown'd me,
(...) take a (...) order with him.


Boyst. Fresh dice: this ^ewell I (...)
Take this and all. I Will play in spite of (...).

(...). Since you will needs; trip for the (...).
I see it is hard to go a winner from this company.

Chart. The Dice are mine:
This Diamond I value at twenty marks:
I Will venture it at a throw.

(...). It Is (...) you.


Chart. Then at all. All Is mine. Nay M. Boyster,
I bar you: let us work upon the winners.
Gramercy Sinks: Nay, though I owe you no quarrel, yet you must give me leave
to draw.

Haring. I had rather you should draw your sword,
Then draw my money thus.

Chart. Again sweet Dice: nay I bar swearing, Gentlemen, let us play
patiently. Well, this At the Candlestick, so --

Chartley (...),
Boyst. Now Dic^ at all. To tho, quoth the (...).


(...). (...) precious luck.


(...) (...). I think (...);
(...) and (...) so (...): there is (...).

(...). He (...) all with (...).


Chart. With Trayes, how say by (...)
Oh he is old dog at Bowls and Trayes.

(...). Lend me some money: be my half one (...).
I Will once out-brave this (...) with a throw
So now the Dice are mine, wilt be my half?

(...). I will.


Senc. Then once I Will play the Franck (...).
Let me but see how much you both can make,
And I Will cast at all, all, every Cross.

(...). Now bless us all, what will you every Cross (...)


Senc. I will not leave my self one Cross to bless me.


Boyst. I set.


Chart. And so do I.


Senc. Why then at all. How*

He flings (...).
Chart. Nay, swear not, lets play patiently.


Senc. Damned Dice: did ever Gamester see the like?


Boyst. Never, never.


Senc. Was ever known such (...)?


Chart. Drunk nor sober, I never saw a man cast worse.


Senc. I Will prove this Hat of mine an (...).
Which of you (...) dares say the contrary?

Chart: As fair an Helmet as any man in (...) Needs to wear.


Senc. (...), thy Hat is black.


Chart. Upon better recollection, it is so indeed.


Senc. I say it is made of Wool.


(...). True, my losing had took away my Senses,
Both of Seeing and Feeling: but better luck
Has brought them to their right temper.
But come, a pox of Dice; it is time to give over.

Senc. All times are times for winners to give over,
But not for them that lose. I Will play till midnight,
But I will change my luck.

(...). Come, come, you shall not.
Give over: (...) give over: do I pray,
And choose the Fortune of some other hour:
Let Us not like debosht (...), play our Clothes,
Belts, Rapiers, (...) our needful ornaments:
It Is childish, not becoming G^ntlemen.
Play was at first ordayn'd to pass the time;
And sir, you but abuse the use of Play,
To employ it other wise.

Sencer. You may persuade me --
For once I Will leave a loose^.

Chart. Then (...) put on your Helmet; let us leave this abominable Game, and
find out some better Exercise. I cannot endure this (...) when men loose.


Senc. And there is not a more testie waspish Companion then thy self when thou
art a looser, and yet thou must be vexing others with, Play patiently
Gentlemen, and lets have no swearing.


Chart. A sign that I can giv^ good counsel better than take it: but say,
Where be the prettiest wenches, my hearts?


Senc. Well remembered, this puts me in mind of an appointment I had with a
Gentlewoman of some respect.


Chart. I have you sir, I have you; but I think you will never have her: it is
(...) the Knights daughter in Gracious Street. Have I touched you?


Senc. You have come somewhat near me, but touched me not. Master Haringfield,
will you bear me company thither? Have you seen the Gentlewoman, M. (...)?


Chart. Never sir.


Sencer. How have you heard of her?


Chart. That (...) has, as other women have,
That she goes for a Maid, as others do, etc.

Senc. I can assure you, she is a proper G^ntlewoman.


Chart. Then i^ she have you, she is like to have a proper Gentleman.


Senc. You should tell them so that know it not. Adjew Gentlemen.

Ex. (...), and Haring.
Boyster. I am glad yet they go so lightly away.


Chart. What will you do M. Boyster?


Boyst. Somewhat.


Chart. You will not acquaint me with your business.


Boyst. No: I am in love, my head is full of Proclamations. There is a thing
called a Virgin. Nature has showed her Art in making her. Court her I cannot,
but I Will do as I may.


Chart. Do you go, or stay sir?


Senc. Go.

Exit Sencer.
Chart. You before, I Will follow. He thinks with his blunt humor, to enter as
far as I with my sharp: No, my true Trojan, no: There is a fair sweet
modest rogue, her name is Luce: with this Dandiprat, this pretty little Apes
face, is yon blunt fellow in love; and no marvel, for she has a Browe
bewitching, Eyes ravishing, and a Tongue enchanting: And indeed she has no
fault in the world but one, and that is, she is honest: and were it not for
that, she were the only sweet Rogue in Christendom. As I live, I love her
extremely, and to enjoy her would give any thing: But the fool stands in her
own light, and will do nothing without Marriage: but what should I do
marrying? I can better endure Gives, than Bands of Matrimony. But in this
Meditation, I am glad I have won my Money again. Nay, and she may be glad
of it too: for the Girl is but poor, and in my pockett I have laid up a
Stock for her, it is put to use already. And if I meet not with a Dyce-house,
or an Ordinary by the way, no question but I may increase it to a sum. Well,
I Will unto the Exchange to buy her some pretty Noveltie: That done, I Will visit
my little Rascal, and solicit instantly.

Exeunt.
Actus primus, Scena secunda.
Enter Luce in a Semsters shop, at work upon a laced Handkercher, and Joseph a
Prentice. Luce. Where is my Father? Joseph.


Joseph. Mistress, above,
And prays you to attend below a little.

Luce. I do not love to sit thus publicly:
And yet upon the traffic of our Wares,
Our provident Eyes and presence must still wait.
Do you attend the shop, I Will ply my work.
I see my father is not jelousof me,
That trusts me to the open view of all.
The reason is, he knows my thoughts are chaste,
And my care such, as that it needs the awe
Of no strict Overseer.
Enter M. Boyster.
Boyst. Yonder Is Luce. Save thee.


Luce. And you too, sir, y' are welcome; want you ought,
I pray, in which our Trade may furnish you?

Boyst. Yes.


Luce. Joseph, show the Gentleman.


Boyst. It Is here that I would buy.


Luce. What do you mean sir, speak, what is it you lack?
I pray you wherefore do you fix your eyes
So firmly in my face? what would you have?

Boyst. Thee.


Luce. Me?


Boyst. Yes, thee.


Luce. Your pleasure is to jest, and so I take it.
Pray give me leave sir, to intend my work.

Boyst. You are fair.


Luce. You flout me.


Boyst. You are, go too, you are,
I Would vex him that should say the contrary.

Luce. Well, you may say your pleasure.


Boyst. I love thee.


Luce. Oh Sir!


Boyst. As I live, I do.


Luce. Now as I am a true Maid,
The most religious oath that I dare swear,
I hold my self indebted to your love:
And I am sorry there remains in me,
No power how to requite it.

Boyst. Love me, prithee now, do if thou can*


Luce. I cannot.


Boyst. (...), if thou can.


Luce. Indeed I cannot.


Boyst. Yet ask thine heart, an^ see what may be done.


Luce. In troth I am sorry you should spend a ^igh
For my sake unrequited, or a tear;
Ey, or a word*

Boyst. It Is no matter for my words, they are not many,
And those not very wise one's neither.

Luce. Yet I beseech you spend no more in vain.
I scorn you not; (...) as far from me,
As are the two Poles distant: therefore Sir,
Because I would not hold you in suspense,
But tell you what at first to trust unto,
Thus in a word, I must not fancy you.

Boyst. Must-not?


Luce. I cannot, nor I may not.


Boyst. I am gone:
Thou have given me, Luc^, a Bone to gnaw upon*
Exit*
Luc^. Alas, that Beauty should be sought of more
Then can enjoy it: might I have my wish,
I would seem fair but only in his eye,
That should (...) me in a Nuptial tie.
Enter young Master Chattley, with (...), Ring, Purse, (...).
Chartl. Morrow (...); In exchange of this (...), see
what I have brought thee from the Exchange.

Luce. What mean you Sir, by this?


Chart. Guess that by the circumstance, here is a Ring* weare't for my sake;
twenty Angels, pocket them you fool; come, come, I know thou art a Maid, say
nay, and take them.


Luce. Sweet Master Chartley, do not fasten on me,
More then with ease I can shake off: your Gift
I reverence, yet refuse; and I pray tell me,
Why do you make so many Errands hither?
Send me so many Letters? fasten on me
So many favors? what is your meaning in it?

Char. Hark in thine ear, I Will tell thee; nay hear me out, is it possible so
soft a body should have so hard a soul? Nay now I know my penance, you will be
angry, and school me for tempting your modesty: a fig for this modesty, it
hinders many a g^od man from many a good turn, and that is all the good it
does. If thou but knewst, Luce, how I love thee, thou would be far more
tractable. Nay, I bar chiding when you speak* I Will stop thy lips if thou do
but offer an angry word, by this hand I Will di'^, and with this hand too. Go to
now, what say you?


Luce. Sir, if you love me, as you say you do,
Show me the fruits thereof.

Chart. The stock I can, thou may see the fruits hereafter.


Luce. Can I believe you love me, when you seek
The ship wrack of mine Honor?

Chart. Honor! there is another word to flap in a man's mouth: Honor! what
should thou and I stand upon our Honor, that were neither of us yet, Right
Worshipful?


Luce. I am sorry Sir, I have lent so large an ear
To such a bad discourse; and I protest
After this (...), never to do the like.
I must confess, of all the Gentlemen
That ever courted me, you have possessed
The best part in my thoughts: but this course language
Exiles you quite from thence. Sir, had you come,
In stead of changing this mine honest name
Into a Strumpets, to have honored me
With the chaste Title of a Modest Wife;
I had reserved an ear for all your suits:
But since I see your rudeness finds no limit,
I leave you to your lust.

Chart. You shall not, Luce.


Luce. Then keep your tongue within more moderate bounds.


Chart. I will, as I am virtuous, I will: I told you, the second word would be
Marriage. It makes a man forfeit his Freedom, and makes him walk ever after
with a Chain at his heels, or a Iack-an-Apes hanging at his elbow: Marriage
is like (...) his labyrinth, and being once in, there is no finding the way out.
Well, I love this little property most intollerably, and I must set her on the
Last, though it cost me all the shoes in my shop. Well Luce, thou see my
stomach is come down; thou have my heart already, there is my hand.


Luce. But in what way?


Chart. Nay, I know not the way yet, but I hope to find it hereafter, by your
good direction.


Luce. I mean, in what manner? in what way?


Chart. In the way of marriage, in the way of honesty, in the way that was
never gone yet: I hop^ thou art a Maid, Luce.


Luce. Yes Sir, and I accept it; in exchange
Of this your hand, you shall receive my heart.

Chartley. A bargain, and there is earnest on thy lips*


Luce. I Will call my Father, Sir, to witness it:
See, here he comes.

Enter her (...), (...) Ci^izen. Chart. Father, save you, you have happened of
an ^ward Son-in-Law; here I am, how do you like me?


Father. Sir, I was nearer then you were aware,
And overheard both sum and (...).

Chart. Then I perceive you are an old Eves-dropper:
But what do you think of it, Father?

Father. I entertain the motion with all love,
And I rejoice my Daughter is preferred,
And raised to such a match; I heard the contract,
And will confirm it gladly: but pray Sir,
When shall the merry day be?

Chart. Marry, even to morrow by that we can see; (...), (...) lose no more
time, ^le ^ake order for that.


(...). Stay but a month.


Ch^rt. A (...) I thou can not hire me to it. Why L^ce, if thou be hungry,
(...) thou stay a month from meat? Nay, if I see my diet before me, I love to
fall too when I have a stomach. Here, buy thee a new Smock; let us have a new
Bed too, and look it be strong: there is a box of Rings and Jewels, lay the^
up. Ha (...); me thinks the very name of Wedlock h^th brought me to a
Nightcap already, and I am grown civil on the (...). There Is more money for
Dishes, Platters, Ladles, Candlesticks, etc. as I shall (...) them (...) down
in the Inventorie.


Father. But whom shall we invite unto the Wedding?

Enter 2d. Luce, a young (...), in the habit of a Page, and overheares their
discourse.
Chart. Ey, thereby hangs a Tale, we will have no more at our marriage, but my
self, to say, I take thee Luce; thou to say, I Luce take thee Robin: the Vicar
to put us together, and you Father, to play the Clerk, and cry Amen.


Father. Your reason for that.


Chartl. I would not for a world it should be known to my Friends, or come
to my Fathers care. It may be ten thousand pounds out of my way for the
present: therefore this is my conceit, Let us be married privately, and L^ce
shall live like a Maid still, and bear the Name. It Is nothing L^ce: it is a
common thing in this age to go for a Maid, and be none. I Will frequent the
house secretly: ^eare not Girl, though I revell abroad a days, I Will be with
thee to bring a nights, my little Whiting Mopp.


Luce. But so I may incur a public scandal,
By your so often frequenting to my Chamber.

Chart. Scandal? what scandal? Why to stopp the mouth of all scandal, after
some few days do^ I appear in my likeness, marri^d man and honest
hous-keeper, and then what becomes of your scandal? Come, send for Mr. Vicar,
and what we do, lets do suddenly.


2. Luce. Cold comfort for me.


Luce. If you purpose to be so privately married, I know one excellent at such
an exployt: are you not acquainted with the (...) of Hogsdon?


Chartl^y. O the Witch, the Beldame, the Hagge of Hog^don.


Luce. The same, but I hold her to be of no such condition. I will anon make
a step thither* and punctually acquaint her with all our proceedings: she
is never without a Sir John at her elbow, ready for such a stratagem.


Chart. Well, be it so then.

Exeunt.
2. Luce. Heigh ho^: have I disguised my self, and stolen out of the Country
thus far, and can light of no better news to entertain me? Oh this
wild-headed wicked Chartley, whom nothing will tame. To this Gallant was I
poor Gentlewoman betroathed, and the Marriage day appointed: But he out of a
fantastic and giddy humor, before the time prefixed, posts up to London.
After him come I thus habited, and you see my welcome, to be an ^are-witnesse
of his second Contracting. Modesty would not suffer me to discover my self,
otherwise, I should have gone near to have marred the match. I heard them
talk of Hogsdon, and a Wise-woman, where these Aims shall be brought to
Action. I Will see if I can insinuate my self into her service: that is my next
project: and now good luck of my side.

Exit.
Explicit Actus primus.
Actus secundus, Scena prima.
Enter the Wise-woman and her Clyents, a Countryman with an Urinall, four
Women like Citizens wives, Taber a Serving-man, and a Chamber-mayd. Wisewoman.
Fie, fie, what a toil, and a moyle it is,
For a woman to be wiser then all her neighbors?
I pray good people, press not too fast upon me;
Though I have two ^ares, I can hear but one at once.
You with the Vri^e.
Enter 2. Luce, and stands aside.
Countryman. Here forsooth Mistress.


Wisew. And who distilled this water?


Countr. My wives Limbeck, if it pl^ase you.


Wisew. And where does the pain hold her most?


(...). Marry at her heart forsooth.


Wisew. Ey, at hor heart, (...) has a griping at her heart.


(...). You have hit it right.


Wisewo. Nay, I can see so much in the Urine.


2. Luce. Just so much as is told her.


Wisewo. She has no pain in her head, has she?


(...). No indeed, I never heard her complain of her head.


Wisewo. I told you so, her pain lies all at her heart:
Alas good heart! but how feels she her stomach?

Countrym. O queasie, and sick at stomach.


Wisewo. Ey, I warrant you, I think I can see as far into a Millstone as
another: you have heard of Mother Notingham, who for her time, was prettily
well skilled in casting of Waters: and after her, Mother Bombye; and then there
is one Hatfield in Pepper-Alley, he does pretty well for a thing that is lost.
There Is another in Coleharbour, that is skilled in the Planets. Mother Sturton
in Goulden-lane, is for Forespeaking: Mother Phillips of the Banke-side, for
the weakness of the back: and then there is a very reverent Matron on
Clarkenwell-Green, good at many things: Mistress Mary on the (...)-side, is for
recting a Figure: and one (what do you cal^ her) in Westminster, that
practices the Book and the Key, and the Sive and the Sheares: and all do
well, according to their talent. For my self, let the world speak: hark you
my friend, you shall take --

(She whispers.)
2. Luce. It Is strange the Ignorant should be thus fooled.
What can this Witeh, this Wizard, or old Trot,
Do by Enchantment, or by Magic spell?
Such as profess that Art should be deep Scholars.
What reading can this simple Woman have?
It Is palpable gross foolery.

(...). Now friend, your business?


Taber. I have stolen out of my Masters house, forsooth,
with the Kitchin-Mayd, and I am come to know of you,
whether it be my fortune to have her, or no.

(...). And what is your suit, Lady?


Kitchen. Forsooth, I come to know whether I be a Maid or no.


Wisewo. Why, art thou in doubt of that?


Kitchen. It may be I have more reason then all the world knows.


Taber. Nay, if thou come to know whether thou be a Maid or no, I had best
ask to know whether I be with c^ild or no.


Wisew. Withdraw into the Parlour there, I Will but talk with this other
Gentlewoman, and He resolve you presently.


Taber. Come Si^y, if she cannot resolve thee, I can, and in the Case of a
Mayden-head do more then she, I warrant thee.

Exeunt.
The Wom. Forsooth I am bold, as they say.


Wisew. You are welcome Gentlewoman. --


Wom. I would not have it known to my Neighbors, that I come to a Wise-woman
for any thing, by my truly.


Wisewom. For should your Husband come and find you here.


Wom. My Husband woman, I am a Widow.


Wisewom. Where are my brains? it is true, you are a Widow; and you dwell, let
me see, I can never remember that place.


Wom. In K^ntstreet.


Wisewom. Kentstreet, Kentstreet! and I can tell you wherefore you come.


Wom. Why, and say true?


Wisewom. You are a Wagge, you are a Wagge: why, what do you think now I
would say?


Wom. Perhaps, to know how many Husbands I should have.


Wisewom. And if I should say so, should I say amiss?


Wom. I think you are a Witch.


Wisewom. In, in, I Will but read a little of Ptolomie, and Erra Pater; and when
I have cast a Figure, I Will come to you presently.

Exit W^m. Now Wagge, what would thou have?


2. Luce. If this were a Wisewoman, she could tell that without asking. Now me
thinks I should come to know whether I were a Boy or a Girl; forsooth I lack
a service.


Wis^. By my Fidelity, and I want a good t^sty Lad.


2. Luce. Now could I sigh, and say, Alas, (...) is some Bawd trade-falne, and
out of her wicked experience, is come to be reputed wise. I Will serve her, be it
but to pry mto the mystery of her Science.


Wis^. A proper strip^ing, and a wise, I warrant him; here is a penie for thee,
I Will hire thee for a year by the Statute of Winchester: prove true and honest,
and thou shall want nothing that a good Boy --


2. Luce. Here Wise-woman you are o^t again, I shall want what a good Boy
should have* whilst I live: well, here I shall live both unknown, and my Sex
unsuspected. But whom have we here?

Enter Master Haringfield, and Chartley (...) drunk.
Chart. Come Harin^ld, now we have been drinking of Mother Red-caps Ale, let
us now go make some sport with the Wise-woman.


Haring. We shall be thought very wise men, of all such as shall see us go in
to the Wise-womans.


Chartley. See, here she is; how now Witch? How now Hagge? How now Beldame?
You are the Wisewoman, are you? and have wit to keep your selte warm enough,
I warrant you.


Wisewo. Out thou knave.


2. Luce. And will these wild oats never (...) sown^?


Chart. You Inchantresse, (...), Shee-devill* you Madam (...), Lady (...), you
are too old, you Hagge, now, for con^uring up Spirits your self; but you keep
pretty young Witches (...) your roof, that can do^ that.


Wisewo. I, or my Family conjure up any Spirits! I defy thee, thou young
Hare-brain'd --


Haring. Forbear him till he have his Senses about him, and I shall then hold
thee for a Wise-woman indeed.: otherwise, I shall doubt thou have thy name for
nothing. Come friend, away, if thou love me.


Chart. Away you old Dromadary, I Will come one of these nights, and make a racket
amongst your SheeCatterwaullers.


Haring. I prithee let us be civil.


Chart. Out of my sight, thou Shee-mastiffe.

Exeunt.
2. Luce. Patience, ^weet Mistress.


Wisewo. Now bless me, he has put me into such a fear, as makes all my
bones to dance, and rattle in my skin: I Will be revenged on that swaggering
companion.


2. Luce. Mistress, I wish you would, he is a mere Madcap, and all his delight
is in mis-using such reverent Matrons as your self.


Wisewo. Well, what is thy name, Boy?


2. Luce. I am even little better th^n a Turn-broach, for my name is Jack.


Wisewo. Honest Jack, if thou could but devise how I might cry quittance
with this (...) Dicke, I will go near to adopt thee my So^e and heir.


2. Luce. Mistress, there is a way, and this it is;
To morrow morning does this Gentleman
Intend to marry with one M^ris Luce,
A Goldsmiths Daug^; (...) you know the Maid?

Wisewo. My Daughter, and a (...) smug fac^t Girl.
I had a note but late from her, and she means
To be with me in th'evening; for I have bespoke
Sir Boniface to marry her in the morning.

2. Luce. Do but prevent this Gallant of his Wife,
And then your wrongs shall bereveng'd at full.

Wisewo. I Will (...), as I am Matron; Ey, and show him a new trick for his
learning.


Enter (...) Boyster. Boyst. Morrow.


Wisewo. You Are welcome Sir.


Boyst. Art wise?


2. Luce. He should be wise, because he speaks few words.


Wisewo. I am as I am, and there is an end.


Boyst. Can conjure?


Wisewo. Oh that is a foul word! but I can tell you your Fortune, as they say;
I have some little skill in Palmistry, but never had to do with the devil.


Boyst. And had the devil never any thing to do with thee? thou look
somewhat like his damme. Look on me can tell what I ayle?


Wisewo. Can you tell your self? I should guess, you be mad, or not well in
your wits.


Boyst. T^*art wise, I am so; men being in love, are mad,
And I being in love* am so.

Wisewo. Nay, if I see your complexion once, I think I can guess as near as
another.


Boyst. One Mistress Luce I love, know thou her, Grannam?


Wisewo. As well as the Beggar knows his Dish. Why she is one of my Daughters.


Boyst. Make her my wife, I Will give thee forty pieces.


2. Luce. Take them Mistress, to be revenged on Chartley.


Wisew. A bargain, strike me luck, cease all your sorrow,
Fair Luce shall be your Bride betimes to morrow.

Boyst. Th*art a good Grannam; and, but that thy teeth stand like hedge-stakes
in thy head, I Would kiss thee.

Exit.
Wisewo. Pray will you in; come hither lack, I have
A new trick come into my head, will thou
Assist me in it?

2. Luce. If it concern the crossing of the marriage with
Mistress Luce, I Will do it what e're it be.

Wisewo. Thou shall be tired like a woman; can you make a courtesy, take small
strides, simper, and some modest? me thinks thou have a woman's voice already.


2. Luce. Doubt not of me, the act them naturally.


Wisewo. I have conceited, to have Luc^ married to this blunt Gentleman; she
mistaking him for Chartley, and Ch^tley shall (...) thee, being a Boy, and take
thee for Luce. Wilt not be excellent?


2. Luce. Oh super, super-excellent!


Wisewo. Play but thy part, as I Will act mine, I Will fit him with a Wife, I warrant
him.


2. Luce. And a Wife I Will warrant him.

Exeunt. E^ter Old Sir Harry, and his man Taber.
Sir Har. Ha, then tho^ saw them whispering with my Daughter.


Tab. I saw them, if it shall please you, not whisper, but --


Sir Har. How then, thou knave?


Taber. Marry Sir Knight, I saw them in sad talk; but to say they were
directly whispering, I am not able.


Sir Har. Why Taber, that sad talk was whispering.


Taber. Nay, they did not greatly whisper, for I heard what was said, and what
was said, I have the wit to keep to my self.


Sir Har. What said the unthrift, Taber, tell me knave? Tell me, good knave,
what did the unthrift say?


Taber. I am loath to be called in question about men and wom^s matters, but as
soon as ever he saw your Daughter, I heard what was spoke.


Sir Har. Here sir, take thy Quarters wages aforehand, and tell me all their
words, and what their greeting was at their first encounter; hold thine hand.


Taber. Thanks, Noble Sir, and now I Will tell you. Your daughter being wal^ing
to take the air of the fields, and I before her; whom should we meet just in
the nicke?


Sir Har. Just in the nicke, man?


Taber. In the highway I meant, Sir.


Sir Har. Ha, and what conference past betwixt them, Taber?


Taber. As well as my Pipe can utter, you shall know Sir. This Gentleman
meeting with my young Mistress full butt; imagine you were she, and I young Master
Sencer; now there you come, and here I meet you; he comes in this manner, and
put off his hat in this fashion.


Sir Har. I, but what said he?


Taber. Be with you, fair Gentlewoman; and so goes quite away, and scarce so
much as once look'^ back: and if this were lang^age to o^r to a young Lady,
judge you.


Sir Har. But spoke he nothing else?


Taber. Nothing as I am true.


Sir Har. Why man, all this was nothing.


Taber. Yes Sir, it was as much as my Quarters wages aforehand.

Enter Master Sencer, Master Haringfield, and Gratiana.
Great. Here are two Gentlemen with great desire,
Crave conference with my Father: here he is,
Now Gallants, you may freely speak your minds.

Senc. Save you Sir, my name is Sencer; I am a Northamptonshire Gentleman,
borne to a thousand pound Land by the year: I love your Daughter, and I am
come to crave your good will.


Sir Har. Have you my Daughters, that you covet mine?


Senc. No Sir, but I hope in time I shall have.


Sir Har. So hope not I. Sir, Sir, my Daughters young, and you a Gentleman
unknown, Sencer? ha, Sencer? O Sir, your name I now remember well, it is rank't
'mo^st ^thrifts, dicers, swaggerers, and drunkards: were no^ ^ou brought before
me, some month since, for beating of the Watch, by the same token, I sent you
to the Counter?


Senc. I confess my self to have been^ in that act^on, bu^ note the cause,
Sir: you could not have pleasur'd me so much, in giving me a piece of gold,
as at the same time to help me to that Counter.


Sir Har. Why Sir, what cause had you to beat the Watch, and raise a midnight
tumult in the streets?


Senc. Nay, but hear me, sweet Sir Harry: Being somewhat late at Supper at
the Miter, the doors were shut at my Lodging, I knocked at three or four
places more, all were a-bed, and fast: Innes, Tavernes, none would give me
entertainment. Now, would you have had me dispair'd, and layne in the streets?
No, I bethought me of a trick worth two of that, and presently devised, having
at that time a charge of money about me, to be lodged, and safely too.


Sir Har. As how, I pray you?


Senc. Marry thus: I had knocked my heels against the ground a good while, knew
not where to have a Bed for love nor money. Now what did I? but spying the
Watch, went and hit the Constable a good sowse on the Ear, who provided me of
a lodging presently; and the next day, being brought before your Worship, I was
then sent thither back again, where I lay three or four days without
control.


Sir Har. O, you are a Gallant! is that Gentleman
A Suitor too?

Haring. I am a Suitor in my friends beh^lfe,
No otherwis^: I can assure you, Sir,
He is a Gentleman descended well,
Derived from a good house, well quallify'd,
And well possessed; but that which most should move you,
He loves your Daughter.

Great But were I to choose,
Which of th^se two should please my fancy best,
I sooner should aff^ct this Gentleman,
For his m^d carriage, and his fair discourse,
Then my hot Suitor; Ruffians I detest:
A s^ooth and square b^haviour likes me best.

Senc. What say you to me, Lady.


Gratian. You had best ask my Father what I should say.


Senc. Are you angry, sweet Lady, that I ask't your Fathers consent?


Great. No, if you can get his consent to marry him, shall it (...) me?


Haring. Indeed you therein much forget your self,
To sound her Father e're you tasted her.
You should have first sought means for her good will,
And after compast his.

Sir Har. He can prevail with neither: Gentlemen,
If you will come to revell, you are welcome;
If to my Table, welcome; if to use me
In any grateful Office, welcome too:
But if you come as Suitors, there is the door.

Senc. The door!


Sir Har. I say the door.


Senc. Why Sir? tell not me of your door, nor going out of it, your company
is fair and good, and so is your Daughters; I Will stay here this twelve-moneth,
e're I Will offer to trouble your door.


Sir Har. Sir, but you shall not. Taber! where is that knave?


Senc. Why Sir, I hope you do not mean to make us dance, that you call for a
Taber.


Haring. Nay Master Sencer, do not urge the Knight,
He is incenst now, choose a fitter hour,
And tempt his love in that: old men are testie,
Their rage, if stood against, grows violent;
But suffered and forborne, confounds it self.

Sir Har. Where Is Taber?


Taber. At hand, noble Master.


Sir Har. Show them the door.


Taber. That I will, and take money too, if it please them.


Senc. Is thy name Taber?


Taber. I am so eclip't Sir.


Senc. And Taber, are you appointed to give us Jack Drum's entertainment?


Taber. Why sir, you do not play upon me.


Se^er. Though I cannot, yet I have known an Hare that could. But Knight, thou
do not forbid us the House.


Sir Har. Yes, and forewarne it too.


Sencer. But by thy favor, we may choose whether we will take any warning or
no. Well, farewell old Knight, though thou forbidst me thine house, I Will
honor (...), and extol thee; and though thou keepst me from thy Daughter,
thou shall not hinder me to love her, and admire her: and by thy favor,
sometimes to see her: A Catt may look at a King, and so may I at her. Give me
thine hand, Knight, the next time I come into thy company, thou shall not only
bid me welcome, but hire me to stay with thee, and thy daughter.


Sir. Har. When I do that, enjoy my full consent,
To marry Graciana.

Sencer. It Is a match, strike me luck:
Wife that may be, farewell: Father in law that
Mu^t be, adieu. Taber, play before, my friend
And I will dance after.
(...).
Sir Har. When I receive thee gladly to mine horse,
And wage thy stay, thou shall have (...),
Doubt not, thou shall. Here Is a strange Humourist,
To come a wooing. Taber, are they gone?

Tab. I have played them away, if it please your Worship* and yonder at the
door attends a Schoolmaster, you sent for him, if you remember, to teach my
little young Master and Mistress.


Sir Har. A proper Scholar, pray him to come (...).

Enter a pedanticall Schoolmaster, Sir Boniface.
Sir Bonif. Eques (...): (...): non (...) quid est in Tergo, sed salve bona
virgo.


Sir Har. Sir, you may call me nicknames: if you love me, speak in your
Mother Tongue; or at the (...), if Learning be so much allied unto you, that
Latin unawares slowes from your lips: to make your mind (...) with my
knowledge, pray utter it in English: what is your name?


Sir Bonif. Sit (...).
I Will tell you my (...).

Sir Har. Will you tell it to no men.
I Will entertain none e're I know their names:
Nay, if you be so dainty of your name,
You are not for my service.

Sir Bonif. Intend (...).


Sir Har. Not for twenty Nobles:
Trust me, I will not buy your name so dear.

Sir Bon. O Ignorantia! what it is to deal with stupidity?
Sir (...), Sir (...), hear me one word,
I see, (...), (...) vero negligitis.

Tab. I think he says we are a company of fools, and Nigits, but I hope you
shall not find us such, Mast^r Schoolmaster.


Sir Har. Friend, friend, to cut off all vain circumstance,
Tell me your name, and answer me directly,
Plainly, and to my understanding too,
Or I shall leave you: here is a deal of gibberish.

Sir Bonif. Vir bone.


Sir Har. Nay, nay, make me no bones, but do it.


Sir Bonif. Then in plain vulgar English I am called, Sir Boniface Absee.


Sir Har. Why this is somewhat like, Sir Boniface,
Give me thine hand, thou art a proper man,
And in my judgment, a great Scholar too:
What shall I give thee by the year?

Sir Bonif. I Will trust, Sir, to your generosity;
I will not bargain, but account my self
Mill and mill modis, bound to you.

Sir Har. I cannot leave my Mils, they are farmed already,
The stipend that I give, shall be in money.

Taber. Sure Sir, this is some Miller that comes to undermine you, in the shape
of a Schoolmaster.


Great. You both mistake the Scholar.


Sir Har. I understand my English, that I know;
What Is more then Modern, does surpass my reach.
Sir Bonifa^, come to me two days hence,
You shall receive an answer; I have now,
Matters of some import that trouble me,
Thou should be else dispatched.

Taber. Sir Boniface, if you come to live in our house, and be a Familist
amongst us, I shall desire you better acquaintance, your Name and my Phisnomy
should have some consanguinitie, good Sir Boniface.


Sir Bonif. (...) vales, (...) vales.


Taber. Go with you to the Alehouse? I like the motion well; I Will make an
excuse out of doors and follow you. I am glad yet, we shall have a Good Fellow
come into the house amongst us.


Sir (...). (...) vir (...).


Sir Har. You shall not have me at Saint Magnes, my house is here in (...).


Sir Bonif. I know it, sweet Knight, I know it.
Then virgo formosa, and Domine (...) valete.

Sir Har. Ey, in (...) you shall hear of me,
Sir Bonif. He shall instruct my children; and to thee,
Fair (...), read the Latin tongue,

Taber. Who, shall Sir Bawdy-face?


Sir Har. Sir Boniface, you fool.


Taber. His name is so hard to hit on.


Sir Har. Come Daughter, if things fall out as I intend,
My thoughts shall peace have, and these troubles end.
Exeunt.
Explicit Actus secundus.
Actus tertius, Scena prima.
Enter the second Luce, which was Jack in woman's apparel, and the Wise-woman.
Wisewo. Jack, thou art my Boy.


2. Luce. Mistress!


Wisewo. I Will be a Mother to thee, no Mistress: come Lad, I must have thee sworn
to the orders of my house, and the secrets thereof.


2. Luce. As I am an honest Lad, I am yours to command. But Mistress, what mean
all these women's pictures, hanged here in your withdrawing room?


Wisewo. I Will tell thee, Boy; marry thou must be secret. When any Citizens, or
young Gentlemen come hither, under a color to know their Fortunes, they look
upon these pictures, and which of them they best like, she is ready with a wet
finger: here they have all the furniture belonging to a privat-chamber, bed,
bedfellow and all; but mum, thou know my meaning, Jack.


2. Luce. But I see coming and going, Maids, or such as go (...) Maids, some
of them, as if they were ready to lie down, sometimes two or three delivered
in one night; then suddenly leave their Brats behind them, and conveigh
themselves into the City again: what becomes of their Children?


Wisewo. Those be Kitchin-maids, and Chamber-maids, and sometimes good men's
Daughters; who having caught a clap, and growing near their time, get leave to
see their friends in the Country, for a week or so: then (...) they come, and
for a matter of money, here they are delivered. I have a Mid wife or two
belonging to the house, and one Sir Boniface a Deacon, that makes a shift to
christian the Infants: we have poor, honest, and secret Neighbors, that stand
for common Gossips. But do not thou know this?


2. Luce. Yes, now I do: but what after becomes of the poor Infants?


Wisewo. Why, in the night we send them abroad, and lay one at this man's door,
and another at that, such as are able to keep them; and what after becomes of
them, we inquire not. And this is another string to my Bow.


2. Luce. Most strange, that woman's brain should apprehend
Such law less, indirect, and horrid means
For (...) gain! How many unknown Trades
Women and men are free of, which they never
Had Charter for? but Mistress, are you so
Cunning as you make your self: you can
Neither write nor read, what do you with hose
Books you so often turn over?

Wisew. Why tell the leaves; for to be ignorant, and seem ignorant, what
greater folly?


2. Luce. Believe me, this is a cunning Woman; neither has she her name for
nothing, who out of her ignorance, can fool so many that think themselves
wise. But wherefore have you built this little (...) to the door, where
sitting, you may hear every (...) spoken, by all such as ask for you.


Wisewo. True, and therefore I built it: if any knock, you must to the door
and question them, to find what they come about, if to this purpose, or to
that. Now they ignorantly telling thee their errand, which I sitting in my
Closet, (...) hear, presently come forth, and tell them the cause of their
coming, with every word that has past betwixt you in private: which they
admiring, and thinking it to (...) miraculous, by their report I become thus
famous.


2. (...). This is no Trade, but a Mystery; and were I a Wise-woman, as indeed
I am but a foolish Boy, I need not live by your service. But Mistress, we lose
our selves in this discourse, is not this the morning in which I should be
married?


Wisewo. Now, how had I forgot my self? Mistress Luce promised to be with me
half an hour (...), but (...) and disguised, and so shall thou be too: here is
a black Veil to hide thy face against the rest come.

Enter Sir Bonifa^.
Sir (...). Sit tibi bona dies: salus and quies.


(...). Into the withdrawing room, Sir (...).


Sir Bonif. Without any compunction, I will make the Conjunction.

Exit.
Wisewo. Now keep thy countenance, Boy.


2. Luce. Fear not me, I have as good a face in a Mask, as any Lady in the
Land could wish to have: but to my heart, he comes, or he comes not; now am I
in a pitiful ^rlexity, until I see the event of all.


Wisewo. No more Jack now, but Mistress Luce.


2. Luce. I warrant you Mistress: that it happens so luckily, that my name
should be Luce too, to make the marriage more firm!

Enter Chartley disguised, and in a Visard.
Chart. My honey svveet Hagge, where is Luce?


Wisewo. (...) svveet heart, but disguised and veiled, as you are visarded.


Chart. (...) what is the reason we are thus Hoodwinkt?


Wisew. No discovery of your selves for a million, there is Sir Boniface within,
shall he blab who you are? Besides, there is a young Heir that has stolen a
Lords Daughter from the Court, and would not have their faces seen for a
World: cannot you be content to fare well, and keep your own counsel, and
see, yonder they come.

Enter at several places, Boyster visarded, and Luce (...).
Chart. Gramarcie my Sugar-candie svveet Trot.


Wisewo. Mum, no more words.


Chart. If the great Heir and the young Lady be so dainty of their Complexions,
they shall see (my svveet Luce) we can visard it with the best of them.


Luce. That Gentleman, by the Wisevvomans description, should be Master
Chartley. (Meaning Boyster.)


(...). That gallant Wench, if my Grannam fable not,
Should be Luce: but what be those other?

Wisewo. You vvrong me, but to ask, who but a young Heir, and a Lady of the
Court: that is Luce, take her, and keep your promise.


Boyst. Poc^ palabras.


Wisewo. That Is Chartley, take him Luce.


Luce. But who be they?


Wisewo. A Lord and Lady shall Sir Boniface stay,
Rather then so, strive who should lead the way.
Exeunt Chartley (...) Jack, Boyster with Luce.
Wisewo. Now Jack my Boy, keep thine own counsel, and counten^nce, and I
shall cry quittance with my young Gallant. Well, by this time Sir Boniface is at
his Book. But because there is a mistake, known only to my Boy and my self;
the Marriage shall be no sooner ended, but I Will disturb them by some sudden
outcry, and that too, before they have leisure to unmaske, and make known
themselves one to another; for if the deceit were known, I should fall into
the danger of that young mad Rascal. And now this double apprehension of the
Lord and the Lady shall fetch me off from all; I know it is Sir Boniface his
custom, to make short work, and has dispatched by this: And now
Wise-vvoman, try if thou can b^stir thy self like to a Mad-vvoman -- shift
for your selves, Warrants and Pursevants! Away, Warrants and Pursevants! shift
for your selves.

Enter, as affrighted and amazed, Chartley, Boyster, Boniface, and others.
Chart. I Will take this way.


Boyst. I this.

Exeunt.
Bonif. (...) Curris (...): My cheeks are all Murry,
And I am gone in an hurry.
Exit.
Luce. O Heaven! what shall become of me?


2. Luce. I know what shall become of me already.


Wisewo. O svveet Daughter, shift clothes with this Lady! Nay, as thou love
thy credit and mine, change Habits -- So, if thou be taken in her Garments,
finding the mistake, will let thee pass; and should they meet her in thine,
not knovving her, would no way (...) her: and this prove to both your
securities and my (...).


Luce. As fast as I can, good Mother: So Madam farewell.


2. Luce. All happy joys betide you.

Exit.
Wisew. Ha, ha, let me hold my sides, and laugh: Here were even a Plot to make
a play on, but that Chartley is so fooled by my Boy (...): Well, heel make a
notable Wagge, I Will warrant him. All the Jest will be, if Boyster should meet
with him in Luce's habitt, which he has now on, he would think himself
merely gulled and cheated; and should Chartley meet with Luce as she is now
Roab'd, he would be confident he had married her. Let me see how many
Trades have I to live by: First, I am a VVise-vvoman, and a Fortuneteller, and
under that I deal in Physic and Fore-speaking, in Palmistry, and recovering
of things lost. Next, I undertake to cure Madd folks. Then I keep Gentlewomen
Lodgers, to furnish such Chambers as I let out by the night: Then I am provided
for bringing young Wenches to bed; and for a need, you see I can play the
Match-maker. She that is but one, and professes so many, may well be termed
a Wise-woman, if there be any.

Exit. Enter Boyster.
Boyst. Why, run away, and leave my Wench behind? I Will back: what have
Warrants and Pursevants to do with me? with me? why should I budge? why
should I wear Mask or Visard? If Lords or Ladies offend, let Lords and Ladies
answer; let me better bethink me. Why should I play at Hob-man blind? Hum;
why marry in Tenebris, ha! is there no trick in it? If my Grannam should make
me a younger Brother now, and instead of Luce, pop me off with some broken
commodity, I were finely served: most sure I am, to be in for better and
worse, but with whom, Heaven and my Grannam knovves.

Enter half ready and maskt, 2. Luce.
2. Luce. I am stolen out of doors, to see if I can meet my Husband; with
whom I purpose to make some sport, ere I suddenly disclose my self: what is
he?


Boyst. Heyday, what have we here, an Hoberdehoy? come hither you.


2. Luce. It Is Mistress Luces Husband,
I Will not leave him thus.

Boyst. What art thou?


2. Luce. Do you not know me?


Boyst. That Mask and Robe I know?


2. Luce. I hope so, or else I were in a vvo^ case.


Boyst. That Mask, that Gown I married.


2. Luce. Then you have no reason, but to enjoy both them and me too, and so
you are like; I should be loath to divorce Man and Wife.


Boyst. I am fooled, but what cracked vvare are you, forsooth?


2. Luce. I belong to the old Gentlevvoman of the house.


Boyst. I Will set her house on fire: I am finely bobb'd.


2. Luce. But I hope you will not bobb me.


Boyst. No I'se vvarrant thee: what art thou? Girl or Boy?


2. Luce. Both, and neither; I was a Ladd last night, but in the morning I
was conjured into a Less: And being a Girl now, I shall be translated to a
Boy anon. Her^'s all I can at this time say for my self: Farevvell.


Boyst. Yes, and be hanged vvithall. O for some Gun powder to blovv up this
Witch, this (...), this damned (...)! O I could tear her to fitters with my
teeth! Yet I must be patient, and put up all, lest I be made a jeere to such
as know me: fooled by a Boy! Go too, of all the rest, the Girl Luce must
not know it.

Exit. Enter Chartley and his ^an, meeting Luce.
Chart. So, now am I the same man I was yesterday; who can say I was disguised?
or who can distinguish my condition now? or read in my face, whether I be a
married man, or a Bachelor?


Luce. Who Is that?


Chart. Luce.


Luce. Sweet Husband, is it you?


Chart. The news?


Lu^e. Never so frighted in my days.


Chart. What Is become of the Lord and the Lady?


Luce. The Lord fled after you, the Lady staid; who maskt, and half unready,
ran fast after her poor affrighted Husband: now all is quiet.


Chart. This storm is then well past, and now conveigh your self home as
privately as you can: and see you make this known to none but your Father.


Luce. I am your Wife and Servant.

Exit.
Chart. This name of Luce has been ominous to me; one (...) I should have
married in the Country, and just the night before, a toy took me in the head,
and mounting my H^se, I left Capons, Ducks, Geese, Poultry, Wildfowle, Father,
and Bride and all, and posted up to London, where I have ever since continued
Bachelor, till* now. And now --


Enter Gratiana in haste, a Serving-man before her, and Taber after her. Great.
Nay on, I Pretkee fellow on, my Father will wonder where I have been visiting.
Now, what had I forgot? Taber, there is money, go to the Goldsmiths, bid him
send me my Fan; and make a quick return: on, fellow on.

Exit.
Taber. Her Fan at the Goldsmiths! now had I forgot to ask her his name, or
his sign: but I will after to know.


Chart. Sirrah, go call me back that Serving-man,
And ask him what is the Gentle-vvomans name.

Servingman. I shall; ho, you: Friend, you.


Taber. Who Is that calls?


Servingman. 'Twas I.


Taber. Your business? you should be one, though not of my cognizance, yet of
my condition: a Serving-creature, as I take it: pray what is your will with
me?


Servingman. Pray Sir, what might I call that Gentlevvoman, on whom you were
attendant?


Taber. You may call her what you please, but if you call her otherwise then
in the way of honesty, you may perchance hear on it.


Servingman. Nay, be not offended: I say, what do^ you call her?


Taber. Why Sir, I call her as it shall best please me, sometimes young Lady,
sometimes young Mistress; and what has any man to do with that?


Chart. Are you so captious, sirrah, what is her name? Speak, and be brief.


Taber. Ey marry Sir, you speak to purpose, and I can resolve you: her name is
Gratiana. But all this while I have forgot my Mistress Fan.

Exit.
Chart. Gratiana! often have I heard of her, but saw her not till now: it is a
(...) wench, a very pretty wench, nay, a very, very, very pretty wench. But
what a Rogue am I, of a married man? nay, that have not been married this six
hours, and to have my shittle-wits run a Wooll-gathering already? What
would poor Luce say if she should hear of this? I may very well call her
poor Luce, for I cannot presume of five pounds to her portion: what a Coxcombe
was I, being a Gentleman, and well derived, to match into so beggarly a
kindred? What needed I to have grafted in the stock of such a Choke Pear,
and such a goodly Popering as this to escap^ me? Escape m^e (said I?) if she
do, she shall do it narrowly: but I am married already, and therefore it is
not possible, unless I should make away my wife, to compass her. Married! why
who knows it? I Will outface tho Priest, and then there is none but she and her
Father, and their evidence is not good in Law: and if they put me in suite,
the best is, they are poor, and cannot follow it. I marry Sir, a man may have
some credit by such a Wife as this; I could like this marriage well, if a man
might change away his Wife, still as he is a weary of her, and cope her away
like a bad commodity: if every new Moon a man might have a new Wife, that is
every year a dozen. But this, Till Death us depart, is tedious: I will go a
wooing to her, I will; but how shall I do for jewels and tokens? Luce has
mine in her custody, money and all; tush, I Will juggle them from her well
enough: see, here she comes.

Enter Luce, and her Father.
Luce. Here is my Husband, I pray move him in it.


Father. It touches both our reputations nearly;
For by his often repair, now whilst the Marriage
Is kept from public knowledge, your good name
May be by Neighbors hardly (...) of.

Chart. (...), (...) (...) what, melancholy already* ^re thou have had good
cause to be m^rry, and (...) what (...) was.


Luce. I have great reason, when my name is tossed
In every Gossips mouth, and (...) a byword
Unto such people as it least concerns.
Nay, in my hearing, as they pass along,
Some have not spared to brand my modesty,
Saying, There (...) she whom young Chartley keeps.
There has ^ee ^ntred late, betimes gone forth.
Where I with pride was wont to sit before,
I Am now with shame sent blushing from the door.

Chart. Alas poor fool, I am sorry for thee, but yet cannot help thee, as I
am a Gentleman. Why say (...), thou losest now (...) shillings worth of Credit,
stay but a time, and it shall bring thee in a thousand pounds worth of
commodity.


Father. Son, Son, ^ad I esteemed my profit more
Then I have done my credit, I had now
Been many thousands richer: but you see,
Truth and good dealing bear an humble sail;
That little I enjoy, it is with q^iet,
Got with good conscience, kept with good report:
And that I still shall labor to preserve.

Chart. But do you hear me?


Father. Nothing I Will hear, that tends unto the ruin
Of mine, or of my Daughters honesty.
Shall I be held a Broker to lewd Lust,
Now in my waine of years?

Chart. Will you but hear (...)?


Father. Not in this case. I that have lived thus long,
Reported well, esteemed a welcome Guest
At every (...) Table, there respected;
Now to be held a (...) to my Daughter?
That I should live to this (...)

Chart. But hark you Father?


Father. A Bawd to mine own child*


Chart. Father?


Father. To my sweet L^ce!


Chart. Father?


Father. Deal with me like a Son, then call me Father;
I that have had the tongues of every man
Ready to crown my Reputation:
The hands of all my Neighbors to subscribe
To my good like; and such as could not write,
Ready with Palsy and (...) fingers,
To set their ^cribling marks.

Chart. Why Father in Law?


Father. Thou had a Mother Luce; it is (...) with me
To say thou had, but have not; a kind Wife,
And a good Nurse she was: she, had she lived
To hear my name thus canvast, and thus tossed,
Seven years before she died, I had been a Widower
Seven years before I was: Heaven rest her soul,
She is in Heaven I hope.
((...)* (...) eyes.)
Chart. Why so now, these be good words, I knew these storms would have a
shower, and then they would (...). Now if your anger be over, hear me.


Father. Well, say on Son.


Chart. Stay but a Month, it is but four Weekee; nay, it is February, the
shortest Month of the year, and in that time I shall be at full age; and the
Land being entailed, my Father can dis-inherit me of nothing. Is your (...) I
satisfied you? Well, I see you chollericke hasty men, are the kindest when all
is done. Here Is such (...) of (...), (...) weeps to think of his Wife, she
weeps to see her Father cry * Peace (...), we shall else have thee (...)
^dred of the Woman killed with kindness.


Father. Well Son, my anger's past; yet I must tell you,
It grieves me that you should thus (...) it off,
Concerning us, no such a dear degree.
In private be it spoke, my Daughter tells me,
She Is both a Wife and Maid.

(...). That may be helped.

Now Luce, your Fathers pacified, will you be pleased? I would endure a
Quarters punishment for thee, and wilt not thou suffer a poor Months penance
for me? It Is but eight and twenty days, Wench; thou shall fare well all the
time, drink well, eat well, lie well: come, one word of comfort at the later
end of the day.


Luce. Yours is my fame, mine honor, and my heart
Linked to your pleasure, and shall never part.

Chart. Gramercie Wench, thou shall wear this chain no longer for that word,
I Will multiply the linkes in such order, that it shall have light to shine about
thy neck, oftener then it does: this jewel, a plain Bristowe stone, a
counterfeit. How base was I, that coming to thee in the way of Marriage,
courted thee with counterfeit stones? Thou shall wear right, or none: thou
have no money about (...), Luce?


Luce. Yes Sir, I have the hundred pounds that you gave me to lay up last.


Chart. Fetch it; let me see, how much branched Satin goes to a Petticoat?
and how much wrought Velvet to a Gown? then for a Bever for the Citle, and a
Blackbagge for the Country: I Will promise her nothing, but if any such (...) be
brought home, let her not thank me for them.

(...) (...) with the (...). Gramercie Luce, Nay, go in, Gravitie and
Modesty, ten to one but you shall hear of me, (...) you see me again.


Father. I know you kind, (...) my hasty Language unto my rage, not me.


Chart. Why, do not I know you, and do not I know her? I doubt you will wish
(...) that I had never known either of you: now, what say thou, my sweet
Luce?


Luce. My words are yours. so is my life: I am now part of your self, so made
by Nuptial vows.


Chart. What a Pagan am I, to practice such villainy against this honest
Christian! If Gratiana did come into my thoughts, I should fall into a vain
'to pity ^er: but now that I talk of her, I have a tongue to* woo her,
Tokens to win her; and that done, if I do not find a trick, both to wear
her, and weary her, it may prove a piece of a Wonder. Thou see, Luce, I have
some store of Crowns about me, there are brave things to be bought in the
City; Cheapside, and the Exchange, afford variety and raritie. This is all I
will say now, but thou may hear more of me hereafter.

Exit.
Luce. Heaven speed you where you go Sir; shall we (...)?
Though not from scandal, we live free from (...).

Father. I Will in before.

Exit. Enter (...) Boyster.
Boyst. I am still in love with Luce, and I would know
An answer more directly: fie, fie, this Love
Hangs on me like an Ague, makes me (...) fool*
Coxcombe and Ass: why should I love her, why?
A Rattle-Baby, Puppit, a slight toy,
And now I could go to buffets with my self,
And (...) this Love away: but see, that' s Luce.

Luce. I cannot shun him, but I Will shake him off.


Boyst. Morrow.


Luce. As much to you.


Boyst. I Will use few words, Can love me?


Luce. Deed Sir no.


Boyst. Why the farewell, the way I came, I Will go.

Exit.
Luce. This is no tedious Courtship, he is soon answered,
So should all Suitors else be, were they wise;
For being repulst, they do but waste their days
In thanklesse suites, and superficial praise.
Enter Boyster again.
Boyst. Swear that thou will not love me.


Luce. Not Sir, for any hate I ever bare you,
Or any foolish pride, or vain conceit:
Or that your feature does not please mine eye,
Or that you are not a brave Gentleman:
But for concealed reasons I am forced
To give you this cold answer; and to swear
I must not, then with patience pray forbear.

Boyst. Even farewell then.

Exit.
Luce. The like to you, and save your hopes in me.
Heaven grant you your best wishes; all this strife
Will end it self, when I am known a Wife.
Exeunt.
Explicit Actus tertius.
Actus 4us. Scena prima.
Enter Sir Harry, M. Harringsfield Gratiana with others. Sir Harry. I am
satisfied good M. Harringsfield touching your friend, and since I see you have
left his dangerous company, I limit you to be a welcome guest unto my Table.


Harring. You have bin always noble.

Enter Taber.
Sir Harry. Taber: the news with thee?


Taber. May it please the right worshipful to understand that there are some
at the Gate who dance a turn or two without, and desire to be admitted to
speak with you within.


Sir Harry. The Scholar is it not.


Taber. Nay sir, there are two Scholars, and they are spowting Latin one
against the other; And in my simple Judgment the stranger is the better
Scholar, and is somewhat too hard for sir Boniface: For he speaks louder, and
that you know is ever the sign of the most learning, and he also has a great
desire to serve your Worship.


Sir Harry. Two scholars; My house has not place for two, thus it shall be.
Taber admit them both, we though unlearned will hear them two dispute, and
he that of the two seems the best read, shall be received, the other quite
casheired.


Harring. In that you show but Justice, in all persons merit should be
regarded.

Enter Taber vshering sir Boniface and Sencer, disguised like a pedant.
Sir Boniface. Venerabilis magistri: Absint vobis capistri.


Sencer. Et tu domini calve, iterum atque, iterum salve,
Amo amas amavi, sweet Lady Heaven save ye.

Sir Harry. This approues him to be excellent, but I thank my breeding I
understand not a word, you tong-men you whose wealth lies in your brains; Not
in your budgets here me: Be it known, my house affords room for one
Schoolmasters but not for more. And I am thus resolved, take you that side
gentle sir Boniface, and sir possess you that.

He of you two in arguing proves the best. To him will I subscribe are you
agreed.


Sir Boniface. Nec animo, nec cord, nec vtroque.


Senc. No more of that nec cord, noble Knight, he wishes you nec cord, think
of that.


Sir Harry. A Cord about my neck, sir Boniface.
Speak do you use me well.

Sir Boniface. Domine currogas:


Senc. Is this to be endured, to call a Knight.
Cur, Rogue and Ass.

Sir Harry. I find my self abused.


Harring. Yet patience good sir Harry, and hear more pray sir Boniface: of
what University? Were you of.


Sir Boniface. I was student in Brazen nose.


Harring. A man might guess so much by your pimples, and of what place were
you:


Senc. Petrus dormit securus; I was Sir of Peeter house Sir Boniface. Natus
eram, in Woxford, and I proceeded in Oxford.


Senc. Est mihi been nostrum, thou would say, in Gotam; For my part sir
Harry, I can read Service and Marry, Que genus et flexum, though I go in
genes Fustion, scalpellum et charta I was not brought up at Plowe and cart, I
can teach Qui mihi, and neither laugh nor tee-hee, sed as in present, if your
worship at this present, Iste, Ista Istud, will do me any good, to give me
legem pone in Gold or in money. Piper atque papauer, I Will deserve it with my
labor.


Harring. But when go you to dispute.


Sir Boniface. Nomnativo hic prediculus, his words are most ridiculous: But tu
thou, qui the which, deridest those that be rich, con^teruc hanc sententiam,
constrne me this sentence. Est modus in rebus sunt certi denique fines:


Sencer. Est modus in rebus: There is mud in the rivers.
Sunt certi denique fines, and certain little Fishes.

Sir Harry. I warrant you he has his answer ready.


Sir Boniface. Dij boni boni.


Harring. Heel give you more bones then those to kn^w on Sir Boniface.


Senc. Kartere Moosotropos Poluphiltate phile poetatis Tes Logikes retoon, onch
elashiste sophoon.

That is as much as to say, in our m^terna lingna I will make you sir Boniface,
confess your self an Ass in English, speak open and broad words, for want
of Latin, and Denique instruct me to resolve such questions as I shall ask
you in our modern tongue.


Sir Harry. Confess him an Ass, speak obsceane words after entreat thee to
resolve thy questions. Do that, possese the place.


Sencer. Di do and dum: No more words but mum:


Sir Boniface. Noble sir Harry; Nunquam sic possit?


Sir Harry. Sir Boniface is sick already and calls (...) possit, no marvel,
being so threatened.


Sencer. You Boniface, decline me I am a no after the first conjugation, amo
(...), vocito vocitavi. Titubo titubavi?


Sir Boniface. I am not the preceptor to a pupil.
But can decline it, mark sir Timothy:
I am a no,

Sencer. Been been.


Sir Boniface. I am an as?


Senc. Most treue most treue, vos estis, ut egojum (...), that what he confessed
is, as true as the pestis.


Sir Harry. This Scholar works by magic he has made him confess himself
an Ass.


Sir Boniface. Per has meas manus vir, tues insanus,


Sencer. I Will make him fret worse yet; Sir Bouiface: quid est grammatica.


Sir Boniface. Grammatica est ars,


Sir Harry. Fie, fie, no more of these words good sir Boniface.


Sencer. Attend again, proceed me with this verse
of reverent Cato: Si deus est animus-

Sir Boniface. Nobis ut carmina dicunt.


Taber. Di quoth ha, out on him for a beastly man.


Sir Harry. I would not have him teach my children so for more then I am worth.


Sir Bonif. O! but reverend sir Harry you must subaudi.


Sir Harry. I Will never be so baudy whilst I live, nor any of mine I hope.


Sir Boniface. O! Propria quae maribus:


Sir Harry. ^y Boniface, it is those maribo^, that makes you talk so broadly?


Sir Boniface. Venerabilis vir hom^ ille est ebrius.


Sir Harry. What does he mean by that.


Sencer. H^ says, I can speak Hebrewe


Sir Harry. I Beleeu't:
But if sir Boniface still co^ these lessons,
He Will, speak the French ton^ue perfect.

Sencer. Now to the last, i will task sir Boniface, but with an (...) question.
Tell me sir: What Is Latin for this Earth?


Sir Boniface. Facile and easy more fit for the pupil then the preceptor:
what is Latin for this Earth? Tellus.


Sencer. Tell you; no sir, it belongs to you to tell me.


Sir Boniface. I say Tellus is Latin for the Earth.


Sencer. And I say, I will not tell you what is Latin for the Earth; unless
you yield me victor*


Sir Harry. You have no reason: good sir Timothy,
The place is yours.

Harring. He has deserved it well.


Senser. But i will deserve it better, why this fellow
^s Frantic, you shall here me make him speak
Idely and without sense. I Will make him say,
His Nose was Husband to a Queen,
He whispers to* sir Harry.
Sir Harry. Sir Timothy not possible.


Taber. He will not speak it for shame.


Sencer. That you shall here; Magister Boniface.


Sir Boniface. Quid ais domine Timothy.


Sencer. Who was Pasiphas husband Queen of Creete.


Sir Boniface. Who knows not that, why Minos was her Husband.


Sencer. That his nose was; did I not tell you so.


Sir Boniface. I say that Min^s was:


Sencer. That his Nose was ha has.


Sir Harry. I Will not believe it.


Sir Boniface, there are a brace of Augels.
You are not for my turn sir Timothy.
You are the man shall read unto my daughter
The Latin tongue, in which I am ignorant:
Confess your self an Ass; speak bawdy words;
And after to talk idely. Hence away:
You s^all have my good word, but not my pay?

Sir Boniface. Opus est vsus; (...) Timothy you abuse us.
Is wear by a nowne, had I thy hose down,
Qui que quod, I would so smoke thee with the rod:
Ille Illa Illud, until I fetch blood.
But Nobiles valete, remain in quiet.
Exit.
Sir Harry. Sir Timothy, there is some Gold in earnest,
I like you well take into your tuition,
My daughter Gratiana; the news Taber.

Enter Taber
Taber. Of another gallant noble sir that p^etends to have business, both with
you and my mistress,


Sir Harry. Admit him.


Enter Chartly very gallant, in his hand a Lady. Taber. Lusty Iuventus; will it
please you to draw near.


Chart. Noble Knight, whilst you peruse that sweet Lady, tell me how you
like this:

kisseth her.
Gratia. You press so suddenly upon me sir
I know not what to answer.

Sencer. Mad Chartly; what makes desperation here.


Chart. To the word wooer let me add the name speeder my father has written
to your father, and the cause of his writing at this present, is to let you
understand, that he fears you have lived a maid too long: and therefore to
prevent all diseases incident to the same; as the green sickness and others.
He sent me like a skillful Physician, to take order with you against all such
maladies. If you will not credit me, list but how fervently my father writes
in my behalf.


Sir Harry. He is my only son, and she I take as your only daughter, what
should hinder then,

To make a match between them, (well it is well it is good I like it) I will make
her Ioynter three hundred pounds a year.


Chart. How say you by that sweet Lady three hundred pounds a year and a
proper man to boot.


Sir Harry. All Is good, I like it, welcome M. Chartly.
Thou (...) art no child of ^ine
Unless thou bidst him welcome. This I presume
To be your fathers hand.

Chart. But I Will be sworn he never writ it.


Sir Harry. And this his seal at Arms.


Chart. Or else I understand it very poorly, but L^dy*
In earnest of further acquaintance, receive this Chain,
These Jewels, hand and heart.

Sir Harry. Refase no Chain nor Jewels, heart nor hand, but in exchange of
these bestow thy self thine own dear self upon him.


Gratia. My self on him, whom I tell now I near saw? Well since I must, your
will's to me a law.


Senc. Nay then it is time to speak, shall I stand here wavting like a
Coxcombe, and see her given away before my face? stay your hand sir Harry; and
let me claim my promise.


Sir Harry. My promise i will perform sir Timothy, you shall have all your wages
duly paid.


Senc. I claim fair Gratiana by your promise.
No more sir Timothy, but Sencer now,
You promised me when you received my service,
And with your liberal hand did wage my stay:
To endowe me freely with your daughters Love,
That promise now I claim.

Sir Harry. Meer^ cosnidge, knavery,
I tide my self to no conditions.
In which such guile is practiced, come son Chartly,
To cut of all disasters incident.
To these proceedings we will sollemnise
These Nuptial rites with all speed possible.

Chart. Farewell good sir Timothy; farewell learned sir Timothy.

Exeunt.
Sencer. Why: and farewell learned sir Timothy.
For now sir Timothy and I a^ two:
Boast on, brag on, exalt exalt thy self,
Swim in a Sea of pleasure and content
Whilst my Bark suffers wrack i will be revenged,
Chartly; i will cry vindicta for this Horn,
Next time thou gorest, it must be with thy horn,
Exit. Enter M. Boyster
Boyster. I am mad, and know not at what.
I could swagger but know not with whom,
I am at odds with my self; and know not why:
I shall be pacified, and cannot tell when,
I would feign have a wife but cannot tell where,
I would fasten on Luce but cannot tell how.
How; where; when; why; whom; what.
Feeding sure makes me lean, and fasting fat.
Enter Luce and Joseph.
Luce. Not all this while once see me.


Joseph. His occasions, perhaps enforce his absence.


Luce. His occasions:
Unless he find occasion of new Love.
What could enforce such absence from his spouse:
A^ I grown foul and black, since my espousals.
It should not seem so; For the shop is daily,
Custom'd with store of Chap-men, such as come
To cheapen Love. O no, I am my self?
But Chartly he is changed.

Joseph. You know that Gentleman.


Luce. Escape him if thou can.


Boyster. He cannot, I arrest you;


Luce. At whose suite.


Boyster. Not at mine own, that's dashed, I love thee not.
Thou art a Spaniard, Gipsee, a mere Blackamore:
Again, I say I love thee not.

Luce. A Blackemore, a Gipsy?
Sure I am changed indeed, and that's the cause
My Husband left me so, this Gentleman
Once tearmd me beautiful, how look I Joseph.

Joseph. As well as ere you did, fat, fre^h, and fair*


Boyster. You lie boy, pocket that, and now be gone.


Joseph. And what shall then become of my Mistress*


Boyster. I Will wait upon your Mistress.


Luce. I know you will not wait on such a Gypsy.


Boyster. Yes Luce on such a Gipfie: Boy, abi abi.


Joseph. Abide fir, you need not fear that I have no purpose to leave her.


Boyster. Now you are going to the wedding-house.
You are bid to be a Bride maid, are you not.

Luce. What wedding sir, or whose?


Boyster. Why Chartleyes; Luce has he bin thy friend so long, and would not
bid thee to w^ite on his Bride. Why lookst thou red and pale, and both, and
neither.


Luce. To Mr. Chartleyes Bridals, why, to whom, Should he be married.


Boyster. To Grace of Gracious street.


Luce. To Gratiana?
Be^hrow you sir you do not use me well,
To buze into mine ^res these strange untruths:
I tell you sir, it is as impossible
That they two should ma^ch: as Earth and Heaven to meet.

Boyster. You Will not believe it, pray then hark within,
The Nuptial music ecchoing to their joys.
But you give credit to no certaintyes:
I told you but a tale, a lie, a fable?
A monstrous, a notorious idle untruth,
That you were black, and that I loved you not.
And you could credit that.
Enter sir Harry and Harings-field, Chartly leading Gratiana by the Arm, Taber
and attendants. Who Is tell-troth now.
Know yo^ that ^an, or know you that fin^ Virgin:
Whom by the arm he leads.

Luce. I Will not indure't: Heaven give you joy sir:


Chart. I thank you: Luce?

she faints.
Sir Harry. Look to the Maid she faints.

Royst. held her up.
Chartly. Grace, come not near her Grace.
Father keep off, on Gentlemen apace.
She^s troubled with the falling sickness, for
Often has she fallen before me.

Sir Harry. Nay if it be no otherwise, on gentlemen.
Let those with her strive to recover her.
Keep off, the disease is infectious:

Chartly. If it were in a man, it were nothing, but the falling sickness in a
woman is dangerous.

Enter Luces Father. My the other father in Law, now shall I be utterly shamed,
If he assure to know me, I Will out face him.


Father. Son your well met.


Chartly. How fellow.


Father. I cry you mercy sir.


Chart No harm done friend, no harm done.

Exeunt.
Fath. If he? he could not but have known me there, Yet he was wondrous like
him.


Boyst. How cheer you Luce, whence grew this passion.


Luce. Pardon me sir, I do not know my self:
I am apt to swound, and now the fit is past me.
I thank you for your help; is master Chartly
Vanished so soon:

Boyster. Yes: and to supply his place, see where thy father comes.


Father. He has not such a suit, besides this gallant
Led by the arm a Bride, a lusty Bride?
How much might I have wronged the Gentleman.
By craving his acquaintance, this it is,
To have dim Eyes. Why looks my daughter sad.
I cry you mercy. Sir I saw not you.

Boyst. I would I had not seen you at this time neither, farewell.

Exit.
Luce. If he be gone? then call me vent my grief, * Father I am undone,


Father. Forbid it Heaven.


Luce. Disgraced, despised, discarded, and cast off.


Father. How, mine own child:


Luce. My Husband, O my husband?


Father. What of him.


Luce. Shall I the shower of all my grief at once
Power out before you: Chartly, once my husband
Has left me to my shame. Him and his Bride,
I met within few minutes.

Father. Sure it was they.
I met them two, it was he; base villain Jew.
I Will to the Wedding board, and tell him so:
I Will do it as I am a man?

Luce. Be not so rash.


Father. I Will live and dye upon him;
He Is a base fellow, so I Will prove him too.
Joseph my Sword.
This rashness will undo us.

Luce. I Will have my Sword.


Father. It has bin twice in France, and once in Spain,
With John a Gaunt, when I was young like him
I had my wards, and foynes, and quarter-blowes:
And knew the way into St. Georges fields.
Twice in a morning, Tuttle, Finsbury?
I knew them all, i will too him, where is my sword,
Or leave this spleen, or you will o^erthrow
Our fortunes quite, let us consult together,
What we were best to do.

Father. I Will make him play at Leap-frog, well I hear thee


Luce. I cannot pr^ue our marriage, it was secret,
And he may find some cavell in the Law.

Father. I Will too him with no Law, but Staffood Law.
I Will ferret the false boy, nay on good Luce.

Luce. Part of your spleen, if you would change to counsel,
We might revenge us better.

Father. Well I hear thee.


Lu^e. To claim a public marriage at his hands:
We want sufficient proof, and then the world
Will but deride our folly, and so add
Dubble disgrace unto my former wrong.
To Law with him he has a greater purse,
And nobler friends, how then to make it known?

Father. Is this his dam^sk'd kirtl^ frendge with Gold,
His black bag, and his Beaner, it is well yet
I have a Sword:

Luce. And I have a project in my Brain begot,
To make his own mouth witness to the World
My innocence, and his incontinence?
Leave it to me, i will clear my self from blame,
Though I the wrong, yet he shall reap the shame.
Exeunt. Enter Sencer like a Seruing-man.
Senc. Now or never, look about thee Sencer, tomorrow is the Marriage day
which to prevent, ly^ not within the compass of my appr^hension, therefore I
have thus disguised my self, to go to the, Looming woman's, the Fortune
tellers. The a^y thing, the nothing, this over against mother Red-caps is her
house, i will knock.

Ent^r (...). Luce in her boys shape.
2. Luce. Whose there? What would you have.


Sencer. I would speak with the wise gentlewoman of the house.


2. Luce. O belike you (...) lost somewhat.


Sencer. You are in the wrong (...) youth.


2. Luce. I am somewhat thick of (...), pray speak out.


Sencer. I say I have not lost any thing, but wit and time,
And neither of those she can help me too:

2. Luce. The^ you belike are cro^ in Love, and come to know what success you
shall have.


Sencer. Thou have hit it sweet ladde; thou have hit it.


2. Luce. What is it, you say sir:


Sencer. Thou have ^it it?


2. Luce. I pray (...) in, i will bring you to my Mistress*

Exit.
Enter Luce and Joseph. Luce. This is the house, knock Joseph, my business
craves dispatch.


Joseph. Now am I as angry, as thou art timorous, and now to vent the next
thing I meet, O it is the door.

knocks. Enter 2. Luce.
2. Luce. Who Is there, what are you.


Luce. A maid and a wife.


2. Luce. And that would grieve any wench to be so,
I know that by my self, not Luce.

Luce. Boy, where is your Mistress.


2. Luce. In some private talk with a Gentleman?
I Will fetch her to you presently.
Exit.
Luce. If she and you see me not, I am but dead,
I shall be made, a byword to the World:
The scorn of women; and my Fathers shame:
Enter Wise-woman and Sencer.
Wisewoman. You tell me your name is Sencer, I knew it before, and that
Chartly is to be married, I could have told it you.


2. Luce. Married to morrow, O me!


Sencer. Ey but you tell me, that Chartly before to morrow shall be
disappointed of his, make that good, Thou shall have twenty Angels.


Wisewoman. I Will do it, stand aside, i will have but a word or two with this
Gentlewoman; and I am for you presently.


Luce. O! Mother, mother.

They whisper.
2. Luce. My husband marry another wife tomorrow? O changeable destiny, no
sooner married to him, bu^ instantly to loose him. Nor death it grieves me so
much that I am a wife, but that I am a maid too, to carry one of them well is
as much as any is bound to do, but to be tid^e to both, is more then flesh and
blood can endure.


Wisewoman. Well trust to me, and I will sell all things straight.

Enter Boyster.
Boyster. Where Is this Witch, this hagge, this beldan, this wisard, and have I
found thee, thus then will I tear, mu^ble and maule thee.


Wisewoman. Help, help^, and if you be a gentleman.


Sencer. Forbear this rudeness, he that touches her, Draws against me.


Boyster. Against you sir, apply thou, that shall be tried.


All. Help, help, part them help.


Sencer. With patience hear her speak.


Boyster. Now Trot, now Granam, what can thou say for thy self: what Luce
hear be patient and put up them, she must not see the end.


Sencer. Than trince of all sides, if we come for counsel,
Let us with patience hear it:

Luce. Then first to me.


Wisew. You would prevent young Chartlyes marriage, you shall: hark in your
ear.


Luce. It pleases me.


Wisew. You-forestall Gratiane^ wedding, it is but thus.


Sencer. I Will do it,


Wisew. You would enjoy Luce as your wife, and lie with her to morrow night.
Hark in your care.


Boyster. Fiat.


Wisewoman. Away, you shall enjoy him, you are married,
Luce away, you shall see Chartly discarded from Gratiana,
Sencer be gone, and if I fail in any of these or the rest,
I lay my self open to all your displeasures.

Boyster. Farewell till soon:


Wisewoman. You know your meeting place.


All. We do?


(...). You shall report me wiser and cunning too.

Exit.
2. Luce. I Will add one night more to the time, I have said.
I have not many I hope to live a maid.
Exit. Enter Taber and ^ir Boniface with a Trencher, with broken meat and a
Napkin.
Taber. Fie, fie, what a time of trouble is this to morrow to morrow is my
mistress to be married, and we seruingmen are so pusled.


Sir Boniface. The dinner's half done, and before I say
Grace, and bid the old Knight and his guest proface.
A medicine from your trencher, good M. Taber.
As good a man as ere was sir Saber:
Well think it no shame, men of learning and wit, say study gets a stomach,
friend Taber a bit.

Taber. Lick clean good sir Boniface, and save the scraper a labor.

Enter Sencer like a Servingman.
Sir Boniface. But soft let me ponder:
Know you him that comes yonder?

Taber. Most heartily welcome, would you speak with any here.


Senc. Pray is the young gentleman of the house at leisure*


Taber. Mean you the Bridegroom M. Chartly.


Sencer. I have a Letter for him. You seem to be a gentleman your self,
acquaint him with my attendance, and I shall rest yours in all good offices.


Taber. Sir Boniface, pray keep the gentleman company I will first acquaint
your lips with the virtue of the Seller.


Sir Boniface. Adesdem come near, and taste of your beer. Welcome, sine dole,
for puntis te vole,

Exit.
Sencer. When I taste of your liqour.
Gramercy master Vicar.
Enter Taber with a bowl of Beer and a Napkine.
Taber. Most heartily welcome: your courtesy I beseech you, ply it off (...)
entreat you, pray sir Boniface keep the Gentleman company; till I acquaint my
young master with his business.

Exit.
Sir Bonif. Taber, I shall besolas manus.

They dissemble one to another
Sencer. A vostre seruitor.

Enter Haringsfield.
Harring. He what art thou,


Sencer. A hanger on, if it please you:


Harring. And I a shaker off, i will not bear your gallows,
You shall not hang on me.
Enter Chartly with his Napkin as from Dinner. O. Mr Bridegroom.


Chartly. Gentlemen, the Ladies call upon you to dance, they will be out of
measure displeased, if dinner being done, you be not ready to lead them a
me^sure:


Harring. Indeed women love not to be scanted of their measure.


Chartly. Fie sir Boniface: have you forgot your self, Whilst you are in the
Hall, there is never a whetstone for their wits in the Parler?


Sir Boniface. I will enter and set an edge upon their I ngenies.


Chartly. To me sir, from whom? a letter to her most dear, most loving, most
kind friend Mr. Chartly these be delivered: sure from some wench or other I
long to know the contents.


Sencer. Now to cry quittance with you for my farewell learned sir Timothy.


Chartly. Good news, as I live, there is for thy pains my good sir Pandarus:
Had thou brought me word my father had turned up his heels. Thou could
scarcely have pleased me better: (He reads) though I disclaim the name of
wife, of which I account my self altogether unworthy, yet let me claim some
small interest in your love, this night I lie at the house where we were
married, (the Wisewomans I mean) where my maidenhead is to be rifled, bid
fair for it, and enjoy it, see me this night or never, so may you marrying
Gratiana, and loving me, have a sweet wife and a true friend: This night or
never, your quo^dam wife: Hereafter your poor sweetheart no other: Luce. So
when I am tired with Gratiana, that is when I am past grace. With her I can
make my rendevowz, i will not slip this occasion, nor sleep till I see her, thou
art an honest ladde, and may prove a good Pimpe in time. Can thou advise
me what color, I may have to compass this commodity.


Sencer. Sir, she this night expe^ts you, and prepares a costly banquet for
you.


Chartly. I Will go, although the Devil and mischance look big,


Sencer. Feyne some news that such a piece of Land is fallen to you, and you
must instantly ride to take possession of it, or which is more probable, cannot
you persuade them you have received a letter that your Father lies a dying.


Chartly. You rogue, I would he did but the name of that news is called, too
good to be true.


Sencer And that if ever you will see him alive, you must ride post into the
Country.


Chartly. Enough: if ever I prove Knight errant thou shall be mine own
proper squire, for this thou have fitted me with a plot, do but wait here
note how I will manage it,

Tabor my horse, for I must ride to night*


Taber. To night sir.


Chartly. So tell my Bride and Father, I have news that quite confounds my
^nces.

Enter Sir Harry, Gratiana and Harringsfield.
Gratiana. How ride to night, the marriage day to morrow
And all things well provided for the feast.
O tell me sweet, why do you look so pale.

Chartly. My Father, O my Father:


Grace. What of him.


Sir Harry. What of your father, Son?


Chartly. If ever I will here his aged tongue.
Preach to me counsel, or his palsy hand,
Stroke my wild head, and bless me, or his eyes:
Drop tear by tear which they have often done,
At my misgovern'd rioting youth.
What should I more, if ever I would see;
The good old man alive. Oh, Oh?

Sencer. Go thy ways for thou shall have it.


Grace. But do you mean to ride.


Chartly. Ey Grace, all this night.


Sencer. Not all the night without alighting sure:
You Will find more in it then to get up and ride,

Harring. The Gentleman's riding, boots and spurs.
Why Taber?

Chartly. Nay Grace, now is no time.
To stand on scrupulous parting. Knew thou my business.

Sencer. As she shall know it:


Chartly. And how I mean this night to toil my self.


Sencer. Marry hang you brock.


Chartly. Thou would be moan my travel.


Sencer. I know it would grieve her:


Chartly. You father, Grace, good Mr Harringsfield.
You sir, and all pray for (...) Gentl^men, that in this dark
nights journey I may find smooth way, sweet speed and
all things to my mind.

Sir Harry. We Will see my son take horse.

Exeunt.
Gratiana. But I will s^ay.
I want the heart to see him post away?

Sencer. Save you gentlewoman, I have a message to deliver to one Mistre^
Gratiana, this should be the Knights house her father.


Gratiana. It is: The message that you have to her.
You may acquaint me with, for I am one
That knows the inside of her thoughts.

Sencer. Are you the Lady,


Gratiana. Sir I am the poor gentlewoman*


Sencer. There is a conning woman dwells not (...).

At Hogsden Lady, famous for her skill.

Be^des some private talk that much concerns your fortunes in your love. She
has to show you this night if it shall please you walk so far as to her
house, an admirable suite.

Of costly needle work, which if you please.
You may by vnder-rate for half the value
It cost the making, about six a clock.
You may have view thereof, but otherwise.
A Lady that has craved the sight thereof:
Must have the first refusal.

Gratiana. I Will not fail her.
My husband being this day rid from home.
My leisure fitly serves (...), thank you Mistress?

Sencer. At six a clock.


Gratiana. I will not fail the hour.

Exit.
Sencer. Now to sir Harry, his is the next place.
To meet at Hogsden his fair daughter Grace.
Exit.
Actus 5us. Scena prima.
Enter old M. Chartly as new come out of the Country To inquire after his
Son* and three or four serving men with blew Coats to attend him. ^Old
Chart. Good heaven; This London is a stranger grown, and out of my
acquaintance, this seven years I have not seen Paul's steeple, or Cheap,
cross.


Gyles. Sir.


Old Chart. Have thou not made inquiry for my Son.


Gyles. Yes sir, I have asked about every where for him,
But cannot hear of him.

Old Chart. Disperse your selves* ^quire about the Tavernes, O^dinaryes,
Bowle-allyes, Te^courts, Gaming-houses. For there (I fear) he will be found.


Gyles. But where shall we hear of your wo^ship again.


Old Chart. At Grace Church by the Conduit, (...) ^ir Harry, but stay, leave
off a while (...) bootlesse search, had e're man such a wild brain to hi^
^row, of such small hope, who when (...) should have married a fair, a modest,
and a virtuous maid, rich and revenewed well, and even the night before the
marriage day, took horse, road thence whether Heaven knows, since the
distracted virgin has left her Fathers house, but nether feumd, yet in their
search we have measured out much Ground.

Enter Sir Harry and S^ncer.
Sencer. Your ^orship will be there.


Sir Harry. Yes, not to f^le.
At half an hour past six, or before seven.

Sencer. You shall not find us at six and at seven, i will
Warrant you: good health to your worship.
Exit.
Sir Harry. Farewell good fellow,
At the Wisewomans house I know it well:
Perhaps she knows some danger touching me.
I Will keep mine hour.

Old Chart. Sir Harry, a hand a hand to balk you it were siun.
I shall be bold to make your house mine Inn:

Sir Harry. Brother Chartly; I am glad to see you.


Old Chart. Me thinks sir Harry you look strangely on me.
And do not bid me welcome with an heart.

Sir Harry. And blame me not to look amazedly,
To see you hear.

Old Chart. Why me?


Sir Harry. Come come, you are welcome.
And now i will turn my strangeness to true joy,
I am glad to see you well, and safe recovered*
O^ your late grievous sickness.

Old Chart. The strange amazed looks that you c^st off
You put on me, and blame me not to wonder,
That you should talk of sickness to sound men,
I thank my stars, I did not taste the grief
Of inward pain or outward malady,
This seven years day.

Sir Harry. But by your favor brother,
Then let me have my wonder back again.

Old Chart. Before I quite part with it, let me know,
Why you the name of brother put upon me.
In every clause, a name as strange to me:
As my recovered sickness,

Sir Harry. You are pleasant,
And it becomes you well, w^lcome again,
The rather you are come just to the wedding.

Old Chart. What wedding sir.


Sir Harry. That you should ask that question:
Why of my daughter Grace.

Old Chart. Is Grace bestowed? Of whom I pray,


Sir Harry. Of whom, but of your (...).
I wonder brother Chartly, and my friend,
You should thus play on (...).

Old Chart. But by your favor,
Were you ten Knights Sir Harry, (take me with you)
My son match with your daughter, my cons^nt,
Not worthy to be craved.

Sir Harry. Nay, then I see:

You Will stir my patience, know this forward match took its first birth from
you.


Old Chart. From me?


Sir Harry. From you.
Peruse this letter, know you your own hand.
It Was well that I reserved, your hand a witness
Against your tongue, you had best deny the Ioynter,
Of the three hundred pounds made to my daughter,
It Is that I know you aim at, but your seal.

Old Chart. Shall not make me approve it, I deny
This Seal for mine, nor do I vouch that hand,
Your daughter and the dower, letter and all
I quite disclaim, sir Harry you much wrong me.

Sir Harry. I can bear more then this, heap wrong on
wrong, and i will support it all, I for this time
Will cast my spleen behind me, and yet hear me,
This letter your son Chartly as from you,
Delivered me. I like the motion well.

Old Chart. My spleen is further thrown aside then yours.
And I am full as patient, and yet hear me;
My sonne's contracted to another maid,
Nay I am patient still, yet that I writ
This letter sealed, this impresse I deny.

Sir Harry. Why then the jack your hand did counterfeit.


Old Chart. Why then he did so, where is that unthrift speak?


Sir Harry. Some hour ago, he mounted and rid post.
To give you visit whom he said lay sick
Upon your deathbed.

Old Chart. You amaze me sir.
It is an ill presage, hereon I see.
Your former salutation took its ground:
To see me safe recovered of my sickness.

Sir Harry. Indeed it did, your welcome is a subject.
I cannot use too often, welcome again,
I am sorry you this night must sup alone:
For I am elsewhere called about some business,
Concerning what I know not, hours run on.
I must to Hogsden, high time I were gone.
Exit.
Old Chart. Perhaps to the Wisewomans, she may tell me.
The fortunes of my son, this accident,
Has bred in me suspicion, and strange fears.
I will not sup alone, but I protest,
amongst some this night. I Will play the intruding guest.
Fxit with his serving-men. Enter the Wisewoman, Sencer, Luce and her Father,
2. Luce.
Wisew. But will sir Harry come.


Sencer. Presume (...) will, and Chartly too.


Father. I Will have the kna^e by the ears.


Luce. Nay patience sir, leave your revenge to me.

Enter M. Boyster.
Boyster. Granam I am come according to promise.


Wisew. And welcome to the best hole that I have in Hogsden.


Boyster. Good even.


Luce. Thanks sir, a good even may it pro^e,
That each may reap the fruits of their own Love:

2. Luce. That shall be my prayer too.


Boyster. Come what shall's do.


Wisew. Withdraw, I Will place you all in several rooms.
Where sit, see, but say nothing.
Exeunt. Enter Taber vshering Gratiana.
Taber. Here sweet Mistress, I know the place well e ver
Since I was here to know my fortune.

Gratiana. Call me some half an hour hence.

Exit. Enter the Wisewoman and 2. Luce.
Wisew. Your Ladyship is most lovingly welcome. A low stool for the
Gentlewoman boy: I made bold to send to you to take view of such a piece of
work, as I presume you have seldom seen the like.


Gratia. of whose doing, I pray.


Wisew. A friend of yours and mine. Please you withdraw I Will bring you to it.


2. Luce. Mistress.


Wisew. One calls sweet Lady, I shall do you wrong,
But pray you think my little stay not long:
Enter Sencer, sir Harry and Luce.
Sencer. Here sir in this retyring Chamber.


Sir Harry. Gramercy friend, how now; what is here to do
A pretty wench and a close chamber too.

Luce. That you have so much graced my Mothers house,
With your desired presence worthy Knight.
Receive a poor Maids thanks, who is there? a chair
And cushin for fir Harry.

Sir Harry. Thanks most fair.


Luce. Please you but a few minutes here to stay:
Till my return, i will not be long away.

Sencer. The gentlewoman will wait on you by and by (...).


Sir Harry. And i will attend her friend,
Of all those doubts I long to know the end::
Enter 2. Luce and old Chartly.
2. Luce. The Knight you seek was here, or will be ^reight, and if you be
the man you name your self. You are most welcome, and you shall not back,
sill you have scene si^ Harry.


Old Chart. (...) youth.

I saw him (...) here, and under privilege of (...) ^tance made I (...) to
stay.


^. Luce. And you are welcome sir, (...) I pray.


(...). Now they (...) in (...), that look
Into (...) one. Were (...) come we had all our company.

Senser. Hark, there is on^ knocks it is (...) on my life*


Luce. One of you let him in (...) I (...) me
To entertain his coming.
Enter young Chartly. (...) in by (...).
Chartly. What? old acquaintance (...). Not a word?
Yet some lip labor if thou love me.

Gratiana. My Husband?


Sir Harry. What young Chartly?


Old Chart. How? My (...).


Chartly. Come, come away with this wailing in woe, if thou putst finger in the
eye a little longer, I shall plunge in pain too presently.


Luce. O husband, husband.


Anne. Husband?


Chartly. What (...) thou my sweet wife,


(...). Wife? O my heart.


2. Luce. In that name (...) I (...) a poor child's part.


Luce. O husband; How have you (...)?


Chart. Nay how do I mean to (...) the: (...) as a (...)
Should use his wife.

(...). I hope he does not (...) to (...) her so.


2. Luce. I hope so too,


(...). My (...) is a Witch.


(...). Nay (...), sweet wife (...) weeping if (...) me,


Luce. O can you blame me, knowing that the (...) of all these Springs took
their (...), from you, you know, you (...) will know, not (...) since are past,
since we were married.


Gratiana. Married, I can (...) no longer.


Sir Harry. It cannot be.


Old Chart. It is not possible.


Boyst^. I Will be even with thee, for this old granam.


Luce. And though we wanted wit^e upon ^arth,
Yet Heaven bears record of our Nuptial (...),

Chart. Tush, when we, meet in heaven let^ talk of that.
Nay come you ass, you fool, what is past is past,
Though man and wife, yet I must marry now.
Another gallant, here is thy letter Luce.
And this night I intend to lodge with thee.

2. Luce. I Will sc^tch her eyes out first, although I love her.


Chartly. Prithee be merry?
I have made a gull of Grace, and old (...) Harry thinks me
a great way off, I told the Knight,
My father lay a dying, took post horse,
Rid out of Holbur^, turned by Islington,
So, hither wench to lodge all night with thee.

2. Luce. Heeres one says nay to that,


Old Chart. Was that your journey:


Chartly. Why I (...) too much of Grace already*


Boyster. Thou have no grace at all.


Chartly. Nay lets to bed, if thou could but imagine how
I love thee Luce.

Luce. How i^ it possible you can love (...), and go^ about to marry another.


Chartly. Do thou not know (...) rich? Why you fool as soon as I have got
her dower, it is but giving her a dram, or a pill to purge m^choly to make her
turn up her heels, and then withal that wealth, come I^o li^ with thee my
sweet rascal.


Gratiana. She thanks you, and is much beholding to you.


Chartly. I am betraide.


Gratiana. Art thou my suitor? would thou marry mo^*
And thy first wife alive, then poison me,
To purchase my poor dowre.

Chartly. What shall I say, or think, or do, I am at ^ Nonplus.


Gratiana. Have thou the face, thou brazen impudence,
To look upon me past grace.

Chart. Thou can not properly call me p^st grace, for
I never inioyd thee yet: I cannot tell, whether
I blush or no, but I have now at this time,
More Grace, then I can tell what to do with.

Gratiana. Who drew thee to this folly?


Chartly. Who but the old dotard thy Father, who when I was honestly married to
a civil maid, (...) perswa^ed me to leave her, I was loath at first but
after entreating, urging, and off^ring me large proffers, I must confess I
was seduc't to come a wooing to thee.


Grace. My father, villain.


Chart. Ey thy father Grace. And were he here I would Iu^ifie it to the old
dota^ face.


Sir Harry. Vil'd boy thou dare not be so impudent.
When did I meet thee, seek or sue to thee:
When? Name the day, the month, the hour, the year.

Chartly. Plots, plots. I can but cry you ^rcy both, Say that I have done you
wrong, I can be but sorry for it, but indeed to clear you, and lay the fault
where it ought to be. All this comes from mine own father in the country,
who hearin^ I had married with Luce. Sends me word of. his blessing to be
divorst from her, and to come a suitor to your daughter, I think you have his
hand and (...) to show.


Old Chart. My hand and seal, when was that letter wri^.


Chart. Heyda, if you get one word more of me to night, but scurvy looks, i will
give you leave to hang me*


Sir Harry. Vilde boy,


Old Chart. Ungracious villain.


Gratiana. Treacherous youth?


Sir Harry. No (...) at all?


Ch^t. No (...).


Chart. This is bad company who has reduced thee?
Speak on my blessing, who has thus misled thee?
But no more lies I charge thee.

Chart. Bad company has bin the shame of me, I was as virtuously given as any
youth in Europe, till I fell into one Boysters company, it is he that has done
all the harm upon me.


Boyster. I.


Chart. And if he should deny it?


Boyster. What then you would cry him mercy.


Chart. I had best bite out my tongue, and speak no more what shall I do, or
what shall I say, there is no out-^acing them all ^^^ntlemen, Fathers, wives,
or what else. I have wronged (...) all. I confess it that I have, what would
you more, will any of you rail of me? Ill bear it, will any of you beat
me? So they strike not too har^^ I Will suffer it, will any of you challenge me?
I Will answer it. What would you have me say, or do? One of these I have
married, the other I have betrothed, yet both maids for me; Will you have me
take one, and leave the the other? I will, will you have me keep them both? I
will.


Father. Perjured not mine.


Chart. What you here too? Nay then I see all my good friends are met
together, will thou have me Luce? I am thy Husband, and had I not loved thee
better then Grace. I had not disappointed the marriage day to morrow.


Luce. Lascivious no,


Chartly. Will thou have me Grace, for had I not loved thee better then Luce.
I would never after I had married her bin contracted to thee.


Grace. Inconstant no,


Chart. Then neither married man, widow nor batcheller, what is to be done?
Heeres even the proverb verified, between too stools, the tail goes to
ground.


Sir Harry. Now I bethink me this our meeting here is wondrous strange, call
in the Gentlewoman that ownes this house.


Enter Sencer and the Wisewoman, He lik^ a gentleman* Boyster. Old trot, i will
trounce thee.

Here is the marriage proved twixt Luc^ and Chartly, witch this was not your
promise.


Wisew. Have patience, and in the end we will pay you all. Your worships are most
heartily welcome, I made bold to send for you, and you may see to what end,
which was to discover unto you, the wild (...) of this, of this wanton wag
pasty, a wil-doates I warrant him, (...) Harry that your daughter has escaped
thi^ (...), t^nke this gentleman, and then make of him as (...) deserves.


Sir Harry. O, I remember him.


Grace. He never pleased mine eye so well as now.
I know his Love, and he in Chartlyes place
My favor shall possess.

S^ncer. Thanks my sweet Grace.


Sir Har. Ey and the more the inconstant youth to spite.


Sencer, I gave her thee in Chartlyes sight.


Chart. There Is one gone already, but thi^ is my wife and her i will keep in
spite (...) of the Devil and his dam.


Wisew. Not from her law^ull Husband.


Chart. That am I.


Wisew. That is the Gentleman, acce^* him Luce.

And you then like of her, nay (...) make it good,

This gentleman married you visarded, you him (...) mistaking him for Chartly,
which none but my boy Jack was privy too: after she changed her habit with
him, as you with Jack.

And you in mistress Luces habit.


Luce. May I believe you mother.


Wisew. This be your token.


Boyst. Her that I married, I wrong twice by the finger.


Luce. Of that token, my hand was sensible.


Boyst. And ere the clamorous and lo^d noise be g^ne,
I whisperd to her thus.

Luce. You are the man,


Boyster. Thanks granam, what thou promised thou have done.


Father. And leaving him, I take you for my son.


Chart. Two gone, then where is the third, this mak^ me mad, where is my wife
then, for a wife I had.


Wisew. Not see thy wife. Come hither jack my boy.
Nay take him to thee, and with him all joy.

Old Chart. Well art thou served to be a general scorn,
To all thy blood: and if not for our sakes,
For thy souls health and credit of the world,
Have some regarded to me, to me thy father.

Chartly. Enough sir: if I should say I would become
A new man; You would not take my word.
If I should swear. I would amend my life,
You would not take mine oath, if I should bind my self, to become an honest
man you would scarce take my bond.

Old Chart. I should do none of these.


Chartly. Then (...) sir, when to all your judgments I see me past grace, do^
lay hold of Grace, and here begin to retire my self, this woman has lent me
a glass, in which I see all my imperfections, at which my conscience does more
blush inwardly, then my face outwardly, and now I dare confidently undertake
for my self I am honest.


2. Luce. Then I dare confidently undertake to help you to a wife who desires
to have an honest man or none, look on me well, simple though I stand here I
am your wife, blush not at your folly man, perhaps I have more in me, then you
expect from me.


Chartly. Knavery and riot both which, are now to me mean fo^ige.


2. Luce. You and I have bin better acq^inted and yet search me not too far
least you shame me, look on me well, nay better, better yet, i will assure you
I left of a petticoate when I put on these breeches,

What say you now, she skatters her hair.


Chart. First love, and best beloved?


2. Luce. Let me be both or neither.


Wisew. My boy turned girl I hope she will keep my counsel from henceforth,
i will never entertain any servant but i will have her searched.


Old Chart. Her love has drawn her hither after him.
My loving daughter welcome thou have run,
A happy course to see my son thus changed.

Chartly. Father, call me once again your son, and sir Harry me your
friend: (...) an hand, and mistress Grace an heart, in honorable love. Where I
hane wronged you Luce forgive. Impute my errors to my youth not (...), with
Grace I interchange, an embrace with you Luce, a parting busse I wish you all
joy, devide my ^art amongst you, thou my soul.

Nay mother midnight there is some love for you.

Out of thy folly, being reputed wise,

We, self conceated ha^ our follyes found:

Bear thou the name of all these comic acts.


Luce. Luce and Grace, (O covetous man) I see,
I sought to ingrosse what now su^ceth three.
Yet each one wife, enough, one Nuptial Feast:
Shall serve three Bridalls (...), be thou chief guest.
Exeunt omnes.
Explicat Actus 5us.
TO HIS CHOSEN FRIEND, the learned Author Mr Thomas Heywood.
THou wants no Herald to divulge thy fame;
It needs no Apology; Only thy name;
(...), (...) infuse;
A will: to add a Laurel to thy (...);
Was now (...) living. How would (...)
S^pport thy learned wit? Whose ind^ry
(...) a knowing (...)* (...)
Who read admire thee; less some Critic^ (...)
His Ignorance in (...) with (...) so^s,
To gain the honor; (...) thee (...).
But let pale (...) all (...)
Thy Candid (...)
Vuspotted, (...), and (...), (...),
Be turned obli^on, or ^ Deity,
Prove mortal; And when (...), (...)
The fatal (...), her belongs unto;
Apollo will r^ath a life in thee,
In length to equal all eternitye
Where in Elyzian joys he will so raise
Thy worth where (...) wither shall (...)
Wherewith he crowns thee; So thy works will (...).
The Debt, I pay 'sno more but what I owe.
SAMVEL KING.
FINIS.

