A MODEST REPLY TO Certain Answers, which Mr. Gataker B. D. in his Treatise
of the Nature, and use of Lotts, gives to Arguments in a Dialogue concerning
the Unlawfulness of Games consisting in Chance.

And Aunsweres to his Reasons allowing Lusorious Lotts, as not evil in
themselves.

By James Balmford, minister of Jesus Christ.

2. Cor. 13. 8. We can do nothing against, but for the truth*
Ephesians. 5. 11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works Darkness, but
even reproove them rather.



Imprinted 1623*

A SHORT AND PLAIN DIALOGVE CONCERNING THE Unlawfulness of playing at Cards, or
Tables, or any other Game consisting in chance.

OFFERED TO THE RELIGIous consideration of all such as make conscience of all
their ways.

1. Thessal. 5. 21. Try all things, and keep that which is good.
Imprinted at London for Richard Boil 1591*

Reprinted 1623.

To the right Worshipful Master Lionel Maddison, Mayor, the Aldermen his
Brethren* and the godly Burgesses of Newcastle upon Tine; JAMES BALMFORD
wishes the kingdom of God and his righteousness that other things may be
ministered unto them.
THat which heretofore I have propounded to you (right Worshipful and beloved)
in teaching, I do now publish to all men by printing, to wit, mine opinion of
the unlawfulness of Games consisting in chance. My desire is either information,
if I err in judgment, or reformation, of so lewd a practice. But whether I
err or no (which yet I would gladly understand, Romans 3. 7.
for I ought not to teach an untruth, though to Gods glory) yet there is none,
zealous indeed against sin, desirous from the heart to reclaim sinners, and
who deeply considers the greiuous abuses, which accompany dicing and
carding, (as horrible swearing, dangerous quarelling, loss (I say not of good
hours, but) of nights and days, and the pitiful vndoeing of too too manny)
but will remember that all things are not 1. Cor. 6. 12.
expedient, which are lawful, and therefore abstain from such Heathenish
pastimes, that ifby their example they cannot reform, 1. Cor. 8. 9.
they may be sure they do not confirm gamesters in their inordinate walking.
Which respect* the 7. Iniunction forbidding Ministers to use these unlawful
games, may besupposed to have. Now that which authority exacteth of Ministers,
does Religion require of all true Professors. For as the one are to be
ensamples to the flock, 1. Tit. 5. 3. Phil. 1. 5. 1. Cor. 8 10. 13.
so the other are to be lights in the world. And therefore as Paul says, If
meat offend my brother, I will eat no flesh while the world stands: so
every true Christian should say, and that with more resolution (for Play is not
so necessary as meat) If play offend my brother, who seeing me* having
knowledge, play, is boldned to follow gaming, I will not play while the world
stands. Which care unto edification, if Psalm. 50. 16. 17.
all, who have the word in their mouths, and would not be thought to hate to
be reformed, would manifest in their sincere conversation; and if Magistrates,
who Romans 13 4. 33. H. 8. c. 9. ^. E. 6. c. 25.
should not carry the sword in vain, would do what they may by law, to
banish these forbidden past-times, or rather lost-times, I doubt not, but that
preaching and writing against the^ would more mightily prevail, and this good
would come of it, many would apply themselves to better exercises, there would
be less time misspent in Alehouses, and Godless provoked to displeasure
against us. But these things I refer to the consideration of the wise, and
this my Dialogue to the judgment of the godly, chiefly to you, whose good I
wish especially. Farewell: From my study the first of January 1593.

A short and plain Dialogue concerning the unlawfulness of playing at Cards or
Tables, or any other game consisting of chance.
Professor. SIR, howsoever I am persuaded by that which I read in the common
places of Peter Martyr, par. 2. page 525. b. that Dice (condemned both by the
Civil laws, and by the Fathers) are therefore unlawful, because they depend
upon chance: yet not satisfied with that which he writes of Table-playing,
page 526. b. I would craue^ your opinion concerning playing at Tables and Cards.


Preacher. Saving the judgment of so excellent a Divine, so far as I can
learn out of Gods word, Cards and Tables seem to me^ no more lawful (though
less offensive) than Dice. For Tableplaying is no whit the more lawful
because Plato compares the life of man thereunto, than a thief is the more
justifiable, because Christ compares his second coming, ^o Burglarie in the
night, Mat. 24. 4^* 44. Again, if Dice be wholly ^^ill* because they wholly
depend upon chance, then Tables and Cards must needs be some what evil*
because they somewhat depend upon chance. Therefore consider well this reason,
which condemns the one as well as the other: Lots are not to be used in
sport; but games consisting in chance as Dice, Cards, Tables, are Lots:
therefore Ioh. 8. 40. 1. Cor. 11. 15.
not to be used in sport.


Prof. For my better instruction, prove that Lots are not to be used in sport.


Preach. Consider with regard these three things: First, that we^ 1.
read not in the Scripture that Lots were used but only in serious matters
both by the Jews, Ios. 18. 10. and Gentiles, Ion. 1. 9. Secondly, 2.
that a Lot in the nature thereof does as necessarily suppose the special
providence and determining presence of God, as an oath in the nature thereof
does suppose the testifying presence of God. Yea so, that (as in an oath, so)
in a lot prayer is expressed, or to be understood, 1. Sam. 14. 41. Thirdly, 3.
that the proper end of a Lot (as of an oath, Heb. 6. 16.) is to end a
controversy: and therefore for your bettet instruction examine these reasons.
Whatsoever directly, or 1.
of it sefe, or in a special manner, tends to the advancing of the name of
God, is to be used religiously, Mal. 1. 6. 7. and not to be used in sport: as
we are not to pray or swear in sport, Exodus 20. 7. Esa* 29. 13. Ier. 4. 2.
but the use of Lots, directly of it self and in a special manner tends to
the advancing of the name of God, in attributing to his special providence in
the whole and immediate disposing of the Lot, and expecting the event, Pro. 16.
33. Act. 1. 24. 26. Therefore the use of Lots is not to be in 2.
sport. Again we are not to tempt the Almighty by a vain desire of
manifestation of his power and special providence, Psalm. 78. 18. 19. Esa* 7.
12. Matthew. 4. 6. 7. But by using Lots in sport we tempt the almighty, vainly
desiring the manifesta^ of his special providence in his immediate 3.
disposing, Therefore, etc. Lastly, whatsoever God has sanctified to a proper
end is not to be perverted to a worse, Matthew. 21. 12. 13. But God has
sanctified Lots to a proper end, namely to end troversies, Number. 26. 55. Pro.
18. 18. therefore man is not to pervert them to a worse: namely to play, and by
playing to get away another man's money, which without controversy is his own.
For the common saying is, Sine lucro friget lusus, No gaining, cold gaming.


Profes. God has sanctified Psalms to the praise of his name, and bread and
wine to represent the body and blood of our crucified Savior, which be holy
ends: and the children of God may sing Psalms to make themselves merry in the
Lord, and feed upon bread and wine not only for necessity but to cheer
themselves; why then may not Gods children recreate themselves by lotterie
notwithstanding God has sanctified the same to end a controversy?


Preach. Because we find not in the Scriptures any dispensation for recreation
by lotterie, as we do for godly mirth by singing, Iam. 5. 13. and for
religious and sober cheering our selves by eating and drinking, Deuteronomy. 8. 9. 10.
And therefore (it being withal considered that the ends you speak of, be not
proper, though holy) it follows, that God who only disposes the Lot touching
the event, and is therefore a principal actor, is not to be set on work by
lotterie in any case, but when he dispenses with us, or gives us leave fo to
do: But dispensation for recreation by lotterie cannot be showed, Therefore,
etc.


Profes. Lots may be used for profit in a matter of right, Number. 26. 55. why not
for pleasure?


Preach. Then oaths may be used for pleasure, for they may fot profit, in a
matter of truth, Exodus 22. 8. 11. But indeed lots (as oaths) are not to be
used either for profit or pleasure, but only to end a coutrouersie.


Profes. The wit is exercised by Tables and Cards, therefore they be no lots.


Preach. Yet lotterie is used by casting Dice, and by shuffling and cutting the
Cards before the wit is exercised. But how does this follow? Because Cards and
Tables be not naked Lots, consisting only in chance (as Dice do) they are
therefore no lots at all. Although (being used without cogging, or packing)
they consist principally in chance, and thefore from thence they are to receive
their denomination. In which respect a Lot is called in Latin Sors, that is,
chance or hazard, and Lyra upon Prou. 16. says, To use Lots, is, by a variable
event of foam sensible thing, to determine some doubtful or uncertain matter,
as to draw cutts, or to cast Dice.


But whether you will call Cards and Tables Lots, or no, you play with chance
or use Lotterie. Then consider whether exercise of wit does sanctify playing
with lotterie, or playing with lotterie make such excercising of wit, a sin,
Hag. 2. 13. 14. For as a calling God to witness by vain swearing is a sin, 2.
Cor. 1. 13. so making God an vmpire, by playing with lotterie, must needs be a
sin: yea, such a sin as makes the offender (in some respects) more
blameworthy. For there be more occasions of swearing than of lotterie.
Secondly, vain oaths most commonly slip out at unawares, whereas lots cannot
be used but with deliberation. Thirdly, swearing is to satisfy other, whereas
this kind of lotterie is altogether to fulfill our own lust. Therefore take
heed, that you be not guilty of perverting the ordinance of the Lord, of
taking the name of God in vain, and f tempting the Almighty, by a ^amesome
putting of things to haard, and making play of lotterie, xcept you think that
God has o gouvernment in vain actions, r has dispensed with such lewd ^ames.

Profes. In shooting there is a chance, ^ a sudden blast, yet shooting is no
loterie.


Preach. It is true, for that chance ^ommeth by accident, and not of ^he nature
of the game, to be ^sed.


Profes. Lots are secret, and the whole disposing of them is of God, Pro 16.
33. ^ut it is otherwise in Tables and Cards.


Preach. Lots are cast into the ^ap by man, and that openly, lest conveiance
should be suspected: ^ut the disposing of the chance is secret, that it may be
chance indeed, and wholly of God, who directs all things, Prou. 16. 13. 9.
33 So in Tables, man by fair casting Dice truly made, and in Cards by
shuffling and cutting, does openly dispose the Dice and Card so, as whereby a
variable even may follow: but it is only and immediately of God, that the Dice
be so cast, and the Cards so shuffled and cut, as that this or that gam
follows, except there be cogging and packing. So that in fair play man's wit
is not exercised in disposing the chance, but in making the best of it being
past.


Profes. The end of our play is recreation, and not to make God an vmpire: but
recreation (no doubt) is lawful.


Preach. It may be the soldiers had no such end when they cast lots for Christ
his coat, Matthew* 27* 25. but this should be your end when you use lotterie, as
the end of an oath should be, to call God to witness. Therefore as swearing,
so Lotterie, without due respect is sin. Again, howsoever recreation be your
pretended end, yet remember that we must not do evil that good may come of
it, Romans 3. 8. And that therefore we are to recreate our selves by lawful
recreations. Then see how Cards and Tables be lawful*


Profes. If they be not abufed by swearing or brawling, playing for too long
time, or too much money.


Preach. Though I am persuaded that it is not lawful to play for any money,
considering thanks cannot be given in faith for that which is so gotten, De^t.
23. 18. Esa* 61. 8. Gamesters work not with their hands the thing that good,
to be free from stealing, Ephesians. 4. 18. and the looser has not answerable
benefit for his money so lost, Gen* 29. 15. contrary to that equity which
Aristotle by the light of nature has taught long since, Eth. ^. ^. 4. yet I
grant that Cards and Tables so used as you speak are, less sinful, but how
they be lawful I see not yet.


Profes. Good men and well learned use them.


Preach. We must live by precepts, not by examples, except they be undoubtedly
good. Therefore examine whether they be good, and well learned in so doing or
no. For every man may err, Romans 3. 4.


Profes. It is not good to be too just, or too wise, Eccl. 7. 18.


Preach. It is not good to be too wicked or too foolish, Eccl. 7. 19. in
despising the word of God, Prou. 1. 22. and not regarding the weakness of
others, Romans 14. 21. Let us therefore beware that we love not pleasure more
than godliness, 2. Tim. 3. 4.


FINIS.
CHristian Reader; it is no new thing that men* learned, wise, and judicious,
holding the same orthodox, and sound truth of God, in respect of maine, and
fundamental points of Christian Religion, do sometimes differ in their
opinions, and be of different judgments touching some things of less
importance* It pleases God (who orders all things most wisely for the
spiritual good of his own) by his wise disposing hand to order differences in
opinion, and judgment in the smallest matters for the further good of his
Church. Though the iarring of Paul, and Barnabas (Act. 15. 37.) caused a
separation of the one from the other, yet (God so disposing) the Church got
much good by it and things questioned, and controverted (though of lesser
weight are commonly more narrowly searched into, and upon diligen^ search into
them, they come to b^ better cleared, and the gifts o^ worthy men to be better
known It were no hard matter to instanc^ in many particulars clearing thi^
from many ages foregoing; but ^ list not to enter into that large field. The
ensuing Reply considered with the occasion of it, may, in part, evidence, the
truth herein* Some years since, the Author o^ this Reply, published a
Dialogu^ touching Lottery, and Lotts, disprooving, (by diverse arguments,) the
using of Lotts in sport, and in play; and now some few years past finding his
arguments opposed, and held as weak, and insufficient, by a worthy, reverend,
and judicious Divine, in a treatise of his printed touching the Nature, and use
of Lotts, he held himself bound, upon further, and more serious consideration
of the point called into question, either to alter his judgment, or to
endeavor, to strengthen his former arguments: He has set upon the
buisinesse, and now offered to thy view (Christian Reader) his Reply tending to
the further strengthening* and confirmation of those arguments. My poor
judgment touching this Reply being desired by the Author, I could not but
yield it unto him, he being my reverend, and loving friend, to whom I am
obliged by many bonds of love. I have perused it, and so far as I, (in my
weakness) can judge, the Author has herein carried himself wisely, and
^udiciously, and so as, I think, may satisfy any indifferent reader, and with
all (as I take it) modestly, and temperately, and without the least breach of
charity toward the worthy Opponent. Happily I may be thought unfit thus to
give mine opinion, because (as I freely confess, and have openly made known)
I iumpe with this Author in judgment in the point controverted, but I profess
before him, who knows the hearts of all men, that, which here I putt down, is
(as I conceive) according to the truth, without any inclining, or partial
affection to the one one side, or to the other, and I desire not to entertain
the least thought, that may praeiudice the worth of the reverend, learned, and
godly Opponent, being alsoo my dear, and loving friend, and one whom I am
bound, in many respects, both to love, and reverence. Look upon this Reply
(whosoever thou art) with an vnpartialleye, and consider it seriously, and fin
ding that good by it, which is intended, bless God for it, who guides, and
blesses all things to his own glory, and to the good of his own.

Thine in the Lord Jesus Edw: Elton. B. in D. and Pastor of S. Mary Magda len's
Bermondsey near London.

2. Tim. 3. 4.
To the Christian Reader being none of those men* who, (according to S. Paul's
prophecy,) love pleasures more than God.
Jonah. 1. 7.
SOme years are past since Mr. Gataker took occasion, from casting of Lotts
to find out for whose sake a dangerous storm was, to justisie playing with
Dice, Cards, etc. and to confute me by name in open pulpit. I hearing thereof
by many, sent him this message. If it would please him to send the substance of
the Confutation (for I dare not rely upon report) I would either reply, or
change mine opinion with thanks to God for him; though for the present, I
thought he failed in Indgment, Discretion, and Charity. In Judgment. Because
that Doctrine was not drawn from his Text; Except this be a judicious
deduction. Gentiles cast Lotts in a most serious matter, therefore Christians
may use Lottery in dicing, carding, etc. In Discretion. Because that Doctrine
(though occasioned by his text, yet) so insisted upon, incourageth gamesters in
their sinful course and builds up those abuses, which the Laws of our Land,
would pull down. In Charity; Because he confuteth me by name, (as I was
certified) not having had any conference with me either by speech, or by
writing, though I be his neighbor Minister. Well; Mr. Gataker, sent me his
answer to my dialogue. I acknowledge it with hearty thanks. But why have I
not replied in so many years? I answer, Sa^^ito, si sat been. To speak
freely I think, I should never have replied, in hope that the question would
have died, had not Mr. Gataker confuted my Dialogue in print* But now, the
rather, being provoked* by many learned Ministers and other, who tell me, that,
seeing of all those whom Mr. Gataker confuteth, viz: Peter Martyr, Zuinglius,
Cartwright, 10 1.
Danoeus, Perkins, Fenner, etc. I only live, I ought to reply, least my
silence should give way to impiousiniquity, I am ready to perform my promise
in replying. Which (indeed) I could not have done so conveniently before,
because the answer, which Mr. Gataker sent me, had not the positive grounds of
his opinion, which the printed book has.

Before I proceed* I protest before God, that I esteem Mr. Ga^aker as a
learned, painful, and faithful Minister, and a right honest man, and
therefore pray thee (Christian Reader) that whatsoever I write may be
considered as concerning the question between us, and not in any wise applied
to the least praejudice of so reverend a brother, or to any of his excellent
parts; So excellent, that I wonder what moved him to publish his opinion in
print, and the more, because of many passages in his book. First, He takes
knowledge 1*
of many enormous crimes, which accompany Dice, Cards, etc. pa. 193. and in
the quotations. Secondly; 2.
He gives this rule, That, that, which is no necessary duty, but a thing
indifferent only, otherwise, may not be done, where is strong presumption upon
good ground yet it shall spiritually endanger a man's self, or others, by
giving occasion of sin unto the one, or the other. page 107. 108. 109.

If many and grievous sins attend dice, cards, etc. If those games be too
too commonly abused, as he confesses. pa: 194. and if an indifferent thing may
not be done which gives occasion of sin, I wonder why Mr. Gataker writes in
defense of dice, etc. and the more, because he grants, that, where the use,
and abuse of a thing are so inwrapped, and entangled together, that they cannot
easily be severed the one from the other, then the use of the thing it self,
(if it be unnecessary otherwise) would be wholely abandoned, page 262. 263.
Thirdly; He shows in many pages* how severely tables, but especially dice, be
condemned by Laws, Civil, Canonical, and Municipall, that is, our English
statutes, as ^e shows at large, Lib. 8. 5. 8. He wishes the Laws were yet
^ore severe, and putt in better exe^ution, pa. 206. He says, yet our ^ommon
dicers may be marshalled among ye flock, of ye Devill's fol^owers, pa. 217. He
affirms most ^ifelings, and Lotteries to be little ^etter than unlawful
games, page ^ 20. And he teaches, that, by ^heis games, we must not give
of^ence to the Laws under which ^ee live, pa. 251. Now I wonder, that so good
a man is not afraid to offend our Law by allowing for^idden games, even Dice,
as well ^s Cards, etc. which consist not only of Lottery. Here I have
occasion to think, that I may have ^ome more comfort in mine opinion, than Mr.
Gataker can have in ^is; For he names famous, learned, and godly men
concurring with me in opinion: But in t^ multitude o^ his quotations, I find
none approoving Dice in play, an whereas some learned Divines, i some sort,
allow games consistin of Lot, and ^itt, but altogethe condemn D^^e, Mr.
Gataker defe^deth mine opinion, disapproovin^ a mixed* as well as a mere Lot,
because (as he says) a true Lot is i^ either, pa. 126. and, He deemet^ them
to be amiss, who allow Lot in game, and yet add for a cautio^ that
Religionsnesse be used in the action, in regard that Holy things must be done
in an holy manne^ 4.
pa. 133. Fourthly, He grants tha^ Prayer specially applied to the Lot may
be conceived, where the matter is more weighty, and the event of some
consequence, pa. ^1^ And yet he holds, that the less^ weighty the matter is,
wherein ^ Lot is used, the lawfuller the Lot is, page 111. The reason, why I
wonder at this passage, shall be given in my Reply. The last passage now to be
observed as matter of my wondering, is this; Notwithstanding, he confidently
affirms that we may not do ought without warrant, page 301. Sufficiently
confirms the same, because such an Act is not done of Faith, and therefore
not free from sin, Romans 14. 23. but is a mere presumption, and tempting of
God, page 313. and quot. A* and B. and Earnestly reprooveth one kind of
Lottery (why not all, against which the same reason is of like validity?)
because not found revealed in any word of God, but brought in either by Satan,
or by some of his instruments who are addicted to Vanity, page 315. and 316.
and, yet he avoucheth, That it is a sufficient warrant for the use of Lottes,
In that the oppugners, being learned, can say nothing against them* but what
has been, or may be sufficiently answered, page 235.

May I not wonder that so judicious a scholar does not observe this
discrepance? Lottery is unlawful, if not warranted by the word which positio^
supposes the Wor^ to be perfect, as is the Authou^ thereof, and 2. Lottery is
lawful^ if Learned men can say nothing ou of the Word against it. Which
position supposes two things, viz That the Word is like the Laws o men, that
is, Imperfect, as be the Authors thereof; and, That Learne^ men cannot so fail
in Diligence o reading, Clearenesse of understanding, and Firmness of Memory
but that* if there were in the Wor^ anything against Lottery, the^ could nor
but see it. Well; It man be seen shortly, how Mr. Gataker Diligence,
Understanding, and Memory have served him in defenoing Lusorious Lotts. In the
mean while, Sufficiency of his answering is but upon the Trial, and not yet
adjudged.

All these passages well reveiwed by Mr. Gataker I should think he cannot
wonder that a man of 64. years complete, (and therefore his wits may fail)
does wonder that so godly, wise, and learned a man, the faculties of whose
mind are at the best, did not say to himself, before he preached, much more
before he penned this lusorious doctrine, Let Baal plead for Judge. 6* 31. ^2.
Esa. 5. 18
himself; and, These gamesters shall, without any encouragment from me, draw
on their iniquity ^ith these cords of vanity; and the rather, because he
acknowledges that accoumpt is to be given unto God of gaming pa. 261. If of
the act much more of justifying it. Fro m which account good Lord deliver me.
For I fear, that in justifying lusorious Lottes, I should put false spectacles
on a gamester's nose, whereby the bridge seems broader, than it is, and so he
falls in without fear, to use Mr. Gataker similitude, page 264. But Mr.
Gataker beleveth, that he has written the truth, (Preface to the Reader) and
is confident that truth is to be known, especially concerning matters of
common practice, page 263. and gives four reasons, by which he was moved to
defend 1.
lusorious Lottes, page 264. The first is, To draw men from Superstition in
restraining themselves, when God does not restrain them. This beggeth the
question, (as I hope) will appear in the Reply. ^.
A 2. motive is, Because arguments against lusorious Lottes have made many
stagger in the necessary use of serious civil Lottes. It may be so some
failing in their judgment: But it may be also, that many more will be made to
stagger by reading Mr. Gatakers exceptions against arguments for, and cautions,
in those serious Civil Lottes, Cap. 5. and by his Maxim, [The less weighty
the matter is, wherein a Lot is used, the lawfuller the Lot is, page 111.] A
3. motive is, To take away 3*
much heart-burning; Nay, rather this justifying Lusorious Lottes will not
only cause more heart-burning; but encourage also gamesters to overcrow such,
as are scrupulous. For, if many well affected have been constrained, in regard
of scruple, in this kind, to strain themselves to some inconveniences by
refusal of those games, when by those, whom they had dependence upon, upon or
familiarity withal, they have been urged occasionally thereunto (which to
prevent hereafter, is a 4. cause of his writing) How will those supporters, and
familiars insult upon the scrupulous* now they have so learned a Patron of
their gaming? Some have strained themselves, to some inconveniences for not
pledging drunken Healths, being drink offerings to Bacchus. To prevent which
hereafter, should Mr. Gataker do well, unto aedification, to preach, and write
in Justification of these Healths? The sum of his causes (as he expresses
himself in his preface to the Reader) is, To set at Liberty the entangled
consciences of Godly disposed persons. Indeed; If any conscience, simply for
playing with Lottes, should seek his his satisfaction in private, then if Mr.
Gataker quieted him by his grounds (supposed true) it were not amiss. But is
every doctrine, though true, to be insisted upon both by preaching, and
printing, and that affirming matter in question, and of no necessary use? I
say, Affirming, remembering the holy wisdom of the Apostles, and Elders, who
decreed touching offensive things (yet some of them lawful, if conveniently
used) only negatively, and deemeth it not necessary Act. 15. 28. 29.
to decree affirmatively things that were then, and might be in use for a time.
Many (I fear too many) learned Divines approove Usury in their Judgment, thouh
condemned by Law. Yet none, that I know, ever insisted upon the Justification
thereof by preaching and printing. Again; Was there ever any so troubled with
playing with Lotts? I doubt it; But without doubt thousands will now more
boldly use lusorious Lotts without regard of the cautions, in these licentious
times. As Usurers regard not the cautions which Divines set down. For it is
enough to them, that some godly Divines affirm Usury to be lawful. O that Mr.
Gataker had considered what he writes, page 107. before cited, and what he
writes, page 103. and 104. viz: Where inconveniences, that shall necessarily,
or in good probability, appear to accompany the thing questioned, or ensu^
upon the doing thereof, shall be such, and so great as the Conveniences, which
stand on the other side, shall not be able to countervaile, there that action
is worthily disallowed as Inconvenient, and ^ Lot consequently unlawful, wha^
he writes in his spiritual Watch page 27. viz: The rifer any evil i^ in
those places, or ages we live i^ the more careful should we be to shun, and
avoid such a sin. No doubt he would have taken heed how by writing he make
way to the sin of, or by, Lusorious Lotts. Many Divines and intelligent men,
though of opinion that Lusorious mixed Lotts may be used lawfully, yet wish
that Mr. Gataker had never published his book. For a running horse (say they)
needs no spurring. For my part I wish, that Mr. Gataker had been affected in
writing, as he professes himself to be in the use of lusorious Lottes, page
266. Well; Whatsoever he writes dogmatically, he wishes thee (good Reader) to
imitate him in* his practice, to wit, That, albeit in judgment thou art
rightly informed of the truth concerning the lawfulness of these games in
themselves; yet in godly discretion, thou would rather abando^ them,
considering the too too common, and ordinary abuse of them, and that many (it
may be) among whom thou live may remain vnresolved, and unsatisfied,
touching the lawfulnes of them, page 267. I desire the same, and therewith a
suspending thy judgment until thou have well considered my Dialogue, Mr.
Gatakers answers, and my Reply, together with mine answer to his positive
grounds. Here I promise (with Mr. Gataker, page 128.) to raze what I have
reared, if my Reply and aunsweres be prooved insufficient, and so commend thee
to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is able to build further. Only,
consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in Act. 20. 32. 2.
Tim* 2. 7.
all things.

14. September. 1620.
To the Reader.
THat I may do Mr. Gataker no wrong I am to let thee know that the 14. of
March. 1622. Still: Ang. Mr. Gataker denied naming me when he confuted mine
arguments in Pulpit, yet confessing that he named me in Pulpit, with others,
diversely dissenting from him in judgment touching Lusorious Lotts when he
entered into the question of playing with Lotts.

An Answer to Reasons inducing M. Gataker to allow lusorious Lottes, as not
evil in themselves, Lib. 6. 4.
THIS Tenent seems to me more fearful* then beseems a learned man, who,
after the turning over a wonderful n umber of books to compile his
Historical, and Theological Treatise of the Nature, and Use of Lotres,
sets down his judgment. Allowing lusorious Lottes only as not evil in
themselves, whereas he affirms them to be lawful in themselves, page 266. So
that if these games be used with due observation of all his cautions, why is he
fearful to allow them as good in themselves? How then may a scrupulous man,
who remembers Ezekiel. 36 31.
not only his wicked wicked ways, but his deeds also that are not good,
build upon such quagmiry grounds? Again; Allowing these games only as not
evil in themselves does not manifest that Love of God, which (I doubt not) is
in Mr. Gatakers heart. For whereas God is glorified by good works, Math. ^. 16.
and these games be too too common, and accompanied with many crying sins,
whereby God is every where, and daily much dishonored, the Love of God would
have constrained him, if doing John. 5. 21.
truth, to have brought these games to the light, that thereby it might be made
manifest, that they are wrought according to God. Lastly; By this Tenent he
shows not due Charity to his neighbor. For now it is enoug for Gamesters to
plead; A very learned man holds our Gaming to be not evil in it self.
Therefore they will not seek, further to know, whither it be good in it self,
forgetting that it is written* Math. 3. 10.
[The axe is putt to the root of the trees, therefore every tree which
brings not forth good fruit* is hewn down, and cast into the fire.] Is not
then hereby his neighbor's spiritual danger occasioned? But here (perhaps)
it may be said, The first Reason, prooving that a Lot may be matter of
Recreation, does give me a check: It is a check? Then I will try if I cannot
avoid the Mate. The Argument, collected with all faithfulness, (as the rest,
and his aunsweres be,) is this.

M. G. 1.
That which may be ordinarily used in other Civil affairs, be they more or
less weighty, may also be used for matter of recreation, and delight: But a
Lot may be ordinarily used in other Civil affairs. Therefore I see not what
should banish it out of our disportes, more than out of other (though serious
yet) Civil affairs.

I. B. 1.
Is not this a fearful conclusion like the Tenent? Why does not Mr. Gataker
conclude positively thus. Therefore a Lot may be used for matter of
recreation, and delighte. He (forsooth) see's not. Can a blind man go stoutly
on his way? But (blessed be God) Mr. Gataker sees well, though not in this
point. Bernardus non vidit omnia. For, if God had opened his eyes in this
point, he might have seen plainly what should banish a Lot out of disportes,
more than out of other Civil affairs. To wit, Because God allows a Lot to
be used in them, but not in these; and It is praesumption, of set purpose, to
employ God but as it may stand with his pleasure. Hereof more hereafter. In
mean while, in further answer to this argument I deny the Proposition
thereof. For an Oath may be ordinarily used in other Civil matters, yet not
for matter of Recreation: Whereof also more hereafter. Now I proceed to the 2.
reason, which is set down in two shapes; The former is this.

M. G. 2.
That which best sorteth with the nature of a Lot, may a Lot most lawfully be
used unto: But the lightest matters best sort with the nature of a Lot:
Therefore about things of that nature may a Lot most lawfully be used. The
Proposition he prooveth thus. Great is the uncertainty of a Lot. Therefore not
fit to be used in any weighty affair.

I. B. 2*
A Lot is sometimes taken for the instrument of purpose disposed unto
casualty, as [The Lot is cast Prou. 16 3^. 1. Sam. 14. 41*
into the lap:] and sometime for the event, as, [Give a perfect Lott] Which,
howsoever it be casual in relation to the former, yet, falls out certainly
this, or that, by God's whole disposing the former, Prove. 16. 33. I therefore
deny both the Proposition, and Assumption persuaded that Mr. Gataker would
never have set down this supposed reason, if a Lot, in the former acception,
had not drawn his religious eye from God as the only disposer thereof to be a
Lot in the latter acception. So that I mervaile much, that he finds a Lot
to be not fit to be used in any weighty affair. For why? Dividing the Land of
promise, Numb. 26. 55. by Lot. Discovering Achan. Iohs. 14. Choosing of a king.
1. Sam. 10. 20. 81. and of an Apostle Acts: 1. 26. were they not weighty
affairs? Nay rather the premises considered, a Lot may more lawfully be used
about weighty affairs. But indeed* whether the subject matter be more or less
weighty, a Lot may be used about it, provided it be with Gods allowance. For
want whereof both Divinatory, and Lusorious Lotts be equally unlawful. The
other shape of his reason, more particularly (as he says) for the present
buisinesse is this.

M. G.
A matter of mere indifferency, that is, such as a man may lawfully do, or not
do, and it is not material whether he do, or omit, such may a man lawfully
putt to the hazard of the uncertain motion of the Creature, whether he shall
do it, or not do it* But the using of a Lot in game is but the putting of a
matter of mere indifferency to the hazard of an uncertain event. Therefore the
putting of such matters to the hazard of a Lot, is not evil simply in it
self.

I. B*
What a trembling argument is this? In the Proposition he speaks of a Lot in
the former acception. In the Assumption, of a Lot in the latter acception.
Indeed a man may be bolder with the Creature, so it be without relation to God,
than with the Creator himself. In the Proposition he affirms lawfullnes but
concludes only, as not evil simply in themselves. Indeed, the conclusion is
to follow the worse part: But in this Argument the Assumption is particular,
and the Conclusion is general* What? Is Mr. Gataker afraid to put (The using
of a Lot in game) into the conclusion? is not the Minor to be the Subject, and
the Mayor to be the Praedicate of the Conclusion? I will not quaestion the
Figure of this praetended argument if Sub: prae: prima: will serve the turn;
and though I find it in no Mood, yet will I answer the two fore-pieces
thereof. The former is not true, except Mr. Gataker understand a matter of mere
indifferency controverted. For though such a matter may be the subject matter
of a Controversy, yet a matter controverted is the only subject matter of a
Lot, otherwise it is no Lot, as Mr. Gataker truly writes even in this case,
page 167. If Mr. Gataker so understand, then there is some necessity of ending
the controyersy putt to the determination of a Lot, and consequently it is not
then merely in the wiil of a man whether he shall do it, or no do it. In the
other piece I observe, that Mr. Gataker speaking of a Lot in the second
acception, supposes it to be uncertain. Which is begging the question, for
the reason given in mine answer to his former shaped argument. Neither it is
true that if in game, a controversy (truly so termed) be decided by a Lot, a
matter then of mere indifferency is put to hazard. But more hereof in my 3.
reply. In mean while, consider whether this 2. shape be more particularly for
the present business, so as to conclude the question, than the former; and
Note, that in both these shapes, only Lightness, and indifferency of matters
putt to Lottery are pressed as causes most justifying a Lot, yea so, as that in
the confirmation of his former shaped arguments proposition, he positively
affirms that we shall find a Lot not fit to be used in a weighty affair*
If so, then Weightnesse, and Necessity of matters controverted make Lottery
less lawful, if not altogether unlawful. But thereof also more in that
reply. I therefore proceed to his 3. reason page 131. Which is this.

M. G. 3.
If the use of Lotts in game be of it self evil, then must it needs be a
sin either against Piety in the first table, or ag: Charity in the 2. But the
use of Lottes in game, is not of it self, a sin against either Piety, or
Charity. Therefore it must be justified as agreeable to Gods Word. The
Assumption is prooved thus* No man avoweth the use of a Lot in game, (as it is
a Lot) to be against Charity: and A Lusorious Lot is not the profaning of any
thing hallowed, by any divine institution from the Word, to an holy Use.
Therefore not against Piety. Indeed, if Lottes be holy, they may in no case be
made matter of sport.

I. B. 3.
Here I observe one of the faults which I found in the latter shape of the 2.
reason to wit* The conclusion contains more than the premises. For the
Conclusion says A Lot in game is agreeable to Gods Word, and then it must be
[Good of it self,] which is more, than [Not evil of it self.] For that is
good of it self, for doing whereof there is either praecept, or permission in
Gods word, page 137. But to the Assumption, an d proof thereof I answer, That
the use of a Lot in game is, (of it self), a sin against Piety. For it
profaneth a Lot hallowed by divine institution from the Word, as shall be
manifested hereafter. Yet here I think fit breifely to show 2. things. One
is, 1.
That an Oath is hallowed to mak^ an holy use of the testifying presence of
God, So a Lot is hallowed to make an holy use of the determining presence of
God. If Mr. Gataker deny a Lot to be holy, except it have a more remote holy
use, I say He may as well deny an Oath to be holy for that cause. More of 2.
this point in my 2. reply. The other is, That use of a Lot is against Piety,
which is (I say not, [Not forbidden] but) [Not warranted] by the Word. For it
is without faith, therefore a Romans 14 23.
sin, yea Impiety. So disputes Mr. Gataker against a Divinatory Lot, page
313. and so do I against a Lusorions Lot. If then a lawful Lot be holy, it
is (says Mr. Gataker) in no case to be made matter of sport. Nay, I may make
yet more advantage. For I may say; That maintaining the use thereof in gaming,
as it is a Lot, by practice, much more by writing, is against Charity, as well
as against Piety. For so [a weak brother is offended, and con^equently Christ
sinned against] that brother being occasioned, by error of judgment, to
stumble. I have this reasoning from Mr. Gataker himself, page 255. Now then
with some comfort I proceed to the 4. argument, as Mr. Gataker calls it, page
134.

M. G. 4.
By virtue of Christian liberty, every Christian man has a free use of all
Gods good creatures, to employ them unto such purposes, as by any natural
power, they are enabled unto: But in lusorious Lottes the Creature is used to
no other end or use, but what it has a natural power unto, and such as by
the mutual consent, and agreement of those that use it, it may be enabled to
effect. Therefore it is no more to be exiled from a Christian man's recratio^,
than any other creature whatsoever, that has any power to delight.

I. B. 4.
So general and eager is the pursuit after Liberty in this licentious age,
that a godly, and charitable Christian, (much more being a minister), ought to
take great heed, that he occasion not any 1. Pet. 2. 16.
much less too too many, to make Liberty a cloak of Naughtiness* But Mr.
Gataker speaks of Christian liberty, not of Licentiousness* Then let us
consider what he says* For both the premises of this argument are flatly to
be denied* For sundry good Creatures have a natural power to impoison; But
Christian Liberty gives us not free use thereof to impoison a^ pleasure.
Neither is it true that any creature has a natural power to be a Lot, no
more than a stone has a natural power to be carried upward. For as a stone is
carried upward by a power; that is without it: so all creatures are moved, and
applied to be Lotts by a power without them. God keep me from teaching that
Christian Liberty warranteth the unlawful use of any Creature, what natural
power soever it has to that use. If any creature have any power to be a Lot,
yet that power is not to be used unto Lottery, but in cases (whereof gameing is
none) wherein God allows such use thereof. To the enforcing of the conclusion
by a supposed confirmation of the Assumption, I say, It is a begging of the
question. For though a dog having a natural power to hunt, be not exiled from
recreatio^ yet ought a Lot-creature to be, for reasons given, and to be given,
or rather defended hereafter. Now then to a 5. argument A concessis, (as Mr.
Gataker terms it,) page 135.

M. G. S.
Any thing in different is lawful matter of recreation: But Lottery is a thing
indiffertnt; Lottery therefore may be made lawful matter of disport. The
Proposition is confirmed by the words of M. Fennor. Christian (says he)
recreation is the exercise of some thing indifferent for the necessary
refreshing of body, or mind. The Assumption is also proved by Mr. Fennor.
Indifferent in nature is that, which is left free, so as we are not simply
commanded, or forbidden to use it: But such is Lottery (says Mr. Gataker) Not
simply commanded. For Prove. 18. 18. is rather a permission than a praecept,
or, Not so much a Commandment as an advise commending that as a prudent
course; Nor any where forbidden as evil in it self.

I. B. S.
Mr. Fennor's book, from whence these allegations be drawn, and from whence I
learned that Lottes may not be used in sport, does prove that lusorious Lottes
are forbidden, and therefore not indifferent. What help then has Mr. Gataker
from Mr. Fenners grauntes? and his own proofs help him as little. For it is
granted, that if Lottery be either commanded, or forbidden, it is not
indifferent, to pass by the former, only observing that Mr, Gataker does not
absolutely deny it to be commanded, Prove. 18. 18. I come to the other. I might
here refer the Reader to my Dialogue, and to my Reply, by which it will
appear evidently, that a Lusorious Lot is forbidden, and therefore not
indifferent. But to speak a little more (generally) of things not indifferent,
because forbidden, I say, That is forbidden as well which is forbidd^^ by just
consequence, as that which is expressly forbidden: As that is permitted as well
which is permitted by just consequence as that which is expressly permitted.
Mr. Gataker affirms, the latter, pa* 137. and will not (I dare fay) deny the
former. Again, The Word of God is so perfect, that whatsoever it neither
commands, nor permits expressly, or by just consequence, that is verily
forbidden. For all things especially such as have relation to God, ought to
have some warrant from the word. If Mr. Gataker putt me to prove this, I dare
undertake to prove it demonstratively. But I presume he will not. For, in the
last mentioned page, he describes that to be indifferent, which is (at least)
permitted by the Word. If a thing be not so much as permitted, it cannot be
lawful, and therefore not in^different. Here I wish he would remember what he
writes page 95. Speaking of this word [Indifferent,] ^s it is opposed to good,
or evil, and ^he wing how some say, that to be ^ndifferent which is neither
good, ^or evil, he determines the point ^hus. Nevertheless most true it is,
That ^o particular moral action, or No action ^f the reasonable Creature
proceeding from reason, can possibly be so indifferent, ^ut it must of
necessity be either confor^able to the rules of Gods holy Word, or
^isconformable thereunto. So that I ^onder, why Mr. G. should say ^ere, Lottery
in game is not any ^here forbidden as evil in it self. ^s it not evil, if
forbidden, except ^ be otherwise evil of it self? that is good of it self
which is ^ither commanded, or permitted, ^ag, 137. Therefore that is evil of
^ self which is forbidden. It grei^eth my soul to see what a wide ^ore to
lusorious Lottery this doctrine will make. For now Lotmongers will choppe
Logic, and say, What if a lusorious Lotte be forbidden by just consequence,
ye^ they are not forbidden as evil in themselves, and therefore they are
indifferent. Now to come to Mr. Gatakers last reason, which, like an Orator,
he amplifieth to leave a deep impression behind. Bu^ let it be well
considered, as in i^ self, so whether it prove that the use of Lottes in game
is not agaia^^ Gods word, but has sufficient warrant from it, as he
pretends in his introduction, page 136. It is this.

M. G. 6.
Where the Wisdom of God, has not determined the subject matter, the manner,
and other Circumstances of a thing lawful in it self, there all such are
lawful, a^ the Word does not forbid, and a^ no Circumstance that a man shall
make choice of, shall be against the general rules of the word concerning the
same: But a Lot is a thing lawful in it self, and the subiectmatter, manner,
and other Circumstances thereof are not determined by Gods Word, nor against
the general rules. Therefore a Lot in game is not prohibited, nor is against
the general rules of Gods Word otherwise. The Proposition he confirms.
First, touching a thing lawful in it self, by showing 1.
that act to be lawful in it self, which in Gods word, is either commanded,
or permitted expressly, or by just consequence. Secondly, touching the manner
etc. by prooving 2.
the rest of the Proposition; which he indeavoureth to perform. (1.) By the
Authority of Calvin. (2.) By Luke: 9. 50. (3.) By a gloss (4.) By showing that
the circumstance of time for free will offerings being not determined, they
might have been offered at at any time, and Sacrifices might have been in any
place before a certain place was determined 3.
Thirdly, touching both the doing o^ every act, and the doing of it in this or
that manner, by showing that i^ natural reason will not, of it self affoard
sufficient direction, the^ must warrant be had out of God^ Romans 14. 23.
Word, because, Whatsoever is not o Faith is sin. Which Word is give^ us in
moral matters to supply the defect of it caused by our first parents their
fall. Neither does the Word abridge us of the help, an^ use of natural reason
for direction in such actions. The Assumptio^ is thus prooved. Recreation, i^
general, is warranted from the Word as permitted, and inioined* if not
expressly, yet by just consequence. For the matter or manner, or the things
wherewith we may recreate our selves, there is nothing determined. Therefore
any means that are not against the general rules Of comelines, and decency,
Romans 13. 13. 1. Cor. 14. 40. Of convenience, and expediency, 1. Cor. 6. 12. and
10. 23. Romans 14. 21. Of Religion, and Piety, 1. Cor. 10. 31. Colos. 3. 17. and
the like, are by the Word of God allowed.

I. B. ^.
I might, as did Alexander, loose Gordian's knott with one choppe, and say, The
use of Lottes in game is forbidden in the Word, referring my self to what I
have, and shall write. But for better satisfaction, I will answer more
particularly, not doubting, but that the Proverb may (now) prove true, viz:
In many words there cannot want iniquity. Pro. 10. 19.
First, I observe fearful shifting, 1.
and then unsound arguing. The former thus appears, He supposes the thing
must be lawful in it self, and disputes only about the subiect-matter, etc.
Again, In the introduction he says. The Use of Lottes in game is not against
God's Word, but has sufficient warrant from it, which may imply this position.
[That is against the Word, which has not sufficient warrant from it.] But in
the Proposition of the maine argument his ground is; [Such things are lawful,
which the Word does not forbid.] Four of his confirmations, and his Assumption
are to that effect, or rather defect, and his conclusion is answereable: Is not
this a fearful shifting course of reasoning? Now let us consider his unsound
arguing. Touching the Proposition of his maine argument, I mervaile why Mr.
Gataker avouching such subiect-matter etc. to be lawful as are not forbidden,
limiteth this assertion with these words (Of a thing lawful in it self) As
if such a thing may warrant our retchlesnesse in, and about the subiect-matter
etc. As if God does not, according to the old saying, [Loue Adverbes] An Oath
is a thing lawful in it self; Are not we therefore to make conscience, that
the subiect-matter, etc. be agreeable to the Word of God? But I mervaile much
more at this gronnd. [Such things are lawful, as the Word does not forbid.] I
set it down thus, because the confirmations tend to make this good, and so
conclude. All things not prohibited are permitted, and therefore the
subiect-matter, etc. of a thing lawful in it self. I mervaile (I say) the
more because Mr. Gataker confirms a thing or act it self to be lawful in it
self, if it be in the Word, either commanded, or permitted expressly, or by
just consequence. Which I acknowledge to be so clear a truth, that (me
think's) Mr. Gataker cannot, but, in proportion of reason, if he believe the
Word to be perfect unto every Psalm. 19. ^. 2. Tim. 3. 15. 16. 17.
good work, hold All things to be unlawful, which are not lawful one of
these two ways, and the rather because he peremptorily affirms, page 95. All
particular moral actions, be they never so iu^different, to be either
conformable, or disconformable to Gods Word, and, by particular actions, he
means actions clothed with circumstances, page 94. O that Mr. Gataker would
hold to this doctrine! John. 3. 21.
Then should he thereby provoke all, who make consciences of their ways, and
do truth (that is* do good works sincerily) to come to the light, that their
deeds might be made manifest, that they are wrought according to God. On the
contrary; If he bring not disciples to the Law, and Is a. 8. 20.
Testimony, by doctrine according to the Word, but writhe from it, by teaching
that to be lawful which is not forbidden, as therein his light fails, so
there by he shall make men careless to seek for their warrant, and wilful to
seek after their own heart, and eyes after which Number. 25 39.
they go a whoring. Well, let us examine his confirmations. First, Mr. Calvin's
1.
testimony in English is this. [When the Scripture delivers general rules of
a lawful use, the use is to be limited according to them.] From hence Mr.
Gataker concludes that a man has a sufficient warrant for any circumstance he
shall make choice of, that is not against those rules. Mr. Calvin speaks of
an Use, and of an Use do we dispute, Mr. Gataker concludes a Circumstance:
Mr. Calvin says, According, Mr. Gataker concludes, Not against. Is ^.
this sound arguing? Is the 2. confirmation from Luke: 9. 50. much better? The
words set down by Mr. Gataker be these. [He that is not against me, is with
me.] This place (forsooth) is a rule holding in the subiect-matter, etc.
neither determined, nor forbidden. As these words, [He that is not with me, is
against me, Math. 12. 30.] is a rule in the subiect-matter, etc. determined.
Both a like in conceit. And why may not M. Gatakers? conceit be the same
touching things, or actions? But let us see, whether the conceit be not a
be-misted Phantasy. In the former place Christ his words are occasioned ^y his
Disciples their forbidding one who cast out Devils in Christ his name. Forbid
him not (said Christ) for, He, that is not against me, is with me. In the
latter place Christ spoke those words upon occasion of the Pharisees their
opposition. So that consider the two sentences with their occasions together,
this, indeed, is the sum. All men are either with, or against Christ. For
there be no Neutralles. So that those two sentences are like these. He that is
not a goat, is a sheep, and He that is not a sheep is a goat. But Mr.
Gataker's argument is this. All men who are not against Christ, are with him.
Therefore Circumstances not determined, nor forbidden, are lawful. Is this
sound arguing? The third confirmation is from a Gloss. 3.
Here I remember an old saying [A cursed gloss corrupt's the Text.] Now let
us see whether Mr. Gataker have any blessing by this gloss, the words whereof
in English, be these. [All things are permitted by Law, which are not found
prohibited.] Note, that it speake's of things. Therefore it make's as well for
actions, as for circumstances* Is this Divinity? But what Law? If the Civil
Law, what is that to the point? Except Mr. Gataker can prove, the Civil Law
to be a perfect rule to us; and whatsoever it permits is allowed of God.
Howsoever, (I say) this course of fetching proofs from any other Law, than
God's Law, is fitter for a Papist, who holds Unwritten verities (so called)
to be a supplement to the Scriptures, thereby to authorize traditions of men,
than for one, that fears Deuteronomy. 10 12.
God to walk in his ways. Is then this glossing sound arguing? Has 4.
the fourth confirmation more validity in it than the rest? The former 3.
proofs speak not directly of Circmmstances according to the proposition, (so
does Mr. Gataker dispute Adidem) here he does* here then Iinquire, If the
Circumstances of Time, and Place be at the pleasure of him that v^eth a thing
lawful in it self, does it follow thereupon, that the subiect-matter, and
manner be so too? If God allow any thing to be done, of necessity there must be
a time, and place, when and where it may be done, Even when, and where there is
just occasion of the Act* It is to be obscrved, that, as here, so, in the
Proposition it self Mr. Gataker slideth from the subiect-matter, and manner,
to circumstances only. Is not this fainting? Let us now proceed to that, which
Mr. Gataker writes, touching both the doing of every act, and the doing of it
in this, and that manner. Neither of which needs warrant from the Word if
natural reason, of it self, afford sufficient direction* Good Lord! What
fearful shifting from the Word is here? But why does he join the doing it
self of an Act. with the manner thereof? I Will tell you, even to make a way to
his Assumption. For, if he stick close to that which he teaches in imediate
words, to wit, that an act it selse is lawful in it self, if, in the Word,
it be, either commanded; or permitted expressly, or by just consequence, he
foreseeth, that it will be answered to the forepart of his assumption, that
every Lot is not lawful in it self. Therefore he would trouble the Reader's
head with a supposed direction therein of natural reason, and that sufficient,
(I say) Supposed; For he shows no direction therein of natural reason either
sufficient, or insufficient. But let us with fear, and trembling, consider Mr.
Gataker his most strange position to wit, [Neither the doing of any act, nor
the manner of doing needs warrant from the Word, if natural Reason of it
self, affoard sufficient direction.] Let us consider it (I say) together with
his reason. For (says he) the Word is given us in moral matters, to supply
the defect of natural reason caused by our first parents their fall. Is it our
best way then to seek sufficient direction, in moral matters, from natural
reason, before wc consult with God in his Word? For the said direction is the
2. time urged thus. I say where natnrall reason does not, of it self, afford
sufficient direction, and need not a man know, that he has warrant srom God's
Word if, in his persuasion, he have sufficient direction from natural Reason?
Does the Max^me of Gods Spirit quoted here, by Mr. Gataker Romans 14 23.
to wit, [What is not of Faith is sinne] intimate. That whatsoever is done by
sufficient direction from natural reason, is of Faith? Became natural reason
only defective, and not corrupted also by our Romans 8. 7.
first Parents their fall? O God have mercy upon us! For I see that the
Wisdom of the Flesh is Enmity against thee; For it is not fubiect to thy Law,
neither, indeed, can be. But why do I vex my soul with this fearful
doctrine, seeing Mr. Gatakers heart faints in the prosecution thereof? For,
at last, he comes to say. Neither does the Word abridge us of the help, and
use of natural reason for direction in such actions. Here is some more
authority (to wit, Of not abridging us of the help, etc.) given to the Word.
For it does imply, that the Word might abridge us, etc. Therefore ou^ most
warrantable way is to be well informed, when, and how far, the Word does give
us leave to use the direction of natural reason in moral matters. If this be
so, then the former strange doctrine is contradicted, and I need not make any
answer to the scriptures quoted in the margent. So then I proceed to the
Assumption of the maine argument. In the former part whereof, it is to be
denied (as was said before) that every Lot is a thing lawful in it self. For
as a Divinatory, by him, cap. 11. so a Lusorious Lot by me, and others, is
denied to be a thing lawful in it self. More clearily to answer the other
part. It is to be observed, that, in this large, argument it cannot be gathered
w^ath M. G. means by Subiect-matter. So the mind of the Reader may be
troubled with words, which ought not to be. But Acts. 15 24.
by that which he writes, page 230. I understand he means the Matter
whereabout the Lottery is employed. If so, I affirm that the fubiect matter of
a Lot is determined by God, namely, A Controversy to be ended thereby; and
therefore I also affirm lusorius buisinesse (to use Mr. Gataker own word page
130.) to be a subiect-matter of a Lot, no less against the general rules of
the Word, than was the finding out of Jonas, in Mr. Gatakers judgment, page
278. If then a Lusorious Lot be not a thing lawful in it self, and If
Lusorious buisinesse be a subiect-matter of a Lot, that is against the
general rules, then how can the manner, and other circumstances, though
neither determined, nor forbidden, be sufficient warrant for the use of a
Lusorious Lot? Now then, Let us try the force of the Assumption's
confirmation. It is true that Recreation in general, indefinitely understood,
is warranted by God's Word. But I believe Mr. Gataker will not affirm all
recreations taken up by men, to be so warranted. Yes (says Mr. Gataker) we may
recreate our selves with any thing, that is not against the generales rules,
because, touching things, wherewith we may recreate, there is nothing
determined.

Of this evasion [Not against] I need not speak at this instant. But touching
things not determined, so much inculcated, I ask whether things must be
determined particularly, or by name; or else, if not so forbidden, they are
lawful. If so, why does Mr. Gataker (speaking of diverse particulars,) as of a
key, and a book, of a pair of sheares, and a ^ive, and such like so earnestly
ask, Are they any where found revealed in the Word of God? Where he is of
another mind, than here, arguing thus. Not found there commanded, or
permitted; therefore unlawful. If it be said, Not so found there, to find out
a theife. I then say; Neither are Lottes so found there for Recreation. But if
by Not determined be meant, Things wherewith we recreare are not determined in
the Word either expressly, or by just consequence, then, whosoever says so, if
he be wise, will add [So far as I do remember, and know.] For who can
remember all the sentences of holy Scriptures, and know all just consequences,
that may be made from them? If he thus add then his Negation is of no
validity, but he himself is too bold in denying, upon presumption, that
another remembers, and knows no more than he. At last let us religiously
consider the general rules so often spoken of, and we shall find, that Mr.
Gataker should have done well not to have pleased Libertines by pleading Not
against, but to have given the Word due honor by saying with Mr. Calvin. [The
use of things is to be limited according to the general rules.] For these
rules require Decency, Expediency, and Piety, and therefore they are not obeyed
by the use of things not indecent, not inexpedient, and not impious. For it is
to be noted that in 1. Cor. 6. 12. and 12. 23. Paul says not, all things are
lawful, but some things are inexpedient, but in both places thus. [All things
are lawful, but all are not expedient.] Let us consider these rules yet
somewhat more nearely to the point. Touching the first. The words of the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 14. 40. be these. [Let all things be done honestly, and by
order] In which is no intimation, that all things are in themselves lawful to
be done, which are done honestly, and by order, but a charge that all things,
be they in themselves never so lawful, be done honestly, and by order. Those
drink offerings to Bacchus, commonly called Healthes (per Antiphrasin,) are
solemnized sometimes with standing, sometimes with kneeling, always with
putting of hatts, and some speech more or less, are they acceptable to God,
because they are thus orderly carried? If not, Then be Lotts, and the users of
them in gaming never so orderly disposed, yet are they not therefore justified.
2.
Touching the second rule. It is true, That all things must be expedient, that
is, edify, 1. Cor. 10. 23. Therefore they sin who stumble, or offend a
brother, that is, occasion him to fall or be made weak, Romans 14. 13. 21. But
Lu^orious Lotts occasion thousands to fall into sin, and to be weak in
goodness. Therefore they do not edify, and therefore are not expedient.
Concerning the 3. rule. Let all things to be 3*
done to Gods glory, 1. Cor. 10. 31. Is this to Gods glory, to use his name in
any other case than wherein God is well pleased his name should be used, and
the^ to take that name in vain? Is tempting of God any glory to God? But
playing with a Lottis to use God's name in an other case, than wherein God is
well pleased his Name should be used, and then also to take that Name in vain,
and it is a grievous tempting of God as shall be prooved. Therefore playing
with a Lots is not to God's glory, and by consequence not agreeable to Religion,
and Piety. Though it be sufficiently prooved that Lusorious Lotts are directly
aga in^t tw^ of the general Rules, and not warranted by the third, so that Mr.
Gataker has not beat red his cause by appealing to them, yet it is to be
observed, that all the rules require, Things, and Actions to be according to
them, But Mr. Gataker by only speaking of them, would justify circumstances,
and means of playing with Lotts if (forsooth) they be not against them. Thus
having evidently showed Reasons inducing (not drawing) Mr. Gataker to allow
Lusorious Lotts to be both fearful, as these evasive speeches. [Not evil in
themselves.] [Not prohibited.] [Not determined.] and, [Not against the general
rules,] do import, and otherwise unsound, I will now (with God's help I hope)
reply upon M. G. answers to mine arguments against playing with Lots, contained
in my Dialogue.

A Reply to M. Gataker's answers to arguments contained in a Dialogue against
the unlawfulness of games consisting in chance.
Dialog.
WHatsoever directly, or of it self, or in a special Mal. 6. 7 Exo. 20. 7.
Isa. 29. 13. Ier. 4. 2. Prove. 16 33.
manner tends to the advauncing of God's Name is to be used religiously, and
not to be used in sport, as we may not pray, or swear in sport: But the use
of Lotts directly, or of it self, and in special manner tends to the
advauncing of the name of God in attributing to his special Providence in the
whole, and immediate Acts. 1. 14. 26.
disposing of the Lot, and expecting the event. Therefore the use of Lotts is
not to be in sport.

Aunsw. pa. 149.
The Assumption is not true, if it be understood universally. The proof
annexed I deny; Neither do the places produced prove it. The former of them,
concerning ordinary Lotts, or Lotts in general, was answered sufficiently
before. The latter is an example of an extraordinary Lot, wherein was (indeed)
an immediate, and special Providence. But extraordinary examples make no
general rules Neither is it a good course of arguing to reason from the
special, or a singular, to the general, and universal: Much less from one
extraordinary act or event, to all ordinary courses of the same kind. Herein
is the difference between the one, and the other That the one could not but
fall certainly, were it never so often cast, whereas the other, cast often in
the same case, would not certainly fall out still the same.

The assumption understood universally Reply 1.
is true, and the places quoted make good the proof thereof, as shall be made
manifest. First therefore let us consider the 1.
supposed distinction between ordinary, and extraordinary Lottes Mr. Gataker
speaks of a distinction, but shows not wherein, (touching the Lottes
themselves,) it does consist. Indeed, touching themselves, (as they be Lottes,)
there is no difference; For in an ordinary, as well as in an extraordinary
Lot, the things are by man, of purpose intentionally disposed unto a variable
event, and they are wholly disposed by God unto this, or unto that event, which
the vser of a Lot expects. If so, then it follows, That the use of all
Lottes, (as they be Lottes) whether ordinary, or extraordinary, directly, or of
it self, and in special manner, tends to the advauncing of the Name of God.
How? The use of Lottes attributes to Gods special Providence In the whole,
and immediate disposing of the Lot, and In expecting the event- Does this
scarce carry good sense? Is there then no difference between an ordinary, and
extraordinary Lot? The only difference is the subiect-matter whereabout the
Lot is employed. The subiect-matter of an ordinary Lot, is, by God's
allowance, A Controversy to be ended: The subiect-matter of an extraordinary
Lot is any other matter, whereabout a Lot is employed by God's special
direction; otherwise it is unlawful, as be lusorious, and Divinatory Lotts. In
regard of which difference only, Mr. Gatakers Logique holds good, as thus.
From the use of a Lot about an other matter than ending a Controversy and that
by God's special direction, it follows not, that it is lawful to use a Lot
about any other matter, than ending a Controversy, as gaming, without God's
special direction. But Mr. Gataker makes an other difference to wit, An
immediate, and special Providence in an extraordinary Lot, which is not in an
ordinary Lot. He does so; and therefore in his Logique, he cunningly joins a
supposed extraordinary Event to a supposed extraordinary Act, and declineth the
proof of an extraordinary act, which rather he should have done, because mine
argument stands upon the Use of Lottes. Neither does he foundly prove an
immediate, and special Providence, or extraordinary event, to be in an
extraordinary, and not in an ordinary Lot. For, as it is a tempting of God to
cast an extraordinary Lot the first time without God's special direction,
page 313. so it is a tempting, yea, a greater tempting of God, when he has
given his iudgmentalready by the event of the Lot, to cast the Lot again
without his special direction. How then can Mr. Gataker so confidently
affirm, that an extraordinary Lot could not but fall certainly, were it never
so often cast? Indeed, The certain event of an extraordinary Lot may, in faith,
be expected, because of Gods special direction. And why not so in an ordinary
Lot? Seeing God advises us, page ^35. to use Lottes for the ending of
controversies. Prove. 18. 18. and assures us that the whole disposing of them
is of him, Prove. 16. 33. But Mr. Gataker has answered this place before. Let
us then consider what he has answered. Before he says, page 144. Good
Authors expound this place of singular, extraordinary, and miraculous Lottes
only. But (says he) the words seem to be more general, and are, word for
word, thus in the Original, [The Lord is cast into the Lap, but every
judgment, or disposing of it, is of God.] Does not confuting them, who hold
only extraordinary Lottes to be meant in this place, and translating the Text
[Every iudgment] and expounding it, [Or disposing of it,] show plainly that
this place prooveth mine Assumption to be universally true? So that I much
mervaile that he denies this place to prove mine Assumption, because it
concerns Lottes in general. For if it do so, then it prooveth that
ordinary, as well as extraordinary Lottes tend to the advauncing of the Name of
God. Again page 145. Mr. Gataker taking the words, as they are usually read
in the Genevatranslation, and the King's edition, to wit, [The Lot is cast
into the lap, but the whole disposition, or disposing thereof is of the
Lord,] grants that the whole event is of God. A grant though true, yet
turning the reader aside from seeing the whole truth. For the Text is, [The
whole disposing of the Lot cast into the lap.] If then the Lot cast into the
lap, that is, of purpos^ disposed by man unto a variable event, be wholly
disposed by God, so, as the event be that, which pleases him, then God does
not mediately dispose the Lot to this, or that event, if not mediately, then
immemediately, because the whole disposing is of him. Does not then this place
make good mine Assumption? But for all this Mr. Gataker will not have it so;
For as he translateth this place, he says It imports thus much, [That there
is a Providence in all things, even the least, and most casuall] and this he
would confirm by these my words, viz: [The disposinges of the chance is
secret, that it might be chance indeed, and wholly of God, who directed all
things.] Do these words justify Mr. Gatakers interpretation of this place?
Yes; For they say plainly, God directed all things, and, they say withal; The
disposing of the chance (that is of the things purposedly disposed by a man
unto a variable event) unto a certain event, is secret, that it may be chance
indeed, that is, an event not by the will of man, but wholly of God. So that my
words imply this argument. God directs all things, Therefore much more, in
our discerning, a Lot, the whole disposing whereof is of him. This is far
from saying that this place imports only, That there is a Providence in all
things. Neither does Mr. Gatakers translation infer this imported
interpretation. For this discretion. [But] does so oppose every judgment, or
disposing of it (as he expounds Judgment) to a Lot cast into the lap, as
that Every disposing, is all one with The whole disposing. This place so
troubles Mr. Gataker that from it he would have no more gathered, than that
the whole event (as of all things, so) of a Lot, is of the Lord. Yet so, as
working by means in the most of them, and not implying and immediate
Providence universally in them. I need not examine the means, or immediate
Providence of all the instances quoted in the margent For here it is impliedly
granted (for he faith not All, but the most of them) that in some things God
works not by means, and that there is an immediate Providence Particularly,
for he denies such a Providence only, as being universally. Howsoever it be
in other things, I think it is manifest to all, that will see, that God,
without means, and therefore immediately, does wholly dispose the Lot cast into
the lap unto this, or that event, what pleases him, whereas man disposes
the things only unto a variable event. As at cards, man shuffleth them of
purpose to dispose them unto a variable event: But, by the immediate Providence
of God, they are so shuffled, as that this, or that event follows. Therefore
(with Mr. Gataker favor) any reasonable man may judge it not senseless to say
(which he doubts of pa. 147.) that in childrens plays, at Even, and Odd, or
at Heads, and Points, there is an immediate Providence, In inclining the will
of the child, and guiding his conjecture. Thus we see this place does confirm
mine assumption, and the proof annexed, Mr. Gatakers interpretation
notwithstanding. But he gives 2. reasons against an immediate providence in
ordinary Lottes, which 1.
are also to be considered. The former is this. That which agrees to a thing,
as it is such, agrees necessarily to all things, that are such. Therefore if
there be an immediate Providence in a Lot, as it is casual, then there is an
immediate providence in all things, that are casual: But the latter is not
true; ergo not the former, page 143. Why not the latter? if the is Positions be
true. That which seems Chance to us, is a certain Word of God (says
Bernard, But Mr. Gatak. translateth Sermo quidam
it, Is as a word of God) acquainting us with his Will, page 17. and In casual
events there is nothing guiding them, but God's Providence, page 22. But
suppose that there is not an immediate Providence in all things, that be
casual, what is that to the purpose? For all things casual are not such, with
a Lot, wherein things are of purpose disposed by man unto an uncertain event,
which things, so disposed by man, are wholly disposed by God unto a certain
event, this or that; so it is not in all other things, that be casual.
Therefore all other casual things, and Lotts are not such* Neither is it said
an immediate Providence is in a Lot, as it is casual, but as the Lot being
made casual is wholly disposed by God to this, or that event. So that from Mr*
Gatakers axiom this argument may be framed. An immediate Providence, in an
extraordinary Lot, is acknowledged by Mr. Gataker as it is a Lot (say I) wholly
disposed by God; Therefore an immediate Providence is in an ordinary Lot (as it
is a Lot) wholly disposed by God. For there is no difference between these
sorts of Lotts, (as they be Lotts) and so disposed. For Mr. Gataker has showed
that Prove. 16. 33. speaks as well of one sort of Lotts, as of another. The
other argument is this* which is the kill-kow. If in every Lot there be
necessarily an immediate work, and Providence of God, then is it in the
natural of man to make God work immediately at his pleasure: But to say, that
it is in man's power naturally to set God on working, immediately, at his
pleasure, is absurd. There is not therefore an immediate work, and Providence
of God necessarily in every Lot. Mr. Gataker like an Orator, seems desirous
to draw his adversary into hatred by they words [Necessarily, Natural power,
Set God on working, At pleasure, To say, and Absurd] Verba dum sint, surdo
canit. But hoping better, I aunswering his Logique, deny the Assumption. For it
is as much in man's natural power to set God on work immediately, in an
ordinary, as in an extraordinary Lot. For both God, and man do respectively as
much in the one Lot, as in the other. But an extraordinary Lot is by the
special direction of God: True; So is an ordinary Lot by God's special
advise to end a controversy. If then every Lot be a setting of our glorious
God on work, there ought to be prayer, if not by words; yet in heart in the
use as well of ordinary, as extraordinary Lotts. If so, then Lotts are not to
be used in sport. Here then will I proceed to the defense of my second
argument, which is this, page 150.

Dialog.
We are not to tempt the Almighty Psalm. 78. 18. ^9. Isa. 7. 12 Math. 4. 6. 7.
by a vain desire of manifesting his power, and special Providence: But by
using Lotts in sport we tempt the Almighty, vainly desiring the manifestation
of his special Providence in his immediate disposing; Therefore we may not use
Lotts in sport* The Assumption (says Mr. Gataker) they seem to prove on this
wise. To call God to sit in judgment, where there is no necessity so to do,
for the determining of trifles, is to tempt, nay to mock God: But by the use
of Lotts in sport, God is called to sit in judgment, where is no necessity,
for the determining of trifles. By the use of Lotts in sport therefore, we do
tempt, and dishonor God. This argument Mr. Gataker has from Dan^eus that
learned man of reverend memory. To prove the Assumption whereof, he alleges
these words out of my Dialogue. A Lot in the nature thereof does as
necessarily suppose the Providence, and determining presence of God, as an
Oath, in the nature thereof, does suppose the testifying presence of God, yea
so, that, as in an Oath, so in a Lot, prayer is expressed, or to be understood.

Aunsw.
The Assumption of the maine Argument is not true, but only in extraordinary
Lottes, used not with out special direction. Yea rather, if a Lot be such as
is here said, it is not lawful to use Lottes in any case whatsoever. Because
thereby we require a work of God's immediate Power, and Providence, and so
tempt God. And to speak as the truth is. By this course, and force of this
discourse, the only lawful use of a Lot is condemned, and an unlawful use of
it is allowed in the room of it. Again: An Oath, and a Lot are not alike. The
comparison therefore laid between them will not hold. For neither is the
right of ought in an ordinary Lot, put to the special providence, and imediate
work of God, as the truth of the thing testified is in an Oath, put to his
Testimony: Neither is there in every Lot any such solemn invocation of God, as
there is in an Oath ever, either expressed, or implied. For the definition of
each thing contains the whole nature of the thing defined. Now a Lot may be
defined without mention of Prayer, as appears in the definition thereof in
the Dialogue: But so cannot an Oath. Therefore Prayer is not of the essence of
a Lot. Neither do the places, 1. Sam. 14. 41. Acts 1. 24. (whereof the former
was a faithless prayer) prove it. They prove only, that prayer was
sometimes used before an extraordinary Lot, for an immediate Providence to
direct the event of it. Which is not lawful in ordinary Lotts. For in setting
forth tithes, Levit. 27. 32. it was not lawful to pray God to give a right
Lot. In election of offices sacred, or civil prayer ought to be used, yet it
follows not therefore, that Prayer is part of the choice, or that therefore
the Election, in the nature thereof, does necessarily suppose a special
providence, and determining presence of God. Lastly, A Lot is not in it self
an holy thing always, and necessarily, as has been showed, nor indeed was
ever any so save extraordinarily. Therefore there is difference between Lotts
and Oaths. Indeed, Whosoever shall contemn an extraordinary Lot, he shall
abuse an holy thing, and Gods Name.

Reply 2.
To this long answer I might make a short reply. For whereas Mr. Gatakers maine
ground is this. There is no immediate providence of God in an ordinary, as is
in an extraordinrry Lot, and thereupon he builds these answers, Therefore
there is no tempting of God by using Lotts in sport: Therefore no prayer
expressed, or to be understood is required in ordinary Lotts: and Therefore an
ordinary Lot is not an holy thing in it self; I might, (referring my self to
the defense of my former argument,) breifely reply, and say. There is an
immediate providence in an ordinary Lot. Therefore God is tempted by using
Lotts in sport: Therefore Prayer expressed, or to be understood, is required
of them who use an ordinary Lot: and Therefore an ordinary Lot is an holy
thing: But something more in replying, will have more savor in reading.
Therefore I first mervaile that M. G. forgets himself in concluding. That
all Lotts be unlawful, if there be an immediate providence in all Lotts. What?
Were extraordinary Lotts unlawful too? Nay; He understands an exception of
them because they were commanded by God. So I say, ordinary Lotts were advised
by God to end controversies. Therefore using them, in that case, is no tempting
of God. I mervaile also, why Mr. Gataker should so confidently affirm, that,
by this course, that is, by maintaining an immediate Providence in all Lotts,
an unlawful use of a Lot is allowed in the room of the only lawful use.
But I refer the discussing thereof to the defense of my 3. argument* Again,
It is to be observed, that he sett's down a comparison between an Oath, and a
Lot, which I set not down, whereby the mind of the reader may be troubled*
For I say not, As the Truth of a thing is, by an Oath, put to Gods Testimony:
so in an ordinary Lot the R^ght of a thing is put to Gods immediate Providence.
This is that I say, As an Oath, in the nature thereof, suppo^eth the testifying
presence of God: so a Lot, in the nature thereof, supposes the determining
presence of God. My reason is, Ending a controversy (I say not, Deciding a
Right, for, before dividing the land of Promise by Lot, no tribe, or family
could challenge more Right to one portion, than to another) Ending (I say) a
Controversy is, by a Lot referred to God's determining the same by his whole,
or immediate disposing the uncertain Lot) to a certain event. It is also to
be observed that in the 2. comparison between an Oath, and a Lot, touching
Prayer, he says, Neither is there in every Lot any such solemn invocation.
Therefore in some Lot, that is, an extraordinary Lot, because of an immediate
Providence to direct the event of it. For the same cause (say I) is prayer to
be expressed, or understood in the use of an ordinary Lot too. But (says Mr.
Gataker) Prayer is of the essence of an Oath, and not of a Lot. I have said
nothing to the contrary; So that he might have spared his definition of a Lot:
But because he takes a definition (such as it is) out of my Dialogue, I will
say somewhat thereto. The Definition (so called) is from Lyrd, viz. To use
Lotts is by a variable event of some sensible thing to determine some
doubtful, or uncertain matter. How is this matter to be determined indeed?
Even by God's whole, or immediate disposing the Lot. Has God the principal
hand in the determination? and Is not then Prayer to be expressed, or
understood in a Lot, that is, in the managing by the users thereof? Now then
let us consider the places produced to prove it. The former (says Mr.
Gataker) was faithless, I say so too, Because that Lot was without any
warrant. This (notwithstanding Prayer in this, and the other place) does show
that God's people beleiving that God does signify his judgment by the whole,
or immediate disposing of that Lot, did therefore think themselves bound to
pray. But both these Lotts were extraordinary, wherein was an immediate
providence of God. Therefore they might well believe they should pray. True; So
all Christians may, yea and must believe they ought to pray in the using
ordinary Lotts, because of God's immediate Providence exercised therein. Nay*
It was unlawful in setting out Tithe. If so* Not because it was an ordinary
Lot (If a Lot) but because the Lord expressly said Of all that goes under the
rod the tenth shall be holy. The instance of election of offices is besides
the purpose- For it is not argued thus. Because Gods people prayed when they
used a Lot, therefore there is an immediate Providence of God in a Lot: But
thus. There is an immediate Providence of God in a Lot, therefore Gods people
prayed when they used a Lot. If then there be an immediate Providence of God in
a Lot, and in regard thereof, Prayer is to be expressed, or understood in
lawful use of a Lot, then Praying and Playing, (though they rhyme well
together, yet) run not well together in the lawful use of a Lot. Nay rather
it follows from both That a Lot is not to be used but in a case of necessity
more, or less; and Therefore stra^nge (I will not say absurd) is Mr. Gataker
his Position, page 111. to wit, The less weighty the matter is wherein a Lot
used, the lawfuller the Lot is. Except it be prooved, That the less weighty
the m^tter is, the greater is the necessity of ending the controversy by a Lot.
The said Position is more strange because he grants, page 95. That Prayer
specially applied to the Lot may, (in some case,) be conceived, where the
matter is more weighty, and the event of some consequence, as in the choice of
a Magistrate. But concerning this also more shall be said in my next Reply.
Lastly; It serves my turn that Mr. Gataker acknowledges that God's Name, and
an Holy thing is abusod whenever an extraordinary Lot it contemned, because
an immediate Providence of God is therein. For the same cause an ordinary Lot
is the Name of God and an Holy thing, and therefore not to be abufed in sport.
But Mr. Gataker has shown before that a Lot is not, in it self, an holy
thing. Indeed; He would have shown in his 3* reason inducing him to allow
lusorious Lotts* as not evil in themselves, that a Lot is not holy either in
it self, or by divine institution. Whereunto I have already answered somewhat.
But having learned more (occasionally) by his further dispute, I will now, for
some more satisfaction, answer somewhat more. A Lot (says Mr* Gataker, page
132. and 133.) is not holy, either in it self, because a Casualty has no
holiness in it self; For then all Casualties should be holy: or By divine
institution i^ the Word, sanctifying it to some holy use. I answer breifely.
Is an extraordinary Lot the Name of God, an Holy thing in it self, because of
God's immediate Providence therein, and not an ordinary Lot in respect of the
same Providence? If it be, Then, though all casualties be not holy in
themselves, yet all lawful Lotts be holy in themselves. So that as ^he Bush
that burnt, and wasted not, was holy, when God manifested himself to Moses in
it, page 156, so a Lot is holy, because of God's special Presence therein.
Herein they differ. The Bush was holy but for a time, because God was present
in it but for a time: Whereas a Lot is holy from time to time, so often as it is
lawfully used, because of God's special presence therein from ^ime to time,
Therefore Hows^e^er sport might have been made with the Bush the special
presence of God being remooved, yet ought sport never be mad^ with a Lot,
because God's special presence is ever therein. Again; I need not prove
that an ordinary Lot to end controversies is by divine institution in the
word, seeing Mr. Gataker grants that God in Prove. 18. 18. advises us to use
it to that end. But it is not sanctified to an holy use. I have showed
otherwise. But what then? Is not a Lot therefore always holy in it self, as
Mr. Gataker says in this passage? Were all extraordinary Lotts sanctified to
holy uses? Yet Mr. Gataker deemeth them all holy in themselves, because of
God's immediate Providence in them. Why may not I, for the same cause, think
the same of all ordinary Lotts? And the rather, because Mr. Gataker says, page
^27.* Marriage, being Gods Ordinance, is holy in it self: But (as he
acknowledges, page 1.) a Lot is Gods Ordinance; Therefore, from his grant, a
Lot is holy in it self. If then a Lot be holy in it self I conclude with Mr.
Gataker, page 133. It may in no case, with no caution, be made matter of sport.
Now then I proceed to my 3. argument, which is this, page 166.

Dialog. Mat. 21. 12. 13. Numb. 26. 5^. Prove. 18. 18. Heb: 6* 16.
Whatsoever God has sanctified to a proper end is not to be perverted to a
worse end: But God has sanctified Lotts to a proper end, viz: To end
Controversies* Therefore man is not to pervert them to a worse, viz: To play,
and by playing to get away another man's money, which, without controversy is
his own. The Assumption is amplified by the like use of an Oath.

Auns^.
This Argument is faulty. But may be mended thus. That which God has
sanctified to some proper use is not to be applied to any other, especiala
worse. But God has sauctifyed Lotts to this propre use, to wit, the deciding
of Controversies in matters of weight; A Lot therefore may not be applied to
any other use, much less to a worse. But to answer the argument. The
Proposition is granted, if, [To Sanctisie] be understood in a larger sense, as
meats are said to be sanctisied, by God's word, for man's food, and The
vnbeleiving mate sanctified to the married believer, and if thereby be also
understood the sanctification, and approbation of the whole kind. To the
Assumption, and amplification thereof, it is answered. That place, Prove. 18.
18. does not inioyne tho use of a Lot; Nor restrains it to the ending of
strife, Much less to the ending of great quarrels only, For, ending strife
is but one use amongst many, Joshua, 7. 14. Jonas 1. 7. 1. Sam. 14. 42. Levit.
16. 8; 9. So ^ebr. 6. 16. does not she w that ending a Controversy is the only
lawful use of an Oath. For there be other uses of it, As, to give assurance of
the performance of Covenants, and promises. For, what controversy was there
between Jonathan, and David to be ended by 1. Sam. 20. 16. 17. 42.
Oath when they swear either to other?

Reply ^.
I would thank Mr. Gataker for mending mine argument, though there be not any
great need, if he had not put into his Assumption these words [In matters of
weight] for his own purpose, as shall appear, But to the matter. In mine
understanding, and meaning, the Proposition does sufficiently express all that
which mooveth Mr. Gataker to grant it. Well, Then let us consider his
opposition made to the Assumption, and the amplification thereof. Does Mr.
Gataker imply a Lot not be sanctified, because (as he says now peremptorily)
it is not enjoined? What! Is Recreation (in general) enjoined by precpt, if
not directly, yet (at least) by just consequence, as Mr. Gataker in his
allowance of lusorious Lotts, says is grants by all, page 138? and is not
so useful an Ordinance, as is a Lot, to end Controversies, enjoined by precept
either directly, or by just consequence? Does God more carefully provide for
recreation, than for peace amongst his people? But Mr. Gataker is not so
peremptory in an other place, page 135. where he says. The use of Lotts is not
simply commanded, For. Prove. 18. 18. is Rather a permission than a precept,
and Not so much a commandment as an advise, and counsel. I will come to an
issue. If it will please M. G. to set down his just consequence to prove
Recreation enjoined by precept, I will undertake to set down as just a
consequence to prove, that a Lot to end a Controversy is likewise enjoined by
precept. In mean while I cannot be persuaded that our God of peace, Psalm. 34*
14.
who commands us to seek peace, and follow after it, and has ordained a
Lot, wherein he is specially present by his immediate providence, to end
controversies, which otherwise cannot be ended conveniently, does leave us at
liberty in that case, to use, or not to use a Lot. But suppose the use of a Lot
be not (thus) enjoined, yet does not Gods counsel (which me thinks is a
commandment though it be said of man's consell that it is no commandment)
sanctify it to be used to end controversies. This (I think) will not be
denied: But it is denied That the use of a Lot is restrained to end
controversies, much less great quarrelles only, and sundry instances are
given of using Lotts to other ends than to end controversies. But all those
Lotts were extraordinary. Therefore, whereas in the beginning of this answer
where he would find fault with mine argument, he says, That the use of Lotts
in play is ever to decide some question, or controversy, though a light one (it
is like) yet a question, or controversy truly so termed, otherwise it were no
Lot. If he mean a Lot in general, then (with his favor) he forgets
himself in saying Lotts, by him quoted were not to end controversies: If he
speak of a Lot in play, as being an ordinary Lot, then he fails in judgment,
In denying that the use of ordinary Lotts (whereof is the question) is
restrained to end controversies, and The instances which he gives being
extraordinary Lotts, are not to the point. Besides: The subiect-matter of an
extraordinary Lot being by God's special direction, if it be lawful, there
may (happily) be no present controversy. Whereas, the subiect-matter of an
ordinary Lot, being something questioned between man, and man, there may be a
great controversy. I say, May be, For if it be well observed, in an ordinary
Lot there is not always a present controversy to be determined: But always
some question to be decided to prevent a controversy. As may appear by Mr.
Gatakers own words, partly here, where he says [That there must be some
question, or controversy, or else it is no Lot,] but more evidently, where he
says: That the Lot used by the soldiers about Christ his garments, which he
truly calls a serious divisory Lot, was to prevent all contention, and
strife, page 176. and 177. Such was the Lot also which was used about dividing,
the Land of Promise, about which was no present controversy. For God, who would
have no controversies, whould have also such things remooved which may cause,
or justly occasion controversies. Therefore Christ expounding the
commandment. Math. 5. 21. 22.
Thou shallt not kill, forbids words of provocation. About which ordinary
Lot, God, who knows how ordinary or common, controversies, and the occasions
thereof be, gives direction in Prove. 18. 18. That which is said of an ordinary
Lot may justly be also said of an Oath, that the use of it is sanctified to end
controversies by present determination, or prevention. For, as it is true, that
Heb. 6. 16. implies, that Gods Oath to man is more inviolable, than an Oath
from man to man, whereof only, M. G. takes knowledge, so it pa, 17^.
is true, that Heb. 6. 16. intimates, That, as an Oath, for confirmation, is
amongst men an end of all strife* so Gods Oath for confirmation of his promise
to Abraham, was to put the matter out of doubt, question* or controversy* Else,
these words *An end of all strife] were to no purpose. But that they were to
the purpose by me understood, appears in the 2* uext verse. where it is
written. That God bound himself by Oath as to show the stablenesse of his
Counsel, so that the heirs of promise might have strong cousolation. So that
Gods Oath to Abraham took away doubting, questioning, and all strife that
might be, not only in Abraha^s mind, but also in the minds of the heirs of
promise. Therefore an Oath does not only end present controversies, according
to M. G. understanding, but confirming a promise* or covenant does also end a
strife, though there be none present, when the Oath is given, to wit, by
Prevention. Now let us somewhat consider Mr. Gatakers purpose in putting into
the Assumption, these words* [In matters of weight.* Forsooth, By denying the
the same, to make way for light matters, and consequently for playing with
Lottes. Because (as he says, page 130.) they best agree with the nature of
Lotts, that is, with uncertain hazard. Surely, If Mr. Gataker had acknowledged
God's special presence by his immediate Providence in a Lot, as being a Lot
ordained by God, to end controversies, he would not have so written, but deemed
weighty matters best agreeing with the nature of a Lot. It is true that a
matter of less weight in it self may be the subiect-matter of a controversy,
as a controversy may be among men, as well mean, as might, yin their state, as
Mr. Gataker here says pa. 137. For by mighty men (as in Genesis 6. 4. so) in
Prove. 18. 18. are meant Men strong in their affections, so as the controverfy
cannot be well ended without a Lot, whether the subiect-matter of the
Controversy be of more, or less weight in it self; so as there is a necessity
that one or both parties be satisfied. For otherwise there may be a great
quarrel about a matter of less weight. Neither do I say, that only great
quarrels are to be ended, or prevented by a Lot, as Mr. Gataker denies not,
but some may. For (as he says truly, page 173.) God speaks in Prove. 18. 18.
of contentions in general. Here then we may enter into further consideration
of that which Mr. Gataker writes, page 135. to wit. That, by the force of our
discourse against playing with a Lot, the only lawful use is condemned^, and
an unlawful use is allowed in the room thereof. What is that Only lawful
use of a Lot? I can find none other than The putting of that to a Lot which he
calls (page 130.) A matter of mere indifferency, that is, Such as is not
material, whether a man do, or omit: Howsoever there may be a lawful use of
a Lot about such a matter questioned to determine, or prevent a Controversy,
yet I wonder that Mr. Gataker deemeth it that only lawful. Does not he
grant, page 91. That Prayer specially applied to a Lot may be conceived in
weighty matters, as in the choice of a Magistrate, which is not a matter of
mere indifferency, that is, such as is not material whether it be done or
omitted. Did God specially appoint Lotts to be used about only matters of
weight? and must man so far swerve from Gods example as to strive only about
matters of such indifferency, and then to putt only such, controverted, to the
determination of a Lot? So that I doubt not but that with found judgment, and a
clear conscience not accusing me of not duly respecting the special
Providence, of God by his immediate disposing of a Lot, I may affirm. That the
more weighty the subiect-matter of a controversy is, the more justifiable is
the Controversy: and Be that matter of more or less weight, the greater the
necessity of ending a Controversy is, the more justifiable is the use of a Lot.
Is not then playing with a Lot an irreligious abusing of Gods Ordinance? But
(faith Mr. Gataker glad of any thing to plead for playing with a Lot.) The use
of a Lot in play is ever to decide some question, or controversy truly so
termed. If so, Then he might have called it a serious Lot, according to his
doctrine, the lightness of the subiect-matter controverted, notwithstanding.
But whereabout is that supposed Controversy? Mr. Gataker in his written answer
to my Dialogue, before mentioned, says. The Controversy tends to Victory,
which till it be decided, there is a Controversy though a light one, yet a
Controversy, truly so termed. But is that truly or worthily to be called A
Victory, which falls out by hap-hazard (according to M. Gatakers esteeming a
Lot) without any desert? But (say I) Is it not a tempting of God to put him, by
his immediate Providence in disposing the Lot, to humor (I say not, honor)
some of the vain glorious fools with supposed Victory, who make a pretended
controversy there-about, whereas (before they intended to play with a Lot)
there was none indeed? Is this a Controversy truly so termed? I need say no
more, and therefore proceed to the last argument (whereof, but part is mine) It
is this, page 173.

That, which there is neither precept for, nor practice of, in Gods Dial. 4*
word, general, or special, expressed or implied, that there is no warrant
for in the word: But such is the use of Lotts in game. For we read in
Scripture that Lotts were used, but in serious matters only, both by Jews,
and Gentiles; Neither is there any warrant in the Word for the ludicrous use of
them, by precept, or practice, general, or special, expressed, or implied,
There is no warrant therefore for lusorious Lotts in Gods word.

Aunsw.
The Proposition is unsound. For an argument holds (indeed) from the Negative
in matters of Faith, but not in matters of Fact. Mnch less may a man reason
from a matter of Fact, to a matter of Right negatively. For many things are of
ordinary use, whereof there is no mention at all in Gods Word, which yet all
generally allow, as 2.
sugar for sweetning, etc. Secondly; An action may have warrant sufficiently by
permission, without precept, or practice. For where God has not limited the
use of any creature, or Ordinance, there he has left the use of it free: Where
he has not determined the Circumstances of any action, there, what he has not
prohibited, that he has permitted. For this cause, Ier. 7. 31 and 19. 5. Col.
2. 22 23. Deu. 12 30. 31. 32
in the point of Gods worship, the argument holds from the Negative, for the
substance of it. Because God has determined it: But in civil affairs, it will
not hold from the Negative to disallow ought, because God has not determined
them.

Reply 4.
Mr. Gataker in his book shows many instances of Lotts used both by Jews,
and Gentiles, and all in serious matters. Which intimates to me, that they, by
the light not only of the Word, but of nature too, discerned, that Lotts are
to be used only in serious matters. O let us take heed how we put out so great
light. But let us consider his answer, which is only to the Proposition,
though I have already confuted many principal parts thereof. In my Dialogue to
show that the Spirit sometime reasons from a matter of Fact to a matter of
right, negatively, I quote these Scriptures, John 8. 39. 40. 1. Cor. 11. 16.
The words of the former be these, Ye go about to kill me, a man that has
told you the truth; This did not Abraham. The argument is this Abraham did not
kill any that told him the truth, Therefore ye ought not go about to kill
me, if ye would be sons of Abraham. This is Christ his Logic, wherewith I
dare find no fault: Neither does Mr. Gataker. For he says nothing to it,
because the Printer puts for verse. 40. the 48. verse. wherewith Mr. Gataker
makes pastime, but I will let pass time now to take further knowledge of it.
Of the other quotation the words be these. We have no such custom, nor the
Churches of God. The consequent implied is. Therefore nomen ought not to pray
uncovered. Hereunto Mr. Gataker answers indeed, but so, that he does not deny
that Paul argues negatively from a matter of Fact to a matter of Right. Which
is all that I intended by the quotation, and not, to imagine this argument. The
Churches of God, and faithful men do not use Lotts in gaming* Therefore such
gaming is unlawful. So that I need not herein reply upon Mr. Gataker, I only
wonder that he says. The use of Lotts in games has been common in the
Churches of God. What! In the public Assemblies? as was the fault of women
their heads uncovered in the Church at Corinth? But Mr. Gataker in this answer
speaks of things merely natural, or civil, as sweetning with sugar, etc. I
will not now endeavor to prove that in the Word there is matter of just
consequence either general, or implied (which is a part of the proposition) to
allow as well sweetning with sugar, etc. as Recreation in general, and
therefore they may be lawful though they be not mentioned in the Word. But
suppose M. Gatakers axiom holds in them, what is that to Lotts, wherein is
the Name of God by his immediate providence, and the use whereof is limited to
end serious controversies? In regard whereof doubt I not but an argument
concerning the use of them, may hold from the Negative in matter of Fact, as
well as in matter of Faith, or of the point of Gods worship for the substance
of it. For I presume that as Abraham would not, if he had had occasion, as he
did not, kill a man that told him the truth: so that all who feared God, and
knew the nature, and use of a Lot, would not, as they did not, use a Lot in
game. Secondly. Why may not there be for 2.
a thing permitted, some precept in the Word, general, or implied? The
permission of any thing must be in the Word, either express or by just
consequence, and then the thing so permitted is indifferent. But Mr. Gataker
reconsileth these two axioms [Every action is indifferent,] and [No action is
indifferent,] thus, Every naked and bare action simply conceived, is
indifferent: But, No action cladde with his particular circumstances, is
indifferent, page 94. So that, he concludes it to be most true, That no
particular moral action, or No action of the reasonable creature, proceeding
from reason, can possibly be so indifferent, but it must of necessity, be
either conformable to the rules of Gods holy word, or disconformable thereunto,
page 95. These things, especially these words (Rules of Gods Word,
considered,) I may say, that howsoever a naked indifferent thing be by
permission, yet a clothed indifferent thing, if lawful, is by precept, or
rule, as well as Mr. Gataker says, Recreation in general, is both by
permission, and by precept, if not expressly, yet by just consequence page 138.
Does then Mr. Gataker make permission a just exception against the Proposition?
Touching his proof that Permission is a sufficient 1.
warrant: I first would know what ordinance of God that is, which has not some
limited, or appointed use thereof. I am sure, and have showed, that Gods
ordinance ^.
touching a Lot, has. Secondly, I greive to observe what a gappe Mr. Gataker
has, by this doctrine, opened to Licentiousness. What! may man disposed to
finne, employ any creature, whose vfe God has not limited, to what use he
will? No; For here is to be understood that exception which is expressed in the
next part of the reason touching circumstances, viz [Any use, but that which is
prohibited] Howsoever I could demurre the revpon, especially if an express
prohibition be understood, yet herein I will be silent having enough granted
me. For the use of Lotts in game is prohibited by just consequences, as I have
demonstrated. For the better understanding of the 2. part of the reason,
(hasting to an end) I only desire an answer to this question. Is any use of a
Lot lawful where the circumstances of Time, Place, and Persons be not
determined? If Mr. Gataker except an extraordinary use, I may as well except
the lusorious use of Lotts, In answer to the exemplification of this reason,
granting that an argument holds from the Negative for the substance of Gods
Worship, I yet make this Quaere. Whether, only because God has determined
it? For in those places of Jeremy, God does blame his people only for using a
worship [which he commanded not], without any intimation that he prescribed
his own worship. To the same purpose writes Paul to the Colossians against
traditions of men, and will worship, not for Mr. Gatakers cause, but because in
so worshipping they held not the Head, ver. 19. which is Christ, King of his
Church teaching, and governing the same in all things. But in Deuteronomy. Mr.
Gatakers cause is implied. It is true, that there God forbids his people to
inquire how other nations served their Gods, and sends them to his word to
observe the same, without putting anything to, or taking out from the same.
Surely, I should not gather from hence Mr. Gatakers cause, as being the only
cause; Because I fear it would encourage Papists in their superstitious rites,
and ceremonies called Circumstances, though, indeed, parts of the substance of
Gods outward worship. For they are to ready to take hold thereof and say God
has determined nothing touching these supposed Circumstances, and they are not
against the word of God, therefore they are permitted, and so warranted. But I
should gather from that, and the other places (I think directly, and not
auckwardly) this conclusion. Because all things in, and unto the service of God
ought to be precisely according to Gods Will revealed in his word, therefore
whatsoever is not commanded ought not to be. And the rather (God being
jealous) because of the meaning of the fringes upon the Exo. 20. 5. Number. 15 39.
Israelites their garments, to wit, Tha^ ye may remember all the
Commaunde*ments of the Lord, and do them, and that ye seek not after your
own heart, nor, after your own eyes, after which ye go ^ whoring. To the
last I answer. That a Lot is no more a Civil affair, than is an Oath, though
it, (as is an Oath,) be used in Civil affairs. And lastly, I affirm again,
that God has determined the use of a Lot to determine controversies, so as,
without Gods special appointment, (which is not now to be expected,) it cannot
be lawfully used to any other purpose; Therefore an argument from the Negative
will hold by Mr. Gatakers rule, to disallow the use of any other Lot, as well
lusorious, as divinatory. Thus having answered Mr. Gatakers reasons inducing
him to allow Lusorious Lotts as not evil in themselves, and remooved Mr.
Gatakers answers to mine arguments, I may more confidently hold mine opinion,
which Mr. Dudley Fennor (of reverend memory) his godly treatise of Recreations
has taught me* to wit, That Tables, and Cards, as well as Dice, and all
other games consisting in cha^nce, (wherein there is use of a Lot) are utterly
vnl^wfull.

ERRATA.
Page 6. Godless re^d God less* Page 13. foam some. Page 31. ye the: Page 34.
nor not. Page 42. with what. Page 46. enoug euough. Page 63. with what. ^ag.
75. observed observed. ^ag. 82. recreare recreate ^^g. 86. beat red bettered.
^^g. 101: they these. ^ag. 103. I serves It serves. Page 114. it is. Page 127.
might^y mighty, Page 128. condemns condemned.

Pardon the rest, both literal and punctual*


