THE DIGNITY OF PREACHING: IN A Sermon upon 1. Thessal. 5.20.

By SAM. HIERON.

ROMANS 10.15. How beautiful are the feet of them which bring glad tidings of
peace?

printer's or publisher's device BY PEACE PLENTY. BY WISDOM. PEACE


AT LONDON Printed by FELIX KYNGSTON for William Welby, and are to be sold at
his shop at the sign of the Swanne in Paul's Churchyard. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL KNIGHTS, SIR FARDINANDO GORGES, Commander of his
Majesty's Fort at Plimmouth, Sir WILLIAM STRODE of Newingham, Sir WARVVICK HELE
of Wenbury, Sir CHRISTOPHER HARYS of Radford, and to the Worsh. GEORGE
CHVDLEIGH of Strachleigh Esquier.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Let it not (I beseech you) be thought presumption in me, to
present that now to your view by Pen, which not long since, I commended to
your ears by Voice. I am, among many others, thankful to God, who has put
it into your hearts, both to commiserate, and to help, the spiritual
necessity of an untaught Town, by procuring the establishment of a weekly
Lecture in it. I hope, the Lord shall remember you in goodness, Nehem. 5.15.
according to that which herein you have cared to do for that people. And I
doubt not but the souls which shall reap comfort by the ordinance of God,
there, will bless you, and God for you, acknowledging you his Instruments for
their best Good. It is fallen to my lot, by your choosing, to be one in this
Preaching-course: when my first turn came, I thought it fitting, to hansell
(as it were) the Business, by treating upon the worth and necessity of that
service, which the rest of my Brethren and my self, were there called to
discharge; that both they which wanted it, might understand their Hazard, and
they which enjoyed it might know their Happiness, if they might be so happy as
to embrace it. This thing thus labored in by me, (according to my measure)
though it was gladly entertained by the most, yet by some it was not so wholly
approved of, but thought in some particulars, to smell too much of
selfe-opinion. This has moved me (contrary to my first thoughts) to adventure
it by printing, upon the Common Censure. I have delivered nothing in it, but
that which I have learned, partly in the University, partly since by my poor
studies in the Country, and that from the chiefest for learning, Place, and
Pains, in this our English Church; whereof I rejoice to be a son, and
wherein, it shall be my glory and my crown in the day of Christ to have been
employed as a Minister. Now, I am bold, to shroud it under your patronage, in
as much as your calling me to a Turn in this Lecture, was the occasion of its
first Being, and you all likewise gave countenance to it by your Presence,
(according as you have respectively done the like to us al, and I trust will
do still) when it was delivered. If you shall please to accept it as a fruit
of my due respect to each of you in your places, it is all the recompense I
look for: In confident exspectation whereof, I bind my self under my hand,
to be

Ever at your Worships service in the Lord, SAM. HIERON.
From VVodbury. 1615.
THE DIGNITY OF PREACHING.
1 Thessalonians. 5.20. Despise not Prophesying.


THE verse next before this, I handled not far hence, now well near half a
year ago. My meaning was to have there also treated, both upon this and that
which follows, if there had been opportunity. But now, this Lecture being
well begun, (and I pray God it may so long continue) and my self being called
to bear a part therein, I thought with my self, I could not choose a more fit
text, wherewith, to set on with this work, it being so direct to procure honor
to this preaching business, which the gentlemen of these parts (for their own
good and the Towns) have seemed so desirous of, and upon which they profess
to have dependence. I delight not to be long in preambles, I am come hither to
discharge the duty of a Preacher, not of an Orator.

Thus then, it was Paul's advice in the precedent verse, The coherence of the
text.
to every one sensible in himself of the graces of Gods spirit; such as do
accompany salvation, to beware of quenching them, and so accordingly to
endeavor to keep life in them; yea and to add more heat unto them, by all
good means. Now a special means both to continue and to augment this sacred
fire, is here prescribed, and it is this, not to despise prophesying: so have
you of a short text the connection in short.

I cannot be profitable to you in discoursing upon these words, The opening of
the words.
unless I make you to know what that is which is here termed Prophesying, and
what not to despise Prophesying. In the strictest taking of the word, to
Prophecy, is to foretell some future thing, and so accordingly they were
anciently termed Prophets, to whom God revealed his special purposes touching
the after times. But now in the new Testament we find this Prophesying, not so
much to signify a revealing before hand, by divine inspirement, what touching
States and Commonwealths, and particular persons shall ensue, as an expounding
the Scriptures in such sort as might best advance the common benefit. Me
thinks I find in Paul an exact definition of Prophesying; It is a speaking to
men, to edifying, to exhortation, to comfort 1. Cor. 14.3.
. It is even the very same which we term, Preaching. I could countenance this
interpretation, by the names of men, which deserve respect, but Paul's
description is warrant enough: whatsoever any say, discovering their opinion
touching this words meaning here, they ground upon the place of Paul which I
have named. Plowing therefore with the same Heifer, we may soon attain to the
depth of that which may be thought the Riddle of this place.

Now not to despise, here is to honor: for in this case there can be no third.
He who does not despise Prophesying, does honor it, and he who does not honor
it, does despise it. So that to come as soon as I can to the principal matter
of this verse, you may please to entertain it as it is presented you in this
form: The general doctrine.
That the exercise of preaching ought to receive from us all esteem.

Would thou that the spirit of God, namely, the saving graces thereof, might
be conveyed into thee and preserved in thee? lo, God has given gifts unto
men, and has furnished them with skill of right dividing his holy and sacred
word, Pastors and Teachers for the gathering together of his Saints, and for
the comfortable discovery of the secret of the Gospel: see thou hearken unto
these, and let their labor in the word, be sweet and precious to thy soul.
This is the effect of Paul's counsel here, which now that we have found out,
to the end it may be more useful, I am now a little further to enlarge. My
proof of this doctrine shall be made good by the declaring of two things. 1.
That it is the express will and ordinance of God, that there should be in his
Church a certain calling of men, set apart to this work and service, of
making the holy Scriptures useful to the people by the act of preaching. 2.
That this act of preaching is so ordained by God, that we have no assurance in
the world to attain salvation but by it. These two points well cleared, will
take away all doubt touching this doctines truth. For if preaching be Gods
ordinance, shall it not be honored? and if we have without it no hope of being
saved, shall it not deserve esteem? If then I shall be able to double these
two two points, I shall hope to procure an easy passage for the maine doctrine
into the heart and soul of every one that hears me. So that you will not cry
when I have done, as they did against Paul, Away with such a fellow from the
earth Act. 22.22.
, but rather break out into some such note, as theirs that followed Christ,
Lord evermore give us this preaching Ioh. 6.34.
. My first task must be this, to make it to appear, that God never purposed
to leave his holy word to be no more but read, either privately in men's houses,
or publicly in our Churches; but appointed there should be men ordained, to
expound the same by voice, and apply it to the occasions and necessities of
the people for their edifying. For this is the soul of prophesying, and the
very life of preaching. It opens the Scripture, to show what it means, it
fits it to the particular uses and cases of the hearers. Now that there has
been from the beginning a Calling of men to deal betwixt God and man in the
things of God, the course of the holy story makes it plain. In the days
before the flood (besides that the first borne of every family was an officer
of this kind) we read particularly of Enoch and of Noah; the one a Prophet by
the testimony of S. Jude Jude verse. 14.
, the other a Preacher of righteousness by the witness of S. Peter 2. Pet. 2.5.
. In the following times, notwithstanding the smalnes of Gods Church for diverse
years, yet that which is said of Melchizedech, that he was a Priest of the
most high God Genesis 14.18.
, is an argument, of some such rank and condition of men as I now speak of.
As the people of God multiplied and began to put on the shape of a Body
politic, so this course became more evident and more ordinary. Then the Tribe
of Leui was deputed to a special attendance upon this function Deuteronomy. 33.10.
, and from thence there was a continual succession of men sitting in Moses
chair until our Saviors time. Christ when he came did not overthrow this
course, but establish it. He appointed Apostles first Luke 6.13.
, they being by him instructed in the things which pertain to the kingdom of
God Act. 1.3.
, and precise to ordain nothing but that which themselves had received 1. Cor.
11.23.
, as they were diligent in respect of their personal industry, so they
appointed such as themselves (in regard of the substance of their office) and
gave order (for the perpetuating of this course) to make choice of faithful
men still to be employed in this service 2. Tim. 2.2.
: and Paul says expressly that Christ ascended on high to give gifts unto men,
even that there might be such for the gathering together of the Saints to the
end of the world Ephesians. 4.11. etc.
. Now, as such a Calling was of old, and must continue till time shall be no
more, so the special intendment was to teach. See for proof in the old
Testament, Deuteronomy. 33.10. 2. Chro. 15.3. and in the new, Mat. 28.19. 2. Tim. 2.2.
Therefore (as we gather by our Saviors speech to Nicodemus) they of this
profession were called Masters in Israel Ioh. 3 10.
, and after in the same sort Teachers Ephesians. 4.11.
. The matter of their teaching was in the old Testament termed the Judgment
and Law of God Deuteronomy. 33.10.
, and in the new it is said to be whatsoever Christ has commanded Matthew. 28.20.
, and more briefly the Word 2. Tim. 4.2.
. The manner of their teaching in the old Testament, is reported to be reading
in the book of the Law, distinctly giving the sense, and causing the people to
understand the reading Neh. 8.8.
: in the new, a publishing of the secret of the Gospel Ephesians. 6.19.
; a dealing unto the people the Gospel of God 1. These. 2.8.
. Now in teaching it is manifest, that there is a further matter then the
publishing to the people, by reading from out of the book, the words and
tenor of the Scripture. Every ordinary man will quickly conceive so much out
of the nature of the word; Teach: Does a Schoolmaster teach his scholar in
reading to him his Rule, unless he do also cause him to understand it, and
show him how he may practice that which is the purpose of it? Does a man of
occupation teach his apprentise his trade, by propounding certain general
precepts, if he do not discover to him that which we term the Mystery of
his profession in particulars? Thus far we are come in the proof of this
first branch.

It is the ordinance of God, that there should be a Calling of men, to deal
betwixt him and man, and that every one called to this calling should be apt to
teach 1. Tim. 3.2.
. He that wants this knowledge is no Priest for me, said the Lord of old Hos.
4.6.
. Agreeing hereto is ye wholesome order of our English Church, in which no man
is admitted Presbyter, See the book of ordination of Bishops, Priests and
Deacons.
but he is first exhorted by the Bishop, to consider that his office is of
great excellency, and of great difficulty, such as he cannot by any other
means compass, but with Doctrine and exhortation taken out of the Scripture:
and then, after he is asked, whether he is determined to instruct the people
committed to his charge with the Scriptures; in the end (a Bible being
delivered into his hand) he is willed to take authority to preach the word of
God. And by the book of Common Prayer it is manifest that none ought to
administer the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to the people, but he who may
boldly say to the people, If there be any of you which cannot quiet his
conscience, See the Book of Common Prayer, in one of the Exhortations to be
sometimes used at the discretion of the Minister.
but requires further counsel or comfort, let him come to me, or some other
discreet and learned Minister of Gods word, and open his grief that he may
receive such ghostly counsel, advice and comfort, as his conscience may be
relieved. It is meant that he should have somewhat in him, who must openly in
the congregation make such an offer. Our learned men do in their writings
deride that of the Popish Decretals, Decret. p. 1. did. 28. c. 5. Homilias per
Circuitum anni Dominicis diebus and festiuitatibus aptas.
which require little more of a Priest then to fetch out according to the rule
of his Rubricke, the appointed service for the day. I must yet adioyne one
thing more before I quit this branch, namely, that this is also Gods ordinance,
that of this sort there should be some in every Town, and that the same
should perform this Teaching-seruice every Sabbath. The ordinance for every
town may be probably collected out of the ancient scattering of the tribe of
Leui through all the land, out of that which is said, that they ( viz. the
Leuits) taught all Israel 2. Chro. 35.3.
; and by that which is reported, that when Christ was teaching, there sat by,
Doctors of the Law, which were come out of every town of Galile and Judea,
etc. Luke 5.17.
: More directly by that, that Moses was preached in every city Act. 15.21.
; and the Apostles ordained Elders in every Church Act. 14.23. (...).
: according whereunto was Paul's Iniunction to Titus, to constitute such in each
city Tit. 1.5. (...).
. Hereupon came the term of charges in the old Testament 2. Chro. 35.3.
, and of flocks in the new 1. Pet. 5.2.
. Then the ordinance for every Sabbath is justly gatherable out of ye former
saying, Moses was preached in the Sinagogues every Sabbath day Act. 15.21.
; and it may be without violence concluded out of that commandment of the
Apostle to preach in season 2. Tim. 4 2.
: what better season, then when the people rest from all other services, and
meet together in one place for holy duties? This course was held in the days
next following the Apostles. It is the report of Justin Martyr that in his
time, Just. Martyr Apol. 2. Tertul. Ap. c. 3.
Reading and opening the word lasted an hour long every Sabbath: and
Tertullian, that there was not a meeting of the Christians, wherein their souls
were not fed with holy Sermons before they departed. It was a decree of the
Council of Mentz, under Charles the great, that there should be a course
taken, that there should not be one wanting, who should upon the Lords days
preach the word of God, Iuxta quod vulgus intelligere possit. Babing. on the
Lords Prayer.
to the understanding of the people: With this consents that opinion of
Reverend Bishop Babington, of respective memory, namely, that a Minister can
no more enter the Church upon a Sabbath day without preaching, and not be
guilty of a damnable sin, then Aaron could go into the congregation without
death, in case, that at his entrance in he did not sound his bells. And again,
Idem upon the Command.
he sins the sin of a dumb dog, who passes over the Sabbath day
without preaching, and therein makes the people guilty of the profanation of
Gods holy day. Upon this ground the Canons of our Church have ordained that
every beneficed man (allowed a Preacher) shall preach one Sermon every Sunday
in the year: and again, Can. 45.
that every Incumbent shall every Sunday before Evening Prayer examine and
instruct the youth and ignorant persons of the parish in the ten
Commandments, Can. 59.
the Articles of the belief, and the Lords Prayer. These things I note to
prevent a conceit which some may have, that I come hither to open a pack of
Puritanicall ware, and to vent some private humorous opinions; you may see that
that which I avouch touching the ordinance of God in this point, is the
judgment of our Church. And thus have I finished the first part of my proof,
that preaching is Gods ordinance. It is his will that the ability for it should
be in every Minister, and the execution of it in every Congregation, every
Sabbath.

The next part of my proof is, that without dependence upon preaching we have
no assurance of salvation. To make this manifest, I demand, whether we believe
the Scripture? that without faith it is impossible to please God Heb. 11.6.
: and whether any other means be sanctified by God to beget Faith, besides the
hearing of a Preacher? that, I am sure, is ordained to that end Romans 10.14.17.
: as for any other mainly deputed thereto (without this) I am sure there is no
in^^ evidence in all Gods book. The Lord having Saints to gather and to
translate out of the kingdom of darkness, has appointed and gifted Pastors
and Teachers to that end Ephesians. 4.11.
: so much is apparent. And whereas the promise of salvation is limited only to
so many as God shall call Act. 2.39.
, (whereupon they which shall be saved are termed a called company Jude verse.
1.
,) feign would I know whereto calling has reference but to a voice? What voice
shall we think it to be, but that which sounds in the public Ministry?
Christ's voice we will all yield it to be, and so we may well, ( for his sheep
hear his voice Ioh. 10.27.
:) and where is Christ's voice now, but in those who by their calling are in
Christ's stead 2. Cor. 5.20.
? and of whom he has said plainly, He that hears you hears me Luke 10.16.
.

As we can have no certainty of our Election, unless we give diligence to
make our calling sure 2. Pet. 1.10.
: so what warrant has any man to think he is called, but by that means
which God ordained to call the Gentiles? and what means find we that to be,
other then this? Go teach Matthew. 28.19.
, Preach the Gospel to every creature Mar. 16.15.
. What can be plainer then this? God has reconciled us unto himself by
Christ, and has given unto men a ministry of Reconciliation 2. Cor. 5.18.
. We will soon yield that by this place it is proved that there is no coming
unto God the Father, but by Christ: shall it not be as strongly proved thence,
that there is no ordinary access to Christ, but by the ministry? What moved
our Savior to pity the multitude being without a shepherd, ( a laborer in
the Lords harvest Matthew. 9.36.
) was it not because they were in apparent hazard of salvation, being so
destitute? Why is the land of Zebulim and Nepthalim said to sit in Darkness, and
in the Region of the shadow of death, until the light of preaching shone among
them Mat. 4.15.16.
, but because the inhabitants were in the high way to hell, without
ministerial instruction? Note that speech: Israel, a long time, without God,
and without a Priest to teach 2. Chro. 15.3.
. No Priest to teach, no interest in God. There is no Logic in the world to
conclude otherwise. I am feign to stint my self in that which I could say in
this argument. I hear what men say, when they be not able to elude the
evidence of these testimonies. Oh Cruelty, oh Barbarism! now you do damn
all that have no preaching. Exodus 6.
; he can make one suit of clothes, or one pair of shoes to serve a man's turn
forty years Deuteronomy. 29.5.
; he can cause the earth to yield corn without sowing Isai. 37.30.
; he can make one pitcher of oil to pay a great deal of debt 2. King. 4.2.
. But what of this? no warrant hence for me to say, Husbandry is not the
ordinary means of having Corn; sowing and mending the ordinary means to
preserve apparel; providence and industry, and endeavor to get money, the
ordinary means to pay debts. Because the Israelites were fed with Mannah, may
I lie under a hedge in the Sun looking till Mannah drop into my mouth? or
because Corn once grew without sowing, go fell away my Plough: and like
Salomons sluggard Prou. 26.15.
, sheathe up my hands into my bosom, and renounce husbandry: or because of
that of the Prophets widow, discharging debt by a pitcher of oil; purposely
run my self into debt, many pounds, resolving to leave to my Executor a
Iarue of oil to pay all; we would laugh at such inferences, and think a man
half mad, who should make such conclusions. And yet I know they are better a
great deal then this; that because we do not say they are all damned which
have no preaching, therefore Preaching is not the ordained means to seek
salvation by, I say these conclusions are better, because we have evidence of
some, sustained in outward things by such unusual means, but there is no
certainty of any particular man's salvation without ministerial Teaching. As
therefore notwithstanding Gods dealing with the Israelites, with Hezechiah,
with the widow, I may boldly say, that he who trusts to be fed from heaven,
shall be sterued; and he who supposes to pay his debts with a pitcher of oil,
shall rot in prison: So he who thinks to be saved without preaching, shall be
damned. We must look to what God bids us do, and not to what he in his
absolute power can do. Gods extraordinary working is no impeachment at all to
the truth of an ordinary Rule. Augustine reports touching himself, how that
he heard a voice saying to him, Confess. lib. 8. c. 12.
Take up and read, take up and read. And so taking the new Testament, he fell
suddenly at the first opening of the book upon that place: Not in gluttony
and drunkenness, etc. Romans 13.
. and hereby it is supposed Augustine was converted: whereupon they would
conclude a possibility of turning a man from the power of Satan unto God
without preaching. that who so shall say, that Augustine was not converted
until he heard that voice, shall deliver an untruth. For it is plain that
Augustine had before that time been in spiritual affliction, greatly exercised
with a combat betwixt the flesh and the spirit, as appears plainly in the
chapter going next before this, whereas he reports the matter of the Voice: And
when this Voice came, he was on his face weeping and at prayer, earnestly
confessing his sins, and desiring to be delivered from them. This Voice is
rather to be reputed a confirmation and perfiting of his conversion, then the
proper instrument of working it. If we would know whereby in deed he was
converted, let himself be heard, whose report this is, Confess. lib. 5. cap.
13.14.
That being a Rhetorician, he came to the city wherein Ambrose was Bishop,
desiring there to profess Rhetoric: while he was there he would needs go
hear Ambrose preach, Non vt doctorem very.
Not as a Teacher of the Truth, (so are his own words) for he thought there
was no such to be found among the professors of the Christian faith) but
because he had unto him showed kindness. Now mark what he speaks,
directing his speech to God: Ad eum per te ducebar nescius, vt ad te per eum
sciens ducerer. Omni die Dominico. Sensim and nescius.
To him I was by thee led unawares, that by him I might through knowledge be
led to thee: and so he goes on to show how by hearing him, whom (as he
reports other-where) he heard preaching every Lords day, he was brought by
little and little ere he was aware, nearer and nearer to the embracing of the
truth. An excellent example for the confirmation of this point, that preaching
is ye means of a man's conversion. And yet I add, that in case it were true,
that the reading of that place had been the direct means of his Turning, yet
it were nothing to the prejudice of that which I now teach, for I would say
(and well I might) it was extraordinary, and such whereof we can make no Rule:
and so indeed whenever any man is brought to have saving grace and true faith
otherwise then by preaching, it is a course out of course, such wherein God
will show his power and mercy, and the freedom of his proceedings; not such
whereupon he will have us simply and generally to rely. I return then to my
point, which is this: We have no warrant to expect salvation any other way,
then by dependence upon preaching; neither may we (to speak of an ordinary
course) persuade our selves we are in the way of salvation, unless we be
sensible of our being set into it by this means. God does diverse things (as it
it were) by way of preparing me^ to grace: such are afflictions, crosses,
inward affrightments; but when all is done, and spoken that can be, to this we
must come at last, that the maine work (ordinarily) either by preaching it is
wrought, or not at all. What an absurd thing were it to acknowledge preaching
to be Gods ordinance, and yet to deny it to be simply necessary to salvation,
and to mince it over with (I know not what) fair terms, that it is good if it
may be had, and profitable for those who have no other helps, and the like?
Why? what make we of Gods ordinances? do we account them only matters of
conueniencie, and not of necessity? For my part I know no more scripture for
faith without preaching, then for salvation without faith; I am sure the same
spirit of God which has said, Believe that thou may be saved, has also
said, Hear that thou may believe: you would al cry out upon me (and you
well might) if I should say, a man may be saved without praying; and yet men
are ready to account it half an heresy, to avouch that a man cannot be saved
without preaching: yet S. Paul linkes these together upon one string,
Salvation, Prayer, Believing, Hearing, Preaching, Sending Romans 10.13.14.
. Men cannot be saved without praying to him that can save: They cannot pray to
him without believing on him; they cannot believe on him without Preaching;
they cannot preach without Sending: and whom did God ever send, who was not
able to divide the word for the peoples edifying?

The things which God has joined together let not man separate Matthew. 19.6.
: we will grant the beginning, (no salvation without prayer, no praying without
faith) but we will distinguish upon the latter, (no believing but by waiting on
a Preacher which is sent). Thus (I hope) albeit I have not said so much as
might be said in such an ample subject, yet I have said enough to confirm the
two things which I undertook: namely, first, that preaching (understanding
thereby, as before, a speaking to men to exhortation, edifying and comfort) is
Gods ordinance: Secondly, that he has not revealed or warranted unto us any
other way of being saved; other helps with this: all fruitless and in vain
with the neglect of this. These two things being true, shall not the maine
doctrine be true, that the preaching of the word by men deputed of God to that
service, does deserve esteem? Indeed as the whole worship of God deserves
honor, so this service especially, as being the chief of all the rest. It is
more excellent then the administration of the Sacraments: Paul was sent to
preach, not to baptize 1. Cor. 1.17.
, that is, to preach was his maine errand; for baptize some he did, which he
might not have done if he had not bin sent. It is more noble then governing and
the administration of discipline, Apol page 3. s. 300.
because (as says the Reverend Bilson) God gathers his Church by the mouths
of Preachers, not by the summons of Consistories: and Paul requiring honor to
be showed to Elders ruling well, wills it to be showed especially to those
that labor in the word and doctrine 1. Tim. 5.17.
, as the persons employed in the better business. It excels reading as much
as the Apothecaries brusing and breaking the perfume does the presenting it in
lump; the householders cutting the bread to the family, the setting it down in
the whole loaf; the stirring up of the fire, and the blowing it with the
bellows, the letting it lie covered in the ashes: all which are the
similitudes to this end used by Reverend B. Babington in his exposition of that
petition of the Lords Prayer (Thy kingdom come). It is more of worth then
prayer: for what but preaching shall direct to pray? and whether in reason
shall be thought more excellent, our speaking to God, (which is prayer) or Gods
speaking to us (which is preaching?) and look 1. Cor. 14. and see whether Paul
does not prefer prophesying before all other spiritual gifts, and makes it
to be the chief, even where he also speaks touching prayer. If then the
worship of God is worthy of respect, the exercise of preaching most of all, as
being indeed the best of all. It is worthily rejected as a popish barbarism by
learned Morton, Apol. p. 1. lib. 2. cap. 21.
that opinion, that the duties of the Sabbath serve not so much to edify the
people, as to serve the Lord: which the Papists maintain for the upholding of
that absurd proposition, that the hearing of a Mass is to be preferred before
the hearing of the word. So that by the best of judgment, the preaching of the
word is reputed the mainest part of Gods public worship. I have now done with
the proving of the doctrine. Every way I hope it is clear: Honor and esteem
is the due of preaching.

There is much matter by way of use to be derived hence: A double use. 1. For
Ministers.
First, this concerns us that are Ministers: secondly, this concerns all good
Christians generally. First for us Ministers, this doctrine binds us to
maintain by all good means the honor of preaching, and to beware how we do
bring this reverend and sacred ordinance of God into contempt; of all men, it
stands us upon to endeavor that that may be duly esteemed, which God commands
not to be despised: It is the life and glory of our profession: it were a
strange thing if we should not care to bring it into disgrace: I say it is the
glory of our profession: for when it may be said of a man, he is a Minister,
but no Preacher, it is like that which is said of Naaman 2. King. 5.1.
, he was a great man, and honorable in the sight of his Lord, he was also a
mighty man and valiant, but a Leper. This is a (But) which darkneth all the
rest: So that thereon I infer, how much it behoues us, to labor to uphold
the reputation of preaching; because to be termed a Preacher, is the fairest
flower in our garland. Me thinks I should not say much of this: and therefore
I will rather apply my self, Three things by which a Minister shall promote
the honor of Preaching. 1.
to show how we may save this course from contempt, then to prove that we are
in equity tied thereunto. Thus then, there are three things by which a
Minister shall advance the honor and esteem of prophesying. 1. Diligence in
preaching: It is that which Paul calls in one place laboring 1. Tim. 5.17,
; in another, a being instant 2 Timothy 4.2
; in a third, a preaching the Gospel with much striving 1. These. 2 2.
; It is the Lords work 1 Cor. 16.10.
, and cursed be he that does it negligently Iere. 48.10.
. It may be thought in the reason of flesh and blood, that this is no means to
make preaching honorable, but to auile it rather; kingdom of God is preached,
the more they will press unto it Luke 16.16.
. Look into experience, and see whether the seldomnesse of this service does
not confirm the people in their opinion, of the no great necessity of it;
which is the maine ground of contempt? Suppose a parish have an Incumbent
reputed learned, but yet remiss in preaching, shall not his slacknes cause the
people to conclude, yt preaching is not so simply necessary as it is thought?
will they not say, Our Minister is learned and of judgment, and knows what is
what; surely if preaching were so useful, he would be more frequent in it
then he is? And what has bred those prejudicial paradoxes to preaching, as
that reading is preaching, etc. but the indisposition of men of gifts to be
diligent in preaching? The unwillingness and backwardnes of men to spend
themselves this way, has caused (for the hiding of their shame) a straining of
wits, and a wresting of Scripture, to prove the competencie to salvation of a
reading Ministry: such spurious propositions had never seen the light, if
diligence in this duty had universally been made conscience of. Therefore we
must yield that, that which old Latimer (a man who sacrificed his life in Gods
cause) once blamed under the witty term of strawbery-preaching, is a special
means to lay the honor of preaching in the dust. It brings a rust, yea and a
curse upon our gifts, and begets a kind of habit of idleness, and causes the
people to respect that little which we perform but little: when I speak of
diligence, I do not mean that a man should be ever and anon in the pulpit:
for there must be a time of gathering, as well as of dispersing; and there is a
kind of mercenarie diligence in some, which is meet to be restrained: but
this is diligence; a man is ready to take all occasions to do good;
especially binds himself constantly upon Gods day to be busied in Gods word.
Happy is that servant whom his master when he comes shall find so doing.

2. The manner of handling the word of God in preaching so as it is fit. If any
man speak, The second way of honoring preaching by Preachers.
let him speak as the words of God 1. Pet. 4.11.
: let him remember what he has in hand, and so deal accordingly. I remember
how often Paul stands upon his manner of preaching 2. Cor. 2.17.4.2. These. 23.
: It is Hoseas phrase, the great or honorable things of the law of God Hos.
8.12.
; yet may these be so used, as that they may seem base to those that hear
them. Woe be to that good meat that must pass the fingers of a slouen, before
it comes to the mouth of the eater. I love not to be forward to tax any man's
preaching, and therefore I will so speak as showing rather what may be, then
what is. There may be a preiudicing and an endangering the honor of preaching
in handling it, two ways: One is, too much exactnes: as when men strive to
have every word in print, and to stand in equipage; one neither higher nor
lower, neither further forth, nor more bacward then another; and do affect
terms more then matter: embellishing their Sermons with the gleanings of all
manner of authors, sacred, profane, any thing which may be thought to smell
of learning, and may raise an opinion of Eloquence, profoundnes, variety of
reading in the hearers. Demosthenes: Tully terms him Leuiculus Demosthenes.
Tus. Qu. Hic est ille Demosthenes.
he said it pleased him secretly when as he went in the streets, he should
hear the women that carried water, say, There goes eloquent Demosthenes. Thus
a man may be rewarded with some such breath for this windy kind of preaching:
but when it comes to the touch, this shall be found to dishonor Gods
ordinance in true judgment. For what is that which indeed makes preaching
honorable in the hearts of Gods people, but their understanding it, so as that
they may feel the sweetness of it, and receive comfort by it? That therefore
which hinders understanding must needs expose this course to a kind of
disgrace: what contentment shall a man take in it, when he conceiues but little
what it means? It comes in our ordinary congregatio^s, to as little purpose
(such a kind of teaching) as that which is said in the Proverb, Hic mulget
hircum, ille supponit cribrum: (...)?
Where one does milk a goat, another holds under a sieue. It may be the
matter is good and excellent, but the hearer holds no more then a sieue:
because nothing to any great purpose is understood. It is the pithie plainnes,
which is the beauty of preaching. A text well opened, handsomely divided,
instructions familiarly raised, substantially proved by the Scripture,
powerfully pressed upon the hid man of the heart, faithfully applied to the
soul and conscience of the hearer. This is the course which makes manifest the
secret of his heart, and brings him to fall down on his face and worship God,
and to say that God is in the Preacher indeed 1. Cor. 14.25. Ferrum potest quod
aurum non potest.
. It is truly said that in some cases Iron can do that which gold cannot: and
so that which is by some in their nicenes and curiosity accounted but a blunt
kind of teaching, shall yet do that which the more glorious, and glistring
and gaudie course could not effect. The kingdom of God is not in word, but in
power 1. Cor. 4.20.
. I have heard of a thing that fell out once at the Council of Nice, where a
Christian of no great learning in esteem, Ruffin. hist. lib. 2. cap. 3.
converted a learned man, whom all the learned Bishops with all their skill and
eloquence could not persuade: the party won, brake out into these words: Oh
you learned men, as long as the matter went by words, against words I opposed
words; and that which was spoken I overthrew by the art of speaking: but when
in stead of words power came out of the mouth of the speaker; Non poterunt
verba resistere veritati ( or, virtuti) nec homo aduersari potuit Deo.
words could not withstand truth, nor man stand out against God. Thus that
plain kind of teaching, in which the evidence of the spirit is to be seen,
works that which the more curious and refined eloquence could not do.

A second way, by which in handling the word, preaching may be made
contemptible, is in another extreme: namely, when the manner of dealing with
the word is over slight, too loose, and superficial; a man vents raw, sudden,
undigested meditations, such as have no manner of coherence, either with the
text, or with themselves: the text is rather torn, then divided, rather
tossed, then handled; rather named (because it is the fashion to have a text)
then followed so, as that the hearer may see the course, by which all is drawn
from the text. Here a man makes a shift to rub out an hour, and to have
somewhat still to say; he is much like the beggar, of whom we say, he is never
out of his way, though he be never in his way: so in this case, a man is never
out of matter, though he speaks never to the matter. This makes preaching
ridiculous, and lays it open (as it falls from some mouths) unto a just
scorn. The common sort happily espy not the weakness by and by, thinking all
well so long as one goes on; but the more advised holding it up, (as it were
against the light) see the rawnesse and raggednes and independance of that
which is delivered. It is an honor to a Sermon, when (as the saying is) it
shall smell of the candle, and testify for it self, that there was aforehand
care to deal substantially, and to approve our selves to every hearers
conscience in the sight of God.

The third thing to be taken heed to, The third way for Ministers to honor
Preaching by.
that we may preserve the honor of preaching, is our manner of life. An evil
life in Preachers cannot but cause preaching to be vile: I call it an evil
life, not when a man fails in some things; For in many things we fail all
Iam. 3.2.
: but when a man makes it to appear by his course, that he makes no
conscience of framing his life according to his own teaching: is strait in the
pulpit, and in the street dissolute. There is a great readiness in many to
pick quarrels with the lives of the best Teachers, and no doubt many things
are slanderously reported touching such. Cruel witnesses arise up, and ask
things they know not Psalm. 35.11.
: but when men taking the ordinance of God into their mouths, shall yet walk
like men hating to be reformed, and run into the same excess with others,
and be justly taxable with open and scandalous evils; what can more dishonor
preaching? will it not cause it to be reputed a mere toy? A man shall be seen
to persuade to that, which himself ordinarily neglects; and to cry out
against that, of which himself does make a common practice. Let no man despise
thee, said Paul to Timothy: how shall that be? Be unto them that believe an
example 1. Tim. 4.12.
. I have here a large field before me, but I would be loath to prevent my self
in that I have to say: and therefore I here shut up this use, touching us of
the Ministry. Preaching deserves esteem, take we heed how we expose it to
contempt. Our diligence in dispensing the word; our reverend and well advised
handling the word; our endeavoring in the eyes of the people to frame our lives
according to the word, shall uphold the credit of this worthy service: Men
(though we do this) some will despise notwithstanding, and speak
contemptuously both of us and of our ministry: yet in doing it, they shall be
as the Heretic, of whom Paul, who is condemned by himself Tit. 3.11.
.

The second use for all Christians in general.
I am now come to the second use, which concerns all Christians more in
general: All that profess to expect salvation by Jesus Christ, are bound to
this duty, to save preaching (as much as may be) from despising. This may be
done (that I may not say all which might be said, Two things by which ordinary
Christians may save preaching from contempt
but may insist only upon the chiefest) by two things especially. 1. By a
constant and an unwearied dependence upon preaching, seeking by all means
possible to enjoy it. Have we not reason to depend on it, when,n where it
wants the people perish Prou. 29.18.
? And shall we not honor it exceedingly, when our feet shall even wear out
the threshold of that house, where it is faithfully dispensed? and when we
shall seek knowledge at the lips of the Priests with such earnestnes, as if
we were guided by that spirit which was in those primitive Conuerts, that
cried out to Peter and the rest, Men and brethren what shall we do Act. 2.37.
? It will appear that we esteem Gods ordinance, when we shall for the sake
of it neglect our profit, hazard our outward peace, seem careless of our
credit, strain our purses, and be like the Merchant in the Gospel, that
part's with all that he has for one special Pearl Matthew. 13.46.
. Great contempt is cast upon prophesying at this day, by default herein; I
will not so much speak of those who cast no manner of respect unto it, but
openly and ordinarily, and in a sort professedly do auile it; but of those
which make some show to esteem it. That is most pitiful when such as pretend
a kind of honor, shall yet by consequent be found despisers. First some would
(as they make show) wait on this means, but they will make their own
conditions: provided that it comes home to them; that they may have it without
trouble: Oh how glad would they be, had they a Preacher in their Churches; they
would think it to be none of the smallest portions of their happiness? But
when it comes to the point of seeking out and of traveling to the Prophet with
the Shunamite 2. King. 4.
; or else of cutting off some of their superfluities, and of stinting
themselves in other things, that they may draw to them some able Minister of
the new Testament; then they begin to be as backward and sorrowful as the rich
man in the Gospel, who as forward as he seemed at first, yet began to flinch,
when he heard the charge of selling; and so they, after a large commendation
of preaching, and a fair tale of their esteeming it, yet while they are afraid
of trouble, and reproach, and labor, and are loath to be at any charges, they
still content themselves with an unable ministry. Here is a fair honor done
to preaching. For shame, if our hearts be to it, (as woe be to us if they be
not) let us engage our selves for it. Remember what has been both said and
proved, there is no other ordinary way of salvation: and will thou not
strain thy body, thy purse, thy credit; adventure thy outward peace; do any
thing that thou may be saved? It is no honoring of the ordinance of God, if
thou can any way satisfy and content thy self without it. I shall be
thought (perhaps to persuade strange things, and (as may be thought) not
justifiable. But do me right, I pray you, in indifference, considering what I
say: Behold Luke 6.17. and mark what you find there: A great multitude of
people out of all Judea, and Jerusalem, and from the sea coasts of Tire and
Sidon which came to hear him. Did these say, If this good man would come to
us, how glad should we be? but they went out to him, they left their blind
guides and followed this Seer where he was, I demand; Is not this written for
our learning? Can we say, it was not well that they did? were they not worthy
of praise for so doing? Then say I with the Apostle, Whatsoever things are
honest and of good report, those things do Phil. 4 8.
. And if this satisfy not, and you suspect my judgment, I pray look into the
book you have in your parishes, the Works of Bishop Jewel, in his Sermons
upon this chapter, and upon the 12. and 13. verses: what shall we say of them
that labor not, that do neither teach, nor exhort, nor reprove, nor correct;
that have no care to do their message; and no regard to the people, what may I
say of such? God himself says, They are dumb dogs that cannot bark, they
lie and sleep, and delight in sleeping, they all look to their own way, and
their own advantage, and every one for his own purpose Isai. 56.10.11.
Christ calls them Thieves and Robbers. They are unsavory salt, profitable
for nothing, but to be cast forth and ^^oden under feet of men. Woe is unto me
(says Paul) if I preach not the Gospel 1. Cor. 9.16.
. Woe to the servant that wrappeth his tallent in a napkin, and increases not
his Masters gain. God grant such idle and slothful Ministers grace to know
their office, and to do it: If not, God give the people grace to know them,
and to shun them, and to fly from them. (So far he:) Which words if they
do not teach, not to be satisfied without preaching, and to shun those which
are insufficient, and negligent in that duty, for my part I must acknowledge I
do not understand English. Let this then be our honor given to preaching,
even to strive that we may enjoy it, and to put our selves to hard conditions,
rather then to want it. And do you of this town particularly take notice of
it; see how God has moved the hearts of the Worshipful of these parts, to
pity your necessity; and to procure a course of preaching with you, not so
much that you might rest content with this, or say as Micah the Ephramite, when
he had got a Leuite into his house, Now I know that the Lord will do me good,
seeing I have a Leuit to my Priest Judge. 17.13.
; so now, We are safe, we have a Lecture in our town. No, if you shall not set
together amongst your selves, to have it amongst you on the Sabbath day, the
day principally deputed to this service, for my part I shall think our pains
here (in respect of you) to be unprofitable.

2, There is another kind of dependence, which is also prejudicial to the
honor of preaching, and that is that which is but by fits and starts; somewhat
eger happily at the beginning, but slaking by degrees, till it come to nothing:
you will disgrace it here much, if filling the Church now at the first, you
shall hereafter, like men whose stomachs are full, begin to grow weary and
full of that which you now seem to affect. Give us not occasion to say
hereafter as Christ of John; He was a burning and a shining light, and you were
willing for a season to rejoice in this light Ioh. 5.35.
. It is a thing to be suspected: experience shows, that (as the saying is)
every thing is pretty when it is young; so such exercises as these, are flocked
unto at the first, but after, men by little and little fall off: some will
hear only this man, some only that man; some only now and then, when they
have occasion to come to town; some never a whit: You will bring a disgrace
upon our pains here, if you shall cause it to be thought that we have cloyed
your stomachs, and taken away the edge of your appetites. Have not the faith
of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory with respect of persons Iam. 2.1.
: make much of, and honor any man's endeavors that does his duty upon his
conscience. This shall be your first way of honoring preaching; your manner of
dependence upon it let it be earnest, painful, constant; let it appear that
you will not hope to be saved, but by the means that God has sanctified.

The second way of honoring preaching by common Christians.
The second way by which you shall honor preaching, is, yielding obedience to
that which is taught, and conformity in life to our preaching. It is not the
bare hearer, but the doer withal that shall be blessed Iam. 1.25.
. There is no fouller stain to preaching, then when they which say they love
it, and desire it, and esteem and follow after it, and travail to enjoy it,
shall yet make no conscience of obedience to it: How does this open the mouths
of gain-saiers, and embolden them to their imputations upon preaching, when
they shall have some color to cry out, there be none worse, more proud,
wanton, contentions, covetous, oppressing, fraudulent, then the greatest
hearers? when you walk not according to the rules you are taught, you make
preaching and professing to be reputed the nurserie of ungodliness, and the
covert for all villainy. And therefore, you that are of the first sort,
Gentlemen and Justices, who have labored to draw Preachers hither, and who now
give countenance to us by your presence, honor us also (I pray you) with your
holy practice: make it to appear by your zealous execution of Justice, when
you sit here upon the business of the Country, by your suppressing of gross
disorders, and that world of Alehouses, that is, and which is the very neast of
all wickedness; and by the reformation of your followers and families; and
principally by the Christian carriage of your selves; and by the abatement of
your excesses, vain pleasures, Epicurismes, swearings, and such like, that you
have not drawn preaching hither for a form, or out of a glory; but that in
sincerity of heart, you have sought your own furtherance in the ways of
piety. Let it not be said, (as it will be, if you prevent it not) Behold, here
be such and such, every week at Sermon, and yet how do they live rather as
Atheists, and enemies to Religion, then as godly Christians? And you of the
town, who seem to be glad of this erected course, resolve with your selves
that you will set on with a general reformation. Let us see some fruit by our
labors with you: give no cause to have it thought, you rejoice in this for
outward respects; as to increase, your Market; and to draw company to your
town, or to vent your commodities; or that you may glory; Oh we have a
Lecture too, as well as such a town, or as such: but as other adjoining towns
shall be beholding to you, for borrowing from your Church the light of
Doctrine; so let them receive from you the light of good example. And you all,
whether Gentlemen or Yeomen, or whatsoever else, I beseech you in the fear of
God, receive not this grace of God in vain; make some use of your coming;
learn to practice that, by which your families through you may be bettered;
your neighbors provoked, especially your own souls comforted in the day of
Christ. Let not the Lecture-day (now when the Sermon is ended) be made a day of
voluptuousnes, of quaffing, swaggering, disorder; go not from the Church to
eat out, and eat up one another in the Market, by fraud and cruelty: Run
not every man to his raze, as a horse to the battle, but let us have comfort
to spend our spirits among you, when we shall behold your good conversation in
Christ, that we all both Preachers and hearers may rejoice together at the
last day, that we have not run in vain. If you fail in this, it is not your
coming to hear us, your commending us, your respective saluting us, your
providing to entertain us, that can honor our ministry: we shall
(notwithstanding all this complement) hang down our heads with shame and say;
You have requited our labor with intolerable contempt.

FINIS.
Wodbury, first of August. 1615.


