THE ABRIDGEMENT of the Gospel: Or THE ORDER AND COURSE o^ ^ans salvation, as
it is set forth by ZACHARY the father of JOHN BAPTIST, Luke 1.67. etc. and
further opened in ten Sermons thereupon:

By SAM. HIERON.

1. TIM. 3.16. Without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness.

LONDON Printed by M. Bradwood for Samuel Macham, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Bull-head. ANNO 1609.

TO THE READER.
I Continue still (Christian Reader) to impart unto thee some of my
Sermon-notes: not so much to supply thy want (God having so abundantly blessed
this age with better helps) as to manifest my desire of doing my utmost good in
Gods Church. Thou have here such Observations as it pleased God to enable me to
deliver (in the place where I live) upon the song of Zachary. In which (in my
poor understanding) the order and course of man's salvation is as effectually
set forth, as in any other part of holy Writ. The fountain of it is Gods
mercy: the ground, Christ Jesus: the substance of the thing it self,
Redemption from the bondage of spiritual enemies: it was anciently promised to
the Fathers, and reported by the Prophets in all ages: Knowledge of it is now
given unto us by the Ministry of man: and the end is, to lead us by the
cheerful practice of Holiness and Righteousness, to the comfortable
fruition of eternal Peace. Some other points (of good use) are occasionally
handled in these Lectures, but these be the principal. The ordinary use of
this Scripture in the Church, has moved me (besides the particular excellency
thereof, it being indeed the very Abridgement of the Gospel) to cull it out
from among my other Readings upon Luke, and to commend it to thy view. So
praying God to bless my labor to thy use, I commend thee heartily to his
Grace. Modbury in Deuon.

Thine in the Lord, SAM. HIERON.

THE ABRIDGEMENT of the Gospel. THE FIRST SERMON.
LVKE 1.67. etc. Then his father Zacharias was filled with the Holy Ghost, and
prophesied, saying: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, etc.


IN this passage of speech, The general division of the whole place.
in which the Hymn of Zachary is reported; two things are to be considered.
1. The Preface to it. 2. The Hymn it self. In the Preface again, there are
two points observed. 1. The special enabling of Zachary to this business. 2.
The general nature of the thing performed. The enabling of Zachary, is in
these words, He was filled with the Holy Ghost.

By (the Holy Ghost) we must not here understand the very Essence and Deity of
the third person in Trinity, but the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost,
according as the word is often so taken in the Scripture Ioh. 3.34. Ioh. 7 39.
Romans 8.9.
. By being filled with the Holy Ghost, we must not imagine, that Zachary till
this time was destitute of the graces of the spirit, but this is the meaning,
that at this time, and upon this occasion, a more large and plentiful measure
of the graces of Gods spirit appeared in him. In this we may observe, that
Zachary afflicted formerly with the dumbness of many months, has not only
the liberty of his speech restored, but being endowed with a fuller portion of
Gods graces, his tongue is made the instrument of the Holy Ghost, in uttering a
matter of extraordinary consequence. From whence we may collect this
doctrine: The 1. Doctrine.
That the comforts which GOD heapeth upon his afflicted servants do come in
with a kind of advantage; there is not only a remoouing of the affliction,
but a bestowing withal of some special kindness. Zachary is not only now
not dumb, but (which is more) is enabled by an extraordinary measure of
spiritual gifts, even in an admirable manner, to set forth the whole mystery
of the redemption of mankind. We meet with like examples in holy writ. Great
was the affliction of Joseph. He was sold for a slave, they held his feet in
the stocks, and he was laid in yrons Psalm. 105.17.18.
. But when the Lord had thoroughly tried him, as silver is tried, in the furnace
of a long and grievous affliction, he was not barely enlarged, but withal
advanced to a place of great respect. The king made him Lord of his house, etc.
verse. 21.
. Moses his trial is at large set down in the story Ex. 2.14. etc.
, his fear, his flight, and his long service in Midian; but when Gods
appointed time came, he not only restored him to the fellowship of his own
countrymen, but made him the guide and captain of his people, so that he
never wrought greater things by the hand of any mere man, than he did by the
hand of Moses. Notorious is the History of Job, how he was tormented in
person, and wasted in estate: but when the Lord turned his captivity, he gave
him twice so much as he had before Job 42.10.
, and blessed his last days more than the first verse. 12.
. To this agrees that of David, who says, that the Lord did not only bring
him out of the horrible pit, but also set his feet upon a rock, and ordered
his goings Psalm ^0.2.
. And that of the afflicted people is of like nature; After two days (say
they) he will revive us: that is not all, but, in the third day he will raise
us up, and we shall live in his sight Hos. 6.2.
. He would not only pull back his hand and forbear to smite (which yet had
been much) but he would come as a skillful and tender hearted Surgeon, to
lap up their sores, to power oil into their wounds; to give them beauty for
ashes, the garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness Isa. 61.3.
: neither would he alone in some little measure revive and quicken them, but he
would give that large measure of strength that they should live in his sight.
They which went weeping, do not only return with joy, but they do over and
above bring their sheaues with them Psalm. 126.^
.

The reason of the Lords so dealing proceeds, first, from his mercy: He
knows whereof we be made (says David) he remembers that we are but dust
Psalm. 103.14.
: therefore lest his afflicted servants should be swallowed up with
heaviness, and even overcome with discouragement, he does not only withdraw
his hand of chastisement, but, he adds some special mercy, to the end that
they may be comfortablie assured, that whatsoever was done, was done to prepare
them for a greater kindness. Secondly, it proceeds from his Wisdom: he
knows that none do value his kindnesses more, or are fitter to employ them
to their own good and the good of others, than those that have been most
humbled by afflictions: according as no ground is so fit to receive seed, even
with a full hand, as that which has been most torn with the plough, and
beaten smallest with the labor of the husbandman: For this cause God is wont
to make ready his servants for great graces by great crosses: Affliction is
his school in which he traineth them up for the best purposes.

This doctrine is full of comfort to all, The Use.
who being under the cross in what kind soever, do look up to the hand
which smites, and seek to profit by tribulation. The Lords yoke is unpleasing
to flesh and blood, and his chastisements like bitter pills which cannot go
down without much annoyance to the stomach; but if thou will have true solid
comfort, look not so much upon the present grieuance, as upon the quiet fruit
of Righteousness Hebr. 12.11.
which will surely follow: and take it for a rule which never fails, that the
cross (if care be had to profit thereby) never departs but it leaves a
blessing behind: God gives some special favor or other in lieu of the former
burden. Zachary, who had been dumb ten months, not only speaks, but being
furnished with a large portion of new grace, he speaks more heavenly than
before. Learn thus to be humbled with Zachary, and so, thus thou shall be
comforted.

The 2. Doctrine.
Secondly, from hence we are taught another doctrine; That those whom God
intends to employ in any special service, he furnishes with gifts suitable
to the nature of the business, in which he will employ them. Zachary is
appointed to prophecy: the business is weighty, therefore he is filled with
the holy Ghost, that he may be able to perform it. This may be made plain by
many particulars: The Lord meant to send Moses upon a service of great
consequence. I will send thee to Pharaoh etc Exodus 3.10.
: Moses, being guilty of his own infirmity, was afraid to undergo it: Oh my
Lord I am not eloquent etc Exodus 4.10.
: The Lord supplied his want: Go now, and I will be with thy mouth, etc verse.
12.
. Isaiah being in a vision in the presence of God, and considering the nature
of the service to which he was called; cried out, Woe is me, for I am undone,
etc Isay 6.5.
. After this one of the Seraphims touched his mouth with a coal from the
Altar, and the Prophet was thereupon so sensible of the supply of grace, that
he was as ready to go as the Lord was to imploie him: Here am I, send me
verse. 8.
. The same is to beseene in Jeremy: God calling him, he began to complain of
his insufficiency; O Lord, behold I can not speak, for I am a child Ier 1.6.
. Well, the Lord took away his fear, by bestowing a competencie of gifts;
Behold I have put my words in thy mouth verse. 9.
. Touching Ezechiel; as there is mention made of Gods sending him Eze. 1.3. etc.
, so there is also of Gods furnishing him Eze. 2.2. and 3.1.
. Christ told his Disciples, that he would make them Fishers of men Matthew. 4.19.
, that is, that he would train them up to be competently fit for the service
to which he ordained them: For this cause, before he chose the^ he spent the
whole night in prayer to God Luke 6.12.
, he breathed on them the Holy Ghost Ioh. 20.22.
. He willed them after his ascension, to tarry at Jerusalem, until they were
endued. with power from on hie Luke 24.49.
. Bezaleel and Aholiab, insomuch as they were to work in the Tabernacle, were
filled with an excellent spirit Exo. 35.31.
: and when God chose Saul to the kingdom he gave him another heart 1. Sam.
10.9.
. If God should not thus deal, it were contrary to those principles of holy
wisdom which himself has left upon record in his Word. As vinegar is to the
Teeth, and smoke to the Eyes, so is the slothful to them that send him Pro.
10.26.
. He that sends a message by the hand of a fool, is as he that cuteth off
the feet Pro. 26.6.
. No wise man will send a fool on an errand of moment: Who will set a fresh
soldier over an army, or entrust a dumb man with an embassage? It were an
odious imputation to the wisest God, to think him less careful in his
business, than men are in their affairs. Besides, great is the corruption of
our nature, our Heart wicked above all things Ier. 17.9.
, the imaginations of it are only evil Genesis 6.5.
. Now, as men do not gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles Matt.
7.16.
, so the heart of man, which is in itself, even a very mint of vanity, and a
forge of profane, godless and irreligious thoughts, cannot bring forth any
good matter without special enabling.

This is a good admonition to all those which intend to enter into any service
of weight, The Use.
either in the Church or commonwealth. It is a dangerous thing to thrust ones
self into the Lords business. Heavy will that saying be, when God shall say
of any; I have not sent them, yet they ran Ier. 2, 21.
: And woe to him who shall be challenged with that; Friend, how came thou in
hither Matt. 22.12.
? Now he that would know. whether God has sent him, must not stay for
revelations or some special informations from heaven, but he must search his
own heart, to see with what graces he furnished: If between the calling he
intends, and his sufficiency, there be any proportion, there is an evidence of
sending; where there is not, he that undertakes it, is but an intruder, and his
reckening will be terrible.

Now follows to consider the general nature of the business to which
Zachary was enabled: It is said, he Prophesied. To Prophecy, in Scripture
signifies two things: 1. To foretell things to come, and so the word
ordinarily signifies in the old Testament. 2. Exactly and soundly to interpret
the Scripture, to which sense the word is often applied in the new Testament 1.
Cor. 14.1. etc. 1 Thessalonians. 5.20.
. Zachary his Prophesying may not unfitly be referred to both: For he partly
foretold things to come, as of John Baptist, and partly also he did
excellently interpret things anciently written of the Messiah. Once, this we
see, that the Holy Ghost in him was not idle, but did discover it self in
some holy and religious employment: so that hence this is gathered; The 3.
Doctrine.
That the graces of Gods spirit wheresoever they be, are not idle, but are
always to be seen in the doing of some spiritual good, according to their
places and callings who are endued therewith. Zachary is filled with the Holy
Ghost, and straightway he prophecieth: the more graces he had received in
himself, the more good proceeds from him to others. He that believes on me,
(says our Savior) out of his belly shall flow rivers of life Ioh. 7.38.
. The graces received shall issue out to the refreshing of others. Paul says,
that it pleased God to reveal his Son to him, that he might preach him among
the Gentiles Gal. 1.16.
, and that God did comfort him in all his tribulation, that he might be able to
comfort others 2. Cor. 1.4.
. It is an express commandment: Every man as he has received; 6
so let him minister unto another, as a good disposer of the manifold grace of
God 1. Pet. 4.10.
. Every one is a Steward, not to engrosse Gods graces to himself, but to
employ them to a common benefit. The word (says the Prophet) was in my heart
as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I could not stay Ier 20.9.
: and, we cannot but speak, say the Apostles Act. 4.20.
. The gifts and graces of Gods spirit are like the ointment, wherewith Marie
anointed Jesus feet; the text says, the house was filled with the savor of
it Job. 12 3.
. It is truly said, that Good is a spreader of it self Bonumest sui diffusium.
: It is like a candle in a workmans shop in a winters evening, which both
gives light to the workman, and to the passers by also.

This first may be an advertisement to those, The 1. Use.
which being called to the service of the Church, are negligent in their
places: some such would be accounted learned and good scholars. But it cannot
be so: Where the graces of God are, they are never idle: Where there is
idleness in action, there is emptiness in affection. It may be that in such a
loiterer, as the Prophet speaks of, who lies and sleeps, and delights in
sleeping Isa. 56.10.
, there may be a great deal of confused knowledge, but certainly there is no
sanctified learning: There is no Holy Ghost in thy heart, if (thy calling
requiring it) there be no Prophecy in thy mouth; and what use is there of a
head full of learning, with a mouthfull of nothing? It is truly said that the
Priests lips should preserve knowledge Mal. 2.7.
: But why? To hoord it up as misers do their come? No: But that his lips may
feed many Pro. 10.21.
, and may spread abroad knowledge Pro. 15.7.
. Therefore also (says the Prophet) the people must seek it at his mouth
Matthew. 2.7.
. Wherefore let us hold this: The gifts of the spirit and profitable employment
cannot be separated; He is not truly learned, who does not truly labor: When
thou art converted strengthen the brethren Luke 22.32. The 2. Use.
.

Secondly, this may have a larger application to all; thus, Paul says, If any
man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is none of his Romans 8.9.
: Now if we would know whether Christ's spirit be in us or no, we must follow
Christ's rule, of judging the tree by the fruits Matt 7.16.
. Let us see what comes from us, which may be profitable to others in matters
concerning life eternal. Where be those particulars spoken of in the
Scripture, admonishing the unruly, comforting the feeble minded, etc 1. These.
5.14.
. Where is our Considering one another to provoke to love and to good works
Hebr. 10.24.
? Where be our prayers, exhortations and instructions in our families? Where
such fruits as these be are wanting, there the graces of Gods spirit are not
present. He that is not careful in his place to profit others in the ways of
godliness, himself is far from any true taste of godliness. Zachary was
filled with the Holy Ghost, and he was forthwith employed in a spiritual
service, of which even we have the benefit to this day. Thus much of the
Preface.

The division of the Hymn into 2. parts.
The Prophecy or Hymn it self may be divided into two parts: the first of
which is touching Christ and the work of salvation by him wrought, unto the
76. verse: the second is of John Baptist and his office in respect of Christ.
The 1. part divided.
The former part again may be cut into two members: 1. A proposition (Blessed
be the Lord God of Israel.) 2. The proof thereof (For he has visited and
redeemed his people etc.)

In the proposition we have to note two things. 1. A duty performed: 2. A
description of the party to whom it is performed. The duty performed, is a
Blessing of God. To Bless God, is an ordinary phrase of Scripture, it
betokens nothing else, but to give thanks to God for his blessings received:
These words, praise God, or bless God, or give thanks to God, are
indifferently translated: It is all one as if Zachary had said, All praise,
honor and thank be given unto God. The 4. Doctrine.
The Doctrine commended to us is this; That the praising and blessing of the
name of God for his goodness, is one part of that spiritual worship and
service, which is owing from us unto God. It is plain by the text. For I ask
what that was which Zachary here performed: It must be answered, that he
offered up a sacrifice of thanksgiving unto God. I ask again, Did he therein
worship God? Out of all question he did, and that which he did, proceeded from
the spirit of God, and could not choose but be acceptable before him. Out of
these it must needs follow, that thanksgiving is one part of that duty which
is to be performed by us unto God. This will easily be made good by Scripture:
Call upon me (says God) in the day of trouble, so I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me Psalm. 50.15.
. Let us offer the sacrifice of prayer always to God Hebr. 13.15.
. This kind of service is in those words compared to those sweet smelling
sacrifices which in the time of the Law were offered to God. Paul bids join
giving of thanks with our requests which we show unto God Phil. 4.6.
: so that this duty is like the salt with which all our services must be
seasoned. Hence are the commendations given of it, It becomes upright men to
be thankful Psalm. 33.1.
: It is a good thing to praise the Lord Psalm. 92.1.
: It is a pleasant thing, and praise is comely Psalm. 147.1.
. Hence was David's care to give evidence of special thankfulness upon
special occasions: from whence came that phrase of his, A new song Psalm. 40.3.
, signifying his course of particular insisting upon particular favors. The
default herein remains as a great stain in the good name of Hezekiah, He
did not render according to the reward bestowed upon him 2. Chr. 32.25. The Use.
.

This should provoke us to make conscience of this duty, every man saying to
his soul with David, My soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me
praise his holy name Psalm. 103.1.
. Thanksgiving was ordained as an exercise for man in Paradise, and shall be
an exercise in heaven, when as all other exercises are determined. In heaven
the word and Sacraments shall cease, but the Blessing of God shall never cease,
being the peculiar exercise of the Angels and Saints of the Lord: The more we
practice this duty now, the more we have our Conversation in heaven Phil. 3.20.
: If it be a service tedious unto us, heaven it self will be a burden. When
this duty is named with the particulars of it, many will be ready to step
forth and say with him in the Gospel, All these have I kept from my youth Luke
18.21.
: we thank God (say we) for all: but when it comes to trial, the case will
be like that of the ten lepers. Ten were cleansed, but one only returned to
give God praise Lu. 17.17.18.
. Many enioiers of Gods blessings, few which return back to show their
thankfulness. And this appears by three things: First by our general
carelessness in the duties of Christian holiness. True thankfulness stands
not in words and shows, but in the practice of obedience. The son in the
Gospel who said, I go sir, yet wont not Matt. 21.30.
, was he dutiful? so he who says, I thank God, and, Blessed be God, etc. and
yet cares not to dishonor God, is he thankful? Offering praise, and,
disposing ones way aright, are coupled together as companions Psalm. 50.23.
: where the latter is wanting, the first is but a ceremony. He that having
received a kindness from me, shall come to me and say, he thanks me, and when
he has turned his back, shall do me a displeasure; I will never think him
to be thankful. He that comes to God, like the Pharisee, with Lord I thank
thee, Luke 18.11.
, in his mouth, and yet makes no conscience of sin, is but a dissembler. He
has Jacobs voice, but Esaus hands Genesis 27.22.
. His words are the words of blessing, but his deeds are full of cursednesse.
Since then men generally live in gross sins to the dishonor of God, and to
the discredit of religion, let their words be as they will, yet they shall be
cast off as men guilty of unthankfulness. The second sign of our
unthankfulness is, our passing over daily favors without respect: Health,
liberty, rest, food, success in our affairs, these things are daily
bestowed, yet we use them as swine, who eat the mast, but never look up to
the tree from whence it falls: we go to our meat, to our rest, to our labor
without any signification of our acknowledgement from whom these things come;
or of our opinion, that nothing can do us good without Gods blessing. The third
sign, is the cursednesse of many of our language. Saint James makes it a
matter of impossibility, that God should be blessed by a cursed tongue; Does a
fountain at one place send out sweet water and bitter Iam. 3.11.
? Swearers, raylers, slanderers, vicious speakers; as holiness cannot dwell in
their hearts, so neither can their toongs be messengers of any true
thankfulness unto God. To conclude this point then, if we will be thought
truly to worship God, let us make conscience of the duty of thankfulness: if
we will be thought truly thankful, let us declare our thankfulness by
obedience, let us take all occasions to bless God for blessing us, and let us
beware how we defile our tongues with cursednesse. Thus much of the duty to be
performed.

Now follows the description of the party to whom it must be performed: The
Lord God of Israel. He is the Lord of the whole earth, according to that in the
Psalm: The Earth is the Lords and all that therein is Psalm. 24.1.
. How then is he the God of Israel? By Israel is meant the church and chosen
people of God: and therefore the elect are called The Israel of God Gal. 6.16.
, and the true servants of God, Israelites indeed Ioh. 1.47.
. The state and Church of Israel was a type of the Church of God, selected and
culled out from the rest of the world, to be a peculiar people to himself Tit.
2.14.
: so then; The God of Israel is the God of his Church: This is his especial
dignity, as when a great man carries the name of his Baronry. Hence we are
taught two things; the one is this, The 5. Doctrine.
The absolute and impregnable safety of Gods Church: The Lord is the God
thereof. God would have even the very situation of Jerusalem to be a sign of
his protection: As the mountains are about Jerusalem, so is the Lord about his
people Psalm. 125.2.
: God is in the midst of it, therefore shall it not be moved Psalm. 46.5.
: He will cover thee (says the Psalmist to the whole body of Gods people)
under his wings, thou shall be sure under his feathers, etc. Psalm. 91.4.
. Behold, he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep Psalm. 121.4.
. The Church of God is shadowed out by Solomon's bed: threescore strong men are
round about it of the valiant men of Israel, they all handle the sword, and are
expert in war, every one has his sword upon his thigh for the fear by night
Can. 3.7.8.
. Deservedly therefore said David, Blessed are the people whose God is the Lord
Psalm. 144 15.
.

The Use.
This does teach us a good lesson. All kingdoms have their periods, all states
are subject to innovation, only the Church of God is of perpetuity: I will
give salvation in Zion, says God Isay 46.13.
, there shall be a place of refuge, and a cover for the storm and for the
rain Isay 4.6.
. Natural men can see the uncertainty of all outward things, and the vanity
of the greatest assurances, yet they take not the right course for safeguard:
some use the policy of the unjust Steward Luke 16.4. etc.
: some verify the saying of Solomon, The rich man's riches are his strong
city, and as an hie wall in his imagination Prou. 18.11.
: some put all desperately to an adventure. The only way is to cleave to the
Church of God, there the Lord will create a defense Isay 4.5.
. They which labor to keep the fellowship of Gods people by the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace Ephesians. 4.3.
; the Lord is their God, they shall be sure of the surest protection.

The 6. Doctrine.
The other thing taught hence is, That to be one of Gods people, a true lively
member of his Church, is a man's greatest honor. It is (we see) Gods greatest
honor, and his highest title, to be called the God of Israel, the God of his
Church: He is (says Paul) the Savior of all men, specially of them that
believe 1. Tim. 4.10.
. In the Church God is known, there he is worshipped, there he bestows the
greatest prerogatives, and thence he receives the greatest honor. It is his
chief honor to be the God of his Church; so is it our chiefest dignity to
be true limbs of that society. Hence was David's desire, to have the Lord to
lift up the light of his countenance upon him Psalm. 4.6.
, and to be though but a Doore-keeper in Gods house Psalm. 84.10.
. Out of the Church there is no salvation; and, What shall it profit a man to
win the world, if he should lose his soul Matt. 16.26.
?

The Use.
Many are wont to say, Who will show us any good Psalm. 4.6.
? To those which so demand, I answer, Behold here the chiefest good: the best
and most absolute preferment, Seek the kingdom of God Matthew. 6.33.
, labor to be one of Gods people, thou can not have a greater dignity.

THE SECOND SERMON.
Because he has visited and redeemed his people.
WE have heard of the Proposition, (that the Lord God of Israel is to be
praised.) Now follows the proof thereof: For he has visited and redeemed
his people, etc. The sum of the proof is; that God is therefore to be
praised, because of that great work which he has wrought for the good and
salvation of his Church. Here we have two things to speak of: 1. The parties
to whom the benefit of this great work appertains, and for whose sake it is
wrought. 2. The work it self.

Touching the first, they are Gods people, that is, those which belong unto the
election of grace, and which are in Gods eternal counsel ordained unto life.
Hence we are taught, That the blessings which do directly and immediately
concern life eternal, only those are interessed in them, The 1. Doctrine.
which are Gods people: This is plain in this place: For if the question be,
whom the Lord did visit and redeem? It is answered by the spirit of God
speaking in Zachary, that he visited and redeemed his people: so speaks the
Scripture. It was the saying of the Angel, He shall save his people from their
sins Matthew. 1.21.
: there the benefit of salvation is restrained only to Gods people. So again:
I bring you tidings of great joy which shall be to all the people. The birth of
Christ is a message of joy, but to whom? not to all: (for all do not rejoice
therein) but only to the chosen of God: The people: The, is a word of special
distinction Luk 2 10.
. Peace shall be upon them, and upon the Israel of God Gal. 6.16.
. Who be the Israel of God, but only those which are here termed his people?
Ask then to whom belongs Peace and mercy: what? to all without distinction?
No: but to the Israel of God: Consider the course of the Apostles words, Tit.
2.14. For whom did Christ give himself? whom has he redeemed from iniquity?
whom has he purged? only those whom he has chosen out to be a peculiar
people to himself. Christ speaking of his death, tieth it to his sheep: I lay
down my life for my sheep Ioh. 10.15.
: but who be his sheep? even those which are given to him of his Father verse.
29.
. It is a special speech of limitation which Christ used in his prayer: I pray
for them, I pray not for the world Ioh. 17 9.
. Many such places might be gathered together. We heard how God is the God of
Israel, the God of his Church: He is so the God of his Church as that none else
can have any interest in his love.

The Use.
We hear much of salvation, of life eternal, of the glory to be revealed
hereafter: These things are great, and only they are happy which shall enjoy
them. All men almost promise these things unto themselves: there is not amongst
us the veriest drunkard, or swearer, or vicious person, or Usurer, or despiser
of good things, but if you talk with him, he will make show of a hope and
expectation to be saved; of all other things, he makes himself believe that
he is surest of that. But let us learn this one thing, and meditate well of it,
That eternal mercy, the benefit of redemption by Christ, the deliverance from
the bondage of spiritual enemies, these things belong not to all: Many, even
of those which profess Christ, and which say Lord, Lord Matt 7.21.
, yea and which preach Christ, shall be thrust out at the day of separation.
They be Gods peculiar people only to whom these things appertain. Look to
it, be sure thou art one of Gods people; otherwise, when mention is made of
the things which concern eternal life, I say to thee as Peter did to Simon
Magus, Thou have neither part nor fellowship in this business Act. 8.21.
. But how shall I know (will thou say) that I am one of Gods people? I will
tell thee plainly: How is a man known to be one of the Kings subjects? one (as
we say) of the Kings liege people? Even by this: his obedience to the wholesome
laws of the kingdom. So in this: holy obedience is the mark and badge of
Gods people: My sheep hear my voice Ioh. 10.27.
. Ye are my friends, if you do whatsoever I command you Ioh. 15.14.
. It is not the twanging of religion upon the tongue, but the practice of
holiness in the life, which shows a man to be a Christian: Gods peculiar
people are zealous of good works Tit. 2.14.
. To this therefore we are now come: Would thou be sure that the treasures
of happiness which are stored up in Christ, belong to thee? enquire into thy
self whether thou be one of Gods people: Remember how Gods people are
discerned, They hear my voice, says our Savior. If Christ's voice in his word
be not even music in thy ears, yea sweeter than honey, and the honey comb
Psalm. 19.10.
, dearer than thousands of gold and silver Psalm. 119.72.
, the joy and rejoicing of thy heart Ier. 15.16.
: If the fruits of holiness appear not in thy life, but rather the
unfruitful works of darkness Ephesians. 5.11.
, those works of the flesh which S. Paul speaks of Gal. 5.19.
; thou art none of Gods people, no subject to his kingdom, but a very rebel
and traitor to his Majesty; and when thou think to thrust in among Saints,
to enjoy the felicity of his chosen Psalm. 106.5.
, thou shall hear that heavy sentence pass upon thee and such as thou art;
Those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring
hither and slay them before me Luke 19.27.
.

Now we are come to the work it self, where many things come in order to be
touched. 1. The fountain and beginning thereof, (He has visited). 2. The
general nature of the work it self, (Redeemed). 3. The means of it, (And
has raised up the horn, etc.) 4. The evidence of it; the testimony of the
Prophets, in whom the covenant of grace and the oath of God to Abraham are at
large recorded ( As he spoke by the mouth, etc. 5. The end of it, (That we
being delivered etc.) Of these shall be spoken in order.

The beginning and fountain of all is Gods visitation: (He has visited) There
is a twofold visiting ascribed to God in Scripture: One of displeasure: In the
day of my visitation I will visit their sin upon them Exodus 32.34.
. The Lord comes out of his place to visit the sin of the inhabitants of
the earth Isay 26.21.
. The other is of mercy; The Lord visited Sarah as he had said Genesis 21.1.
, that is, he performed the good which he had promised. In this sense, the day
of ones conversion is called, the day of visitation 1. Pet. 2.12.
: So then here: God has visited, that is, he has graciously and mercifully
looked upon his people, he has scene and beheld with a pitiful eye the
misery and bondage of his chosen, and he is now, as it were, come amongst them
to show them kindness. This visiting on Gods part having this signification,
and being here put in the first rank, is the ground and spring of all which
follows; The 2. Doctrine.
and it affoords us this doctrine: That the kindness and mercy, and free grace
of God, is the beginning and the fountain of all those good things which do
concern eternal life. Consider the place: Many things are here spoken of
Redemption: of a Horn of salvation; of a Covenant and oath of grace: But
whence proceed all these, but from the sole mercy of God; even from his
gracious disposition to visit his people? Where visiting is, there is
presupposed a very woeful estate: Visit now yonder cursed woman, said Iehu of
Iezebel, meaning to respect her above her desert 1. King. 9.34.
. It is easy to show out of the Scripture how the love, mercy, and grace of
God are noted, as the beginning of those things which concern salvation. The
Lord (says Moses to the old Israelites) did not set his love upon you, nor
choose you, because ye were more in number than any people, etc; but because the
Lord loved you, etc. Deuteronomy. 7.7.8.
. Now the people of Israel were a type of Gods people: Canaan a type of heaven:
it was Gods free love which moved him to bring them into Canaan; it is his free
grace for which he vouchsafes to advance us to heaven. When mention is made of
the course and order of our salvation, these and the like speeches still come
in: So God loved the world Ioh. 3.16.
, the good pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1.5.
, freely by his grace Romans 3.24.
, not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but according to his
mercy Tit. 3.5.
, not that we loved God, but that he loved us 1. Ioh. 4.10.
, who has given unto him first Romans 11.35.
? These speeches agree with the manner of speech here used, and do show
plainly that there was nothing in man to move the Lord to reach out his arm
of deliverance; all proceeded from the absolute and undeserved freedom of his
grace. Many things there were in man to provoke God in his justice finally to
forsake him, nothing which might induce him to show the least degree of favor.

Besides that this does overthrow all Popish opinion of merit, The Use.
and (which is the maine end of all) sets out the grace and mercy of God to the
full; it serves to quicken in us that duty of thankfulness, of which we heard
before, and which Zachary did here perform. A great blessing requires great
thanks, but the freer the blessing is, the greater should the thankfulness be.
All my fathers house (said Mephibosheth to David) were but dead men before my
Lord the King, yet did thou set thy servant among them which did eat at
thine own table 2. Sa. 19.28.
. The less desert he found in himself, the more deeply did he hold himself
bound unto David: so that when we look upon the greatness of the blessing on
the one side, (namely, life eternal, and a kingdom which can not be shaken)
and then the smalnesse of our own desert on the other side, who were but dead
men before the Lord, even dead in trespasses and sins Ephesians 2.1.
, we may well say with David, What shall we render unto the Lord Psalm. 116.12.
? This must needs condemn our carnal mindedness: some things do sometimes
fall from us, by way of thankfulness for outward things; as health, peace,
seasonable weather, and such like: but the greatest blessing, the chiefest
favor, and to which of al other we can lay the least claim, is scarsely once
made mention of: Blessed be God that has visited us when we were dead in
sin; thanks be to God for his Son Christ Jesus. How are we bound to his
Majesty, who has showed us this mercy to redeem us! It is a rare thing to
hear of such a speech. It shows that we mind only earthly things Phil.
3.19.
. Corn and Wine, a full basket, and a full barn, these things will affect us;
but the Lords merciful visitation in his Son Christ, in pulling us out of the
jaws of Satan cannot move us: It is a fearful sign, even that we are
enthralled unto Satan, and in the very bond of iniquity Act. 8.23.
. For did we feel and apprehend our own desert, to be eternally forsaken, and
the riches of Gods mercy in visiting us with his salvation, our spirits would
be so ravished therewith, that all other things would seem vile and base in
comparison of this one. Thus much of the fountain of this great work, which
serves notably to beat down Merit, and to stir up thankfulness.

The general nature of the benefit is set down in this word (Redeemed.) To
redeem is (as we know) to buy out: the very word in the common usage of it
presupposes a bondage and captivity. The 3. Doctrine.
Whereupon just occasion is given us to consider that miserable servitude in
which by nature we are all. This servitude is said to be under the power of
darkness Col. 1.13.
, that is, under the power of spiritual enemies: which are three: 1. Sin. 2.
Death. 3. The Devil. Sin makes us subject unto death: for the wages of
sin is death Romans 6.23.
. Death brings us into the full and absolute power of the devil: That we are
naturally servants to sin, it is plain by the Apostles complaint: I am
carnal, sold under sin Romans 7.23.
. It is a true rule, To whomsoever we give our selves as servants to obey, his
servants we are Romans 6.16.
: and, whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin Ioh. 8.35.
: Now it is apparent that naturally we obey sin in the lusts thereof: and,
give our members as weapons of unrighteousness unto it Romans 6.12.13.
; every member has his task in the service of sin, as the Apostle shows
Romans 3.13. etc.
, and whereas slaves and bondmen do their services and base offices grudgingly
and discontentedly, we do the business of sin, willingly, readily and
joyfully. Again, that we are slaves to eternal death it cannot be denied:
For what was it which God said to Adam: In the day that thou eatest thou shall
die the death Genesis 2^*7.
? As Soon as he had sinned, that sentence laid hold upon him, and death
eternal became his portion. Now, lastly for bondage under Satan, the Apostle
says, that so long as we are the children of disobedience Ephesians. 2.2.
he works in us, we are in his snare, and are taken of him at his will 2.
Tim 2.26.
. This is the common slavery of all: there is not the greatest, nor noblest,
nor mightiest, nor fairest, nor wealthiest among the sons of men, but he is
in his natural estate thus enthralled. Let men boast never so much in outward
respects, as sometimes the Jews did, We were never bond to any Ioh. 8.33.
, yet till the Son shall make them free verse. 36.
, this is their captivity. We read of the bondage of the Israelites in Egypt,
there they were kept under with burdens, and made weary of their lives by sore
labor Exodus 1.11.14.
; under the Philistims 1. Sam. 13.19.
; under the Midianites Iud. 6.3.4.
; under other nations Psalm 66.12.78.60.61. etc.
; of the slavery of Samson bound with fetters and made to grind Iud. 16.21.
like a horse: These particulars were grievous to be born, but to this
spiritual captivity they are nothing. When baseness, and cruelty, and
spite are joined together in an oppressor, how heavy must the yoke needs
be? Now, what baser thing than sin; what more cruel than death; what fuller
of venom than the devil? Who is able to describe the misery of that bondage,
where there is such a concurrence of such a threefold extremity? This is our
slavery, this is that from which we are redeemed: from sin unto holiness,
from death unto life eternal, from the power of Satan into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God. For this purpose a Price 1. Cor 6.20.
was paid, but of no common value; (for we were not redeemed with corruptible
things 1. Pet. 1.18.
, he gave himself a ransom 1. Tim. 2.6.
, he took on him the form of a servant Phil 2 7.
, to free us from this eternal slavery. We may truly say, This was the
Lords doing, and I pray God, it may be marvelous in our eyes Psalm. 118.23. The
1. Use.


Here is first a good lecture of humility, the best and the hardest lesson of
all others: the best, because I may say of it as Jacob did of Bethel; This is
the gate of heaven Genesis 28.17.
: the hardest, because we are full of self-love, and there will be no small a
do to make us low in our own sight 2 Samuel 6.22.
, and as nothing in our own seeming. Let us in this word (Redeemed) (as in a
glass) behold what we are, and what just matter we have of humility, and how
little reason to be secure. The very name of a servant or bondman, or vassal,
were enough to put a man down in his own conceit; but to be servant to so
base a thing as sin, to so hateful a person as the devil, to so terrible a
thing as eternal death, I do not see how any man may be able to express it.
Whosoever therefore thou be, who have been foolish in lifting up thy self
Prou. 30 32.
, thinking better of thine own souls estate than there is cause, henceforth
lay thine hand upon thy mouth, learn to abhor thy self in dust and ashes
Job 42.6.
, remember, that whatsoever opinion thou have conceived of thy self, yet the
verdict of the Scripture (which is the voice of God) is, that thou art by
nature a slave under the power of darkness: Satan is the prince of darkness,
thou art his subject; hell is the kingdom of darkness, and that is thine
inheritance. When thou considerest this, smite thy breast with the Publican Luke
19.13.
, pray the Lord to humble thee, that the glad tidings of salvation in Christ
may be welcome to thee.

The 2. Use.
Secondly, here is also a good lesson of obedience. Ye are bought for a price,
therefore glorify God etc. 1. Cor. 6.20.
. It is a very direct inference. God has redeemed us, freed us from thraldom
and from captivity: what should we refuse to do for him, even by way of
thankfulness? Besides, it is a matter of great equity: Ye are not your own,
says the Apostle verse. 19.
; we are not in our own power, his we be who has redeemed us: and wherefore
has he redeemed us? what, that we should still serve sin, that we should
follow the vain conversation of the world, and be led by the swaie of our
own hearts? Surely no. But to be zealous of good wonks Tit. 2.14.
. I say then with Paul: How shall we, who are thus redeemed, and to this end
redeemed, live yet in sin Romans 6.2.
? Shall we live to the dishonor of God, to the shame of religion, serving our
own lusts, and drowning our selves in the pleasures of sin, who have
received so great a deliverance? God forbid. What shall we think of the
unthankful Israelites, who being mightily delivered out of bondage, yet cried,
it had been better for us to serve the Egyptians Exodus 14.12.
? We must needs say they were unworthy of so great a blessing. Take heed we
do not make it our own case. God has sent his Son to redeem us, and to
free us from the thraldom of death, of sin, and of Satan: We profess that
we rejoice in this: yet when we be called upon to shake off the yoke of sin,
and to become the servants of righteousness Romans 6.18.
, we seem to say as those Israelites did, Let us be at rest: we would be
content to be freed from death, the wages of sin, but the business of sin
we would rather than our life we might continue in. We have some corrupt
humor or other, that, let the Lord say what he will, we must needs give
satisfaction to. Men would serve God and Mammon too Luke 16.13.
, God and their bellies too Phil. 3 19.
, God and drunkenness too, God and whooredome too, God and their pleasures
too. This is a poor religion: this is a slender requital for so great a
benefit as redemption: Those which are redeemed, are redeemed from their vain
conversation 1. Pet. 1.18.
. If thou be ensnared in the sensual delight of thine own sins, I cannot
see how it can be said of thee, that thou art one of Gods redeemed. When a
battle is ended, can it be said that such a one is ransomed from the enemy
who still follows his camp, and willingly does whatsoever he commands? No.
If I see thee live in the service of sin: I am sure thou art not yet within
the compass of redemption. Remember we this Use: when thou hear Redemption
spoken of, think thou; Has God redeemed us by his Sons blood, and shall I
draw back and choose rather to run mine old course in following the lusts of
sin? God forbid: Say rather: O Lord, I am thine, thou have bought me, thou
have paid full dearly for me, thou have best right unto me, thee will I
serve: O strengthen me by thy grace, that my secret sin may not ensnare me,
that corruption may not get dominion over me.

THE THIRD SERMON.
VERSE. 69. And has raised up the horn of salvation unto us in the house of
his servant David.


THe next thing which comes to be handled, is the means by which this great
work of Redemption is effected; and that is set down in this verse. Where we
have two things to consider: The points to be handled in this Sermon.
1. A matter done: (He has raised up the horn of salvation unto us.) 2. The
place where it is done, (In the house of his servant David.)

In the former point, two things must be inquired. 1. Who is meant by this
Horn of salvation. 2. Why the party meant by this title is so styled. He that
is here meant by the Horn of salvation, is Jesus Christ: For under heaven
there is given no other name whereby we must be saved Act. 4.12.
, and, to him give all the Prophets witness Act. 10.43.
. If he then be the party whom all the Prophets pointed at, as the alone
restorer of mankind, if there be no other means of salvation; who should be
meant by the Horn of salvation, but only He? Now for the next, why he
should be so entitled, it will easily appear, if we consider the usual form
of speaking in the Scripture. The spirit of God is wont by this word (Horn) to
note out Power and Strength: as in those words, All the horns of the wicked
will I break Psalm. 75.10.
, that is, I will take down and abate the height and strength of the wicked:
and Jeremy speaking of the ruin of the kingdom of Moab, says thus, The horn
of Moab is cut off Ier. 48.25.
. The power and greatness of states and kingdoms and commonwealths is often
designed in Scripture by that word, as in Daniel and elsewhere. It is a speech
borrowed from horned beasts, whose strength lies in that part, and which use
it both for defense if they be assaulted, and for offense if they have an
intent to vanquish. So that by an Horn of salvation is rightly understood (as
it is usually translated) a Mighty salvation, or, a Savior of admirable and
exceeding power. Hereupon then we have occasion to discourse of the power and
strength of our Savior, and that two ways. 1. As it concerns the salvation
of his Elect. 2. As it respects the confusion of the wicked.

Touching the first, this is the doctrine: That Jesus Christ is every way
furnished with sufficiency of power, The 1. Doctrine.
for the accomplishment of the work of Redemption which he undertook. This is
easily proved. It pleased the Father, that in him all fullness should dwell
Col. 1.9.
. If all Fullness, surely then Fullness of power: and the word (dwell) is very
effectual, signifying the perpetuity of his power: it is not for a turn or
two, but eternally remaining in him, for the beginning, continuing, and
perfecting of the salvation of his chosen. Again, it is said of him, that God
the Father has sealed him Ioh. 6.27.
. God has (as it were) set a mark upon him, and noted him out, as the only
Savior. He has lifted him up Act. 5.31.
. Now it were a disparagement to the wisdom of God, to call the whole world
to a dependence upon him for their salvation, if he were not in full and
absolute manner able to effect it. Thirdly, if we consider the nature of that
which he was to do for man's redeeming, we shall see his power to effect it.
He had two things to do, if he would procure our salvation. First he was to
save from destruction (which was due for the multitude of our sins.) Next he
was to inuest into eternal happiness, into which (because of our spiritual
nakedness) the justice of God could give us no admission. To do the former of
these, he took upon him our sins, he bare them in his body 1. Pet. 2.24.
, he was made sin 2. Cor. 5.21.
, and, that handwriting which was against us, he took out of the way Col.
2.14.
, and upon his cross triumphed verse. 15.
over all our spiritual enemies. To accomplish the latter, he put upon us his
own righteousness, that so we being clothed with that white raiment Reu.
3.18.
, and with the garment of salvation Isay 61.10.
, as Jacob with the apparel of his brother Esau Genesis 27.15.
, might obtain the blessing. Thus is that fulfilled which was said: God gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but
have life everlasting Ioh. 3 16.
. Should not perish, that he did by being our Redemption 1. Cor. 1.30.
: But have life everlasting, that he brought to pass by becoming our
Righteousness 1. Cor. 1.30.
. Many things might easily be produced for this purpose, but these may
suffice. Only this one thing is to be noted, that the salvation wrought by
Christ, as it may be called mighty, because of the present fullness, so does
it deserve the same name, because, being done nothing is able to undo it.
Othniel delivered the Israelites from Chushan, and is therefore called their
Savior Iud. 3.9.
, yet they fell after into the hand of Moab verse. 12.
. Ehud rescued them from the Moabites verse. 28. etc.
, yet became they servants to the Canaanites Iud. 4.2.
. And a Physician is sometimes a means of health, in one disease, yet the same
party may after sicken, yea and die for all that. But in this work of
redemption it is otherwise: it is a through piece of work. He that believes
etc. shall not come into condemnation, but has passed from death to life Ioh
5.24.
. I give my sheep eternal life, they shall never perish etc Ioh. 10.28.
. Thus we see how Christ is a Horn of salvation: The salvation procured by
him is plentiful, (every way answerable to our spiritual need) and
perpetual, no sin of man, no malice of hell is able to undo it.

The first use hereof is, The 1. Use.
to let us see the wrong which Popish religion does to the whole mystery of
Christ. He is called (as we have heard) a Horn of salvation, because of his
absolute sufficiency to effect that work of salvation which he has
undertaken. Papists, as though Christ were not sufficient, or his horn strong
enough to batter down the kingdom of the devil, and fully and wholly to
reconcile us unto God, adioyne other things, as it were to supply that which is
wanting in him, or to perfect that which he has begun: as for example: with
his offers of grace, our freewill; with his righteousness, our good works;
with his satisfaction for eternal punishment, our satisfaction for temporal
punishment, either here in Earth or in Purgatory; with his intercession, the
intercession of Saints. Thus they have maimed the work of Christ; and by their
gross and unfitting patcheries have utterly defaced it. We must believe the
Scripture, which calls Christ an Horn of salvation, that is, (as it seems
to be expounded by the Apostle) one, who has by himself purged our sins
Heb. 1.3.
: that which he has done is a work complete and entire; he himself only,
without any assistance, has and does effect it. Many things are left unto us
by way of obedience, but nothing by way of promoting that which he has begun.
Thus this phrase (a Horn of salvation) is as an Horn of iron, to break down
all those unwarrantable supplies, which the Church of Rome conioineth and
coupleth with the absolute and all-sufficient work of Christ Jesus.

Secondly, The 2. Use.
this is a doctrine full of comfort to every humbled Christian: as for
example: Thou see weakness in thy self, of understanding, of will, of
affection, of action, thou art unable to do any thing by which God might be
pleased, or thine own soul helped forward unto life: Turn now the eyes of
thy faith to this Horn of salvation: thou shall not find so much weakness in
thy self, as thou shall find might and power in him; not so much emptines in
thy self, as fullness in him; not so much poverty in thy self, as plenty in
him; and happy thou if the apprehension of thine own weakness, make thee to
long to be established and vpheld by his power. Offenders were wont of old to
fly for succor and safeguard to the Horns of the altar 1. Kin. 1.50.
: so when thou feel thy self pursued by Satan, and even to be arrested by
the wrath of God, fly to this Horn of salvation, labor to hold fast upon it
by faith: say, as did Jacob to the Angel: I will not let thee go except thou
bless me Genesis 32.26.
. This is the surest covert: thou shall be sure under his feathers, his truth
shall be thy shield and buckler Psalm. 91.4.
. Thus much touching the power of Christ for the salvation of his chosen.

The 2. Doctrine.
The next is, that he is of absolute power for the full and final overthrow
and confusion of his enemies. For Christ is armed either way; he is a Horn,
both to defend and to strike: He is a precious stone, and he is a stone of
offense 1. Pet. 2.6.8.
, and even in that that he is an overthrow to the wicked, he is a salvation to
his chosen: according to that saying of Paul's, that persecution, was to the
adversaries a token of perdition, and to them which were troubled, a token of
salvation Phil. 1.28.
: and so the same Apostle says, that by the Fall of the Jews, salvation
comes to the Gentiles Romans 11.11.
: And of this power we must consider necessarily: Now what and how great it is,
may be gathered out of the second Psalm. In the beginning of the Psalm,
mention is made of the opposition of the world, and of men of all sorts,
against the spiritual kingdom of Christ Jesus: The kings of the Earth band
themselves etc Psalm. 2.2.
. Afterward verse. 9.
is set down both the easiness and the irrecouerablenesse of their
destruction. He is compared unto some mighty man, having in his hand an iron
scepter, or mace of brass; his enemies are likened to an earthen pot. Now
common sense teaches us how easy the breaking of a Potters vessel is with a
rod of iron: A knock with an instrument of much more weakness were
sufficient to break it, but, being of iron, the very weight of it alone, must
needs crush it into many pieces. As this comparison shows the easiness of
the wickeds overthrow, so it makes known the irrecouerablenesse too. And
therefore the breaking of a potters vessel is usual in the Scripture, to
signify an utter and irrecouerable destruction Isay 30.14. Ier. 19.10.11.
. I remember what is said of Antichrist, one of Christ's strongest adversaries,
that yet Christ shall easily destroy him, even with the Breath of his mouth, 2.
Th 2.10.
. His enemies shall lick the dust Psalm. 72.9.
: He shall wound even kings in the day of his wrath, and smite the head over
diverse countries Psalm. 110.5.6.
. This was the stone cut without hands, seen by Nebuchadnezzar in his dream;
which smote the image upon his feet and brake them to pieces Dan. 2.34.
.

This is a caveat to all the wicked enemies of the grace and kingdom of Christ
Jesus; The Use.
they may here see the certainty of their absolute overthrow. A head of
glass, against an head of brass, what will become of it? The thistle that is
in Lebanon, sent to the Cedar that is in Lebanon, said Iehoash king of Israel
to Amaziah 2. Kin. 14.9.
Far greater is the difference betwixt this Horn of the house of David, and
those presuming weaklings, which are not afraid to withstand him. To all such I
say with the Apostle, Do ye provoke the Lord to anger, are ye stronger than
he 1. Cor. 10.22.
? But (thou will say to me) who be these enemies of Christ, whom he thus will
quell and destroy? I answer, they are his enemies, who will not that he should
reign over them Luke 19.27.
. But how does Christ reign? with his word, this is the scepter of his
kingdom, and the Rod of his mouth Isay 11.4.
. They which obey his word are his subjects, they which disobey are his
enemies. But what is it to obey his word; to be present now and then at the
preaching of it? No: For so be many sleepers, scorners, Atheists,
Church-papists, drunkards, whoremasters, Usurers, etc. all which
notwithstanding shall be shut out of the new Jerusalem Reu. 21.8.22.15.
. But to obey the word, is, to be ruled by the word, to walk according to the
Rule Gal. 6.16.
of the word. You are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you Ioh.
15.14.
. If any man hear the word of Christ never so often, yet do yield no
obedience to it, he shall have his part among the enemies of Christ Jesus. So
then, Christ is a Horn of power to bruise his enemies. Art thou none of his
subjects, do thou not suffer his word to bear sway with thee, and to
reform thy corrupt and carnal conversation, but live rather in gross
sins, to the disgrace of it, and to the reproach of the profession thereof?
thou art an enemy to his Majesty, and one of those whom he will consume with
the breath of his mouth, and whom with the rod of his wrath he will break in
pieces like a potters vessel.

We are now come to the second point, the place where this Horn of salvation
is raised up: In the house of his servant David. That we may make the best use
of this place, we must consider in what state David's house was then when
Zachary endited this Hymn. The House of David was the stock royal, and to
his lawful heirs belonged the crown of Judah; but, at this time, David's
kingdom was decayed, the glory of it was dimmed and defaced, the government
and sovereignty was fallen to strangers, the next heir, as the right of his
succession was not ordinarily and universally known, so he lived in poor
estate: Joseph was become a Carpenter. Out of this decayed family of David,
was this Horn of salvation raised: It did bud Psalm. 132.17.
out of this dead stock, even as a root out of a dry ground Isay 53.2.
. Thus at once were joined in Christ's person, Nobility and Poverty. Nobility
in regard of his birth (he was of David's stock): Poverty in respect of his
present estate, the glory and pomp of the kingdom being quite overthrown.
Out of this, four profitable points are to be observed. The 3. Doctrine.


The first is: That that Christ in whom we believe, is the very same which was
to come into the world, and besides whom (...) is to be looked for. The
Scripture had foretold that it should be the son of David, and rise out of
his stock. The Lord has sworn in truth unto David, and he will not shrink
from it, saying; Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne Psalm.
132.11.
. He shall sit upon the throne of David Isay 9.7.
. I will raise unto David a righteous branch Ier. 23.5.
. As it is clear in the old Testament, that the Messiah should be made of the
seed of David according to the flesh; so the new Testament evidently shows
how the same was fulfilled in Christ: for this cause the Evangelists do labor
to make manifest the descent of Joseph and Marie from David. Matthew Matthew. 1.
makes it plain, how notwithstanding the mean estate which Joseph was fallen
into, yet the right of the kingdom rested in him. Luke Cap. 3.
shows how Marie was naturally descended out of David's loins. Both Matthew
and Luke join in Zorobabel, and from him derive the line both of Joseph and
Marie; of Joseph by Abiud Math. 1.13.
, of Marie by Rhesa Luke 3.27.
. So that our Savior, by Marie was borne of David, by Joseph was next heir to
the crown: For although he came not of Joseph according to the flesh, yet
being the next of his kin, and Joseph being childlesse, he was by the law
(of force among the Jews) to succeed him as his lawful heir. This right of
Christ's was apparent: the Star Mat. 2.2.
showed it: Herod Verse. 7.
perceived it: Christ acknowledged it Ioh. 18.37.
: Pilate granted it Ioh. 19.15.
, and the Jews when that matter was questioned before Pilate, could not tell
whom to name against Christ but Caesar In the same verse.
.

This serves notably for the confirmation and settling of our faith in a point
of the greatest moment, The Use.
and in which it is dangerous to be mistaken. For what reason have we to rely
upon Christ for salvation, unless we be assured that he is the anointed of
God, even that very Savior upon whom we may boldly depend? Our Savior told us,
that there shall arise false Christ's Mat. 24.23.
: how shall we be able to discover them, and avoid deceit by them, if we be
not settled in this point. It is good for us therefore to (...) how the old and
new Testament do herein agree (...) out of the harmony of both, we may for
the grounding (...) our faith derive a comfortable conclusion.

The 4. Doctrine.
The second point observed from hence is: That our Savior Christ is a person of
great nobility, even the noblest that ever was. For one way he was the
eternal Son of the most high, and another way (as man) lineally descended from
the Patriarks and renowned kings of Judah: It is a very Honorable style which
is given him in Scripture, far surpassing the royal style of any earthly
monarch: Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, the Everlasting Father, The
Prince of Peace Isay 9.6.
: I will make (said the Lord) my first borne higher than the kings of the earth
Psalm. 89.27.
. And therefore both kings and Judges are willed to kiss Psa. 2.10.12.
him, and to do homage to him, and the very Angels also are commanded to
worship him Heb. 1.6.
. And whereas all kingdoms have their ends, and the greatest Princes die as
men, and fall as others Psalm. 82.7.
; his Throne is for ever and ever Heb. 1.8.
.

The Use.
This teaches men of birth and blood not to stand too much upon their Pedegrees
and Ancestors, as though Nobility stood principally in this, that man is borne
of man; If they affect the true nobility, they must labor to be the children
of God by regeneration in Christ. This is the best ornament of blood: Noble
birth without new birth in Christ is but an earthly vanity. Though a man be
able to show never so glorious a line of progenitors, yet if he be not a
repentant sinner, he is but base and vile in the sight of God. To be by faith
ingraffed into Christ, is the true Honor, this does inuest a man into that
royalty which is in the Person of Christ, and makes him both to be an heir
of the Earth, and to have a title of inheritance into heaven.

The 5. Doctrine.
The third observation hence stands thus: That whereas Christ, albeit of David's
stock, and heir apparent to the crown, came notwithstanding when the outward
glory of the kingdom was utterly gone, therefore The kingdom of Christ is no
earthly kingdom. My kingdom (said he himself to Pilate) is not of this world
Ioh. 18.36.
. Hereupon was his withdrawing, when the people sought him to make him king
Ioh. 6.15.
, and his refusal when he was requested, to determine a case of inheritance
betwixt two brethren Luke 12.13.
, and his charge to his Apostles, not to be as the Lords of the Gentiles Math.
20.25.26.
. It is one of the Jews errors to think otherwise, and his Disciples were
long carried away with that conceit; for even at the point of his ascension,
they propounded him a question that way: Lord will thou at this time restore
the kingdom to Israel Act. 1.6.
? But Christ came purposely when the Scepter was departed from Judah Genesis 49.10.
, to show that he came to effect a spiritual deliverance, and not to erect an
outward state.

This warns us, The Use.
not to affect nor embrace the profession of Christianity, as a condition of
outward greatness. Our Savior must not be followed as a great Lord, to grant
us Leases, and Farms, and good preferment in the world: these things must not
be expected: We must follow him rather as one contemned, as the reproach of the
world, as a manfull of sorrows Isay 53.3.
. When Zebedeus sons (dreaming of an outward state) were suitors to Christ to
have some place of respect about him: Christ presently (to put that conceit out
of their heads) told them of drinking of the cup, which he was to drink of
Math. 20.22.
, that is, of partaking with him in his affliction; showing how much they are
deceived which look for worldly advancement by his service. True it is, he is
able to bestow outward honors upon his followers, (for the earth is his, and
all that therein is Psalm. 24.1.
,) and he does often also give them to those that fear him: But yet they must
not be held as matters annexed to the state of a Christian, as though every
one that has them, were by and by a good Christian, and he which has them
not, were to be reputed as no good servant unto Christ. For the fatness of
the earth was given as well to Esau as to Jacob Genesis 27.39
, and it is possible for the beggar to be carried by A^to Abraham's bosom, when
the soul of the rich man ^demned to hell Luke 16.22.23.
. So that this is the thing we are taught, (...) seeing Christ, although he be
a king, yet is no earthly king, therefore we betaking our selves to the service
and profession of his name, should not make outward prosperity, and worldly
things, the end of our hope, lest (so doing) we run into one of these two
extremities; either, if we have it not, to grow discouraged, and to be weary
of our profession; or if we have it, to presume, that we are therefore highly
in Gods favor.

The 6. Doctrine.
The fourth point noted hence is this: That outward greatness is of no value
for spiritual uses. Christ was raised to do this great work, and to be the
Horn of salvation; out of the poor outward estate of David's house: Now if for
the spiritual use, any outward greatness had been behoouefull, Christ would
have chosen a time when David's house was in the highest glory, and not have
come now when the honor of it lay even in the dust: And this was the reason
why al things were purposely carried after a mean fashion. The place of his
birth was not Jerusalem (the head city of the kingdom) but Bethlehem: ( little
among the thousands of Judah Micah 5.2.
:) The house, not some great Gentleman's place about the town, but a common
Inn; in the Inn; not the best lodging or fairest room, but the stable; not
laid in some rich cradle, but lapped up in clouts, and thrust into a manger:
The tidings of his birth brought first, not to the Scribes and great learned
men, but to a few poor shepherds; himself followed not with any train of
note, but with men of the meanest rank, contemned in his life, and evil
entreated in his end.

The Use.
This serves to put down the great, rich and mighty men of the world, who do
so pride themselves in their greatness, their wealth, their fullness, their
glory, their abundance, that without these they suppose no great thing can be
effected: They trust (says the Psalmist) in their goods, and boast themselves
in the multitude of their riches; yet a man can by no means redeem his
brother, he cannot give his ransom to God Psalm. 49.6.7.
. Our Savior in a poor despised estate, has done that, which all the Monarchs
and Politicians in the world, though they had laid all their wealth and wit
together, could never have brought to pass.

THE FOVRTH SERMON.
VERSE. 70. As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which were since the
world began, saying, That he would, etc.


THe evidence of this work of man's redemption comes now next to be spoken
of. In which, these several points must be handled. 1. That it is necessary
for the strengthening of a man's faith, to observe the course and order and
agreement of the Scripture. 2. That from the worlds beginning God foretold all
things concerning Christ. 3. That that which was delivered by their mouth was
spoken by God. 4. What the sum is of that which they spoke. Of these in their
course.

So that the first doctrine now, is this: The 1. Doctrine.
That for the grounding and confirmation of Faith, it is needful to note the
order and agreement of the Scriptures. For indeed, whereupon was Zecharie his
faith built, but upon the courses of holy writ? upon the accomplishment of the
ancient Prophets, which he now beheld. He was able to say to himself; This
which I now see to come to pass, I am sure is no other, but that which
formerly has been foretold; as the Prophets spoke, so is it now fulfilled. To
this very thing Christ exhorts: Search the Scriptures, they are they, which
testify of me Ioh. 5.39.
. By this he endeavored to settle his Disciples faith: He began at Moses, and
all the Prophets, and interpreted to them in all the Scriptures, the things
which were written of him Luc. 24.27.
. This was Paul's course for the establishing of his hearers: He disputed by
the Scriptures Act. 17.2.
; he said no other things, than those which Moses and the Prophets did say
should come Act. 26.22.
. These and the like sayings we read often, That the Scriptures of the prophets
might be fulfilled Math. 26.56.
, This is done that the Scripture should be fulfilled Mar. 14.49.
, Thus the Scripture was fulfilled Mark. 15.28.
; which argues the care and purpose which the Spirit of God had, to ground our
judgments upon the Scripture. So in our times when we see the same things
happen, which we read in Scripture to have happened; when we see such things
come to pass, as we find prophesied in Scripture, it is a great comfort, and a
special strengthening unto faith. So did they to the Prophets, says our
Savior Math. 5.12.
; so it was Then, says Paul Gal. 4.29. The Use.
.

This shows what enemies they are to their own faith, and comfort, who are
wilfully strangers in the Scripture. Thou say, thou do believe in Christ;
but how know thou that he is the Christ in whom thou must believe; what
assurance have thou, that he is the person promised? When Satan, or the
doubtings of thine own heart shall thus sift thee, what certainty art thou able
to allege? and what is become of thy faith, which is built upon such a weak
foundation? If thou did dwell in an estate of land, of which thou could
show no better evidence, thou would think to be quickly shut out of
doors. The Lord has precisely set down particulars, (such has been his
care to establish our faith:) if we let the Scripture lie like some needless
History, turning over (as too many do) the cards oftener than the leaves of
the Bible, that we might be able to say (as every Christian ought) Thus it is
written, and thus I believe; well may we talk of faith, but, that faith
should be where there is such little experience in the rule and life and ground
of faith (which is the Scripture) it is impossible. These things were written
that we might believe Ioh. 20.31.
. Do thou not know what is written, how should thou then be able to
believe?

The second doctrine of the place is: The 2. Doctrine.
That God from the worlds beginning foretold by Prophets all things concerning
Christ. This is manifest out of the course of the place in hand, and is easily
confirmed. First in general, it is said, that unto Christ all the Prophets give
witness Act. 10.43.
. Christ appealed to the Scriptures of the old Testament Ioh. 5.39.
, and in his discourse with the two disciples iourneying to Emmaus, he found in
every of the prophets something touching himself Luke 24.27.
. Secondly, if any shall exactly peruse the old Testament, he shall find every
specialty touching Christ distinctly set down: as namely, when he should be
borne Genesis 49.10.
, where he should be borne Mic. 5.2.
, of what stock Psalm. 132.11.
, of what kind of woman Isay 7.14.
, what manner of person, both God Isay 19.6.
and Man Genesis 3.15.
, how he should be entertained Isay 53.2.3. etc.
, for what end he should come Isa. 61.1.2.3.
, by whom he should be betrayed Psalm. 41.9.
, what manner of death he should die Numb. 21.9. with Ioh. 3.14.
, how he should be used in his execution Psalm. 22. at large.
, where he should be buried Isay 53.9.
, how long he should abide in the grave Ioh 1.17. with Math. 12.40.
, that he should rise from death Psalm. 16.10.
, that he should ascend into heaven Psalm. 68.18. with Ephesians. 4.8.
. These and many more circumstances than these, the Prophets from the worlds
beginning did set down very exactly: so that there was nothing befell Christ
from the first moment of his conception, until the last period of his time
here on earth, (I mean of those things which are revealed to have befallen
him; and which befell him as our Mediator) of which a man experienced in the
Scripture might not truly say, Thus and thus it happened, as the Lord spoke by
his Prophets, etc. Besides the ceremonies in the Temple and Tabernacle, in the
daily Sacrifices and Sacrificers, all of them shadowing out something or other
in the Christ to come, who was the substance of every type, and the body of
every representation. It is worthy any man's pains to mark and observe how
the whole mystery of Christ is lapped up in the Prophecies of the old
Testament, and how the same is explaned, laid open and unfolded in the story
and application of the new: The pith and marrow and substance of both being
this, Jesus Christ, yesterday, to day, and the same for ever Heb. 13.8.
. The reason hereof on Gods part is twofold: First the confirmation of our
Faith: These things were written that we might believe Ioh. 20.31.
. Our faith by this course is strengthened after this manner: we see by this
exact foretelling of the Prophets, that the whole course of our salvation is a
matter framed by God, and the whole order thereof in every part and limme set
down in his eternal wisdom and providence: out of which we may gather and
conclude the certeintie thereof, inasmuch as a plot which God has laid, all
the power of Satan cannot alter. Secondly, many base wrongs, many vile vsages,
and indignities befell our Savior in the days of his flesh, the consideration
whereof might make a man to doubt whether he could be the Savior of mankind.
But when we see that every such specialtie is foretold by the Prophets, and
so, that nothing came to pass but according to Gods appointment, and that for
some special end, that doubt is removed, and those particulars of his
debasement, become grounds of comfort and of reioicing unto us.

The Use.
Now (for a use of this doctrine) we see here (as in a glass) the care which
God has had in all ages, from the very cradle (as it were) of the world, for
the good and comfort of his Church. He has not kept a word back which might
be for the necessary information thereof. Every age has been furnished with
Prophets, and every prophet furnished with gifts, to instruct the Church in
the mystery of Christ. It is a true saying, that the Lord did still reveal
his secrets to his servants the Prophets Amos 3.7.
; And the Prophets were all (like Moses) faithful in all Gods house Heb. 3.5.
, and like Paul, they kept nothing back that was profitable, but showed all
the counsel of God Act. 20.20.27.
. Wherefore may not God then say, as of old, What could I have done any more
Isay 5.6.
? If we now remain ignorant and unsettled in religion, ready to be carried
about with every wind of doctrine Ephe. 4.14.
, Where is the fault, and against whom will ye plead? God has not been
wanting to us, neither yet is: but here is the misery of it, and that which
will make hell even ready to burst with damned souls: My people will not
hear my voice, Israel will none of me Psa. 81.11.
. Light is come, but men love darkness more than light Ioh. 3.19.
. The Sermons of the Prophets are recorded, read, expounded, but we will not
hear them: we say rather with those wicked ones, Depart from us, we desire not
the knowledge of thy ways Job. 21.14.
. Let us remember what is said, Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be
much required Luke 12.48.
. We have the mystery of Christ, foretold by the Prophets, explaned by the
Evangelists, applied and enforced by the writings of the Apostles, pressed
nearer to us and made more familiar by continual preaching; our ignorance is
without excuse, our blood will be upon our own heads, our portion will be
deeper in the pit of hell, than the Indians and Moors and Tartars, which never
had the like means of spiritual information.

The third instruction stands thus; The 3. Doctrine.
That that which was uttered by the mouth of the Prophets God spoke: so are the
words: As he spoke by the mouth, etc. The mouth of the Prophets delivered those
things, but it was by direction and inspiration from above. So it is generally
said of all the hoie Writ: Holy men spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost 2 Pet. 1.21.
. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God 2. Tim. 3.16.
. In the old time God spoke by the Prophets Heb. 1.1.
. I will be with thy mouth, said God to Moses Exodus 4.12.
. I have put my words in thy mouth, to Jeremy Ier. 1.9.
: The word of the Lord was in my tongue, said David 2. Sam. 23.2.
. The Holy Ghost spoke by the mouth of David said Peter Act. 1.16.
. God does beseech you through us, says Paul 2. Cor. 5.20.
. These places show, that the things uttered by these men, were not of their
own devising, but came by special authority from above. For the making of
the best profit by this point, let us look a little further into it. By the
foretellings of the Prophets in this place, Zecharie (no doubt) understands
the old Testament, which is there-therefore called, the Word of the Prophets 2.
Pet. 1.19.
, and, The Prophets Act. 26.27.
, and, The Scriptures of the Prophets Romans 16.26.
. They have Moses and the Prophets, that is, the Scriptures Luke 16.29.
. Now that which is here said of the Prophets (that by their mouth God spoke)
is true also of those which wrote the New Testament, according to that saying,
that the whole Scripture is given by Inspiration of God 2 Timothy 3 16.
: and the Apostle speaking of the Foundation of the Church, makes it to be
both Prophets (the old Testament) and Apostles Ephesians. 2.20.
, the new Testament: the body and frame whereof, albeit it was not all compiled
by Apostles, yet the doctrine was taught and preached by the Apostles, whose
understanding Christ opened Luke 24.45.
, and with whom he promised to be Mat. 28.20.
. So that it is true of all the writers of the holy Scriptures, that God spoke
by their mouths. Whereupon touching the Scripture we are here taught three
things.

Three things noted touching the Scriptures by occasion of this 3. Doctrine.
The first is, the Majesty of it. For how must not that needs be full of
Majesty and of admirable excellency which proceeds out of the mouth of the
most high? We see in experience when books come to our hands, which contain
some briefes of the Orations and speeches of the King, how apt we be to carry
an higher estimation of them, than of other ordinary writings; and al is,
because we measure the words by the worth and dignity of the Author: so in the
Scripture; it coming from a God of infinite Majesty, there must needs be in
it more than steps or prints of excellency. Hereupon they are called, the
Great, or, Stately, or, honorable Things of the Law Hos 8.12.
. David calls them the Wonders of the Law Psa. 119.18
. The Law of God seemed to him so full of many admirable things, and the same
so full of heavenly brightness and glory, that his natural eyes were even
dazzled therewith, therefore he desires God to do a cure upon his sight, that
he may be able to behold them: Open mine eyes, etc. It is said of Christ, that
he taught as one having authority Matthew. 7.29
; there was another manner of state in his words, than in the Verbal Sermons
and Lectures of the Scribes; And so (whosoever shall observe it,) shall see a
kind of Majesty in the word of God revealed in the Scriptute, more than in
any other writings.

The use hereof is, The Use of the 1. note touching the Scripture.
to admonish us to beware of al slight and base and contemptuous using of Gods
word. That which God has spoken must needs be maiesticall. If the Scripture be
such an evidence of his eternal and incomprehensible Majesty, who shall dare
to use it without respect? The Majesty of the Scripture is drawn ^undrie,
ways into contempt: First, if it be in preaching handled negligently and
irreuerently. Secondly, if the phrases and sentences of it be drawn into
common speech: Thirdly, if it be heard, idly, carelessly, scornfully, sleepily,
which is the ordinary indignity offered to the Majesty of Gods Word. If it
were but one of Esops fables, or a tale of Robinhood, it could not be heard
with less respect, or with more disdain, than it is by many. Yet, even Eglon,
though but a Heathen, was better than such; who when he was told by Ehud, that
he had a message to him from God, rose out of his throne Iud. 3.20.
. When Pilate heard of having to do with the Son of God, he trembled Ioh.
19.8.
. Well then, when the Minister addresseth himself to the reading and to the
opening of the Scriptures, remember we, that that which we shall hear is the
voice of God: He speaks by Man's mouth; let us think with our selves how
great Majesty must needs be in his words; and let us labor to make our
behavior in hearing, suitable to the state and excellency of that which is
delivered.

The second note touching the Scripture is the Authority of it. Is it Gods
voice? Then of it self it is of sufficient credit, and needs no other
testimony to confirm it: It is also an absolute Judge for the ouer-ruling of
all doubts, and the determining of all cases and questions in Religion. For who
is higher than God? when his mouth and word has given the sentence, what
exception shall we make, or to whom shall we appeal? Thus you see that
heerupon is grounded the authority of the Scripture: of which authority of
the Scripture you see also that there are two branches: One, that it is of
sufficient credit to it self: The other, that it is in matters of Religion the
supreme Judge. Touching the first, we have this proof: I receive not (says
Christ) the record of men Ioh. 5.34.
. His meaning is, that he was of credit enough of himself, and needed no
testimony from any other, for the confirming of that which he had d^red. That
which is true of Christ, is true of the word of Christ, which is the Scripture:
It is the voice of God, and needs no other witness to avowe it. If we receive
(says S. John) the witness of men, the witness of God is greater 1. Ioh. 5.9.
. There is none greater or more certain, than the divine testimony. This is
enough, God has spoken it; where shall we have a witness of better credit?
Now for the supreme authority which the Scripture has in iudgeing; it is the
same in the Church that the Law is in the commonwealth: To the Law (says God)
and to the testimony Isay. 8.20.
. Christ submitted his doctrine to the decision of the Scripture Ioh. 5.39.
: So did Paul Act. 28.23.
. An Vmpire for matters of Religion had need of three things. First, it must be
of that nature, that we may be assured that the verdit thereof is true.
Secondly, it must be such, as from which it shall not be lawful to appeal.
Thirdly, it must be indifferent, and without partiality. Now nothing has
these three properties but the Scripture, and therefore that only is fit to
be the supreme Judge in matters of Religion.

This makes first against the Papists: Their opinion is, The Use of the 2. note
touching the Scripture.
that the Authority of the Scripture depends upon the Church, that is, that
it is therefore Canonical and of Divine credit and authority, because the
Church, (that is, indeed, when the matter is well sifted, the Pope) has so
determined. This one place is sufficient to overthrow this fancy. The
Scripture is the voice of God: shall not the voice of God be of credit to it
self? must men come in for a witness to justify that unto us which God has
said is true? God forbid. But, how shall I know (thou will say) that God has
spoken this or that? I answer; what, by the Church? Thou (perhaps) wilt say so:
but I demand; How shall I know, which is the Church? The Church must prove it
self by the Scripture, and therefore the Scripture has not its dependence
upon the Church. Yet thou do still urge, how thou shall know the Scripture
to be the voice of God. I answer: By it self: Therefore it is often called The
Testimony Isay 8.20.
; because it b^witnesse to it self. Thou shall know it by the e^^^^s: it is
mighty in operation etc Heb. 4.12.
, it will make thy heart to burn within thee Luke 24.32.
. He that will not believe this witness, will believe none. It is the Churches
Ministry which commends the Scripture, but it is not the Churches authority
which makes it to be Canonical. Another opinion of the Papists is, that the
Scripture is not the absolute Judge in matters of Religion, but the Church,
that is, by their interpretation, sometimes the consent of the Fathers;
sometime, the decree of a general Council; sometime the verdict of the Pope,
whose faith cannot fail. They accuse the Scripture to be obscure, imperfit,
the matter of contention, and therefore unfit to be a Judge. But if that be
true which is here, that the Scripture is the voice of God, who shall be more
fit to determine? But (thou say) how shall we be certain of the sense? I
answer: The Scripture is the interpreter of it self, as the Law of the Land is
of it self: The Scripture is Light Psalm. 119.105.
: As we see the light by the light, so the Scripture by it self. Who shall
judge what is Gods meaning but himself? Scripture with Scripture must be
conferred This is the meaning of the word (...). Act. 9.22.
, and that is the way to find the truth. Secondly, this point may be fitly
applied to our own occasions: There is betwixt us and our Teachers controversy
about sundry things: These and these things are urged and persuaded, as good
and necessary: such and such things are cried out upon, as evil and ungodly.
The Preacher draws one way by exhortation, we draw clean contrary by our
conversation. He says we must do thus and thus, we think it to be more than
needs: He says this or that is a gross sin, and will bring us to hell if we
continue in it; we suppose there is no danger in committing it. Here is now a
question, and by whom shall it be decided? If we will have a Judge which is
able to give an absolute verdit, let us appeal to the Scripture, let us
hearken what God says; where shall we find a more sufficient arbitrator ^ee
is the only Lawgiver Iam. 4.12.
of his Church. Every action, every course must stand or fall at his
determining. And where or whence shall we know what his will is, but in the
Scripture? The Prophets and Apostles have written and spoken, but God spoke by
their mouths: I would we could be persuaded to yield to the Lords verdit
revealed in the Scripture: What a notable reformation of sundry gross evils
would soon ensue? Touching those things which we go about to persuade, as,
diligence in the worship of God, care to hear and to profit by the Word,
sanctifying the Sabbath, Chastity, Sobriety, Mercy, Peaceablenesse and such
like, sure we are, we have the Scripture on our sides, and men have nothing but
humor, and custom, and obstinacy to oppose. If we will not yield to the
judgment of the Scripture now for our conversion, we shall ere long be forced
to yield unto it for our confusion.

The third thing touching the Scripture noted hence, is the Truth of it: which
follows from hence necessarily. God is the God of Truth Psalm. 31.5.
. How can there be any untruth in that which he has delivered? I remember
that for confirmation this does often come in, The mouth of the Lord has
spoken it Isay 1.20. and elsewhere.
. Heerupon are those commendations of the word of God: The judgments of the
Lord are truth Psalm. 19.9.
; Thy word is truth Ioh. 17.17.
; The word of truth, which is the Gospel Col. 1.5.
. And not without cause: For there is nothing related in it as done, but it was
so, as is reported, with every circumstance: There is nothing mentioned as a
matter to be done, but it shall so come to pass, as is foretold. It is more
easy that heaven and earth should pass away, than that one tittle of the Law
should fall Luke 16.17. The Use of the 3. note touching the Scripture.
. This is also a needful note. It is probable, that the greatest part of men
do not think, that there is that absolute truth and certainty in the
scripture: but that they do suppose it rather to be an idle tale, or
frightfull sound to amaze fools, full of terrible threatenings, but yet lighter
than vanity in performance. Therefore it is meet to hold this firm, that the
Scripture is the voice of him who cannot lie; Every curse written in it shall
fall upon the unrepentant; and every blessing promised therein, shall be made
good to the soul of every true believer.

The fourth general point in this part touching the Evidence of redemption is,
What the Prophets spoke: Where we have to note two things: 1. The sum of that
which God by the Prophets promised to do by Christ, verse 71.2. The inducement
or reason moving God so to do, verse. 72.73.

Concerning the first, whereas mention is made of enemies and haters, we must
inquire what and who they be. Touching their nature in general, they are
spiritual Enemies, or enemies in spiritual things, or for spiritual respects
Ephesians. 6.12.
. The chief of them is Satan; He was the first, and is therefore styled, A
murderer from the beginning Ioh. 8.44.
, and an Old Serpent Reu. 12.9.
: he desires us to winnow us Luke 22 31.
, and walks about seeking to devour 1. Pet. 5.8.
. Another enemy is sin, a dangerous enemy, lurking in our bosom, and still
laboring the ruin and overthrow of the soul: It fights against the soul
1. Pet. 2.11.
, and lusts against the spirit Gal 5.17.
. A third enemy is death, so entitled by the Apostle 1. Cor. 15.26
, and is therefore said to have a Sting Verse 53.
, by which it wounds the soul, and brings it within the compass of eternal
misery. A fourth enemy is the world; that is, wicked, unregenerate, godless
men. These be the enemies and haters of Gods people. The world hates you,
says our Savior to such Ioh. 15.19.
; and, In the world you shall have affliction Ioh. 16.33.
; and, Ye shall be hated of all nations for my names sake Math. 24.9.
. Now let us also see how true this is, that Christ brings Deliverance from
these Enemies: First, for deliverance from Satan, it is plain: For this
purpose appeared the Son of God, that he might loose the works of the devil
1. Ioh. 3.8.
; and, God has delivered us from the power of darkness Col. 1.13.
; Christ has spoiled the principalities and powers Col. 2.15.
. Secondly, for deliverance from sin, the words are express: The sting of
death is sin, etc. But thanks be to God that has given us victory, through
our Lord Jesus Christ 1. Cor. 15.56.57.
. Thirdly, for deliverance from death; Death (says the Apostle) is swallowed
up into victory 1. Cor. 15.54.
. Lastly, touching deliverance from the World: Be of good comfort (says our
Savior) I have overcome the World Ioh. 16.33.
. Let us proceed yet further and enquire into the manner of this deliverance:
Concerning which, I will briefly open two things. 1. The substance and ground
of the deliverance: 2. The manner of declaring it. The ground of the deliverance
is the merit of Christ's death. He was made sin 2. Cor. 5.21.
, and so died, and in death encountered with him, who had the power of death,
the devil Heb. 2.14.
. By being made sin, he took away sin, by dying he overcame death: sin
being abolished, and death subdued, the kingdom of the devil was utterly
overthrown. As for the manner of declaring and manifesting this deliverance, it
is either in this life, or hereafter. In this life he delivers from Satan,
by restraining his rage, by limiting his malice, by not giving us over to his
assaults: I have prayed that thy faith fail not Luc. 22.32.
. He delivers from sin by sanctifying us by his spirit, by killing the
strength of our corruption, by transforming us more and more into the image of
God. Sin shall not have dominion over you Romans 6.14.
. He delivers from death, by taking away the natural fear of it, by
assuring that it shall be a passage into glory. Thus Paul knew, that being
loosed he should be with Christ Phil. 1.23.
. He delivers from the world, by ordering the rage of evil men, by giving
constancy to maintain and profess the truth unto the death. To you it is
given to suffer for his sake Phil. 1.29.
. In the day of judgment he will further manifest this deliverance; for then
all tears shall be wiped away, there shall be no more death, etc. Reave. 21.3.
. The devil, with all his angels and wicked instruments, shall be sent away
eternally into hell. The God of peace shall tread Satan under our feet
shortly Romans 16.
. Many things might here be handled, as of the Excellency of our redemption,
far exceeding that of Moses, Deborah, Gedeon and others; of our security,
who having so many enemies, yet take no thought to withstand them, and such
like points: But the chief thing obseruable here, is The certainty of the
salvation of Gods chosen. The 4. Doctrine.
If any thing could endanger them and work their ruin, it must be one of
these four, Satan, Sin, Death, the World; no fifth can be thought upon: But
none of these four can. The reason is; It was Gods intent, by Christ to
deliver them from all these: Think we that God did fail in the prosecuting
his intent? did he either not follow it, or in following it, did he not
accomplish it? Far be it from us so to think. Hence comes that boasting
used by the Apostle: Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? Who
shall condemn? Who shall separate us from the love of Christ Romans 8.32.33.34.
etc. Satan's head broken, sin destroyed, death swallowed up, the world
vanquished, the happiest and most absolute victory that ever was.

This is a point of much comfort to all the godly. The Use.
Satan rages, sin strives, death looks terrible, the world opposes it
self: fearful are these things at the first beholding. Look we to Jesus the
author and finisher of our faith Heb. 12.2.
, the Prince of our salvation Heb. 2.10.
: he has to every of these given their mortal wound, and they shall never
prevail against any of his chosen. This doctrine is health to the navel, and
marrow to the bones Pro. 3.8.
, Yet, lest any should abuse it, remember that one of the enemies is sin, and
one of the deliverances from sin, is from the dominion thereof. A slave to
sin, a servant to his own lusts, he which makes a mock of sin Pro. 14.9.
, he that takes to himself the liberty of gross evils, such a one has no
right unto this comfortable deliverance; his condemnation (without speedy
repentance) is as sure, as the salvation of the elect is certain.

THE FIFTH SERMON.
VERSE. 72. That he might show mercy toward our Fathers, and remember his holy
Covenant.

73. And the oath which he swear to our Father Abraham.


NOw follows the inducement or Reason moving God to vouchsafe this great
Deliverance: and that was, the manifestation and discovery of two things. 1.
His mercy: That he might show mercy, etc. 2. His truth: And remember his holy
Covenant, The 1. Doctrine.
etc.

In the former of these, two things must be handled. 1. That the work of
Redemption by Christ, was intended by God, as it were a stage, in which the
Fullness and even the riches of his mercy might be seen. 2. A question, how
this work now wrought (as it were) in the worlds last quarter, might be said
to be a work of mercy to the Fathers, who lived in the prime days of the
world, long before Christ was exhibited in the flesh.

To manifest the first of these two, this first is in general to be noted,
that the Elect of God, which are redeemed by Christ's precious blood, are called
Vessels of mercy Romans 9.23.
: because in the eternal counsel of God they were chosen to this end, that the
Lord might declare the riches of his glory, and that their salvation might be
to the praise of the glory of his grace Ephesians. 1.6.
. The Lord intending a memorable instance of his unspeakable mercy, chose some
in Christ, to be redeemed from eternal slavery by his death. Secondly it is
worthy the observing, that the whole work of our salvation is called by this
one word Mercy 1. Pet. 2.10.
. The reason is, because to which part soever of it we cast our eyes, we shall
see more than prints and footesteps of his grace; the whole frame of it, is (as
it were) made of mercy. If we begin at the foundation of all, (Gods eternal
election) and pass down along by the period and full point of all (the glory
which shall be showed hereafter) and ask from what root each part did spring,
this one mercy, must be the sum of every answer: There was mercy in choosing;
mercy in sending Christ; mercy in calling us; mercy in justifying us, and what
can it be but mercy, that we shall be admitted to an Inheritance immortal and
undefiled 1. Pet. 1.4.
? Mercy the beginning mercy the progress, the conclusion mercy. In discoursing
hereof the burden of our song must still be like that of the Psalm, For his
mercy endures for ever Psalm. 136.1. etc.
. This very same thing, is showed in that parable of the Prodigal. In the
whole passage thereof, we shall see nothing but the fruits of exceeding mercy:
He ran and fell on his neck, he kissed him, he commanded to bring forth the
best robe, and to kill the fat calfe, etc Luc. 16.20. etc.
: What was here but mercy? The same is true in the dealing of God the Father
with those to whom he is reconciled in his Son: Christ being for them made
sin, feels the edge of his justice; but they, being made righteous through
Christ, enjoy the fullness of his mercy.

The 1. Use.
This is, first, matter of information and of settlement in the truth. For here
we see, against the Papists, that in the whole work of man's redemption by
Christ, there is no footing left for humane merit. Light and darkness, God and
the devil are not in a more direct line of opposition either to other, than
mercy and merit: It is impossible that these two should admit any composition.
It is said by Philosophers, that in lower degrees, contraries may have some
concurrence: as light and darkness in the twilight: But take two contrary
qualities, and let one of them be in the height and full strength, there is no
possibility of place for the other. So then, seeing in the work of salvation,
the Lord has intended to make show, not of some parcels (as it were) but of
the very fullness of his mercy, there is no more room for merit, than there
was for Dagon before the Arc of Jehovah 1. Sam. 5.3.
. I remember what is said of him that went into the field to gather herbs, he
found a wild gourd, and shred it into the pottage: But when the pottage came
to be tasted, the eaters cried out, Death is in the pot 2. Kin. 4.39.40.
. Such cooks the Papists are: they take upon them to make ready a potion of
comfort, for a perplexed soul; but when they temper with this herb of Grace,
the leaves of this wild gourd of humane merit, which never grew in the Lords
garden, or at least was never planted by him, but crept in (as a weed) by the
negligence of the dressers, they have given occasion to make the same cry,
Death is in the pot, and with it they have poisoned a world of souls, and have
dealt as injuriously with the Church of God, as the Philistims did with Izhak,
when they stopped and filled up with earth all his Wells Genesis 26.15.
; so with this earthly trash they have choked up the Fountain of Grace Zach.
13.1.
, that it cannot stream out comfortably, for the refreshing of the wearied
souls of Gods people. Thus (as Job said to his friends) they have forged lies,
and by that means are Physicians of no value Job 13.4.
.

Neither is this to be observed only because of Papists, but even because of
the common people, inasmuch as the doctrine and opinion of Merit, (that is, of
doing somewhat whereby to further our own salvation) is graven as with an iron
pen Ier. 17.1.
, in the tables of every natural heart. Experience shows, that the
sowrenesse of this Popish leaven remains in many: Good prayers, and good
doings; mean well, and do well; these and the like are the slaves they lean
unto. It is said, that the children of the Jews which married wives of Ashdod,
spoke half in the speech of Ashdod Noh. 13.24.
: Such is the religion of many: Talk with them of salvation, they speak half
popishly, and half soundly: They will speak of mercy and grace, and seem to
magnify and esteem it; yet something of their own shall be brought in too,
and a man shall have somewhat ado before he can conjure out this devil, and
bring them to an absolute dependence upon the freedom of Gods mercy. Remember
we then the doctrine of this place: God intented the mystery of Christ, in
which to set out to the full, the unsearchable riches of his mercy; to couple
with it ought else, more or less, is injuriously to darken the beauty of that
which the purpose of God was to have to be seen and beheld in whole without
impeachment.

Secondly, this doctrine is a matter of comfort. The 2. Use.
There cannot be a matter of greater security to the soul of a Christian, than
to lay his whole hope upon Gods mercy. The reason is, because the mercy of God
is (as himself) infinite, eternal, and unchangeable. Where shall I find a
more certain refuge? When I see a plaster as large as my sore, there is my
comfort. The perplexed conscience groaning under the weight of sin, and
panting for grace, is the fittest Judge in points of this nature. Well then,
let a man's Bones be full of the sin of his youth Job 20.11.
, let his heart be broken with one breaking upon another Job 16.14.
, let his conscience be set upon the rack, the Lord writing bitter things
against him Job 13.26.
; you will tell him of the mercy and grace of God. You do well: but you will
add withal, that his comfort in this must be eyked out with something of his
own: He must cry out upon you as Job did upon his friends, Miserable
comforters ye are all Job 16.2.
. He will see such weakness, such scantnesse, such maimednesse, such
imperfection in his best performances, that he will not dare to bring them
into a reckoning before God, yea the very thought of them, will but add
affliction to his grief. Thus will his comfort consume like a rotten thing,
and as a garment that is moth-eaten Job 13.28.
. But teach him to build all upon Gods mercy, laboring that nothing of his
own may be once thought upon in this business, he shall straight see such a
breadth and length, depth and height Ephesians. 3.18.
of comfort, which will be as cold waters to his weary soul Pro. 25.25.
. Thus this doctrine is matter of instruction to ground us in knowledge, and
matter of refreshing to furnish us with comfort. The soul of a Christian is as
the Done which went out of Noah's Arc Genesis 8.9.
; It finds no footing but upon the rock of Mercy; and it is but an
imagination of mercy when any thing is coupled thereunto. This truth has
forced even the greatest adversaries to acknowledge it: according as we find,
that no mean Papist, after long laboring against the doctrine of
Justification by only Faith, does in the end confess, that yet it is the
safest way to place a man's trust upon Gods only mercy and favor Bellar. lib.
5. de Iustif. c. 7.
.

The next matter to be treated is the Question; How the work of Redemption
wrought by Christ, can be said to be a work of mercy to the Fathers? For the
resolving of this question, this is to be known, that there is but one way of
salvation to the Fathers before and under the Law, and to us which have lived
since the revelation of Christ in the flesh: Jesus Christ, yesterday, to day,
the same for ever Heb. 13.8.
. Hereupon Christ is said to be the Lamb slain from the beginning of the
world Reu. 13.8.
: whereof this is the meaning, that albeit he was manifested in the flesh in
the latter end of the world, and not slain before, yet all the holy men and
women, even from Adam, were saved by his blood. The most persons of note under
the Law, were types of Christ, and all their sacrifices and ceremonies tended
to this one thing, to cherish in them the hope of the Messiah; and to acquaint
them with the whole mystery of Redemption, which was wrought by his means.
There is not one little circumstance in the carriage of our salvation by
Christ, but the same was shadowed out in the ancient complements of the Law:
Even Abraham saw the day of Christ Ioh. 8.56.
. To them that lived before Christ, Christ was crucified in the Sacrifices and
bloodsheddings of the Law; among us he is crucified Gal. 3.1.
by the preaching of the Gospel: They believed on Christ to come; we believe
on Christ already come. Zeeharie therefore does here mention the Fathers, to
teach, The 2. Doctrine.
That the efficacy of Christ's death is not restrained or limited to one point
of time, but is stretched even to the ages bypast, and that the Fathers from
the beginning of the world came within the compass of this mercy which God
showed to mankind in Christ's incarnation: And this to be true has been
proved in the opening and clearing of this question: Paul said, that the
Christian Religion which he professed, was the Hope of the promise which God
made to the Fathers Act. 26.6.
; and Peter in his Oration made in the Synod at Jerusalem, speaking of
believing to be saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, joins the
Fathers with them who then lived; We believe, even as they Act. 15.10.11.
.

This is first, matter of Resolution in a needful doubt. The 1. Use.
I am taught if I will be saved, to believe only in Christ Jesus; the Ministry
of the word does still (like John Baptist) point out him unto me, as the only
person which takes away the sins of the World Ioh. 1.29.
, it says, that he is the only way Ioh 14.6.
; and that there is no salvation in any other Act. 4.12.
. It tells me moreover, that this Christ was crucified many hundred years
since, and that now in respect of his body, Heaven must contain him Act. 3.21.
, till the end of all things. But now here my faith wauereth and is in doubt,
asking how his blood, which was shed so long since, can be of force for the
purging and cleansing of my sin. This scruple is taken away by considering
that which is here said: Zecharie affirms, that the mercy of God in Christ,
did concern even the Fathers, which had long before gone the way of all flesh,
and which were asleep in the dust of the earth. Now then, look how the
Fathers, so long before might have benefit by his death to come, by the same
means may we now so long after receive comfort by his death past. By faith they
beheld Christ to be offered, and are now entered into rest: by faith we may also
look back upon Christ already sacrificed, and be admitted into the fellowship
of eternal happiness. The two Cherubins placed at the two ends of the
mercie-seat, had their Faces one to another Exo. 25.18. etc.
, and both upon the Arc: So the age bypast, and the age after, look either
on the other, but both upon Christ.

The 2. Use.
Secondly, this is matter of much contentment to a true believer. For here he
may see, that be he never so poor, or despised, or base, though he lie among
the pots Psa. 68.13.
, or be behind the Ewes with young Psa. 78.72.
, yet he is by Christ called into the fellowship, and partaking of the same
salvation, which the holy Fathers and Prophets do now enjoy; Adam, Enoch,
Noah, Abraham, Moses, etc. these were worthy men, and in great account with
God. How truly may thou say with David 1. Sam. 18.18.
, What am I, that I should enjoy that mercy which God has prepared for them?
In such a manner does our Savior describe the happiness of the saved; They
shall sit down with Abraham, Izhak and Jacob in the kingdom of Heaven Matthew.
8.11.
, and it is one circumstance of the torment of the wicked: ye shall see
Abraham, Izhak and Jacob and all the Prophets in the kingdom of heaven, and
your selves thrust out at doors Luke 13.28
. What shall then become of us, who neglect so great salvation Heb. 2.3.
? Who, when God has promised such glorious things Psalm. 87.3.
for us, even the same salvation and mercy which the chiefest of his Saints do
now enjoy, yet had rather be malicious with Cain; tyrannizing with Nimrod;
profane with Esau; scoffing with Ishmael; extorters with Ahab; proud with
Iesabel; superstitious with Jeroboam; catching with Judas; playing the
belly-gods with Dives; resisting the truth with Elymas; railing with
Rabshakeh; murmuring with Core; vicious with the Sodomites; (of which persons
we have no other testimony, but that they are reserved in everlasting chains
under darkness unto the judgment of the great day Jude 6.
:) than seek to reign with Abraham, Izhak, Jacob, and the Prophets. If we
desire the same happiness, we must go by the same way. It is impossible to
have the Pleasures of sin Heb. 11.25.
, and the Felicity of the chosen Psalm. 106.5.
too.

The other thing which God intended to make known in the work of our
Redemption, is his Truth. To remember his holy covenant, and the oath etc. Here
we must treat touching this Holy Covenant, what it is, and how it was
confirmed by an Oath: and then next, how God can be said to be mindful of his
Covenant and Oath. As for the former, we all know the nature of a Covenant. By
it here are meant those Articles of agreement which are betwixt God and man
concerning life eternal. The substance of this Covenant is, I will be thy God,
and thou shall be my people. This Covenant is twofold. The one of Works, the
condition whereof is, perfect Obedience. The other of grace, of which the
condition is Faith Ioh. 1.12.
. These two covenants are one: they differ in manner of dispensation, the one
being in types and shadows after a more obscure manner, and called The old
Covenant: the other being more plain and perspicuous, delivered after a new
fashion, and therefore called The New: But the sum of both, was and is,
Christ Jesus: No other foundation can be laid 1. Cor. 3.11.
: and it was ever a truth, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself 2. Cor. 5.19.
. Now this covenant is called a Holy covenant, because it was made by a holy
God, and tended unto holiness, both to make Christ's holiness to become ours,
and to bind us to show forth the fruits of holiness in our lives. Touching
the confirmation of it by an oath, (By my self, says God, I have sworn Genesis
22.16.
,) in it, briefly we must examine the quality of the oath: and the reason why
God swear. The quality of the Oath is, By himself. The Lord does bind (as it
were) his Godhead for the performance of that which he promises, as though he
should say, If this be not so, let me be God no more: Now for the other, it may
be indeed doubted, why God should swear, seeing his word is certain in it
self and needs no confirmation: but we must know, that God swear not to win
more credit to his promise, but he did it for the better confirmation of our
faith, being willing more abundantly to show unto us the stablenesse of his
Counsel Heb. 6.17.
.

Now for that, how God can be said to remember his covenant and oath, seeing God
cannot forget, thus it must be understood: The long delaying of the actual
performance of the promise touching the Messiah, might give occasion to some to
think that God had utterly forgotten it, and that it was but a verbal promise
without any purpose of accomplishment. But now (says Zecharie) he will
fulfill all to the utmost, and by so doing make it manifest, that whatsoever
men might suppose, yet the performance of the Covenant was ever in his mind.
The sense then of the whole place is this; that whereas God had freely and of
his own accord made a holy league with his church, grounding the same upon
Christ, and binding it (for better assurance) with an Oath, which
notwithstanding because of the delays of so many years, might seem to be
even buried in forgetfulness; he would now make known his never failing
faithfulness, and show to the world, that nothing of all that he had said,
should fall to the ground unfulfilled.

The doctrine here is, The 3. Dotrine.
the absolute and unchangeable certainty of Gods promises. One end of the
incarnation of Christ was, that there might in it be an evidence given to the
world, that the Lord neither could nor would be unmindful of his promise.
Jesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision for the truth of God, to
confirm the promises made to the fathers Romans 15.8
. I will not falsify my truth, my covenant will I not break, nor alter the
thing that is gone out of my lips Psalm. 89.33.
. It was a worthy resolution of the Prophet, long before Christ was borne:
Thou will perform thy truth to Jacob, and mercy to Abraham, as thou have
sworn to our fathers in old time Mica. 7.20.
. God can not lie Tit. 1.2.
, nor deny himself 2. Tim. 2.13.
: Thou art the same (says the Psalm Psalm. 102.27.
): I am the Lord, I change not Mal. 3.6. The 1. Use.
. This is the reason he is called Jehovah, because as he gives being to all
things, and has his own being from himself; so he makes that to be which he
has promised.

Of this there is a double use. First, here is much matter of upholding for the
faith of a Christian. God has promised; that is much: he has bound his
promise with an oath; this is more. He has sent his son in the fullness of
time Gal. 4.4.
, in whom all his promises are Yea and Amen 2. Cor. 1.20.
. What can be more absolute? The faith which is strengthened with this
threefolde cord can not easily be broken. It is an old custom of the devil
to lay siege to the truth of Gods word: Yea, has God indeed said Genesis 3.1.
? So now, the main point that he labors in, is, That God will not be so good
as his word, he will forget to be merciful, and his promise will fail for
evermore Psalm. 77.89.
. To put back this assault, remember this one instance of the manifestation of
Christ: all promises had their reference to him. His birth and sufferings are
left as an undoubted pledge of the performance of whatsoever God has spoken.
We may say as the Apostle, He that gave us Christ, how shall he not with him
give all things also Romans 8.32.
? So, he that has performed the promise concerning Christ, wherein shall he
fail? He that has kept his word in this, I will make no question of his truth
in any thing.

The 2. Use.
Secondly (for a second use) here is matter of very needful advertisement to us
all. Here is mention made of the covenant of God, of the oath of God, and of
the certeintie of both. This covenant consists of two parts: in the one God
binds himself to us, to be our God; in the other we bind our selves to him,
to be his people. I will say to them, Thou art my people; and they shall say,
Thou art my God Hos. 2.23.
. His is a covenant of mercy, ours is a covenant of obedience. He promises
happiness, we holiness; he glory, we duty: he has tied himself by an oath,
we have bound our selves by the vow of baptism. Will he be mindful of his
covenant, and shall we forget ours? Will not he alter, and shall we fail? Will
not he trifle with us, and shall we dally with him? God forbid. Yet, this
faltring in that part of the covenant which concerns us, is a common evil.
The most of our lives rather argue a resolution to break promise, than a
purpose and endeavor to perform it. Blessed be thou of the Lord (said Saul to
Samuel) I have fulfilled the commandment of the Lord. But Samuel said, What
means then the bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the
oxen which I hear 1. Sam. 15.13.14.
? So, it is like enough, we will be ready to justify our selves; and when we
are challenged for breach of promise, will be ready to say, like the gainsaying
Jews, Wherein Mal. 3.8.13.
have we trespassed? But it shall be said to us, as it was to Saul, What mean
then these and these things? If we make conscience of the covenant, what mean
these gross sins, which cry loud in the ears of the most high, and under
which he is pressed, as a cart that is full of sheaues Am. 2.13.
, swearings, whoredoms, drunkenness, oppressions, cruelties, contempt of the
Word and Sacraments, and all these with an High hand Number. 15.30
; many being grown to that extremity that they cannot have any shame Ier. 8.12.
: the very trial of their countenance testifies against them Isay 3.9.
? Is this our promise? Is this to be mindful of our covenant? With what face
can we lay claim to the covenant of mercy, when we shall be so manifestly
convicted to have trodden under our feet the covenant of Obedience? How ever it
be, God will keep his word, but not of favor, but of justice, even that which
Moses speaks of, enough to make his two ears to tingle 1. Sam. 3.11.
, and his belly to tremble Hab 3.16.
that hears it: The Lord will not be merciful unto us, but his wrath and
jealousy shall smoke against us, and every curse that is written shall light
upon us, and the Lord shall put out our name from under heaven Deu 29.20.
. This is their portion, which forget God and deal falsely concerning his
covenant Psalm. 44 17.
: this is the heritage that they shall have of God for their works Job 20.29.
. Remember then, as the substance of the covenant on Gods part, so the
condition on ours: he has couenanted, so have we: he has sworn, so have we
also: he will not forget his part, let us make conscience to remember ours.

THE SIXTH SERMON.
VERSE. 74. That he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the
hands of our enemies, should serve him without fear etc.


WE are now come to the last part of the work of our redemption, which is the
end and drift thereof; and which is also a branch of the Covenant which God made
to the fathers, and a limme (as it were) of that good which he promised to
bestow.

Touching this end, I will speak first, generally; and then, more particularly
I will discuss those things which do necessarily concern that maine duty, at
which God aimed in vouchsafing us so great a deliverance by Christ Jesus.

The general sum of this end of our redemption is, that we being delivered
from our enemies should serve God. Concerning these enemies who they are, and
what is the deliverance from them, I shall not need to speak; these things
were opened in the 71. verse. The sense and general doctrine of the place is
this; The 1. Doctrine.
That the purpose of God in freeing us from the spiritual bondage in which we
were by nature, was, that we should even consecrate our selves to the glory
and honor and service of himself. This point is plain in the words of this
place, and easily to be further manifested by the Scripture. Being made free
from sin, ye are made the servants of righteousness Romans 6.18.
; that is, seeing the Lord has dealt thus graciously with you, to rescue you
by the death of Christ from the slavery of sin, this is that which is now
expected of you, even that you should deuote your selves to the practice of
righteousness, being henceforth as zealous in good services, as ye have
formerly been earnest and eager in fulfilling your own lusts, and in glutting
your selves with the pleasures of sin. Like to this is the reasoning of the
same Apostle elsewhere in the same Epistle: I beseech you by the mercies of God,
that you give up your bodies, etc Romans 12.1.
. He persuades unto a godly life by propounding to us the mercies of God. Now
this kind of reasoning were of no force, were it not for this, namely, that the
drift of all Gods mercy unto us in Christ, is, the drawing and recovering of us
from the service of Satan, unto the obedience and service of himself: Such is
that speech of his in another place: Ye are bought with a price, therefore
glorify God, etc 1. Cor. 6.20.
, as if he had said, God has redeemed you, therefore it stands with
equity, and it is agreeing to his purpose and meaning, that you should serve
him. Excellent is that place to Titus; The grace of God etc. has appeared, and
teaches us, that we should deny ungodliness, etc. and that we should live
soberly etc. in this present world Tit. 2.11.12.
. The meaning is, that the doctrine of the Gospel (the sum whereof is,
Redemption in and by Christ) is preached publicly unto all, but not to
encourage them to continue in sin, but to urge them to lay aside
profaneness, and to renounce their own lusts, and to have their fruit in
holiness, as they hope to have their end, eternal life. For (says the
Apostle) Christ gave not himself for us, that we should the more boldly give
the raines to our own lusts, but that we should be zealous of good works Verse.
14.
. To these we may join that of S. Peter: Pass the time of your dwelling here
in fear, knowing that we were not redeemed with corruptible things, etc. but
with the precious blood of Christ 1. Pet. 1.17.18.19.
. There he uses the price of redemption as a special motive to a religious
life, inasmuch also as the drift thereof was to free us from our vain
conversation. Many particulars of this kind might be heaped up: I will conclude
this enumeration of places with the saying of David; Thou have (says he)
delivered my soul from death, and also my feet from falling, that I may walk
before God in the light of the living Psalm. 56.13.
. He makes the end of all the deliverances which God had vouchsafed him, to be
this one thing, that he might spend his days in a sincere course in the sight
of God. And indeed this is a matter of great equity. Who planteth a vineyard
and eats not of the fruit thereof 1. Cor. 9.7.
? And so; who will pay a price of Redemption for him, by whom he shall receive
no service? Gods we are by the right of redemption: Ye are not your own
(says Paul 1. Cor. 6.19
): we are bought with a price for his use, therefore all which we can do, is
to be diuerted to his glory.

Hereby it appears that the case is not so as the most suppose: The Gospel
is no doctrine of carnal liberty, The Use.
as though because of the abundance of mercy, and in respect that Christ has
performed sufficient for the presenting of us without fault in Gods sight, and
for the acquiting us from the guilt of al our sins, be they never so many or so
great, therefore it might be lawful for us to live after our own will, and to
give liberty to our own inordinate affections. No: the doctrine of the Gospel
tieth us to as strict terms of obedience, as the law. There is not any one
holy duty which in the Scripture God requires of a Christian, from which the
freedom of our being justified by the grace of Christ, does give us any
color of dispensation. Fit to this purpose is the saying of the Apostle, after
he had largely disputed of our free justification by Christ, and had proved
that the works of the Law are of no force to deserve salvation; Do we then
(says he) make the Law of none effect through Faith? For so it might seem to
be a matter indifferent whether we do well or no, and that the doctrine
which he had taught being true, there is no use of the Moral Law. God forbid
(answers the Apostle) yea we establish the Law Romans 3.31.
. The doctrine of grace is so far from overthrowing the Law, that it binds
all which hope to be saved to a more strait obedience: good works are ordained
for them to walk in Ephe. 2.10.
, and God has therefore called them unto grace, that he might be glorified
^eir pure conversation. Let all profane ones consider this, all despisers of
good things, swearers, Sabbath Breakers, wantons, drunkards, Libertines, etc.
Such (some of them) do pretend a faith in Christ, they will say they hope they
are redeemed by him, and look to be saved by his death. I ask of thee, who so
hopest and yet live in the service of the devil, and in bondage to thine
own lusts, what think thou? Do thou believe that God did therefore send
Christ, or, that Christ did therefore shed his precious blood, that men might
take liberty thereby to enter into all manner of excess? Did he therefore
raise up an horn of salvation, that under hope thereof men might lay iniquity
to iniquity, and then salve up all with this, I believe in Christ, I know mine
own works cannot save me, etc. God forbid, that any man should so imagine. It
is plain against the Scripture, and directly contrary to the purpose of God
in the work of man's Redemption. Mark this place: God has visited, redeemed,
raised up a horn of salvation, etc. not to establish sin, but to dissolve
sin, not to discharge us from our obedience, but to bind us unto duty.
Therefore, either be sure that thy settled resolution and purpose is, to
mortify and subdue thine own corruption, and to sacrifice even thy sweetest
and best pleasing sins unto God, and to limit thy self by all means within
the compass of Christian obedience, or else thou art one of those, of whom S.
Jude speaks, which art of old ordained to condemnation Jude 4.
; the benefit of redemption belongs not to thee, thy damnation sleeps not,
and thy judgment long agone is not far off 2. Pet. 2.3.
. Thus much in general touching the end of our redemption, to serve God.

Now follow the particulars appertaining to it, and they are these. 1. The
party from whom the power and grace to do this, (to wit, to serve and
glorify God) must be looked for; That he would grant us. 2. The manner of so
doing it; without fear. 3. The time to which the performance of this duty is
tied; All the days of our life. 4. The special duties wherein it stands:
holiness and righteousness. 5. The trial of the truth of these duties: before
him. Of these in their course.

First touching the party from whom the power to serve God must be expected:
That he would grant unto us (says Zachary.) This is a chief difference
betwixt the Law and the Gospel. The Law commands good things, but shows no
means of doing them. The Gospel does not only enjoin things right, but
declares also, how and whence that may be supplied which is wanting in us.
Therefore Zachary does not only manifest the drift and intent of God in
redeeming us, (namely, that we should serve him) but does also point his
finger to the fountain, and teaches us who it is, that will enable us to do
it. And indeed this is a part of the Covenant of grace, The 2. Doctrine.
That as God will expect service at our hands, so he will make us able to
perform that acceptable service which he requires. In the handling of which
doctrine, I will declare two things. 1. That in us there is no such power. 2.
That God works it in those whom he has chosen. The former of these is
apparent out of the manifest testimonies of the Scripture. All the imaginations
of the thoughts of man's heart are only evil continually Genesis 6.5.
. We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves 2.
Cor. 3.5.
. Without me you can do nothing, says Christ Ioh. 15.5.
. Now, who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness Job 14.4.
, or whether can men gather grapes of Thorns Math. 7.16.
? There is nothing but crookedness in our nature, and how is it possible that
any good thing should come there from? The second branch, touching the supply
from God of that which is wanting in us, is very clear. What man is he that
fears the Lord, him will he teach the way that he shall choose Psa. 25.12.
; Thou shall walk safely by the way, and thy feet shall not stumble Pro. 3.23.
; I will cause you to walk in my statutes Ezec. 36.27.
. These places show how that the Lord will furnish his redeemed with such a
measure of grace, as that they shall walk in such a way, and run such a
course as shall be pleasing and acceptable to himself. The order and manner of
the Lords bringing this to pass in them is this: First, because the heart is
the fountain of all our actions, therefore Gods first work in them, is, to
put a new spirit into their bowels, and, to take the stony heart out of their
bodies, and to give them a heart of flesh Ezec. 11.19.
, that is, to remove their natural untowardness, and to make their hearts,
more inclinable and pliable unto good. Secondly, he puts his Law in their
inward parts, and writes it there Ier. 31.33.
, he planteth in them the true saving knowledge, he opens their hearts Act.
16.14.
, making them to conceive and understand it, he causes them to love it, and
to delight in it, he kindles in them a desire to practice it, and to walk in
all holy obedience to it. Thirdly, he furnishes them with the assistance of a
secret director, a word behind them, saying to them: This is the way, walk in
it Isay 30.21.
; and thus he keeps their feet 1. Sam. 2.9.
, and guides them in the way Psa. 25.9.
. Fourthly, he fills them with the fruits of righteousness Phil. 1.11.
, that is, he enableth them to bring forth that good into outward act, the
knowledge whereof is seated in their hearts; that so they may not be idle nor
unfruitful 2. Pet. 1.8.
, but may adorn the doctrine of God their Savior in all things Tit. 2.10.
. Lastly, he does not so leave them, but the hand of his mercy is stilll
stretched out, to stablish them in every word and good work 2. These. 2.17.
, to confirm them and to make them perfect Heb. 13.21.
, that so they may hold out, and may not be weary of well doing 2. These. 3.13.
, but that the yoke of Christ may become easy Math. 11.30.
unto them, and the Christian life may not seem (as it does to the wicked)
burdensome and unsavory. Thus it is manifest, that serve the Lord of our
selves we cannot; and withal, that God has even tied himself by promise to
enable his servants thereunto.

We are taught by this, The Use.
when we are called upon to any good work, not to run to our selves, as
though by our own power we should be able to perform it, (for who are we that
any good thing should come from us?) but we must lift up our hearts to God,
praying with David: Open my eyes Psalm. 119.18.
; Teach me the way of thy statutes; Verse. 33.
Incline my heart unto thy testimonies Verse. 36.
; Direct my steps in thy word. Verse. 133.
We are by nature dead in trespasses and sins Ephe. 2.1.
: until he quicken us by his everliving spirit, and create a new heart Psalm.
51.10.
within us, we cannot entertain so much as a motion unto good. And this is the
true cause, that we are so barren in good duties, and so fruitful in the
unfruitful works of darkness Ephesians. 5.11.
even because we ask not Iam. 4.2.
. Thou which art an adulterer, or a man given to drunkenness, or apt to
contend, or to be desirous of revenge, or to be drawn by every occasion into
evil company, or which can scarsely remember any good thing taught, or
which find a kind of drowsinesse still to creep upon thee, when thou come
to hear the word of God: when wast thou an earnest and humble suter unto God,
out of a hearty detestation of these evils, that he would enable thee to reform
them? when did thou entreat him and beg with him to subdue thy unruly and
untamed affections? when did thou lament before him, with a sorrowful heart,
the untowardness of thy nature unto good? what marvel then, if sin get the
dominion over thee, if thou be led captive by thine own lusts, if evil grow
strong upon thee: For why? Although happily thou could wish, that God would
pardon thee, yet thou art not a suter to him to reform thee; thou could be
content that thy sins might be remitted, but thou do not entreat that they
may be subdued. When thou feel an evil lie hard upon thee, and perceiuest
that it still strives to draw thee to the practice of it, thou should do
as Paul, beseech the Lord that it may depart from thee 2. Cor. 12.8.
. God has so bound himself, to fulfill the desire of them that fear him
Psalm. 145.19.
, that at least (which yet is not little) thou shall receive the comfort which
Paul did, my grace shall be sufficient for thee 2. Cor. 12.9.
. God has made a covenant to grant grace, and albeit for trial of faith he
may delay suitors for it, in some particulars, for a time, yet he will not
finally deny it. If any lack wisdom, let him ask of God, and it shall be
given him Iam. 1.5.
. Who can say that this promise was ever broken? Remember this then; when
mention is made of the end of redemption, namely, a life led to Gods glory,
think who it is from whom this grace must come: It is God which gives it: let
us strive to him by our prayers Romans 15.30.
, certainly we shall not be disappointed of our hope.

The next point is the manner of doing this duty: ( without fear.) This place
must first be examined, because it may seem contrary to another place, which
bids us to serve the Lord with fear Psalm. 2.11.
. We must therefore learn to distinguish: There is a hellish fear, and there
is a holy fear, a slavish fear, and a sonlike fear. The former of these is
called by S. Paul, the spirit of bondage Romans 8.15.
. It is such as slaves have in respect of those to whom they are in bondage: A
kind of respect they have to those in whose power they are, they do that which
is commanded them, but they neither have love to their commanders, nor take any
delight in that which is enjoined them: that which they do, they do by
enforcement, and in fear of the whip. Such is the fear of God in reprobates:
sometimes they are stricken with a kind of awe of Gods majesty, and do even
tremble at his judgments, and (it may be) do something which is required, but
their obedience proceeds not out of any love to God, or out of any truth of
affection to that which is performed, but only out of constraint. Thus did Cain
cast down his countenance Genesis 4.6.
, Esau weep Genesis 27.38.
, Pharaoh let the people go Exo. 12 31.
, Ahab humble himself 1. King. 21.27.
, Judas repent Math. 27.3.
. None of these was truly grieved for his offense, or sorry that God was
displeased: They had an apprehension of the terror of the Lord 2. Cor. 5.11.
, and that wrung from them something, in which otherwise of themselves they
took no delight. Now the other fear is called the spirit of adoption Romans
8.15.
, and it is a fear to offend, rising out of the apprehension and feeling of
Gods love: as, when the experience which I have had in my self of Gods
gracious dealing with me, makes me to entertain a fear lest I should abuse
his love, and do ought that might displease his majesty. This kind of fear
may be where there is the greatest and firmest and most respective love: as
betwixt the father and son; the husband and wife: Let the wife see that she
fear her husband, says Paul Ephe. 5.33.
. This distinction of fear, being rightly understood, it will be easy to
reconcile these places. Serve the Lord with fear says David: that is,
consider you the majesty of God, what he is in himself, and what he is to
you, and so let your hearts stand in awe of him, and be you afraid to displease
him. Again, the end of our redemption is, that we should serve God without
fear, says Zachary: This is his meaning; Whereas the face of God, is naturally
a terror unto us, even as the face of a Judge is to a thief, and whereas that
which we do is so full of maimes and blemishes, that we can have no courage to
present it unto God, nor hope that he will accept it, this is the end of our
redemption, that being certainly persuaded of the favor of God in Christ, and
of remission of sins by him, all this fear may be quite removed, and we may
boldly come to the throne of grace, and comfortably assure our selves, that God
for Christ will accept, even the imperfect and scant measure of our obedience.
This is the true sense of the place, this is the fear, in the freedom from
which stands the true service of God. So that now this is the doctrine; The
3. Doctrine.
That till the mind and conscience of a Christian be quieted and pacified by
the knowledge of ones personal acquittance before God by Christ, a man cannot
truly serve God, nor yield unto him that obedience which he ought. This is
plain out of the place: the true manner of serving God is without fear, that
is, without astonishment and suspense of mind how God will accept that which we
do. Now this fear cannot be banished, but by the comfortable apprehension of
a discharge by Christ, therefore without this comfortable apprehension, no man
can serve and obey God as he ought to do. These things are all manifest. The
reason also of the doctrine is apparent thus: As often as I recount with my
self the severity and justice of God, how that he cannot abide iniquity, and
is in his wrath a consuming fire Heb. 12.29.
, and do consider withal, how full of corruption my heart is, and how far
short the best I can do, comes of that which is required, what heart shall I
have to tender my service unto him, unless I be someway assured that my person
is accepted in Christ, and that Gods just displeasure is allaied toward me
for his sake, so that my scant performances shall be shrouded under his most
absolute and perfect obedience? Hence is that saying of David: There is mercy
with thee, that thou may be feared Psalm. 130.4.
. It is the hope and apprehension of mercy which encourages to obedience.
Seeing we have these promises (says the Apostle) let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness, etc 2. Cor. 7.1.
. See what Paul infers upon the promises of mercy which God has made. Paul
says in one place, that Whatsoever is not of Faith is sin Romans 14.23.
, meaning that whatsoever is offered to God, which proceeds not from faith,
the same is a sin. In another place he says, that by faith our consciences
have peace with God Romans 5.1.
. Both the places put together do show thus much, that until the conscience
be pacified by the assurance of reconciliation with God by Christ, nothing
that is done can find acceptance with the Lord. The order of the words
touching Habel, is worth the noting; The Lord had respect to Habel, and to his
offering Genesis 4.4.
: First, to Habel, then to his offering. So that till I know that God does
accept my person, I can have no hope that he will respect my service.

By this it is plain, first, The 1. Use.
that it is impossible for a Papist rightly to serve God, or to yield unto him
any true obedience. This will be thought a hard censure, especially touching
those which seem so devout and make so great a profession of good works: But
it is easily justified by the doctrine of this place. God is not rightly served
unless it be without fear, without that slavish awe, which arises out of the
not knowing a man's own particular reconciliation with God. Now it is certain,
that Papists do stiffly maintain it, that it is impossible for a man by an
ordinary faith to be assured of Gods favor. By the Decrees of the Council of
Trent, a man must doubt of his salvation as long as he lives in this world
Sess. 6. Cap. 9. and Can. 13.16.
: so that indeed a Papist can never attain to any true peace of conscience by
his own doctrine: If he keep himself to it, he must resolve while he lives
to be in suspense and uncertain of Gods favor: What a rack is this to a man's
conscience, to be taught that he can never be sure in this World that his
sins are pardoned, and that God is reconciled to him in Christ Jesus? What
cheerfulness or boldness can a man have to serve God, when it is taught that
there is no possibility for him to be assured in his soul that God in Christ
will accept his service and forgive his weaknesses? Let this be a rule to us to
judge of Popery: it is a desperate comfortless doctrine. Christ came into the
world to free us from this servile fear, and to fill our hearts with
cheerfulness, by showing unto us Gods loving countenance: Popery holds us
in suspense, and labors to uphold that fear which is the very direct enemy
to true obedience.

The 2. Use.
Secondly, this makes also against the common opinion, which (in this point) is
the same with the Papists. The most do talk (I know not what) of serving God,
and profess to do it every day: but if it be asked what ground they have of
peace with God by Christ, this will be found to be a very strange demand, and
they will not know what to answer: Security they have enough, but, what true
peace of conscience is, they understand not. Well may they seem to be without
fear in regard of their common brutishness: but let their consciences be
touched and awaked, by some cross, or judgment, or by deaths approaching, then
this servile fear, this dismal horror of heart will soon appear, and it
will be a hard matter to comfort them. Know we therefore, that until we
labor to know our own particular reconciliation with God by Christ, and to
that end reverence the ordinance of God (the Word and Sacraments, which serve
to no other use but to apply Christ to our souls) careless we may be, frozen
in our dregs we may be, benumbed and senseless we may be; but true peace
of conscience we can never have, neither can any service come from us which
shall be pleasing and acceptable unto God: unless my heart can witness with
me, that I serve and obey God cheerfully, and with a free spirit, knowing that
God for Christ has and does accept me, and that my weak services shall be
favorably looked upon, God measuring them rather by the sincerity of my
affection, than by the measure of my performance, I can not say that I serve
God; that which I do, comes from the spirit of bondage, and God esteems it
not.

THE SEVENTH SERMON.
VERSE. 75. All the days of our life, in holiness and righteousness before
God.


THe next point to be handled, is, the Time, to which our serving of God
without fear is limited: All the days of our life. Here I will handle two
points. 1. That this life is the time of our serving God. 2. That it must not
be done in some part, but in all the days of our life.

Touching the first, this is the doctrine; The 1. Doctrine.
That the time of our living here in the world, is the alone time, in which
those duties are to be done which ought to be performed by us in token of
thankfulness to God for our redemption, and in respect of the hope which we
have of life eternal. This plainly follows hence: for, if the question be,
when and at what time the duty of serving God (which is the end of our
redemption) must be done; the answer is, it must be done in the days of our
life, while we live here, or not at all. This is agreeing to the Scriptures in
other places. While we have time let us do good etc Gal. 6.10.
. that is, while we live here, for when that time is gone, we have no further
opportunity. In this present world, says the same Apostle elsewhere Tit. 2.12.
; The time of our dwelling here, says Peter 1. Pet. 1.17.
; During my life, says David Psalm. 116.2.
. I have finished my course, said Paul, when he was near his death 2. Tim. 4.7.
: He could not have so spoken truly, if, after his departure hence, there had
been any thing further to be performed. Thus all is confined to the compass of
this present life. After death comes the judgment Heb. 9.27.
: then is a time of reckning, not of practice. Besides, death being come, the
time of grace is expired, the ministry of reconciliation cease; therefore now
is the accepted time, behold now the day of salvation, says the Apostle 2.
Cor. 6.2. The 1. Use.
.

This serves first, to batter down the walls of the Popes supposed purgatory:
the ground whereof is this, that there is a place for repentance after this
life, and that as some, which are perfect Christians, go directly after death
to heaven, and others, which are extremely wicked, go straight to hell; so
there are a middle kind, who having not perfited their obedience in this world,
nor made full satisfaction for all their sins, must stay by the way, in a
place of torment, where the relics of sin must be purged out, and the full
sum of their duty made up before they can be admitted into heaven. This is
held as an article of faith, and they are said to be certainly damned so many
as do not believe it Bellar. lib. 1. de purg. ca. 11.
. Indeed Papists have reason to maintain it, it is a fire which has well
heated the Popes kitching, and the conceit and fear of it, together with an
opinion that the offerings of Priests can help to shorten a man's time in it,
has brought them in no small revenue: they may truly say, that by this craft
they have their goods Act. 19.25.
. Now the opinion is plainly confuted by this place. For whatsoever is required
of us, either toward God, or toward man, is to be done in the days of our
life, or never. The dead in the Lord, do rest from their labors Reu. 14.13.
: This could not be true, if they were either busied in doing good works for
the getting to heaven, or were tormented in fire. They sweat much to make good
this fancy; but in vain: sure we are, the Scripture makes mention of two
only places, for the dead Luc. 16.22.23.
: neither was there in Moses law appointed any sacrifice on the behalf of the
dead. The thing it self came first from the heathen, and was unknown to the
world until the Council of Florence Anno Dom. 1439.
: and therefore though they threaten the black curse to those that deny it,
yet let us not fear it; the curse that is causlesse shall not come Pro. 26.2.
The 2. Use.
.

Secondly, this makes against those who are of that swinish disposition, that
they never think upon doing good until they die; while they live, they rake,
and catch, and extort, and oppress: A man may as soon wring water out of a
flint, as draw ought from them to a good purpose; then they grumble like Nabal,
shall I take my bread etc. and give it to men, whom I know not whence they be
1. Sam. 25.11.
? But when they come to the knife, and die they must and leave their goods
behind them, then (it may be) shall some drop or two be given to the poor, or
to some good service. I do not condemn it if any man by will bequeath ought
to the Church or poor: this I condemn, when such things are never done tell
then: It is an argument, that that which is then done, is but a formal and
extorted benevolence. Formal; men therein will do as others do: Extorted;
because it is done most commonly to stop the mouth of an accusing conscience.
Remember we therefore, that the obedience which we owe to God, or to man for
Gods sake, reaches it self to the whole life, and is not to be restrained to
the last act. That knowledge which we will learn, and that good which we will
do, let us apply it now: It is a miserable thing when men must be catechized
in principles, and must first begin to exercise charity, when they are going to
appear before God to give account of their life.

Thirdly, The 3. Use.
this does press a kind of hastening in the duties of godliness without
delaying or putting off. For mark how the spirit of God speaks. He says,
that the life present is our only time of well doing: but how does he define
life? not by months or years, but by days, which is also the usual manner of
the Scripture Genesis 47.9. Psalm. 90.9.12.
. This speech argues the shortness of our life, being nothing but a
composition of a few days; which how soon they may be swallowed up, by that
long night of death, we cannot tell. This should make us to make haste with
David Psalm. 119.60.
, and to work while it is day Ioh. 9.4.
. It was the very thing intended by Moses in that suit of his, Teach us to
number our days etc Psalm. 90.12.
, that is, enable us (O Lord) so to sum up the time of our life, that
considering the shortness of it, we may learn this wisdom to do that first
which most concerns us, so that if by the sudden coming of death, any thing
for lack of time be left unperformed, it may not be that, the not doing
whereof will be the undoing of our souls. Memorable is the speech of Isaak:
Behold I am now old, and know not the day of my death, wherefore now etc Genesis
27.2.3.
: as if he had said; There is a thing to be done, which must be done before I
die, and I know, that as the days of my life are but few, so the greatest part
of them are gone and past, therefore that which I intended I will hasten to do
it: so should every Christian reason w^^h himself; My time is short, my life
a span, my days nor many, therefore Lord frame my heart, that whilst it is
called to day I may turn to thee, and seek thy favor. This care is a chief
difference betwixt the godly and the wicked: For they argue clean contrary,
Let us eat and drink, tomorrow we shall die Isay 22.13.
: Therein they imitate their father the Devil; for even of the same humor is
he: He has great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time Reu. 12.12.
.

The second point now follows. For so Zachary teaches us, that as God is to
be served in our life (which is the more general point), so it must be all the
days of our life. Here come to be opened two doctrines: 1 That religion is to
be practiced every day. 2. That it is to be practiced to the end of our days.
The former of these requires assiduity, and dailinesse; The latter perpetuity
and lastingnesse* I will bless thee daily (says David) and praise thy name
for ever Psalm. 145.2.
: That speech may be in stead of a commentary to this place. I will speak of
both severally. The former of the two doctrines is; The 2. Doctrine.
That a Christian man is bound by the word of God to a daily practice of
religion. Every day and every action of the day must be a witness of his care
to approve himself in all holy conversation unto God. It will not be hard to
prove this by the Scripture; namely that a godly life is to be brought into
every days practice. We must henceforth live as much time as remains in the
flesh, not after the lusts of men 1. Pet. 4.2.
. As much time: so that no time is exempted from living after the will of God.
Let thy heart be in the fear of the Lord continually Pro. 23.17. Toto die.
Tremel.
: There is no allowance for any intermission of time, to be spent as it were a
little more vainly or carelessly than other. Paul speaks of being given unto
every good work continually, or of attending thereupon daily So does the word
signify. 1. Tim. 5.10.
. Every good work: there is no toleration for any sin: Every day: there is
no exemption of time. I endeavor my self to have always a clear conscience
Act. 24.16. (...).
. Always, or, thorowout, that is, at one time as well as at another, one time of
the day as well as another. There are very few duties of religion, but the
Scripture speaks of the dailinesse of them either by precept or example: For
daily praying, besides the commandment pray continually, 1. These. 5.17.
we have Daniels example, of three times a day Dan. 9.10.
; and David's, of seven times a day Psa. 119.164.
. For reading we have the charge given to Joshua: Let not this book of the law
depart from thee Io^. 1.8.
. For meditation, we hear David: Oh how I love thy law! it is my meditation
continually Ps. 119 97.
. For talking of good things: My tongue shall talk of thy righteousness daily
Psalm 71.24.
For watching over our own selves: Keep thy heart with all diligence, says
Solomon Pro. 4.23.
Watch in all things, says Paul 2. Tim. 4.5.
: Take heed lest at any time there be in any of you an evil heart Heb 3.12.
. For depending upon Gods providence, we are taught to ask daily bread Matthew.
6.11.
. For preparation for the cross, there is speech of taking it up daily Luc
9.23.
. For seeking to do good to others, there is a precept to exhort one another
daily Heb. 3.13.
. These places and many like, show, that one day as well as another, is to be
consecrated to God, and the duties of religion rending to Gods glory, the
edification of our own souls, and the good of others, are to be performed
every day. And if it were not so, why should God be so careful in the
Scripture to give such directions for every specialty that can be incident to
any day; as, apparel, meat, calling, company, speech, solitariness,
recreation, health, sickness, prosperity, crosses, friends etc? whatsoever
occasion may at any time take up a man in any part of the day, the Scripture
gives a direction for it, because a man is bound to make conscience of the
practice of religion in every particular. Now a double reason there is for this
doctrine. First, Gods compassions are renewed every morning Lam. 3.23.
, and he ladeth us daily with benefits Psalm. 68.19.
. Now since there is no slacking of Gods kindness, why should there be any
intermission of our duty? Secondly, Satan goes about, seeking to devour 1.
Pet. 5.8.
: when a man begins to be a little secure, and to give the raines a little
to his own heart to wander after it own ways, then takes he his advantage;
and the soul being by some intermission of a godly care thus (as it were) let
loose, does quickly fall into his snares.

The 1. Use.
The first use of this doctrine is, to remove two opinions, which are common in
the world touching religion: The one is, that it is an easy matter to be a
Christian, a thing of no great pains to be religious; some general desires,
some superficial good meanings, some formal shows, some devotion now and then
by fits, some few actions of charity; this is enough to salvation. Hence
comes our common security: Moiling and droiling there is for the world
without measure: To some carnal and carking humors, the day is not long
enough, the week is too short, even some of Gods day must be borrowed for
earthly occasions. Godliness is followed but at leisure times: heaven we
suppose will come of it self without seeking. How many days pass over us in
a year, in which matters of the soul are not once thought upon! But how much
are we herein deceived? Religion is a task for every day: He that does not
make conscience every day to look to his Religion, to profit in his Religion,
and to show forth the fruits of his Religion, that he may comfortably at
night say, he is so much nearer his iourneies end to heaven, than he was at
his first setting out in the morning; that man's Religion is not as it ought:
and he which thinks to come to heaven by this idle and negligent course,
shall be called the least in the kingdom of God Matt. 5.19.
. The second opinion is, that if there be some show of devotion and care to
serve God on the Sabbath day, then upon other days men may be left free to
themselves, and may take a little more liberty to be secure. If matters of
godliness be banished from their thoughts, and tongues, and lives, all the
whole week long, they think it to be no great offense: This opinion is
overthrown by this place. We were redeemed to serve God every day: Though the
Sabbath be to be employed more especially (God then vouchsafing more
plentiful helps to godliness) yet all evil is to be avoided every day,
and all such good is to be done, as in our callings and lives we shall be
occasioned: Endeavor we must to walk in the sanctification of our hearts, and
innocence of life in other days, as well as on the Sabbath day.

Secondly, this must be a motive to us, every day, The 2. Use.
even at our first awaking, to deuote and consecrate our selves to the Lord,
and to arm our selves with a holy resolution to strive against sin: This
will be a matter of no little benefit: For by this means God will enable us to
be blameless and pure, and without rebuke Phil. 2.15.
, and we shall be kept from presumptuous sins Psalm. 19.13.
. The want hereof draws many of Gods children sometimes into great
inconveniences, namely, when as, not considering the slippery path which they
walk in here in the world, and being without fear of their own frailty,
they do not covenant with themselves to be very watchful, and to commit
their way unto the Lord, and to stand upon their guard against every sin: We
have an example of this in Peter: Doubtless he had no settled purpose to deny
his Master: yet to what a case did his own rashness bring him, while he did
not seriously cast with himself what danger might arise, by the place and
persons, neither yet waighed his own weakness, how easily he might be snared,
having no warrant to be there. This draws many into ill company, to
swearing, drinking, gaming, etc. I will not say, that these evils in some do
always proceed from a purpose so to do; but rather from the want of a purpose
to withstand them, and to give up themselves unto God. I would this were
written in every ones heart, that every day must be consecrate to God, every
day must be a holy day to a Christian, though not according to our sense in
respect of cessation from labor, yet in respect of watching and striving
against sin.

The 3. Use.
Thirdly, if every day must be given to God, what shall we say of those which
spend so many whole days in the service of Satan? whole days (I say) or the
better part of the day, in drinking and reuelling, in sports, in pranking up
themselves, in plotting to defraud, revenge, and eat out others: How do these
consecrate their days to God? What religion or godliness is in these
fashions? When men make every day either for vain pleasure, or sensuality, or
Epicurisme, or worldly benefit, what is become of Gods part? Think upon it: I
doubt not, but the serious thinking upon this, that God challenges every day,
will reform many corruptions. Thus much touching the dailinesse of serving
God. Now follows the perpetuity.

The 3. Doctrine.
The doctrine then is this; That as we must make conscience of diligence in good
duties for the present time, so we must have a care of continuance and
perseverance also. All the days of our life, says Zachary; therefore the last
day as well as the first. The Scripture is full in this point. Christ expounds
the seed which fell into good ground, of those which bring forth fruit with
patience Luc. 8.15.
. That only is good fruit which is accompanied with continuance. Often times we
shall find the condition of perseverance put in. He that endures to the end,
he shall be saved Matt. 24.13.
. In due season we shall reap, if we faint not Gal. 6.9.
. Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life
Reu. 2.10.
. The laborers in the vineyard, none of them had wages, unless he wrought
until the even Matt. 20.8.
. We must not only obey the call of Christ, Come to me Matt. 11.28.
, but the charge also which he gives, Abide in me Ioh. 15.4.
. If ye continue in my word, then are ye verily my disciples Ioh. 8.31.
.

The use is, to mind us of the Apostles counsel, which is, The Use.
not to be weary in well doing 2. These. 3.13.
. Our nature is apt to recoill and to fall back, like a broken bow Psalm. 78.57.
. A kind of sacietie will quickly creep upon us, and those good duties, which
at the first seem pleasing, will (without great care) be a wearines Mal. 1.13.
unto us, according as we see in many. I have known some, to whom the
preaching of the word was more welcome than now it is; who were more careful
to use private means to profit by it than now they are; who had a little
restrained some corruptions, to which now they are carried with full stream.
They look back upon Sodom, and they could almost be content to be in Egypt
again. Look to it, thou which art guilty to thy self of thine own
backesliding: remember thou owe unto God All thy days: The trees planted in
the Lords house bring forth fruit in their age Ps. 92.13.14
; and they which do not so, shall be hewn down and cast into the fire Matt.
3.10.
. It must not be in religion as in bankets, In the beginning good wine, and
then after that which is worse Ioh. 2.10.
; but rather, like those of Thyatira, our Works must be more at last, than at
the first Reu. 2.19.
.

The fourth general point in this passage of speech, is, what be the special
duties in which this our serving of God stands: In holiness and
righteousness. These two words answer to the two tables of the moral law. By
holiness are understood those duties which are owing immediately from us unto
God; and are set down in the four first commandments: namely; a holy regard
to the truth and majesty of his Godhead, in the first commandment: a holy
manner of worshipping him according to his will, in the second: a holy usage of
his name, in the third: a holy keeping of his sabbath, in the fourth. By
righteousness are meant those duties which we owe to our neighbor; of all which
the sum is, to give to every one his due: to wrong no man in his honor, or in
that precedence which God has given him, in the fifth precept: nor in his life,
in the sixth: nor in his chastity, in the seventh: nor in his goods, in the
eight: nor in his good name, in the ninth: nor to entertain a thought which
may draw to any of these breaches, in the tenth: so that now our obedience and
service of God stands not in following our own courses, but in making
conscience to frame our selves to that which the Lord commends unto us, to be
performed either to himself, or to others. Here is a large field to enter
into, but I will abridge that plentiful matter which offers it self unto
me, as much as I can. Two special points are here taught us.

The 4. Doctrine.
The first is; That true religion stands not in a verbal profession or
informall shows, but in action, and in the doing of that which God requires.
It is plain here: For here particular duties are designed, in the practice
whereof true religion and godliness does consist. In the Scripture, doing and
practice are still urged. Hearken to the laws which I teach you to do Deuteronomy.
4.1.
: Hear the laws etc. that ye may take heed to observe them. Cap. 5.1.
Ye shall keep all the commandments etc. for to do them Cap. 8.1.
. If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them Ioh. 13.17.
. Whosoever hears these my words and does them not, shall be likened unto a
foolish man Matt. 7.26.
. Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only Iam. 1.22.
. If it were not so, it were nothing to be religious, it were no great thing to
be godly: To profess is nothing, to talk and speak of religion, and to make
a show is a matter soon done, the veriest Atheist may go so far: doing is
the trial, the fruits of holiness and righteousness do show a man to be a
Christian.

The Use.
This makes against those, who have only tipped their tongues with religion,
and have taken upon them a name, and put on a vizard of godliness. Like they
be to the fig tree which our Savior cursed, abounding with leaves, but
without fruit Matt. 21.19.
: the Apostle thus describes them; they have a show of godliness, but deny
the power thereof 2. Tim. 3.5.
: such hearers had Ezekiel; They did come unto him, and sit before him and
hear his words, but they would not do them Eze. 33.31.
: and such have we: right like him in the Gospel: he came to Christ with a
question, Good master what ought I to do, to inherit eternal life? The same
seems to be our desire in coming to the Congregation: well, when he heard
his task; he was very heavy Luc. 18.18. etc.
, and went his way doing nothing: even so, persuade us to any thing which is
crossing to our humors, and comes athwart our courses, we say straight, This
is a hard saying, who can hear it Ioh. 6.60.
? Remember we this then, that to be a true Christian, is no titular thing, it
is a matter of action. Many at the last day shall say, We have prophesied Matt.
7.22.
, and we have professed thy name, O Lord: but seeing they have been wells
without water, the black darkness shall be to them for ever 2. Pet. 2.17.
. The other doctrine collected hence, is; That in the practice of religion, The
5. Doctrine.
there must be a joining together of these two, holiness and righteousness;
our holy carriage toward God, and our upright demeanor toward men. It is not
said here, holiness or righteousness, as though either might serve, but
holiness and righteousness, both together. God has joined them, and man may
not sever them. To this agrees that of Paul; That we should live soberly and
righteously and godly etc. Tit. 2.12.
. These are two maine parts of the image of God: Righteousness and true
holiness Ephesians. 4.24.
; neither can we assure our selves that we are truly regenerate, unless we
find in ourselves a concurrence of both. It is absurd to be respective toward
men, and to neglect that duty which we owe to God: It is hypocritical to make
show of devotion to God, and to have no regard how we live in respect of men:
But, to be careful in the knowledge and service of God, and fruitful in the
duties of equity and evenness amongst men, this is religion, this is the whole
duty of man.

This doctrine is very necessary, because, The Use.
the renting asunder of these two, holiness and righteousness, is the common
evil of those which make a profession of religion. Some there are, who in the
outward exercises of religion are very diligent, in repairing to the
congregation, in hearing, in communicating, in refraining from open misorders
on the sabbath day: but look on them in those things which concern men, there
you shall find them exceeding faulty; proud, disdainful, malicious,
reuengeful, cruel, oppressing, all for themselves, without respect to others:
Others there are which show a kind of ciuility in outward fashion to the world;
quiet they be and peaceable, observing a kind of truth and equity in their
dealings, and so gain a name and an opinion of honest men; yet have no regard
to the exercises of piety, more than for outward form, despise knowledge,
basely esteem the public ministry, make no reckoning of the sabbath. Both
these sorts come short, and continuing as they are can never be saved. Remember
then, to join both together, holiness toward God, righteousness toward
men: Art thou a lover to hear, a man forward in the public exercises of
religion? thou do well: see thou make conscience also of equity amongst men,
else all thy devotion is but hypocrisy. Art thou a man of civil fashion, that
pretendest to give every man his own? see thou season thy carriage to men, with
knowledge and zeal in the matters of God, else thy civility is but formalitie:
and both the former with his unrighteous holiness, and thou, with thine unholy
righteousness, shall be cut off from having any inheritance in the kingdom of
Christ and of God.

The fifth and last point, according to the order first propounded, is the
trial of the truth of all these duties, in those words, before him: whereby is
meant such holiness and such righteousness, which is framed, not barely to
content men, The 6. Doctrine.
but to please God: where we are taught; That if we would be religious indeed,
we must not look so much how to make a show and to be something in appearance
and opinion before men, as how to approve our selves by truth and sincerity of
heart unto God. Truth it is, that the opinion of men is not simply to be
neglected: for it is the rule of the Apostle that we should procure things
honest in the sight of all men Romans 12.17.
: but yet the approbation of men must not be made the rule of godliness, but
only the will and majesty of God. It was the commendation of Enoch and of
Noah, that the times wherein they lived being ouerrunne with lewdness, yet
they walked with God Genesis 5.22.6.9.
, that is, they considered more what God appointed, than what most men
practiced, and desired more to approve themselves by a holy carriage unto him,
than to run to the same excess with the multitude, though (perhaps) so to
have done, might have been more for their outward commodity. It was the charge
given by God to Abraham, Walk before me Genesis 17.1.
, that is, let it still be thy care, that, seeing I am present every where, and
privy to all thy courses, thou may walk as in my sight and make thy ways
acceptable before me. It was the best testimony which Solomon could give of
his father David, that he walked before God in truth, and in righteousness,
and in uprightness of heart with him. 1. King. 3.6.
It was Hezekiah his best comfort when he thought he should die; O Lord I have
walked before thee in truth Isay 38.3.
. When Job was censured for an hypocrite (according as it is still the manner of
the world, to account every man who is more careful in religion than
themselves, to be but a dissembler), well (says he) my witness is in heaven,
and my record is on high Job 16.19.
; you give your verdit of me as you please, but I am known unto God, I have
walked with him, and I do rest satisfied with his approouement, which is the
thing that I have always cared for. Paul speaking of the execution of his
ministry, says, that he did not handle the word of God deceitfully: as if he
had said, I could easily have taken another course in preaching, by which to
have pleased the multitude and to have gotten my self credit, but it was not
the thing I looked after: But what then? to approve my self to every man's
conscience in the sight of God 2. Cor. 4.2.
. These several examples concurring with my text, do show that we must care
more to be religious, than to be thought religious; and have more respect to
the approbation of God, who sees in secret Matt. 6.4.
, than to the opinion of men, who may be deceived with shows.

The Use.
This doctrine does utterly condemn the art of seeming, which every one
(almost) has learned in these times. The hypocrite, if he have Lord, Lord, in
his mouth, and be busy about the outward work, knocking and kneeling, and
framing his face to a show of devotion; he thinks that he is very religious,
and cares not though God sees him within, to have neither any sound knowledge
nor any true love to religion. The covetous worldling who rackes all that can
be gotten, if he can set a color to the world, that no body shall see his plots
and cunning shifts, respects no more; albeit the Lord knows how his heart
is set upon the world, and has made gold his hope Job 31.24.
, and will do any thing for gain, he fears it not. The uncharitable person,
if he can use a few idle protestations, that he bears no ill will etc.
persuades himself it is enough; not remembering that the Lord beholds his
thoughts, and is privy to his desires to work mischief. The close slanderer,
if he can under hand raise up an ill report, that the party wronged may not
know he did it, is safe in his own conceit; howbeit God knows that his
tongue is like a sharp rasor which cutteth deceitfully Psalm. 52.2.
. The evil disposed, who are in houses of misorder when others are at Church,
if the doors be shut, and no noise be made, and officers know it not, they
doubt not but to avoid Gods beholding well enough. The whorish woman, if she
can hide her sin in any sort, so that none can prove it directly against
her, stands upon terms of honesty, and is not afraid of Gods presence, from
whom nothing can be kept secret: she wipeth her mouth (says Solomon) and
says, I have not committed iniquity Pro. 30.20.
, Thus the care of the most is to keep credit with men; if it be well with us
before men we care little how the case stands betwixt us and the Lord. This
will not serve the turn when all things come to receive their due trial: then
the vizard will be plucked off from every hypocrite; then shall many a man be
approved, whose course the world now condemns for folly; and many that now
carry a face and bear out matters with a show, will be found dissemblers, and
the lot of hypocrites will be their portion. Let this persuade us to affect
sincerity and singlenes of heart, and always to make it our care, more to
regard the acceptance with God, than the account and opinion of men. It is a
special point of godliness, and he has well profited in religion, that has
well learned this lesson, and this one thing which I shall name unto you is the
best trial of it; when a man is the same alone and in company; that is, when
as that sin, that evil course which a man knows he would not enter into,
in the presence and sight and knowledge of men, the same he does forbear when
he is by himself, and has many advantages and opportunities safely and
secretly to practice it. To forbear to do evil when men are by to behold it,
is nothing, the veriest hypocrite and reprobate in the world may do it: but,
closely and secretly to abstain, and when one has many incitements to it, yet
even for Gods sake, and for lothnesse to displease him, to forbear, that is a
thing which none but a good man indeed, a child of God can come unto. To make
shows of holiness and devotion in a Church, there to look ciuillie, and in
praying to use signs of great earnestness and affection, is no great matter,
it is not of any value to build upon, for an hypocrite may come so far: But
in a private corner, in ones Chamber (as Christ says Matt. 6.6.
) apart from the world, where no man can hear or understand, or take notice of
it; there to power out ones soul before the Lord 1. Sam. 1.15.
, to cast down himself in humility, and to make many sighs and tears, to
be the messengers of the hearts desire unto God; this is an evidence of
sincerity, this is done before God, and is without hypocrisy. So then this is
a sure rule to try our selves by, if that which we would be thought to be
before men, we travel with our hearts, and strive to be indeed, when none can
take notice of our courses, in regard of the secrecy of them, but the Lord. He
that makes conscience of it to be as honest, and as uprightly behaved in the
greatest priuacie and solitariness, as he would be if all the world beheld
him and could see into his very thoughts, that man may be said indeed to be
religious.

THE EIGHT SERMON.
VERSE. 76. And thou Babe shall be called the Prophet of the most High: for thou
shall go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways.

77. And, to give knowledge of salvation unto the people, etc.


The second part of the Hymn.
THis is the beginning of the second part of this Hymn: The sum of it is a
description of the office of John Baptist; which yet is so carried, as that in
this part also, the mystery of Christ and of salvation wrought by him is laid
open very exactly.

My method shall be this, to let you see, The order of the whole place to the
end.
how each branch of these verses depends on other, as it were so many linkes
inchained either to other. First of all, Zachary directs his speech to the
Infant (present, in my opinion) and pronounces of him that he shall be called
the Prophet of the most high: If it be asked why he shall be so styled? it is
answered, Because he shall go before the face of the Lord to prepare his
ways. If we would know what it is, to prepare the Lords ways, he says it is,
to give knowledge of salvation to the people. If we demand wherein this
salvation stands, he adds, that it stands in the remission of sins. If we
enquire further, out of what fountain this salvation, standing in the
remission of sins has flowed; he tells us, that is come from the tender
mercy of our God. If we would be informed what is the especial fruit of this
Mercy of our God, he sets it down thus, that by it is come to pass, that
the dayspring from an high has visited us. If lastly the question be, to what
special end this Dayspring has appeared, he shuts up all with this sweet
and gracious conclusion; that the end is, To give light to them that sit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet into the way of
peace. This is the order of this whole place. I will prosecute every branch in
the same order and manner in which it lies.

And first of the title, to be given to John Baptist, Thou Babe shall be called
the Prophet of the most high. The meaning of which speech is, that all men
should take notice of John, and acknowledge him to be a Prophet of God, called
from above, and appointed by special deputation for the service of the Church.
The verification of which foretelling we read in the story. The multitude
counted John as a Prophet Matt. 14.5.
. All hold John as a Prophet Matt. 21.26.
. But here may arise a doubt: John himself being demanded whether he were the
Prophet, answered no Ioh. 1.21.
. The answer is easy, thus. It was the error of the Jews, that before the
Messiah there should come a special Prophet, besides him that was spoken of,
by the name of Elias. So it appears by that the multitude said on a time
touching Christ: This is of a truth the Prophet that should come into the world
Ioh. 6.14.
, and in another place: Of a truth this is the Prophet Ioh. 7.40.
. This error of theirs arose out of the words of Moses: The Lord thy God will
raise up unto thee a Prophet like unto me from among you Deu. 18.15.
. John therefore denies himself to be a Prophet in that sense; he was no such
Prophet as they looked for. This is the sense.

The 1. Doctrine.
Now the doctrine is this; That it is an estate of preferment and credit, for a
man to be deputed to the calling and office of a Prophet and minister in the
Church of God. Mark how this arises out of this place. Zachary directs his
speech to John: He was now at the time of the speaking of these words an
Infant, there was not then any great matter of outward circumstance in him to
be taken notice of: yet notwithstanding (quoth Zachary) even thou O babe,
little though thou now be, wrawling in thy cradle, and wrapped up in clouts,
shall in time obtain this honor, to be reputed and called a Prophet of the
most high, a Preacher appointed by him to publish the doctrine of salvation to
the world. Thus the manner of speaking, Now thou art but a silly babe, yet
shall thou live to bear the title of one of Gods Prophets, serves to justify
this doctrine. There is nothing more effectual to the clearing of this point,
than to consider the matter and business about which every true minister of
God is employed; which is not base or vulgar, but of as great weight and worth
as may be: It is to give knowledge of salvation, to publish peace Isay 52.7.
, to declare to a man his righteousness Job 33.23.
, to save them that believe 1. Cor. 1.21.
, to pray men in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God 2. Cor. 5.20.
, to gather together the Saints, Ephesians. 4.12.
to be Gods mouth to the people in preaching to them from God, and to be the
peoples mouth again in praying for them to God Deuteronomy. 33.10.
. These are no base things, no vile services, no mean emploiments, to treat
betwixt the Lord and his Church of no worse matter than the glory of the one
and the salvation of the other. Many things might easily be heaped up to this
purpose, but I will satisfy my self with this, and proceed to the uses of
this point, which are three.

The 1. Use.
The first is an admonition to those who have by their place to do in the
electing and ordaining of Ministers for several congregations; They must
remember the charge, Lay hands suddenly on no man 1. Tim. 5.22
. The calling is honorable, and therefore not for every one hand over head to
be admitted into. It is not meet that the passage into the ministry should lie
open for whomsoever: Who would might consecrate himself 1. Kin. 13.33.
, it was one of the evils of Ieroboams time: It will lay the beauty of the
calling in the dust, and make the world full of such wandering Levites, as the
young man of Bethlehem Judah, whom Micah hired for ten shekels of silver by the
year, and a suit of apparel and meat and drink Iud. 17.7.10.
, which will be ready to serve the turn of every Church, spoiling patron, and
to be at his devotion, for a piece of silver and a morsel of bread 1. Sam.
2.36. The 2. Use.
.

The second use, is an advertisement to all that are entered into that function,
to take diligent heed, that they do nothing which may disgrace so honorable a
calling. A minister is tied to watchfulness by a double bond; First, as he is
a Christian, then as he is a minister: whosoever of Aarons seed had any blemish
in him should not press to offer before God Leu. 21.17.
. Many things may be pardoned to others, which in us will seem intolerable. If
the salt have lost his savor, it is thencefoorth good for nothing Matthew. 5.13.
. God grant that the eminency and dignity of our calling may beget in us a
steady care to do nothing which may bring it into disgrace.

Thirdly (for a third use), The 3. Use.
this makes against the contempt, which is generally cast upon the ministry.
Many scorn it in themselves, accounting it a base thing for them or their
children to consecrate their life to the ministry of the Gospel. A cluster of
the civil or common law, is better (in their seeming) than a whole vintage of
Divinity. It is Paul's rule, that we should be had in singular love for our
works sake 1. These. 5.13.
. In the world it is otherwise, hated we be for our works sake, and despised
for our professions sake; It is the common Theme of many being in their cups,
or otherwise in want of matter to discourse of, to open their mouths against
the ministry. Be it so that some deserve ill enough: yet when men take a
pleasure in these kinds of inueying, and seek out of the misbehauiour of some
to collect conclusions against all, it argues that they speak not out of the
hatred of evil, but out of enmity to the calling, thinking that they have quit
themselves well, if they can bring that into disgrace. Well, touching those
which are faithful, and make conscience to feed the people with knowledge and
understanding Ier. 3.15.
this I say, and yet not I but the Lord; Let a man so think of them as of the
ministers of Jesus Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God 1. Cor. 4.1.
. The contempt reaches high: He that dispiseth you dispiseth me Luc. 10.16.
. It was John's honor, to be called a Prophet of the most high, why should it be
any man's debasement to serve the same master, in the same business? Thus far
touching the first branch.

The second branch is the reason why John should be styled A Prophet, etc: Thou
shall go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways. This is the true
description of a Prophet or minister; although in it some thing there was
peculiar to John; notwithstanding true it is of all Prophets and ministers,
that they go before Christ. The Prophets of old went before Christ to be
borne, and they all bore witness of him, that through his name all that
believe in him, should receive remission of sins Act. 10.43.
. The ministers since Christ borne, go before in respect of his second
coming, to judgment, to give warning of it, and to make men ready for it.
John went more immediately before Christ's face, because he was the very next
Prophet before him, and lived to see him in his body, and with his finger to
point to him, Behold the lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the
world Ioh. 1.29.
. Now although it was peculiar to John, thus immediately to go before Christ,
yet this is common to other ministers with him, to be messengers of Christ, and
to make the people ready to receive him. Hence arises this doctrine; The 2.
Doctrine.
That it is the office and duty of the true Prophets and ministers of God, to
draw disciples unto Christ, and to prepare the people to receive him. No man
shall deserve the name of a Prophet unless he so do: He must profess
himself to be Christ's servant, and must aim at the advancement and setting up
of his kingdom. The acknowledgement of this truth may be seen in all the
Prophets jointly: They all gave witness to Christ Act. 10.43.
: they all directed their course to this one thing, to beget in the peoples
hearts an absolute dependence upon only Christ. The same did the Apostles, both
while Christ yet lived (for that was their errand when they were first sent
out, The kingdom of heaven is at hand Matt. 10.7.
) and afterward also, as may be observed out of their general course Act.
3.12. etc. chapter 4.11.12. chapter 14.15. chapter 17.3.
. Thence came the profession of Paul; We preach not our selves, but Christ
Jesus the Lord 2. Cor. 4.5.
. For this cause also it is set down as the mark of Deceivers, to draw to
themselves, to draw disciples after them Act. 20.30.
. Excellent is the similitude of the Apostle, to show both his own care and
every ministers duty: I have (says he) prepared you for one husband, to
present you as a pure virgin unto Christ 2. Cor. 11.2.
. Often in Scripture is Christ compared to an husband, and the Church to a
spouse: This life is the time of wooing the last judgment is the marriage day
Reu. 19.7.
: Ministers are as servants, or as the bridegroomes friends Ioh. 3.29.
, to attend upon the Church, and to treat of this spiritual marriage, and to
seek to array and attire the people of God, with the garments of salvation Isay
61.10.
, against that solemn day, in which they must be eternally united unto Christ.
Thus this is the duty of all ministers, not to seek to set up themselves, or
to call the people to them, but to direct unto Christ, saying, Hear you him,
and your soul shall live Isay 55.3.
: If any man sin, he is the Advocate 1. Ioh. 2.1.
. We see the truth of this doctrine: now let us enquire of what use it may be.

First, as it admonishes all Ministers to set themselves to the advancement of
Christ's kingdom, The 1. Use.
so does it plainly prove the necessary use of the public Ministry. The
Scripture makes no mention of any other outward ordinary means to prepare us
unto Christ. We cannot prepare our selves ( for our hearts are wicked above
all things Ier. 17 9.
) and unless we be prepared, Christ cannot be entertained: Wherefore look of
what necessity the presence of Christ is unto salvation, of the same (when we
speak of an ordinary course) is the Ministry of the word: There is no
salvation but by Christ, there is no way for Christ to enter in, until the
word have made us ready to receive him. To refuse Christ, is to reject grace;
to contemn the Word preached, is to keep out Christ. Fetch we a similitude
from Physic: The learned Physician, intending a wholesome potion to his
patient, first gives him a preparatiue to fit his body to receive it: If the
preparatiue work not, he has small hope to do good with that which was to
follow: So in this; Christ purposing salvation unto us, sends his Preachers
before, to make way for grace, and to beget in us a desire and expectation of
mercy: If the Harbingers be rejected, if we yield not to the course taken to
prepare us, there is no hope of Christ, there is no likelihood of salvation.
This is the cause why the Ministry of the Word is compared to an Axe Matt.
3.10.
, because as no beam is put into the building, until the worke-mans axe has
made it ready for the place where it must be; so no man is coupled into that
spiritual frame (the body of Christ) to become the habitation of God by the
spirit Ephesians. 2.22.
, until the axe of the Word have pared off his corruption, and by hewing him
again and again, have made him fit for such a heavenly service. Take you heed
therefore, all you despisers of Gods ordinance: the Preaching of the Word is a
burden unto you, and even a base thing in your seeming: you say of a Preacher,
as the Athenians did of Paul, What will this babbler say Act. 17.18.
? O that God might vouchsafe to open your eyes, to see the devils policy
herein! He will yield to you, that, professedly to reject Christ were
dangerous: but to scoff and repine and murmr at the Word which you hear, he
makes you believe, that is nothing. Why will you suffer your selves to be
beguiled? Can you receive Christ before you be prepared? If you know your own
corruption, you will never think it: or can you (ordinarily) be prepared but
by the public Ministry? If you know and believe the Scripture, you will never
imagine it. When Christ comes, his Word goes before; let his Word be
rejected, and he will not be entertained. Behold I stand at the door and
knock Reu. 3 20.
: what knocking means he, but this by his Word? and therefore it there
follows: If any man hear my voice, etc. If this Knocking be not regarded,
he himself does never enter. It is vain to say, I love Christ, but him which
preaches Christ I do not love: Either such an one must prepare us, or Christ
Jesus will not dwell with us.

Secondly, by this we may know, The 2. Use.
whether we have truly profited by the Word which we have so often heard. Are
our hearts made ready to receive Christ, are we prepared to entertain him? We
are profitable scholars. Is there no fitness in us for this honorable guest?
we have lost our time, and our hearing hitherto has been in vain. But, what
is this to be prepared for Christ? for this may seem to be spoken something too
generally. The Prophet Isaiah well tell us; namely, that we are prepared for
Christ, when we are Poor and of a contrite spirit, and tremble at the Word
Isay 66.2.
. A man is then ready for Christ, when his soul thirsts for him, and his
flesh longs greatly after him Psalm. 63.1.
; when like the woman of Canaan, he would be glad of a few crummes Matt. 15.27.
of mercy; when with Paul he counts all things to be loss and dung that he
may win Christ Phil. 3.8.
; when he has no mind of any thing so much as how he may find favor with
God; when his own sins are even a burden and a detestation unto him, he even
quaketh in his own conceit, to think how he should do, if God should call
him to a strait account, and proceed against him in extremity. Let us proceed
then: I demand of thee, which have now so long been a hearer of the Word
preached: Is it thus with thee? Has thy heart been plowed up, and rent in
sunder by the power of the Word, so that now the tidings of the Gospel are
music to thine ears, and thy spirit within thee cries out continually, O
say unto my soul, I am thy salvation Psalm. 35.3.
; O my Savior, turn thy face unto me and have mercy upon me, for I am
desolate and poor Psalm. 25.16.
? It is an argument, that thou have heard with profit, and may give a
comfortable account of thy hearing. Art thou of a dull and dead heart, not
knowing out of thine own private feeling what it is to long for Christ, and to
thirst after his righteousness? Surely thy hearing hitherto has been
fruitless, and thou art yet in thy sins. And truly such are the most: Let
the mystery of Christ, and of grace in and by him be laid open unto us, never
so exactly or comfortably, it does no more affect them, than any of the most
idle tales that can be imagined. It is impossible, that men prepared for
Christ, should, when Christ is preached, stop their ears, like the deaf Adder
Psalm. 58.4.
, and voluntarily betake themselves to a kind of settled drowsinesse. Thus much
of the reason, why John was to be called a Prophet, where we have seen what is
the use and necessity of the public Ministry.

The third branch follows: wherein is taught, what it is, to prepare the way
of the Lord; namely, to give knowledge of salvation to Gods people. Now to give
knowledge in this place, is not, to infuse knowledge: (for no mortal man can
do that) but it signifies to give notice, and to publish in that manner, as
that all may perceive what is meant, and that, if they remain ignorant, the
fault may appear to be their own. This was the office of John, and this he
did, as appears in the holy Story Matthew. 3.11. etc.
, and for that cause he was called a Crier Matt. 3.3.
. The words thus expounded do afford us three doctrines.

The 3. Doctrine.
The first is; That he who desires to make way for Christ, and to draw disciples
unto him, must study to be able to open to the people the hid treasure of the
Scripture: We see here, that it is the Ministers duty to prepare the way for
Christ; now to prepare a way for Christ, is to give knowledge of salvation: And
what is that, but (as the Apostle speaks) to publish the secret of the
Gospel Ephesians. 6.19.
, and to lay forth the mystery of Christ in that manner, that even the simple
may attain sharpness of wit, and children knowledge and discretion Pro. 1.4.
thereby? A minister is called an Ambassador 2. Cor. 5.20
: and much is required to the discharge of an embassage. He that shall be
therein employed, must be a man of understanding, able to treat to and fro of
the affairs of his Soueraign as occasion shall be offered. The same is true in
his spiritual message: He that carries it had need to have the tongue of the
Learned Isay 50 4.
, and it were good, that his lips did preserve knowledge Matt. 2.7.
, that he may be able to satisfy the doubts of those which desire certainty
of information in Gods truth. This made Elihu call him one of a thousand Job
33.23.
, and Paul to say, Who is sufficient for these things 2. Cor. 2.16.
?

This may be a good admonition to those which affect this calling: that they
press not rawly into it: The Use.
Look unto it, that thou have eat the role Eze. 3.1.
, that thy mouth be touched Ier. 1.9.
, and thy heart filled with the right understanding of the mystery of Christ;
otherwise thou can have no hope to prepare the way for Christ, or to win
souls unto God.

The second doctrine from hence is; The 4. Doctrine.
That the Minister desiring to prepare souls for Christ, must so preach in
that plain and familiar sort, as that (if it be possible) the knowledge of
salvation may from him be derived unto all that hear him. This is justifiable
by this place: For how shall a Minister be truly said to give knowledge of
salvation, if he lap up his speech in such a mist of words, that the meanest
and shallowest among the hearers cannot understand it? Such a kind of preaching
is rightly compared, to a Trumpet giving an uncertain sound, at the hearing
whereof no man can tell how or when to prepare himself to the battle 1. Cor.
14.8.
: so if he which speaks in public, do speak in such high terms and
obscure phrases, that ordinary men cannot conceive what he intends, how shall
they by his preaching be stirred up to any good service, how shall they prepare
themselves to fight against Satan? Hence was that worthy resolution of Paul's; I
had rather in the Church to speak five words etc. that I might also instruct
others, than ten thousand words in a strange tongue 1. Cor. 14.19.
: In which place by a strange tongue, may not only be understood, the speaking
of Latin; or French, or the like amongst English men, but the speaking of the
mother tongue in such a strange fashion, that it may seem all one to the
hearers, as if one spoke in the most unknown language. The want of this
painted eloquence brought Paul's preaching into disgrace among the learned
Grecians, whence came that phrase, The foolishness of preaching 1. Cor. 1.21
; yet Paul still went on without excellency of words, or the entising speech of
man's wisdom, and affected only the plain evidence of the spirit 1. Cor. 2.1.4
: so that this was no small comfort unto him, that he had preached the Gospel
after that familiar manner, that he might truly say, If our Gospel be hid, it
is hid unto them that are lost 2. Cor. 4.3.
. It is a fit comparison, in which a Preacher is likened to a Nurse 1. The. 2.7.
. Nurses do half chew the meare to the little ones, and do babble with them
in their own stammering and imperfect language: so must a Preacher proportion
his doctrine to his hearers capacity, and fit his tongue to their conceiving;
otherwise he shall never give the knowledge of salvation, but shall rather make
it more obscure.

The 1. Use.
This first belongs as a reproof to some, who (like the old Pharisees) loving
the praise of men, more than the praise of God Ioh. 12.41.
, soar so high, in such uncouth words, and in such an affected kind of
eloquence, that they become as Barbarians 1. Cor. 14.11
unto their hearers: It were all one if they preached to them in Latin or in
French. Let all such remember, that their office is, to bring the people to the
knowledge of salvation. Now the plainer the Preacher is, the sooner shall the
people be brought to the knowledge of salvation by his means.

Secondly, this discovers the misconceit of many hearers; who, if a Preacher
have gallant words, The 2. Use.
and delightful phrases, and interlace his sermon with other toongs,
straightway admire him, as extraordinarily learned and profound. But I ask of
thee, what knowledge of salvation have thou got by such a sermon? how is thy
understanding helped in the mystery of Christ? Thou will say (perhaps) that he
was too deep for thee. What good then shall he do to thy soul, if, by
hearing him, thou art brought no nearer to the knowledge of God than thou wast
before? If thou would hear for thy profit, pray to God to send thee such an
one, which may speak to thy conscience, which may season thy heart with
soundness of knowledge, and not tickle thy itching ears 2. Tim. 4.3.
with pleasingnesse of words.

The third doctrine from hence is; That those which are ignorant in the true
way and means of salvation, The 5. Doctrine.
are not yet prepared for Christ, nor fit to entertain him. The reason hereof
is manifest by the text: John must prepare a way for Christ; that is, he must
make men ready to receive Christ; How shall he do that? By laboring to bring
them to the knowledge of salvation: Therefore they which are not yet come so
far, as to know what is absolutely necessary to salvation, are not come the
first step toward Christ. It is truly said by the Apostle, that they whose
cogitations are darkened, be strangers from the life of God Ephesians. 4.18.
. Hear what Christ says; This is life everlasting, to know God to be the only
very God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ Ioh. 17.3.
. Know thou not Christ, what he is, what he has done, how that which he
has done may be available to thy soul? thou art not yet in the way to life
eternal. This Paul begged of God for his hearers, That they might be fulfilled
with knowledge of Gods will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding Col.
1.9.
, that they might be able to comprehend, what is the breadth, and length, and
depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ, etc Ephesians. 3.18.19.
.

The Use.
This serves to show the inevitable danger of the common ignorance of the
multitude. They believe that they shall be saved, and yet have no skill in the
doctrine of salvation; they hope upon Christ, and yet understand not the
mystery of Christ: Nay (which is worst of all) when the knowledge of salvation
is offered to them, they do with both hands put it from them, and do
advisedly seek to cherish and maintain themselves in their wilful
blindness. We are not a shamed to say, What needs this knowledge, To what
end is so much teaching? Thou art labored with from Sabbath to Sabbath, that
thy heart may be seasoned with the knowledge of salvation, and that thou may
be prepared for Christ: if thou reject this kindness, surely when thou come
to Christ, to seek favor from him, he will say to thee: What have thou to do
with me? depart from me, I know thee not Matt. 7.23.
: thou have an ignorant heart, a heart hating knowledge Pro. 1.22.
, I cannot brook thee.

THE NINTH SERMON.
-- By the remission of their sins:

VERSE. 78. Through the tender mercy of our God, whereby the dayspring from an
high has visited us.


THe fourth branch comes next in place, namely, how this salvation, the
knowledge whereof must be given to Gods people, is wrought; and that is, By the
remission of sins. In handling this point, I am thus to proceed: First. I
must teach what Remission of sins is. Secondly, I must prove, that our
salvation stands in the Remission of sins. Thirdly, I must apply both to our
use.

Touching the general nature of remission of sins; It is an action of God,
whereby for the merit of Christ he accounts sin as no sin, or, as if it had
never been committed. Hereupon it is, that when th^^ is in Scripture speech
made of forgiunesse of sins, such manners of speaking are used, which do
imply an utter abolishment. Thou have cast all my sins behind thy back Isay
38.17.
. I have put away thy transgressions like a cloud, and thy sins as a mist
Isay 44.22.
. I will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sins no more Ier. 31.34.
. In those days, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall
be none Ier. 50.20.
. He will subdue our iniquities, and cast all our sins into the bottom of the
sea Mic. 7.19.
. Christ calls it a forgiving our debts Matthew. 6.12.
, alluding to the manner of Creditors, who then forgive debts, when they account
that which is debt, as no debt, and cross the book. Now the foundation of
this remission is the merit of Christ. In him we have redemption through his
blood, that is, the forgiveness of sins Col. 1.14.
. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin 1. Ioh. 1.7.
. That we may fully understand this point how sins are remitted by Christ and
for him; it is to be noted, that in sin there are three things: The first is
the crime it self, or the swaruing and straying from the will of God, by which
God is offended. The second is, the guilt, by which the party offending is
liable unto eternal punishment. The third is, the stain or blot, which the
sin committed leaves in the offender; by which there follows an aptness or
pronenesse either to the same sin or to any other. These three are taken
away by the merit of Christ: The disobedience or crime, is taken away by his
obedience. The guilt is removed by his sufferings. The corruption hidden by his
holiness, and the very being of it daily diminished, and by the strength,
power and working of his spirit. If it be demanded how this can be? I answer,
it is done by imputation, by which there is a kind of translation or putting
over of the believers sin unto Christ, and of Christ's righteousness to the
believer. Christ's obedience is accounted the obedience of the believer: Christ's
sufferings, the sufferings of the believer: Christ's holiness, the holiness of
the believer. And so God accounts Christ's obedience, passion and holiness to
be the believers, as much as if they were really in him, and as if he himself
had actually and personally performed the same. The right understanding of this
point is the key of Religion, and the staff of all true comfort in Christ
Jesus.

The 1. Doctrine.
Now the second thing to be opened (which is indeed the doctrine of the place)
is; That salvation stands in the Remission of sins. And this is justified by
that saying of the Psalm; Blessed is the man whose wickedness is forgiven,
and whose sin is covered Psa. 32.1.
. Now look wherein stands happiness, therein stands salvation: for what
happiness is there besides salvation? And the reason of the doctrine is
apparent. Man was first cast out of Paradise for sin; neither does any thing
hinder his return but only sin: for so long as his sins remain, they are
as a weighty burden Psalm. 38.4.
, to press him down to hell, and his wages and stipend is eternal Death Romans
6.23.
. Therefore if sin be taken away and pardoned, God has against him no
matter of displeasure, and Christ's obedience being imputed to him, heaven
cannot be denied him, he must needs be saved. This may briefly serve to make
plain this doctrine.

The 1. Use.
The first use of it, is to strengthen us in a notable point, which is, that in
the matter of salvation, all merit and desert of our own works, are utterly
excluded: The ground whereof is in this place very express. For I demand:
wherein does that salvation stand, which must be published by the minister in
the Church of God? Zachary answers, that it stands in the remission of
sins. Now, desert and remission cannot agree: If my plea for salvation must
be, the pardon of my sins, where is my merit? If I have salvation by desert
of works, I have it upon right: but if I obtain it by the pardon of my
sins, I have it wholly upon courtesy. This is a direct kind of reasoning:
and it is justified by S. Paul's course. His maine proposition is, that a man is
justified by faith, without the works of the law Rom 3.28.
. This he proves (as by other reasons, so) by a testimony fetched out of the
two and thirtieth Psalm. Even as David (says he) declares the blessedness
of the man unto whom God imputes righteousness without works etc Romans 4.6.
. David places happiness in the remission of sins: If in remission of
sins, what place is left for works in this business? And this is the
express doctrine of the Scripture: Eternal life is the gift of God Romans 6.23.
: and what is more free than gift? By grace are ye saved through faith, etc.
not of works, lest any man should boast himself Ephesians. 2.8.9.
. Not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but according to his
mercy he saved us Tit. 3.5.
. If any works might deserve, what more meritorious than the sufferings of
Martyrs? yet the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the
glory, which shall be showed unto us Romans 8.18.
. This is directly against the doctrine of Popery, which is not ashamed to
maintain, that Works are the proper cause of life everlasting Rhem Test. in
Gal. 6.9.
. Let Papist (if they can) reconcile and make these agree, how salvation can be
grounded upon the forgiveness of sins, and yet be ours by the dignity of our
works. They cry out against us in regard of this doctrine two ways. First,
that life eternal and salvation are often in Scripture promised as the reward
of good works, and that therefore life eternal is of merit. I answer, that
reward is twofold. First, of favor. Secondly, of debt. So S. Paul himself
does distinguish Romans 4.4.
. Now life eternal, is a reward of favor: It is the gift of God Romans 6.23.
. Indeed in the matter of salvation God has made himself a debtor: But how?
By his free promise, not by the merit of any work. If he has vouchsafed to
promise life eternal to our obedience, it is true we may claim it as due, but
not because of the excellency of our obedience, but because of the truth and
strength of the promise. Very effectual is that phrase of the Apostles, when
he calls life eternal, a Reward of inheritance Col. 3.24.
: which proves, that God does not give it for Works, as a thing by them
deserved, but because we are become his children by the free grace of adoption.
Secondly, they cry out, that by this means we destroy good Works. I answer,
that that is a mere untruth. For we say, that none can be saved without good
Works, because God has ordained them that we should walk in them Ephesians 2.10.
; we teach, that that Faith is vain and dead Iam. 2.26.
, which does not work by love Gal. 5.6.
: For albeit we must not be zealous in good works Tit. 2.14.
, with an hope to merit thereby, yet we know and preach, that there are sundry
necessary uses Tit. 3.14.
of them, for which they ought not to be neglected. So then this is the first
use of this doctrine, to establish us in the doctrine of free justification
without works. If I would be saved, the pardon of my sins, the hiding and
covering of mine own actions, is the thing which I must seek after: therefore
what warrant have I to rely upon my own deserving? This is needful to be
noted, because this error goes far, and too too many do trust to their own
deeds. If thou would be saved, this must be thy Plea: O Lord I have sinned,
even in my best courses, I beseech thee for Christ to pardon me: and not, Lord
behold this I have done, thus I have deserved, therefore I require thee of thy
justice to reward me.

The 2. Use.
The second use, is matter of exhortation to every one of us. For behold, our
salvation stands in the remission of sins: Do thou then desire to be saved?
then thou must labor that thy sins may be pardoned: This follows
necessarily. It is a woeful thing to look upon the most: They pretend an
expectation and a desire of salvation; talk with them, they will say they
desire it and pray for it: yet of all other things, Remission of sins, is
that which is least labored for. If any man should with Solomon, stand in the
window of his house, and look Pro. 7.6.
and consider the courses of men, how should he see them employed? Some gaping
after wealth, some striving to become great, and to set their nest on hie Hab.
2.9.
, some running after vain delights, some plotting and studying for revenge,
some drinking, some gaming, some playing the wantons, some pranking up
themselves, all of them guilty before God, of more sins than there be grass
piles upon the earth, and yet scarsely any one seriously busying himself about
this, how his sins may be pardoned, and his iniquities covered. If we should
see a malefactor guilty of many capital trespasses, taken and imprisoned, and
the day of the assise approaching, and yet the same man to be secure and iocund
and gamsome, would we not all condemn him for a desperate person, and say, we
wondered how he could be so merry, having so many foul matters to be put in
against him, and not knowing how to escape? yes doubtless. And yet even so is
the case with us: Our sins are more in number than the hairs of our head
Psalm. 41.12.
; taken we be, and cannot hide our selves from the Lord, (for whither shall we
flee from his presence Psalm. 139.7.
? answer to particulars we cannot, to endure the trial is a thing impossible;
for if thou, O Lord, straightly markest iniquities, O Lord who shall stand Psalm.
130.3.
? and, can thine heart endure, or can thy hands be strong in the days that I
shall have to do with thee Ezekiel. 22.14.
? The very sight of the Judge at the day of reckning, will make us say to the
mountains, Fall on us, and to the hills, Cover us Luc. 23.30.
. What then shall we say of our own selves, who for all this, sleep upon the
elbowes of our own security, and put these things far from our thoughts,
and never go about to sue out a discharge, and to be comfortablie secured in
our consciences of Gods favor? This security cannot be excused; well may we
sleep in our negligence, but our Damnation sleeps not 2. Pet. 2.3.
, and we shall surely perish in our carelessness. Thou will say (perhaps) unto
me; You speak much of my negligence, you blame me for not seeking the pardon
of my sins, but you teach me not the way by which I might obtain this
favor. Hearken therefore, whosoever thou art, which desire to be instructed in
this thing. There is none can forgive sins but God; the only person, in and
by whom sins are pardoned, is Christ Jesus. The means of obtaining pardon
from God the Father by Christ, is set down briefly by S. John: If we
acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins 1.
Ioh. 1.9.
. Thus then thou must proceed if thou desire Remission of sins: First, thou
must use a diligent and serious examination of thine own heart by the law of
God, to see how the case stands with thee, and what sins and corruptions
thou art guilty of: This the Scripture teaches; Let us search and try our
ways Lam. 3 40.
. Secondly, thou must in thine own thoughts arraigne thy self before God,
supposing that even now the day of reckning were, and thou were now instantly
to answer before God. Thirdly, thou must put up an accusation against thy
self, ripping up all thy known sins, without lessening them, without
excusing them, without hiding them, without taking upon thee to defend them:
Thus did David; I know mine iniquities, and my sin is ever before me. Against
thee, against thee only have I sinned etc Psalm. 51.3.4.
. Thus did Ezra; Our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespase
is grown up to the heaven Ezra 9.6.
. Fourthly, thou must go on, to give the sentence against thy self,
acknowledging that thou art worthy of everlasting death and condemnation. Thus
did Daniel; O Lord unto us belongs open shame Dan. 9 7.
: Thus did the Prodigal, I am no more worthy to be called thy son Luc. 15.21.
. Fifthly, thou must with as much earnestness as thou possibly can, entreat
the Lord for Christ's sake to pardon thee, and never leave him, till he give
this blessed answer to thy conscience, that all thy sins are clean put out
of his remembrance. Thus we are taught to do; Take unto you words, and turn
to the Lord, and say unto him, Turn away all iniquity and receive us
graciously Hos. 14 3.
. Thus did Daniel; O my God incline thine care and hear etc. O Lord hear, O
Lord forgive, O Lord consider etc Dan. 9.18.19.
. Lastly, thou must beg grace and strength to be able to walk in newness of
life. So did David; Let thy good spirit lead me into the land of righteousness
Psalm. 143.10.
. This is the only way to obtain remission of sins, if we would be saved,
this is a thing which ought daily to be done; we must be ever reckning with our
selves, still asciting ourselves before God, still laying open our corruptions
before him, still bewailing our weaknesses, still suing for mercy, still
laboring that our sins may be shaken off, and the graces of God increased in
us. Are these strange things to our knowledge, strange to our practice, have we
never thought upon taking this serious and strict and through course with our
selves? surely our sins do yet hang upon the file in Gods high court, the
bill against us is uncancelled, and in the day of account we cannot escape. It
is my duty to give knowledge of salvation, and to teach that our salvation
stands in the remission of sins, and to show you the way how this remission
may be obtained: and God forbid that I should cease to show you the good and
the right way 1. Sa. 13.23.
. If now, when the way is thus sanded forth unto you, you will say, as they
did of old, We will not walk therein Ier. 6.16.
, you must suffer me to conclude with Moses, I call heaven and earth to record
against you, this day, that you shall shortly perish Deuteronomy 4.26.
. Thus much for the fourth branch.

The fifth is the fountain out of which this salvation, which stands in the
remission of sins, does flow, in those words, Through the tender mercy of our
God. The phrase of speech here is very effectual. For Zachary satisfies not
himself to say mercy, but he mentions, Bowels of mercy. It is spoken after
the manner of men, to note out an exceeding tenderness and inwardnesse of
compassion, such as is, when a pitiful person his very bowels yearne and are
moved within him, to behold some woeful or distressed spectacle. So the mercy
of God in this case is not ordinary, but more full of commiseration, than any
man possibly can imagine. Hence are we taught that, (which has been often
touched in this Hymn) namely, That the supreme cause, The 2. Doctrine.
the first root of our salvation, is the riches of Gods mercy, the tenderness
of his voluntary and free compassion toward us. Hence is it that the elect are
called Vessels of mercy Romans 9.23.
, because the whole work of their salvation, can be ascribed to no other thing
but only to mercy. Excellent is the place of the Apostle Ephesians. 2.1.3.4 5.
; Thus and thus we were by nature, dead in trespasses and in sins, children of
wrath etc. Whence is it that we are brought into a better estate? God, which is
rich in mercy etc. has quickened us, etc. Paul says of himself that he had
sometimes been a blasphemer, and a persecuter and an oppressor: whence came
it, that he was not so still? was it from himself? no: I was received to
mercy, says he 1. Tim. 1.13
. Blessed be God etc. which according to his abundant mercy etc. 1. Pet. 1.3.
. The Scripture is very precise in this point, in ascribing every specialty to
Gods mercy and free grace. Touching election, it is called the election of
grace Romans 11.5.
. Touching vocation, it is said to be according to grace 2. Tim. 1.9.
. Touching faith, it is said to be given Phil. 1.29.
. Touching justification, it is said to be freely by Gods grace Rom 3.24.
. Touching every good motion, it is said, that it is God which works it Phil.
2.13.
. Touching life eternal, it is termed a gift Romans 6.23.
. The holy Scripture labors in nothing more, than to prove that God was
moved by nothing in the matter of man's salvation, but only by his mercy. I,
even I, am he that puts away thine iniquities for mine own sake Isay 42.25.
. And indeed if our natural estate be considered, it must needs be, that all
will be ascribed to mercy: Children of wrath Ephesians. 2 3.
, Enemies to God Romans 5.10.
, our imaginations only evil Genesis 6.5.
, our wisdom death Romans 8.6.
, Reprobate to every good work Tit. 1.16.
. What was there (think we) to induce God, or to incline or bend him to do
ought for us? how must not all needs be said to flow from his free mercy? Every
spiritual man may truly say in respect of spiritual things, as Jacob did of
his wealth, God has had mercy on me, and therefore I have all these things
Genesis 33.11
; or as the Church acknowledges; Lord thou have wrought all our works for us
Isay 26.12.
.

The use is, still to maintain the glory of God, The 1. Use.
and to beat down the natural pride and presuming of man's heart: merit and
grace can never agree Romans 11.6.
: that which is by mercy is not by works, that which is by works is not by
mercy. And know we this, that we have made great proceedings in godliness,
when we have learned out of the due consideration of our own spiritual
weakness, and out of the lively apprehension of our own lost and desperate
estate, effectually and affectionately to acknowledge, that had it not been
for the unspeakable riches of Gods mercy, we could never have come one piece
of a step toward heaven. And indeed, until a man is come to the effectual
acknowledgement and understanding of an absolute misery in himself, without
any power left in himself, so much as by a thought to wish or further his own
true good, he may prate of the mercy of God, but he can never truly and
comfortably apprehend it. God is so ielous of it, that if we go about to
temper any other thing therewith more or less, the sweetness thereof is
utterly lost.

Secondly, this may be a comfort unto us, The 2. Use.
that look how much we take from our natural humor by giving all to Gods
mercy, so much we add to our spiritual setlednesse, and do make the estate
of our souls so much the surer. For, if that which had the first beginning
from Gods mercy, were by our endeavors to be perfited, we might well doubt of
our salvation; but when we rely wholly upon Gods mercy, there is no cause of
fear: because the mercy of God is (as himself) perpetual and unalterable.
There is nothing in us that began it, there is nothing in us that can alter it.

The sixth branch now follows, touching the especial fruits of this tender
mercy of our God: and that is, that thereby the dayspring from on high has
visited us. Here we must enquire. 1. What the dayspring is. 2. Who is meant by
it. 3. Why it is said to be from an hie. First, by Dayspring is meant
literally, the first appearance and breaking of the day, in the East part of
heaven, foretelling the near rising and approaching of the Sun. Secondly, by
Dayspring is spiritually understood Christ Jesus. It seems that Zachary had
reference to the ancient Prophecies, touching a star that should come of
Iaacob Number 24.17
, and of a Sun of Righteousness which should arise Mal. 4 2.
. Thirdly, it is said to be from on hie, to teach us from whence this
refreshing comes, not from earth, not from below, not from the device or
procurement of Man; but from Heaven, from the free grace and mercy and power of
God: And it is also said to visit us; to note out (as has been before
observed) our woeful extremity without Christ: inasmuch as the word (visit)
does ordinarily betoken a sick and distressed estate in those which are
visited. So that this is the sense; that by the great mercy of God, it is come
to pass, that Christ Jesus, (who is the light and comfort of his Church) has
broken forth, and has cast out his beams for the refreshing and cheering of
our souls.

If this clause were to be handled apart, many things might be gathered
thence: but treating of it now with the rest, and so, neither repeating out of
it things already touched, nor yet raising from it such points as that which
follows will give us more full occasion to consider, these are the chief
things to be noted hence. The 3. Doctrine.
First, That the coming of Christ into the World, to work our salvation, is
the principal evidence and the chief fruit of Gods mercy. Consider how this
is raised. Zachary had spoken of the bowels of Gods mercy, that is, of the
deepest measure of his grace and compassion: Now, as an instance and proof
thereof, he does insist especially upon this, the rising of the Sun of
Righteousness Christ Jesus. As if he had said: Many ways is the mercy of God
made known unto us, the earth is full of it, but this exceeds all, that he
has enlightened the World by his Son, and has visited us with so great
salvation To this agrees the speech of Paul, God sets out his love toward
us, seeing, etc. Christ died for us Romans 5.8.
. His meaning is, that in other things the mercy of God is not obscure, but the
mystery of Christ is (as it were) a stage, upon which he has set it forth,
that all men might behold in it the fullness thereof. In this (says John)
appeared the love of God, because he sent his only begotten Son into the
World etc 1. Ioh. 4.9.
. In this: meaning, that although it appears in other things, yet in this
especially. The reason is plain: It is the mercy of God, that we live and
breath, and enjoy health and peace. In these things Gods love is to be seen;
but what were these without Christ, according to that saying; What shall it
profit a man, though he should win the whole world, if he lose his own
soul Matt. 16.26.
? All other comforts without an interest into Christ, do but help to increase
our condemnation.

This serves to discover our folly. The Use.
Of all the mercies of God, that, of Christ is the chiefest; yet of all the
rest it is least sought for. We are (the most) right of the Epicures mind, if
the sides and belly be well, let the rest go how it will. Herein we are like
children, who look upon the babies in a book, but care not for the matter.
These outward things are but toics and trifles in comparison, them we gaze
upon, upon them we do even fix our desires. It ought not to be so, neither
indeed is it so with true Christians: they are like David; who when he beheld
the men of his time, rejoicing in their Wheat and their Wine, cried out, Lord
lift up the light of thy countenance upon me Psalm. 4.6.
, as it were scorning all things else in respect of that. Remember we then: This
is the height of Gods mercy, that he has given us Christ; let it be the
height, yea, the very All, of our desires to enjoy Christ. Of all cares, let
this be our chief care, how we may be saved.

Another point obseruable hence is; The 4. Doctrine.
The stablenesse and unchangeableness of that work of salvation which is
wrought by Christ Jesus: It must be so, seeing it is said to be from on hie;
out of heaven and from God: Apply to it we may that rule of Gamaliel: If this
counsel be of God, ye cannot destroy it Act. 5.39.
: so this thing, is from on hie, it has fetched the beginning from God,
therefore it cannot be frustrated. All things under the Moon are subject to
change, the things above are firm and immutable. This is Paul's reasoning
touching the certainty of salvation Romans 8.33.
. He goes upon hie to the foundation of all, Gods eternal Predestination,
that is unchangeable, therefore their Justification is firm, therefore their
Glorification is certain. Hymeneus and Philetus by their false doctrine
destroyed the faith of certain (for it was not built upon the Rock) but The
foundation of God remains sure, says the Apostle 2. Tim. 2.19
.

The 1. Use.
This is, first, a great comfort to all true believers: Their salvation
depends not upon uncertainties: he is come from on hie, which has
undertaken it. This is an Anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast Heb. 6.19.
. Your life is hid with Christ in God Col. 3.3.
. The course was framed in heaven, all the strength and power of hell cannot
dissolve it.

The 2. Use.
Secondly, this (from on hie) may be a good admonition to us, if we desire a
part with Christ, to labor to pull and retire our affections from earthly
things. So reasons Paul; If ye be risen with Christ, seek the things which
are above Col 3.1.
. Our salvation is from on hie, and therefore we must labor to look upward:
It was the speech of Christ: You are from beneath, etc Ioh. 8.23.
, meaning, that because they were such as did savor only of earthly things,
therefore Religion and grace could not enter into their hearts: If we ever be
like swine, muzling in the ground, and like the Mole or Want, burying our
selves in the earth, we make our selves unfit for the kingdom of God: The
Church has the Moon under her feet Reu. 12.1.
: She despises and sets light by all the riches, glory, pomp and carnal
pleasures of this world: And indeed still, the higher a man labors to lift
up his thoughts to heavenly things, the baser will these earthly things seem
to be unto him: as when one climeth a high tower or hill, the higher he does
mount, the less does every thing appear which is below him.

THE TENTH SERMON.
VERSE. 79. To give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of
death, and to guide our feet into the way of Peace.


WE are now come unto the seventh and last branch, namely, the special end why
this Dayspring has appeared, which is, To give light, etc.

The sum of the place is, A kindness or benefit bestowed: the party by whom
it is bestowed we have heard of: (The Dayspring from on hie). Now we have
here two things to be considered of: 1. The state and condition of the
parties to whom it is given (they sit in darkness and in the shadow of death).
2. The quality of the benefit, (To give light, and, to guide into the way of
peace.) The former shows how miserable we be without Christ: The latter, what
happiness is offered to us in Christ.

In handling the former we must first enquire the sense, namely, what is meant
by Darkness, and what by the shadow of Death. The word (Darkness) must not
be taken literally, for any outward, material, earthly or sensible darkness;
such as is when the heavens are overwhelmed with clouds, the Sun set, the
stars hidden, and the Moon not appearing, and neither fire nor candle to be
gotten. But it must be taken in a spiritual sense, with reference to the
inward parts, to the soul and conscience. And being so taken, it betokens
two things. 1. Want of true saving knowledge: 2. Want of true spiritual
comfort. Thus Light, in Scripture is taken: first, for true knowledge. That the
Eyes of your understanding may be lightened Ephesians. 1.18.
: Secondly for true comfort: Light is sown for the Righteous, and joy for the
upright in heart Psalm. 97.11.
. So also darkness, is put for the contrary. First, for Ignorance: Men loved
darkness rather than Light Ioh. 3.10.
: Having their cogitation darkened Ephesians. 4.18.
. Secondly, for amazedness and perplexity of spirit: If they look to the
earth, behold darkness and sorrow Isay 5.30.
. Therefore Hell, which is the seat of Horror, is (...) led Darkness Matt.
18.12.
. So then by those which sit in darkness, are meant those which lie buried in
ignorance and blindness, utterly destitute of all true spiritual consolation.

Now to this, there is added another clause, (The shadow of death.) A phrase
usual in Scripture, signifying an estate brought, as it were, within the
coasts and borders, and (as I may so speak) within the reach of death. So
that the meaning of both clauses together is this; That those to whom Christ
has appeared as a Savior, were without knowledge, without comfort, without
any means or possibility of life eternal in themselves. This is the sense.

Here then is ample occasion given to speak of our natural estate without
Christ: The misery whereof stands in three things. 1. Want of true knowledge.
2. Want of true comfort. 3. Subjection and liablenesse to death eternal. That
these three are all true of every natural man, I will declare briefly.

The 1. Doctrine.
And first, That every natural man is destitute of true knowledge, the
Scripture speaks plainly. Paul says, that naturally our Cogitations are
darkened through Ignorance Ephesians. 4.18.
: that we are unwise Tit 3.3.
, that is, such as understand not What the will of the Lord is Ephesians. 5.17.
: that the Wisdom of our flesh is death and enmity against God Romans 8.6.7.
: that we neither perceive, nor can know the things of the spirit of God 1.
Cor. 2.14.
. And of this ignorance we have examples; as in Nicodemus, who could not tell
what to make of the doctrine of Regeneration Ioh. 3.9.
; and in the learned Athenians, who mocked at that which Paul taught touching
the Resurrection Act. 17 32.
. The most points of Religion seem to flesh and blood, unreasonable, absurd,
unlikely. Man has no knowledge of God by nature, but only so much as may
serve to condemn him.

We are taught by this, first, The 1. Use.
to disclaim all opinion of freewill, that is, of power in man (of himself)
to embrace and to entertain good when it is offered. This is certain, that
where the mind of man has no power to conceive, there the will has no power
to embrace. Now it is proved here that we are all in darkness; nay even
darkness it self Ephesians. 5.8.
. We are possessed with that extreme ignorance and dullness in the things of
God, that (of our selves) we cannot understand them: Therefore, as God must
first enlighten our minds, before we can conceive any good, so he must first
bend and frame and new mould our wills, before we can truly affect, nay
before we can once incline or lean toward the same. Let the patrons of
Freewill see how they can reconcile these things, namely, that man should
naturally lie groueling in a thick mist of spiritual darkness, and yet
should have power in himself to choose that which is good, without special and
particular enabling.

Secondly, this advises us, not to admit our own sense and conceit as a Judge
in matters of Religion. The 2. Use.
The blind (we say) is unfit to judge of colors, and natural man, to
determine of holy things. He that will believe nothing, but that which his
own reason shall approve, nor do nothing more than his own corrupt
affection shall incline unto, shall never believe so much as he ought, nor
practice the one half of that which is required. A great cause of men's
disobedience in religion, is, that they consult with flesh and blood, that is,
about matters of the soul, they consult with that which is the greatest enemy
to the soul. The first lesson to be learned by a Christian is, to deny
himself Matt. 16 24.
. It ought to satisfy thee that God has so commanded, so spoken, so revealed:
whether it be agreeable to reason or no, it is all one: Say with Peter, At thy
word I will do this, or I will believe that. Happy is he, who being privy to
his own spiritual blindness, can stretch out his hand to the Lord, and say
with David, Teach me, Direct my steps in thy word: Let me not wander from thy
Commandments Psalm. 119.10.12.133.
.

The 3. Use.
Thirdly, we are hereby let to see what they do which please themselves in
their ignorance. What is it, but a delighting in their own misery? It is as
if a man should content himself to lie in the bottom of a dark stinking
dungeon, even when there is means offered to release him. What is the chief
part of our natural misery? Is it not this, that we sit in darkness? But what
darkness is it? Our senses do tell us, it is not any outward, bodily
darkness, which is meant: It cannot be any, but the darkness of the soul.
And what is the darkness of the soul but Ignorance and dullness? Faith is
the eye of the soul, and knowledge the ground of Faith. You then, which
wilfully muzzell your selves in ignorance, which desire not to be better
taught, which are weary of the means of knowledge; what do you, but even
resolve with your selves to lie still in darkness, and to rush your selves
into that Utter darkness, where nothing will be besides Weeping and gnashing
of teeth Matt. 8.12.
. Remember we then, that as by nature in respect of sin, we are of all
creatures the most miserable, so one branch of our misery is the darkness of
ignorance, the want of true saving knowledge: if we do willingly and
contentedly cherish our selves therein, and refuse to understand the things
which belong unto our Peace, it is all one as if we should say, We will not be
saved; Hell shall be more welcome unto us then eternal life.

The second part of our natural misery, is, The 2. Doctrine.
The want of true comfort. There is no peace to the wicked, says God Isay
57.21.
. The conscience, naturally, being not yet renewed and purged by Christ's blood,
has in it, one of these two evils; Senslesnesse, or Amazedness: Either it is
blockish and benumbed and feels nothing, and so passes on in a kind of
drowsinesse and security, like an Ox that goes to the slaughter Pro. 7.22.
; or else it is perplexed and distracted with inward horror, not knowing which
way to turn it self for any true refreshing: And the reason is this; In every
natural heart, Satan reigns and works Ephesians. 2.2.
, and Christ is a stranger from it. Now where the King of confusion reigns,
and where the Prince of Peace Isay 9.6.
is a stranger, what comfort can be looked for? Again, the foundation of all
true comfort, is the persuasion of Gods love in the forgiveness of sins; but
this, I am sure, does not grow in natures garden. And thirdly, let a soul be
wounded, a heart pricked, a conscience astonished, with the apprehension of
sin, and with the Terror of the Lord 2. Cor. 5.11.
, all the wit, of all the wisest men in the World, out of their own reason
cannot comfort it. This is a lim of our natural darkness. Let us once be
touched with inward sorrow, let nature do her best, let carnal reason stretch
it self to the utmost pin, yet shall we be swallowed up with dismaiednes.

This teaches us, what we must do, The Use.
when as in sickness, loss, disgraces, and in any other sadness, and
sullenness of spirit we desire refreshing. If we ask counsel of Nature or
of carnal friends, what direction shall we receive? Company, Music,
discourse, gaming, and things of the like nature; which are like to water taken
by one sick of a burning fever, which cools a little at the first, but after
increases the heat: or to sticks catched at by a man ready to be drowned,
which promise some hope of help, but yet fail in the use, and perish with him
that trusted to them. If we desire true comfort, we must go out of our
selves, and look upward, to him, who is the God of all consolation 2. Cor. 1.3.
. In his word we must meditate: Except (says David) thy Law had been my
delight, I should now have perished in mine affliction Ps. 119.92.
. The cause of men's deadness in the day of sorrow, is their dependence upon
carnal means ( the reed of Egypt Isay 36.6.
) while in the mean time they neglect the principal.

The 3. Dotrine.
The third part of our natural misery, is subjection to eternal death. Death
is gone over all men Romans 5.12.
: and, The wages of sin is death Romans 6.23.
. God told Adam, that in the day that he did eat the forbidden fruit, he
should die the death Genesis 2.17.
. Now inasmuch as we have all taken part with this disobedience, we have all a
share in this punishment. This punishment is called Death, not because it is an
utter abolishment of the Being of the creature (happy were it for the wicked
if it were so) but it is so called, because the soul is eternally separated
from God, who is the fountain of life and happiness, and by that means, it
is ever dying, but dies never, wishing a dessolution, but can never obtain it.

The Use.
The use hereof is to humble us, and to abate our natural pride. Among men, if
we see one that is a beggar by birth, to be proud, and lifting up himself, we
account it intolerable. Put case some one were borne to be a slave or a
drudge, we would think such an one had little cause of boasting: Yet such is
the natural condition of us all. The shadow and darkness of eternal death, is
our best inheritance. Let God give us our right, and what portion can we
expect but the fire of hell? It is natures desert, nay it is even the desire of
nature, to be plunged into it. Why are we secure, whom our sins have cast
into such a dismal estate? Thou pridest thy self in thy birth, thou in thy
wealth, thou in thy wit, thou in thy painted sheath and gay clothing, and
considerest not, thy best desert what it is, and whereto it tends: whereas thou
ought rather, to power out thy heart like water before the face of the Lord
Lam. 2.19.
, and to cry with David: Save me O God; Deliver me out of the mire, that I
sink not: Let not the pit shut her mouth upon me Psalm. 69.1.14.15.
.

Thus much touching the state of the parties, upon whom Christ bestows the
benefit of salvation: where we see what we are all by nature without Christ;
without the light of knowledge, without the light of comfort, ready to be
swallowed up in the darkness of eternal death. The right understanding of
this point, when it works to the humbling of the soul, is the very first step
to happiness, and the first fruits of true godliness.

The second thing to be handled in this Text, is the nature of the benefit,
which is here declared in two things: 1. To give light: 2. To guide our feet
into the way of peace. Of these two in their course. In discoursing upon the
former, I must show first, what is meant by Light; and then how this Light is
given. The word Light is opposed to the former misery. Whatsoever is
understood by Darkness and the shadow of death; the contrary thereunto is
intended by this word Light: as namely, Light of knowledge, Light of comfort,
and Light of life. The 4. Doctrine.
All these three are meant by the word Light, and into the world Christ came to
impart these three. First, to give the Light of Knowledge; I am come into this
world, that they which see not, might see Ioh. 9.39.
. No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, etc. he has
declared him Ioh. 1.18.
. In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and Knowledge Col. 2.3.
, and of his fullness we must all receive Ioh. 1.16.
. Secondly, to give the Light of comfort: The spirit of the Lord is upon me,
(the place is meant of Christ) to give beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, the garment of gladness for the spirit of heaviness Isay 61.1.3.
: And thence comes that offer made by Christ: Come unto me all that are
weary, etc. and ye shall find rest for your souls Matt. 11.28.29.
. Thirdly, to give the Light of Life: He that follows me shall not walk in
darkness, but shall have the Light of Life Ioh. 8.12.
. He has brought Life and Immortality to Light by the Gospel 2. Tim. 1.10
. And thus is that fulfilled which Christ spoke: Whosoever believes in me
shall not abide in darkness Ioh. 12.46.
: neither in the darkness of Ignorance, nor in the darkness of discomfort,
nor in the darkness of eternal death.

Now for the manner and means of imparting this Light. He who is the Sun of
Righteousness Mal. 4 2.
, conueieth the beams of this Light by two instruments: 1. The Word. 2. The
Spirit. To assure us that the Word is the Instrument to convey the Light of
Knowledge, it is said, to give Light to the eyes Psalm. 19.8.
; and the Ministry of it, is called the Light of the World Matt. 5.14.
; the Ministers themselves, are said to be Stars in Christ's right hand Reu.
1.20.
, they have committed unto them, the Key of Knowledge Luc. 11.52.
, and it is their office, to give Knowledge Luc. 1.77.
. Again, that we may know the Word to be the Instrument of comfort, it is said
to rejoice the Heart Psalm. 19.8.
, and to be a Comfort in trouble Psa. 119.50.
. Thirdly, to certify us, that it is the Instrument of Life, it is called the
Word of Life Act. 5.20.
, and a quickening Word Psa. 119.93.
. Touching the Spirit, as much is testified also. By it God gives Knowledge. It
is the Spirit of Truth, and leads into truth Ioh. 16.13.
. The work thereof is called the opening of the Heart Act. 16.14.
, and the opening of the understanding Luc. 24.45.
. Secondly, by it comes Comfort; therefore he is called the Comforter Ioh.
14.26.
, and The oil of gladness Psalm. 45.7.
. Thirdly, by it comes Life, for which cause it is called The spirit of Life
Romans 8.2.
. Thus we see, Christ the Dayspring, for what end he came, even to give Light,
namely, the Light of Knowledge, the Light of comfort, and the Light of Life: We
understand also, how he sends forth these his beams upon us: Outwardly, by
the brightness of his Word: Inwardly, by the shining of his Spirit.

The 1. Use.
The first use is, to make the tidings of the Gospel, to be (as in their own
nature they are) tidings unto us of great joy Luc. 2.10.
: They should be as the news of Joseph's life to Jacob, at the hearing whereof
his Spirit revived Genesis 45.27.
. But why so? The substance of the Gospel is Christ Jesus, and the sum of
his office is to give Light: What one thing is there in the world more
comfortable? When Paul and the rest were in danger of shipwreck, they wished
(says the text) that the day were come Act. 27.29.
. The darkness of the night added to their danger, and doubled their fear:
Every hour seemed two, until the day were broken. Indeed that saying is true
of evil doers: The morning is to them as the shadow of the death Job 24.17.
: but to them of honest carriage, the light of the day is exceeding welcome.
Therefore David sets forth his longing after God, by the watching of the
morning watch for the morning Psalm. 130.6.
. It is said of Abraham that he rejoiced to see Christ's day Ioh. 8.56.
: A little glimpse of this light was the very joy of Abraham's heart. How great
therefore and intolerable is our dullness, who take. no contentment in the
beams of this Light, which shine unto us? A great blessing it is, which is
reported of Zabulon and Nepthalim; The people which sat in darkness saw great
Light, and to them which sat in the Region and shadow of death light is risen
up Matt. 4.16.
. We (by the goodness of God) enjoy the like blessing, and yet, in the
opinion of the most, it is nothing less than a blessing: Men had rather lie
wallowing in the darkness of Ignorance, than open their eyes to receive that
light which is offered unto them by the Gospel. This is that which will bring
hell and judgment upon this generation, according to that speech of Christ:
This is the condemnation, that light is come into the World, and men love
darkness rather than light Ioh. 3.19.
. A marvel it is, that men should reject such a blessing: But Christ has told
the reason; It is, because their deeds are evil. This Light of doctrine
discovers their sins, (for it is Light which makes all things manifest
Ephesians. 5.13.
) it bewrays the grossness of their courses, and lays open many a man's
hypocrisy, who seemed to himself, and was reputed by others, to be such an
one as he ought to be. There cannot be a greater vexation to men of corrupt
minds than to be met with in their sins; they cry then with Ahab, Have thou
found me, O mine enemy 1. Kin. 21.20.
? This is the cause that the Light of grace, which we ought of all other
things most to rejoice in, is become such a burden unto us; it discovers
that, which we desire by all means to keep close. The world hates me (says
our Savior) because I testify of it, that the works thereof are evil Ioh.
7.7.
. Remember we therefore: Christ is the Light, we are they to whom he offreth
Light; he has sent his word to enlighten us. If we rejoice not in this Light,
but wish rather it were even blown out, that we might sleep freely in our
sins, it shows us to be the heirs of darkness, and that the shadow of
eternal death must be our portion.

The 2. Use.
The second use stands thus: Since Christ, as he is Light himself, so, imparts
his Light unto us by his Word and the Ministry thereof, we must remember the
counsel which Christ gives: Walk while ye have light 1. Ioh. 8.35.
. We have no assurance of the continuance of that Light of the Gospel which we
now enjoy. Our sins may bring a storm upon us, in which the Sun shall go
down over the Prophets, and the day shall be dark over them. Mic. 3.6.
Our unthankfulness and barrenness in our profession, our lothing of the
heavenly Mannah, has deserved this, and more: It is holy wisdom therefore
for us, to take the benefit of the light whiles it yet shines, lest such a
judgment should come upon us, as Christ spoke of; namely, that we should
desire to see one of the days, which we now see and value not, but the^ shall
not see them Luc. 17.22.
. Perhaps, in the opinion of some this is no judgment, nay it is the very
thing they desire, being like those, who when the Prophets of God were slain,
reioiced over them, and sent gifts one to another Reu. 11.10.
. But let them hear what Christ says; He that walks in the dark, knows
not whither he goes Ioh. 12.35.
. He that iourneieth not whiles it is day, at last when he is benighted, he
loses his way, falls into the hands of thieves, rusheth into some downe-fall
where he casts away himself. Such is the state of men without the Light of
doctrine: They go, they know not whither; they believe, they know not what;
down they will be in the pit before they are aware. But (will some say) will
you make us so blind and so simple, that we cannot see the way to heaven
without you? I answer with the words of Christ to the Pharisees; Now ye say,
we see, therefore your sin remains Ioh. 9.41.
: You which think your selves so cunning, there is none so blind, no bodies
case is more desperate.

The third use is taught by the Apostle, in these words, The 3. Use.
Walk as the children of Light Ephesians. 5.8.
: That is, Christ is come into the world to enlighten, his word is preached, to
convey the light of grace into our hearts: this is no small privilege; behave
your selves therefore agreeably to this mercy, live as becomes those whom God
has called into Light. This same thing the same Apostle urges elsewhere: The
night is past (the time of ignorance is blown over) the day is come (the Light
of grace and knowledge has appeared) put on therefore the armor of Light Romans
13.12.
. We may thus understand it: Men that by occasion go abroad in the night, are
not so curious about their attire, thinking that whatsoever is amiss, will be
shrouded under the mantle of the night: But he who goes forth at noone day,
will be more careful, that nothing may be seen contrary to modesty,
contrary to civility: So (says the Apostle) in the days of your ignorance,
happily you might do such or such things, and because you knew no other, they
might (in some sort) be borne withal: but now the case is otherwise: Light
has shined, grace has appeared, knowledge is preached unto you, therefore
other things are now expected; if you now live as in times past, your fact
cannot be hid, your fault cannot be excused: We see in general, what the
Apostle persuades: That we may more fully conceive what this is to Walk in the
Light; let us hear him opening the same unto us: It comprehends under it three
things: 1. To approve that which is pleasing to the Lord Ephesians. 5.10.
, which is revealed in the Scripture, and is more and more made known unto us
by Preaching. 2. To beware of the unfruitful works of darkness verse. 11.
, such as gluttony, drunkenness, chambering, wantonness, strife, envying Romans
13.3.
, filthiness, foolish talking, etc Ephesians. 5.4.
. 3. To Reprove them: that is, to carry our selves in that holy and blameless
manner, that our very lives, (though we hold our tongues) may be sufficient to
lay open and condemn the leaud fashions of the ungodly. This is to walk as
the children of Light. This is straightly required of those which enjoy the
Light, but (alas) full slightly it is performed. How common, how shameless,
and how presumptuous are these unfruitful works of darkness; security,
contempt of goodness, scorn of Religion; Pride, Whoredom and such like? do
these agree with that Light which God has given us? Think we that God has a
part in us, when these things bear dominion over us? It is impossible. If we
say we have fellowship with God, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not
truly 1. Ioh. 1.6.
. The conclusion is this; Christ is our Light, he imparteth his beams unto us
by his Word: If we love this Light, let us walk as the children of Light. The
works of darkness will bring us into his power who is the Prince of darkness,
we cannot escape it.

The second part of the Benefit, is, To guide our feet into the way of peace.
Here it must first be enquired what is the way of peace. Secondly, it must be
proved that we need a Guide. Thirdly, it must be justified that Christ is the
Guide. Lastly, it must be showed, how he does guide. Of these briefly.

The 5. Doctrine.
The way of peace, is the way which leads unto eternal happiness: It is
called Gods way Psalm. 86.11.
, and the way of salvation Act. 16.17.
. That we have need of a guide, it is plain. The way of peace (by nature) we
do not know Romans 3.17.
: The way which seems right unto us, the issues thereof are the ways of
death Pro. 14.12.
. It is a part of our misery, that we are turned every one to his own way
Isay 536.
. That Christ is the Guide his own words prove; I (says he) am the way Ioh.
14.6.
. He goes before his sheep, he leads them out Ioh. 10.3.4.
. Now he guides even as he gives light; By the Word, and by his Spirit: By
his Word; Thy word is a lantern to my feet, and a light unto my paths Ps.
119.105.
: and the Interpreters of this word are called Guides Act. 8.31.
. 2. By his Spirit: Thy ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is
the way, walk ye in it, etc Isay 30.21.
. The Spirit of truth will lead you into all truth Ioh. 16.13.
. Thus is that verified which Hannah spoke in her song, that the Lord keeps
the feet of his saints 1. Sam. 2.9.
, and (as David says) does teach them the way that they shall choose Psa. 25.12.
.

We see by this, how soulely we do all err by nature, The 1. Use.
how apt we be still in matters which concern our souls to be mistaken, how
graciously God has dealt with us in providing us a Guide; What should we now
learn hereby but this? In all thankfulness and humility to yield our selves
unto his conduct. He has prepared for us a way by his blood Heb. 10.20.
, he has trodden out a path by his own Example Ioh. 13.15.
, he has left us his Word and the Ministry thereof, to point out the finger
to the right way, and to show us what is good Mic. 6.8.
: To the reverent use hereof he has promised the assistance and guidance of
his spirit: What should he have done more, which he has not done Isay 5.4.
? Shall we now when all things are thus fitted for us, be like those spoken
of in the Prophet, who when the way was laid out before them, said plainly, We
will not walk therein Ier. 6.16.
? God forbid. And indeed, we our selves if we do consider it, must needs
condemn it, that it should be so. Why then is it so? Christ calls daily upon
us in his word, while we be traveling in our own ways; Return ye sons of
Adam Psalm. 90.3.
. Why will ye die, O house of Israel? Cause therefore one another to return
Eze. 18.31.32.
: yet we turn the deaf ear, saying in effect, as they did of old; The word
spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not hear Ier. 44.16.
. Thus every one turns to his race Ier. 8.6.
, and the way of sinners Psalm. 1.1.
is preferred before the way of peace. The word of God calls us one way, and
we will be sure to go the clean contrary. If it were asked of us, whether
we would refuse to follow Christ, we would all say with one voice, God forbid
we should refuse it: but when he offreth his directions to us in his Word, we
will not follow them. Hold we this then: Christ is the head Guide: His Word
and the preaching thereof is the staff and instrument to conduct us: if we
refuse that guidance, we shall never find the way which leads unto peace.

The 2. Use.
Secondly, here we have a good direction in the diversity and multiplicitie of
guides, whom and what to follow. The time-seruer follows the State and the
law: The profane person, the multitude: The worldling his outward quietness:
The carnal wise man, his own conceit: The superstitious his forefathers: The
papists, the name of the Church. He which would not be deceived, let him
hearken to Christ: His sheep hear his voice Ioh. 10.27.
: Christ speaks in his word. If we will needs follow men, let it be according
to that rule: Be ye followers of me as I am of Christ 1. Cor. 11.1.
. Look who goes with Christ, that is, who brings his word, him let us follow:
Let us do as soldiers do in their watch, demand The Word. Thou will say; the
devil alleges the word, as he did to Christ. Truth, but he alleges it
falsely, as he did in his reasoning with Christ. Seek thou the Lord in
humility, and in denial of thy self, he will give thee a discerning spirit,
and thou shall not finally, or fundamentally be deceived. If any man (says
Christ) will do my Fathers will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be
of God, or whether I speak it of my self Ioh. 7.17.
. *

Let God alone have the glory.

