THE DOCTRINES TRIAL: Showing both the necessity and the way of trying what is
taught, in a Sermon upon 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.

By Sam. Hieron.

1 COR. 10. 15. Judge ye what I say. At LONDON, Printed by Humfrey Lownes, for
William Butler; and are to be sold at his Shop in Saint Dunstanes Churchyard
in Fleet Street. 1616.

TO MY REVErend Friend, Mr. Dr. Chaderton, Master of Emanuel College in
Cambridge.
SIr, as a pledge of the respect I owe you, I have made my self bold, under
your name, to set forth this Sermon. The old proverb, which forbids to
send Owls to Athens, has taught me not to send this to you, as a matter of
supply: you (now) live at the wel-head (from whence I confess, and rejoice, my
self to have drawn that little, by which it has since pleased God to enable
me to the doing of some service in his Church) and were (long since) one of
those judicious and painful Divines, at whose feet I sat (with many others)
in the days of my preparation to that work; wherein I now (by the assignement
of the Lord of the vineyard) am employed. In this therefore, I desire rather
to be thought to present you with an account of mine own courses, the^ with any
direction for yours: The two verses before this, I have preached on, and the
Sermons are abroad. As I held it necessary to treat on this also, so I
thought it fitting to publish that, which concerning it was given me to
deliver. There is no one thing (I think) in which our ordinary hearers, are
either more unskillful or more backward, then this duty of trying doctrines:
what vnsettlednesse in opinion, what unsoundness in judgment, this has caused,
I doubt not your self in your long experience have observed. If I shall
prevail ought to the curing of this Epidemicall disease, I shall glorify God
in that behalf. My endeavor that way, I have showed in this small Sermon:
which (here) from your hand, I commend to the common use of Gods Israel: from
Modburie in Deuon.

Yours respectively, Samuel Hieron.

The Doctrines trial.
1 These. 5. 21. Try all things: and keep that which is good.
I Will not enter into any course of repeating that which I taught in my former
Sermon. This in brief, to manifest the connection and order of both; The order
of the place.
both my two Texts, and Lectures. In the former we were taught the necessitiy
of diligent and respective dependence upon the preaching of the Word, unless we
will presumptuously and vnwarrantably adventure our selves upon the neglect of
the ordinary way, by which God is pleased to collect and gather his, unto
himself. We are now to be informed, with what wisdom it becomes us to
behave our selves in awayting upon this ordinance of God; that so we may reap
that good by it, which in the purpose of God is intended in it. The general
scope thereof.
A service, in it self, and in it own nature, wholesome and profitable, may
yet in the manner of using it be depraved. Hearing is a very necessary and an
important duty: and yet, a man through his own default may be constant and
continual in it to his hurt, rather then to his benefit. To the end therefore
we may so attend upon this exercise of Prophesying, as that thereby we may be
edified in our holy faith, Paul commends here unto us, two necessary
virtues: The division of it.
1 Discretion: 2 Constancy. Discretion, to try all things. Constancy, to hold
fast that, which is found upon trial to be good. To retain ought in Religion
stiffly, before a man have tried it thoroughly, what greater folly? This is
wilfulness rather and Pertinacy, then true Constancy. Again; to examine
points diligently, and then to neglect them carelessly, what greater vanity? It
is a great deal of labor to no use. But to sift and scanne that which is
heard, exactly, and to maintain that which is found to hold at the touch
resolutely, this is the glory and credit of Christianity. Of these two points I
am now in order to entreat.

Concerning the first, The first Doctrine.
this is the Doctrine; That it is the duty of those which honor preaching as
the means appointed for salvation, To try things taught, before they give
their full and absolute yielding thereunto: Who that looks upon the place, but
he will forthwith conceive this to be the doctrine? The advice of the
spirit of God is, that our honoring of prophesying, should be accompanied
with trying it. So respect it, as that you bind not your selves to a receiving
without inquiry, hand over head, whatsoever is commended by it. Heereto is
that charge to be referred, of trying the spirits 1 John 4. 1
, that is, of examining their persons and doctrines, who profess to speak
unto us by the Spirit. It remains upon record, as an honor to the Nobles of
Berea, and it is a rule for us, that hearing Paul and Silas preach they were
diligent in searching, whether the things they spoke were so Act. 17. 11
.

The course of seeking holy knowledge, at the mouths of those, whose lips by
their calling ought to preserve it Mat. 2. 7
, is termed by Solomon, a buying of the Truth Pr. 23. 23
. As therefore in buying, it is every man's wisdom to consider the wares which
are tendered to him, Gyrare negotiatorem vnum and alterum.
how they are conditioned, and (as Chrysostom says pithily to this purpose) to
go from shop to shop, Chry. Hom. 44. in opere imperfect.
and from chapman to chapman, to look where he may have the best, before he
make a through bargain: so it ought to be the care of a prudent Christian, to
consider of particulars, which are taught, before he give them entertainment.
Take heed how you hear, said our Savior Luke 8. 18.
; Does not this Take heed in hearing intend a trial of things heard? Consider
two things with me; and the truth, equity, and necessity of this doctrine
will soon be yielded to. The one is the possibility of being deceived in
our dependence upon prophesying. The other is, the danger of mistaking. The
possibility of being deceived, proceeds from two things: 1 Somewhat in them
which prophecy: 2. Somewhat in our selves, who listen thereunto. Touching them
which prophecy, there are two sorts by whom there is danger of deceit. 1 Some
purpose to deceive: 2 Some casually may deceive. Some purpose to deceive, whom
the Apostle terms, liers in wait to deceive Ephesians. 4. 14
, and whom he compares (according to the nature of the Greek word used) to
cheaters and false gamesters, (...)
who have devices by cogging dice, to deceive the unskillful. These speak
perverse things Act. 20. 30*
, and privily bring in damnable heresies 2 Pet. 2. 1
. It has been an ancient practice of the devil, to be a lying spirit in the
mouths of some Prophets 1 Kin. 22 22
; There have been ever some misleading leaders Isa. 3. 12
, causers of the people to err by their lies Ier. 23. 32
; and Saint Peter has assured us, that in this particular, the latter times
will hold proportion with the former 2 Pet. 2. 1
: Still there will be some seedsmen of Tares amongst them that sow the purer
Wheat; some temperers of Leaven, with the sweet lump of Gods sacred Truth.
Others there are again, which may casually deceive, and they are also of two
sorts. The one sort are such as may lead the people into error (though perhaps
it be not their purpose) through their insufficiency, their rawness, their
unskillfulness, their negligence, for and in the discharge of this great service
of instructing. Too many such there be, who wanting the tongue of the Learned
Isa. 50. 4
, who lacking Judgment Mica. 3. 8
, and skill of right dividing the word of Truth 2 Timothy 2 15
, and being no well taught scribes to the kingdom of heaven Mat. 13. 52
, and then withal being careless of that charge, touching taking heed to
Doctrine 1 Timothy 4 16
, do vent many things unsound and unsavory, sometimes things vain and foolish,
as the Scripture terms them Lam. 2. 14
ordinarily, such as God never commanded, nor spoke, neither ever came into his
mind Ier. 19. 5
, whereby the minds of the simple are deceived Romans 16 18
, and the hearts of the righteous made sad Eze. 13. 22
. These be such as Paul calls Deceived deceivers 2 Timothy 3 13
. They are beguiled themselves, (...).
and so beguile others. I will not be so uncharitable as to range such among
purposed deceivers: yet this I say, they themselves, being through
unskillfulness and negligence mistaken, and doing the Lords work more remisly
then is fit, they become an occasion of erring unto others. When men come to
the handling of holy things, not well instructed themselves, and then do that
which they do, without any great conscience (it may be they do it for form,
and bind themselves to speak according to the Times) it cannot be avoided
(though it may be, their hearts are not so naught as to mean deceit) but
sometimes others by them shall be in danger to be misled. The second sort of
such as casually may deceive, are even the best, the most sufficient and
faithful Teachers. It is possible, that even such, notwithstanding all their
care, may at a time deliver that which is not safe to entertain. None since
Christ, neither companies of men, nor particular persons, have had the
infallible assistance of the holy Ghost, except the Apostles. Our knowledge
here is but in part 1 cor. 13. 9
. In sundry things (as men) we are many times much mistaken. And it falls
out many times, thorough Gods wise dispensing, that somewhat is revealed to him
which sits by, which he who occupies the room of the Teacher, does not
understand; as is gatherable out of that saying of the Apostle, (1 Cor. 14.
30.) This is the first thing out of which there springs a possibility of being
deceived. The second, is from out of our selves which come to hear. We are
naturally in matters of Religion easily miscarried, by reason of the vanity of
mind, and darkness of cogitation, which we have brought with us from the Womb
Ephesians. 4. 18
: we are unwise by nature and deceived 1 Tit. 3. 3
. And then what through presumption, trusting too much to our selves, what
through a kind of native lothnesse to endure the pains of Trying, what
through an affectation of Nouelty, we are very liable to deceit, apt to
drinke-in error as water, and to be carried up and down with every wind of
doctrine Ephesians. 4. 14
. As it is said of us in the general, that we are clay to God, and wax to the
devil: so may it be applied to us in the particular, that we are hardly
wrought to an entertainment of a truth, but soon won to the embracing of an
error. The Jews in regard of their untowardness to good, were termed
stiff-necked Act. 7. 51
, and a gainesaying people Romans 10 21
, and yet soon turned out of the way which God commanded them Ex. 32. 8
; and the Galatians were soon removed to another Gospel Gal. 1. 8
, and yet the pains of forming Christ in them was as a travailing in birth
Gal. 4. 19
. Ever since the razing out of us the image of the God of truth, there has
been in our nature such an affinity with falsehood, that that which S. Paul
calls the deceiueableness of unrighteousness 2 These. 2 10.
, is very prevailing, speedily to entangle us. That same canker or gangreane of
untruth does soon seize upon us, and it fretteth 2 Timothy 2. 17
apace when it has once begun. Hereupon, the bringers in of heresies have
many to follow their damnable ways 2 Pet. 2. 2
: and Antichrist has small and great, rich and poor, to receive his mark
Apoc. 13 16
. Now for the danger of erring in matters of this kind, it is not hard to
discover it. Religion is a matter which concerns the soul, and the
everlasting happiness thereof. A mistaking therefore must needs be followed,
with a more then ordinary hurt. I know there are differences and degrees of
errors in matters of Religion. Some do strike more directly to the heart of
piety, and weaken the very maine foundation of faith. Some are not altogether
of so dangerous a nature; being in points of less importance. The former are
as mortal diseases in the body: the other are but as superfluous humors
within, or swelling tumors without. But yet as in the body, smaller griefs,
when they are multiplied and continued, become prejudicial to the life of the
whole: so these inferior kinds of mistakings, when they are ordinary and
increased, grow dangerous, to the Maine. A little leaven does leaven the whole
lump Gal. 5. 9
: It is applied by the Apostle, to show what inconvenience follows the
entertainme^t of (as it may seem) a petty error in the things of God. The
withal in the day of tentation, when a man is either before the world called
into question for that which he does profess, or else is sifted and winnowed
by Satan, about that which he believes; how woeful and hazardous shall his
case be, if he have taken up his religion only (as I may so speak) upon
trust, or raised it up out of his own surmise! There is neither of these, but
will be a poor ground for him to rely upon, in the time of Trial. Small
courage shall one have, to engage his life for that, for which his best proof
is the authority of him from whom he received it: and it will not be easy to
answer the devil, by alleging the name of a man, unless he be able to
justify his Tenent by divine authority. So then, if either we consider the
easiness of erring in matters of Religion, or the peril of mistaking therein,
we must needs acknowledge this doctrine, touching the Trial of doctrines, to
be true. How shall this easiness to err be prevented? how shall this danger
of not going aright be avoided? but by this one course of considering all
things, and of examining each point, before we build upon it as a certainty.

The devil labors to poison the fountain of Truth (the public Ministry) so
that often times there stream even from it very dangerous conceits: (...).
and the old saying may be well applied to our profession, Many good inches,
but few good ploughmen: So, many adventurers to speak from the pulpit; not so
many who observe the rule, of speaking as the words of God 1 Pet. 4. 11
, and then the best sometimes are ouershot. I remember what we learned when we
were boys; Cicero Offi. lib. 3
How one Cannius was cozened in the buying of a garden in an Island. The seller
first invited him to it, and for that day hired diverse fishermen, to attend the
banks with boats and nets, and to bring in plenty of fish, and to lay it at
his feet, making Cannius believe (who wondered at it) that it was the royalty
of the place, and that that service was due to him, as Lord of the garden,
whenever he came thither. Cannius believing him, and being much in love with
such a commodity, would needs have the garden, and paid for it to the purpose.
Shortly after, he had a disposition, to let some of his friends see what a
purchase he had made, and brought them to the garden to be merry, making full
account that the fishermen would be there, both to show him pastime, and to
present him with a tribute of fish. When he saw neither boat, nor fisherman,
nor net, he asked his neighbors whether it where holy day with fishermen:
They answered none that they knew of; and added withal, that they wondered at
the late resort of fishermen there, as a thing unusual in that place. Upon
this, Cannius perceived he was cozened: but it was too late; he could not
help it. And thus may an heedless person be deceived in his dependence upon
Gods ordinance: He may meet with some crafty Pythius (for so was he called who
deceived Cannius) who may commend a doctrine to him, and set it out with many
plausible terms, as if it were of such and such excellent use for a man's
soul; which yet, when it is brought to trial shall be found to yield out no
such matter as was promised. Thus still may this point be amplified, touching
the possibility to receive infection, even by preaching: to which when we
shall join our own aptness to be misled, and the peril of going awry, the
general point must needs be yielded to; namely, that in receiving of
doctrines* Trying ought to go before Trusting; we must labor to be sure that
which we intend to keep is good, before we set upon the keeping of it as good.

This point of doctrine, The use.
makes to the discovery (I wish also it may so please God, to the recovery)
of three great evils, which are very prevailing, and very universal in these
our Times. 1 Wilfulness. 2 Carelessness. 3 Unskillfulness. The first of these
is a froward humor. The second, a negligent humor. The third, a sottish
humor. They are ouercomne with the first, who plead for their excuse, in
either not hearing, or not crediting any whom they hear; the variety of
opinions to be found among preachers, and the possibility of being deceived
by dependence on them; scarcely two of them of a mind (say some) and therefore
my resolution is, I will believe none. How does this agree with the Rule of
Trying all things? It is not the counsel of the holy Ghost, because there is a
spirit of error in the mouths of many, and the best learned may mistake,
therefore cease to hear; but because it is thus, be sure to try. This binds to
judicial hearing, it gives no warrant to desist from hearing. Will thou rather
starve, because of a possibility to be poisoned? or go naked and near the
wind, because in the shops of them that sell, thou may be cozened? or lie
down in the street, or by the hedge, because (perhaps) thou may either go
wrong, or stumble on the way? Our Savior would have his Disciples learn and
inquire, and seek to be sure what he was, though some said one thing, some
another, touching him Mat. 16 13. 15
. That I may be deceived, must increase my care, not overthrow my diligence.

Now touching the second evil, of carelessenesse, it is to be seen in those,
who are apt to take all for sound and good, which is delivered. If they can
countenance that which they seem to maintain, with the name of a Teacher, or
say, it was delivered at a Sermon, they think it is enough. Especially there
is even a kind of Idolatry committed by some, in selling themselves so to some
men's judgments, that they do in a manner repute every word an Oracle which
they speak. It is sufficient for them, if such or such a man has said it.
This is even a spice of that which Saint Paul terms a being servants to men,
1 Cor. 7 23.
. It is to have ones faith more in the wisdom of man, then in the power of
God 1 Cor. 2. 5
. Let a man esteem of us, as the ministers of God 1 Cor. 4. 1
, but yet, not as men in whom, but by whom, you believe 1 Cor. 3. 5
. Were he an Angel from heaven, yet his Gospel must be looked into Gal. 1. 8
. Hearken to a matter because we say it; so much we may challenge by our
place: but do not believe it, until you know upon what ground we have
spoken it. Could we once work a conscience of this duty in our hearers, many
who do now despise our doctrine, would then approve it; and they which do
approve it, would find ten times more sweetness in it then they do.

But now comes the third evil, at the least as bad as the two former, and
that is unskillfulness. This reaches far. For, besides, that they who are
guilty of the two before named, are also chargeable with this; even they who
are better disposed, and have a kind of inclination to the duty of Trial,
yet want that skill, and ableness for it, which is necessary. It is not
easy, no not among the best professors, to find a man that has an exercised
wit, to discern both good and evil Heb. 5. 14*
. A witty and ingenious man, well spoken, and able to carry a matter
handsomely, and to set it out with a smooth and pleasing phrase, would soon
deceive even a great many of those which mean well.

Quickly might a man of Arts and Parts, make many of us to stagger, even
touching those very things which hitherto have gone with us for current, and
wherein we have seemed very confident. A man might so lap up the poisonous
drugs of Popery, and so gild them over with the seeming allowance of
Scripture, and of hore-headed Antiquity, that even the greatest part would
soon swallow them down without suspicion. This is a truth, but a lamentable
truth. What pity is it, that after this long Sunneshine of the Gospel in this
Land, there should be so many, who but (as Saint Peter's term is) see
glimmeringly, and uncertainly, like one who cannot see a far of 2 Pet. 1. 9
(...)
, in matters of Religion; and like Zebut in the holy story, either take men to
be but the shadows of mountains, or the shadows of mountains to be men Iud.
9. 36
. They know not what to make of many things, what to conceive, or how to
determine. And as Absalom and the Elders of Israel, at the first gave a
general approbation to Ahitophels advice, and were ready to follow it, but by
and by, said the counsel of Hushai the Archite was a great deal better, and
so did accordingly 2 Samuel 17 4. 14.
: so they who now say, Surely this is the truth which we must bide by, within a
while are apt to cry out, Nay but this is the better, and like the Lystrians in
the story, be ready to cast him out, whom in the beginning they did magnify
Act. 14. 19
. Must I not here say with the Apostle, Shall I praise you in this? in this I
praise you not 1 Cor. 11 22
.

Now happy might I account my self, if the doctrine which I have framed out
of this Text might become a purgative receipt, for the remoouing of these three
malignant humors; then the which, I profess I know none, which do more
prejudice the good concoction of that heavenly and wholesome doctrine which is
taught us. If we can say, this Text is not the word of God, or that it has no
authority to bind us, or that it does not directly make against these 3
corruptions, I see no cause but we may cherish them, and maintain our selves
in them: but otherwise, it becomes us upon the pain of the most High his
displeasure, to cast aside all either frowardness, or neglect in this matter,
and to labor to have skill in the performance of this Trying duty. We
disclaim all Lordship over your faith 2 Cor. 1. 24
, we are set set on work for the service of your faith Phil. 2. 17
, not for commanding it. We leave it to Papists, to tyrannize over men's
thoughts in matters of Religion, and to require the people to lap up their
faith in the general believing of the Church. We desire you to Try, we
beseech you to enquire, we would feign bring you to stand in the ways and
ask Ier. 6. 16
, we know you can never till then have stablished hearts Heb. 13. 9
; you can never attain to that of being fully persuaded every man in his own
mind Romans 14. 5
: and when you shall do this, you will say to us, who have preached to you, as
the Samaritanes said to the woman, Now we believe not, because of your
sayings, for we have found it our selves, and know that this and this is so
indeed Ioh. 4. 42
: or after after some such sort as the Queen of the South said to Solomon;
The sweetness which we now feel in Religion far exceeds your report 1
King. 10. 7
.

Now because, if I should win you all to a resolution of Trying doctrines,
and then leave you doubtful how and which way to perform it, my course would
be unprofitable: therefore you shall give me leave to bestow some pains that
way, and to give some necessary directions in that behalf. That there is a
means to attain to some sufficiency for the discharge of this service, why
should I go about to prove? God would never bid us Try, if it were not possible
for us to be able to Try. Now all Trial of doctrine must be by some Rule. The
Greek word here translated Try, betokens, such a trial as Goldsmiths use
touching metal; for the discerning whereof they have a touchstone, at which
that which will not hold, is rejected and laid by as counterfeit. A touchstone
there must be sought, for this business. And when we have found it, we must
understand how to make use of it, to that end. The maine Touch by which all
doctrine must be tried, and by which it must either stand or fall, is the will
of God revealed in the Scriptures. Bring them to the Law, and to the Testimony
(said the Oracle of God of old) and consider whether they speak according to
that word Isa. 8. 20
. By this our Savior himself was content to be tried Ioh. 5. 39
; By this the preaching of Paul and Silas at Thessalonica was tried Act. 17. 11
. Religious doctrines are Gods matters: and shall we have a better then God to
be tried by, in the things of God? and how shall we know what is Gods mind
in a matter of doctrine, but by the Scripture? Excellently spoke he, Cor and
animam Dei.
who called the Scripture the heart and soul of God; Gr. in Reg. 3
and he who affirmed that God has left for us in the Scriptures, Firmamentum
contra errores.
a Fortress against errors. Let Papists (if they will needs) persist in
their blasphemous disclaiming the trial of the Scripture, Aug. in Ioh. 1.
tract. 2
accounting Traditions to be the touchstone of doctrine, Lindanus Panop. l. 1
c. 9. calls them Lidium lapidem. lib. 5. c. 2. Fundamentum fidei.
and the Foundation of faith, and reputing the Scriptures to be rather a kind
of Storehouse for advice in matters of Religion; Co^monito^ium Bellar. Diuina
statera; Aug. lib. 2. Bap. c. 6.
yet we will ever account them the Divine beam, and the most exact balance,
Exactissima trutina. Chr. hom. 13. in 2 Cor.
and approve that course of that great Constantine, (...). Th. lib. 1. Inst.
Cap. 7
exhorting the Fathers assembled in the Nicene Council, to take the resolution
of things in question, out of the divinely inspired writings. And let men
learn here by the way, how necessary it is for them, if they would be rightly
grounded in Religion, to be well acquainted with the Scriptures. Our Saviors
rule can never fail: You are deceived, not knowing the Scriptures Mat. 22 29
. God forbid, we should under any pretext dishearten you in your care to turn
over Gods book. Let profaneness, and popery cast reproaches, upon diligence
and ordinariness; herein we the Ministers of Christ, Audite seculares,
co^parate vobis Biblia. hom. 9. in Ep. ad Colos.
shall rather call upon you as Chrysostom of old did upon his hearers, Hear
O you men of the world, get you Bibles. Super omnia tormentoru^ genera, si quem
videant verbo dei operam dare. Orig. in Number. hom. 27
It is says another of the Ancients, of all torments, the greatest to the
devils, if they see a man given to the reading of the Scriptures. We would
rejoice to see those days spoken of in Story, Theod. de Corrig. graecoru^
affect. lib. 5.
wherein the secrets of the Scriptures should be familiarly known to Tailors,
Smithes, Weauers, Seamsters, Deluers, Neatheards, Hier. in Psa. 133
etc. and of which Hierome speaks, wherein even seely women were wont to
contend who should learn without book most Scripture.

Never will we hold with that blasphemous Papist, Mart. Peers. de (...). 44
that it was the invention of the devil to permit the people to read the
Bible: but we will still press you with that of the Apostle, Let the word of
Christ dwell plentiously in you Col. 3. 16
.

Thus have we found the touchstone: let us now enquire how it must be used. A
little child, or a fool may easily find a touchstone, and yet when he has
it, not know what to do with it, more then with an other ordinary pibble.
Though the Scripture be not so common as it should, yet it is conuersed with
by more, then can tell how to turn it unto good. This then shall be the next
part of my task, to show how the Scripture may be made use of, for the
Trial of doctrines.

And here there are two things considerable. 1 How he must be qualified, who
aduentureth to meddle with the Scripture. 2 How being so qualified as is
necessary, he may be able to apply it to this use. First, whosoever puts his hand
to the Scripture in desire to get skill by it, so, as that by the help thereof
he may be able to examine doctrines, it is meet especially that he be a man of
an humble spirit. They be the humble, to whom the Lord gives grace 1 Pet. 5. 5
, he dwells with such Isa. 57. 15
, he teaches his way to such, to them he reuealeth his secrets Psalm. 25. 9 14
: a man must humble himself, that he may walk with his God Mic. 6. 8 Modo ad
hautiendum accedat deuote. Aug. de vtilitate credendi. c. 6
. It is a good speech of Augustines, The doctrine of the Scripture is so
tempered, that there is no man but may draw thence sufficient for himself,
provided that he come unto it with Devotion. Now, that which the Scripture
means by humblenes of spirit in this case, and Augustine by Devotion, is
this; A yielding of a man's self over to be taught of God, out of a resolved
and strong opinion, that he is of himself but a fool in the things of God.
This is that which the Apostle calls a being a fool, to the end that he may
be wise 1 Cor. 3 18
. They be the simple, to whom the word of the Lord gives sharpness of wit Pro.
1. 4
. The sum is this in a word (that I may not dwell upon this particular);
Except a man be sensible in himself of man's native dullness in the matters of
God, of the unfitness of his reason to judge and to determine in points of that
nature, and so resolve to submit himself wholly to be taught of God, and to
conform himself and to subdue his thoughts, and to frame them to that which
he shall reveal, it is impossible that he should ever, be by the Scriptures
made wise unto salvation. Now the best evidence of ones being furnished with
this worthy quality, is his binding himself not to look into the Scripture
without prayer. Thus did David bewray the meekness of his spirit, by begging
of God to open his eyes, to see the wonders of the Law Ps. 119. 18
, by praying him to give him understanding Ps. 119. 34
, to teach him good judgment and knowledge Ps. 119. 66
. This showed David to have renounced all opinion of his own sufficiency, and
to have resigned himself over wholly to the Lords guidance. He would not
trust himself in wading into these depthes: but in more then a jealousy over
himself, he cast himself altogether upon God. It is but as Paul calls it,
vain iangling 1 Timothy 1. 6
, and science falsely so called 1 Timothy 6 20
, a kind of frothie knowledge, whatsoever men get out of the Scripture,
aduenturing on it, without this quality. Determine if thou would get ought
out of Gods book, by which thy soul may be satisfied as with marow and
fatness, never to betake thy self to the use of it, but to urge that upon thy
self, which the woman of Samaria, scoffingly said to Christ, Thou have nothing
to draw with, and the well is deep Ioh. 4, 11
, without thee O Lord, Orandus est deus and dicendum cu^ Apostolit, edissere
nobis hanc parabolam. Hier. Epi. ad Pammachiu^
I shall depart empty away. God must be prayed unto, and we must say with the
Apostles, Lord show us this parable.

Now when a man is thus addressed and prepared with an humble, yielding, and
resigned spirit, his next care must be, to be furnished out of the Scripture
with some matter of Rule, by which he may still in his hearing course, make
that trial which is necessary. This matter of Rule, I may thus distinguish;
It is either more general, or more special and particular. The more general
matter of Rule, is the doctrine of Catechism. I will show you what I mean
hereby. There is a thing, which Paul in one place calls the Form of doctrine
(...). Romans 6. 17.
; in another, the Pattern of wholesome words (...). 2 Timothy 1. 13
; else where, The doctrine of the beginning of Christ Heb. 6. 1
. It is a certain frame of sacred Truth, raised out of plain, direct, and
vnquestiond Texts of holy Scripture, manifesting by the way of abridgement, the
order and course of man's salvation, to whom he must look up for it, and by
what way and means he must come to it. He which does not begin at this,
shall never come unto that in Religion, which is called the Certainty Luke 1. 4
. There was a course of teaching this in the Apostles days, as may be gathered
out of Heb 6. 1. and has been continued in all well governed Churches ever
since. And I am verily persuaded, that one special reason, why both many, who
are for profession Divines, are staggering and uncertain, and various in
points of divinity, and subject to drawing this way, and that way, either by
the Times, or by such Authors as they meet with; and diverse also of our
people, of all ranks are so unsettled, and so by and by puzzled, upon the
raising up of a new or strange point of doctrine, is, they were never well
brought up in the grounds of Chatechisme. And it is a great error both amongst
us Ministers, that this kind of Teaching is so little in our practice; and
amongst the people, that where it is used it is so little in esteem. Never
shall a man be other then raw in Religion, that was not well seasoned with the
first rudiments. These must be to him like the patterns which some craftsmen
have, by which they proportion out their work: That which they hear, if it
hold not agreement with these principles, it must be rejected as unsound. These
our days afford many helps in this kind, and our neglect herein is the more
without excuse. If you shall give this point, but a little time and room in
your thoughts to be here considered of, I make no doubt, but you will all
confess it to be true.

Now the more special and particular Rule, is either for the deciding of the
great question betwixt us and papists, or for our direction and settlement in
that ordinary preaching which is amongst our selves. Touching Popery, we
shall find that course which Solomon took for the trying of the two Harlots
which came before him, whether was the true mother, when both were therein very
confident 1 King. 3*
, to be of very special use for the trial thereof, and for the confirming of a
man's determination touching it, that it is but counterfeit. She who could be
content the living child should be divided, Solomon gave his verdit upon her,
that surely she was not the mother. Unity is a matter much boasted of by
papists, yet there is nothing so pregnant against them as this point of
division. For whereas God will have all reserved to himself, and will admit no
copartinarie (I will not give my glory to another Isa. 42. 8
,) we shall find Popery in the points of Christian religion, to admit (clean
contrary to the fundame^tall laws of heaven) as it were a Gauel-kinde custom,
and to allow shares with God, in the things wherein he will endure no
partners; as for example: Adoration is divided betwixt God and Images. The
service of prayer betwixt God and creatures. Mediation to the divine Majesty,
betwixt Christ and Saints. The headship of the Church* betwixt Christ and the
Pope. The conversion of a Sinner, betwixt the freedom of Gods grace, and the
freedom of man's will. Justification, betwixt faith and works. The ground of a
Christian man's faith, beetwixt Scriptures and Tradions. Absolute obedience
betwixt Gods Commandments, and the precepts of the Church. And so in other
things, for I give you but a taste. Take we this for a certain Rule, by which
to judge of the doctrine of Popery. It is content like the pretended mother to
divide those things betwixt two, or more, which ought of right to be reserved
unto one. I dare undertake, that in the maine points of Religion, there is a
making over, more or less, from God to somewhat else, all that glory, that
respect, that dependence upon, that reverence, that acknowledgement, which by
virtue of the first Commandment is his peculiar. I would feign see, how the
doctrine of the Church of Rome can be freed from dispersing those affections
and powers of the heart unto sundry particulars, which the Lord requires to be
given wholly unto him. Let the matter be thoroughly examined: and if the
several points of that Religion, which we profess and preach in the Church
of England at this day, be not like the lines in a Circumference, which al
meet in this one Center of Gods glory, and of that maine aim of God in all his
proceedings, He that rejoices, let him rejoice in the Lord 1 Cor. 1. 31
, we may freely allow you to disclaim it. We will never fear to join issue
with Papists in this: we will never decline, nay we will entreat and sue for
this Trial.

Now for direction in dependence upon our ordinary preaching, I commend this
especially to the observation and use of common men. For I now labor not so
much to give precepts for those that be learned, and have helps by Arts and
Tongues and reading, to scan the things which are presented to them: but I
endeavor to guide those, who have no more for their aid in this service, then
common education has afforded them. I remember a saying of Paul's, 1 Cor. 10. 15
Judge you (said he) what I say. Me thinks I may thence conclude, that there is
somewhat within the soul and conscience of the hearer, by which he must
determine touching that which comes to him, whether it be meet to give it
entertainment, yea or no. There is a certain hid man of the heart 1 Pet. 3. 4
, which must be judge in this case. Thou must try that which thou hear, by
the work which it has upon thy soul. There be three special things which I
may term the aim of the whole Scripture. That doctrine which tends to the
furtherance of all, or either of these three, a man may safely build upon it,
that it is true: That which is a let or an impediment to any of these three, it
must be rejected as unsound. The three things, are, 1 Humility. 2 Comfort. 3
Conscience of obedience. The whole Scripture drives to these three: 1 To abase
man in his own eyes, and to lay him in the dust. 2 To refresh his soul, and
to bring his bones which have bin broken, to rejoice. 3 To frame his heart to a
constant desire and care of pleasing God. These be three things simply
necessary to the composition of a right Christian. Hereupon the Scripture is
so exact in laying open the corruption of man's natural estate, in setting out
the foulness, and haynousnes of sin, in describing the rigor of Gods
justice, in declaring the terror of that which is the best of man's desert. Here
upon (secondly) it is, that it so graciously discovers the mystery of Christ,
the fullness of the grace which is in him, the riches of Gods mercy through
him, every way answering a man's spiritual necessity. Hereupon (thirdly) it is,
that it so precisely and straightly presses the duties of holiness, giving no
manner of liberty to man's own natural inclination, but binding him to a
finishing his salvation with fear and tre^bling, and to a causing his heart to
be in the fear of God continually. Mark thou this then: Exaamine thine own
soul how that which thou hear helps thee onwards in either of these
three; how it beats down the natural pride and presumption of thy heart,
striving to make thee vile in thine own eyes; how it acquaints thee with the
Fullness of Christ, and directs the for the settling of thine abased and
trembling soul upon him; how it hedgeth thee in, in those excesses thou art
inclinable to; how it limits and stints thee in the things wherein thou
would feign have liberty; how it tieth thee up, and urges thee to a kind
of strict and circumspect walking. If thou find it thus to work, embrace it,
rest upon it, lay it up, hide it in the midst of thy heart, it shall be health
to thy nauill, and marowe to thy bones. If thou hear a doctrine taught,
which thou find to extenuate the corruption of man's nature, or to darken and
obscure that abundant mercy which is in Christ, weakening that assurance which
an afflicted soul desires by him, or to hearten the evil inclination of the
heart, and to give some liberty to the flesh, and to seem to make some of those
courses tolerable which thou (as a man) art ready to affect; beware thereof, as
of poison to thy soul. It is not that truth which thou must hearken to. I have
set you down a Rule, which if you please to observe and practice you shall
find to be exceeding useful. That which thou hear, if thou perceive that
it humbles and checketh thee in thy security, comforts thee in thy perplexity,
curbs thee in, in thy desired liberty, thou may be bold to say, It is the
Truth of God. All the falsehood which in these days generally we are in danger
of, fails in one of these 3 particulars. If I shall show you an experiment of
this Rule, it will be the better understood, and the better credited. I pray be
pleased to join a little with me in the trying of the doctrine which my self
have here taught in my former Sermon upon the precedent verse and upon this,
thus far. I taught in that, the necessity of dependence upon preaching, if we
would be saved: I urged the seeking to enjoy this means, especially on the
Sabbath day, though it were with some charge or hazard. I have persuaded (in
this) diligence to Try the doctrins which are taught, and care to be furnished
with skill to that end. Now it may be, all are not in these particulars of the
same opinion; perhaps, you may hear that taught sometime, which is somewhat
differing: as, that other means may serve without preaching, that there
needs not be such laboring and seeking after it, now and then may suffice;
and that it is not for ordinary persons, to seek to be so skillful and busy,
as to fall to the examining of doctrines. It may be (I say) such things as
these may be delivered plausibly, and with some show of truth. To resolve us
therefore herein, let us make use of our Rule: you shall find that this
doctrine which so presses an attendance upon preaching, makes most for man's
humbling, most for his comfort, most for his restraint. 1 Most for his
humbling. For what can put a man down more then the binding of him (whatsoever
he be, noble, wise, learned, and howsoever else outwardly qualified) to sit him
down as a disciple in (...) ^^^rners form? He shall not think to work out a
path to heaven by his own industry: but he must seek saving knowledge at the
mouth of another, and go as he is led by another hand. This cuts the very
heart of man's natural pride, according as indeed it is only out of the
hautinesse of their spirits, and their loathness to stoop, and the good
opinion of their own sufficiency, which makes a great many to gainsay this
doctrine. What is the reason that Paul of old called it the foolishnes of
preaching 1 Cor. 1 21
? but because men in their seeming wisdom scorned it, and esteemed it for
little better then even a very ridiculous and childish course. Oh, if man by
some course of his own inuenting, might be permitted to seek out heaven, it
would please him a great deal better: but, to require him to give attendance
upon a Teacher, to sit at the foot of a poor Minister, and to hear what he
shall say, and to suffer him to control and check him in his courses, and
with meekenes and silence yea even with thankfulness to endure it, what a very
death is this? what a base thing in the eyes of flesh and blood? you see
plainly this makes most for a man's humbling: I am much deceived, if it do not
also make most for his comfort. First, this I am sure, that the mystery of
Christ (the ground of comfort) can never so work upon a man's affections any
way, as when it is effectually discovered by a lively voice. There is a
certain efficacy in the voice of man to put life into the inward parts. Habet
nescio quid latentis energiae viua vox. Hier.
But this is not all: Here is the chief; A man's comfort in Christ is then such
as he may have best assurance of, when he can say, he has not therein been
his own caruer, but the same has been applied to him by the hand of Gods
Minister; who is the steward of the Lords house, to give to every one his
portion of meat in season. The faithful Pastor in the congregation, is in
Christ's steed 2 Cor. 5. 21
, and has power to bind and loose Mat. 18. 18
. I say unto thee plainly, thou can never take that true, sound and solid
comfort in Christ, which is fit, till thou have the authority of Gods Minister
to seal it up unto thee. That which he puts on thee, and applies to thee,
(thy heart being rightly prepared before hand) that same is it whereupon thou
may rest. He is that one man of a thousand, which must declare thy
righteousness unto thee, that God may have mercy on thee Job. 33. 23. 24.
. Loath would I be to prejudice any man's or or woman's comfort. Let every one
look to himself vp-what ground he stands: This I am sure, that he stands
upon the best and safest terms, who can say touching his hope and comfort in
Christ Jesus, This I have gotten by awaiting upon Gods ordinance; The Minister
who has authority from God, thus and thus has he spoken to my soul.

Let us now see in the third place, whether this course be not also (as I
said) most for man's restraint. What man is there but if he were left unto
himself, to take his own choice, would not rather sit still warm and quiet
at home, and keep his money in his purse for his own private occasions, and
take his ease on the Sabbath day, and satisfy himself with a reading
Minister, then pain his body, strain his purse, hazard his peace, tie up
himself short from those Sunday-delightes, which the men of the Times are
accustomed to, and all this for preachings sake? Certainly, there is more
content to the flesh by the other still course, then by that kind of
dependence upon preaching which I have labored to persuade. A man must resolve
to cut himself short in many things, or else he shall never profit by it as is
meet. I may thus discover the truth of this Rule, in that other point also
touching Trial. How does this make to a man's humbling, when he is not
permitted to trust his own first apprehensions, but is required (in a kind of
jealousy over him self and in the disclayming of his own judgment) to seek
a Rule out of himself, by which to examine that which he must make use of for
himself? How does it again add to a man's comfort? By this means he
attaines to that sweetness in Religion, and to that understanding, which
without this he should never have perceived. This will enable him to say, Thy
word is proved to be pure, and thy servant loves it Psalm. 119. 140.
How (lastly) does this curb a man in his own natural desire? For whereas of
himself he would gladly end his taste with the act of hearing, and so betake
himself to some freer course; this calls him to an after-reckoning, and binds
him to a second labor of recounting and viewing all particulars; and making
diligent inquiry into them for their certainty. And thus have I given an
instance or two for the application of this Rule: and therein I end this first
part of my Text touching the first virtue therein required, which I called
Discretion.

The next now follows, The second Doctrine.
which is concerning constancy (Keep that which is good). The doctrine is, That
that which diligence of trial has discovered to us to be found, must with
all faithfulness and perseverance be kept and retained to the end. The very
first view of the words will acquit me from strayning this collection: Keep
that which is good: Never leave sifting of Doctrines till you have found the
good: when you have found it, be sure to preserve it; a shame to have taken
such a deal of pains for it, and then to forsake it. The truth of this point
will be the more profitably discovered, if we shall be pleased to understand
and consider, that there is a threefold keeping which may very well be thought
to be here intended. 1 A keeping in memory. 2 A keeping in affection. 3 A
keeping in practice. The first of these makes way for the second; the second
for the third. Good must be remembered that it may be loved: and it must be
loved, that it may be practiced. Touching keeping of good and holy things in
memory these Texts are plain. Hide my Commandments within thee Pro. 2. 1
, Keep them in the midst of thy heart Pro. 4. 21
, Take heed, keep thy soul diligently that thou forget not Deuteronomy. 4. 9*
. These words shall be in thy heart Deuteronomy. 6. 6*
. Remember the words which I said unto you (said our Savior) Ioh. 15. 20
. Remember the words which were spoken of the Apostles Jude 17
, Give heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we should
let them slip Heb. 2. 1
. The memory is as it were the treasury of the soul: what more worthy to be
laid up in it, then that wherewith the things of the greatest worth are not
meet to be compared Pro. 3. 14
. Holy doctrine is (as I may call it) the food of the soul. It is the portion
of meat spoken of in the Gospel Luke 12. 42
. Now what good will a man's meat do him if he void it up, through weakness
of stomach as fast as it is eaten? the body thereby can receive no nourishment.
Elsewhere that which is commended to us by preaching, is compared to seed Luke
8. 11
. Now when the seed is cast into the ground, if the birds do by and by pick it
up, or the swine strait way devour it up, Is there any hope of harvest? It is
so in this. Be that which we have gotten by hearing never so excellent, if it
tarry not with us it cannot avail us. It may bring a man to some smell of
Religion; never to any truth or power of godliness. Well, as it must be kept
in memory, so in affection too; my meaning is, a man must persist in the
earnest love and zealous profession thereof. There must be no declining nor
going back, no slaking of that first egerness with which he seemed in the
beginning to embrace it. This is that holding fast commended by Christ to the
Church of Philadelphia Reu. 3. 11
, and the want hereof was the blemish of Ephesus; it is taxed in her by the
terms of losing her first love Reu. 2. 4
. There may be an intertaining of good things with joy, which yet vanishes
like a morning cloud; and as it comes to nothing* so it is worth nothing. It
is good to love always earnestly in a good thing Gal. 4. 18
. When the beginnings be hot, and the proceedings but warm, the conclusion
generally is cold, and the end of such is fearful Luke 11. 26
. The children of God must rather increase 1 The. 4. 1
and grow 2 Pet. 3. 18
, and go from strength to strength Psa. 84. 7
, and shine more and more Pro. 4. 18
, and follow hard toward the mark Phil. 3. 14
. Then (thirdly) there must be also a keeping in practice. That good which is
found must be obeyed. This is that keeping, to which Christ promises a
blessing Luke 11. 28
, which Saint James co^mends Iam. 1. 25
, and which David aymeth at in that affectionate speech, Oh that my ways were
directed, that I may keep thy statutes Ps. 119. 11
. There is no such keeping here meant, as that of the greedy men of the world,
in hoarding up their treasure, even until the cankering and rusting thereof
Iam. 5. 3
, be ready to witness against them, and as a fire to eat their flesh: but this
is a keeping for use. Such a keeping David speaks of, I have hid thy promise
in my heart, that I might not sin against thee Ps. 119. 11
; he so kept the knowledge of holy things in his mind, that he might produce
them into practice. The truth is, if a man do hold fast the truth of God in
his affection, he cannot but show forth the fruits of obedience to it in his
practice: The abundance which is in his heart, cannot but break forth into his
outward man. This is like that oil in a man's right hand which utters it
self Pro. 27. 16
. It is as the wine, which will sooner break the vessels in which it is, then
it will want vent Job. 32. 19
. The sweetness which a man finds and feels in it, by giving it loving
entertainment in his heart, will so ravish him, that he cannot but bewray the
contentment which he finds therein, by his outward carriage. His whole life
and course will proclaim and testify the zealous affection of his soul. Can
a man love the truth in his heart, and not tender the credit thereof? And is it
possible to bring more credit to it, then to be bold and resolute in obeying
it? to be careless of credit, peace, profit, and what soever else by nature man
affects, so that he may walk therein? It is in vain for a man to profess to
love religion in his heart, if he disclaim the rule, and authority, and power
of it in his life. As, if a man should protest he loves me, but when I come to
try him he will do nothing for me; will I believe his protestations? So
then, this may satisfy us for this point; If I would keep life in the graces
of Gods spirit which I have received, I must honor prophesying: My honoring
of prophesying must be tempered with trying that which is delivered by it: when
by trial I have found out that which I am sure is good, I must resolve upon
keeping it, I must keep it in memory, and strive not to forget it. I must keep
it in affection, and labor not to lose my first love to it. I must keep it in
practice, that all my whole life and carriage may adorn it. To labor to find
out good, and when it is found, not to remember it is ridiculous: to remember
it and yet to make no account of it, is vain: to say I make account of it, and
yet do not practice it, is absurd: I strive to remember it, I labor to effect
it, I make conscience to obey it, this is excellent.

Think you, The Use.
whether this be not a very necessary point to be remembered to us, considering
what ill Keepers generally we be in matters of this nature. For touching the
first kind of keeping, which is memory; besides that natural debility which
is in us in things of this kind, how justly are we chargeable with a kind of
willing forgetfulness? It is not our purpose nor our care to remember, we are
even very well content to lose these particulars. We who can whine and fret
for other losses, and be angry with our selves, and say, what a beast was I to
forget this, and not to remember that; are yet never troubled, though
multitudes of good points of doctrine run through us, as through a pipe, or
fall from us, as water from a Swans back, leaving behind within us no
impression. Do but speak soothly (I pray you) betwixt God and your souls, and
say, when did you solemnly in prayer lament your forgetfulness, and entreat
the Lord to pardon it? This shows we are guilty of a kind of affected
forgetfulness. I would this were all our failing (though this be bad enough)
but, behold yet more abominations; Alas how loose are we in our affections to
holy things? There is (I confess) a kind of sudden heat, which arises in
some, somewhat violent at the first, like the flushings in the face of a man
who is inwardly distempered. Oh, what will not they do? they march as
furiously as Iehu, in their first onset; They will hear, they will read, they
will sanctify the Sabbath, they will reform their families, they will swear
no more, etc. but (woe is me) what is more ordinary then to see every day many
such pass away, as the rising of Rivers Job 6. 15
? their great heat is soon assuaged, they are quickly weary of that service,
which they seemed to undertake with a great deal of feruency. How full are our
days, of such upon whom when a man looks he may with a kind of mournful
indignation say, Are all their great shows come to this? Nay, let the best
professors (if they be wise) consider themselves touching this, and compare
together their present course with their first beginnings, and see whether they
have not let go a great deal of their first hold, and are even come the very
next step to a Laodicean temper. I know nothing wherein a wise Christian has
more cause to fear himself then this, that his love is not so earnest, nor
his zeal so fervent as it has been. This same decaying in affection, it is
like a consumption, it steals upon a man, and is far grown upon him many
times, yea even wel-neer to an incurable pitch before it be perceived. Fearing
it, will be a means to prevent it. We live in a cooling Climate, and we shall
find it as hard to keep this heat in us, as it was to maintain David's
natural heat when he was old 1 Kin. 1. 1
. I have showed our defect in the two first kinds of keeping: let us see what
may be found in us touching the third, Keeping in practice. And here (me
seems) I am suddenly stricken with astonishment, and know not what to say:
not for lack of matter, but for lack of skill to draw, into few words, such a
world of matter, as this particularity does afford. Here a man might fill even
a roll of a book within and without Ezekiel. 2. 10
, with accusations, censures, complaints, threatenings, against all degrees,
ages, conditions, sexes. Somewhat happily we remember, somewhat we seem to
esteem and to profess: but what is our practice? I speak not now touching
those, which are at a kind of enmity with all religion, and care not though
they be noted and known to be of none: but let us look to our selves, who
would be thought to have a regard to goodness, and some respect to the best
things, who come to hear, and will needs be thought to love that course, to
approve it, to uphold it, and see how poor and barren is our practice. Alas,
that we should not only give cause to papists to speak evil of our Religion,
and Faith, through our barrenness, but (which is worse) should open the mouths
of profane wretches amongst our selves, to tax profession and hearing, as the
nursery of licentiousnes. The truth is, the lives and courses of many, who yet
will come and sit, as Gods people uses to come Ezekiel. 33 31
, are very scandalous. For my own part, though I will not join with those, who
urge this to the disreputatio^ of all that are affected well, yet I will nether
seek to excuse their evils, but say rather with the Apostle They shall bear
their judgment whosoever they be Gal. 5. 10
. I have almost done: I will now draw to an exhortation, and I beseech you that
I may preuail with you for this Keeping duty. It is such a keeping, as by which
your selves shall be kept unto salvation. I persuade entertainment for such a
guest, at whose entrance into thy soul, thou may say, as Christ did at his
coming to Zacheus his house, This day is salvation come to thee Luke 19 9
. It shall be to thy soul, as the presence of the Arc of Obededoms house 2 Samuel 7 11
. Lose not al your labor (I pray you) in repairing hither; you cannot bestow
an hour worse, then by going to a Sermon and get nothing. Hearken what we
say: we may say with an humble boldness, we are the Ambassadors of Christ,
we are the Messengers of the Lord of hosts, we speak words unto you, by
which you and yours may be saved: Yet, hear us as men subject to infirmities,
hear us with discretion: Bring us to the touch. Oh, that you would once do us
that honor, to Try our doctrine. If you find any thing to be good (as no
doubt you shall) what will you do to it? look upon it awhile, and (as it were)
play with it, as little children with a new-bought toy which within awhile they
cast away? God forbid. God will not be so answered. Labor to lock it up in
your memories: resolve with David, I will not forget thy words Psa. 119 16
; pray the God of peace, to write his law in your hearts, strive to love it,
and that will be a good help to remember it. Can a maid forget her ornament
and a bride her attire Ier. 2. 32
? Her love to it, makes her not to forget it. I never heard (says the Orator)
of any man so old, as that he forgot where he laid his treasure. When you
remember it, strive to work your affections to embrace it more and more. Be
constant to the death, and you shall receive the crown of life Reu. 2. 10*
. Resolve touching that which you have found to be true, and so accordingly
have begun to profess, as that worthy Thebane soldier did touching his
buckler, I will either defend thee, or die upon thee. Say to the Truth when
thou have once met with it, as Ruth did to Naomi; The Lord do so to me and more
also, if ought but death depart thee and me Ruth 1. 17
. And when you have thus fastened your affections to it, then let me say to
you, as Iehosaphat did to his Officers when he sent them on the circuit, Be of
courage and do it, and the Lord shall be with that good 2 Chr. 19 11
. Let your virtue and your knowledge go together 2 pet. 1. 5*
. Thus do, and the God of peace shall be with you. Especially remember to be
practitioners of good in your particular places, Magistrates in yours,
Ministers in yours, Masters of families in yours. In your ranks and standings
make your care of obedience to appear. This is that course which shall bring
you peace and comfort at the last. God will be good unto those that are good:
such as turn aside by their crooked ways, them shall the Lord lead, with the
workers of iniquity psa. 125 4. 5
. Woe unto their souls, for they have rewarded evil to themselves Isa. 3. 9*
.

FINIS.
Erratum;
Page 56. line 7. of Religion, for of that Religion.


