THE Second Part of, If you know not me, you know no body.

With the building of the Royal EXCHANGE:

And the famous Victory of Queen Elizabeth, in the Year 1588.

AT LONDON, Printed for Nathaniell Butter. 1606.

The second Part of If you know not me, you know no body: With the building
of the Exchange.
Actus Prima. Scena Prima.
Enter one of Greshams Factors and a Barbary Merchant.
Factor. MY Master sir, requests your company,
About confirming certain covenants
Touching your last nights conference.

Merchant. The Sugars.
Believe me, to his credit be it spoke,
He is a man of heedfull providence,
And one that by innatiue courtesy
VVinnes love from Strangers, be it without offense,
How are his present fortunes reckoned?

Fact. Neither to flatter nor detract from him,
He is a Merchant of good estimate,
Care how to get, and forecast to increase,
(If so they be accounted) be his faults.

Mar. They are especial virtues, being clear
From avarice and base extortion.
But here he comes: Good day, to M. Gresham,
You keep your word.
Enter Gresham.
Gresh. Else should I ill deserve
The title that I wear, a Merchants tongue
Should not strike false.

Mar. What think you of my proffer,
Touching the Sugar?

Gresh. I be thought my self
Both of the gain and losses incident,
And this I take it was the whole circumstance:
It was my motion and I think your promise,
To get me a sealed Patent from your king
For all your Barbary Sugar at a price,
During the kings life; and for his princely love,
I am to send him threescore thousand pounds.

Mar: It Was so conditioned, and to that effect
His highness promise is already past,
And if you dare give credit to my trust,
Send but your private letters to your Factor,
That deals for your affairs in Barbary,
His Majesty shall either seal your Patent,
Or i will return the money to your Factor.

Gresh. As much as I desire; pray sir draw near
And taste a cup of wine, whilst I consider
And thoroughly scan such accidental doubts,
As may concern a matter of such moment.

Mar: At your best leisure.

Gresh: I Will resolve you straight.
Bethink thee Gresham, threescore thousand pounds
A good round sum: let not the hope of gain
Draw thee to loss. I am to have a Pattent
For all the Barbary Sugars at a rate,
The gain cleers half in half, but then the hazard:
My term continues during the kings life,
The King may die before my first return,
Then where is my Cash? why, so the King may live
These 40. years, then where is Greshams gain:
It stands in this as in all ventures else
Doutfull, no more, i will through what ere it cost.
So much clear gain, or so much coin clear lost.
Within there ho.
Enter John Gresham, 2. or 3. Factors.
Fact: At hand sir, did you call?

Gresh. How thriues our Cash? what is it well increast?
I speak like one that must be forced to borrow.

1. Fact. Your worships merry.

Gresh. Merry, tell me knave,
Do not thou think that three score thousand pounds,
Would make an honest Merchant try his friends?

Fact. Yes, by my faith sir, but you have a friend
Would not see you stand out for twice the sum.

Gresh. Praise God for all, but what is the common rumor
Touching my bargain with the King of Barbary?

1. Fact. It Is held your credit, and your Countries honor,
That being but a Merchant of the City,
And taken in a manner unprovided,
You should upon a mere presumption
And naked promise, part with so much Cash,
Which the best Merchants both in Spain and France,
Denied to venture on.

Gresh. Good: but withal,
What do they think in general of the Bargain?

1. Fact. That if the King confirm and seal your Pattent,
London will yield you partners ynow.

Gresh. I think no less: Go fit you for the sea,
I mean to send you into Barbary:
You unto Venice, You to Portingall,
Provide you presently: where much is spent,
Some must be got, thrift should be provident:
Come hither Cousin, all the rest depart.
Exeunt Factors.
John. I had as good depart too, for heel ring a peale in mine
It Will sound worse then a passing bell. (care,

Gresh. I have taken note of your bad husbandry,
Careless respect, and prodigal expense,
And out of my experience counsel you.

John. And I hope good Uncle, you think, I am as ready to take good counsel,
as you to give it, and I doubt not, but to clear, my self of all objections
that foule-mouthed envic shall intimate against me.


Gres. How can you satisfy the great complaint
Preferred against you by old Mistress Blunt.
A woman of approved honesty.

John. That Is true, her honesty has been proved ofter then once or twice:
but do you know her Uncle? are you inward with her course of life, she is a
common midwife for tradefalne virginity, there are more maidenheads chargde
and dischargde in her house in a year, then pieces at the Artillery yard.


Gres. She bring sin further proof, that you miscal'd her.

John. I never called her out of name, by this hand Uncle, to my remembrance:


Gres. No: she says you called her Bawd.

John. True; and I have known her answer to it a thousand times; tut Uncle it is
her name, and I know who gave it her too, by the same token her Godfather gave
her a bowd angel standing at the do re which she has kept time out a mind.


Gresh. Antonio reports you love his wife.

John. Love, why alas, Uncle, I hold it percell of my duty to love my
neighbors, and should I hate his wife, no man would hold me a fit member for a
common wealth.


Gresh. He hates you fort.

John. Why, ahlas Uncle, that is not my fault, i will love him nerethelesse, you
know we are commanded to love our enemies, and though he would see me hanged,
yet will I love his wife.


Gresh. He told me, you bestowed a gown of a strumpet.

John. Why, ahlas Uncle, the poor whore went naked, and you know the text
commandes us to cloth the naked, and deeds of mercy be imputed to us for
faults, God help the elect.


Gresh. Well, if your prodigal expenses be aimed
At any virtuous and religious end,
It Is the more tolerable, and I am proud
You can so probably excuse your self.

John. Well Uncle to approve my words, as indeed good words without deeds
are like your green fig tree without fruit. I have sworn my self to a more
conformable and strikt course of life.


Gresh. Well Cousin, hoping you will prove a new man.

John. A new man, what else Uncle, I Will be a new man from the top to toe, or
i will want of my will: Instead of Tennis-Court, my morning Exercise shall be at
Saint Antlms: i will leave Ordinaries, and to the end I may forswear Dicing and
Drabbing, keep me more short Uncle, only allow me good apparel, good Rags
i will stand to it are better then seven years prentiship, sor they will make a man
free of any, nay of all Companies without Indenture, Fathers coppie, or any
help whatsoever, but I see my error, wild Youth must be bridled, keep me
short good Uncle.


Gresh. On these presumptions i will apparel thee,
And to confirm this resolution,
I will prefer you unto Master Hobson,
A man of a well known discretion.

John. Any thing good Uncle, I have served my prentiship already, but bind me
again and I shall be content, and it is but reason neither, send me to the
Conduit with the water-tankard, i will beat Linen, Bucks, or any thing to
redeem my negligence.


Gresh. Your education challenge more respect.
The Factor dealt for him in France, is dead.

John. And you intend to send me in his room,

Gresh. I do indeed.

John. I it is well done Uncle, and it will not be amiss in policy to do so:
the only way to curb a dissolute youth as I am, is to send him from his
acquaintancc, and therefore send me far enough good Uncle, send me into
France and spare not, and if that reclaim me not, give me ore as one past all
goodness.


Gresh. Now before God my thoughts were much against him,
And my intent was to have chid him roundly,
But his submissiue recantation.
Has made me friends with him, Come follow me,
I Will do thee good, and that immediately.
Exit.
John: Thank you good Uncle, you will send me into France, all Forboone: and I
do not show you the right trick of a Cousin before I leave England, i will give
you leave to call me Cut, and cosen me of my patrimony as you have done.

Exit. Enter Hobsons prentises and a boy.
1. Prent. Prithee fellow Goodman, set forth the ware, and look to the shop a
little, I Will but drink a cup of wine with a Customer at the Rose and Crown
in the Poultrie, and come again presently.


2. Pren. Foot I cannot, I must needs step to the Dagger in Cheap to send a
Letter into the Country unto my father, stand by, you are the yougest
prentise, look you to the shop.

Enter Hobson! Where be these varlets, bones a me, at Tavern?
Knaves, villains, spend goods, foot my Customers
Must either serve themselves, or pack vnseru'd.
Now they peep like Italian pantelownes
Hehind an Arras, but i will start you knaves,
I have a shooing-horne to draw on your liquor,
What say you to a piece of a salt Eele?
Come forth you hangdogs, bones a me the knaves
Fleere in my face, they know me to too well,
I talk and prate, and lay't not on their iackes,
And the proud iackes care not a sigge for me:
But bones a me, i will turn another leaf.
Where have you been sir?

1. Pren. An honest Customer
Requested me, to drink a pint of wine.

Hob. Bones a me, must your crimson throat
Be scowr'd with wine? your master's glad of beer:
But you will die banquerouts, knaves, and ban querouts all.
And where have you been?

2. Pren. At breakfast with a Dagger pie sir.

Hob. A Dagger Pie! vd's daggers death, these knaves
Set cock a hope, but Hobson pays for all.
But bones a me, knaves either mend your manners.
Leave Alehouses, tauernes, and the tippling mates,
Your Punkes, and cocatrices, or i will clappe ye
Close up in Bride well, bones of me i will do it,

2. Pren. Beseech you sir, pardon this first offense.

Hob. First, bones a God, why it is your common course,
And you must needs be gusling, go by turns,
One to the Alehouse, and two keep the shop.
Enter Peddler with Tawnie-coate.
2. Pren. It shall be done sir, how much ware yould you have?

Ped. Five pounds worth in such Commodities,
as I bespoke last night.

1. Pren. They are ready sorted.

Taw. God bless you M. Hobson.

Hob. Bones a god, knave, thou art welcome what is the news
At bawdie Barnewell, and at Sturbridge Fair?
What, have your London wenches any trading?

Taw. After the old sort sir, they visit the Toulebooth, and the
Bulring still.

Hob. Good girls, they do their kind, what your packes empty?
Good news, a sign you bring your purses full,
And bones a God, full purses must be welcome:
Sort out their wares: welcome's your due:
Pay the old debt, and pen and incke for new.

Taw. We have for you sir, as white as Bears teeth.

Hob. Bones a god, knaves you are welcome, but what news?
What news in the Country? what Commodities
Are most respected with your country Girls?

Taw. Faith sir, our Country girls are a kin to your London Courtiers, every
month sick of a new fashion, the horning buske and silken bridelaces are in
good request with the Parsons wife, your huge poking stick, and french
perewig, with Chamber-maides, and waiting-gentlewomen, now your Puritans poker
is not so huge, but somewhat longer, a long slender poking stick is the all in
all with your Suffolk Puritan, your silkband, half farthingales, and
changeable Fore-parts are common, not a wench of thirteen but wears a
changeable forepart.


Hob. An ancient wearing: there is some changeable stuff
Has been a wear with women, time out of mind.

Taw. Besides sir, mauy of our young married men, have taken an order to wear
yellow Garters, Points, and Shootyings, and us thought, yellow will grow a
custom.


Hob: T'as been used long at London.

Tow. And it is thought it will come in request in the Country too, it is a
fashion, that three or four young wenches have promised me their husbands shall
wear, or they will miss of their marks: then your mask, silke-lace, washed
Gloves, carnation girdles, and buske-point suitable, as common as Coals from
New Castle, you shall not have a Kitchin-maide scrape trenchets without her
washed Gloves, a Darie-wench will not ride to market to sell her Butter-milke,
without her mask and her buske.


Hob. Still a good hearing, let the country pay
Well for their pride, it is gratis here at London,
And that is the cause it is grown so general.
But feed their humors, and do not spare,
Bring Countrey-money for our London ware.
Enter Gresham, and John Gresham.
Gresh. Where Is M. Hobson, cry you mercy sir.

Hob. No harm good M. Gresham, pray draw near:
I Will but dispatch a few old Customers,
And bend a present ear to your discourse.

Gresh. At your best leisure.

Hob. Nay my task is done:
O M. Gresham it was a golden world
When we were Boys, an honest Countrey-yeoman,
Such as our fathers were, God rest their souls
Would were white Karfie: bones a me you knaves,
Stools for these Gentlemen, your worships welcome.

Gresh. You know my business.

Hob. About your kinsman,
He shall be welcome: beseech you Gentlemen
Less of your courtesy: when shall we see the Youth?

Gresh. Why this is he.

Hob. Which, bones a me man, which?

Gresh. Why this.

Hob. Which, where, what this young gentleman!
Bones a me man, he is not for Hobsons turn.
He looks more like my Master then my servant.

Gresh. I must confess he is a Gentleman,
And my near kinsman: were he mine own child,
His service should be yours.

Hob. I thank you for it,
And for your sake i will give him entertainment?
But Gentleman if you become my man,
You must become more civil: bones a me,
What a curld pate is here? I must ha'te off,
You see my Liuerie, Hobsons men are known
By their Freeze Coats: and you will dwell with me,
You must be plain, and leave of bravery.

John. I hope sir to put on such civil conformity, as you shall not repent my
entertainment.


Hob. Pray God it prove so.

Gresh: If he do respect
an Uncles love, let him be diligent.

Hob. well, M. Gresham, partly for your love,
And chiefly to supply my present want,
Because you say your kinsman is well seen
Both in languages and factorship,
I do intend to send him into France,
In trust both with my Marchandzies and my Cash.

John. And if I take not order to cashier that and myself too, a pox of all
French-farthingales.


Gresh. How stand you minded to your Masters motion?

John. Somewhat unwilling to leave my acquaintance, but good Uncle, I know you
send me out of love, and I hope it will be a means to call me home the sooner.


Gresh. Pray God it may.

John. I Will want of my will else, I Will play a Merchants part with you, i will take
up french Commodities, v^luet kirtles, and taffery fore-parts; i will ha that I go
for, or i will make half the hot-houses in Deep smoke for this trick.


Hob. What are your books made even with your accounts?

1 Pren. I have compared our wares with our receipt,
And, sind sir, ten pounds difference.

Hob. Bones a me knave,
Ten pounds in a morning: here is the fruit
Of Dagger Pyes, and Alehouse-guslings:
Make even your Reckonings, or Gods mother knaves,
You shall all smart for it.

2. Hark you fellow Goodman,
Who took the ten pound of the country Chapman.
That told my master the new fashions?

1. Fore God not I.

3. Nor I.

Hob. Bones a me, knaves,
I have pa'yd soundly for my Country news:
What was his name?

1. Now before God, I know not.

2. I never saw him in the shop till now.

Hob. Now bones a me, what carlesse Knaves keep I,
Give me the book, what habit did he were?

1. As I remember me, a tawnie coat.

Hob. Art sure: then set him down John Tawnie-coate.

1. Ten pound in trust unto John Tawnie-coate.

Hob. Bones a God man, these knaves will beggar me.

Gresh. Birladie sir, ten pounds is too much to loose,
But ten times ten pound cannot shake your credit.

Hob. Thank God for all: when I came first to town,
It would have shook me shrewdly: but M. Gresham.
How stands your difference with Sir Thomas Ramsey?
Are you made friends yet?

Gresh. He is so obstinate,
That neither Iuries, nor Commissions,
Nor the entreaties of his nearest friends,
Can stoop him unto composition.

Hob. It Is passing strange: were Hobson in your coat,
Ere i would consume a penny amongst Lawyers,
I Would giu't poor people, bones a me I would.

Gresh. A good resolve: but sit Thomas Ramsies mind
Is of another temper, and ere Gresham
Will give away a tittle of his right,
The Law shall beggar me.

Hob. Bones a me, man, twill do that quickly.

Gresh. To prevent which course,
The Lady Ramsey has by earnest suit,
Procured the reverent Preacher Doctor Nowell,
A man well reckoned for his grave respect.
To comprimise and end our difference,
The place the Lombard, ten of clock the hour
Appointed for the hearing of our cause.
Shall I request your friendly company,

Hob. With all my heart, both company and purse:
Bones a me, knaves, look better to my shop:
Men of our trade must wear good husbands eyes,
Among many Chap-men there are few that buys.
My leisure now your business attends,
Time's won not lost, that is spent to make men friends.
Exeunt. Enter Doctor Nowell, and my Lady Ramsie.
Lady. Good Master Doctor Nowell, let your love
Now show it self unto me: such as they,
Men of the chiefest note within this City
To be at such a jar, does make me blush
Whom it does scarce concern: you are a good man,
Take you the course in hand and make them friends,
Twill be a good days work, if so it end.

D. Now. My Lady Ramsie, I have heard ere this
Of their contentions, their long suite in Law,
How by good friends they have been persuaded both,
Yet both but deaf to fair persuasion:
What good will my word do with headstrong men?
Breath blown against the wind, retures again.

Lady. Although to Gentlemen and Citizens,
They have been so rash, yet to so grave a man,
Of whom none speak but speak with reverence,
Whose words are gathered in by every ear
As flowers receive the dew that comfort them,
They will be more attentive: pray take it in hand,
It Is a good deed, it will with your virtue stand.

D. Now. To be a make-peace does become me well,
The charitable motion good in you,
And in good sooth it will make me wet mine eyes,
To see them even, have been so long at ods.
And by my means, i will do the best I can,
But God must bless my words, for man's but man.
Enter Sir Thomas Ramsie.
Lady. I thank you heartily, and by the hour I know.
They will be presently here on the Lumbard,
VVhither I drew you for this intent:
And see, sir Thomas is come: pray break with him.

D. Now. Good day to sir Thomas Ramsie.

Ram. M. Deane of Powles, as much to you:
It Is strange to see you here in Lumberstreet,
This place of traffic whereon Merchants meet.

D. Now. It Is not my custom: but sir Thomas.
Enter M. Gresham, and old Hobson. Hob. Come, come: Now body a me, I swear not
every day,
You are too to much to blame: two Citizens,
Such as your self, and sir Thomas Ramsie are,
To beat your selves in Law six or seven year,
Make Lawyers, Turneyes clerks, and knaves, to spend
Your money in a brabling controversy,
Even like too fools: see where the other is,
With our Deane of Powles, nere better met,
We two as Vmpiers will conclude a strife
Before the Clock strike twelve, that now is aleuen:
Lawyers this full seven year have brabled in,
And with a cup or two of merry-godowne,
Make them shake hands: Is It not well said M. Deane?

D. Now. And I could wish it as well done, M. Hobson.

Gresh. I Will have you both know though you are my friends,
I scorn my cause should stoop or yeele to him,
Although he be reputed Ramsie the rich.

Ram. And Gresham shall perceive that Ramsies purse,
Shall make him spend the wealth of Osterley,
But he shall know.

Gresh. Know, what shall I know?

Ram. That Ramsie is as good a man as Gresham.

Gresh. And Gresham is as good a man as Ramsie.

Ram. Tut, tut, tut, Gresh Tut in thy teeth although thou art

Hob. Bones a me, you are both to blame: (a Knight.
We two like friends, come to conclude your strife,
And you like fish-wiues fall a scolding here.

D. Now. How stands the difference twixt you my good friends?

Lady. The impatience both of the one and other,
Will not permit to hear each other speak:
I Will tell the cause for both, and thus it is.
There is a Lordship called Osterley,
That M. Gresham has both bought and built upon.

Gresh. And it is a goodly Manor, M. Deane.

Lady. Which Osterley before he dealt therein,
Sir Thomas my husband here did think to buy,
And had given earnest for it.

Ram. Then Gresham here, deals with the Land-seller,
And buys my bargain most dishonestly.

Gres. God for his mercy touch mine honesty,
Away with comprimize, with taking up,
The Law shall try my cause and honesty.

Ram. It Will prove no better then it should Gresham.

Gres. It Will pooue as good as Ramsies, Ramsie.

Ram. Do not I know thy rising?

Gres. I, and I know thine.

Ram. Why mine was honestly.

Gresh. And so was mine.

Hob. Hey day, bones a me
VVas't ever seen two men to scold before?
Here Is, I know thy rising, and I know thine,
When as Gods blessing, that has raised them both.
Am I worse because in Edwards days,
When Popery went down, I did ingrosse
Most of the Beads that were within the Kingdom,
That when Queen Marie, had renewed that Church,
They that would pray on Beads were forced to me:
I made them stretch their purse-strings, grew rich thereby,
Beads were to me a good commodity.

Gresh. No matter for your beads, my right's my right.

Ram. Yet Gresham shall well know he has done me wrong.

Gresh. There Is law enough to right you, take your course.

D. Now. Reason being made man's guide, why is it that force
Are violent passions to sweep the soul
Into such headlong mischiefs: it is only this,
Reason would rule, Nature a Rebel is.
You know the fire of your contention,
Has only cherishing and is maintained
From vild affections, whose strength's but th^^
As soultry heat does make us shun the fire,
An extreme cold does alter that desire:
All things that have beginnings, have their ends.
Your hate must have conclusion, then be friends.

Hob. Friends, M. Doctor Nowell, look you here,
Here Is M. Greshams hand.

Lady. I Will bring the the other.

Hob. This seven year they have been in law together.
How much such men as they in seven yeares' spend,
Lawyres may laugh at, but let wise men judge.

Gresh. Friend Hobson.

Ram. Wife Lady.

Hob. Bones a me, i will hold you fast,
I will not have a couple of such men
Make cackling lawyers rich, and themselves fools,
And for a trifling cause: as I am old Hobson.

Gresh. Sir Thomas Ramsis.

Ram. Master Gresham.

Hob. Body of me, both shall be schooled, M. D. Nowell,
You know the cause that this contention,
Is only that he bought a piece of land
This had given earnest for, all Adams earth,
And Adams earth is free for Adams sons,
And it is a shame men should contend for it:
What ere you speak shall for a sentence stand,
And being spoke, they shall shake hand in hand.

D. Now. If I must then decide the difference,
Thus it shall be: because that Sir Thomas Ramsis,
Had earnest given before you bought the Land,
Though you were not acquainted with so much,
I do ^ward he have a hundred pound
Toward his charges, and for that you
Have both paid for the Land, and built upon it,
It shall continue yours: the money you have spent,
Either account it lost, or badly lent.

Gresh. Gods precious, I have spent five hundred pound,

Ram. And so have I.

Hob. No matter.
The judgment stands, only this verdite too,
Had you before the law foreseen the loss,
You had not now come home by weeping cross.
Strifes may as well have end twixt honest men,
Lawyers set fools to Law, then laugh at them.

Gresh. Fore God it is true: and now I think upon it,
We might at first have ended it by friends,
And made our selves merry with the money:
But being done, it is done, then sir Thomas Ramsey,
Let Us leave both loosers, it is but a thousand pound,
And if you be as well content as I,
Here we will shake hands and let our anger dye.

Hob. Shake hands, by the Marie god, sir Thomas what else,

Ram. You show your selves our friends, to make us friends,
Then in good sooth i will not be obstinate.

Lady. Nay, M. Doctor Nowell join their hands,
I know the reverent regard of you
Has tempred both their hearts.

Gresh. Madame, it is true: I think to any but so good a man,
We should have both been headstrong: but come.

D. Now. With all my heart, long may you live together,
As friend should be to friend, brother to brother.

Gresh. Amen, amen, sir Thomas.

Ram. Amen, amen, Master Gresham.

Hob. Amen, amen, to you both.
And is not it is better then every Term to trot after Lawyers?

Gresh. Good sooth it is true, if we could think it so,
But it is man's nature, he desires his woe.
A storm. Now passion of me sir Thomas, a cruel storm,
And we stay long we shall be wet to the skin,
I do not liked, nay and it angers me
That such a famous City as this is,
Wherein so many gallant Merchants are,
Have not a place to meet in, but in this,
Where every shoure of rain must trouble' them:
I cannot tell but if I live: lets step into the Popes head,
We shall be dropping dry if stay here:
I Will have a roof built, and such a roof,
That Merchants and their wives, friend and their friends
Shall walk underneath it as now in Powles.
What day of the Month is this?

Hob. Day M. Gresham, let me see:
I took a fellows word for twenty pound
The tenth of March, the tenth of March.

Gresh. The tenth of March, well if I live,
I Will raise a work shall make our Merchants say,
It Was a good shower that fell upon that day. How now Jack?
Enter John Gresham.
John. Sir, my M. here having preferred me to be his Factor into
I am come to take my leave of you. (France

Gresh. I thank him for his care of thee: M. Hobson,
My kinsman's come to take his leave of me,
He tells me you are sending him for France.

Hob. Bones a me knave, art there yet?
I thought thou had been half way there by this.

John. I did but stay sir, to take my leave of my Uncle.

Gresh. O M. Hobson, he comes in a very good time,
I was bethinking me whom I might send
To fetch this hundred pound, I am set to pay
To sir Thomas Ramsey: nay, as we are friends
We Will have all Covenants kept before we part.

John. God grant that I may see it.

Gresh. Here John take this sealed Ring,
Bid Timothy presently send me a hundred pound.

John. I sit.

Gresh. I am sure he has it ready told for thee,
We Will stay here on the Lumbard till thou come.

John. Yes Sir.

D. Now. Nay stay good John, thou know my dwelling John?

John. In Powles Churchyard Sir.

D. Now. The hundred pound thou art sent for, bring it thither

John. Yes marry will I sir.
Exit.
D. Now. And my good friends, since that so long a strife
Has end by my persuasion, i will entreat,
My house may entertain you for this time.
Where with such necessaries we will pass the time,
As God shall best be pleased, and you contented:
I keep no riot, nor you look for none,
Only my table is for every one.

Gresh. A cup of Sack and welcome M. Deane,
Nature is best contented with a mean.
Exeunt. Enter Timothy and John Gresham.
John. As I told you Timothy,
You must send my Uncle straight a hundred pound:
A dines at Doctor Nowels, and gave me in charge
To have with the money after him.

Thimo. You come to me John for a hundred pound, I thank my spiritual maker I
have the charge of many hundreds of his now John: I hope John you fear God.
(too.


John. Fear God, S'foot what else, I fear God and the devil

Tym. I must tell you John and I know it, you have not fed of the spiritual
food, but edified by faith and suffered the tares of the wild affections to be
burnt.


John. Foot thou would not have me make my self a French Martyr, to be
burnt at these years would thou?


Tym. I have known them John of our Church, have been burnt for other sins
before thy years.


John. I by my faith Timothy it may be you have, for as close as you carry your
teeth together, with indeed good brother, I do not think but once in a year,
a man might find you quartered betwixt the Mouth at Bishops-gare, and the
preaching place in Spittle.


Tim. Now you talk of the Spittle, I must say in very deed I have been in
the Spittle.


John. It is the more like Timothy you have been acquainted with the pox then.


Tim. But if you should think John, that I would be there to commit, deal, or
to speak more profanely, to venture in the way of all flesh, you do wrong me
being a brother of the faith.


John. Come right your self and your Master then, and send him this one
hundred pound, here is his sealed Ring, I hope a warrant sufficient.


Tim. Upon so good security John, i will fit me to deliver it.
Exit
John. Spend it, God send me but once to finger it, and if I do not make a
Flanders reckoning on it, and that is as I have heard mad wags say, receive it
hear and revel it away in an other place: let me be spit out of the room of
good fellowship, and never have so much favor to touch the skirt of a Taffatie
peticote.

Tut I am young, mine Uncle's an old chuffe,
And i will not want by God, since he has enough.
I must not let this same wainscot-face, yea and nay, hear me tho.
Enter Timothy.
Tim. Here John, accept my duty to my Master, I must tell you John, I would
not have trusted you John, without so susficient a discharge.


John. I am the less beholding unto you, but now I hau't, because you preached
to me upon my demand of it, i will be so bold to lecture to you upon your
delivery, Timothy you know the Proverb good Timothy, That the still Sow
eats a l the draffe: and no question the most smooth tongued fellow, the more
arrant knave: God forbid I should call you so Timothy, yet I will leave this
for your further remembrance.

Under the yea and nay, men often buy
Much cosonage, find many alye:
He that with yea and nay makes all his sayings,
Yet proves a Judas in his dealings,
Shall have this written over his grave,
Thy life seemed pure, yet di'd a knave.

Timothy. Do you hear John, you know the Chapmans word in London, I Will trust
you but no further then I see you, you have the hundred pound John, but for
that you have wronged us that love to be edified, I will go with you to my
Master, and see the money delivered.


John. Why, a trusted me to come with it.

Timothy. I care not by yea, and nay, i will go by yea and nay, I will.

John. Let me but ask thee this question, Whither do thou go, in any love
to thy master, or to me?


Tim. Though my master be my master, yet you have stur'd my stomach.


John: I thought there was the fruit of your Puritan patience, come let us
along, and if I do not show your religion a trick shall be scarce disgested
with pepins or cheese, let me be called Cut, Come along.

Exeunt. Enter Honesty the Sergeant, and Quiek.
Honesty. Fellow Quick, pray thee have a care if thou can see John the
Vpholster, I must needs airest him.


Quick. How much is the debt?

Honesty. Some 50. li.

Quic. Do thou think he is able to put in bail to the action?

Honesty. I think scarce enough.

Quick. Why then we will arrest him to the pope's head, call for the best cheer
in the house, first feed upon him, and then if he will not come off, carry him
to the counter, but if he will stretch some 4. or 5. li. being the sums so great
he shall pass, we will make him swear he shall not tell he was arrested, and
we will swear to the creditor we cannot meet with him.


Honest. Fore God thou say well.

Quick. I have served Sent the Perfumer, Tallow the Currier, Quarrel the
Glasier, and some three or four more of our poor smelts so this morning.

Enter John.
John. Heart I have cour'st through two or three Lanes, yet the miching slave
follows me so close I can not give him the slip for this hundred pound: as
God save me now it is in my hand i'do rather be hanged then part from it: Foot,
it will make a man merry half a year together in France, command wenches or any
thing: part from it quoth you, that were a jest indeed: shall a young man as I
am, and though I say it indifferent proper, go into a strange country, and
not show himself what mettell he is made of when a comes there: I protest a
very good hundred pound, a hundred pound will go far in France, and when a
man has it not of his own, who should he make bold withal for it, if he may
not with his Uncle; but see if that thin faced rogue be not come again, I must
have a trick for him.

Enter Tim.
Tim. For all your fore-long too and fro, by yea and nay, i will follow you.


John. Will you, there should be Sergeants here abouts, will you: Lord if it
be thy will send me to hit of one, and if I do not show you a trick, thou
should be a Sergeant by thy peering so.


Honest. Why M. John so I am. (thy name?

John. Thou art happily met: I am looking for one, what is

Ho. My name M. John, I have been merry at your Uncles many a time, my name's
Honesty.


John. I faith.

Quick. Nay, i will assure you his name is Honesty, and I am Quick

Ioh. Honesty! who the pox gave thee that name? (his Yeoman.
But thou must do an office for my Uncle:
Hear Quick, run thou before and enter the action,
There Is money, an action of an hundred pound
Against Timothy Thin-beard, M. Greshams Factor,
I hope I shall teach you to dog me.

Quick. An action against Thin-beard, I go.
Exit.
John. Here Honesty, there is money for thy arrest,
Be sure to take good Bail or clap him fast:
I hope I shall show you a trick.

Honest. Mum for that.

John. See where he is, God prosper it.
Fasten upon him like a hungry Dog upon a piece of meat:
And if this be not a trick to chaste a fool,
A more knave learn me, and i will go to school.

Honest. I arrest you Sir.

Tim: Arrest me, thou servant to Satan: at whose suit?

Honest. At your Masters, M. Greshams.

Tim. O God for thy mercy, M. John, M. John.

John. Nay, nay, this 100. li, has other work in hand for me,
You are in the Devils hand, and so agree.
Exit.
Tim. My good friend, now what must become of me?

Honest. Unless, we shall to the Tavern, and drink till you can send for
Bail, you must to the Counter.


Tim. Is there no difference made betwixt the faithful and the unfaithful.


Honest. Faith very little in paying of debts: but if you be so holy, I marvel
how you run so far behind hand With your M.


Tim. I must confess I owe my M. 500. li. How I came so, it is not fit to lay
the sins of our flesh open to every eye, and you know the saying, It Is bad to do
evil, but worse to boast of it: yet he above knows that sometimes as soon
as I have come from Bowe-church, I have gone to a Baudie-house. (your knauerie.


Honest. Nay it appears so, that now your M. has smelt out

Tim. Not to commit in very deed good friend, but only to see fashions or to
recreat and stir up our drowsy appetites.

Enter Quic.
Honest. Well here comes my fellow Quick, and unless you will content us for
staying, you must along to the Counter.


Tim. I hope you think The Labourer is worthy of his hire: we will stay here
at the Tavern, and Quick I will content thee, to carry a letter to my master,
wherein I will make him a restitution of his 500. li. by repentance, and show
him the way that my frail nature has run into.


Honest. Well, we will be paid by the hour.

Tim. It will not be amiss if you buy an houre-glasse.
Exeunt. Enter D. Nowel, Gresham. sir Tho. Ramsie, Hobson, Lady Ramsie,
Gresh. Come M. D. Nowell, now we have done
Our worst to your good cheer, we would feign be gone:
Only we stay my kinsmans long return,
To pay this hundred pound to sir Thomas Ramsie.

D. Now. Then assure you, he will be hear presently:
In the mean time, I have drawn you to this walk,
A Gallerie, wherein I keep the Pictures
Of many charitable Citizens:
That having fully satisfied your bodies,
You may by them learn to refresh your souls.

Gresh. Are all these Pictures of good Citizens?

D. Now. They are, and i will describe to you some of their births,
How they bestowd their lives, and did so live
The fruits of this life might a better give.

Gresh. You shall gain more in showing this to us,
Then you have shown.

Lady. Good M. Deane, I pray you show it us.
This was the Picture of sir John Philpot sometimes Mayor,
This man at one time, at his own charge,
Leauied ten thousand soldiers, guarded the Realm
From the incursions of our enemies:
And in the year a thousand three hundred and eighty,
When Thomas of Woodstocke, Thomas Percie with other noble
Were sent to aid the Duke of Britannie, (men,
This said John Filpot furnished out four ships
At his own charges and did release the armor
That the poor soldiers had for victuals paw'nd.
This man did live when Walworth was Lord Mayor
That provident, valiant, and learned Citizen,
That both attacht, and killed the traitor Tyler,
For which good service Walworth the Lord Mayor,
This Filpot, and four other Aldermen,
Were knighted in the field.
Thus did he live, and yet before he di'd
Assured relief for thirteen poor for ever.

Gres: By the marry God a worthy Citizen:
On good my Dear.

Now: This sir Richard Whitington three times Mayor,
Son to a Knight, and Prentise to a Mercer,
Began the Library of Gray-Friars in London;
And his Executors after him did build
Whittington College, thirteen Almes-houses for poor men,
Repaired S. Bartholmewes in Smithfield,
Glased the Guild Hall, and built Newgate.

Hob. Bones of me then I have heard lies,
For I have heard he was a scullion,
And rai'sd himself by venture of a Cat.

Now: They did the more wrong to the gentleman.
This sir John Allen Mercer and Mayor of London,
A man so grave of life that he was made
A privy Counselor to King Henry the eight,
He gave this City a rich Collar of gold,
That by the Mayor succeeding should be worn;
Of which sir William Laxton was the first,
And is continued even unto this year,
A number more there are, of whose good deeds
This City florisht.

Gresh: And we may be ashamed,
For in their deeds we see our own disgrace,
We that are Citizens are rich as they were.
Behold rheir charity in every street,
Churches for prayer, Almes-houses for the poor,
Conduits which bring us water: all which good
We do see and are relieved withal,
And yet we live like beasts, spend time and die,
Leaving no good to be remembered by.

Lady. Among the Stories of these blessed men,
So many that enrich your Gallarie,
There are two women's Pictures: what were they?

D. Now. They are two that have deserved a memory,
Worthy the note of our Posterity:
This Agnes Foster, wife to sir A. Foster,
That fre'd a Beggar at the grate of Lud-gate,
Was after Mayor of this most famous City,
And builded the South Side of Lud-gate up,
Upon which wall these Verses I have read.
Devout souls that pass this way,
For M. Foster late Mayor honestly pray,
And Agnes his Wife to God consecrate,
That of pity this house made for Londoners in Lud. gate:
So that for lodging and water here nothing they pay,
As their Keepers shall answer at dreadful Doomes day.

Lady. O what a charitable deed was this!
This Aue Gibson who in her husbands life,
Being a Grocer, and a sheriff of London,
Founded a free School at Ratcliffe,
There to instruct threescore poor children,
Built fourteen Almes-houses for fourteen poor
Leaving for Tutors 50. li. a year,
And Quarterly for every one a Noble.

Lady. Why should not I live so, that being dead
My name might have a register with theirs.

Gresh. Why should not all of us being wealthy men,
And by Gods blessing only raised; but
Cast in our minds how we might them exceed
In godly works, helping of them that need.

Hob. Bones a me it is true: why should we live,
To have the poor to curse us being dead?
Heaven grant that I may live, that when I die,
Although my children laugh, the poor may cry.

Now. If you will follow the religious path,
That these have beat before you, you shall win heaven,
Even in the midday walks you shall not walk the street.
But widows orisons, Laysars prayers, Orphans thanks,
Will fly into your ears, and with a joyful blush,
Make you thank God that you have done for them:
When otherwise theil fill you ears with curses,
Crying we feed on woe, you are our Nurses.
O is it not better that young couples say,
You raised us up, then you were our decay:
And mothers tongues teach their first borne to sing,
Of your good deeds, then by the bad to wring.

Hob. No more M. D. Nowell, no more,
I think these words should make a man of flint.
To mend his life: how say you M Gresham?

Gresh. Fore-god they have starred tears into my eyes,
And M. D. Nowel you shall see
The words that you have spoke, have wrought effect in me.

Ladw. And from these women I will take a way,
To guide my life for a more blessed stay.

Now. Begin then whilst you live, least being dead,
The good you give in charge be never done,
Make your own hands your executors, your eyes ouer-seers,
And have this saying ever in your mind:
Women be forgetful, children be unkind,
Executors be covetous, and take what they find.

Hob. In my time I have seen many of them.

Gresh. I Will learn then to prevent them whilst I live,
The good I mean to do; these hands shall give.
Enter Quick.
Quick. The matter you wot of sit is done.

Gresh. Done knave, what is done?

Quick. Is in hucksters handling sir, and hear he commend him unto you.


Gresh. Mary God knave do tell me Riddles, what is all this?

Quic. A thing will speak his own mind to you,
If you please but to open the lip.
Enter Clo.
Clo. Be your leave Gentlemen, I am come to smell out my master here: Your
kins-man John sir, your kins-man John.


Gresh. O he has brought the hundred pound, where is he?

Clo. It appears by this, the matter is of less weight.

Gresh. What more paper:!
Fellow, what have thou brought me here, a recantation?

Clo. It may be so for he appears in a white sheet.

Quick. Indeed he seems sorry for his bad life..

Gresh. Bad life, bad life knave, what means all this?
M. D. Nowell, pray read it for me,
And I Will read that my kins-man John has sent:
Where is he knave?

Clo. Your worship is no wiser then you should be, to keep any of that cote.


Gresh. Knave thou mean.

Clo. Knave I mean sir, but your kins-man John,
That by this time's well forward on his way.

Gresh. Hey-day, what have we here, knavery as quick as Ecles?
We Will more of this.

Clo. You were best let me help you hold it sir.

Gresh. Why knave, do think I cannot hold a paper.

Clo. Help will do no hurt for if the knavery be as quick as an Ecle, it may
chance to deceive you.

Greshams reads. I am a Merchant made by chance,
And lacking coin to venture:
Your hundred pound's gone toward France,
Your Eactor's in the Counter.

Quick. No sir, he is yet but in the Tavern at counter gate, but he shall
soon be in if you please.


Gresh. Away knave, let me read on.
My father gave me a portion,
You keep away my due:
I have paid my self a part to spend,
Here Is a discharge for you.
Precious cole, here is a knave round with me.

D. Now. Your Factor Timothy Thin beard writes to you,
Who as it seems is arrested at your suit.

Gresh. How, at my suit!

D. Now. And hear confesses by using bad company,
He is run behind hand five hundred pound.
And does entreat you would be good to him.

Gresh. How, run behind hand five hundred pound,
And by bad company: M. Deane of Powles,
He is a fellow seems so pure of life,
I drust have trusted him with all I had had.

D. Now. Here is so much under his own hand.

Gresh. Ha, let me see, who set you to arrest him?

Quick. Why your kins-man John sir, your kins-man John.

Gresh. He, ha, infaith I smell the knauerie then:
This knave belike mistrusting of my kinsman,
Would come along to see the money given me:
Mad Jack having no trick to put him off,
Arrests him with a Sergeant at my suit,
There went my hundred pound away: this Thin-beard then
Knowing himself to have played the knave with me,
And thinking I had arrested him indeed,
Confesses all his tricks with yea, and nay:
So here is five hundred pound come, one run away.

Hob. Bones a me, M. Gresham, is my man John
Gone away with your hundred pound?

Clo. Faith it appears so by the acquittance that I brought.

Gresh. No matter M. Hobson, the charge you trust him with,
I Will see he shall discharge, I know he is wild,
Yet I must tell you i will not see him suncke:
And afore-god it has done my heart more good,
The knave had wit to do so mad a trick,
Then if he had pofited me twice so much.

Ram. He ever had the name of mad Jack Gresham.

Gresh. Is the more like his Uncle, Sir Thomas Ramsie
When I was young I do remember well,
I was as very a knave as he is now.
Sir, bring Thin-beard hither to me, and sir Thomas Ramsie,
Your hundred pound i will see you paid my self:
Ha ha, mad Jack, Gramercie for this slight,
This hundred pounds makes me thy Uncle right.
Exeunt. Enter John Tawnicote.
Taw. I sure it is in this Lane, I turned on the right hand coming from the
Stocks, nay, though there was master carles, man carels, and all careless, i will
still be honest John, and scorn to take any man's ware but i will pay them for it:
I warrant they think me an arrant knave, for going away and not paying, and in
my conscience the master cudgeld the men, and the men the master, and all about
me, when as God save me I did it innocently. But sure this is the Lane, there is
the VVindmill, there is the Dogs head in the pot, and here is the Friar whipping
the Nuns arse: it is here about sure.

Enter in the shop 2. of Hobsons folks, and opening the shop.
1. Come fellow Crack, have you sorted up those wares?
Marked them with 54. they must be pack't up.

2. I have don't an hour ago: have you sealed up
My masters Letter to his Factor John Gresham?
It is at Deep in France to send him Matches,
For he must use them at Bristow fair.

1. I, and the Post received it two hours since.

Taw. Sure it is here about, the kennel was on my right hand, and I think in
my conscience I shall never have the grace of God and good luck, if I do not
pay it: Gods foot, look here, look here, I know this is the shop by that same
stretch-halter, O my masters, by your leave good fellows.


1. You are welcome sir, you are welcome.

Taw. Indeed that is the common saying about London, if men bring money with
them.


1. O sir, money customers to us are best welcome.

Taw. You say well, so they should be. come turn over your books, I am come
to pay this same ten pound.


1. And we are ready to receive money: what might we call your name?


Taw. Why my name is John Good Fellow, I hope I am not ashamed of my name.


1. Your Kin are the more beholding to you, fellow Crack turn over the
Callender, and look for John Good Fellow.


2. What comes it to?

Tawnie. Ten pound.

1. You will have no more wares with you, will you sir.

Taw. Nay prithee not too fast, let us pay for the old before we talk of any
new.


2. John Good Fellow, fellow Nimble-chaps, here is no such name in all our book.


1. I think thou art mop-ey'd this morning, give me the book, Letter I,
Letter I, Letter I: when had you your ware?


Taw. I had it some ten days ago.

1. Your name's John Good Fellow you say, Letter I, Letter I, Letter I: You do
not come to mock us, do you. Letter I, Letter I, Letter I. By this hand if I
thought you did, I would knock you about the ears before we parted fellow
Crack, get me a Cudgel ready; Letter I, Letter I, Letter I: Foot here is no
such name in all our Book. Do you hear fellow are you drunk this morning,
to make us look for moone-shine in the water?


Taw: Fut, art not thou drunk this morning, can not receive the money that is
due to thee? I tell thee I had ten pounds worth of ware here.


1. And I tell thee John Goodfellow, here is no such name in our book, nor no
such ware delivered.


Taw: Gods precious, there is a jest indeed, so a man may be sworn out of
himself, had not I ten pounds worth of ware here?


2. No Goodman goose, that you had not.

Taw: Hyday, here is excellent fellows, are able to make their masters horns
grow through his head in a month, they cannot only carelessly deliver away his
ware, but also they will not take money for it when it comes.


1. Do you hear Hoyden, and my master were not in the next room, I Would knock
you about ears for playing the knave with us, ere you parted.


Taw: By the mass I think your master had more need knock you about the
ears, for playing the Iackes with him, there is your ten pounds, tell it out
with a wanion, and take it for your pains.


1. Fut, here is a mad slave indeed will give us ten pound in spite of our
teethes.


2. Fellow Nimble Chaps, alaslet the poor fellow alone, it appears he is
besides himself.


Taw: By the mass, I think you will sooner make your master stark mad, if
you play thus with every body.

Enter old Hobson.
Hobs: Hyday, bones a me, here is lazy knaves.
Past eight a clock, and neither ware sorted,
Not shop swept.

Taw: Good morrow to you sir, have you any more stomach to receive money, than
your men have this morning?


Hob: Money is welcome chaffer, welcome good friend, Welcome good friend.


Taw: Here Is mounsiermalapart your man, scorns to receive it.

Hob: How knaves, think scorn to receive my money?
Bones a me grown proud, proud knaves, proud.

1. I hope we know sir you do not use to bring up your servants to receive
money unless it be due unto you.


Hob. No bones a me knaves, not for a million:
Friend, come to pay me money, for what, for what,
For what come you to pay me money?

Taw. Why Sir, for ware I had some month ago,
Being Pins, Points, and Laces,
Poting sticks for young wives, for young wenches glasses,
Ware of all sorts which I bore at my back
To sell where I come, with what do you lack, what do you lack?
What do you lack?

Hob. Bones a me a merry knave: what is thy name?

Taw. My name sir is John Good Fellow,
An honest poor Peddler of Kent.

Hob. And had ten pound in ware of me, a month ago:
Bones give me the books, John Good Fellow of Kent.

Taw. O sir, Nomine and naturae, by name and nature,
I am as well known for a good fellow in Kent,
As your City Summer's known for a knave,
Come sir will you be ttelling.

Hob. Tell me of no (...) of me here is no such matters
Away knave away, thou owe me none, out of my doors.

Taw. How, owe you none say you! this is but a trick to try my honesty now.


Hob. There Is a groat, go drink a pint of Sack,
Comfort thy self thou art not well in thy wits;
God forbid, pay me ten pound not due to me.

Taw. Gods dickins here is a jest indeed, master mad, men mad, and all mad,
here is a mad household: do you hear M. Hobson, I do not greatly care to take
your groat, and I care as little to spend it, yet you shall know I am John,
honest John, and I will not be out faced of my honesty, here I had ten pounds
worth of ware, and I w'll pay for it.


Hob. Nimble-chaps, call for help Nimble-chaps,
Bones of me the man begins to rave.

2. Master I have found out one John Tawnie-cote,
Had ten pounds worth of ware a month ago.

Taw. Why that is I, that is I: I was John Tawnie-cote then,
Though I am John Gray-cote now.

Hob. John Tawnie-cote! welcome John Tawnie-cote.

Taw. Foot do you think i will be out faced of my honesty?

Hob. A stool for John Tawnie-cote, sit good John Tawnie-cote.
Honest John Tawnie-cote, welcome John Tawnie-cote.

Taw. Nay, i will assure you we are honest all the generation of us,
There it is to a Doyt I warrant it, you need not tell it after me,
Foot do you think i will be out sac't of mine honesty?

Hob. Thou art honest John, honest John Tawnie-cote:
Having so honestly paid for this,
Sort up his pack straight worth twenty pound,
I Will trust thee honest John, Hobson will trust thee:
And any time, the ware that thou do lack,
Money or money not, i will stuff thy pack.

Taw. I thank you Master Hobson, and this is the fruit of honesty.
Enter a Purseuant.
Pur. Be your leave M. Hobson, I bring this favor to you,
My royal Mistress Queeno Elizabeth,
Has sent to borrow a hundred pound of you.

Hob. How, bones a me, Queen know Hobson, Queen know
And send but for one hundred pound: Friend come in; (Hobson?
Come in friend, shall have two, Queen shall have two:
If Queen know Hobson, once her Hobsons purse,
Must be free for her she is Englands Nurse:
Come in good friend, ha, Queen know Hobson,
Nay come in John we will dine together too.

Taw. Make up my pack and i will along from you
Singing merrily on the way,
Points, Points, Gloves, and Purses,
Pokingsticks, and black Iet-rings,
Cambricks, lawnes, and pretty things:
Come maids and buy my back does croke,
I have all that you want: what do you lack?
What do you lack?
Exeunt. Enter Gresham and Sword Bearer.
Gresh. Our Cities Sword Bearer and my very good friend,
What have our honorable Court of Aldermen
Determined yet shall Gresham have a place,
To erect this worthy building to his name,
May make the City speak of him for ever.

Sword. They are in earnest counsel sir about it.

Gresh. Be you my Agent too and fro to them,
I know your place and will be thankful to you:
Tell them I wait here in the Majors Court,
Beneath in the Sheriffs Court my workmen wait
In number full a hundred, my Frame is ready,
All only stay their pleasure, then out of hand
Up goes my work, a credit to the Land.

Sword. I shall be dutiful in your request.
Exit.
Gresh. Do good M. Sword Bearer, now when this work is
It shall be in the pleasure of my life, (raised,
To come and meet our Merchants at their hour,
And see them in the greatest storm that is
Walk dry, and in a work I raised for them:
Or fetch a turn within my upper walk,
Within which square I have ordered Shoppes shall be
Of neat but necessariest Trades in London.
And in the richest sort being garnish't out,
It Will do me good to see shops with fair wives
Sit to attend the profit of their husbands:
Young maids brought vpyong men as prentises.
Some shall prove masters and speak in Greshams praise,
In Greshams work we did our fortunes raise.
For I dare say both Country and the Court,
For wares shall be beholding to this work.
Enter Sword Bearer, Lord Mayor, and Sheriffs.
Sword. M. Gresaam,
Thus sends the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen.

Ram. Or rather come to bring the news our self:
We have determined of a place for you
In Corne-hill, the delightful of this City,
Where you shall raise your Frame: the City at their Charge
Has bought the houses and the ground, (pound;
And paid for both three thousand five hundred three and twenty
Order is given the houses shall be sold,
To any man will buy them and remove them,

Shirife. Which is already done, being fourscore households,
Were sold for 478. pound.
The plot is also plained at the Cities charges,
And we in name of the whole Citizens,
Do come to give you full possession
Of this our purchase, whereon to build a Burse,
A place for-Marchants to assemble in,
At your own charges.

Gresh. M Shnife i will do it, and what I spend therein,
I scorn to lose day, neglect is a sin:
Where be my work men?
Enter workmen.
Work. Here, here with trowell and tools ready at hand.

Gresh. Come fellows, come:
Enter D. Nowell and Hobson. We have a Frame made, and we have room
To raise it: but M. D. Nowell, and M. Hobson,
We have your presence in a happy time,
This seventh of June we the first stone will lay
Of our new Burse, give us some Brickes:
Here Is a brick, here is a fair Sovereign,
Thus I begin, be it hereafter told
I laid the first stone with a piece of gold.
He that loves Gresham follow him in this,
The gold we lay, due to the workmen is.

Work. O God bless M. Gresham, God bless M. Gresham.

Ram. The Mayor of London M. Gresham follows you:
Unto your first this second I do fit,
And lay this piece of gold a top of it.

Shri. So do the Sheriffs of London after you.

Hob. And bones of me, old Hobson will be one,
Here Is fellowys there is my gold give me a stone.

Work. God forbid a man of your credit should want stones

D. Now. Is this the Plot sir of your work in hand?

Gresh. The whole Plot both of form and fashion.

D. Now. In sooth it will be a good edifice,
Much Art appears in it: in all my time
I have not seen a work of this neat form:
What is this vaultage for, is fashioned here?

Gresh. Stowage for Merchants ware and strangers goods,
As either by exchange or otherwise are vendable.

D. Now. Here is a middle round and a far space,
The round is greater, and the space
Seems open: your conceit for that?

Gresh. The grates give light unto the Cellerage,
Upon the which i will have my friends to walk,
When heaven gives comfortable rain unto the earth:
For that I will have covered,

D. Now. So it appears.

Gresh. This space that hides not heaven from us,
Shall be so still, my reason is,
There Is Summers heat, as well as winters cold,
And I allow and here is my reason for it,
It Is better to be bleak't by winters breath,
Then to be stifled up with Summers heat:
In cold weather walk dry and thick together,
And every honest man warm one another:
In Summer then when too much heat offends,
Take air a Gods name Merchants or my friends.

D. Now. And what of this part that is over head?

Gresh. M. Deane in this:
There is more ware there then in all the rest,
Here like a parish for good Citizens
And their fair wives to dwell in, i will have shoppes
Where every day they shall become themselves
In neat attire, that when our Courtiers
Shall come in trains to pace old Greshams Burse,
They shall have such a girdle of chaste eyes,
And such a globe of beauty round about:
Ladies shall blush to turn their vizards off,
And Courtiers swear they ly'd when they did scoff.

D. Now. Kind M. Gresham this same work of yours,
Will be a Tomb for you after your death,
A benefit to Tradesmen and a place
Where Matchants meet their traffic to maintain,
Where neither could shall hurt them, heat, nor rain.

Gresh. O M Nowell I did not forget
The troublesome storm we had in Lumbar-fleet,
That time Sir Thomas and I were adversaries,
And you and M. Hobson made us friends.
I then did say, and now i will keep my word,
I saw a want and I would help afford:
Nor is my promise given you when you showed
That rank of charitable men to us,
That I would follow their good actions
Forgot with me, but that before I die,
The world shall see I Will leave like memory.
A blasing Star.
Hob. Fore-God my Lord, have you beheld the like!
Look how it streakes, what do you think of it?

Shir. It Is a strange Comet M. Hobson,
My time to my remembrance has not seen
A sight so wonderful. M. D. Nowell,
To judge of these things your experience
Exceeds ours, what do you hold of it?
For I have heard that Meteors in the air,
Of lesser form, less wonderful then these,
Rather foretell of danger's imminent,
Then flatter us wish future happiness.

D. Now. Art may discourse of these things none can judge
Directly of the will of heaven in this,
And by discourse thus far I hold of it.
That this strange star appearing in the North,
And in the constellation of Cassiopey,
Which with three fixed stars commixt to it,
Does make a Figure Geometrycall,
Lozengewise called of the learned Rombus,
Conducted with the hourly Moon of heaven,
And never altered from the fixed sphere,
Fore-tels such alteration that my friends,
Heaven grant with this first sight our sorrow ends.

Hob: God, will be done M. Deane, hape what hap will,
Death does not fear the good man but the ill.

Gresh. Well said M Hobson.
Lets have a day, that if death come to morrow
He Is rather messenger of joy then sorrow.
Now sir what news from Barbary?
Enter a Factor.
Fact. Unwelcome news sir, the King of Barbary is slain.

Gresh. Ha, slain by treason or by war.

Fact. By war, in that renowned Battle,
Swift Fame desires to carry through the world:
The Battle of Alcasar, wherein two Kings
Besides this King of Barbary was slain,
Kings of Moroco and of Portugale,
With Srewkeley that renowned Englishman
That had a spirit equal with a King,
Mad fellow with these Kings in warlike strife,
Honored his Country and concluded life.

Gresh. Could news birladie, the venture Gentlemen
Of threescore thousand pound with that dead King,
Lies in a hazard to be won or lost:
In what estate consists the Kingdom now?

Fact. In peace, and the succeeding happy,
Was crowned then King when I took ship from thence.

Gresh. To that King then be Messenger from us,
And by the sound of Trumpet summon him?
Say that thy Master and a London Merchant,
Craves due performance of such covenants
Confirmed by the late King unto our self,
That for the sum of threescore thousand pound,
The traffic of his Sugars should be mine.
If he refuse the former bargain made,
Then freely claim our money that we lent:
Say that our coin did sted the former King,
If he be Kind we have as much for him.

Hob. By the Marie-god it was a dangerous day,
Three Kings beside young Stewkeley slain:
I Will tell you my Lord Mayor what I have seen
When sword and bucklers were in question,
I have seen that Stewkeley beat a street before him,
He was so familliar grown in every mouth,
That if it happened any fighting were,
The question straight was, was not Stewkely there.
Bones a me he would hew it. Now, what news with you?
Enter a Boy.
Boy. Here is a Letter sent you from John Gresham.

Hob. O an answer of a Letter that I sent,
To send me Matches against Bristow fair,
If then any were come.

Boy: I cannot tell Sir well what to call it, but in steed of matches of ware,
when you read your Letter, I believe you will find your Factor has matched you.


Hob. What Is here, what is here.
Read the Letter. As near as I could guess at your meaning, I have labored to
furnish you, and have sent you 2. thousand pounds worth of Match.

How, bones knave, 2. thousand pounds worth of Match!


Boy. Faith M. never chafe at it, for if you cannot put it away for Match, it
may be the hangman will by some of it for halters.


Hob. Bones a me, I sent for matches of ware, fellows of ware.


Boy. And Match being a kind of ware, I think your Factor has matched you.


Hob. The blasing Star did not appear for nothing:
I sent to be sorted with matches of ware,
And he has sent me naught, but a commodity of Match,
And in a time when there is no vent for it.
What do you think on it Gentlemen,
I little thought Jack would have served me so.

Gresh. Nay M. Hebson grieve not at Iack's cross,
My doubt is more and that I laugh at less.
Exeunt. Enter 2. Lords.
1. Lord. You have trauel'd sir, how do you like this building?
Trust me it is the goodliest thing that I have seen,
England affords none such.

2. Lord. Nor Christendom:
I might say all the world has not his fellow.
I have been in Turkies great Constantinople,
The Merchants there meet in a goodly temple,
But have no common Burse in Rom, but Rome's
Built after the manner of Franckeford, and Eniden:
There where the greatest Marts and meeting places
Of merchants are have streets and pent-houses,
And as I might compare them to themselves,
Like Lumber-street before this Buisse was built.
Enter sir Thomas Ramsie.
1. Lord. I have seen the like in Bristow.

Ram. Good morrow to your honors.

2. Lord. Thanks to my good Lord Major.
We are gazing here of M. Greshams work.

Ram. I think you have not seen a goodlier Frame.

2. Lord. Not in my life, yet I have been in Uenice,
In the Realto there called S. Marks,
It Is but a babble if compared to this.
The nearest that which most resembles this,
Is the great Burse in Anwerpe, yet not comparable
Either in height or widnesse: the fair Sellerage,
Or goodly shoppes above: O my Lord Major,
This Gresham has much graced your City London,
His fame will long out-liue him.

1. Lord. It is reported you sir Thomas Ramsie are as rich as he.
This should incite you to such noble works,
To eternize you.

Ram. Your Lorship pleases to be pleasant with me,
I am the meanest of a many men
In this fair City, M Greshams fame
Draws me as a spectator amongst others,
To see his cost, but not compare with it,

1. Lord. And it is cost indeed.

2. Lord. But when to fit these empty rooms about here,
The pictures graven of all the English Kings
Shall be set over and in order plac'st,
How glorious will it then be?

1. Lord. Admirable!

Ram. These very Pictures will surmount my wealth.

1. Lord. But how will M. Gresham name this place?

2. Lord. I heard my L. of Lecester to the Queen
Highly commend this work, and she then promised
To come in person and hear christen it,
It cannot have a better God-mother:
This Gresham is a royal Citizen.

Ram. He feasts this day the Russian Ambassador,
I am a bidden Guest:
Where if it please you.

1. Lord. Good sir Thomas,
We know what you would say, We are his Guests
Invited two: yet in our way we took
This wonder worth our pains, it is our way
To Bishop-gate to M. Greshams house,
Thither so please you we will associate you.
Enter Gresham leading in the Ambassador, Music, and a Banquet served in: the
Ambassador set: Enter Sir Tho. Ramsie, the 2. Lords, my Lady Ramsie the
Weights in Sergeants gowns with one Interpreter.
Gresh. Lords all at once welcome, welcome at once,
You come to my new buildings up sitting,
It has been long in labor now deliver.
anon we will have a health to it.
This Russian Prince the Emberours Ambassador
Does not our Language understand: Interpreter,
Say that the we bid him wel-come.

Inter. The Prince speaks Latin,
And in that language we will interpret for him:
Salutem tibi optat and adicentum tuum grauissume iste Londinensis.

Amb. Istum libens audio, ages illi meo nomine Ex animo gratias, funde quod
bibamus.

Inter. He gladly thanks you for his royal wel-come
And drinks to you.

Gresh. We understand that sign.
Come let our full crowned cups overflow with wine,
Wel-come again fair Lords.

2. Lord. Thanks M. Gresham.
We have been viewing of your works.

Gresh. My Burse how do you like it Lord,
It is a pretty babble.

2. Lo. It Is a fair work.
Her Majesty intends to name the place.

Gresh. She does her servant Gresham too much grace,
It will be pretty when my Pictures come
To fill those empty rooms, if that holds,
That ships rich is worth her weight in gold.

1. Lo. It will be rare and famous.

Gresh. What was it that the Russian whispered?

Inter. He ask me what interpreter the Queen
Would in his Embasse employ.

Giesh. None, tell him none.
For though a woman, she is a rare Linguist,
Where other Princes use Interpreters,
She propria voce, I have some Latin too:
She of her self hears all their Embassies,
And herself answers them without Interpreter,
Both Spanish, Latin, French, and Greek,
Dutch, and Italian, so let him know:
My Lord of Lecester sent me word last night,
And I am prouder on it then on my building,
The Queen to grace me and my works the more,
The several Ambassadors then will hear,
And them in person answer.

2. Lord. It Is most true.
Enter a Gentleman wispering to sir Thomas Ramsie.
Gresham. The Russian with the Frence.
What would that Gentleman sir Thomas?

Ram. He is a Merchant and a Jeweller:
Among other stones he says he has a Pearl
Orient and round, waighing so many carets
That it can scarce be valewed: the French king,
And many other Dukes have for the riches
And prize refused to buy it: now he comes,
To offer it to this Ambassador.

Gresh. Show him the Pearl Interpreter:
The Lord Ambassador.

Inter. Mercator quidem and aurifex spectandum, tibi profere
Ge^mam domine serenissime.

Amb. Et pulchra and principe digna, interroga quanti iudicat?

Inter. He commends it to be both rich and fair,
And desires to know how you vallew it.

Mar. My prise sir, is fifteen hundred pound.

Amb. Quantivalet?

Inter. Mill quin gentis minis,

Amb. Non, non nimis peceara est ista Gemma.

Inter. He says it is too dear, he will not buy it.

Gresh. I will peruse your pearl, is that your prise?

Mar. I cannot bate one crown and gain by it.
Enter a Mariner.
Gresh. We Will not be accessarie to your Loss,
And yet consider all things some may think us
To be but bare of treasure at this time,
Having disburst so much about our works:
Yet if our ships and Trade in Barbary
Hold current we are well: what news from Sea,
How stands my ships?

Mar. Your ships in which all the Kings pictures were,
From Brute unto our Queen Elizabeth:
Drawn in white marble, by a storm at sea
Is wrack't and lost.

Gresh. The Loss, I way not this:
Only it greeues me that my famous building,
Shall want so rich and fair an ornament.

L. Ram. It touches all the City; for those pictures
Had doubly graced this royal edifice.

Ram. Me thinks the ships loss most should trouble you.

Gresh. My ships but wealth, why we have wealth;
The pictures were the grace of my new Burse,
So I might them in their true form behold,
I cared not to have lost their waights in gold.

1. Lord. A noble Citizen.
Enter a Factor.
Gresh. Our Factor, what good news from Barbary?
What says the King, speak, did thou sommon him?
Or have thou brought my threescore thousand pound?
Or shall I have the Sugars at that rate?
If so, new marble Pictures we will have wrought,
And in a new ship from beyond sea brought.

Fact. The King that in the regal chair succeedes
The King late dead I summoned, and demanded
Either your money tendered, or the Sugars
After the rate proposed, he denied both
Alleging though he was successiue heir,
He was not therefore either tide to pay
The late Kings debts, nor yet to stand unto
Unnecessary bargains: notwithstanding
To gratify your love, the King has sent you
As presents, not as satisfaction:
A costly dagger, and a pair of slippers,
And there is all for you threescore thousand pound.

Gresh. Birlady a dear bargain.

1. Lord. I fear me this will plague him, a strange cross,
How will he take this news, loss upon loss.

2. Lord. Nay, will it not undo him, does he not wish his buildings in his
purse.


Gresh. A dagger that is well,
A pair of slippers come unto my shoes,
What 30. thousand pound in sterling money,
And paid me all in slippes, then Hoboyes play,
On slippers i will dance all my care away:
Fit, fit, he had the just length of my foot.
You may report Lords when you come to Court,
You Gresham saw a pair of slippers wear
Cost thirty thousand pound.

1, Lo. Somewhat too dear.
Nor yet for all this treasure we have lost,
Repents it us one penny of our cost.

2. Lo. As royal in his virtues as his buildings.

Ram. These losses would have killed me.

Gresh. Ieweller,
Let Us see thy pearl: go pound it in a Mortar,
Beat it to powder then return it me,
What Dukes, and Lords, and these Ambassadors
Have even before our face refusd to purchase
As of too high a price to venture on,
Gresham a London Merchant here will buy.
What is it broken small? fill us some wine,
Fuller, yet fuller till the brim or'e-flows,
Here 16000. pound at one clap goes,
In stead of Sugar, Gresham drinks this pearl
Unto his Queen and Mistress: pledge it Lords,
Who ever saw a Merchant brauelier fraught,
In dearer slippers or a richer draught?

L. Ram. You are an honor to all English Merchants
As bountiful as rich, as Charitable
As rich as renowned as any of all.

Gresh. I do not this as prodigal of my wealth,
Rather to show how I esteem that loss
Which cannot be regained, A London Merchant
Thus tread on a kings present: Ieweller,
My Factor shall deliver you your money.
And Lords so please you but to see my School,
Of the seven learned liberal Sciences,
Which I have founded here near Byshops-gate,
I will conduct you. I will make it Lords
An University within it self,
And giu't from my revenues maintenance.
We Are not like those that are not liberal
Till they be dying, what we mean to give,
We will bestow, and see done whilst we live.
Attendance, come, th'ambassadour, guess all,
Your welcom's great, albeit your cheer's but small
Exeunt. Enter Tawnicote with a speed.
Taw. Hard world, when men dig living out of stones,
As wretched miserable I am enforced:
And yet there lives more pity in the earth,
Then in the flint-bosomes of her children,
For she is content to have her aged breast
Mangled with matrocks, rent and torn with spades,
To give her children and their children bread,
When man more flinty then her stonic Ribs
That was their mother, neither by intreates,
Tears, nor complaints will yield them sustinance,
But it is our ages fault the mightier,
Tear living out of us, we out of her.
Enter Hobson in his gown and slippers.
Hob. Mother a me what a thick mist is here:
I walked abrod to take the mornings air,
And I am out of knowledge, bones a me
What Meads, what Enclosures have we here?
How now old Hobson, dote in thine old age?
A fool a threescore, whether will thou wit?
I crossed the water in my gown and slippers,
To see my rents and buildings of the Bancke-side,
And I am slipped clean out of ken, fore-god
A wooll-gathering.

Taw. Either mine eare's deceived,
Or I should know that tongue: it is so indeed,
Each word he speaks makes my torn heart to bleed.

Hob. Ha, ha, I smile at my own foolerie,
Now I remember mine old Granmother
Would talk of Fayries and Hobgoblins,
That would lead milke-maides over hedge and ditch,
Make them milk their M. neighbors kine,
And ten to one this Robin Godfellow,
Tawnicote digges. Has led me up and down the mad man's maze.
I hear some company, for shame all whist,
Sit thee down Hobson a right man, in the mist.

Taw. It Is he alas, when the rough hand of want
Has cast us down, it loades us with mishaps:
I broke my day with him, O had that fatal hour
Broken me heart: and Villain that I was,
Never so much as write in my excuse,
And he for that default has sewed my bill.
And with an execution is come down
To seize my household stuff, imprison me,
And turn my wife and children out of doors.
What shall I fly him? no he is pitiful:
Then with my tears I will importune him:
God save you M. Hobson.

Hob. Hobson, Bones a me,
What voice is that? art thou a man, or friend?
Tell me if thou be that Will of the wispe,
That leadst me this wild Morice: I coniute thee
To leave me to my self.

Tim. O M. Hobson,
As ever you have been a poor man's friend,
Continue still so, Insult not over thy fortunes,

Hob. I am in the mist, what art thou, speak?

Tim. A Debtor of your worships.

Hob. A Debtor of mine, mother of me thou lie,
I know thee not, nor do I know this place:
If thou owe me any thing, pay me with thy love,
And if thou be acquainted in these woods,
Conduct me to some Town, or direct road
That leads to London, and i will here discharge thee
Of debts and duties, and beside impart
Somewhat to cherish thee.

Taw. What should I think?
He knows me, and for fear I should escape him,
He would entice me to the Officers.
O Master Hobson tho not for mine own,
Yet sor my wife and my poor childrens sakes,
If your intent be to imprison me,
Upon my knees I do entreat you spare me:
The goods you trusted me withal, I have not wasted
In royot and excess, but my kind heart,
Seeing my helpelesse neighbors in distress,
By reason of the long and extreme dearth,
Some I relieved, some trusted with my goods,
Whose pouerties not able to repay.
Then bear with me a little, your rich store
Has saved my life and fed a hundredth more.

Hob. Now bones a me another Tawniecote:
What Is thy name Knave?

Taw. John Rouland sir,

Hobson. Bones a me!
I thought as much: art not thou Tawnicote?

Taw. I am the man whom you called Tawniecote.

Hob. And I the Hobson that will pity thee:
Now bones a me, what make thou with a spade?

Taw. This spade alas, it is all the wealth I have,
When my poor wife and children cry for bread,
They still must cry till these have purchased it:
They must go naked till these hardened hands,
When the cold breath of VVinter strikes on them,
Till these have earned it.

Hob. Now alas good soul,
It melts my heart to hear him, and mine eyes
Could weep for company, what earn'st a day?

Taw. Little God knows:
Though I be stirring earelier then the Lark,
And at my labor later then the Lamb,
Toward my wife and childrens maintenance,
I scarsely earne me threepence by the day.

Hob. Alas the while, poor soul I pity them,
And in thy words as in a looking-glass,
I see the toil and travel of the country,
And quiet gain of cities blessedness.
Heavens will for all, and should not we respect it
We were unworthy life: but bones of me,
Do thou think to pay me twenty pound,
And keep thy charge, earning a groat a day?

Taw. God bless my labors, I hope I shall,
I have this quarter by exceeding thrift,
Bare clothing, and spare diet scrap't together
Five shillings in a purse which I lay up,
Toward your worships debt.

Hob. Give it me, somewhat has some savor,
And yet shall I spend that which the poor laborer got?
No God forbid, old Hobson nere will eat,
Rather then surfeit upon poor men's sweat:
Take it again, and by thy children bread.
But soft the mist does break, what town is this?

Taw. Dedford and it like your worship.
Enter Timothy,
Hob. Bones a me, to Detford came I to do charity:
I see it was Gods appointment,
But who comes here, bones a me honest Tim,
It Was said in London you were bound for France,
And I determined to have write by you.

Tim. By yea and nay, M. Hobson it is no untruth, I was bound for France, landed
in France, dispatched some secret business for a sister in France, and from
her have french tokens to deliver to the sister hood, whom I shall first
encounter in England.


Hob. Bones a me Tim, so speedy in your journey,
It seems your business was of much import.

Tim. Verily it was, and it stood chiefly between two women: and as you know
women love to have their business dipatch't.


Hob. Mother a me Tim, I am glad of it,
But how doo's my factor John Gresham in France?

Tim. You gravely may better consider of that then I can discourse, but withal
I pray you think he is a wild youth: there are Tauernes in France, yet I do
not think John Gresham is given to frequent them, and yet I must remember you,
he is a youth, and youth may be drawn to expenses, England's on this side
France, on it, the Sea betwixt him and his Master, but I do not think him
guilty, yet I could say.


Hob. Mother of me, leave of these Parables,
And tell me plainly, is he not a wencher?

Tim. By yea, and by nay sir without Parable, I am no teltale, I have seen him
in company with Madona such a one, or such a one, it becomes not flesh and
blood to reveal: your worship knows he is in France, the Sea betwixt him and
you, and what a young youth in that case is proone unto: your gravity is wise,
I Will not say so much as I saw him drinking with a French Lady, or Less in a
Tavern, because your gravity is wise, but if I had, it had been less then
perhaps you imagine on such a wild youth, as he no question doos deserve.


Hob. Mother of me it is so, In a French Tavern
Kissing the Lady, and the Sea betwixt us:
I am for you M. John: thus in my gown and slippers,
And nightcap and gown i will step over to France,
Here Tawnicote, receive thou my sealed ring,
Bear it to my Factor, bid him by that token
Sort thee out forty pounds worth of such wares
As thou shall think most beneficial:
Thou art a freeman, up with thy Trade again,
I Will raise thee Rouland, if God say Amen.

Taw. I know not how.

Hob. Tut bones a me man peace,
Hobson will do it; Tou owe me but twenty pound,
I Will venture forty more, Timothy here shall be thy witness
To my Factor in this business.
To all our friends in London say, I am gone
Oner to France, I am for your M. John.
Exeunt. Enter John and Curtezan.
Courtez. Sweet youth thou art too young, and yet scarce ripe
To taste the sweetness of my mellowed love.

John. That Is the reason I set thy teeth an edge thus, but thou know I
promised to have about with thee at our last parlay, and I am come to perform
my word, name the weapon.


Curtez. Nothing but kisses, and enticing looks,

John. Then ward your lips well, or you will ha the first venney.
I have no ward but this; my tender Sex
Have not the manly skill to break a thrust:
Oh how I dote on thee! I have tried ere now
The sweatie Spaniard, and the carowsing Dane,
The foggy Dutchman, and the fiery French,
The brisk Italian, and indeed what not:
And yet of all and all, the Englishman
Shall go for me: I yo'are the truest Lovers,
The ab est, last night, and the truest men
That breath beneath the Sun.

John. Why then the Englishman for thy money, God a mercy little rogue, there is
no love lost i will assure thee. I am my Masters Factor, and thou have a
Commodity that I must needs take up, and not en er't into his Cash-booke
neither. Little thinks my master in England, what ware I deal withal here in
France: but since it is offered me at the best hand, i will venture on it though I be
a looser by the bargain.


Cur. I would be private, least the tell-tale air
Whisper our love. I prithee let us in,
To the inner chamber, I am jealous
Of all eyes but mine own to look upon thee,
I would have none to see thee but my self:
In amorous arms to fold thee but my self:
To associate, talk, discourse or dally with thee:
Clip, graspe hands, or kiss thee but my self.

John. Who would not be a Merchant venturer, and lay out for such a fair
return; I shall venture the doubling of my years presently: I think I have
met with a better Commodity then Matches, and my Master cannot say but he
has met with his match: this it is to have the Land and the Sea betwixt me and
my maste, here can I keep my french Revels, and none say so much as blake is
mine eye, preche little pinckany bestow this Jewel a me.


Curtez. This Iewel's a Love: ask my life it is thine:
But this an English factor whom you know
Gave me at his departure out of Rhoane,
And I have vowed to keep it for his sake,
Any thing but this Jewel.

John. But if I could get his Jewel cleanly, and carry it him over at my
return for a token, it were a jest worth laughing at: but and thou will not
give me this Jewel, prithee give me this same chain to were for thy sake.


Curtez. This was another Countrey-mans of yours,
He made me swear to kep't till his return:
Ask me aught else, it is thine.

John. Why then this Ring.

Curtez That you of all the favors that I wear
Could find out nothing but this ring? This ring,
A toy not worth the giving: yet I sooner
Would part with life then this, a dying friend
Bequeathed it at his death: But honey Love
What should thou talk of giving, it is a word
Worn out of use, it sounds not well in French:
A man should still say take, take to his Wench.

John. Then I say take, take this and this, still take heed of me least I show
you a slipperie trick for this, it is the kindest wench in Christendom, but
she will part with nothing:

Shall we have another woing Room?

Curtez. What Rome thou please, dear heart I agree,
Where ere I go, there shall be room for thee.

John. Any then, I may chance to make you wish rather my room then, my
company and you look not the better to it.

They withdraw: Enter at the other end of the Stage, Hobson in his Gown and
slippers.
Hobson. I have slipped over into France, and in my slippers
Given all my friends the slip, to see this Gallant
My man, he that has matched me: bones a me,
The knaue's a Prophet, else it could not be.
He Is not at his Lodging; yet by an English Factor,
A fellow knows not me, I was directed
Unto this house, I Will know what business
The knave has here. Pulsat.
Intrat Puella.
Wench. Whose there? whose at the door? (man?

Hob. Damsel good day, is there not a fellow here an English-Here's an
Englishman, but none of your fellow neither: I hope sir we are not all
fellows at foote-ball.


Hob. Nay bones a me Girl, there is no reason we should he fellows, but prithee
my wench is there not one Jack Gresha here?


Wench No goodman look like a Goose, but there is one M. John Gresham an English
Gentleman here: and you know no manners, you would be caught some.


Hob. Bones a me goodman Master, Master servant,
Old goodman Hobson keeps Gentlemen to his men
Jack turned to M. John, mary sir reverence,
The french maid taught me manners: well I hope
We shall have a sight of the Gentleman.

Wench. As you use your self you may, and you may not.
Exit Ambo. Fact: Curtiz.
John. Thou see this Jewel well becomes mine ear,
This Ring my signger, and this chain mine arm.

Curtez. I Will be thy Jewel at thy lips i will hang,
And as this Ring thy finger compasses,
So shall these arms thy waste: these are but toys,
Let me displace them.
Intrat Puella.
Wench: M. Iobn here is a fellow below would speak with you.

John. With me, what is he?

Wench. A simple Coxecombe, i will call him up to you.

John. Do my sweet Buffamacke: some Carryer or base knave that hangs of my
liberality: I hope it is not pure Tim, come for the second part of my
benevolence:

Admit him in that he may praise our fate,
And see us in our choicest pomp and state.

Wench. Here Is the fellow I told you of sir.
Intrat Hobson.
John. Zoones my Master.

Hob. Sante amen: Man John, a wenchart Knave, rack and manger knave: bones a
me, cannot a snatch and away serve your turn, but you must lie at rack and
manger? Is this the ware you deal with servant John?


John. Chap-mans ware sir.

Hob. Sir, Sir, the dealing with such war belongs not to our Trade: bones
a me knave, a Prentise must not occupy for himself but for his Master, to any
purpose.


John. And he cannot occupy for his Master without the consent of his
Mistress.


Hob. Come you are a knave.

Ioh: Of your own bringing up sir.

Hobs. Besides, thou can not keep open shop here, because thou art a
forrainer, by the laws of the Realm.


Ioh. Not within the liberty: but I hope the suburbs tollerates any man or
woman to occupy for themselves, they may do it in the City too, and they be
naturalized once.


Hobs: I but sir, I Will have none of my English Prentises Frenchefied; bones a
me knave, I Will have thee deal with no such broken Commodities.


Ioh: Your Worship must have such as the Country yields, or none at all. But I
pray ye sir, what is our trade?


Hobs. What say thou knave?

John. That your worship is a Haberdasher of all wares.

Hobs. Bones of me, a Haberdasher of small wares.

Ioh: And that the worst trade in all Christendom, and especially for French
women: If they know a man to be a Haberdasher of small ware, thee'le have no
dealing with him, and therefore and you will have any good Commodities here,
you must change your copy, you never were a traveler: and therefore you know
not what belongs to it; but you do clean mistake this Gentlewoman, and you
take her for a light wench, weigh her in equal balance, and you shall find
her no such woman, no such woman I Will assure you.


Hobs: No, what is she then John?

Ioh: Fore God sir, I would not have you wrong the Gentlewomans repute, for a
world. This Metressa deals for herself and has many sorts of ware at
command, I was now bargaining with her about a certain Country Commodity,
and had not your coming marred the Match, one had gone through for it. And
further should you wrong the Ladies reputation here in France, I Will assure you
they have the law of their sides, but to confirm your good opinion of her,
this is she of whom I took up your Commodity of Matches; be sorry for your
offense, and excuse you to her for shame master.


Hobs: Bones a me knave I cannot speak a word of French.

Ioh. Nor she of English, but all is one; upon her Master, and what you cannot
do in words, perform in dumb signs:
What in your slippers come to take me napping!
I Will give you what you come for instantly,
And on the sudden make you so aghast,
You will be glad to pardon what is past.

Hobs: Madam, I cry you mercy for this wrong
Done to your Ladyship, I did suspect you
For a bad liver, but I see you clear,
For which mistake, I do remain your servant.

Courtez: Gramercie Mounsier.

Hobs: How, would you my gray Mare see? If it like your Ladyship, I came by
water, and neither of Mares back, nor horse back.


Courtez: No, no point parla Francoi.

Hobs: No indeed Lady, my name is not Frauneis, your servant and John Hobson.


Courtez: No point?

Hobs. No points; yes indeed Lady, I have points at my hose, though I go
untrust.


Courtez: No point parla.

Hobs: I have no points in my parlour indeed, but I have a hundred pounds
worth in my shop.

Intrat Ioh: cum alijs Fact.
John. Tush fear not lads, for he knows none of you,
Do but buffe out a little broken French,
And he will never take you to be Englishmen.

Omnes Fact. We Will second the the other, but manage it.

Ioh. Be patient I beseech you Gentlemen,
Though you be officers, appointed here
To search suspected places, as this is
A most notorious filthy bawdie house,
And carry all old rustie Fornicators
Above the age of fifty unto prison,
Yet know, this is an honest Gentleman.

Hobs. A search, and this a bawdie house! why John,
Bones a me knave, How comes this to pass?

1. Fact. Measar man a moy.

Hobs. How, must you have money of me? I Will know wherefore first, by your leaves.


John. Nay Master I would it were but a money matter,
A Cage, or whipping-post, or so, it is worse:
What an old man to chide his Prentise hence,
As if he had some private business,
And then himself get close unto his wench;
Nay whippping's all too good, had you found me so,
There had been work enough, there had been news
For England, and a whole twelve months chiding
Of my good uncle.

2. Fact: Ie vow stre sau Amise.

Hobs. How, must I go to prison for doing amiss?

Ioh. To prison? nay to whipping, I am sorry,
And to my power I will entreat for you: Fie Master, fie.

Hobs. Bones a me John, is not this a Lady?

Ioh. No by my troth Master, such as in the Garden-allies, Ioane's as good as
this French Lady.


Hobs. Is not this Gentlewoman a dealer?
And has she not a good commodity?

Ioh. Yes by my faith sir, I confess both.

Hobs. Has she not ware?

Ioh. She has, and at a reasonable reckoning.

Hobs. And may not then a chapman deal with her?

Ioh. Marry may ye sir, and I Will send news to your wife of your
The cause of your coming to France shall be known, (dealing:
And what second hand commodities you took up
Since your coming, my mistress in England shall know
What utterance you have for your small wates in France:
Pen and ink, I Will set it down in black and white,

Hobs Bones a me John, what John? why honest John?

Ioh. Hearty commendations -- understand -- reverend master Hobson found with a
whore in Roane, -- place, a common bawdie house, -- must be whipped.


Hobs No more good John.

Ioh You have had none yet, -- whipped about the town.

Hobs: Swee honest John, why bones a me knave John.

Io. In witness whereof, all these honest gentlemen ey-witnesses, have set to
their hands, nay my mistress shall know it, that is flat: are there not Wenches
ynow in England, but you must walk over sea in your slippers, and venture
(being not shod) to come into France a wenching, what an old man too! she
shall know what a slipperie trick you would have served her in your slippers
in France.


Hobs: Nay, bones a me John, friends, sweet John all friends;
I do confess tha'st o'reacht thy master.
Ca me, ca thee, conceal this from my wife,
And I Will keep all thy knauerie from thine uncle.

Ioh: Well sir, In hope of amendment, I am content, and yet

Hobs: Nay, bones a me, I Will take you at your word,
Besides I hope these honest Gentlemen
Will save my credit.

Ioh: I Will entreat for you.

Hobs: It Is Logic to me sir, I understand you not.

Ioh: Marry sir they say, if you will walk with them to their lodgings, for my
sake they inuit you to dinner.


Hobs. God a mercy Gentlemen, God a mercy John, but bones a me knave, where
are their lodgings?


Ioh: Hard by, for why do you ask?

Hobs: I hope they will bring me to no more bawdie houses,
I would not be taken napping again for two and one:
But Gentlemen I Will accept of courtesy, and then John
You shall with me to England, we will show France
Our backs. And you will needs deal for your self,
Before your time, you shall do it in England.
Will you walk Gentlemen?

Curtes: Adue Mounsier, and Gresham farewell too,
No more of French love, no more french loss shall do.
Exeunt. Enter sir Thomas Ramsey being Mayor, Sheriff, Sword Bearer. etc.
Sir Tho: Well said my Masters, see all things be ready,
To give her Majesty such entertain
As may grace London, and become the state
Her highness brings along,
VVher's the Queen now?
She comes along the Strand from Sommerset house,
Through Temple-barre, down fleet street, and the cheap,
The North side of the Burse to Bishops gate,
And dines at master Greshams, and appoints
To return on the South side through Corne-hill,
And there when she has viewd the rooms above,
And walks below, she will give name to the Burse.

Sheriff. The streets are fit, and all the Companies
Placed in their liueries against her return.
But my Lord Mayor, shall these ambassadors
This day have audience?

Sir Thom: Admittance if not audience was granted,
See therefore Trumpets, and all kinds of Music
Be plac'ct against her royal interuiew,
The steps with Arras spread where she ascends,
Besides give charge unto the shopkeepers
To make their best shows in the upper rooms,
Because the Queen intends to compass it.

Sheriff. It Is done my Lord.
Trumpets a far off.
Sir Tho: The Queen has dined, the Trumpets sound already,
And give note of her coming, bid the Waits
And Hoboyes to be ready at an instant.
Enter at one door the Queen, Lecester, Sussex, Lords, Gresham; at the other
Cassemer, the French and Florentine Ambassadors, Sir Tho: Ramsey, etc.
Queen. Lester and Sussex, are those the Ambassadors?

Lest. They are dread Sovereign, he that foremost stands,
The Emperors, the second is the French,
The last is the Florentine.

Queen. We will receive them.
Here the Queen entertaines the Ambassadors, and in their several languages
confers with them. Sussex and Lester place the ambassadors,
We at our Court of Greenwich will dilate
Further of these designs, where is Gresham?

Gresh. Your humble subject and servant.

Queen. Our leasu^e now serves to survey your Burse,
A goodly frame, a rare proportion.
This City our great Chamber cannot show us
To add unto our same, a monument
Of greater beauty: Lecester what say thou?

Lecest. That I my Sovereign have not seen the like.

Queen. Sussex nor you?
Enter Hobson.
Suss. Madam not I: This Greshams work of stone,
Will live to him when I am dead and gone.

Hob. God bless thy Grace Queen Besse.

Queen. Friend, what are you?

Hob. Know thou not me Queen? then thou know no
Bones a me Queen, I am Hobson, and old Hobson (body:
By the Stocks, I am sure you know me.

Queen. What is he Lecester, do thou know this fellow?
Gresham or you?

Gresh. May it please your Majesty,
He is a rich substantial Citizen.

Hob. Bones a me woman send to borrow money
Of one you do not know, there is a new trick:
Your Grace sent to me by a Purseuant,
And by a privy Seal to lend your Highness
An hundred pound: I hearing that my Queen
Had need of money, and thinking you had known me,
Would needs upon the bearer, force two hundred:
The Queen should have had three rather then fail,
I by this hand Queen Besse, I am old Hobson
A Haberdasher, and dwelling by the Stocks:
When thou see money with thy Grace is scant,
For twice five hundred pound thou shall not want.

Queen. Upon my bond.

Hob. No, no my Sovereign,
I Will take thine own word without skrip or scrowle.

Queen. Thanks honest Hobson, as I am true maid,
I Will see my self the money back repayd:
Thou without grudging lendest, thy Purse is free,
Honest as plain.

Suss. A true well meaning man I warrant him.

Gresh: Your Majesty promised to give the name
To my new Burse.

Queen. Gresham we will. A Herald and a Trumpet.

Lest. A Herald and a Trumpet.

Queen. Proclaim through every high street of this city,
This place to be no longer called a Burse,
But since the building's stately, fair and strange,
Be it for ever called, the Royal Exchange.
A flourish here. And whilst this voice flies through the city forth-right,
Arise Sir Thomas Gresham now a Knight.
Be our Ambassadors conducted all
Unto their several lodgings: this 23. of January
A thousand, five hundred, and seventy, Elizabeth
Christens this famous work: now to our Court
Of Greenwich; Gresham, thanks for our good cheer:
We to our people, they to us are dear.
Enter Nowell and Lady Ramsie.
La: Ram: What think you of my Husband master Deane,

Now: As of all men, we are mortal, made of clay,
Now healthful, now crasie; now sick, now well;
Now live, now dead, and then to heaven, or hell.

La. Ram: It cheer's my heart, now in his deep of sickness,
He is so charitable, and so well adicted
Unto the poore's relief.

Now: It joys me too:
Great is the number of the rich in show
About the City, but of the charitable,
There are but few.

La. Ram. Amongst these, I hold old Hobson well deserves
To be ranckt equal with the bountiful'st:
He has raised many falling, but especially
One master Rowland, one called Tawnicote:
But now an able Citizen late chosen
A Master of the Hospital.

Now. I know him well,
A good sufficient man, and since he purchased
His Freedom in the City God has blessed
His travail with increase.

La: Ram: I have known old Hobson,
Sit with his neighbor Gunter a good man,
In Christ's Church morn by morn, to watch poor couples
That come there to be married, and to be
Their common fathers, and give them in the Church,
And some few Angels for a dower to boot,
Besides they two are called the common Gossops
To witness at the Funt for poor men's Children,
Nor they refuse that on their help do call,
And to speak truth, they are bountiful to all.
Enter Hobson.
Hobs. Good morrow Master Doctor; my good Lady!
Bones a me woman, thou look sad to day,
Thou have not drunk a cup of sack this morning.

La: Ram. We have been dealing of our charity
This morning, to poor soldiers such as want.

Hobs. Gods blessing of your heart, need must be fed,
Let us that have it give the hungry bread.
Enter Rowland alias Tawnicote.
Taw. Where Is master Hobson?

Hobs. My new elected master of the Hospital,
What hasty news with you?

Taw. Oh sir, the love I bear you makes me charie
Of your good name, your credit's dear to me;
You never were condemned for any thing,
Since I had first acquaintance with your name;
As now you are, you have done a deed this day,
That has from you taken all good thoughts away.

Hobs. Where? bones a me why? speak, why?

Taw. This day, you have pursued the law severely
Against one Timothy, that stole from you
A hundred pound, and he is condemned for it,
And this day he must die.

Hobs. Bones man, it is not so.

Taw. He is by this, half way to Tyburne gone;
The suit was followed in John Greshams name,
How can you then avow you know it not?

Hobs. A horse, a horse, cart-horse, malt horse, anything
To save the knaves life, I protest, I swear
This was the first time that I heard the knave
Has been in any trouble, bones of me,
It Was done without my knowledge.

Taw. Young Gresham in his name pursude his life.

Hob. They are knaves both, a Horse,
A hundred thousand pound cannot make a man:
A hundred shall not hang one by my means:
Men are more worth then money M. Rouland,
Come help me to a horse, the next I meet,
To save the knaue's life galloppes through the street.
Exit Hobson and Tawnicote.
Now. Men are more worth then money, a says true:
It Is said by many but mantain'd by few.

Lady. He is plain and honest, how many great professors
Live in this populous City, that make show
Of greater zeal, yet will not pay so dear
For a transgressors life: but few are found,
To save a man would loose a hundred pound.
Enter Tawincote.
Now. So suddenly returned?

Taw. He rid to fast for me he has been at buffets
With a poor Collier, and upon his horse,
Is without saddle, bridle, boots or spurs,
Gallop't toward S. Gyles.

Now. They will take him for a mad man.

Taw. Als one to him he doo's not stand on bravery
So he may do men good, good deeds excel:
And though but homely done, may be done well:

Lady. Heaven prosper his intent: now M. Doctor,
And M. Rouland, let me crave your companies,
To see my crazy husband, who has made you
One of his executors, and would use your pains
In these extremes of sickness.

Now. I am pleased
I Will give him physic for a soul diseased.
Exeunt. Enter three Lords.
1. You are an early riser, my good Lord,

2 The blood of Youth that trafficks in the court
Must not be sluggish, your kind remembrance: (the train

3 My very good Lord, we that are stars that weight upon
Of such a Cynthia under which we live
Must not be Tarde.

1. You have said true, we are starters in one hour,
And our attendance is to weight one such a Queen,
Whose virtue all the world: but to leave that
Which every tongue is glad to commune with,
Since Monsiers first arrival in the land,
The time that he was here, and the time since,
What royalty has been in Englands Court,
Both princely reuelling, and warlike sport.

2. Such sports do fitly fit our Nation,
That foreign eyes beholding what we are,
May rather seek our peace, then wish our watre.

3. Heaven bless our Soue reign from her foes intent,
The peace we have; is by her government.
Enter Doctor Parry.
1. M. Doctor Parry.

2. Good Morrow M. Doctor.

3. You are an early riser sir.

Doctor. My Lord, my Lord, my very good Lord.

1. This Summer morning makes us covetous
To take the profit of the pleasant air.

Doct. It Is healthful to be stirring in a Morning.

2. It has pleased the Queen to show him many favors.

3. You say but right, and since his last disgrace,
The cause so great it had surely touched his life,
Had not the Queen been gracious: he seems at Court
A man more gracious in our Sovereigns eye
Then greater subjects.

2. She has given him much pteferment,
In greatest place graced him with conference:
Ask't for him in his absence, and indeed
Made known to us he is one in her regard.

3. But did you never here the cause of his disgrace?

3. He did intend the murder of a Gentleman,
One M. Hares here of the Inner Temple,
And so far brought his purpose to effect,
That M. Hare being private in his Chamber,
He watching as he thought fit time, broke in upon him:
But he assaulted so, behau'd himself,
That he did guard himself, and attach't him.
From whence he was committed unto New-gare,
And at the Sessions by twelve honest men,
Found guilty of Burglarie and condemned to die:
And had di'd, had her Grace not pardoned him.

2. She is a gracious Princess unto all,
Many she raises, wishes none should fall.

1. Fie M. Doctor,
Your face bears not the habit it was wont,
And your discourse is altered, what is the matter?

Doct. And if my brow be sad or my face pale,
They do belie my heart, for I am merry.

1. Men being as you are, so great in grace
With such a royal Princess, have no reason.
Enter a Gentleman.
Gent. Room Gentlemen for my L. high Steward.
Enter the Earl of Lecester, all the Lords flock after him, and exeunt. Manet
Parry.
Doct. The discontend desire to be alone,
My wishes are made up, for they are gone.
Here are no blabs but this, and this one clock
I Will keep from going with a double lock:
Yet it will strike, this day it must be done.
What must be done? what must this engine do?
A deed of treason has prepared me too.
These too, these too, why they had life by her,
And shall these two kill their deliverer?
The life that makes me rise? these once my sin
Had forfeited, her mercy pardoned me:
I had been eaten up with worms ere this,
Had not her mercy given a life to this:
And yet these hands if I perform my oath,
Must kill that life, that gave a life to both.
I have taken the Sacrament to do it, confe'rd
With Cardinal Cemo about it, and received
Full absolution from his Holiness,
Been satisfied by many holy fathers,
During my travels both in France and Italy,
The deed is just and meritorious,
And yet I am troubled when I do remember
The excellency of her Majesty,
And I would feign desist, but that I know
How many vows of mine are gone to heaven,
My letters and my promises on earth,
To holy fathers and grave Catholics:
That I would do it for good of Catholics.
Then in the Garden where this day she walks,
Her graces I will cast behind mine eyes,
Enter Genesis And by a subjects hand, a Sovereign dies.

Gent. Clear the way Gentlemen for the Queen:
Master Doctor Parry.
Exit Gent.
Doct. O, let me see a difference in this man!
Before this Queen (that I am come to kill)
Showed me the gracious eye of her respect,
And gave me countenance mong'st greatest Earls:
This man was forwarder to thrust me forth,
Then now he is humble to accept me in.
If then her Grace has honored me so much,
How can this hand give her a treacherous touch?
The Trumpets speak, heaven what shall I do?
Even what hell, and my dam 'd heart shall thrust me too.
Enter Queen, Lecester, and Lords.
Queen. Fair day my Lords, you are all Larkes this morning,
Up with the Sun, you are stirring early.

Lecest. We are all subjects to your Sovereigns light.

Queen. That you call duty we accept as love,
And we do thank you, nay we thank you all;
It Is not to one, but it is in general.

Lest. The Queen would walk apart, forbear my Lords.

Doct. Now, what makes me shake?
Do Angels guard her, or does heaven partake
Her refuge?

Queen. In such a Garden may a Sovereign,
Be taught her loving subjects to maintain;
Each Plant unto his nature and his worth,
Having full cherishing, it springs forth.
VVeedes must be weeded out, yet weeded so,
Till they do hurt, let them a Gods name grow.

Doct. Now Queen.
He offers to shoot.
Queen. Who's there, my kind friend M. Doctor Parry?

Doct. My must dread Sovereign.

Queen. Why do you tremble M. Doctor? have you any suit to us?
Shake not at us, we do our Subjects love,
Or doos thy face show signs of discontent
Through any heavy want oppresses thee?
Though at our Court of Greene-wich thou were crossed
In suing to be Master of Saint Katherines,
To do thee good seek out a better place,
She Will give thee that, the which has given thee grace.

Doct. I know your love dread Queen: Now.

Queen. M. Doctor, about the talk we had together,
Of English Fugitives that seek my life:
You told me of them I am beholding to you.

Doct. I did no more then duty: O happy time!

Queen: And will they still persist? do they desire my blood?
That wake when I should sleep to do them good.

Doct. Madam.

Queen. O my maker! Parry, Villain, Traitor,
What do thou with that Dagge?

Doct. Pardon dread Sovereign.

Queen. Pardon thou villain, shows thou art a Traitor,
Treason my Lords, Treason.
Enter the Lords.
Lest. Ha, by the ble'st place of heaven, treason and we so near?
A Traitor with a Dagge, Gods holy mother.
Lords guard the Queen: are you not frighted Madam?
I Will play the Sergeant to arrest the wretch.

Queen. Be not so rash good Lecester, he is dead already,
Struck with remorce of that he was come to do:
Pray let me speak with him? Say M. Doctor,
Wherein have I deserved an ill of you,
Unless it were an ill in pardoning you.
What have I done toward you to seek my life,
Unless it were in taking you to grace.

Doct. Mercy dread Queen.

Queen. I thank my God, I have mercy to remit
A greater sin, if you repent for it.
Arise.
Lecest. My Lords what do you mean, take hence that villain,
Let her alone, she will pardon him again:
Good Queen we know you are too merciful,
To deal with Traitors of this monstrous kind.
Away with him to the tower, then to death,
A Tratours death, shall such a Traitor have,
That seeks his Sovereigns life that did him save.

Queen. Good Lecester.

Lest. Good Queen you must be ruled.
Exeunt. Enter Jack Gresham.
John. Nay sfoote Jack, hold on thy resolution: they say, that may happen in
one hour that happens not again in 7. year, and I should chance to take her
in the right vain, and she kindly bestow her self upon me, why then there is a
man made from nothing, for before God I have spent all and am not worth any
thing, and indeed unless this same good old Lady Ramsie take some pity upon
me and take me for better for worse, God knows in which of the two Counters I
shall keep my next Christmas in, but by this hand if she will accept of me
in this miserable estate that I am in now, for before God, I have neither money
nor credit, as I am an honest man, and that's more I am feared, then any man
will believe of me, i will forswear all women but her, and will not kiss any of
my neighbors wives for a kingdom. here is the house, I Will knock at the door:
what shall I do it in the Cauellere humor, with whose within there Ho, or in
the Puritan humor, with by your leave good brother: faith in neither, for in
the one I shall be taken for a swaggring knave, and in the other to be an
hypocritical fool: but honest Jack in thine own honest humor plain
dealing's a Jewel, and I have used it so long I am next door to a beggar.

Enter 2: Creditors. But Gods precious, what a plague make these here? these 2.
are two of my Creditors, I must stop their mouths, fleet them from hence, or
all the fats in the fire.


1. M. Gresham, you are well met.

John. I hope Gentlemen you will say so anon. But you are alone, are you not?


2. Alone M. Gresham, why do you ask?

John. A man has reason to ask, being as I am, that never sees his
Creditors, but is a feared of the Catch-pole. But you are kind my friends, and I
thank you, you will bear with me.


1. I but M. Gresham, a man may bear till his back break.

John: I, Porters may; but you, that are sustantiall honest Citizens, there is
no fear to be made of your breaking, you know there is no man solow but God can
raise him; and though I am now out at heels, or so as you think, I am in the
way of preferment, and hope to be able to pay every man within this hour.


1. We should be glad to see it.

2. But how pray Sir?

John. How? why very easily, if I can compass it: The truth is, though you
would little think it, I am a suitor for my L. Ramsey.


1. But I dare swear she is no suter to you.
Enter Lady Ramsie, and D. Nowel.
John. Why that is true too; for if she were a Suter to me, we should be man
and wife straight and you should have your money within this half hour. But
look, look where she comes: as you are good-men mum, patience and pray for
my proceedings: If I do speed as I am partly persuaded, you shall have your own
with the advantage, if I should be crossed you know the worst, forbearance is no
acquitance: but mum, if it prove a match and any of you should chance to be in
the Counter, you know my marriage being spread, my word will be current, then mum.


Now. Madam you are welcome into Lumber-street.

Lady. I thank your courtesy, good M. Deane.

Ioh: See how fortunately all things chance, if it happen as I hope it will, she
taking a liking to me, here is a Priest to marry us presently Madam.


Lady: Would you any business with me sir?

John. Faith Lady necessary business, and not to go far about the bush, I am
come to be a Suter unto you, and you know the fashion of young men when they
come a woing to ancient widows, the way to speed is to begin thus.


La: You are very forward sir.

Ioh: You would say so Lady if you knew how forward I would be: but Madam you
are rich, and by my Troth I am very poor, and I have been as a man should say
stark naught: but he goes far that never turns, and if now I have a desire
to mend and being in so good a way, you know how uncharitable it were in you to
put me out of it, you may make an honest man of me, if it, please you, and
when thou have made me one, by my Troth Mall I Will keep my self, for I am a
Gentle man both by the fathers side and mothers side, and though I have not the
mucke of the world I have a great deal of good Love, and I prithee accept of
it.


Lady. M. Deane.
Do you know this Gentleman's business to me.

Now. Not I, believe me Madam.

John. I shall have her sure: why i will tell you Sir, my Lady here is a comely,
ancient, rich widow, and I am a honest, propper, poor young man, remembering
still I am a Gentleman, now what good her riches may do to her poverty, your
grauetie may guess: save a soul perhaps M. Deane, look you sir, it is but
giving my hand into hers, and hers into mine: M. Deane, I protest before God
she has my heart already, and with some three or four words which I know you
have by rote, make us two my Lady and I, one till death us depart.


Lady. This Gentleman thinks that to be a matter of nothing. But do you love
me as you do protest?


John. Love you Madam love you by this hand: I shall have her sure, friends you
see how the business goes forward, bring me your bills to morrow morning or
upon the hope that I have, you may leave them with me, I shall be able to
discharge; Ha, ha, Jack.


Lady. How will you maintain me Sir, if I should marry you?


John. Maintain, what needst thou ask that question?
Foot thou have maintenance enough for thee and I too.
If I should marry you? Friends, you see how it goes now, to morrow within an
hour after I am married, I must take the upper hand of my Uncle, and the next
Sunday I that was scarce worthy to fit in the Belferie, the Churchwardens
fetch me, and seat me in the Chauncell.


Lady. M. Deane, I protest, never since I was widow,
Never did man make so much love to me.
Sir for your love, I am much beholding to you.

Ioh. Do Mall, prithee do not think it so, be chosen one of the common
Counsel, or one of the Masters of the Hospital, so perhaps I shall never
become it, marry if I should be chosen one of the Masters of Bridewell, for
some of my old acquaintance; fut, I would take it upon me, vice must be
corrected, vice must be corrected.


La: Ram: Fill me a large cup full of Hippocrist,
And bring me hither 20. li. in gold.

John. And one of your husbands Livery Gowns, so now you trouble your self so
much, that gold is to contract us withal: a simple morning: Friends, you
cannot beat me down with your bills. M. Deane of Poules I pray you stay and
dine with me you shall not say me nay, the oftener you come, the more welcome.


Now. You are merry sir. (cause,

John. I thank God, and all the world may see I have no other
That I am likely to be so well bestowed.

Lady. Sir, you shall not say the love you showed to me,
Was entertained but with kind courtesy:
This for your love, unto your health I drink.
Pledge me.

John. I by my Torth Mall will I, wear it as deep as a well.

Lady. Now for your pains there is twenty pound in gold.
Nay, take the Cup too sir, thanks for your love:
And were my thought's bent unto marriage,
I rather would with you that seem thus wild,
Then one that has worse thoughts and seems more mild.

John. Foot will you not have me then?

Lady. Yes, when I mean to marry any one,
And that not whilst I live.

John. See how a man may be deceived: I thought I should have been sure by
this time well, though I shall not have you, I shall have this with a good will.


Lady. Withal my heart, and for the Love you have shown,
Wish it to thrive with you even as mine own.

1. To Morrow shall we attend your worship.

2. Sir here is my bill, it comes to twenty pound.

John. Friends, Ploydens Proverb, The Case is altered and by my troth I have
learned you a Lesson, Forbearance is no Acquittance.


Lady. What men are these?

John. Faith Madam, men that have my hand, though not for my honesty, yet for
the money that I owe them.


Lady. What does he owe you?

1. Fifty pound, Madame.

Lady. What you?

2. A hundred Marks.

Lady. I Will pay you both: and sir to do you good,
To all your Creditors I Will do the like.

John. That Is said like a kind wench,
And though we never meet again,
We will have one Busse more at parting:
And now I faith I have all my wild oats sown,
And if I can grow rich by the help of this,
I Will say I rose by Lady Ramsies kiss.
Exeunt. A peale of Chambers. Enter Queen, Hunsdon, Lecester, Drum, Colors,
and Soldiers.
Queen. A stand there Lords. Whence comes this sound of shot?


Lest. Please it your Majesty, it is thought the Fleet
Lately discovered by your Subject Flemming,
Riding along the Coasts of France and Dunkerke,
Is met and fought with by your Admiral.

Queen. Heaven prosper his proceedings; hark my Lords,
Still it increases: Oh had God and Nature,
Given us proportion man-like to our mind,
VVee'd not stand here senc't in a wall of Arms,
But have been present in these Sea a larmes.

Huns. Your royal resolution, has created
New spirits in your soldiers breasts, and made
Of one man three.
Enter a Post.
Queen. Make way there, what is the news,

Post. Your Royal Fleet bids battle to the Spaniards,
Whose number with the advantage of the wind,
Gives them great odds but the undaunted worth,
And well known valor of your Admiral,
Sir Francis Drake, and Martin Furbisher
Gives us assured hope of victory.

Queen. Where did the royal Nauies first encounter?

Post. From Dover Cliffes we might discern them join,
But such a cloud of smoke inuiron'd them,
We could discover naught of their proceedings:
For the great Spanish Fleet had wind and Tide,
God and good hearts stand on your Graces side.

Queen. There Is for thy news: he that first lent me breath,
Stand in the right of wronged Elizabeth.

Omnes. God and his Angels, for Elizabeth.
Enter another Post.
Queen. VVelcome a Gods name, what is the news my friend,
Alas, good man: his looks speaks for his tongue.
How stands the sea fight.

Post. Much contrarious.
The Spanish Fleet cast in a warlike Rank
Like a half Moon, or to a full bent bow,
Wait for advantage: when amongst the rest
Sir Martin Furbisher blinded with smoke,
And fired in heart with emulating honor,
Gave the proud Spaniard a broad side of shot:
But being within the compass of their danger,
The distant corners of the gripled Fleet
Circled him round: this valiant Furbisher,
With all his brave and gallant followers,
Are foulded in deaths arms.

Queen. If he Surviue,
He shall be nobly ransomed: If he die,
He lives an honor to his Nation.
How fares our Admiral?

Post. Bravely he fights,
Directs with judgment and with heedfull care,
Offends the Foc: England nere bred
Men that at sea fight better managed.

Queen. It cheers my blood and if my God be pleased
For some neclected duty in our self,
To punish us with loss of them at sea,
His will be done: yet will we pray for them.
If they return, our self will be the first
Will bid them welcome: what saves valiant Lecester?
Thou will not leave me will thou? do thou look pale?
What says old Hunsdon? nay i will speak thy part,
Thy hand old Lord, I am sure I have thy heart.

Huns. Both hand and heart.
A noise within crying a Furbisher. Enter a Captain.
Queen. Then let both heart and hand,
Be bravely used in honor of our Land.
Before thou speak take that if he be dead,
A Queen will see his Funeral honored.

Cap. When the foes ships
Had grasp't his ships within a steely girdle,
The valiant Captain ouer-charg'd with her,
Having no room for cowardice or fear,
Gave all his ordinance a gallant charge,
Cheered up his soldiers, manned up his fights,
And standing bare-head, bravely on the deck,
When dangerous shot as thick as April hail
Dropped by his ears, he waued his warlike sword,
And with a bold de fiance to the foe.
The watchword given, his Ordinance let fly
With such a fury, that it broke their ranks,
Shotter'd their sides and made their warlike ships
Like drunkards reele, and tumble side to side:
But to conclude such was the will of heaven,
The true spirit of that Gentleman,
That being thought hopeless to be preserved,
Yet in wars despite and all the Spaniards scoff,
He brought his ship and soldiers bravely off.

Queen. Wars spite indeed, and we to do him right,
The ship he sailde in, fought in, called Wars spite.
Now noble soldiers rouse your hearts like me,
To noble resolution: if any here
There be that love us not, or harbor fear;
We give him libertid to leave our Camp
Without displeasure.
Our Armies royal so be equal our hearts,
For with the meanest here i will spend my blood,
And so to loose it count my only good.
A March, laed on: we will meet the worst can fall,
A maiden Queen will be your General.
They march one way out, at the other door enter Sir Francis Drake with
Colors, and Ensigns taken from the Spaniards. What mean these Spannish
Ensiges in the hands
Of English Subjects?

Drake. Honorable Queen,
They show that Spaniards lives are in the hands
Of Englands Sovereign.

Queen. Englands God be praised
But prithee Drake, for well I kowne thy name,
And i will not be unmindful of thy worth:
Breefly rehearse the danger of the battle,
Till Furbisher was rescued we have heard.

Drake. The danger after that was worse than then:
Valor a both sides strove to rise with honor,
As is a pair of Balance once made even,
So stood the day, inclined to neither side:
Sometimes we yielded, but like a Ram
That makes returnement to redouble strength;
Then forced them yield when our Lord Admiral
Following the chase: Pedro their Admiral,
With many Knights and Captains of account,
Were by his noble deeds taken prisoners,
And under his Conduct are safely kept:
And are by this time landed at S. Margrets:
From whence they mean to march along by land,
And at S. James he will greet your Majesty.
These Spannish Ensigns tokens of our Conquest,
Our Captains took from off their battered ships:
Such as stood out we sunk, such as submitted,
Tasted our English mercy, and mercy
Vassals and prisoners to your Sovereignty.

Quee. Next under God, your valors have the praise:
Dismiss our Camp, and tread a royal March
Toward S. James, where in martial order
We Will meet and parley our Lord Admiral,
And set a ransom of his Prisoners.
As for those Ensigns see them safely kept,
And give commandment to the Deane of Powles,
He not forget in his next learned Sermon,
To celebrate this conquest at Powles Cross:
And to the Audience in our name declare.
Our thanks to heaven in universal Prayer:
For tho our enemies be overthrown,
It Is by the hand of heaven, and not our own.
On: Sound a call; Now loving Countrymen,
Subjects, and fellow soldiers, that have left
Your weeping wives, your goods and children,
And laid your lives upon the edge of death,
For good of England, and Elizabeth,
We thank you all: those that for us would bleed,
Shall find us kind to them and to their seed.
We hear dismiss you and dismiss our Camp.
Again we thank you: pleases God we live,
A greater recompense then thanks we will give.

All. Our lives, and livings for Elizabeth.

Queen. Thanks; general thanks.
Toward London march we to a peaceful throne,
We wish no wars, yet we must guard our own.
Exeunt.
FINIS.

