A SHORT DIALOGVE CONCERNING THE PLAGVES INFECTION.

Published to preserve blood, through the blessing of God.

Psalm. 91. 11. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all
thy ways. Matthew. 4. 7. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. ANCHORA. SPEI.


LONDON, Printed for Richard Boil, and are to be sold at his shop in
Blacke-friers. 1603.

TO HIS VVELBELOVED IN CHRIST, THE PARISHIONERS OF SAINT OLAVES IN Southwarke,
JAMES BAMFORD wishes increase of Grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.
IT is written in the 33. of Ezechiel: That, if the people of the land take a
man of their coasts, and make him their watchman, if when he sees the sword
come upon the land, he blow the trumpet, and warn the people: then he that
hears the sound of the trumpet and will not be warned, if the sword come and
take him away, his blood shall be upon his own head. But if the watchman see
the sword come; and blow not the trumpet, and the people be not warned, if the
sword come, and take any person from among them, he is taken away for his
iniquity, but his blood will I require (says the Lord) at the watchmans hand.
So you (my beloved) have chosen me to be your watchman. Therefore it concerns
me to give, and you to take warning of mortal danger, as we will be free from
bloudguiltinesse. But I have publicly given you warning of that bloody error,
which denies the Pestilence to be contagious: maintained, not only by the
rude multitude, but by too many of the better sort; you are therefore to take
warning. That ye may the rather take heed to the silver trumpet, which has
sou^ded in your ears, I have thought it necessary to set down in writing all
that I have publicly taught, together with whatsoever else, I perceive, by
private conference to be appertaining to that question, that ye may take time,
better to consider that which is either misunderstood, or not well remembered,
because it was but once delivered, and the common sort are not acquainted with,
and therefore hardly capeable of Scholasticall disputations. And yet I
endeavored to speak as plain as I could. But now I have contrived al in the
form of a Dialogue, which is a more familiar manner of teaching; hoping that
now ye will more readily both perceive, and receive the truth herein
contained. I humbly and earnestly desire you (at your leisure) diligently to
examine the quotations: but first to read over the Dialogue it self. If any
desire a more learned discourse, I refer them to that worthy Treatise written
by that reverend father (the light of our age) Master Beza, and translated by
that faithful and profitable servant of Christ, Master Stockwood.
Furthermore, as I desire you to read this Dialogue with good respect: so I
pray you do not think, that I have any purpose to traduce you as maintainers
of error, and gainsayers of your teacher. For howsoever (indeed) I was
occasioned by that I saw and heard amongst our selves, to preach this doctrine,
and have committed it to writing for your special good, yet knowing that
bloody error (which I impugn) to be commonly maintained in London, I thought
it convenient to publish this Dialogue in print, for a more general good. As
for your selves, I am so far from traducing you, that I do (with joyful
thanks to God the father, in the name of Jesus Christ) give you this
testimony; that notwithstanding the judgment of some be not well informed in
this point, yet I have much comfort in my Ministry amongst you: for in sundry
things ye show the obedience of faith. Amongst the rest, ye attend the
Sacrament of Baptism, from which in most places people run away most
contemptuously; Ye frequent Friday Lecture as diligently (ever since the Plague
was kindled) as in winter nights: whereas many in and about London are winter
hearers, attending the word when they have nothing else to do: and ye fill Gods
house upon the days of humiliation, and holy rest, notwithstanding there have
died in our parish from the 7. of May to this day 2640. Whereas before the
Plague our Church was partly filled by strangers, both on Sondayes and
Fridayes. These things I take knowledge of, as to signify, that in this
Dialogue I do not tax you, or any of you, more than other, so, to encourage
you to go forward (and not backward) in your holy profession, serving God, and
sanctifying his Sabboths as religiously hereafter, as ye do now while God is
present with you in this his grievous visitation. For it is a good thing (says
one Apostle) to love earnestly always in a good thing: Gal. 4. 18.
And it is better (says another Apostle) for you not to have taken the way of
righteousness, 2. Pet. 2. 21
than after ye have taken it to forsake it. Therefore (good brethren) take heed
that ye cool not in your devotion, because the number of the buried in our
parish is fallen (blessed be God) from 305. to 51. in one week, and from 57.
to 4. buried in one day. Shall our love cool, when Gods love is kindled? God
forbid. O remember that when Moses lifted up his hands, Exodus 17. 11. 12.
Israel prevailed: but when his hands were heavy Amalech prevailed. And when it
shall please God to remove this heavy judgment, let us never forget this
visitation, according to the doctrine we have learned out of the title of the
38. Psalm. 78. 34. 35. 36. 37. 57.
Psalm. Let us not turn back like a deceitful bow, and let us sin no more,
lest a worse evil come vntovs, according to the saying of Christ himself to a
man delivered from a grievous disease. Conceiving good hope that ye will hide
the words of exhortation in honest and good hearts to bring forth fruit with
patience, I commend me to your favor, my Dialogue to your reading, and your
selves to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build further.
From my study this 13. of October. 1603.

Yours in the Lord assured and ready to do all the service he may, JAMES
BAMFORD.

The Contents of this Dialogue.
1 THE occasion of this Dialogue, and chief points to be discussed. page 2. 2
People must hear well, before they presume to judge their teachers. page 2, 3,
4. 3 Magistrates may and ought to sever the sound from the infected, and the
infected from the sound. page 5, 6, 7, 8. 4 How the poor infected may go
abroad for necessary relief, which otherwise they should want. page 9. 5 The
infected who want no necessary relief should keep in, and they, withal
supposed to come about them, are to forbear the Church for a while. page 10,
11, 12, 13. 6 The Plague may be in a garment. page 13, 14, 15. 7 The Plague may
be taken by fear, whereof we are therefore to take heed. page 15, 16, 17. 8
How Ministers are to visit the sick. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. 9 How the
sick are to be visited by other. page 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. 10 The sick of the
plague are not to desire the unnecessary presence of their friends. page 28,
29, 30. 11 Thronging at the burying of the infected, is to be taken heed of.
page 31, 32, 33. 12 The law of Lepers proves separation between the sound and
the infected. page 3, 34, 35, 36, 37. 13 Great care is to be had of that bloody
error, which denies the Plague to be contagious. page 38, 39, 40. 14 The true
cause and effects of inordinate fear. page 41, 42, 43. 15 Magistrates are to be
resident. page 43, 44. 16 The escaping of some conversant with the infected, is
not a good argument against the infection. page 44. to 59. 17 Causes why some
escape, though conversant with the infected. page 49. to 54. 18 An absolute
faith touching deliverance from the Plague, is not required. page 54. to 57. 19
Why godly men die of the Plague. pa. 57, 58, 59. 20 The Plague is contagious,
notwithstanding there die none but by the special appointmeot of God. page 59,
to 69. 21 Who may fly into the country from the Plague, and with what
cautions. p. 70. to 74. 22 Gods people are to come to Church, notwithstanding
the plagues contagion. page 75, 76, 77. 23 The Plague is contagious, though the
Scripture does not expressly affirm so much. page 78. 24 The contagion of the
plague may be concluded out of the word. page 79. 80. 25 The use which is to be
made of this Dialogue. page 81, 82.
A short Dialogue concerning the Plagues infection.
Professor. SIR, I make bold to trouble you, and to desire your resolution in a
point wherewith I find the minds of many honest men (better acquainted with
the Scriptures than I am) much cumbred and perplexed: I cannot be quiet till I
be resolved; therefore pardon my boldness I pray you.


Preacher. Neighbor, you are very welcome: for I take you to be of that
discretion, that you will not (as many do) trouble your self and others with
frivolous, or curious questions. And therefore if I were as able as willing,
you should not go away unresolved: but you shall have mine opinion with all
faithfulness, and then judge thereof in the sobriety of wisdom. Tell me
then: What is the matter?


Prof. May it please you: We hear your self, and other faithful Preachers in
this City, reprove such as (for the comfort of their souls) come to Church,
either with plague sores, or out of infected houses. As also those, that of
charity visit such as have the plague, and accompany the diseased of that
disease, unto the grave. In all which duties we think (with your favor) that
Preachers should rather encourage then discourage us. Now because I am under
your ministry, and you have publicly willed us to resort to you for
satisfaction, if we either understand not, or approve not any thing by you
delivered: I am bold to come and crave your satisfaction accordingly.


Preach. You do well, and I thank you: for there be too many that run counter
in a contrary course. For whereas they should be swift to hear and slow to
speak, Iam. 1. 19.
they have heavy ears, E^a. 6. 10.
and ready tongues to speak evil of things they know not, 2. Pet. 2. 12
and so scandalize (that is, To. 14. 13.
stumble) themselves and other, in hearing the word, 1. These. 2. 13.
which is to be heard not as the words of men, but as indeed the word of God.
But I pray you tell me, in what sense, and for what reasons have you observed
me and other Preachers to reprove the offenders you speak of?


Prof. Truly Sir, since you put me to it, I must acknowledge mine infirmity:
for as soon as I hear you or other begin to check Piety and Charity, (so
seeming to me) I am presently so troubled, that I cannot understand, much less
rightly remember, what has been delivered.


Preach. If it be so with you, who profess the obedience of faith, how is it
with the rude multitude, whose imaginations are in no good sort brought into
captivity to the obedience of Christ? But we see the words of Christ
fulfilled: Ioh. 8. 43.
That we do not understand his talk, because we cannot hear his word. Me
thinks, professors should attribute so much to their teachers, yea such as
they acknowledge to be faithful, as to hear with the Athenians, Act. 17. 19.
20. 32. 11.
and to examine with the Bereans. For does the law of God judge a man, Ioh. 7.
51.
before it hear him? But truly ye presume too far in censuring your
teachers, as those that check Piety and Charity. What? Is this Piety, with
an high hand to break godly Orders of a gracious Prince set down for
preservation of life? Is this Charity, presumptuously to hazard the lives, God
knows of how many? Is this either Piety or Charity, wilfully to run our
selves into mortal danger?


Prof. I am enforced of conscience to confess it to be a fault, that we have
presumed to censure our teachers, and that so severely, before we well
understood and humbly examined their doctrine: for by our deed we speak that
in Gods ears, which irreligious people, by word uttered to Jeremiah his face,
Ier. 44 16. 17.
viz. The word that thou have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will
not hear it of thee; but we will do whatsoever goes out of our own mouth.
But pardon me, and let me now with your patience entreat you to prove, not by
man's policy, but by Gods word (according to your profession) that Princes may
inhibit, or forbid the works of Piety and Charity.


Preach. Neighbor, you still beg the question, which is the common fallacy
of the common sort, who dote upon whatsoever comes out of their own mouth,
as you said. For it is in question, whether the works you commend, be the
works of Piety and Charity or no. But I will show you by the word of God,
that Princes both may and ought keep from assemblies, such as be no less
dangerous to them, tha^ one scabbed sheep is to an whole flock, and restrain
the whole and sound from unnecessary running into eminent danger. This I will
do upon condition, that you will then show me, what reasons you have to doubt
of so clear a truth, or object against any thing I have said, or shall say,
that I may either satisfy you, or reform mine own judgment.


Prof. If I do not so, my second error will be worse than the former: for then
I should be like them that pretended with protestation to be informed by
Jeremiah, Ier. 42 56. and 43. 2. 3.
but yet obeyed not his voice, when it was against their mind: for the truth
is, the longer we talk, the more I remember what is muttered by the common,
and what objected by the better sort.


Preach. Upon this condition I proceed, yet so, as not intending any large
discourse: for I need not, speaking to a professor; and I would you should
have time enough to propound al your doubts. In one word therefore consider
well this argument: Esa. 4^. 23. 1. Tim. 2. 2
Kings and Queens ought to be nurcing fathers and nurcing mothers to the
Church, so as that Gods people may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all
godliness and honesty. But this is an honest thing before God and men, that
Kings should (out of a fatherly care) preserve their subjects from destruction,
by infection, as well as by the sword. 2. Sam. 24. 17. and 19. 9.
As David was no less careful for his people, when the Pestilence raged, than
valiant in defending them against their enemies. Again, what other thing do
sundry laws and customs of Israel teach us? Leuit. 10. 9 10.
Priests were forbidden to drink wine or strong drink, that they might put
difference between the clean and unclean: Number. 5. 2. 45. 57.
that every leaper and every one that had an issue, and whosoever is defiled by
the dead, should be put out of the host: that garments and houses defiled by
leprosy, Leu. 13 45. 57 and 14.
should be destroyed: Deuteronomy. 23. 12. 13.
that every one to do the work of nature, should go out of the host: Luke 7.
12.
and that the dead were buried out of the city. Ioh. 19 17. 41. Heb. 13. 12.
What (I say) do these laws and customs (well considered) teach us in their
equity, but that Gods people should be carefully preserved from filthiness and
contagion? Let us a little better consider the laws of Lepers, as most nearely
concerning us, and we shall find that they were not only to have marks to be
known by, but also to give warning to company approaching, Leuit. 13. 45.
by saying: I am unclean, I am unclean. Whereby it is evident, that Lepers
should shun other, and other should shun them. And it is as evident, that
they were not to come into the house of God. 2. Chro. 26. 20. 21.
For a King being a Leper, was kept out thereof all the days of his life. Much
more may Moses (a Magistrate) shut Miriam (though his sister) out of the host
for 7. Numb. 12. 10. 14.
days. But the plague is more daungerously contagious being mortal, Ezec. 34.
2. 8.
then the Leprosy which is not mortal: therefore Princes and Magistrates
(which are called sheapheards) may and ought to be very careful, to keep the
sound from the infected, and the infected from the sound, especially in
assemblies. As the sheapheard is careful to keep scabbed sheep from his
flock, and his flock from scabbed sheep. Let this suffice for this time: let
me now hear your doubts.


Prof. As king Agrippa said unto Paul: Almost thou perswadest me to become a
Christian, Act 26. 28.
so I may say, you have almost changed my mind. But yet for my promise sake,
and for further resolution, I will propound certain doubts: and will first
begin with that which I know does most trouble most men, especially of the
poorer sort. To wit, they think it most extreme cruelty, to be barred from
going abroad to seek relief or maintenance for them and theirs, except they
either had sufficient of their own, or their wants were supplied.


Preach. I am of the same mind: for Lepers might go abroad to seek relief:
Luke 17. 12. 13.
but yet in such sort, as has been showed. And so I could wish that our
infected poor, since they must needs go abroad, would remember ye 10. Lepers,
how they stood afar off, and lift up their voice, when they craved help of our
Savior: so they would go abroad in such sort as authority directs: to wit,
out of the most frequented way, and with a rod in their hand. I say with grief
( must needs) for if authority had regarded these things betimes, when there
were but few infected houses, they might have been well shut up and provided
for, till they were cleansed, either of their own, or the common charges. But
what say you to those, who are not so poor, but that they may keep their
houses at their own charges, till they be cleansed?


Profess. They think it an hell to be so long shut up from company and their
business: the neglecting whereof is the decay of their state.


Preach. Indeed this impatiencie is the cause why so many smother the plague in
themselves and their families, so long as they can to the hazarding of life:
but I advise them to consider the resolution of Paul, which was, never to cate
flesh rather then he would offend his brother: 1 Cor. 8. 13
much more ought they patiently to endure a little restraint and loss, rather
then to endanger the life of many. Genesis 4. 10.
O blood is a grievous and crying sin! Psalm. 51. 14.
and therefore David would not drink the water of the well of Beth-lehem
though he longed for it, 2. Sam. 23. 15, 16, 17.
because it was gotten with the ieopardy of lives, but called it blood. Let
them believe that God is able to give them more then they loose by following
his direction. (...) 5.9 (...)
Let them know what this is: I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. Romans 8. 25.
Let them show their faith by patience. For he that believes, makes no have,
Esa. 28. 16. and 30. 15.
being assured of Gods promise: that in quietness and confidence shall be their
strength. Let them imitate Moses and Aaron, Numb. 12: 12, etc.
who were as hasty in behalf of their sister Miriam, but yet were persuaded by
God to shut her out of the host seven days. Thus much for these goers abroad.
But what say you now for those that come to Church, in whose behalf you seemed
much affected at the first.


Profess. I was indeed affected as I seemed: but that which you have said to
goers abroad, belonging for the most part to comers to Church, has stopped
my mouth: and the rather because I remember the King, who was kept from the
Temple, 2. Chro. 26. 20, 21.
whiles he lived, for the Leprosy. Why then (think I) should not the infected
with the Plague be content to forbear for a while, since in the Plague they
usually mend or end in short time?


Preach. God be praised, for now you understand and remember well, I have
therefore the less to say: only this, touching the comfort of soul, which
they desire by coming to Church. I pray them examine what true comfort they
can have, when they consider that they are more dangerous than they who go
abroad. For in the Church they sit by it, and that in a throng and heat:
whereas if they humble themselves under Gods hand, and tarry at home, though
taking it as a part of their cross that they keep so long from the Church; I
doubt not but that they shall find God (who turns his childrens bed in time
of sickness) as a sanctuary to them. Psalm. 41 3.
And this I further say, Ezec. 11. 16.
that he rather is in the assembly of saints, 1. Cor. 5. 4.
who is there in spirit, though absent in body; Esa. 29. 13.
then he that is present in body, but absent in spirit.


Profess. All this (as I understand) concerns such as being infected
themselves, do yet come to Church. But what say you to those who have spacious
houses, so as they come not near the sick of their family, and be sound
themselves: may not they come to Church as well as those, between whom and the
infected there is but a wall?


Preach. They may, as I am persuaded. But all things are not expedient which
are lawful. 1. Cor. 10. 23. 24.
For many too foolishly fearful (another extremity of this time, as general
and dangerous, as Presumption) knowing their houses to be infected, will verily
suppose that they have been about the sick, and that the plague is in their
garments; and therefore if it fall out so that they sit together, their
fearful conceit may breed the Plague.


Profess. O sir, are you of that mind, that the Plague may be in a garment, and
the party not sick; and that one may take the Plague only with fear, and do
you bear with such a conceit?


Preach. No, I do not. But I deem them guilty of their own bane, who take it
with such a conceit. And yet I think every charitable Christian will grieve
at the heart, that he should be the occasion of such a fright, and could wish
that he had rather been from the church a month, especially being in some sort
Gods prisoner, and the affrighted having likelyhoods that either he or his
garment might be infected. That a garment may be infected, and the Plague taken
only by fear, experience and reason do make manifest. Concerning the former,
it has been proved that clothes of infected persons laid up and not well
ayred, being opened though a year or more after, have instantly renewed ye
Plague. Again, we perceive by the smell that garments will retain the sent of
Wormwood or musk for a long time: the cause is not in the sent by it self
considered, but in the air which is the subject of the sent. The plague in a
garment is a poisoned air (being according to the nature thereof called by the
learned the Death of the air) proceeding from the party infected, and
infecting the garment, though not perceived by smell: as the open, clear and
wholesome air of the heavens is healthful for the body, though not perceived
by smell. Lev. 13. 51. and 14. 46. 47
Lastly, leprosy infecteth garments: and he that sleeps or eats in an
house, shut up for leprosy, must wash his clothes: which argues that
infection may be by the air, since a man may eat in the house, and not touch
the walls infected. If Leprosy be so contagious, much more the Plague, which
is a stronger poison, because it infecteth and kills.


Profess. This is more then ever I heard and considered, and I think it
reasonable: but I cannot conceive how the garment can be infected, and yet the
person that wears it escape the Plague.


Preach. I will show you that in a word. Do you not consider that either the
infection may be but weak, or the party of a strong and healthful
constitution. Cinders will not set fuel on fire so soon as burning coals:
neither will green wood be so soon kindled as chips and dry deale-boord.


Profess. I now see and in some sort assent to your opinion: proceed therefore
I pray you to give reasons why by only fear a man may be infected with the
Plague.


Preach. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmities: Pro. 18. 14. and 4.
23.
but a wounded spirit, who can bear it? says Solomon. By spirit here is meant
a comfortable heart, which animateth a man in all troubles: but if that fail,
he is soon overthrown. From the heart proceed (as Physicians say) vital
spirits, whereby man is made active and courageous. If they by fear be
enforced to retire inward, the outward parts be left infirm: as may appear by
the palenesse and trembling of one in great fear, so that as enemies easily
scale the walls of a town abandoned by soldiers: so the Plague (especially
in a season disposed to infection) does find ready passage into the outward
parts of a man, destitute by fear of the vital spirits which should correct
ye same. Mat. 9. 22. and 13. 58.
Again, as faith makes us partakers of Gods helping hand, so unbelief
depriueth us thereof: Pro. 10. 24.
and fear (adversary to faith) pulls to the wicked the evil which he
fears.


Profess. By this conference I have learned to fear more then I have done, and
yet to take heed of fear: to fear because the plague may be carried about in
garments, and therefore may infect me, keeping company with one that is
co^uersant with the infected, I being peradventure not of so strong a
constitution as the party. To take heed of fear, lest I be guilty of mine
own bane.


Preach. Your collection is good, especially if you remember the distinction of
fear in that sense which I have often taught it: to wit, Fear is contrary
either to Security, Phil. 2. 12. 13.
and so it may be called Heedfulnesse, or to Faith, and so it is cousin germain
to Despair. Mar. 4. 40.
But hoping that now you see our doctrine against unruly and uncharitable going
abroad of the infected, either in person or garments, not to be a check to
Piety and Charity, I pray you tell me, what you can say for unnecessary and
desperate running to the sick and buried of the Plague?


Profess. What? I tell you (be it without offense) that many marvel (I will
not say, cry out) that Preachers, who should be examples of love and faith in
visiting the sick according to their office, 1. Tim. 4. 12.
do yet so flatly speak against the express words of Christ. For does not he
say: Mat. 25. 36, 43.
That we shall be judged at the last day, according to our works of charity,
and amongst the rest, our visiting, or not visiting the sick?


Preach. O neighbor you now lay on load! I must therefore ease (a little) the
shoulders of Preachers whom you charge heavily, for not visiting the sick of
the Plague; before I can nimbly encounter your maine objection. Surely ye
Professors, who so urge this pretended duty, are far from the loving care
and kindness of the Israelites, who would not suffer David to hazard himself
in battle, 2. Sam 18. 3. and. 21. 17.
lest if he, being worth ten thousand of them, were slain, and the light of
Israel should be put out. Again, ye forget that Christ said to him that
desired to bury his father: Mat. 8. 21. 22.
Follow thou me, let the dead bury their dead. If ye did consider this well,
you could not but think, that as Paul said, 1. Cor. 1. 17
Christ sent me not to baptize but to preach: so Preachers may say: Christ has
sent us not to visit the sick, but to preach, and thereupon conclude; that
the less duty (if a duty) especially being dangerous, must give place to
the greater, and the visiting of a few sick and less capable of instruction,
must give place to the teaching of the whole congregation, and more capable of
doctrine and comfort. Now if they visit every one that is sick, how can they
attend unto reading, and follow Christ in the most proper and necessary work
of the ministry? 1. Tim. 4. 13. 15. 16. Luke 10. 42
Lastly, I see not (but herein I humbly submit mine opinion to the Church) that
visiting the sick is a proper duty of a Minister, as he is a Minister. For as
none can ordain officers in the Church but Christ, Ephesians. 4. 8. 11 Mat. 28. 18.
19.
so none (as I am persuaded) can prescribe duties to those officers, 1. Cor.
12. 5. 8.
but Christ. But I cannot find where Christ prescribes visiting of the sick,
as a Ministers duty. If not Christ, why should any surcharge Ministers, and
the rather because they are not (no not the best) sufficient for duties
prescribed? 2. Cor. 2. 16 Act. 6. 1. 2. 3. 4.
Did not the Apostles pronounce it an unmeet thing to be hindered from giving
themselves continually to prayer, and to the ministration of the word, by
ministering to the poor, and therefore put over that duty to special men? If
the Apostles extraordinarily assisted, by the Spirit, both with gifts and
blessing, cast off an impertinent burden (yea such an one as is no less
necessary then visiting.) Alas, why should Ministers, who need all helps (as
much reading, diligent conference, and frequent meditation,) be further charged
than they are by Christ? Indeed I confess that a Minister ought (as you said)
to be an example of all good works, Esa 50. 4.
especially of that as being the fittest man to satisfy the doubtful
conscience, to humble the stubburne heart, and to comfort the wounded spirit.


Profess. I never heard this matter doubted of before. But (I pray you Sir)
does not James say: Iam. 5. 14.
Is any sick among you, let him call for the Elders of the Church? Does he not
understand Ministers by Elders? If so, does not this place prove plainly, that
it is a Ministers duty to visit the sick?


Preach. I say not but that it is a Ministers duty to visit the sick, for
example sake: and as he is more able to do good than other, but not as he is
Minister. I grant also, that long since the same doctrine from this place has
been gathered, which you now apprehend. So as upon the same, Papists have
grounded their bastard Sacrament of Extreme unction. Ioh. 7. 49. Ier. 44. 16.
17.
Which taken away, the cursed people (which know not the law) neither care to
know it (being ever addicted to superstitious vanities) must needs (forsooth)
in stead thereof, have a Minister to visit their sick, though they be more
then half dead. As in stead of Dirgies and Trentals, they must have funeral
Sermons for fashion sake. Thus the holy Ministry, and most glorious name of
God must be abused and taken in vain, by following the vain humor of
arrogant Folly, which never cared for Ministers, or Sermons (as al ought to
have done) in time of health. I grant that some Professors (for all this
Plague, whereby humors (I trow) should be mortified) have a mind, that
funeral Sermons attend their credit. So strong a temptation is the Pride of
life encouraged by Custom. But to come to the point: this place of James does
not prove, yt it is the proper duty of a Minister to visit the sick. For the
Elders were sent for to heal the sick by prayer and oil, according to that
miraculous grace which was then bestowed upon them, Mar. 6. 13.
for confirmation of the Word: so that I am of your mind, that teaching Elders
be here understood. Which gift discontinuing, this Canon is annulled: so that
in time of Pestilence, it is absurdly concluded: that because James enjoined
Ministers to go to heal the sick, therefore Ministers must upon every call
adventure their lives, by visiting the sick of the plague. Again, if it be the
proper duty of Ministers to visit the sick, as it was the proper gift of
Elders, for confirmation of the word, to heal with oil, then none must visit
the sick but Ministers, Heb. 5. 4. 2. Chor. 26. 16. 17. 18. 19.
as none must minister the Sacraments (which properly belong to their function)
but they. Lastly, this word, Elders in the plural number, puts me in mind,
that Ministers were in the primitive Church, assisted with other Elders, 1.
Tim. 5. 17. Act. 6. 2. 3. Romans 12. 7. 8.
(for there were two sorts of Elders) who looked to the manners of people, and
with Deacons who looked to the poor, that they themselves might attend their
study, prayer, preaching, and the Sacraments. Why then should we think, that
visiting the sick, was laid upon them as a duty properly pertaining to their
ministry? But rather that Elders by spiritual comfort, and Deacons by
outward relief visited the sick as there was need: so that the Minister was
not troubled but in extraordinary necessity. As when none but he could
satisfy the despairefull conscience, or mind doubtful in a fundamental
error, of one likely (otherwise) to die out of the faith. In which case, I
think a Minister ought to hazard his life. My reason is: It is the reueiled
will of God that he must save a lost sheep: Ezec. 34. 2. 4.
but it is Gods secret, whether he shall be infected. And the rather because of
the promise made to him that walks in his way. Psalm. 91. 10. 11.
The premises considered touching ordinary visitation, thus I conclude, that
as Ministers are exemplarily (but not as Ministers) to relieve the poor,
according to their ability, and where they have some special calling: so they
are exemplarily (but not as Ministers) to visit the sick, according to their
leisure, and where they have some special calling.


Profess. I know not whether I should be glad or sad, for drawing from you so
probable, and (it may be) a profitable discourse: but I will suspend my
judgment, since you submit your opinion to the censure of the Church, and
proceed (with your favor) to require the justifying of that uncharitable
doctrine (so seeming) against visiting the sick of the Plague, and so
contrary to Christ his judgment, as has been showed. Page 17.



Preach. But have you showed that the plague is expressed? And have you never
heard, that there be few rules so general, but they admit some exception? By
the same judgment prisoners are to be visited, and yet none were bound in
conscience to go into the dungeon there personally to visit Jeremy, Ier. 38. 6.
though he were the Lords prophet. Again, you utterly mistake the point: for
the question is not whether the sick of the Plague are to be visited; which God
forbid that any Preacher should gainesay: but whether they are to be so visited
and with such resort, as other sick of diseases not contagious. Lastly, in the
place so much urged, Christ does not necessarily require personal visitation
(though that also be comfortable in cases convenient, and so required
accordingly) but real, that is, by relief, either brought, Mat. 25. 44.
sent or procured: for in the 44. verse of that chapter you may find,
Ministering to Christ used, for all other works of Charity before specified.
Whereby it is manifest, that Christ requires not so much personal visiting,
as charitable ministering to the necessity of the sick. Of all other, Princes
and Magistrates (who are foster-fathers and shepherds) are to visit the
sick. But who will say they are to do it in person, and not rather by a
faithful care, that the sick of the Plague be well provided for.


Profess. But how can the sick be well provided for, if none do personally
attend them? and if none be bound in conscience personally to visit, how shall
they be attended?


Preach. All this is true. But husbands and wives, parents and children,
masters and servants, near neighbors and dear friends, are mutually to attend
each other: if otherwise convenient attendance cannot be procured.


Profess. Why do you add this condition?


Preach. Because life is precious: 2. Kin. 1. 14. Deuter. 22. 6, 7, 8.
so that we must not destroy the dam with the young: and therefore seeing the
plague sweepeth where it finds many together, life ought to be preserved with
as much care as may be, by separating the sound from the infected, except there
be necessary cause of the sound, or some of their attendance or repair.
Moreover, it may be that the sound, or some of the^, be profitable members in
the Church, or common wealth: now the more hope there is of good by them, the
more care there ought to be of their preservation; according to the peoples
care for the safety of David, before spoken of.


Profess. In my conscience this seems to be very true: but I pray you tell me
what you think of them who send their servants unto the Pesthouse.


Preach. Right well: especially if they want convenient room and other means at
home: for I understand of the Cities right honorable and christian provision
for that house: I know diverse there well used, and thence well returned: and it
is extant in print, that when there were buried in and about London 3385. in
one week, yet of all pestred in that house there were buried but six. And
therefore I condemn those that raised a slander upon that house, holding them
as despisers of government, Iud. 8.
and wicked ill speakers of them that are in authority.


Prof. If you conuersed amongst people as I do, and must do, I know your spirit
would be griued to see how ready they be to lay hold on every light occasion
and false report, to speak their wicked pleasure of Governors. O that they
would consider the example you lately in a Sermon urged of a plague kindled
amongst the Israelites, Numb. 16. 41. 46.
for charging Moses and Aaron with killing Corah and his rebellious accomplices.
Well, God amend us all, and give us grace to humble our selves under this his
heavy hand, that we may be raised again and comforted, Psalm. 90. 15.
according to the days he has afflicted us. Now I speak of comfort (that we
may go on with the main matter) I would know (if it might be without offense)
whether you would have those pitiful creatures that are tormented with the
plague, to want the comfort, which they may take by the very presence of their
good neighbors and friends, much more by their comfortable words?


Preach. O neighbor! I wish them all true comfort of body and mind, the Lord
knows, and I grant that the very presence of those we love, is very
comfortable in time of sickness: but yet I advise all visited with that deadly
and contagious disease, to manifest their mortification from unnecessary
desires, and their charitable love to their friends, by not desiring them to
come into far greater danger than their presence can do good, without
necessary cause. 2. Sam. 23. 15, 16, 17.
And let them remember how David refused that water which was gotten with
ieopardie of life, and called it blood, though he had longed for it, and the
danger was past. As for comfortable words, I likewise acknowledge their
special use: but before I answer that point, let us consider how needful it
is (especially in time of mortality) to hide in their hearts the word of life,
lest we be justly punished with want of comfortable words, when we most need
them: according to that of Amos, Amos. 8. 5. 11, 12.
where a famine of the word is threatened to despisers of the Sabbath, and that
at such a time, when to find the word, they would run from the East to the
West. Now to the point. Since all sickness (especially the plague, until the
worst be past, when comfortable words are not usually in great request) makes
us unfit for long and learned discourses, and therefore short sentences may
(through Gods blessing) do much good: whereby attendants and friends, repairing
for necessary causes, may sufficiently comfort the afflicted, according to that
which is required by the Apostle, in These. 4. 18. except there be
extraordinary need of resolution or consolation, whereof I have spoken before.
Ioh. 14. 26.
Again, the Spirit of God is called a Comforter, because he brings the words
of Christ unto remembrance: and that especially in time of need, as when we
justify wisdom before authority, Luke 12. 12.
so when we are sick. For when the outward man perishes, 2. Cor. 4. 16
the inward man is renewed: so that we often hear, not only men but even
children also, speak divinely and admirably in their sickness. We may the
rather make account of this holy assistance, if we follow Christ his counsel in
laying up his words in our hearts, Luke 21. 14. and 11. 13.
and praying for the holy Ghost. All the premises constdered, I hope that you
are now of my mind, touching the restraint, as of the infected from the sound,
so of the sound from the infected.


Profess. Indeed I confess that your probable discourses have won (I know not
how) a certain inclination to your opinion, but yet I must suspend my
resolution, till you have answered certain objections against the maine grounds
of your opinion: but before I come to them, let me have but one word with you
about burial. I say but one word: for if those that are infected in person or
garment, are to keep from Church for a time convenient: and if friends are to
forbear resorting to friends sick of the Plague, except they have necessary
cause, then I may (of my felfe) conclude, that we are not to throng after
infected corpses (which have no good thereby) without some reasonable cause.
That one word (I spoke of) is this, I would gladly know (if I may obtain that
favor) your judgment, concerning the direction of authority, that but six
persons, besides the Minister, Clerk and bearers, should accompany infected
corpses.


Preach. I dare not presume to judge of the determinations of authority
without sufficient reason, which I want in this case: but rather I am persuaded
(according to that I am commanded by these words, Honor thy father and mother)
Ex. 20. 12.
to indge the best, and take it as an argument, that authority cares more for
the living then for the dead, their pomp so dangerous in these times and not
necessary, as wise men think. But mine own opinion is this I could wish ye
friends of the diseased would respect the preservation of life more than
complements of burial. But I utterly mislike that infected persons should
thrust into the throng, and it grieueth me to hear how the poorer sort, yea
women with young children, will flock to burials, and (which is worse) stand
(of purpose) over open graves, where sundry are buried together, that
(forsooth) all the world may see that they fear not the Plague. This perverse
course of too too many, in doing that which authority forbids, and despising
that which authority commands, to wit, fasting and prayer, occasioneth me to
observe a notable proportion between ye plague and the wickedness of this time:
by which proportion, God seems to teach men to say in their hearts, we would
not be ruled, neither by reason nor authority, therefore are so many, as it
were distracted in their sickness, and by no means to be ruled: so that some
leap out of the windows, and some run into ye Thames. As the rough speeches
of Joseph caused his brethren to say: Genesis 42. 7. 21.
As we would not hear Joseph, so this man will not hear us. I rather observe
this proportion between the unruliness of our sin, and the unruliness of
this sickness, because I find in the Scriptures, that the Plague was
especially threatened against, and inflicted upon wilful offenders. At your
leisure consider these places. Leuit. 26. 23, 24, 25. Number. 14. 37. and 16. 41,
45, 46. 2. Sam. 24. 1, 2, 3, 4, 15. and you will perceive as much. But now let
me hear one of your objections against the grounds of mine opinion.


Prof. The ground whereon you build your opinion, of separating the sound from
the infected, is the law of Lepers. Which (under your correction) seems to be
no rock, but a sand, because that law was merely ceremonial.


Prea. Nay Sir, my ground is the mortal contagion of the Pestilence, which we
call the Plague. Indeed I receive confirmation from the law of Lepers. For thus
I reason: If such care is to be had of infection which is not mortal, much
more of ye Plagues infection which is mortal. And this argument holds good,
your objection notwithstanding. For the laws of separating women in time of
their flowers, Leuit. 15. 24. and 17. 18 15.
and not eating strangled beasts, were ceremonial: but yet husbands are now to
forbear the act of matrimony in that time, and all are to take heed how they
eat of strangled flesh, and both are to be heeded in natural consideration of
bodily hurt, which is still to be feared, in such copulation and eating. So
Leprosy is still infectiue, as experience shows: if now, why not then,
notwithstanding the law of Lepers was ceremonial? And the rather because in
Sacraments and ceremonies, there must be a resemblauce between the sign and
the thing signified: so that, as we object against Transsubstantiation, and
say: If the substance of bread and wine be taken away by consecration, how can
there be bodily nourishment? if no nourishment, how can our spiritual feeding
be resembled? So I say to you, If in the Leprosy there were no infection, how
could the contagion of sin be signified?


Prof. I grant that in Leprosy there was somewhat to signify a sin to be
shunned. But that was Pollution, not Infection. For upon occasion of this
question, Leuit. 14. and 15.
I have read both the Chapters concerning Leprosy, and find them still mention
Uncleanness, and never Infection. Again, if the Leprosy were infectiue, how
chanced it that the Priests, who so often viewed the Lepers, were never
infected?


Preach. Do not you consider, that though all uncleanness be not infectiue,
yet all infection is unclean, and therefore you might have understood
Infection as well as any other Pollution, by the word Uncleanness. And though
you find not the very word Infection, yet you may find enough to make it
evident, that the Leprosy is infectiue. Leuit. 13. 8 51.
For it was not to be pronounced Leprosy, except it were found spreading and
fretting as a Canker, 2. Tim. 2. 16. 17.
or Gangrene in a man's body. And why was the Leper to cover his lips, and to
to cry, Leu. 13. 45.
I am unclean, I am unclean, but to give warning, that none should come within
the infection of his breath? As for the Priests escape, that is to be
attributed to the providence of God, who set him on work. Ier. 1. 18, 19 Act.
18 9, 10.
As he promised to preserve Jeremy and Paul for that cause.


Prof. If my memory fail me not, I have heard you say, that the ceassing of
Man, Ios. 5. 11. 12
presently after the children of Israel had eaten of the corn of the land of
promise, teaches us not to depend upon extraordinary means (viz. Miracles
and such like) when we may enjoy ordinary. So I think it may be said, we are
not to suppose the extraordinary providence of God, in preserving Priests
viewing the Lepers, where we may find an ordinary, to wit, their not touching
of Lepers, whereby they might be defiled.


Preach. How find you that to be the cause? Since you find not in both your
Chapters Touching spoken of. Leu. 15. 5: 7, 19, 21.
Whereas in the next Chapter you find Pollution communicated by touching and
not otherwise in the uncleanness of a man by flux of seed, and of a woman by
issue of flowers. Nay in this case of of Leprosy, Verse. 14. 37 46.
a man is become unclean, by going into an house shut up for Leprosy in the
walls, which he need not to touch, as has been said. Page 14.
So that if you consider your two Chapters well, it may rather appear to you,
that as the infection of the Plague, so of the Leprosy was communicated by the
air, and not only by touching. But suppose that Pollution not Infection, were
the cause that clean men should shun unclean Lepers, lest they should be
defiled, not infected; yet this makes for my purpose. For if. Pollution be to
be shunned, much more Infection, and that deadly.


Profess. I see I must either depart not fully satisfied, or come to a point
which I have hitherto avoided, because I would not offend you, whom I have heard
so carnest against it, so as you have pronounced it to be a bloody error, to
wit, It is stiffely maintained by no small number of people, that the Plague is
not contagious.


Preach. I grant that mo than a good many do more stiffely than wisely
maintain that bloody error, so I will call it again and again. For most of
that many do wilfully maintain that opinion, because they cannot abide to be
Gods prisoners. It is a death to be out of company, and they had rather
endanger a thousand lives, than want any part of their pleasure or profit. As
may appear by the discoured course of many, who hold the Plague to be
infectiue, while they and theirs be well: but when they or theirs be infected;
the^ (forsooth) the Plague is not infectiue. So their reason follows and is
framed to their will, and not their will follows reason to be ruled thereby.
But me thinks every reasonable man should say to his own soul: O let me be
sure mine opinion touching the ininfection of the Plague (whether negative or
affirmative) be undoubtedly true, lest by maintaining an error, in a case and
time of so great mortality and unspeakable miseries, I do infinite hurt. For
if it be true that the Plague is contagious, then of necessity, he that
maintains the contrary, is guilty of the blood of so many, as are
encouraged by his opinion to run into danger. On the other side, if the
Plague be not contagious, then he that maintains the contrary, is guilty of
all the wants and miseries of so many as want convenient relief, not ministered
for fear of contagion, apprehended by the maintenance of his opinion. But
neighbor, I wonder that any should deny the Plague to be contagious against so
general and woeful experience. Do not the botches, blains and spots (called
Gods tokens) accompanied with rauing and death, argue a stranger infection,
then that of the Leprosy, to be judged by botches and spots? Does not the
ordinary experience of laying live Pigeons to plague sores, and taking them
presently dead away, and that one after another, demonstrate mortal infection?
In that the Plague rages and reigns especially amongst the younger sort, and
such as do not greatly regard clean and sweet keeping, and where many are
pestred together in alleyes or houses: is not this an argument of infection?
Thousands can directly tell, where, when, and of whom they took the Plague.
Does not all this make it more then manifest, that the Plague is contagious?
All Magistrates, all Divines, all Physicians, all learned men, and all wise
men, in all ages, have held the Plague to be contagious. Dare any but blind
bayard, be so impudent to deny it, without such reasons, as may sway against so
great experience, and so great authority? If you have any such, I pray you let
me hear them.


Profess. That I have any such I cannot say, in regard of the weakness of
myiudgment, as also of the probability (at least) of that I have heard already
spoken to the contrary: but such as they be (if it please you) I will bring
them out, humbly desiring your answers. The first, is thus urged with open
mouth: This opinion of infection does utterly overthrow charity toward the
visited by the plague, being the cause, why they by whose means the sick and
sound are especially to be provided for, do run away, viz. Magistrates,
Ministers, (such I mean as indeed were never faithful, for (blessed be God)
many faithful remain) Physicians and rich men: and why so many be thrust out
of doors, perish in town and field for want of help, and are so cruelly used
by country people: so that it is a very countermaund to Christ his judgment
concerning visitation of the sick. Page 24, 25, 26. 27. Page 7, 8, and 34.
But by that which has bin said, and by gathering from the last point we
talked of, that the precise commandment touching Lepers to be separated from
Church and company, was no hinderance to their visitation, but that they were
to be ministered unto, according to their need: I am for my part induced to lay
the blame of all this uncharitable dealing upon the excessive fear of people,
occasioned perhaps, but not well grounded upon the opinion of the Plagues
infection: for though the Plague be to be feared, because of the infection, yet
(as I take it) not so excessiuely and inordinatly. For of such fear, the cause
is want of faith, rather then the opinion of infection; as I may partly gather
from that which you delivered before: Page 16.
I will therefore propound an argument (so deemed) which we have not yet
handled.


Preach. Stay here a while, for I can not but thank God that you judge so
rightly between mine opinion, and others fear of infection. If Professors
would wisely observe what is taught, there would not be so many spiders to suck
rank poison out of sound doctrine. Then might we hold the plague in the nature
thereof to be contagious, and men would not take occasion before it be given,
of excessive and inordinate fear: then might we inuey against excessive and
inordinate fear, and men would not take occasion before it be given, of
inordinate and dangerous presumption: but foolish men (as wise men observe) are
ever running into extremities. Romans 3. 28.
If Paul teach, that we are justified by faith, without the works of the law;
the carnal gospeller takes occasion before it be given, to neglect good
works. And if James teach, Iam 2. 26.
that faith without works is dead, the arrogant Papist takes occasion before
it be given, to advance good works to merit and supererogation. Mine heart
bleedeth to hear of the cruelty and inhumanitie you mentioned: so that if I
were in the country, I would (by Gods grace) set my self against those
damnable effects of inordinate fear, and make it evident that the Plague is
not so contagious as excessive fear makes it to be. But now I follow this
course (which God bless) because I live where the contrary sin of
Presumption is more general, and more dangerous; both because of that bloody
error, as also of the absence of Magistrates, who should see good orders put
in execution: through which default it is come to pass, that men, women and
children with running sores, go commonly abroad, and thrust themselves into
company, so that some have perceived when they took the infection of such. How
many may be supposed to have taken the infection from such, though they
perceived it not? I would be loath to make Magistrates neglecting their charge,
guilty of all this blood: but (if I were in place) I would humbly and
earnestly entreat them, seriously to consider the nine first verses of the 21.
of Deuteronomy, where they may learn, how fearful they (of all other) should
be of bloud-guiltines. But leaving them to Gods direction, I pray you propound
your argument so deemed.


Profess. That I will, and (as near as I can) in such sort as it is enforced.
If the Plague be contagious, why is not one infected as well as another? I have
lain in bed with many that have had the plaguesores running on them, I have
been still about them, when they swet, their sores brake, and breath went out
of their bodies, and yet I (and a great number besides me, who have done as
much) had never the plague yet, and trust neuershal, so long as I have a strong
faith in God: for is it not written, Pal. 91. 5, 6, 7, 9.
Thou shall not be afraid of the pestilence, for thousands shall fall besides
thee, yet it shall not come near thee; for thou have said, The Lord is my hope.


Preacher. This aduenturous argument stands upon two points, viz. first the
escaping of some, and secondly their strong faith. Concerning the former, I
answer, (in the name of the opponent) Is thine eye evil because God is good?
Mat. 20. 15.
Will thou by thy bloody error poison other, because God has glorified his
special providence over thee? Is this thy thankfulness for so great
deliverance, to obscure Gods providence by attributing thine escape to this,
that the plague is not infectiue? Consider better the very text alleged for
thy strong faith, and you may (if you will) see clearly, that God does hereby
set forth his providence, in that he preserves those that trust in him, and
walk in his ways, by Angels, and then, when by the pestilence, thousands fall
about them: for the greater the danger is, the greater is Gods providence in
delivering his people: as may further appear by their walking upon Lions, Psa
91. 13. 14
Aspes and Dragons, mentioned in the same Psalm. Therefore take heed how you
obscure the providence of God, and draw many into danger by denying the plague
to be contagious; lest as he that feared not the day of the Lord, Amos 5. 18.
19.
met with a Bear when he had escaped a Lion: so you meet with a judgment
heavier to you, though you still escape the plague. But neighbor, I will turn
my speech to you, praying you to consider this Psalm well, and you shall see me
prove from the same the Plague to be contagious. For if an extraordinary
providence of God be manifested in preserving those that believe from
pestilence, then is the pestilence very dangerous: as be the Lion, Aspe and
Dragon, but the former is true, therefore the latter. If then the pestilence be
dangerous to one that is in the midst of thousands dying thereof, it must
needs be so by contagion: as may further appear, in that it is called
noisome; and in that it is said, Psalm. 91. 3, 7
it shall not come near thee. But let us try the strength of the former part
of that huge argument, laid down in this form. Many have been with the sick
of the plague, when they swet, etc. and yet are not infected, therefore it is
not contagious. Certain Priests said to a Philosopher, All these monuments
which you see in this Temple, be in remembrance of so many delivered from
shipwreck, by prayer to the God of this Temple. But (quoth the Philosopher)
can you show me how many prayed, and yet perished? As the Philosophers answer
was stronger against their God. then the Priests observation was for their God:
so it makes much more to prove the plague to be contagious, to say: an hundred
(if not a thousand) infected by being where the plague is, may be brought for
one that escaped. Again, if that argument be good, then these be as good: Many
have had the plague sores and were sick, and yet died not; therefore the plague
is not in it own nature mortal. Many run upon the mouth of a canon, and
escape, therefore canon shot is not murdering.


Profess. We see the canon shot to kill, but we see not the Plague to infect.


Preach. By common experience it is observed, that souring of drink, and other
effects follow thunder, whereunto they are attributed: and children take the
small pockes coming where they be: though it be not seen how thunder and
being where small pocks are, cause such effects. Why then should we not fear
as well the pestilence that walks in darkness, as the plague that destroys at
noone day: since by common experience it is observed, that thousands fall sick
of the plague presently upon their being where it is, though it be not seen
how ye infectio^ is conveyed. Truly the common people herein do little differ
from brute beasts: in that (for the most part) they are moved by sense, and not
by reason.


Prof. I fear it is so in too many: for going amongst the^, I hardly perceive
one of ten once look for help, though they have a rising of the plague in some
part of their body until they be heart sick, and then often they seek for help
too late. Whereas if in reason they would consider, that as the plague may be
some good time in the garment, before it infect the outward parts, so it may be
in the flesh a good while, before it strike the very heart, no doubt they would
betime prevent the worst. Through which default I am persuaded hundreds do
perish daily: but commending such to Gods gracious providence. I pray you tell
me what causes are given by the learned, why so many escape, though they be
continually in so great danger of the Plague, Page 44.
as has been said.


Preach. There be causes both natural and divine. For natural causes I
refer you to learned Physicians. Only I will show you somewhat, which every
reasonable man (as I think) may conceive. Before any quality, good or bad,
can qualify any subject, the subject must be first disposed thereunto, or
capable thereof. The Salamander lives in the fire, though the fly, playing
with the flame of a candle is consumed therewith. Gun powder takes fire
presently, but so does not chalk. So persons of a tender constitution, or
corrupt humors sooner take the Plague, then those that be of a strong
constitution, and sound bodies, as has been said: Page 15.
and some infected are much fuller of poisonfull corruption then other. The
infirmities of many women in travel, and other diseases turn unto the Plague.
We see few ancient people die in comparison of children, and the younger sort.
Lastly of those that keep a good diet, have clean and sweet keeping, live in
a good air, use reasonable and seasonable preservatives, and be not pestred
many in one house, or have convenient house-roome for their household, we see
few infected in comparison of those, that fail in all these good means of
preservation, and yet will thrust themselves into danger. This well considered,
may not an argument be drawn from hence, to prove (even by reason) that the
Plague is not so infectiue as faithless people conceive, and therefore they
need not fear the Plague so extremely as they do? But I will proceed to the
divine causes or reasons. The chief whereof is this: God works al things
after the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1. 11. Romans 9. 13 15.
and therefore he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, Icr. 15. 2. Ioh. 7.
30.
and none shall die but they who are appointed. For though the Pharisees sought
to lay hands on Christ, yet they could not, before the appointed time came: and
therefore be ye Plague never so contagious in it own nature, none can be
smitten with it, but those, whom God has specially appointed.


Profess. Here I remember an opinion of some people (with whom I converse)
whereby they seem to themselves, to reconcile the difference, touching the
Plagues infection; and that is this. Let one (say they) go never so
daungerously where the Plague is, he cannot die before his time, and yet indeed
he may take the sickness. What think you of this opinion?


Preach. What think I of it? as I do of other opinions which brain-sicke men
(despising the word of God, and ministry thereof) do forge in their own
fantastical braine-pans. How witty soever it seem to them, I tell you it
sauoureth strongly of Epicurisme. For does God dispose of capital and
principal, and not of less matters, as Epicures dream? Shall we say: Psalm.
68. 20.
The issues of death belong to the Lord, and shall we doubt with the
Philistims, 1. Sam. 6. 9.
whether sickness be by chance? If they knew the Scriptures they might
learn, Luc. 12. 6. Mat. 10. 29
that God forgets not sparrowes, but so regards them, that without him,
not one of them falls to the ground. Doubtless Gods providence is the same,
though not alike manifest, in little and great matters.


Profess. The more I confer with you, the more I perceive (I thank God for
it) the presumptuous wit of foolish men, and herein I see evidently, that they
measure the infinite providence of God, by the shallowness of their own
capacity. The Lord grant us grace to understand according to sobriety. Romans
12, 3.
I have another argument against the opinion of infection from the providence
of God, but I would first hear some mo causes or reasons, why so many escape
so great danger of infection.


Preach. Neighbor you still harp upon, so many, so many. I tell you they be
few or nonein comparison of them, who daily are infected by being within
danger of the Plague. As for your desire to hear mo causes, I am content to
satisfy the same. But I must first tell you, that he is happy who can know the
causes of things, to the end you may content your self with those few I can
presently gather out of the word. God preserves some to manifest his power and
providence. As may appear by the 91. Page 45 46
Psalm before discussed: and by Esa. 1. 9 (2) God will take none hence before
they have done him all that service, which in his counsel was appointed, as
appears by these places, Luke 13. 31, 32, 33, and Act. 13. 36. (3) God
reserueth some for an heavier judgment, as may appear by these places: 1.
King. 19. 17. 2. King. 8. 10, 15. Amos 5. 16, 17. And 4, toward some he
perfourmeth his promise in preserving them, in their ways: that is, ways
whereinto God calls the^: according to the 91. Psalm, verse. 11. For which
cause Priests, though taking often view of Leprosy, were preserved, Page 36.
as I showed before, and keepers, buriers, and such as have necessary cause of
coming to the infected of the Plague, are (for the most part) now preserved So
that Peter may boldly go on the water when Christ bids him come. As you may
read, Mat. 14. 28, 29.


Profess. I thank you heartily for yielding me this satisfaction. For amongst
all your good notes I take hold of the second with some comfort, and thereon
ground this conclusion: If I shall not die, before I have done God all the
service I am appointed: why should I be unwilling to die, when my time is come,
and not rather be prepared to say, yea sing with good old Simeon: Luke 2, 29.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace. But I miss one principal
cause of preservation from the Plague: to wit, A strong faith according to the
91. Psalm.


Preach. I thought verily you would not let go your hold on that part of the
mighty argument. But I assure you there is no such force in it, as it seems
to have. Nay rather it overthrows the former part of that argument. For in
that Psalm, the promise of preservation is not made only, to our taking hold
of Gods promise, but also to our walking in our ways. Wherefore as that faith
which stands upon the precept (which is employed) to walk in our ways, and
forgets (as it were) the promise of help, sauoureth of distrust in God. So
that faith which takes hold of the promise, neglecting the precept, sauoureth
of presumption, and therefore having no promise (with comfortable assurance)
cannot hope for preservation. Again, though faith do equally respect both the
promise and the precept, yet since all temporal blessings are promised, not
absolutely but conditionally, so far as the performance of them shall be to
the glory of God, and good of the believer, as I will prove if need require, it
cannot be otherwise assured of preservation, then with respect to those
conditions. If without such respect it be absolutely assured, the^ it is not
faith, but presumption. Except you will have it to be a miraculous faith, which
takes hold of the will of God instantly and by inspiration reueiled. But that
faith lives and dies with miracles, because (I say again) it has no
promise. For howsoever salvation be absolutely promised to believers, because
it is revealed that the performance of that promise is for Gods most glory and
the believers best good, and is therefore absolutely to be believed: yet
because it is not revealed at any time, that then the performance of a
temporal promise, is for Gods most glory and the believers best good:
therefore a temporal promise, is in the nature thereof, conditional, and
accordingly to be believed. Lastly, do you not perceive that the stronger faith
is required, Luke 22. 31, 32.
the greater danger is supposed. But if the plague be not contagious, what
danger is there? if no danger, what need of faith?


Profess. There is no need you should prove your conditions: for they stand
with all reason, Pro. 16 4.
since God has made all things for his own sake, and promises deliverance for
his glory sake, Pal. 50. 15, and 34. 10.
and his promises pretend the good of his people. But yet it will not out of my
mind, but that godly men who die in this plague, do therefore die because they
fail in faith: I mean not touching their salvation, but touching the
particular promise of preservation from the plague. Therefore I pray you for my
better instruction, show me how by the death of godly men dying of the plague,
and believing the promises both of eternal salvation and temporal
preservation, God may have glory and the deceased benefit.


Preach. I grant that a right godly man may fail, as in obedience to the
precept of keeping his ways, by presumption: so in faith to the promise of
preservation, by fear, especially when he hears nothing but crying of wives
and children, mourning of husbands and parents, sorrowing of friends and
kinsfolk, and withal sees the plague weekly to increase from tens to
hundreds, from hundreds to thousands, and to draw nearer and nearer to
himself, and that God in visiting him may justly take hold of this fear: for
Peter walked on the water for a while, Mat. 14. 29. 30.
but when he saw a mighty wind, he was afraid and began to sink. But this
position, A godly man dying of the plague failed in faith, touching promised
preservation, I hold to be as unsound as this: All godly men dying before their
days be long, failed in honoring their father and mother. But I will show you
in a word how the death of godly men dying of the plague, and in the absolute
faith of eternal salvation, and conditional faith of temporal preservation,
may be to Gods glory and the believers good: for by the death of the
faithful, God glorifieth his justice and wisdom. His justice amongst the
wicked, Luke 23. 31.
in giving them cause to say, If God spare not the green tree, what will
become fo the dry? His wisdom amongst the godly, least they should say, For
our righteousness we are delivered. Deuteronomy. 9. 4.
As for the good of the believer, I marvel that you should forget that which
is so often taught in funeral sermons, that as the wicked are reserved for a
further mischief, so the righteous is taken away from the evil to come: Esa.
57. 1. Rcu. 14. 13. Luke 16. 25.
besides, that he rests in glory from mo and greater labors, then the wicked
are commonly subject unto.


Profess. God help us, for our own conceived errors will hardly out of our
minds, but we easily forget that which may reform our judgment. Well,
acknowledging that you have fully answered my first argument, I proceed to
another, grounded on the providence of God, in this sort. If God shoot his
arrows at a certain mark, and not at randon, if none die before his hour:
and if those that are appointed to die, shall die, and those that are appointed
to perish by sword or famine, shall so perish, and none other, Page 51.
as you proved eue^ now; otherwise I had those proofs ready for this purpose:
then if I go where the plague is a thousand times, I shall not die of the
plague, if God have not appointed me to die thereof: and if he have, I shall die
thereof though I come not near it by a thousand miles.


Preach. How now neighbor, stay you there, shall we have no conclusion? All
this is granted: but what infer you hereupon touching our question?


Profess. Trust me sir you pose me now. I have shot the bolt which many deem
to be a kill cow. But indeed I know not to what purpose.


Preach. Then may you see what kind of reasoners heady people be: even such as
are blamed by God for darkning the counsel of God with words without
knowledge. Job. 37. 2.
But to use the words of Paul, 1. Cor. 4. 19.
if God will, I will know, not the words of them that are puffed up, but the
power. To bring this about, understand that upon that ground of Gods
providence, you must of necessity frame one of these two arguments, if you will
reason to the purpose: None can die of the plague but such as are specially
appointed thereunto, therefore the plague is not contagious: or this: None can
die, etc. but such etc. therefore we may as boldly resort to them that are sick
of the plague, as to those that are sick of any other disease. Which of these
co^clusions do you like better? or do you like both? or will you make some
other that may serve your turn better?


Profess. If neither of these will serve the turn, I cannot imagine any other:
for my dull wit could not so distinctly have gathered these. I see that
learning is a good help to judgment: for the very framing of these in this
several sort (which I never heard before) makes me stagger. For the former
conclusion seems now to be absurd: for (as I now conceive) by the same
reason, the bloody sword in a furious battle, and extreme famine amongst a
multitude of miserable poor people, may be concluded to be in their own
nature without danger of death: for in the same chapter of Jeremy (now so much
urged) it is as well said, Ier. 15. 2.
Such as are for the sword to the sword, and such as are for the famine to the
famine, as Such as are appointed to death unto death. As for the second
conclusion, if the plague be contagious, I see not how it holds good. But yet
I pray you to say somewhat to it, that I may the better satisfy my self and
other, as occasion shall serve.


Preach. Certain Anabaptists of Amsterdam, crossing the seas usually without
any weapons, were demanded why they did so, considering the Dunkirkers were
then abroad? They answered, If God have determined that we shall fall into
their hands, we shall not escape though we had all the guns and weapons in the
world: if God have determined otherwise, we shall escape though we have no
weapons, nor any show of defensive provision. Another being sick of the
plague, and advised to take some physic, denies so to do, using the same
argument. What think you of these conclusions?


Profess. If the only setting down of your former conclusions, did make me
stagger, the laying of these by them (and that in so goodly proportion) must
needs make me stumble: for now I see not, but that we may as well hold it
unnecessary to eat and drink, though it be for a year together, if God have
determined that we shall live so long.


Preach. There is great difference in the cases propounded by me, and that
propounded by you. For it is impossible to live a year without meat and
drink, except God work a miracle: but the Anabaptists might happily escape
the Dunkirkers by not meeting with them: and there may be in a man, though in
outward appearance dangerously sick of the plague, yet some secret power of
nature to prevail against the disease.


Profess. All this may be; And yet because the Anabaptist, and sick man do not
know that God has determined such a miss, and granted such a power, they
both presume (in mine opinion) as well as he, that refuses meat and drink:
because they neglect lawful means, the one of defense, the other of recovery.


Preach. Now have you hit upon the very point. For God, who is only wise, has
in his counsel determined the means as well as the event. Which appears, as
in the case of eternal salvation, wherein we see, that God calls all them to
faith, whom he Rom 8. 29. 30. Act. 13. 48. Ioh. 6. 37. 44. Math. 13. 11. 15.
Jude 4.
predestined to life: and contrariwise, he leaves them in their reprobate
minds, whom he has ordained to condemnation: so in cases of temporal
deliverances. For though God granted Hezekiah recovery, 2. Kin. 20. 5. 7.
yet he prescribed a plaster for his sore. And though Paul was assured by an
Angel, Act. 27. 22. 23. 24. 31.
that not one in ship with him should be lost: yet, if they had used any other
means of preservation, then God had determined, they could not be safe. And
howsoever Christ could not die before his hour (as has been said) yet his
life was preserved till that hour by shunning danger. Deuteronomy. 2. 26. 30.
On the other side: as God had determined to give Sihon and his land unto the
Israelites, so he made his heart obstinate to refuse peace, the only mean of
his preservation.


Profess. I perceive your meaning; namely, from all these instances to
conclude, that as God has determined to infect any with the plague unto death,
or otherwise, so has he determined, by what means they should be infected: I
grant all this. But do you think that taking infection one from another is
the only mean?


Preach. No: For there must of necessity be (a First) that is infected, and we
see the godly as well as the wicked, and not only young and poor folk, but
ancient and wealthy persons: yea, such as dwell in a good air, and avoid
infection with all care, to have the plague as well as other: for otherwise how
were it a calamity, or a judgment? And yet many of them (I doubt not) are
infected by being in company of some other infected, in person, or garment,
though they do not perceive it many days after, for causes given before. Page
49.
But to answer your question more fully: I will tell you, what I think
further: To wit. As God himself brings some to their destruction, by working
upon, and by the spiritual corruption he finds in their souls, as Pharaoh
and Sihon, Exo. 4. 21. Deu. 1. 30. Genesis 3. 1. etc. 2. Chro. 10. 14. 15.
but many more by outward means, as our first parents and Rehoboam: so he
himself infecteth some, by turning the natural or accidental corruption he
finds in their bodies into the plague, but (according to his providence) he
visits many more, by the mean of taking infection one from another. But
howsoever God strikes whom he will unmodiatly, yet the Plague being contagious
in it own nature, it cannot be denied, but that one man may be infected by
another, except Gods providence be to the contrary? Now because that cannot be
known, but by the event, therefore as the Anabaptist, sick and hungry men
presume (in your opinion) when they neglect the means of their defense,
recovery and feeding: so he that does not keep himself from the danger of
infection, except he have a necessary calling, does by such neglecting his own
safety, presume on Gods providence. For (to confirm you in your opinion) it is
written: Deu. 29. 29
That secret things belong to God, and reueiled things belong to us. So that I
may conclude, that since the providence of God touching life or death is secret
before the event, and it is revealed, that the Plague is contagious: therefore
it follows, that howsoever it be true that none can die of the Plague, but
such as are specially appointed thereunto, yet there ought not to be that bold
and free resort to them, that are sick of the plague, as to those that are
sick of any other disease. To confirm this point further, thus I argue: A
wanton or unnecessary putting of God to the manifestation of his power or
special providence, is a tempting of the Almighty: as may appear by these
places, Psalm. 78. 18. 19. Esa. 7. 12. Math. 4. 6. 7. But to run into danger
of the plague without necessary cause, as they do, who resort as boldly and
freely to them that are sick of the plague, as to those that are sick of any
other disease, is wantonly and unnecessarily to put God to manifest his power
and special providence in preserving them from the Plague: therefore to run
into danger of the plague without necessary cause, as they do, who resort as
boldly, etc. is a tempting of the Almighty. The assumption or second
proposition I prove by the fourth of Matthew, verse, 6. 7. where Satan would
have persuaded Christ to cast himself down from a pinnacle of the Temple, upon
this presumption, that the Angels had charge to preserve him, being the Son
of God. Where it is to be noted, that Christ does not take knowledge of Satan
his abusing the Psalm 91. by him alleged, in putting in these words, At any
time, for these, In all thy ways: but alleges another Scripture forbidding
us to tempt the Lord our God. Whereby it is evident, that to presume upon Gods
protection, when we are not in our ways, or to neglect means (as the stairs
of the pinnacle were) is to tempt the Almighty, and that without necessary
cause: to run into danger, as Satan would have had Christ to have done, is to
be out of our ways, therefore to run into danger of the plague, without a
necessary cause, is to tempt the Almighty. Thus you see, that from the
providence of God, you cannot conclude, that either the plague is not
contagious, or we need not shun it more than other diseases. Indeed upon that
ground, he that has a necessary cause of resort where the plague is, may thus
argue: It is the revealed will of God, that I am in my way, and therefore have
a promise of preservation, if it shall be to Gods glory, and my good, and it is
not revealed, that I shall be infected, therefore I may proceed with hope and
comfort. I say more from the providence of God manifested, the believer ought
in every affliction, to conclude thus: Howsoever I used means as David did to
prevent this affliction, 2 Samuel 12. 22, 23.
yet perceiving by the event that God has decreed it, I will (by his grace)
take it patiently as David also did. Thus for your satisfaction I have said
that which I think sufficient to the second conclusion. But yet if you have
any thing to reply, or any other argument to object against the infection of
the Plague, I would not have you (in any case) to hold it in.


Prof. If I staggered and stumbled before, how is it likely that I should be
able to reencounter now in this skirmish? I am therefore to seek supply from
another objection, which if you overthrow I must yield: for I remember no more.
But before I assault you with that, perceiving by your discourse, that shunning
the plague is the cause of preservation, as being within the danger thereof is
the cause of infection, I pray your judgment touching flying into the country
for fear of infectio^: which some justify, Pro. 22 3.
by these words of Solomon: The prudent man sees the Plague, and hides
himself. Other say this place is misconstrued, yea some preach against Flying
into the country because of the plague.


Preach. If you had said, a cause, in stead of, the cause, you had more rightly
reported my mind: for I have delivered sundry causes or means of Infection and
Preservation. Amongst the rest, I think, going, and abiding in the country,
to be an excellent mean (in it self) of preservation. But that this mean may
be sanctified to them that use it, let it be considered, Who may take the
benefit thereof, and How it is to be used. I think that they whose residence
is not necessary, may take the benefit of going into the country, as well as a
man, who has a large house, may remove from one side infected, to another not
infected. But let us further examine this point by considering those 4. sorts
of people who^ you taxed for running away, Page 41.
viz. Magistrates, Ministers, Physicians, and rich men. As for Magistrates and
Ministers, I think they should be resident: Page 43. 44.
the one for reasons I gave before: the other for reasons no less evident. For
when will they offer to God the supplications of his people for help and
health, if not now, when their misery is so great? When will they comfort the
afflicted, if not now, when there be so many woeful husbands and wives, parents
and children, friends and kinsfolks? When will they prevail against sin
with the word of exhortation, if not now, when men are humbled with the
punishment of sin? And when will they do good by preparing men to patience,
and teaching them to make good use of affliction, if not now, when (every
hour) they look to come to the trial of their faith and wisdom in Christ
Jesus? I will say no more, since Christ has said enough, when he sets it
down, Ioh. 10. 12.
as a property of an hireling to leave the sheep when he sees the Wolf
coming. As for Physicians, I only propound this question: Whether they be
bound in conscience to be resident, in regard of their profession, and ability
to do good, or they may use their liberty to shift for themselves, and (as they
think) for their lives, in regard they are no public persons, and live (not
by a common stipend, but) by what they can get. But howsoever this question be
answered, I dare say thus much, That a Physician, who may do much more good
than a keeper, has as great interest in Gods promise and providence. There
remains Rich men to be considered, under which name I understand also such as
are able to provide for themselves abroad. I think they may go and abide in
the country, since the good they can do (as they be rich men) is to relieve the
sick and needy: which they may do well enough, without their residence, if
they were so well minded. To which purpose I spoke somewhat before. Page 25.
But though they may be non resident, yet they must not use their liberty, 1.
Pet. 2. 16.
as a cloak of their naughtines, and therefore let them consider: how, or with
what cautions, they are to use that benefit. The cautions be two: One
concerning Fear. The other concerning Love. Psalm. 84. 2. 10. and 137. 5. 6.
Amos. 6. 6. To. 12. 15. Psalm. 137. 1. 2. 3.
Their fear must be neither excessive, one argument whereof is, their
carelessness to provide for their souls, so they shift for their bodies, nor
too little, which appears when they forget miserable Jerusalem, and give
themselves to pleasure. Out of their Love, they are to mourn with, and pray
for their distressed brethren, Heb. 13. 3.
as if they themselves were in their case: they are to be no less liberal in
releeuing their afflicted neighbors, 2. Cor. 8. 7. 8.
then they should be, by order from authority or otherwise, if they were
resident, and they are to have a special care, that their servants whom they
leave behind, 1. Tim. 5. 8.
may be well governed while they be in health, and well provided for, if they
fall sick. If they fly, not respecting these, or like cautions, or good
considerations, Preachers (as you say) reprove them justly. Otherwise I dare
say they do not.


Prof. Indeed your cautions make me remember, that they speak much what to
that purpose. But Sir, I cannot let you pass without saying somewhat to that
place, concerning Hiding our selves from the plague: and the rather because
some excuse their not coming to Church thereby. Therefore I eftsoons crave
your judgment touching the same.


Preach. Will you let nothing pass? Well. That I may encourage you to seek
resolution, and not (as many do) build opinions upon so vain imaginations, I
am, and will be willing to satisfy you as I may. The truth is, many abuse that
place to justify their inordinate fear, taking hold of the words Plague and
Hide. Amongst other, they who will not come to Church because of the Plague: of
whom I would demand these questions: Whether they think that because of the
Plague, the Lords day should, by warrant of Gods word, cease to be sanctified
by an holy assembly? If not, but that rather special days of public
humiliation and prayer, are to be ordained and kept, during the visitation:
then what dispensation have they to be away from holy assemblies, more then
other? Again, if the promise of protection belong to such, as frequent holy
assemblies in time of this visitation, as to those that trust in God and walk
in their ways: and if God can strike them with the Plague, as well tarying at
home, as coming to Church, what grief will it be to their conscience (if God
do strike them) to consider that they have failed in faith, forsaken their
ways, and are found in their sin? Touching the place, whereunto you would
have me say somewhat, thus I understand it. The word Plague does signify a
stripe, or stroke, and therefore not only the Pestilence, but every punishment
for sin is meant thereby. Hiding is put for Preserving, 2. Chro. 22. 11.
as Ioash was, by hiding preserved from murder. But it is to be considered,
from what a prudent man hides or preserves himself. In a Plague two things
are to be avoided. The wrath of God, and the punishment it self. That men may
take heed of inordinate fear, let them know that a prudent man hides not
himself, or obtains preservation from the former, otherwise then by Prayer
and Fasting, Faith and Repentance. For we cannot hide our selves from God,
Psalm. 139. 7. etc.
who is infinite, but by God himself. That is: as the woman appealed from King
Philip sleeping, to King Philip awakened, so a prudent man hides himself from
Gods wrath, under Gods mercy, Eccl. 2. 21.
which is as great as himself. As we may learn by these sayings of David: In
the time of trouble the Lord shall hide me in his Tabernacle. Psalm. 27. 5. and
36. 7.
And: How excellent is thy mercy, o God, therefore the children of men trust
under the shadow of thy wings. As the prudent man hides himself from the
punishment it self, he uses, and may use lawful means, temporal, as well
as spiritual. And therefore a prudent man may use lawful means of
preservation as well from the Pestilence, as from other less Plagues, or
strokes of Gods anger: and by consequence, if shunning infection be a mean to
preserve, as being within danger is a mean to infect, then a prudent man may
fly out of the City infected, into the country not infected: provided his
residence be not necessary, and he observe cautions convenient, as I said
before. Page 73.
This is mine opinion touching flying into the country for fear of Infection,
and that place concerning hiding our selves from the Plague. Now let me hear
your last objection, if you remember no more.


Profess. I have troubled you so long, that I trow it is high time to come out
with my last objection, and yet (I tell you) it is deemed none of the least:
for it seems to be against all reason, that the Plague should be infectiue,
seeing it is spoken of in the Scriptures so often, and yet in no place is said
to be infectiue.


Preach. Howsoever that seems, I am sure this is against all reason, to make
the Bible a book of physic: or to conclude thus, the Scriptures do not in
any place say that ye plague is infectiue, therefore it is not infectiue. It may
be as well concluded thus: the Scriptures do not in any place say that the
French disease comes by whoredom, therefore it comes not by whoredom, and
by consequence whoredom is not to be feared for that cause. I observe with
grief the humor of most to be this, if they have a mind to any sinful
pleasure, unlawful profit, or erroneous opinion, the^ they stoutly demand:
What express Scripture have you against it? Contrariwise, if they have no mind
to any holy duty, then they must know where scripture does expressly command
it. But neighbor, tell me, do you not think that baptizing of infants is
lawful, since it may be justified by sound conclusions from the word, though in
all the new Testament, there is neither precept for, nor example of baptizing
infants?


Prof. No doubt of it. But can you prove the plague to be infectiue by
conclusions? If you can, for Gods sake let me hear some, and then I will
believe, through Gods grace, and inform others as well as I can.


Preach. What need you be so earnest for proof out of the scripture, since I
gave you before an argument out of the 91. Page 46*
Psalm, which may be sufficient to prove a point, wherein the scriptures seem
to be so silent. But that I may give you contentment (if I can) at our parting,
I will show you some other Scriptures which speak to this purpose. In the 14.
of Ezechiel, verse 21. God names four principal judgments appointed to
destroy, viz. the sword, famine, noisome beasts, and pestilence: where note,
that (without question) three of them be fit means in their nature to destroy
many: why not ye pestilence? Consider further, that God does not threaten to
destroy by dogs, bulls or such like creatures; but by noisome beasts, such as
should destroy not to satisfy hunger, but to make havoc: as may appear by
ye destruction of three and forty children, 2. Kin. 2. 24.
only by two Bears: so in that God does not kill by the burning ague,
consumption, or any other disease, when he means to destroy many, but by the
pestilence (which also is called Neisome in ye 91. Psalm, verse. 3.) it is to
be gathered, that the Pestilence is a destroyer by infection: and the rather,
because God says in the 26. of Leuiticus, verse 25. When ye are gathered in
your cities to escape the sword, I will send the Pestilence amongst you. Why
should the Pestilence be more noisome when people are thrust together, then
when they be severed, but that it is co^tagious? Lastly, in ye 24. of the Acts,
ver. 5. Paul is called a Pestilent fellow, or (according to ye original)
Pestilence it self. And why? Because as the Pestilence is contagious, so was
he accused to be by sedition and heresy. Does it not now appear unto you by
the scriptures, that the plague is contagious?


Profess. It does, I confess it freely, and thank God that I had the grace to
come to you for resolution, beseeching his heavenly Majesty for Christ his
sake, not to charge me with that blood whereof I may be guilty, by encouraging
my self and other, unnecessarily to run into danger, in maintaining that
bloody error, as you rightly call the denying of the plagues infection: which
error I will never defend again whiles I live, but will hereafter (by Gods
grace) take heed* as well of headie presumption, as inordinate fear.


Preach. I also thank God with you, in the name of Christ, for this blessing
of our conference: but neighbor, I must put you in mind, and charge you with
your promise, to inform others. For it may be that people, howsoever (for the
most part) they learn corrupt opinions one from another, sooner then sound
doctrine from the godly and learned Ministers, yet they may conceive this truth
better by your familiar talking with them, then by my manner of teaching. As
children learn sooner to speak by prattling one with another, then by hearing
the discourses of their parents. Therefore as Christ said to Peter, When thou
art converted, strengthen thy brethren: Luke 22. 32.
so I eftsoons require you, that being reformed in judgment your self, you
will wisely and zealously endeavor to reform the judgment of other in an error
of so great danger. And withal I desire you, that if you meet with any argument
against the plagues infection, or for unrestrained repair to the infected,
that is worth the answering, let me know it, and I promise you either humbly to
yield to ye truth, or clearly to answer it when God shall be pleased that we
meet again. In the mean while let us pray that God would sanctify this
grievous visitation both to Prince and people, that thereby the King (whom God
preserve from all contagion both bodily and ghostly) seeing so many thousands
of his people dying weekly, and that in his royal City, and beginning of his
reign, may be occasioned to take heed that he leave not his first love,
decline not from his professed sincerity, and be not drawn away from his own
stedfastnes, but rather to vow reformation of whatsoever maybe found by
diligent inquiry, to be offensive in the Church and commonwealth, and that
thereby the people may be stirred up out of a true faith to seek the Lord,
with contrition of heart, confession of mouth, and amendment of life, that so he
may be found in due time to heal the sores of his people, and to restore
health and wealth to Israel. All which God grant for Christ his sons sake, in
whom he has professed himself to be well pleased, Mat. 17. 5. Heb. 12. 24
as being the Mediator of the new covenant; whereby he binds himself not to
take his mercies from us, 2. Sam. 7. 14, 15.
though he chasten us with the rods of men. To whom (for this time and ever) I
commend you and all our neighbors. Farewell.


Faults escaped.
Page 2. lin. 12. read deceased for diseased. page 16. lin. 15 read resist
for correct. page 29. lin. 12. read our for their. page 30. against line 5.
set in the margent Page 23. page 39. lin. 24. read stronger for stranger.
page 45. lin. 10. read vain for name. page 64. against lines 11, 12, 13. set
in the margent Page 51. Math. 2. 13. Luke 4. 29. 30.

FINIS.

