THE DIGNITY OF the Scripture together with The Indignity which the
unthankful world offers thereunto.

In three sermons upon Hose. 8.12. By Samuel Hieron.

Psalm. 119. v. 129. Thy testimonies are wonderful.

HINC LVCEUM ET POCVLA SACRA
ALMA MATTER CANTA BRIGIA



Printed by JOHN LEGATE Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1607. And are
to be sold at the sign of the Crown in Paul's Churchyard by Simon VVaterson.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND MY VERY REVErend friend M. Doctor Goad, Provost
of the Kings College in Cambridge.
WHen I remember the times and furtherances of my education, and consider with
my self by whose free choice, I was preferred into that worthy society (the
head-ship whereof your worship has so many years enjoyed) I cannot but say to
you as Hierome did to a friend of his, Tibi and quod possu^ debeo, Hiero.
Sephron.
and quod non possum: I am indebted to you both to the utmost extent of my
ability, and in much more then I can perform. Give me leave therefore (I
beseech you) not as by way of requital (for I will not so much either
undervalue your favor, or abridge my debt) but as by way of acknowledgement
(leaving this, as it were a bill of my hand what I have received, and how
deeply I am engaged) to present you with these three sermons. They are of the
Dignity of the scripture, and therefore (their subject considered) are not
unworthy your patronage, being so ancient and so indicious a professor of
Theology. The manner of handling, because, as it is liable to censure in this
taxing age, so it may perhaps through my want either of skill or care deserve
reproof, therefore I do submit it wholly to your worships trial, that after,
it may either step further into public view, or else stop where it is,
according as you shall please to dispose. How soever it be, albeit I must
confess, that I should much rejoice in your approouing furtherance, yet at the
least I shall herein find contentment, that I have endeavored out of my
unfeigned sensiblenes of your worships respective kindness, to make the world a
witness of my thankefullnes. And so in the fulness of my desire, that he in whom
all Fulness dwells may so replenish you with spiritual blessings in heavenly
things, Col. 1.19. Ephesians. 1.3. Psa. 92.13.14.
that like the Trees planted in the house of the Lord, you may still even in
your Age bring forth fruit, and be fat and flourishing, I humbly take my
leave.

Modbury in Devonshire this 2. of July. 1607. Your worships ever in the Lord,
Samuel Hieron.

ERRATA.
Page 2. l. 10. for reserved, read referred. p. 3. l. 28. with with sickness. p.
4. l. 15. after needful matter, put in these words viz. not revealed in it,
has added to it a pack and rabble of unwritten traditions, concerning which it
teaches, that they are to be received and embraced with the same affection,
with the like zeal, with the same respect, as we do p. 4. l. 37. after all
the, read the first words of the 5. p. viz. authors of them etc. there be other
small faults escaped which would desire the gentle reader to amend as he read.

Hosea. 8.12. J have written to them the great things of my law, but they were
counted as a strange thing.


The first Sermon.
THis verse is as it were the lords complainte touching the wretched carelesnes
of the sons of men, who inioying the greatest benefit, viz. the blessed
liberty of this word, yet notwithstanding utterly neglect it, and esteem it as
a thing not worthy the regarding. That I may both for your profitte, and mine
own help proceed in handling of it, with the better order, I will divide it
into two parts; the first may be not unfitly called. Gods bounty, I have
written to them the great thing of my law; the second may he termed. man's
impiety, but they were counted as a strange thing. God has vouchsafed the
free use of his word; what greater bounty? Men pass by it as a thing not worth
the looking to, what greater impiety? of these two points in order.

I have etc: In the first part we have two things to consider, first the
commendation of gods word; secondly the mercy of god in vouchsafeing it unto
us: The word of god is commended unto us in these terms; The great things of
the law; The word which is out of the Heb. translated here (great)
signifies, honorable, or precious, or ample and plentiful: so that the word
of God is commended here, by two things, 1. the plenty, and abundance, and
largenes of matter that is in it; 2. the price, and excellency, and worth of
the matter. I will speak of both severally and I pray you let us well observe
them, that the word of God may grow into greater credit with us then it is.

Touching the largenes and amplenes of the word of god, I set down this point;
That all necessary points either touching faith or manners, are abundantly
contained, and laid forth in the scriptures; for proof whereof, that one
saying of the Apostle is sufficient; The whole scripture is given by
inspiration of God, 2. Tim. 3.16.
and is profitable, to teach, to improoue, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousness: now what spiritual occasion can there be devised, which is not
here mentioned? what matter is there in the whole body of religion, but it may
well be reserved to one of these heads; either teaching, improouing,
correcting, or instructing? so that the word of God being sufficient to all
these, is not wanting in any necessary matter whatsoever. Ioh. 20.31.
These things (says Saint John) are written, that ye might have life through
his name; a plain testimony that there is enough left written in the bible,
for the begetting of faith, and for the guiding of the soul of every faithful
believer unto life eternal. I gave them my statutes (says God) I declared my
judgments unto them, Ezekiel. 20.11.
which if a man do he shall live: the taking of that course which is
prescribed to us in the word, is all sufficient to salvation. They have Moses
and the Prophets says Abraham to the rich glutton in hell; meaning that then
they want no needful instruction, Luke 16.31.
for the bringing of them by repentance unto life. Infinite are the places of
scripture to this end, showing the absoluteness of that doctrine, which is
contained in the written word, urging us to rest our selves satisfied with that
which is revealed, condemning all the inventions and traditions of man that are
added thereunto. And seeing it is a sure thing that the books of holy
scripture, are penned by the special guidance of gods spirit, 2. Pet. 1.21.
as Saint Peter affirms; it must needs follow that if there be any needful
matter omitted in them, it came to pass, either because they which wrote, did
not know it, or because, knowing it they would not reveal it, or because being
willing to reveal it, they forgot it, or else because though they forgot it
not, yet they knew not how, and in what manner to perform it. Now whichsoeuer
of all these we shall think, we shall cast a very great indignity and
disgrace, not simply upon the penmen of the scripture, but upon the spirit of
God, by whose special direction, they wrote every word and title, and upon
whom to lay any imputation, either of weakness or unwillingness to perform any
thing for the good of Gods Church, were no less then blasphemy. Add
hereto for the better opening of this point, that look what is the spiritual
necessity of a christian upon any occasion, either of his calling, or of his
degree and proceeding and estate in his profession, the word of God is not
wanting to give him fulness of direction. If he be a Magistrate, it teaches him
how to govern, if a Mynister, it informs him how to teach, if a master of a
family, it instructs him for the particular duties of his place, whether he
be a husband, or a father, or a master, or son, or servant, it shows him in
every of these, how to demean himself as becomes a christian: It gives him
direction for his apparel, his speech, his diet, his company, his disports,
his labor, his buying and selling, yea and for his very sleep, and for those
things which may be thought most arbitrary and indifferent. It is impossible
for him to devise any thing, touching which he may not fetch a needful
direction from the scripture. Again, conceive of him how you will in regard of
the several degrees of Christianity, the word of God is still his councellor:
if he be ignorant, there be plain principles of religion, as milk to feed
him; if he be better grounded, there be points of greater depth to employ him;
if there be any case of conscience that troubles him, any scruple that
disquiets him, there is infallible certainty to resolve him; if he be afflicted
either in body sickness, or in goods with losses, or in good name with
undeserved reproaches, or in mind with the buffeting of Satan, and his own
corruption; there is plenty of comfort to relieve him, there is store of rules
to inform him, how to profit by his trials: if he be zealous, there is matter
to encourage him: if cold and falling back; there is means to quicken him: if
he be stubborn and obstinate, there is judgment to humble him: if he be broken
hearted, there is a salve to restore him: if he be turned out of the way by
some great sin, there is as it were a bridle to stop him: whatsoever his
occasion be, how ever his soul is affected, in what perplexity soever he is,
whether it be comfort or council, or resolution, or reprofe, or instruction
that he needs; the word of God is a plentiful storehouse and meets to the full
which every spiritual necessity, so then this is my reason, why the law of
God, the word of God, is called great, or large because look of what extent
and widenes our spiritual wants are, of the same are those holy directions
which the Lord has revealed in his word. Psalm. 19.96.
I have seen (says David) an end of all perfection, but thy law it exceeding
large. Let us now make use of this doctrine. The use of this point touching
the largnes and amplenes of the word of God, extending and stretching it self
to all the spiritual occasions of all Gods people, is first to overthrow the
judgment and practice of the Church of Room, which, as though there were some
defecte in the scripture, or some needful matter receive the written word it
self, and must be believed also as profitable and necessary to salvation. Now
this opinion and course is plain against this place of scripture, in which the
word of God is graced with this title, great, or plentiful, or large, if
there be any thing left out of it, which is necessary for the information of
any man's soul unto life eternal, sure it has not deserved that honorable
name where with it is styled: I mean, if a Christian man either for the
settling of his soul in a matter of faith, or the directing of his course in a
matter of conversation, should find that scantnesse and barrenness in the
scripture, that he should be feign to go seek direction elsewhere: or if
there were no want in the word of God, why should he be so heavily cursed that
puts ought unto it? whereas if there be any point needful to salvation, which is
not mentioned in it, there must of necessity be some addition. And therefore
we must for ever separate our selves from that Church, which (when God has
written his word as a perfect direction, full and entire in every respect)
thrusts upon us the inventions of man, daring also to make them in authority
equal to the scriptures.

This is the first use, even to teach us heartily and unfeignedly to detest, all
additions to the word of God, and all the not revealed in it, has added to it a
pack and rabble of unwritten traditions, concerning which it teaceth, that they
are to be received and embraced with the same affection, with the likezeale;
with the same respect, as we do authors of them whatsoever: and yet with this
caution, that we must beware that we be not deceived in the right
understanding of that which we call an Addition to the scripture: we must not
think as some do, that this ordinance of God which we call preaching, is an
adding to the scripture; it being a course which God in his wisdom has
appointed for the gathering of his Church, and for the opening and discovering
unto the sons of men, the hid treasure: But that is called an Addition to the
word of God, which being commended unto men as a matter of religion cannot be
justified, nor warranted, nor made good by the written word, but is grounded
only either upon carnal reason and conceit, or upon the will of him that
urges it; All and every such addition we must take heed of, and remember
what the Apostle says: If any man deliver any other (meaning any other for
substance, Gal. 1.8.
though in words and manner of delivery it may differ) though he were an
Angel, etc. let him be accursed.

2. The second use of this point is to condemn the common neglect, and
universal contempt of the precepts and rules of holy scripture: what
occasion soever we have the word of God is still at hand to counsel us, and
it is such a direction, as cannot deceive us yet in the most of our cases and
spiritual needs, we will seek to any thing rather then to the scripture.
In the worship of god we do much more esteem our own humors and the
traditions of our fathers, then the prescription of the word.

In matters of conversation, we prefer the examples and guises of the times,
the course and practice of the multitude, before the principles of gods
spirit: nay we think it too much preciseness, and a thing very ridiculous
and childish, to tie a man's self so strait, as not willingly to swerve from
the direction, and warrant of the scriptures. If we be sick, we will go
first to carnal means, and last to the scripture: if we be greiued in mind
and touched in conscience, we will look for comfort any where, before we will
seek it in the scripture: if we be wronged and injured in the world, we will
run after the eggings on of our own corrupt heart, to be our own auengers,
before we will ask counsel of the scripture. As in these few, so almost in
all other things, any rules please us better then the rules of the scripture.
In apparel we are led by the fashion, in meat and drink by our sensual
appetite; in recreation by company or by our own in ordinate affections: in
dealings with men, by our profit; in getting riches, by our insatiable desires;
these be our rules: the precepts of the word of God either we do not know, or
we do not esteem them, or we think it a burden, and a kind of restraint to
be tied to observe them. Ier. 2.13.
Thus we are like unto those of whom God co^plaines by Jeremy, They have
forsaken me (says he) the fountain of living waters, and dig themselves
pittes, even broken pits that can hold no water, so we let go the best advise
which cannot err, and devise rules and precepts to our selves, which must
needs deceive us. To reform this common evil, let us remember what we have
heard, viz. that God has furnished his word with variety of directions, the
precepts of it are of equal largenes to our spiritual occasions: as many as
walk according to this rule, peace shall be upon them (says the Apostle: but
to every other course whatsoever it be; Gal. 6.16. Pro. 14.12.
we may boldly apply the saying of Solomon: There is a way that seems right
unto a man, but the issues thereof are the ways of death. And thus much of the
commendation given to the law of God, it is large in matter, and abounding with
variety of doctrine.

Now follows to speak of the next thing by which it commended; It is
precious, the value and price of the matter, does equal the largenes and
variety of it. The pretiousnesse and excellency may many ways be made known
unto us; 1. Pet. 1.25. Ps. 1.2. Act 20.27. Romans 3.2. 2. Tim. 3, 16. 2 Pet. 1.21.
which is God, for which cause it is so often called the word of God: the law
of God, the counsel of God, the oracles of God: The whole scripture was given
(says Paul) by inspiration of God: And it came (says Saint Peter) not by the
will of man, but of the holy Ghost: and I have written it (says he) here in
my text. So that it is no idle tale devised as Atheists say by the wit of man
to keep the vulgar in subjection; but it is the very mind of God, and the very
express pattern of that truth, which is originally in the fountain of al
truth, which is the lord: secondly by the matter of it; the matter of scripture
is in a word, that great mystery of godliness of which God manifested in the
flesh etc. 1. Tim. 3.16. Col. 1.27. 1. Cor. 2.8.
A glorious mystery: A hid mystery which non of the princes of this world could
know; A mystery which no man by the wit of man is ever able to conceive; A
mystery which the Angels in heaven do admire, and the Devils in hell do
tremble at: A mystery which the Atheists in their mouths do scoff at, but
even at the same time in their hearts do quake to consider. This is the matter
of the scripture, Jesus Christ, yesterday, to day, the same for ever: he is the
yea, and the amen of all the promises, Heb. 13.8. 2. Cor. 1.20. Revel. 1.11.
the Alpha and the Omega, the first, and the last, the pith and marrow of the
whole: thirdly by the style of it; Fulness of the like temper no where else
to be found in any humane writer whatsoever. I know that in sundry parcels of
the scripture, there are to be seen many more then steps or prints of
eloquence, which the wisdom of God did to make us know, that he could if it
had pleased him, have frettised (as it were) the whole volume of the book with
the excellency of words; yet generally it is so carried, in such a low phrase
of speech, which yet does not savor of any earthly mould, but makes a man
even as it were in despite of himself to admire it Thy testimonies are
wonderful (says David) yet in the next verse he says, the entrance into them
shows light, Psalm. 119.129.
and gives understanding: so that there is a depth of mystery in plains of
words. Fourthly, the end of it; the end of the scripture is not to please idle
humors with variety of delightful matters, to make a man wise unto salvation.
To show the path of life; 2. Tim. 3.15. Psalm. 16.11. Luke 1.79 Romans 1.20.
To guide our feet into the way of peace, we may read in the great book of
the creatures (as I may so call it,) the invisible things of god, his eternal
power and godhead; yet the knowledge of God gotten there is of no power, but
only to make us inexcusable. And therefore David haueing spoken of the majesty
of God which appears even in the creation of things, Psalm. 19.
Ver. 7.
comes at last, to this, The law of the lord is perfect conuering the soul, to
show, that without the word of God, though man might gain knowledge enough to
condemn him, yet he could get none to save him. And so many other places
having declared the testimonies of the power of God which are to be seen even
in the very waves of the sea, Psalm. 93.
at last he concludes the psalm, O lord thy testimonies are very sure,
meaning that there is no certain and comfortable knowledge of God to be
gotten, but only from thence, And for the same cause Christ told the woman of
Samaria, that they worshipped they knew not what; and that the true worship was
only among the Jews, Ioh. 4.22.
because they only had the scriptures. Now then look how far salvation, life
eternal, everlasting happiness, do exceed all other things, by so much is
the doctrine of the scripture of greater price, then all other doctrines, then
all other writings whatsoever. Thus you see the price and exellency of the word
of God; precious for the author, the God of truth; precious for the matter, the
glorious mystery of Christ; precious for the frame and form, plainnes of style
mixed with majesty: precious for the end, to make us wise unto salvation. Let
us endeavor now to make the best use of this doctrine.

1. The first use of it, is to admo^ish every minister, (who by his office and
calling is to handle the word of God) to to do it with reverence and humility,
in as much as it is a thing of that exceeding price, and therefore a woe shall be
unto him whosoever, that shall rashly, and unadvisedly, and irreverently
dispense it. Exodus 30.18.
We shall read, that among other the holy things which God ordained to be made
in the ancient tabernacle he appointed a lauer of brass, in which Aaron and
his sons should wash their hands and their feet, so often as they went into
the tabernacle, or did go unto the altar to minister; which outward washing
commanded to the priests (and that with such a strait penalty, that they must
do it lest they dye, ver. ^0.
) serves to teach all those that succeed them in the service of God, in the
Church, to take heed how they do vnholily and without due preparing, and study,
and an humble seeking of the lord, adventure to meddle with a thing of that
heavenly price, as the word of God is. If any man speak, let him speak as the
words of God (says Saint Peter. 1. Pet. 4.11.


2. Secondly it is an admonition also to all that come to hear, Eccles. 4.17.
to take heed (as Solomon says) to their feet before they come into the house
of God. I may say to you touching the word of God, as Christ said to the
people touching John baptist, Math. 11.7.
what went ye out (says he) into the wilderness to see? so what is it that
you come from your houses to the Church to be pertakers of? is it an idle song,
or an old wives tale, or a foolish history, or a frivolous interlude to be
laughed at? or what is it that you come for; is it not the word of God? if you
say it it is, know you not of what price it is, or do you consider from whom
it comes, of whom it treates, and to what end it aims? if you do, how do you
dare to come unto it with unprepared, unreformed, unsanctified hearts? how is
it that we make no more account of hearing it, then of any other vain
employment? Alas who is there amongst us, but generally he comes with as great
preparation to his work, or to his market, or to his play, as he does to the
grauest exercises of the most precious word of God? nay our preparation usually
is greater unto things of that nature, then to this: for whiles we are setting
our selves to these occasions, we will busy our tongues, and our thoughts,
about the things pertaining to them; but when we com to the word, we never
seek to disburthen our thoughts of all other matters; that we might be the
more free to entertain a thing of that exceeding price: Remember what god said
to Moses when he appeared unto him; when Moses was coming toward the place,
God called unto him; put off thy shoes, Exodus 3.5.
etc. meaning by that ceremony to strike a kind of awful reverence into Moses,
when as he was now to come and stand before God: thereby also teaching us, that
when we come to the exercises of Gods worship, (among which the use of the
word is the principal) we must labor (as the Apostle says) to cast away
every thing that presses down, and to ease our selves from every unclean,
unhallowed, worldly or needless thought, Heb. 12.1.
from every vnreuerent motion, which may be a clogge, or hinderance unto us, in
the saueing heareing of Gods word. This is the second use.

3. Thirdly it is to be applied as an advertisement to all those that Profess
themselves to be knowers and doers of the word, to beware how by their evil
lives, they be a means to bring the precious word of God into disgrace, we
see by every days experience, how forward men of corrupt minds are, to pry
into the actions and courses of those, which seem to have some more respect
unto the word of God, and to religion, then they themselves have, and how
joyful a thing it is unto them, when they can have but any color of occasion
to say. Lo these be the men that be so full of scripture that talk so much of
Gods word, behold their fruits, mark If they be not as bad, or worse then
any other: This is a game unto such, and by this means, they wretchedly
strengthen themselves in their contempt of all goodness: woe to him whosoever,
that shall give just cause to such people of exception, and to make Gods
precious word, to become a byword in the mouths of evil men: how often does
the Apostle give charge to professors of religion, to look unto it, Tit. 2.5.
that the word of God be not evil spoken of? what a heavy accusation is it
that is laid to the charge of the Jews; the name of God is blasphemed among
the gentiles through you; Romans 2.24.
what a sharp expostulation is that which is used by God him self against
dissembling hipocrites, which like a rower in a boat, looks one way, and pulls
another, to profess one thing, Psalm. 50.19.
and do the contrary, what have thou to do to take my covenant in thy mouth
etc. David was a man dear unto God, yet because by his adultery and murder,
he had made the enemies of God to blaspheme, the Lord would not suffer the fact
to go away without some testimony of his displeasure: 2. Sam. 12.
And sure what ever thou be, be sure the Lord will punish thee, if thy evil
life, thy not laboring to master thine own affections, and to make thy
conversation such as becomes the Gosple, do give occasion to any profane
person, to jest at religion, and speak evil of the ways of Godliness.
Remember it therefore ye that love the word, remember it, I say, that the word
of God is precious, be not you a means to bring it into disgrace. This is the
third use.

4. A fourth use is to cut off all vain and idle vseing of the scripture: It
is a common grace of some to use some words or sentences of scripture, in steed
of ieasts and proverbs, in their common talk, by which to delight themselves
and other. The word of God is Precious, and ought to be used with great
regard. I will look upon him that is of a coutrite heart, and that trembles
at my words. Isay. 66.2.
There is a great difference betwixt trembling at the word, and making of a
man's self merry by playing and toying with the word, the Lord looks upon the
one and pittieth it; he sets himself against the other and will revenge it.
We have an example of the practice of it in the history of the Church, in
that wicked Emperor Julian, his manner was to reach unto the Christians boxes
on the ear, and withal to bid them turn the other; for (says he) your
master biddes you that whosoever smites you on the cheek, you should turn to
him the other also: And so when he denied pay to the christian soldiers that
were hired by him, and they complained thereof unto him; his answer was, that he
did to make them fit for the kingdom of heaven; because Christ had said;
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven; thus
this profane wretch scoffed at the scripture: we must labor to take heed of
the like wretchedness. Pilate was but a Heathen, yet the text says that when
he heard but the name of the son of God, he was afraid. Ioh. 19.8.
We that profess our selves Christians should much more reverence the holy
word of God, in every title whereof, Exodus 30.32.
the majesty of God may be seen. You shall read that the oil wherewith the
tabernacle and the Arc, and the Priests were anointed was holy, and therefore
no man might put it to any other use, either to anoint his own flesh with it,
or to make a composition like unto it: The like may be said of the holy
doctrine of the scripture, it is appointed as an holy oil, to supple, and to
refresh the souls and consciences of Gods people, and therefore may not be
diuerted by us, to any other profane or idle use whatsoever. It is a taking of
the name of God in vain, and a breach of the third commandment. These are
the uses I thought good to make of this that the things of the law of God are
called honorable or precious; And thus much touching the first part of this
clause, the commendation of Gods word, the matter of it, is very large, and it
is very precious.

I come unto the second part of the clause, touching the mercy of God in
vouchsafeing his word unto us, in these words, I have written unto them; In the
handling of this clause, sundry things are to be opened, as 1 how it can be
said that God has written his word: 2 why it was meet to write it: 3 when the
word of God began first to be written, and how it was preserved for the
Churches use all that time: 4 how we shall be assured, that that which among us
is now called the scripture, is the very same word and precious will of God,
which he has written, for the use and comfort of his people. These points are
meet to be opened, both for the well understanding of this place in hand, and
for the settling of us against Atheism, and the persuading of us of the
authority of the scripture. Time will not suffer me to enter into them all
now, I will proceed as far as I can. First how it can be said that God has
written his word?

God is said to have written his word in two respects, 1 because the 10
commandments (of which all the rest that is written in the volume of the
book, is but as it were a comment or exposition) these I say were written
after a secret, unknown, and unutterable manner by God him self, according as
the scripture does often mention it, it is called the finger of God, by which
according to the most ordinary interpretation of the anchient fathers, is
meant, the spirit of God; Secondly God is said to have written his word,
because all the rest that was written (though men were the instruments) yet it
was done by his appointment, and by his assistance. As concerning Gods
appointment we read how Moses was commanded to write; so was Isay, so was
Jeremy, so was Ezekiell, so was Habakuk, and so was John as you shall read in
the book of the Revelation: and when as Christ commanded his Apostles to be
witnesses of him, and publishers of his truth and doctrine to the ends of the
earth, and to deliver that, of which the church should have continual use to
the worlds end, no doubt he did in that charge insinuat, that they should not
only preach by word of mouth, but should commit the sum of their doctrine, to
writing also; that the same might be preserved to all posterities. As it is
plain that God appointed the writing of the scripture; so he assisted the
penmen of it, by the extraordinary, and immediate, and infallible guidance of
his spirit; 2. Pet. 1.21.
for which we need no better proof then that one of Peter's, now once or twice
already mentioned: so then because God writ the law immediately with his own
finger, and then both gave commandment and order for the writing of the rest,
and directed the writers so, that they could not in any thing indicted by them
be mistaken; the word is said to have bin written by the lord.

The use hereof is first to be a confirmation to that which I said before,
touching the perfection and price of the scripture; it must needs be an
absolute and entire body, without any either superfluity, or defect, and
contain a most necessary and exact form of doctrine, seeing that god is the
author of it, who both in his wisdom knew what was conuenia^t, and in his
love would not keep secret any thing which he knew to be for the necessary
behoof of his own chosen.

Again it can be no triuiall or base or vulgar matter, which is commended unto
us, as it were out of the bosom of the Lord; and for the ratifying whereof,
our Savior Christ spent his own blood; and in framing whereof the spirit of
God has breathed so extraordinarily. But the principal and more proper use
which we are to make hereof, is to be an assurance to us, of the irrevocable
and unchangeable certainty of the scripture: Math. 5.28.
and that as our Savior says; Heaven and earth shall pass away before one
title thereof do fall to the ground vnfullfilled. It is a good observation of
one of the fathers; if Pilate (says he) being but a man, after he had set the
title over Christ's head upon the cross, Ioh. 19.22.
and was dealt with by the Jews to alter it, could say, quod scripsi scripsi,
meaning that having set it down upon good advise he would not change it: much
more may we be sure that the Lord having written his will, and set it forth to
the view of the world as an absolute rule unto all, will never alter the thing
that is gone out of his mouth. Men alter their writings many times, because of
some oversight or mistaking, or because of some second thoughts wiser then
their former; it were blasphemy to impute any such thing unto God. Again
there is much failing in the execution of men's laws, either through the
remissenes of those that are entrusted with them, or through want of power to
go thorough with them. The Lord is neither slack as men count slackenes says
Saint Peter, 2. Pet. 3.9.
neither yet is his hand shortened that he should not be able to see every
parcel of his holy pleasure put in execution. It may seem needles to insist
upon this point, touching the infallible certainty and fulfilling of the
scripture, but if we consider our times, we shall see it is a needful
doctrine. For whatsoever men's profession is, their conversation is such, that a
man may well think of them, that they imagine the word of God to be but an idle
tale, a frightfull sound to amaze fools: full of terrible threatenings, but yet
lighter then vanity in performance. Heb. 13.4. Gal 5.21. Psalm. 15.2.5.
Does the unchaste person think it true, that whoremongers and adulterers God
will judge? does the dru^kard believe, that no such shall inherit the kingdom
of God? does the usurer imagine that there is any certainty in that speech, that
no such shall be received into heaven? does the contemner of Gods word suppose,
that that shall come to pass which Paul says VIZ: that the lord will in
flaming fire, render vengeance to them that do not obey the Gospel? does the
despiser of knowledge persuade himself, that Solomon spoke with authority
when he said, 2. Th. 1.8.
The lord would laugh at his dectruction? do those that presume upon Gods
mercy, and think they may live how they will, and repent when they will, give
credit to that where it is said, Prove. 1.22.26.
that these which do despise the riches of Gods bounty, and abuse his
patience, do but heap up wrath to themselves against the day of judgment. And
so I might say in many other things, Is it likely that me^ think there is any
truth in the words which are so flat against these courses of which their life
is a continual practice? Romans 2.^.^.
sure it is not: for out of all doubt, if they had any such conceit, and did
not rather say to themselves as they did in Ieremies time, Ier. 5.13.
it is but wind, they would humble themselves before the Lord, for their
evils past, and their future reformation should manifest their reverent
persuasion of the certainite of those Judgments which stand upon record in in
the scriptures. Therefore let us remember this; this scripture, this word, is
not a devise of man, it was written by God; every curse written in it, shall
fall upon the unrepentant, and every blessing promised therein, shall be made
good to the soul of every true believer.

FINIS.
The second Sermon.
THe next question to be handled in this place, touching that which God has
here said, that he had written the great things of his law, is, why it was
meet that the word of God should be committed to writing. As I have proved
unto you that it was not written at adue^tures out of the humors of some private
me^, but by the special appointment and direction of God; so it shall appear
that the writing of it was not vndertake^, but upon very great reason, and for
very exceeding good purpose. The maine and principal end, was the spiritual
good and edification of Gods Church; that is not to be doubted, in as much as in
all things the Lord has a chief respect unto the Glory of his own name in
the good of his chosen: But how and in what manner, and for what respects, the
writing of the word was necessary for the churches good; it shall be worth our
labor to enquire. Understand therefore that the writing of the word was, and is
for the good of the Church in this respect, even that it may have one certain
and infallible rule, by which all doctrine may be tried, all controversies in
religion decided, all doubts resolved, and every conscience firmly grounded
and settled in Gods truth. For this cause we read that when there was no word
written, but Moses law, the doctrine of the prophets was tried by it. After,
when to the law of Moses were added the sermons of the prophets; Isay. 8.20.
then every thing was referred unto them: so Christ cleared his doctrine and
made it good by Moses and all the prophets: Luke 24.27.
and Paul's defense was this, that he had said no other things, then those which
Moses and the prophets did say should come. And all the learned in the best
times which followed, Acts 26.22.
took the same course, leaving themselves an example unto us, to make the
written word, as it were the standard or the kings beam, by which to try all
doctrine that is tendered to us, accepting none for sound and good, but only
that which is agreeing thereunto. So that look what necessity there was that the
Church should have a Judge to decide doubts, and a true rule to find out, and
to discern the truth; the same is there, that the word should be put in
writing, for the common and perpetual good of all posterity. If any man think
that the word of God might as well and profitably have proceeded for the
Churches good, from hand to hand, by lively voice, as by writing, the father
commending it to his son, and so continuing it one after another to the end;
he is much deceived. For first the mind of man is very slippery and weak, and
soon ready to forget the best things; secondly man's nature is very prone to
error, and apt either to entertain, or to broch new religions: and therefore
to prevent forgetfulness, to avoid error, and to preserve the truth of God from
corruption; it was meet the scripture should be written. It is worthy to be
marked, the speech of Luke in the preface of his Gospel to that noble
Theophilus, Luke i. 4.
he confesses that he had been instructed, in the doctrine of religion; yet he
thought to write unto him from point to point, that he might have the certainty
of those things. So that though he had indifferent good knowledge before, yet
writing the story was the means to beget certainty. This shall be written for
the generation to come, says David: Psalm. 102.18.
writing is the best mea^s even (as we se by common course) to preserve a thing
unto posterity.

Besides as in a generallitie it was necessary the word of god should be
written, that there might be one certain rule to judge the truth by so for one
maine point of doctrine it was very behoofull, viz. to assure us that Christ
the son of Mary was the true Messiah, who being once come, none other was to
be looked for: To setle us wherein, there could be devised no more direct course
then this, viz. that first the promises of his coming should be recorded, the
nature and office and all other circumstances of his person discribed, and then
the history of all his acts, his birth, doctrine, miracles, death exactlie
registered; that so the following ages comparing both together, and seeing how
every promise was fulfilled, and every prophecy accomplished, might resolve
upon it, that he indeed was the Christ; and that there is no name else given
under heaven whereby we may be saved. An example of this use of the written
word, we have in Christ himself, who falling into company after his
resurrection with two of his disciples, who were in some doubt; Luke 24.27.
began at Moses (says the text) and interpreted unto them in all the
scripture, the things which were written of him. And whosoever marks the
course of the history of the Gospel shall often find, that when some special
action of Christ is recorded, Marc 14 49. Ioh. 13.8 Ioh. 19.34.36.
this, or the like is added to it; This was done that the scripture might be
fulfilled; which shows how behoofull the writing of the promises, touching
the Messiah, was to be our ground in this maine point; that Christ Jesus is
the only appointed savior of mankind. Here then is the issue of my speech:
it was meet the word should be written, that the Church might never want a
rule of religion, and in particular might be settled in this point, that the
Christ in whom we believe, is that Savior, whom we need not doubt to depend
upon. Let us make use of this point.

The use is this: our courses (considering the obedience that we owe unto God)
should be answerable to Gods intents; since therefore the intent of God in
giueing order for the writing of his word, was the grounding and settling of our
hearts in the truth of religion; it becomes us to labor both to conceive the
doctrine of Godliness, so much as is necessary to salvation; and in matters that
concern the worship of God and our own souls health, not to build upon
opinion, conceit, or the traditions of men whatsoever they be, but only upon
the scriptures: because when we come to give an account (as we must) of our
religion unto God; it shall not go for current, I believed, or I thought this,
because such a one persuaded me, or because the law of the times so commanded
me, or because my fathers before me so thought, and from them I received it:
but this answer only shall be accepted, when a man shall be able to say this;
This my heart has embraced, ad upon this have I built my faith, because God
blessing the ministry of his holy word unto me, I have plainly perceived,
that it is the express doctrine of the written word, and the very same which
God has left upon record for me to believe. This is the only answer that
shall be then accepted of. As many therefore as do desire to have comfort of
their religion at the day of judgment, must give great heed unto the reading
and preaching of the word, and so in humility by prayer be prepared to it,
that in their secret thoughts they may conceive, how the word of God is a
warrant of their belief. Men think this is a matter of impossibility, and
cast many perils (the devil helping them forward) with many shifts to nouzell
themselves in ignorance; but still the saying of the spirit of God is true,
knowledge is easy to him that will understand, and God will always give a
blessing, Prou. 14.6. Psalm. 25.14.
and reveal even his secret (as David says) unto those that fear him, and
will be found of those that seek him as they ought to do. So much of this
question and the use of it, why it was meet that Gods word should be written.

The next question necessary for the clearing of this place, is, When the word
of God began first to be written, and how tell that time it was preserved for
the use of Gods Church. Touching which we must hold, August. lib. de. ciui.
dei 15. c. 23.
that Moses was the first writer of the word of God that ever was. It is the
opinion of some (I know) that Enoch the seventh from Adam, wrote something; and
that they think may be proved out of the saying of Saint Jude, who alleges
some part of Enochs doctrine. But Jude says, not, Enoch wrote, but Enoch
prophesied: Iud. ver. 14.
and it was possible for the sum of Enochs doctrine to be continued without
writing. Besides one Josephus, Iose. Antiq. l. 1. c 3.
(who himself was a Jew, and writ of antiquities,) says that Adams offspring
had erected two pillars, the one of brick the other of stone, in which they had
engraven many things; but these things are uncertain. Romans 3.2.
And that there was no part of Gods word written before Moses, it may thus be
gathered. First because the Jews, to whom as Saint Paul says the oracles of
God were committed, had not in their canon, any holy writ more ancient then
Moses: secondly our Savior laboring to prove himself to be the Messiah, Luk
24.27.
the text says he began at Moses: if there had been any author of greater
antiquity then Moses, no doubt our savior would have alleged it, inasmuch
as all the scripture that was before him, was to give testimony of him. And it
is likely that God himself by writing the 10. Commandments extraordinarily
with his own fingers, did acquaint Moses with the manner of writing and the
use of letters, which for ought we can find to the contrary, until that
time, was unknown. If it be demanded then, whether till then, the church and
people of God were utterly destitute or the word?

I answer no; for it was always a truth, that God would accept of no worship,
but that which was according to his word; voluntary religion was hateful unto
him, even from the very first beginning. Since then it is apparent, that before
the word was written, God was truly worshipped, as by Adam, Abell, Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, etc. it must needs be that there was some word, or some revealed and
known will of God to direct them. If you ask how the will of God was then made
known, and how preserved? I answer, that the Lord revealed it by holy
oracles, by visions, and apparitions of Angels, yea and of Christ himself,
who is ordinarily meant by the name of Angel throughout the old testament. At
sundry times and in diverse manners God spoke to our fathers in the old time,
says the Apostile. He spoke to Moses mouth to mouth: Heb. 1.2. Numb. 12.8.
He used also the ministry of man for the spreading of that truth abroad to
many, which by vision oracle was revealed to few.

Thus the father to the son, one to another made known the will of God. But
when the Church was enlarged, and (having been shut up in some few families)
began to spread it self into a greater compass, and with all, corruption in
religion increased, and the people of God by conuersing with Idolaters were
more subject to be misled; the lord gave order to write the law, and in
process of time added the the writings of the prophets as expositions of the
law, and at the last, the new testament, to be a full and manifest discouerer
of that mystery of Christ, which was more darkely (as it were) lapped in the
types and figures and prophesies of the old. So that this is the answer then
to this question; til Moses began there was no word written, yet the church was
not destitute, but by other means, was made acquainted with Gods will, and was
informed in such things as perteined unto life. We may make use also of the
clearing of this question.

First of all it gives us just occasion to note and observe, the continual
care and providence of God over his Church, in that he has never left it
vnsupplied, but in all times and ages from the beginning, has taken a course
for the right informing it, in such things as were behoofull and necessary
thereunto.

Before Moses he taught the world by visions, and oracles, speaking unto the
sons of me^ from heaven with his own mouth. In the following times he ordained,
and with his own finger (as it were) consecrated the use of writing, for the
perpetual perseruation of that truth, which otherwise in common reason, either
time might have worn out, or men of corrupt minds have falsified, to the
corrupting and poisoning of the church. So that God may truly say to his church
in general, as he did once to the Israelites, what could I have done more,
which I have not done unto you. Isa. 5.4.
I have spoken to you by visions, I have revealed my holy will by the ministry
of Angels, I have committed it to perpetual record, that it might be turned
into all languages, and read and perused by all men. God has not ben wanting
to us, if we shall now be wanting to our selves, we shall bring upon us a
greater measure of condemnation: we shall never be able to say; this and this
we would have done, if we had known it, it shall always be replied upon us,
as it was to the people of old, he has showed thee, O man what is good: the
lord was never sparing or close-handed toward his Church, Mic. 6.8.
to secret any thing, which might be a means to bring it unto life.

Secondly, this mutual following each of other, I mean of the making known of
the word of God unto the Church, by visions, and revelations, and then after in
the appointed time by writing, serves to show unto us, that as before the word
was written, the power of God was not to be doubted of, but that he was fully
able to acquaint his Church with all needful matter; so now the word being
written, no visions, or revelations must be looked for. Now the written text is
our only guide; and whosoever he should be, that under pretense of some
special matter extraordinarily revealed to him, from heaven, should endeavor
to persuade us any thing besides that which is already written, though he
should bring never so great probabilities and shows of likelihood, yet he were
not to be believed. It is true, Christ promised to send his spirit unto his
Church, and he has and does, still make good his promise, but yet, not that
men under a pretense of the spirit, should contemn the scripture, but that
they should be better able to profit by the scripture. For the proof whereof
we have an excellent place in Luke, where it is said, that Christ coming among
his disciples after his resurrection, cap. 24. 45.
opened their understanding, but to what end? what? that they should from that
time despise the written word, and take upon them to deliver what they would,
under a color of being inspired from above? no; but he opened there
understanding, that they might understand the scripture.

So that the increase of the gift of Gods spirit in them, did not privilege
them from tying themselves still to the doctrine of the scripture. But you will
marvel perhaps to what end I speak this? you shall know therefore, that as
there were in the elder times certain Heretics called Enthusiasts which
pretended ( I know not what) visions, and secret conferences with the spirit of
God, and so contemned the written word: So out of their ashes have risen in our
days, men of the same humor, known by the name of the Famely of love, who
despised the ordinary course of the ministry of man, and of attaining to the
knowledge of salvation by the written word, and stood upon private revelations,
and such other idle fancies, comme^ding unto men their own dreams, under the
name of the special instincts of Gods spirit: and the dregs of this
grossenes are remaining among some to this day. Now least at any time we
should be deceived with such senseless and foolish pretenses, we must
understand that since God committed his word to writing, either visions, and
the courses of that nature have been very seldom, or else all those to whom
God has so revealed any thing, have been tied to the judgment of the
scripture. Saint Paul was taken up into the third heaven, and had strange
things discovered to him, yet this was still his plea for himself, and the
thing he stood upon, that he said no other things then those which Moses and
the Prophets did say should come. And therefore if either Papists, Act. 26.^^.
or Familists, or any of the like stamp, shall under any color of visions or
voices from heaven, and the like persuade us to any thing contrary to that we
have been taught, let us straight urge them, to make their matters good by the
word written; and then shall we find that true which an ancient Father has
said, viz. that if you bring them once to defend their questions by scripture
alone, they cannot stand. It has always been the badge of Heretics, that
they were (scripturarum Lucifugae) men that could not abide the light of the
scripture. And thus much for this question, Tertul.
when the word was written, and how the Church of God was instructed until
then.

Now come we to the last and waightiest, viz. that seeing God says here in
our text, that he has written his law unto us; how we may be assured, that
that which we now have, and is called by us gods word, is indeed that holy
will of his, which he commanded to be written for the good and comfort of his
people? And this is a point of great moment, because if we stagger therein,
we can have no certainty of religion. Wherefore I pray you let us observe it
the rather, that we may have wherewith to stop the mouths of Atheists and
profane scoffers; and avoid also the doubtings and questions, which may
sometimes arise in our own hearts. Understand therefore this first of all, that
nothing is able to persuade a ma^s conscience, that the scripture is the word
of God, but only the spirit of God. The Apostle Paul says truly, that no man
can say that Jesus is the Lord, 1. Cor. 12 3.
but by the holy Ghost. Therefore my meaning is to speak only of such
testimonies which are of force to convince the conscience, and to make men that
they shall not be able to deny the scripture to be from God, though to frame
their hearts to yield unto it, is in the power of God only to effect. Now to
come a degree nearer to the matter, we must know also that the best proofs
for the scripture that it is gods word, are to be fetched out of it self; for
which cause it is called light, Ps. 119.105. and. v. 2.14.22. etc.
because it discovers it self; and many times the testimonies of the Lord,
because it bears witness to it self. The papists would have us stand to the
Judgment of the Church, which is altogether doubtful; for there may be as
great question made of the Church, whether it be the true Church of God, as of
the scripture, whether it be the true word of God. The testimony and authority
of the Church may be some inducement to a man in this case, according as Saint
Austine says it was to him; but it can be no certain argument. Know this
then, that there is a certain evidence of Gods spirit, as it were imprinted
in the scripture, which shows the divine excellency thereof, above all the
writings How the script is known to he the word of God.
First, the purity of the law of God written by Moses, above all the laws that
have been ever enacted and devised by the wisest men. We read of many worthy
law-giuers among the Heathen, that ordained statutes of great wisdom for the
government of their people: yet was there never any law devised by the wit of
man, but it needed some reviewing, and for some respect was either to be
repealed, or abridged, or enlarged; besides that, scarce any law can be so
wisely framed by a state, but some or other will find a shifte to do the very
thing, which the intent of the law was to forbid, and yet free himself from
the danger of the law, and stand upon terms as if he had not broken it. It is
not so in the law of God, as it was first given out, so it stands, without any
changing, nether was there ever any found, able to carry himself so cunningly
in the practice of any evil, but this law in one respect or other would surely
find him guilty. Secondly, the quality of the matter in scripture: In the
writings sin, and the entering in of sin into the world by Adams fall, and
the perfect and full remedy for all this, namely Christ's death, was never
narrations. Besides there is no writer of any humane story, that can be proved
to be more ancient then Nehemias and Ezra, who were about the year of the
world 3500. Fourthly, the admirable consent of the whole body of the scripture
Act. 10.43.
that through the name of Christ all that believe in him, shall receive
remission of sins. what shows of uncertainty and differences soever may
appear, either in numbering of years, or in any circumstance of history, or
in any point of doctrine; are so fully and apparently reconciled by those which
have labored therein, that there can be no just color of exception. Fifthly,
the certain events of the prophesies thereof, as of the coming of the Messiah,
the calling of the gentiles, Isay. 45.1.
but names the very man by whom the Lord would save them, Cyrus, and yet Isay
lived at the least a thousand years before Cyrus was borne. Like unto that was
that prophecy of the man of God aginst the Altar of Bethell built by Jeroboam,
he names the party Josiah, 1. King. 13.2.
and relates the particulars what he should do, and yet it was at least 330.
years before Josiah was borne. So Jeremy told the people the just number of
years in which they should be captives under Babylon, (70. years). Ier. 25.11.
And we our selves if we will observe it, may see daily how the prophesies of
the scripture are accomplished. Paul said in the last times men should broch
doctrines of devils, viz. forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from
meats, 2 Timothy 3.2.
we see it verefied in Popery: he says again, that in the last days men
shall be lovers of themselves, etc. do we not perceive among our selves; how
these evils daily do increase? he says further, the time will come when men
will not suffer wholesome doctrine* we may behold how this is made good every
day. 2. Tim. 4 3.
There is no doctrine more wholesome, then that which is applied to men's
particular sins, and yet it is a thing which men will not endure Saint Peter
prophesied, and so did Saint Jude, 2. Pet. 3.3. Iud. 18.
that in the last times, there should be mockers, men walking after there own
lusts, we need nor go far to see the accomplishment of this prophecy. How
do men despise the Judgments of God; and scoff at all goodness, and prefer the
satisfying of there own lusts, before obedience to the will of God? Thus that
which we our selves are witnesses of, declares the certain events of the
foretelling of the Genesis 49.
before the discrediting of his own birth; he was borne of the tribe of Leui,
yet if you read Genesis 49. you shall find he does not spare to report, the hard
sentence that old Jacob gave of Leui at his death, ver. 5.
Simon and Leui, brethren in evil, instruments of cruelty, into their secret
let not my soul come, etc: chap. 12.
And in Numbers he does not spare Aaron and Miryam his own brother and sister,
but has left their sin, and the displeasure of God against it, upon
perpetual record: nay, he is not ashamed to reveal his own error, and how
much the lord was offended with him, and how for it he threatened him, that he
should never come into the promised Canaan: he does in the story many times
make mention of it. It is said that Saint Mark wrote the gospel out of Peter's
mouth, and yet the denial of Peter is more expressly laid down by Mark, then
by any other Evangelist. And Paul sets down with his own pen, his own faults
in more sharp measure, then any other man would do, 1. Tim. 1.13.
I was a blasphemer, a persecutor, an oppressor. This argues that these men
were guided by God, in that they were so free from flattery, that they spared
not themselves. We know it is contrary in other writers: you shall see
generally those that write histories, speak partiallie either of some me^, or
of their own native countries: as if a man should read the Chronicles of
England, he would think that to be the only country. It shows the scripture
to have by the Lord to be laid up in the Arc, Deuteronomy. 10, 2, 5, 6.
and the whole Tribe of Leui commanded to attend it.

Next, the books which Moses himself wrote, Exodus 24.27. Deuteronomy. 31.9. Josh.
24.26. 1. Sam. 10.25.
as he wrote them by the special appointment of god, (as appears) so he
delivered it to the sons of Leui also to be kept. Joshua took the same
course for the preservation of that which he had written: So did Samuel, yet
this is nothing in respect of that which followed. The prophesy of Jeremy was
burned by king Iehoiakinne, thereby thinking to abolish the whole memory of it;
but the lord presently caused the same to be written again, yea, and added
thereunto many words. Ier. 30.
When Manasses and Ammon, two wicked kings to the end they might the better
draw the people to Idolatry, and to keep them in it, had suppressed the book
of the law; 2. Chron. 34.14. 1. Macc, 1.
yet in the days of Josias, it pleased God, that even in the ruynes of the
temple, the book of the law was found again. It is recorded in the book of
Maccabees, how that king Antiochus cut in pieces, and burnt all the books of
che law which he could find, and followed the matter so extremely, that
whosoever had a book of the testament found by him, he should be put to death.
And Eusebius an ancient writer of the story of the Church, reports how
Dioclesian a heathen Emperor, and a cruel persecutor, both forbad the use of
the books of the prophets and Evangelists, and consumed them with fire also.
So that indeed it is a very miracle, and an argument that the scripture is from
above, in as much as notwithstanding the perpetual enmity of the devil against
it, the endeavors of Heretics to corrupt it, the practices of Tyrants
utterly to abolish it, and the many hazards which the Church has been in,
which could not choose but endanger it; yet it has been preserved whole and
entyre, yea, eue^ in the original tongues, the old testament in the Hebrew,
and the new in the Greek, even unto this day: we may well apply unto it the
words of the Psalm, It is the Lords doing, Ps 1.8.23.
and it is marvelous in our eyes. Eighthly, the form and dignity man; and yet
it is always more powerful in matter, then in words. And we see the books
called the Apochripha, who have endeavored to express the excellency of that
holy style; are yet so far from it, that they are but cold, and even Exodus
3.1. Ier. 1.6. Math. 4.18. Math. 9.9. Col. 4.4. 1. Tim. 1.13.
we shall see how unfit they were by all likelihood for such a story. Moses
first a shepherd, then a prophet; Jeremy a yery child by his own confession;
Peter a fisherman, one that was never trained up in learning; Matthew a
publican, a mere stranger to the things of God; Luke a physician, learned, but
yet not accustomed in things of that quality; Paul a persecutor, a professed
enemy to the doctrine of the gospel: It could not choose but be some heavenly
and spiritual power, that should call, and afterward enable these me^ unto
this weighty business to be the penme^ of that, in which so much admirable and
deuides asunder the soul and the spirit, Heb. 4.11.
and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents; it strikes a terror into the
very consciences of those, which are the greatest enemies unto it, and would
seem to despite it: and that is the very thing, that has caused it to have so
many and greiuous adversaries among men. We may behold also how it works to the
reclaiming of many men from their evil ways; what fruits of holiness it brings
forth in the lives of diverse that profess it, with contempt of the world, what
hatred of sin, what duties of mercy; yea, and how the love and sweetness
thereof has so possessed the hearts of some, that they have been content not
only to sacrifice, their wealth, their credit, their good name, their liberty
for it, but even their very lives, and to choose rather to bear any torments,
then to disclaim that holy truth, which by the teaching of the scripture, they
have once thoroughly entertained. Thus this power of the word in conuincing
some, in converting others, in amazing some, in rejoicing others, in drawing
some earnestly to love it, in provoking others deeply and tiranously to detest
it, this same secret and effectual working of it (I say) upon the secret
powers of the soul, is a testimony for the scripture, that it is no devise of
man, but the very sacred will of God. These ten tokens, I have thought good to
commend unto your care and consideration, by which it may be manifested unto
us, that that which we call the Bible, and is daily commended unto us to be the
word of god, is indeed that which it is said to be, and the very thing by which
we shall be judged at the last day. 1. The purity of the law. 2. The matter of
the scripture, the description of man's misery, and of the true remedy for it.
3. The antiquity of it. 4. The consent of it with it self. 5. The certain
event of all prophesies. 6. The impartial dealing of those that write it. 7.
The miraculous preservation of it from the first writing till now. 8. The
maiesticall style wherein it is written. 9. The condition of the penmen before
they were called to that service. 10. The power and efficacy of it in the
working upon men's consciences. Howsoever (as I have said) nothing is able to
persuade the mind, but only the spirit of God, yet these particulars are of
force to convince, and to prove unto men, whether they will or no; that the
scripture is no humane history, but the oracle of God, ordained by him, to be
as it were, a light shining in a dark place, (as Saint Peter's words are) that
by the direction thereof, our feet may be guided in the way of peace.

The world grows to a ripenes and perfection in all kind of sin, and the
Lords long suffering has made many to think, that religion is but a toy, and
all scripture merely vanity: and many hearing manifest testimonies alleged
out of the scripture against their lewdnes, are not afraid to say, that sure it
is not all from God, which is said to be his word. Besides that every man by
nature shall find a spice of Atheism, even in his own bosom, and he shall
find doubtings arise sometimes even in these maine Points, how he shall know
scripture to be scripture, and that there is such a God, and a Christ, and a
Hell, and a Heaven, as is there made mention of. And therefore for strengthening
of us, both against the Atheists, and scorners which we shall meet with in
the world, and the doubtings which may spring up in our own hearts, I have
thought good (my text giving me so just occasion), to discourse thus largely of
this matter for whereas God says here he has written to us his law, we
cannot possibly make any true profitable use of this speech, except we be
cleared in this point; That that which we account Gods law, is that same
doctrine which his will was should be committed to writing for our good.

The third Sermon.
But they were counted as a strange thing. This is the second part of this
verse, the former showed the bounty of God vouchesafeing his law; this shows
the unthankfulness and impiety of men in despising his law; since that by the
very course of the words, it is plain that there is a fault hear discovered,
therefore in the handling of this part, I will follow this course. 1. I will
show the nature of the fault. 2. I will open the greatness of it. 3. I will
declare what punishment is belonging to it. 4. I will apply it to to see whether
it be not also our fault fifthly, when it is manifest that to count the word of
God as a strange thing is a fault, and such a one as shall be punished, and which
is also our fault; I will then teach of what use all these points ought to be
unto us, and what we must endeavor to learn thereby; these be the parts and
points of this days sermon, all necessary to the profitable, handling of this
clause. And first what the fault was, and wherein this people trespassed, when
they are said to have counted the great matters of gods law, as a strange thing.

The effect and substance of the fault in a word was this, that how be it the
lord had committed and commended his word unto them, for their necessary uses,
intending that it should be familiar unto them, and always at hand with them
as a Councellor in all their occasions to advise them, yet they reputed it as a
matter, not pertaining to them; so that, wherein they ought to have been most
conversant in it, they were the greatest strangers; neither were they less
seen, or more slenderly experienced in any one thing, then the rules and
precepts of the scripture. That is breifely the very true fault, for which the
unthankful Jews are challenged in this place, and that was my first point.
Now lest when we shall be found guilty of the same trespass, it should seem
unto us but a slight offense; let me draw you to the next point, which is the
greatness of it, and how gross a thing it is to count the honorable matters of
Gods law, as a strange thing. I will endeavor to make it manifest after as
familiar a manner as I can. This is that therefore which I say of it, that it
was a fault, compounded and made of 3. gross evils; 1 is disobedience, 2
unthankfulness, 3 neglect of their own private good, even the good of souls.
First it was disobedience; for the commandment of God was very strait, that
they should all, one and other acquainte themselves with the things of his law,
whereof that one place which is in Deutronomy, is a sufficient witness; chap. 6.
6, 7.
And these words etc: Therefore besides the ordinary course of teaching by the
Leuits in the Temple, the Lord commanded, to bind them as signs upon their
heads, and write them upon the Posts of their house, and upon their gates. and
all to the end that the law of God by that means might become familiar unto
them: so that it was a manifest contempt of Gods commandment, to pass that
by, as matter which concerned them not, which the Lords desire and will was by
all means to accustom them unto. As it was disobedience to the express will
of God, (and so according to the saying of Samuel to Saul, as bad as sin of
witchcraft. 1. Sam. 15.23.
) so it was unthankfulness also, and a most odious abuse of gods kindness.
Consider how; mark the words of my text, I have written to them etc says
God, so that the written word is as it were an epistle or letter sent from the
Lord unto his Church. A letter I say of which the matter is weighty, and such
as concerns all, even in the hightest degree; so the carriage and frame of it,
considering what the Lord is in respect of us, is full of exceeding kindness,
many gracious promises, many kind entreaties, many fatherly aduertisements,
every word in a manner, sauouring of unspeakable love. Now put case a king
should write a letter to his meanest subjects, nay to such as being traitors to
him, stood at his mercy to be disposed with at his pleasure (for so is the case
betwixt God and us) and should in all temperate manner speak graciously unto
them, promising upon their submission, a final remitting of their
misbehauiour, yea and a purpose to take them finally into his favor; if these
men thus at the kings pleasure, and thus kindly written unto, should throw the
letter aside, not vouchsafeing to pervse it, what name would we give unto this
demeanor; we would say unthankfulness were too favorable a term, presumtion,
villeny, intolerable insolency; we would not know how to discribe it. How must
it not needs then be ingratitude in a higher degree, that the lord writing to
his enemies (as we are all by nature) such a gracious letter of reconcilement,
sueing to win us, when as it were meeter that we should even with tears of
blood importune him: yet the sons of men whose breath is in their nosthrils,
not waighing this unutterable kindness, should dare to set at naught such a
message, and to let it flip as if it were some idle stuff, not worth the
looking on? Again whereas it is often touched in the scripture, that the lord
had a special regard over the Jewish nation, more then to any other under
heaven; the liberty of enjoying the law of god, is noted as the principal
benefit which the lord vouchsafed them. Deuteronomy. 4.8.
What nation is there so great (says Moses) that has ordinances and laws so
righteous, as all the law which I set before you this day. And David in the
Psalms haueing spoken at large touching the providence of God over all
mankind, comes at last to show wherein the Jews had the preeminence above all
other, Ps. 147.19, 20.
in these words; He showed his word unto Jacob, his statutes and Judgments unto
Israel, he has not dealt so with every nation: Romans 3.1, 2.
And Saint Paul propounding to himself this question, what is then the
preferment of the Jew? answers it thus, chiefly because unto them were
committed the oracles of God. So then seeing among all the blessings that God
bestowed upon the^, this was the choice, that the great things of the law were
committed unto them, in it must needs be an argument of extreme unthankfulness
in them to make so slight account of so great a favor.

The third evil of which this evil here reproved in them, was compounded;
was, neglect of their own private good. For the lord had not commended to
them, the things of his law, simply as a means by which they might show their
obedience unto his authority, Eze. 20.11.
but the intent of the lord therein was the furtherance of their good. I gave
them (says God) statutes and ordinances, which if a man do, he shall live in
them: the glory should have returned to God by their obedience, but the chief
profit should have been their own. and therefore for them to let the law lie,
like some old book out of use, or some other forlorn or foreign matter, it
could not but argue a most miserable neglect, and bewray them to be men of a
most profane and dissolute disposition: so then if you demand what great
matter this was, for which this people was so highly blamed in these words,
They have accounted the great things of the law, as a strange thing? I answer,
it was an error comprising under it. 3. soul evils; 1. rebellious
disobedience to Gods express co^ma^dment: 2. presumtuous contempt and base
estimation of gods great kindness. 3. the desperate neglect of the salvation of
their own souls. This is the second point. Now for the third.

Which is, touching the punishment due to this fault: if we have observed what
has been said before touching the nature of the sin, we cannot doubt, either
that it deserves a punishment, or that the lord will surely proceed against it
in his due time: but yet if we shall consider what the scripture says of it in
particular, it will much more affect us. Thus much therefore we may generally
understand that the lord punishes no sin more greiuously, then the
contemning of his word; and thereof we have no more full and pregnant example
then this Jewish nation. For whereas sundry times before the coming of Christ
in the flesh, the wrath of God came upon them, that the judgments wherewith they
were visited, made eue^ their ears to tingle that heard them, and brought that
very people, whom he had carried (as it were) in his arms out of Egypt, to
become a hissing and a byword to the whole world; whosoever observes the
course of the prophets, shall find that the principal ground of all this, was
their slight account of the holy doctrine of God, their preferring the
inventions of men, the guises of other nations, and the traditions of their
fathers; before the blessed will of the lord manifested and revealed to them in
his law. But lest we should think this is nothing to us (though indeed it was
left written to admonish us) concerning this matter, there are two places of
holy scripture especially to be considered, and they are both in the book of
the Proverbs, Chap. 28. 9.
the one is, he that turns away his care from hearing the law: even his
prayer shall be abominable. mark I pray you; there is no duty in the holy
scripture to which the lord has promised a greater blessing then the duty of
prayer; Ps. 65.2.
the lord takes it as an honor unto him, to have this title, to be called the
hearer of prayers; yet the neglect of Gods word, the making no account of the
means to bring us to the knowledge of it, turns all a man's prayers into
sin, stops up the ears of the lord unto all his suits, does (as it were)
bar up the gate of heaven against him, that though his request be never so
earnest, yet it is impossible for him to have entrance. God will hear no
prayer that proceeds from him which does not esteem the knowledge and
understanding of his word; a fearful Judgment.

Chap. 1. 22.
The other place is, O you fools, how long will you love foolishnes, and the
fools hate knowledge; ve^ 25.
and again, you have despised all my counsel, and would none of my advice;
mark now what follows, I will also laugh at their destruction, and mock when
their fear comes. I beseech you in the fear of God, let us consider it. The
lord is often reported of, to us in the scripture by the name of a merciful
God, a God that does not punish willingly: a God that does not take delight
in the death of him that dies: what a grievous sin then must that needs be,
which turns that so sweet and gracious nature of God into that extremity,
that he should even rejoice at men's destruction, and take pleasure in their
tormente. And yet this reckoning the word of God as a strange thing, brings
forth this strange effect, and makes that God who delights in mercy, to please
himself in the feirce execution of his vengance.

Thus then we end this point* if you ask what judgment is due to this
offense of not regarding the great things of Gods law, I answer, in general
it sets open the very floodgate of Gods wrath as appears by the example of
the Jews; 2 in particular, it makes all our prayers odious, and the torment of
our souls, Luc. 14.28.
a matter of reioyceing and pleasure to the Lord. It is truly said of our
Savior, To whom God gives much, of him he requires much. The liberty of his
word is the greatest blessing, and therefore the contempt thereof must needs
bring upon us the greatest vengance.

Come we now to the next point, to see whether this fault thus described, and
thus deserving to be punished; be not our fault also, that so we may by
degrees make a way to that which is the use and drift of the whole scripture.

And first hear, to the end that it may appear, that this is our fault to
neglect Gods word, we must necessarily enquire, whether the lord has not
afforded us the same blessing, I mean the liberty of his word. It is a thing
that cannot be denied, that the kindness of God in his behalf toward us, is no
whit inferior to that which in former times he showed to the Jews, I do think
that no man can name any one particular tending to the discovery and making
manifest of the law: of God, which is not granted to us in as great a measure,
as it was to them: Nay look by how much the ministry of the gospel does
exceed the ministry of the law, by so much is the mercy of God greater unto
us, then unto them; because it is free for us to behold the substance of that,
whereof they saw but the shadows only. So that the lord may every way and in
every respect, say to us as truly, as ever he might say to them, I have written
to you the great things of my law It is manifest then I think to every one
that understands any thing, that we are nothing inferior to the Jews in
respect of the blessing, I doubt not but it shall also appear, that we do
fully match them, nay I believe, go far beyond them in the contempt. And to
the end I may make good that which I say, let me show it in particulars how he
word of God, the holy will of God revealed in the sripture is a mere stranger
unto us; a thing that is far, from being so well known, and so familiar unto
us as it ought to be; and let that which I say be credited, only so far, as
your own consciences shall find it to be true. The word of God is a strange
thing to our judgments, a strange thing to our thoughts, strange to our
affections, strange to our tongues and speeches, strange to our courses and to
our ordinary conversation, if this be true, how shall we be able to shift of
the like challenge from the lord, which is here made against the Jews; vz:
that we have accounted the great things of Gods law as a strange thing. First
it is straung to our judgments; that appears by our exceeding ignorance in
the things of God, and by that extreme dulnes of conceit which is still to be
seen in us: There is scarcely any one thing of those which do necessarily and
generally concern men, wherein the greatest part of our people are less
seen, then the doctrine of Gods word; there is nothing which they hear spoken
of in any company, or upon any occasion, the meaning course, and scope whereof
they do less apprehend, then the rules and precepts and instructions of the
scripture: men of years and great experience, skillfull in the courses of the
world, wise in their affairs and very pollitique, well seem in matters of
law, able to speak well and with good advise about outward things, a man would
wonder to hear their weakness and simplicity in religion. This shows that the
law of god is a strange thing to our Judgments; there is nothing less known,
there is nothing less conceived. Secondly, it is strange to our thoughts;
Truth is, Thoughts are known only unto God, who is the sole searcher of men's
hearts; but yet (if our consciences being appealed unto) we will speak the
truth as it is, I believe that we must (whether we will or no) confess, that
our minds are so (in a manner) wholly taken up with covetous, ambitious, idle,
wanton, reuengfull thoughts, rising out of our corrupt hearts, as from a
continual spring, that there is scarcely any room or time for any private
questionings or communings which our selves touching the words of eternal life,
and the great things of Gods law. Ioh. 6.68.
Such meditations may sometimes (perhaps) knock at the outward door of our
hearts, or (it may be) find, upon a fit some sudden and superficial
entertainment, but (alas) they are quickly vanished; and like a serpent upon a
stone, Pro. 30.19. Coss. 3.16.
or a ship in the mids of the sea, leave no print behind them; and by that
means never come to pitch with us or to dwell plenteously in our hearts
Thirdly there is as small acquaintance betwixt the word of God and our
affections: I need say no more to prove it but this, namely, that there is
nothing which does sooner tire us aut, and make our spirits dull and lumpish,
then the exercises of the word, in what kind soever. In other things we are
like to the Horsele aches daughters, which cry, Pro. 30.25.
give, give, and we are seldom heard to say it is enough: but in matters of
religion we are very moderate; compendious sermons, breife discourses, short
prayers, hasty meditations, these please us best. Indeed were it not for very
shame, we would have none at all. Thus Gods word is not to us as a beloved
friend, of whose sweet acquaintance we could never be weary, but as some
unwelcome stranger, who (it may be) by importunity, gets a nights lodging
with us, but his departure pleases us better then his coming. Now fourthly
for our tongues and speeches, let us call to mind our ordinary conferences,
at home, at work, in iournies, in meetings, in going and coming too and from
the church, and then say truly, whether if our savior Christ should suddenly
chop in amongst us, as he did to see the two disciples traueling to Emaus, Luke
24.15.
and should say to us as he did to them, what manner of communications are
these that you have one to another? we should be able to answer him for on
time of a thousand, that we are reverently and soberlie communing together of
good things, conferring of the things in which publicly we have been
taught, that so we might both edify our selves in our most holy faith, and
might also provoke and stir up one another. to good works. doubtless (as it
was said to Peter) our very speech would bewray us, Iud uer. 10. Arb. 10.24.
and the barrennes of our talk, would discover the drines and deadnes of our
hearts. But now lastly although the word of God do now and then twang upon
some men's tongues, and be made a matter of discourse and table-talke, to take
up the time, or to show wit, or else be called in by some profaine ones, Judge.
16.25.
as Sampson was by the Philistines, to make them pastime, yet it is most
universally a stranger to men's lives and conuersations. It is madness in the
worlds account for a man in all things (with David) to make the testimonies of
the lord, Psalm. 19.24.
his counselors, and to stand upon these strict and nice terms of consience,
as not to adventure upon any thing, but that which he may warrant unto his own
soul thereby. Shall it not hinder my profit? will it be no blemish to my
reputation, may I thereby further such and such purposes? are there any examples
of men of some note and fashion in the world running the same courses? Here is
the ordinary religion of the world; but as for laying the precepts of the word
as precise rules for the ordering of al our ways, and the guiding of our lives
in the lords path, it is a thing so ridiculous, and unreasonable in common
Judgment, and through discontinuance of these evil times so out of use, that
when as the word challenges that right of governing us which the Lord has
given it, men forth with (so strange a thing is it unto them to bear the yoke)
snuff and are not afraid to expostulate with it, as the Sodomits did with Lot,
Genesis 19.9.
shall it, being a stranger judge and rule over us? Thus I have by particulars
confirmed this point; viz that we are as deservedly liable to this reproof,
as the Jews were. The Lord wrote unto them the great things of his law; so he
has done to us; they accounted them as a strange thing, we are very equal to
them in contempt.

Now for the last point propounded, namely the use of all that has been
said, it must needs be this: viz: That seeing to account the great things of
Gods law as a strange thing, is 1 a fault, 2 a greuious fault, 3 a fault
liable to so extreme punishment, and 4 our fault: there is no remedy (unless
by a bold persisting in an apparent evil we will provoke God) but we must
henceforth give all diligence, that the word of God may be no more a stranger
unto us, but a dweller with us, and may become familiar unto us. That this is a
duty from which no man is exempted, the scripture is manifest, in which (if
the whole body of it throughout be examined (there is no releasement or
dispensation given unto any to neglect the searching of Gods book; nether was
it ever maintained by any doctrine; but by doctrine of Popery, that ordinary
men need not seek to be made acquainted with the scripture. We read that when
the Philistines had the Israelits in bondage, 1. Sam. 13.
one pollecy to keep them under, and to detain them in perpetual thraldom,
was this; they left them never a smith throughout all the land, and what was
their reason, least (said they) the Hebrews make them sword and spears. 19.
ver.
if they took away their weapons from them, it was an easy thing to oppress
them. The very like policy was used in the days of Popery, to the end to
continue the people in blindness, that they might not descriy the abomination
of that religion, by the light of the scripture. They took the bible from
them, and shutt it up in Colleges and libraries, and suffered it not to pass,
but in a language which the vulgar understood not. And as in that bondage of
the Israelites under the Philistines, no man could shearpen his mattock, his
axe, 20. ver.
and his weeding hook, but they must be beholding to the Philistines, and take
of them such help, as they would vouchsafe to afford them; So in the days of
Popishi blindness, no common man wanting the helps of learning and knowledge in
the tongues, could enjoy the benefit of any spiritual sharpening, any
comfort for his soul, but as it pleased those tirants over Gods heritage to
bestow upon them. So that the contempt of the scripture of God (which is the
common sickness of the country) is naught else, but a very dregg of popery;
ignorance being the scepter of that kingdom; and the reasons which even the
most learned papstis allege for the discharging of the Laity, from converting
with the scripture, being the very same which every profaine ignorant person,
is able by the private teaching of his own corrupt heart, to plead on the
behalf of his own carelesnes. Well, the scope of this place (which is a part
of that holy truth by which we must be judged at the last day (requires at
our hands better things: and if we be any whit a shamed of our former neglect,
and think our selves bound in conscience, to grow into a farther degree of
familiarity with the word of God, the vseing of these helps shall be a great
furtherance.

hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; and in the sound and a
sincere preaching of the word, there is plainly set out unto us the very
mystery of Christ. To this course is the blessing promised, that it shall save
them that believe, Col. 2 3. 1. Cor. 1.21.
especially when it is yielded to with humility, and with a holy disclaiming of
a man's own seeming wisdom. For the Lord will guide the meek in Judgment,
and teach the humble his way, yea his very secret is revealed unto such:
according as on the contrary he catches the wise in their own craftiues,
Psalm. 25.9.14. 1. Cor. 3.19. Romans 1.22.
and makes them become fools, when they profess the greatest wisdom. If
we would then grow into more and more acquaintance with the scripture, we
must wear out the threshold of the Lords house, and wacth daily at his gates,
Pro. 8.33. Pro. 2.2, 5.
and give attendance at the posts of his doors: For if thou cause thine ears
to hearken unto wisdom, and incline thine heart: then shall thou understand
the fear of the lord, and find the the knowledge of God. if in our affections
and care we be strangers to public teaching, we may perhaps have some
smattering and superficial knowledge, but can never have any true taste of the
marrow and sweetness of the scripture. 2 private exercise, namely an advised,
intentive, deliver, and (as it were) cast us into the form, Romans 6.17.
and mould of doctrine which we hear, and seasoneth the inner man, even the
spirit of the mind, with that holy truth which we have learned. 3. A reverent
and discreet conference touching heavenly things as occasion falls sometime
with our minister, Mar. 4.10. Heb. 3.13. Chap. 310.24. Deuteronomy. 6.7. Luke 24.13.14.
sometimes with our neighbors, sometimes at home with our famelies, sometimes
abroad even as we walk by the way. This is a notable quickening for our selves,
and a great help to others. The lips of the wise do spread abroad knowledge;
Pro. 5.7. Pro. 10.21.
and feed many.

At the lest some of these private exercises should daily be performed, for
miserable is that man who for one whole day together, does nether busy his
tongue, nor employ his thoughts, nor apply his ears to some holy use, to
hear, or talk, or muse about something by which he may be built up in Christ
Jesus. 3 Careful and steadfast practice to keep the Lords righteous Judgments
and to have respect to all his commandments. Use in all things breeds
cunning, Psalm. 119.106. uer. 6.
and he which makes it his care to Put in execution such good duties, as he
hears taught, praying the Lord to establish him in every word and good work,
will in time grow so perfect in good things, that he shall even with a kind of
pleasure, (for the Lords yoke is easy) walk in the law of the Lord never
being idle nor unfruitful in the knowledge of Christ, 2. These. 2.17. Heb.
13.21. Math. 11.30. Ps 1.119.1. 2. Pet. 1.8. Tit. 2.10.
but adorning the doctrine of God our savior in all things. The conscionable
practice of these duties shall by the blessing of God, reform our common fault
of being strangers in Gods, book and shall by making Christ's word dwell with
us, fit, and make us ready to dwell with him for ever in his kingdom.

The end of the third Sermon.
Let God alone have the glory.

