THE Four Prentises of London. With the Conquest of Jerusalem. As it has been
diverse times Acted, at the Red Bull, by the Queens Majesty's Servants.
Written by THOMAS HEYWOOD.



Printed at London for I. W. 1615.

To the honest and hie-spirited Prentises The Readers.
TO you (as whom this Play most especially concerns) I thought good to
dedicate this Labor, which though written many years since, in my Infancy of
Judgment in this kind of Poetry, and my first practice: yet understanding (by
what means I know not) it was in these more exquisit and refined Times to come
to the Press, in such a forwardness ere it came to my knowledge, that it was
past prevention, and knowing withal, that it comes short of that accuratenesse
both in Plot and Style, that these more Censorious days with greater curiosity
acquire, I must thus excuse. That as Plays were then some fifteen or sixteen
years ago it was in the fashion. Nor could it have found a more seasonable
and fit publication then at this Time, when, to the glory of our Nation, the
security of the Kingdom, and the honor of the City, they have begun again
the commendable practice of long forgotten Arms, the continuance of which I
wish, the discipline approve, and the encouragement thereof even with my soul
applaude. In which great and hoped good they deserve not the least attribute of
approbation: who, in the dull and sleepy time of peace, first wakened the
remembrance of these arms in the Artillery garden, which begun out of their
voluntary affections, prosecuted by their private industries, and continued at
their own proper cost and charge, deserves in my opinion, not only respect
and regard, but recompense and reward. But to return again to you, my brave
spirited Prentises, upon whom I have freely bestowed these Four* I wish you
all, that have their courages and forwardness, their noble Fates and Fortunes,

Yours,

Thomas Heywood.

Drammatis Personae.
The old Earl of Bulleine. His four sons. Godfrey. Guy. Charles. Eustace.
Bella Franca his daughter. An English Captain. Robert of Normandy. The French
Kings daughter. Tancred a Prince of Italy. The Souldan of Babylon. The Sophy of
Persia. Turnus. Moretes. A Chorus, or Presentor. Mutes. The French King. The
Bullenois. Bandetti. Irishmen. Ambushes of Pagans. The Clown.
The Prologue.
Enter three in black clokes, at three doors. 1 What mean you, my masters,
to appear thus before your times? Do you not know that I am the Prologue? Do
you not see this long black velvet cloak upon my back? Have you not sounded
thrice? Do I not look pale, as fearing to be out in my speech* Nay, have I
not all the signs of a Prologue about me? Then, to what and come you to
interrupt me?

2 I have a Prologue to speak too.

3 And I another.

1 O superfluous, and more then ever I heard of! three Pr^logues to one play!

2 Have you not seen three ropes to tole one bell, three doors to one house,
three ways to one town?

1 I grant you: but I never heard of any that had three heads to one body, but
Cerberus. But what does your Prologue mean?

2 I come to excuse the name of the Play?

3 I the errors in the Play.

1 And I the Author that made the Play. Touching the name, why is it called,
True and Strange, or The four Prentises of London? A Gentleman that heard the
subject discourst, said it was not possible to be true; and none here are bound
to believe it.

2 It Is true, that Alexander at thirty years of age conquered the whole world;
but strange he should do so. If we should not believe things recorded in
former ages, we were not worthy that succeeding times should believe things
done in these our ages.

1 But what authority have you for your History? I am one of those that will
believe nothing that is not in the Chronicle.

2 Our authority is a Manuscript, a book writ in parchment; which not being
public, nor general in the world, we rather thought fit to exemplify to
the public censure, things concealed and obscured, such as are not common
with every one, than such Historical Tales as every one can tell by the fire
in Winter. Had not ye rather, for novelties sake, see Jerusalem ye never saw,
then London that ye see howerly? So much touching the name of our History.

1 You have satisfied me; and, I hope, all that hear me. Now what have you to
speak concerning the errors in the Play?

3 We acknowledge none: For the errors we could find, we would willingly
amend; but if these cleere-sighted Gentlemen, with the eyes of their
judgments, looking exactly into us, find any imperfections which are hid from
our selves, our request is, you would rather look over them, then through
them, not with a troubled eye, that makes one object to seem two, but with a
favorable eye, which has power in it self to make many to seem none at all.

1 Oh now I understand you. Three Prologues to our Play, pardon me, you have need
of three hundred, me thinks, and all little enough. But to end our beginning
in a word. Thus much by the patience of these Gentlemen.

Spectators, should you oppose your judgments against us: where we are three,
which some would think too many; were we three thousand, we think our selves
to few. Our Author submits his labors to you, as the Authors of all the
content he has within this circumference.

But for your sakes, this only we dare say,
We promised you, and we will perform a Play.
The four Prentises OF LONDON.
Actus primus,
Scoena prima.
Enter the old Earl of Boloigne, and his daughter BELLA FRANCA. EARL.
DAughter, thou see how Fortune turns ^er wheel.
We that but late were mounted up aloft,
Lul'd in the skirt of that inconstant Dame,
Are now thrown headlong by her ruthlesse hand,
To kiss that earth whereon our feet should stand.
What censuring eye, that sees me thus deiect,
Would take this shape to be that famous Duke,
Which has made Boloigne through the world renowned,
And all our race with fame and honor crowned?

BELL. But father how can you endure a slave
To triumph in your fortunes; and here stand
In soul deiect, and banished from your land?

EARL. I Will tell thee Girl. The French King, and my self,
Upon some terms grew in a strange debate,
And taking careful vantage of the time,
Whilst I with all my powers, in aid of William
The Norman Duke, now English Conqueror,
Was busily emploi'd; he seized my right,
Planting another, and supplanting me.
This is the ground of my extremity.

BELL. If for King Williams sake now Conqueror,
You lost your birthright and inheritance:
How comes it that he sees you in this state,
And lifts not up your fortunes ruinate?

EARL. A conquered Kingdom is not easily kept,
He has so much ado to guard his own,
That mine is buried in oblivion;
And I am forced to loose the name of Earl,
And live in Lond^n like a Ci^tizen.
My four sons are bound prentice to four Trades.
Godfrey my eldest boy I have made a Mercer;
Guy my next son, enrol'd in Gold-smithes Trade;
My third son Charles bound to an Haberdasher;
Young Eustace is a Grocer: all high borne,
Yet of the Citty-trades they have no scorn.
Thus bare necessity has made me seek
Some refuge, to sustain our poverty.
And having placed my sons in such a sort,
The little wealth I have left, I leave to thee.
My self will travail to the holy Land;
And ere I lie within the earths vaste womb,
Pay my devout vows at my Saviors Tomb.

BELL. Was that the cause you sent for my four brothers?


EVRLE. Their wished sight will cheer my aged heart:
And I will bless them all before I part.

Enter GODFREY, GVY, CHARLES, and EVSTACE, like Apprentices. GODF. I wonder,
brothers, why my father has sent for us thus early: that, all business set
ap^rt, we must meet together this morning.


GVY. I know not the reason. I had much ado to get leave of my Master to be
spared from my attendance in the Shop, and serving of Customers.


CHA. 'Faith as soon as I heard but the messenger say, my father must speak
with me: I left my Tanakrd to guard the Conduit; and away came I.


EVST. I beshrew him, I should have been at breake-fast with two or three good
boys this morning: but that match is disappointed by this meeting.


BELL. See where my brothers are already come.


EARL. Godfrey, Guy, Charles, young Eustace all at once,
Divide a fathers blessing in four parts,
And share my prayers amongst you equally.
First Godfrey, tell me how thou like thy Trade?
And knowing in thy thoughts what thou have ben,
How can thou brook to be as thou art now?

GODF. Bound must obey: Since I have undertook
To serve my Master truly for seven years,
My duty shall both answer that desire,
And my old Masters profit every way.
I praise that City which made Princes Tradesmen:
Where that man, noble or ignoble borne,
That would not practice some mechanicke skill.
Which might support his state in penury,
Should die the death; not sufferd like a drone,
To suck the honey from the public Hiue.
I hold it no disparage to my birth,
Though I be borne an Earl, to have the skill
And the full knowledge of the Mercers Trade.
And were I now to be create a new,
It should not grieve me to have spent my time
The secrets of so rich a Trade to know,
By which advantage and much profits grow.

EAR. Well have thou done to overcome thy fate,
Making thy mind conformed to thy state.
How likes my Guy, the Gold-smithes faculty.

GVY. As a good refuge in extremity.
Say I be borne a Prince, and be cast down
By some sinister chance, or fortunes frown:
Say I be banished: when I have a Trade,
And in my self a means to purchase wealth,
Though my state waste, and towering honors fall,
That still stays with me in the extream'st of all.

EARL. What says my third son Charles?


CHAR. If I should say I would not brook those bonds,
Which God, and fate, and you, have tied me in;
You would be preaching disobedience.
Or should I say the Citty-trades are base
For such a great man's sons to take on them:
Your fatherly regard would straight advise me
To chastise my rebellious thoughts; and say,
Son, you by this may live another day.
Therefore, as my two brothers, I reply;
You ask me if I like it; I say I.

EARL. What says my youngest boy?


EVST. Father, I say, Hawking is a pretty sport,
And Hunting is a Princely exercise;
To ride a great horse, oh it is admirable!

EARL. Eustace I know it is: but to my question.
How can thou brook to be a Prentise, boy?

EVST. Me thinks I could endure it for seven years,
Did not my Master keep me in too much.
I cannot go to breake-fast in a morning
With my kind mates and fellow-Prentises,
But he cries Eustace, one bid Eustace come:
And my name Eustace is in every room.
If I might once a week but see a Tilting,
Six days I would ^all unto my business close,
And ere the weeks end win that idle day.
He will not let me see a mu^,
Nor in a May Day morning ^ch in May.
I am no sooner got into the Fencing-schoole,
To play a venew with some friend I bring;
But Eustace, Eustace, all the street must ring.
He will allow me not one how^ for sport.
I must not strike a soote-ball in the street,
But he will frown: not view the dancing-schoole,
But he will miss^ straight: not suffer me
So much as take up cudgels in the street,
But he will chide: I must not go to buffets;
No, though I be provoked; that is the hell,
Were It not for this, I could endure it well.

EARL. Sons, ye must all forget your birth and honors,
And look into the times necessity.
I know ye are persuaded: Think not, sons, the names of Prentice can
disparage you.
For howsoever of you esteemed they be,
Even Kings themselves have of these Trades been free.
I made a vow to see the holy Land,
And in the same my Saviors Sepulcher.
Having so well disposed you; I will now
First bless you Boys, and then prefer my vow.

GODF. With much ado, do I contain my spirit.
Within these bands, that have enclosed me round.
Though now this cafe the noble Sun does shroud;
Time shall behold that Sun break through this clowd.

GVY. My Genius bids my soul have patience,
And says I shall not be a Prentise long.
I scorn it not: but yet my sp^ ^me,
To have this hand catch at the Crown of Fame.

CHAR. An Haberdasher is the Trade Ivse:
But the soft wool feels in my hand like steel:
And I could wish each hat comes through my hand
Were turned into an Helmet, and each Helmet
Upon a Soldiers head, for me to lead.
War is the walk which I desire to tread.

EVST. I am a Grocer: Yet had rather see
A fair guilt sword hung in a velvet sheath,
Then the best Barbary sugar in the world;
Were it a freight of price inestimable.
I have a ^de of prompting in my brain,
That says; Though I be bound to a swee^e Trade,
I must forgo it, I keep too much in*
I would fast from meat and drink a Summers day,
To see swords clafh, or view a desperate fray.

EARL. Bridle these humors sons, expel them clean,
And your high Spirits within your breasts contain:
Whilst I my tedious Pilgrimage prepare,
To spend my age in poverty and prayer.
My firstborn, first farewell; my second next:
Charles, Eustace, Daughter: Here my blessings say,
Your wishes bear me on my sacred way.
Exit.
GODF. Even to the place you travail, there to ascend
With those devout prayers you to heaven commend.
Brothers, since we are now as strangers here,
Yet by our fathers provident care so placed,
That we may live secure from penury:
So let us please our Masters by our care,
That we our ruined fortunes may repair.

GVY. Brother, if I knew where to go to war,
I would not stay in London one hour longer.

CHAR. An hour! By heaven I would not stay a minute.


EVST. A minute! not a moment. Would you put a moment
Into a thousand parts, that thousandth part
Would not I linger, might I go to war.
Why, I would presently run from my Master,
Did I but hear where were a drum to follow.

BELL. Would you so brother?


EVST. I good faith, sweet Sister,

I would show him as fine a pair of heels, as light and nimble, as any the
neatest cork shoe in all the Town turns up: I would in faith.


BELL. And leave me here alone?


GVY. Alone? why sister,
Can you be left alone amongst multitudes?
London is sull of people every where.

GODF. Well, leave this jesting: we forget our selves.
Sister, we will have you to our fathers house,
T'enioy the small possessions left you there:
Return we to our Masters and our charge,
Left seeking this our l^tering to excuse,
With forged inventions we their ears abuse.
Sound a Drum within softly. I hear a drum. I have as much power to sit,
Sort out my wares, and scrible on a Shop-board,
When I but hear the music of a drum,
As to abstain from meat when I am hungry.
I Will know what news before I stir a foot.

CHAR. By heaven I am enamoured of this tune,
It Is the best Music in the world to me.

EVST. My legs are marching straight when I but hear it.
R^n, tan, tan: Oh I could lead a drum
Wit^ a good grace, if I but saw behind me
An hundred soldiers follow in even ranks.
Had I but here a band of men to lead,
Methinkes I could do wonders: Oh it is brave
To be a Captain, and command to have.

Enter after a Drum, a Captain with a Proclamation. CAP. All Commanders,
Captains, Liefetenants, Geutletlemen of Compaines, Sergeants, Corporals, or
common Soldiers whatsoever, that will accompany to the holy wars at
Jerusalem, Robert Duke of Normandy the Kings son: they shall have pay and
place, according to their deserts. And so God save King William Surnamed the
Conqueror.

Exit Drum and Captain.
EVST. Ran, tan, tan. Now by S. George, he tells gallant news: I Will home no
more; I*le run away to night.


GVY. If I cast Bole, or Spoone, or Salt again,
Before I have beheld Jerusalem,
Let me turn* Pagan.

CHAR. Hats and Caps adeiw:
For I must leave you, if the Drum say true.

GODF. Nay then have with you brothers; for my spirit
With as much vigor has burst forth as thine,
And can as hardly be restrained as yours.
Give me your hands I will consort you too:
Let Us try what London Prentises can do.

EVST. For my Trades sake, if good success I have,
The Grocers Arms shall in mine Ensign wave.

GVY. And if my valor bring me to command,
The Gold-smithes Arms shall in my colors stand.

GODF. So of us all: then let us in one ship
Lanch all together: and as we are brothers,
So let us enter zealous amity,
And still prevail by our united strength.
I know our hearts are one; sister Farewell.
Trust me in vain you should persuade our stay:
For we are bent, consort us with your prayers.

ALL. Farewell.


BELL. Farewell.


GODF. God!


GVY. Heaven.


CHAR. F^te.


EVST. Fortune.


GODF. Make us happy men, To win.


GVY. Wear.


CHAR. Vanquish.


EVST. Overcome.

Exeunt.
BELL. Amen.

Have you all left me midst a world of strangers,
Here only to my self: not to protect me,
Or to defend me from apparent wrong?
Since it is so, I Will follow after you:
In some disguise I will pursue their steps,
And unto God and fortune yield my self.
Toward sea they are gone, and unto sea must I,
A Virgins unexpected fate to try.
Exit.
Enter marching ROBERT of Normandy, the Captain, the four brethron, Drum,
and Soldiers. Enter the PRESENTER. PRE. Thus have you seen these brothers
shipped to Sea,
Bound on their voyage to the holy Land,
All bent to try their fortunes in one Bark.
Now to avoid all dilatory news,
Which might withold you from the Stories pith,
And substance of the matter we entend:
I must entreat your patience to forbear,
Whilst we do feast your eye, and starve your ear.
For in dumb shows, which were they writ at large,
Would ask a long and tedious circumstance:
Their infant fortunes I will soon express,
And from the truth in no one point digress.
Ye have seen the father of these four fair sons,
Already gone his weary pilgrimage:
Godfrey, Guy, Charles, and Eustace, pressed to sea
To follow Robert Duke of Normandy.
Imagine now ye see the air made thick
With stormy tempests, that disturb the sea:
And the four winds at war among themselves:
And the weak barks wherein the brothers sail,
Split on strange rocks, and they enforced to swim:
To save their desperate lives: where what befell the^
Dispersed to several corners of the world,
We will make bold to explane it in dumb Show:
For from their fortunes all our Scene must grow,
Enter with a Drum on one side certain Spaniards; on the other side certain
Citizens of Bullen: the Spaniards insult upon them, and make them do them
homage; to the Citizens enter GODFREY, as newly landed and half naked,
conferres with the Citizens, and by his instigation they set upon the
Spaniards, and beat them away, they come to honor him, and he discloseth
himself unto them; which done, they Crown him, and accept him for their
Prince: and so Exeunt. Those Citizens you see were Bullonoyes,
Kept under bondage of that tyrannous Earl,
To whom the French King gave that ancient seat,
Which to the wronged Pilgrim did belong.
But in the height of his ambition,
Godfrey, by Shipwreck thrown upon that Coast,
Stirs up the oppressed City to reuoult:
And by his valor was th'y surper slain;
The City from base bondage freed again.
The men of Bulloigne, wondering what strong hand
Had been the means of their deliverance,
Besought him to make known his birth and state:
Which Godfrey did. The people, glad to see
Their natural Prince procure their liberty,
Homage to him, create him Earl of Bulloig^;
And reposs^sse him in his fathers seat.
Where we will leave him having honor won;
And now return unto the second son.
Enter the King of France, and his daughter walking: to them GVY: all wet. The
Lady entreats her father for his entertainment: which is granted; and rich
clothes are put about him: and s^c Exeunt. As the French King did with his
daughter walk
By the Seaside: from far they might espy
O^e on a rafter floate upon the waves,
Who as he drew more near unto the shore,
They might discern a man, though basely clad,
Yet sparks of honor kindled in his eyes.
Him (...) (...) sight the beauteous Lady loves;
And prays her father to receive him home:
To which the King accords; and in his Court
Makes him a great and special Officer.
There leave we Guy a gallant Courtier proved,
And of the beauteous Lady well beloved.
Enter Ba^tto's, with the Earl prisoner: Exeunt some of them with him to
prison: Enter CHARLES all wet with his sword; fights with the rest, and kills
their Captain: They yield and offer to make him their Captain, to which he
agrees: and sic excunt omnes. Charles the third son, is by the winds and waves
Borne on a Planke as far as Italy,
And lands just at a lofty Mountains foot:
Upon whose top a many out-lawed Thieves,
Bandetti, Brauoes, such as keep in Caves,
Made their abode. This crew assailes young Charles:
Who in the bicke^ing st^ikes their Captain dead.
They wondering at his valor, and being now
Without a Leader, humbly seek to him
To be their Chieftaine, and command their strength:
Which at their carnest suite he undertakes.
We leave him there, thinking his brothers drowned,
Nor knowing yet his father there lies bound.
Enter a Coarse aft^r it Irishmen mourning, in a dead March: to them enters
EVSTACE, and talks with the chi^fe mourner, who mak^ signs of consent, after
burial of the Coarse, and so Excunt. Eustace, the youngest of the four, was
cast
Upon the coast of Ireland; and from thence
He comes to travail to Jerusalem;
Supposing his three brethren drowned by sea.
Thus have you seen these four, that were but now
All in one Fleet, a many thousand leagues
Seuer'd from one another: Guy in France,
Godfrey in Bulloigne, Charl^s in Italy,
Eustace in Ireland amongst the Irish kernes.
Yet Gentlemen, the self same wind and fortune
That parted them, may bring them altogether.
Their sister follows them with zealous feet:
Be patient, ye will wonder when they meet.
Four London Prentises will ere they die,
Advance their towering fame above the sky;
And win such glorious praise as never fades,
Unto themselves and honor of their Trades.
Grant them your wonted patience to proceed,
And their keen swords shall make the Pagans bleed.
Exit.
Enter GVY, and the Lady of France. LADY. Fie stranger, can a skin so white
and soft
Cover an heart obdurate, hard a^ flint?
Since I first saw thee floating on the waves,
The fire of love flew from your radiant eye,
Which like a Sunne-beame pierced unto my heart.

GVY. Sweet Lady, all my powers I owe to you:
For by your favor I ascend this height,
Which seats me in the favor of a Prince.
A Prince, that did he know me, in the stead pri^te to himself.
Of doing me honor would cut off my head.
He did exile my father; cast me down;
And spurd with envious hate, distressed us all.
Since fortune then, and the devouring Seas,
Have robbed me of my brothers, and none left
Of all my fathers sons alive but I:
Take this advantage, and be secret, Guy.
Meet this occasion; and conclude with fate,
To raise again thy fathers ruined state.

LAD. Fie niggard, can you spend such precious breath,
Speak to your self so many words apart;
And keep their sound from my attentive ear,
Which save your words no music loves to hear?

GVY. What would you have me say?


LADY. Would I might teach thee!
Oh that I had the guidance of thy tongue! private.
But what would that avail thee foolish Girl?
Small hope in those instructions I should find,
To rule your tongue, if not to guide your mind.

GV. My tongue, my thoughts, my heart, my hand, my sword,
Are all your servants, Who h^h done you wrong?

LADY. I doubt not of your valor. But resolve me
And tell me one thing truly I shall ask you.

GVY. Be It not my birth, no question I Will deny.
Doubt not my truth for honor scorns to lie.

LADY. I do believe you: Fair Knight do you love?


GVY. To ride a horse as well as any man;
To make him mount, curuet, to leap, and spring;
To chide the bit, to gallop, trot the ring.

LADY. I did not ask you if you love to ride.
Some thing I mean^; which though my tongue deny,
Look on me, you may read it in mine eye.
But do you love?

GV. To march, to plant a battle, lead an Host,
To be a Soldier and to go to war,
To talk of Flanks, of Wings, of skonces, Holds,
To see a sally, or to give a Charge,
To lead a Vaward, Rereward, or maine Host;
By heaven I love it as mine own dear life.

LADY. I know all this; your words are but delays.
Could you not love a Lady that loves you?
It Is hard when women are enforced to woo.
Private.
GV. Where is my man to bring me certain news,
The Kings Commission sends me to the wars:
The villain loyters in my business.

LADY. All this is from the matter gentle Knight:
The Kings Commission may be signed at leisure.
What say you to my question?

GV. You would have me tell you true.


LADY. Either speak true, or do not speak at all.


GV. Then as I am true Knight I honor you,
And to your service will espouse my sword.
I wish you as I wish the glorious Sun,
That it may ever shine; without whose luster
Perpetual darkness should o'reshade the earth.
But tell me Lady, what you mean by love.

LADY. To love a Lady, is with heart entire
To make her Mistress of his whole desire:
To sigh for her, and for her love to weep;
As his own heart her precious favors keep:
Never be from her, in her bosom dwell;
To make her presence heaven, her absence hell.
Write Sonnets in her praise, admire her beauty:
Attend her, serve her, count his service duty.
Make her the sole commandresse of his powers,
And in the search of love, loose all his hours.

GV. It Is pretty for some fool that could endure it:
How near am I unto this love, sweet Lady?
I love to mount a Steed, whose heavy trot
Cracks all my sinews, makes my Armor crash:
I love to march up to the neck in snow.
To make my pillow of a cake of Ice,
That in the morning, when I stretch my limbs,
My hair hangs thick with dropping Isicles,
And my brig^t Arms be frozen to the earth.
I love to see my face be^'d in blood:
To have a gaping wound upon my flesh,
Whose very mouth would make a Lady sound.
I love no chamber-musicke; but a Drum,
To give me ^unts-vp. Could your Grace endure
To lie all night within a sheet of Maile,
By a drawn sword that parts* not from my side,
Embrace a body full of wounds and skarres,
And hear no language but of blood and wars?
Such is my life; such may my honor prove:
Make war a Lady, I that Lady love.

LAD. Fie, fie, you run quite from the by as eleane,
To love that dearly, which we hate so deadly.
If love and I be one, you hate us both.

GVY. Then can I love no Lady by my troth.
Madame farewell; for under my command
The King your father sends ten thousand men,
To win the holy Town Jerusalem.
Thither must I; esteeming your high honor
Like a bright Comet and unmatched Star;
But love no woman in the world, save war.
Exit.
LADY. Go flint; strike fire upon thy enemies steel,
Whilst I descend one step from fortunes wheel.
Thou go before, love bids me follow after:
By thee, the King thy Lord must loose his daughter.
Exit.
Enter CHARLES like an Outlaw, with Bandetto's and Theenes, and with the
Clown. CHA. Theeus, and good fellows, speak what should I call you?
There Is not a rogue among you that fears God,
Nor one that has a touch of honesty.
Robbers, and knaves, and rascals all together,
Sweet consort of vild villains list to me.
Am not I well preferred to become Captain
Unto a crew of such pernicious flaues?
I shall have such a coil to make you Christians,
And bring you to some shape of honesty,
That ^re I do it, I shall make your bodies
Nothing but scarre-crowes, to hang round these Trees.

CLOVVNE. Brave Captain courageous whom death cannot daunt; we have been all
Gentlemen and House-holders; But I was banished for nothing but getting of
Bastards; but this fellow ^ed from Venice, for killing a man cowardly on the
Rialto; some for one villainy, and some for another. Our Capta^e that you
killed, and now supply his place, poisoned a worthy Merchant in the City with
rates-bane; and flying hither, for his valor we made him our General. But now
brave Canallero, to thee alone we sing Honononero.


CHAR. Well, I must have you now turn honest Thieves.
He that commits a rape, shall sure be hanged:
He that commits a murder, shall be murdered
With the same weapon that did act the deed.
He that robbes pilgrims, or poor Trauellours,
That for devotions sake do pass these Mountains,
He shall be naked tied to arms of Trees,
And in the days heat stung with Waspes and Bees.
Ye slaves, I Will teach you some ciuility.

CLOVVNE. Captain, what shall he be done withal, that lies with a wench with
her will, if he be hung that lies with one against her well.


CHAR. I Will have him whipped.


CLOVV. See, see, I think the Captain has been a Cook in his time, h^an
fit sweet meat with sour sauce. But what a fool is our Captain, to
prescribe Laws to Out-lawes? If we would have kept the Laws before in the
City, we needed not to have been driven now to lead our lives in the
Country. But Captain, since you are our Captain, we will resign unto you all
our treasures and prisoners, and our spoils. Take possession of them in Gods
name, that came to us in the devils name.


CHAR. Your prisoners, spoils, and treasure all bring forth,
That I may seize them as mine own by right;
As heir to him whom I have slain in fight.

Enter the Thieves bringing in the old Earl bound. EARL. Villains I know you
drag me to my death:
And ye shall do me an exceeding grace.

CHAR. I am deceived but I have seen that face.


VILL. Come, come you old gray-beard, you must before our Captain: if he say
Vi^e then live; if not, thou die if thou were his father.


CHAR. Villain, thou lie if thou were my brother:
He shall not die. Upon your low knees fall,
And ask him pardon, or I Will hang you all.

EARL. Tweene joy and fear amazed in heart I stand:
Does my son Charles lead this unruly band.

CHAR. Your only son, and all the sons you have,
And borne his fathers desperate life to save.

EARL. How camst thou here? why do thou call thy self
My only son? having three brothers more,
Which unto me thy beauteous mother bore.

CHAR. Once we were four, all fellow-prentices;
And after fellow soldiers, pressed to serve
The good Duke Robert in his holy wars.
But in a storm, our ships so bravely manned,
Were wrackt; and save my self none swamme to land.
They perished there: I by the waves and winds
Was driven upon this Coast of Italy,
Where landing naked, save my trusty sword,
This crew of bold Bandetto's set upon me:
But in the dangerous fight, by chance I slew
The lucklesse Captain of this damned crew:
Who since have made me Captain, here to stay,
Till fortune grant me a more prosperous way.

EARL. Mine eyes have vowed to die the self same death
My sons have done: son let me weep a while,
To bring the like destruction to my eyne;
These in salt tears; they in a sea of brine.

CLOVVNE. Is this our Captains father? what villains were we to use him so
roughly?


VILL. If the old fornicator had but told us so much, we should have had the
grace, either to have set him see, or fortune to have used him more gently.


CHAR. Since father we have met this happy day,
Secure with me amongst these Out-lawes stay.

EARL. Not for the world; since I have lost my sons,
All outward joys are from my heart removed:
Vain pleasures I abhor, all things defy,
That teach not to despair, or how to die,
Yet ere I leave the world I vow to see,
His holy blessed Tomb that died for me.

CHA. Then take along with you this bag of gold
To bear your charge in every Inn you come:
Deny it not, relief is comfortable.

EARL. Thanks my dear son, expense it will defray,
And serve to deal to poor men by the way.
And now farewell sweet Charles, thou all my sons,
For now the last sand in my howre-glasse runs.

CHAR. Ye two conduct him safe beyond the mountains.


VILL. Shall I be one?


CLOVV. And I another?


CHAR. Ye know the passages, be it your charge.


VILL. I am glad the silly man is weak and old:
By heaven my fingers tickle at his gold.

CLOVV. Old man is your purse afloate? I have vowed to cut his throat, but to
have it every groate.

Exeunt.
CHAR. And now return we to survey our Cave,
Peruse our treasure got by rape and spoil,
Though won by others, yet possessed by us:
Yet henceforth shall be used no violence.
I Will make these villains work in several Trades,
And in these Forests make a Commonwealth.
When them to civil nurture I can bring,
They shall proclaim me of these Mountains King.
Exeunt.
Enter EVSTACE and his Irishman. EVST. I think these upright craggy moun^aine
tops,
Are (if the truth were known) high way to heaven:
For it is straight, and narrow, and some places
Are for the steepinesse, inaccessible.
Fair fall a ra^ter, and a gale of wind,
Or I had gone to heaven away by water
Nearer then this by land; that way they found,
Who in the salt remorc^lesse seas were drowned,
My brothers, whom I dream on when I sleep;
And my eyes waking at their fortunes weep.
Forgetting them; the s^endly Irish Coast
Gave me safe harbor; thence I have trauail'd hither
Even to these lofty hills of Italy,
After Prince Robert Duke of Normandy.
It Is safer sitting in my Masters Shop,
Crying what lack you, then it is here to stay,
To Wolves and wild beasts to be made a prey.

IRISH. Master, so Christ save me, I shall wait on thee; Wake for thee when
thou sleep, run for thee when thou biddest, and fly a thy errands, like a
narrow from a bow, when thou want wine, or meat, to drink or eat, or any
other necessary provision.

Now I have left my best friend in the grave,
My friendship and my service you shall have.

EVST. Well, fortune has preserved me to some end.
It is for some thing, that I did not sink,
When the salt waves my mouth and ears did drink.
I might have fed the Haddockes; but some power,
Is my good Master, and preserues me still.
Well, sword in all my troubles stand me by,
Thou art bound to win me somewhat ere I die.

Enter the Clown and the Villain, Dragging the old Earl violently, and
rifling him. CLO. Give v^ the gold my Captain you, you old Anatomy.


VILL. Gray-beard deliver, or you are but dead.


EARL. T^ke it my friends; full little needs this strife.
First take the gold, and after take my life.

CLOVV. Nay you old Jack a lent, six weeks and upwards: though you be our
Captains father, you cannot stay there, and for furety that you shall not go
back, and tell him what we have done to you, we will kill you, and fling you
into some Cole-pit.


VILL. Content, and when we have done, we will return him word we have
conducted thee past all danger of the Mountains: And now prepare thee for the
fatal stroke.


EARL. Thou do me a great kindness, let it come;
God take my soul, now when thou will strike home.

EVST. He strikes his own soul down to Erebus,
That lifts a sword that shall but touch his hair.

IRISH. And by S. Patrick I Will make him Garter his hose with his guts, that
strikes any stroke here.


CLOVV. Whom have we here? a Gentleman and his waterspaniell? Let Us robs them
too, and after kill thee.


VILL. Content, content. Sir stand.


EVST. Yes I will stand, base wretch, when thou shall fall;
And strike thee dead, and trampling on thy bulk
By stamping with my foot crush out thy soul.
Take that you slave, for bidding Eustace stand.
He beats them both away. Now father go in peace.


EAR. Thanks my fair son,
By whose stout valor I have freedom won.
I can bestow upon you naught but thanks,
Unless you will divide this gold with me.

EVST. No, father, keep it; thou art old and poor:
But when I want, my sword shall purchase more.
apart to himself.
EAR. By vewing him my former griefs abound,
Even such a one was Eustace that was drowned:
Which had he lived, his stature, years, and all,
Would have resembled his, so straight, so tall,
So fair, so strong, of such a worthy spirit.
But his blessed soul, by this, does heaven inherit.
Grief for his death so near my heart does dwell,
That for my life I cannot say farewell.
Exit.
EVST. The Captains father, whom the slaves had killed
Had not our coming interuented them,
Resembles mine in gesture, face, and look.
But the old Earl my father is by this
Within the walls of fair Jerusalem.
Else had I had surely took this aged man
To Have asked him blessing. But what next cusues?
I find these Mountains will be full of news.

Ente^ CHARLES, Cl^wne, Villain, and the Crew. CLOVV. Captain, a prize! we
two were assailed by two hundred, and of them two hundred. we killed all but
these two. These are the remainder of them that are left alive.


CHAR. Go two or three of you, and fetch them in:
If they resist you, take their weapons from them.

CLO. I had rather some body else should attempt them then I now: But since
their is no other remedy, Give me three or four of the stourest of our crew,
and then GOD and S. Anthony.


EVST. More Thieves and villains have begirt us round.
Now Eustace, for the honor of thy name,
Return them to their Captain back with shame.
He sets upon them all, and beats them.
CHAR. Now by mine honor, the best piece of flesh
That ever in these woods held Outlaw play.
Even such a spirit had Eustace when he lived:
We must not loose this Gallant, if we can,
We Will strive to make him our Companion.

EVST. Ye slaves, I Will beat you all into a mouse-hole:
And like a baited Lion at a stake,
Kill all the curres that come but near to bark.
Ye Guls, have ye no better men amongst you.
Defy your Captain from me: here I stand,
To dare him to a combat hand to hand.

CHAR. I were a Bastard, not my fathers son,
Should I refuse it.

EVST. By all the land I have left me in the world, that is but my grave:
Captain thou honor me.


CHAR. By all the wealth I brought into these woods,
That Is but my sword, thou do the like to me.
Thou shall have fair play, Gallant, by mine honor.

EVST. False was my mother to my fathers bed,
If I should ask more odds of Hercules.

CHAR. He dies upon my sword, disturbes our fray,
Or in the fight dares disadvantage thee.

EVST. Were I the world-commanding Alexander,
I would make thee my Ephestion for that word.
I love thee for thy valor, Captain Thief.

CHAR. It Is that preserues thee from our violence,
An honored mind lies in this O^t-lawes shape.
So much I rekon of thy cheualry,
That were thou master of an Indian Mine,
Thou should not be diminisht one denier.
Securely fight, thy purse is sanctuary'd,
And in this place shall beard the proudest Theife.

EVS. An honored minded villain, by my sword,
A right good fellow, and an honest Theife.
If I should have thee prostrate at my mercy,
I will not kill thee for thy liberal offer.
Yet win it lad, and take it without fail:
I scorn to have my purse govnder bail.

CHA. He goes beyond me in heroicke thoughts:
To thine I stake down this: stand all apart.
He that steps in, be subject to our curses:
And now the betterman take both the purses.

EVST. It is a match, I Will seize them to thy grief.
Now True man try, if thou ^anst rob a Thief.

They fight, as they are fighting, enter BELLA FRANCA, pursued by an Outlaw,
she runs betwixt them and parts them. BELL. If ye were borne of women, aid
a woman.


CHAR. Why what is the matter?


BELL. Oh turn the edges of your swords against him,
That in the Forest would have ravished me.

CHAR. Cease thy pursuit, and stranger pause a while,
To hear the tenor of this Ladies plaint.

EVST. Why then Kings truce. But let the pu^es lie:
They Will fall ^o my advantage by and by.

CHAR. Now tell me Lady, what is your suite to me?


BELL. To save my life from foul inch^stity.
For passing by these Countries on my way,
To pay my zealous vows in Golgotha,
Attended only by a little page:
This villain with a crew of russian thieues,
Seized what we had first, haled my page from me:
And after would have wrackt my chastity.
But being swift of foot, fear lent me wings
Hither (I hope in happy time) to fly,
Either to save mine honor, or to die,

CHA. Thy honor and thy life are both secured:
And for a Ladies sake you much resemble,
Command my sword, my subjects, and my cave.
Where succor, all offencelesse, you shall have.
Sir go you, and scour about the hill.

CLOVV. I go.


BELL. How like is he to Charles by Shipwreck dead!
And he to Eustace perished in the waves!
But they are b^h immortal Saints in heaven:
Yet I am glad because these shapes are theirs.
My happy coming has taken up their strife,
Preserving mine own honor and my life.

EV. So blushed my sister: and this Outlaw Theife
Has a resemblance to my brother Charles:
But she in London lives a Virgin pure:
He in some huge Whales belly too too sure.

CHA. A pretty wench'ifaith, I Will marry her,
And make her Queen of all this Outlaw crew.

EVST. I am half in love already, at first sight:
How will this raging flame increase by might?

CHAR. Fair beauteous maid, resign your love to me;
Mistress of all these Forests you shall be.

EVST. Love me, I Will kiss away these tears of grief;
Sweet wench embrace a True-man, scorn a Thief.

CHAR. How now sir Sauce! you are as bold me thinks,
As if you were a Freeman of our Trade.
None but my self plead interest in this Maid.

EVST. My interest is as much; in this it is greater,
Because that of the two, I love her better.

CHAR. Proud passenger, I Will make thee eat that word.


EVST. If I eat air, thou shall digest my sword.


CHAR. Revive this quarrel, let the former die:
Fight we for her, and let the purses lie.
Outlaw, I rather love to fight, then brall:
I Will win from thee thy wench, thy purse, and all.

BELL. Stay Gentlemen.

She steps between them.
EVST. By heaven, I scorn to stay,
Till both the purses I have taken away.

CHAR. My sword for me, my Mistress, and my gold.
My resolution shall my claim uphold.

Enter the Clown running betwixt them. CLOVV. What do you mean Gentlemen to
fight among your selves, that should be friends, and had more need to take one
another part, to fight against your enemies. We shall all be slain, killed,
murdered, Massacred. For my own part, if I had nine lives like a cat; they
were all sure to die one dogs death.


CHAR. Why? What Is the matter fellow?


CLOVV. Oh noble Captain, we shall all be slain. Tankard a Prince of Italy,
with an Army has beset the foot of the Mountains, and has vowed to make
Venison of all us poor Out-lawes, and kill us like Dear. God be with you:
I Will go shift for one.


CHA. Dear we will be too him, before he do it,
And dearly sell our desperate karcases.
Kind stranger will thou take a Truce with me,
Thou shall divide with me my dignity:
We two will jointly over these Mountains reign,
And by our valors, our estates maintain.

EVST. Because I hear thy life in ieopardy,
And thou have dealt with me so honorably:
Receive my hand; now I am wholly thine.
And ye mad rogues, I am half your Captain now.
Look when ye see me nodde, ye crouch and kneel,
Make legs, and curt'sies, and keep bare your Crowns.

CLOVV. It Is hard to teach them manners that are Clownes.
But for my own part, here is a leg, here is a cap, here is a knee,
All these sweet half Captain, I reserve for thee.

EVST. Speak, do you all accept me?


ALL. We do, we do.


EVST. Then brother thief, I am turned Outlaw too.
But to do no man wrong; I make that Law,
Only to pass this tedious Summer here,
Till we our downe-cast fortunes may vp-reare.

CHAR. You share with me in end, in mind, in all.

Soft March. But hark, I hear our enemies Drums do brawle.


EVST. Their voice is welcome: Oh that I had with me
As many good lads, honest Prentises, apart.
From Eastcheape, Canwicke-streete, and London-stone,
To end this battle, as could wish themselves
Under my conduct if they knew me here;
The doubtful days success we need not fear.
apart.
CHAR. Oh for some Cheape-side boys for Charles to lead:
They would stick to it, when these Out-lawes fail.
Wishes are wind, let us think our selves well manned,
We Will sooner die, then fly, so make a stand.

Enter TANCRED with Dr^ and Soldiers. TANC. Are these the Out-lawes that
disturb our peace?
Think they these Mountain tops can shelter them
From our revenge, and just assembled Arms?

CHAR. Come, come, let us prepare to answer them.


TANC. Which be the chief of these confounded Troops?


CHAR. Prince, I am one of them.


EVST. And I another.


CHAR. I am his friend.


EVST. And I his out-law-brother.


TAN. How dare you stand contemptuous' against your Liege?
Captains ye are our men.

CHAR. That we deny:
I am a stranger Ta^red.

EVST. So am I.


TANC. Such valor is reported to appear apart to his own people.
In the brave deeds of these rude Forresters,
That we could rather wish they were our friends,
To dwell in Cities, then keep out in Caves.
Considering now what wars we have in hand,
Their martial spirits might much advantage us,
Would they but keep within some honored bound^.
We Will work them if we can to our alliance,
And rather motion love, then proud defiance.

CHAR. Why comes the County Palatine in Arms,
To fight against unarmed Forresters?
If thou will win renown, bend thy brave forces
Against Pagans that be^ege Jerusalem.
Small fame and honor can thou win thee here,
Besides our cheap lives thou shall purchase dear.

EV. We have reformed these villains since we came,
And taught them manners and ciuility:
All rape and murder we repay with death:
Amongst us does not live a rauisher.

TAN. I have heard no less, but that you weed out such
As pass the bounds of Christian ^onesty:
Which makes me rather offer peace then war.
But what bright virgin stands so discontent?

CHAR. My life.


EVST. My love.


TAN. The word had been well spent,
If I had said mine too: for I protest,
Of all this number I affect her best.

CHAR. Believe me fellow-partner in my rule,
You offer wrong to impart in this my love.

EVS. Half of all is mine, I claim it as my due:
In which bright Virgin, I except not you.

TAN. I do contain my love with much ado:
For her (me thinks) I could turn Outlaw too.

EVST. What, do you think to have a double share?
Half of here is mine; I will not bate an hair.

CHAR. By thine own words thou gave me half at least.


EVST. But I Will have all, my Title is encreast.


TANC. Stay Captains, for our annall Crowns revenues,
We would not loose the weakest of you both,
So much do we affect your Chiualries.
Let me take up this mutual enmity:
Your quarrel is for her; both would enjoy her.
You claim her as your right.
To Charles.
CHAR. It Is true I do.


TANC. And Captain, you say she belongs to you.


EVST. True (valiant Prince) my hopes shall his destroy:
Thou art mine own, sweet wench, God give us joy.

TANC. Then till this strict contention ended be,
Deliver this bright virgin unto me.
Here shall our former hate and discord cease:
This Lady shall be Hostage of your peace.
Unto thy charge we give ten thousand men. To Charles.
As many soldiers we resign to thee. To Eustace.
Make me her keeper till these wars be done:
Ye have the price, I my content have won.

CHAR. Honor has taught the Palatine to speak.


EVST. Since what we both desire, one can but have,
Take charge of her. Let me receive the charge
Of a great Army, and commanding power:
Before I marry, I must win my Dower.

CHAR. So say I too, and Outlaw life adieu.


TANC. And welcome love, which I must keep for you.
Their Drums shall scold, mine shall have time to cease,
And whilst they war, with her I Will make my peace.
Are you content, sweet Lady?

BELL. I must do
That which amongst you all best pleases you.
I am a prisoner; prisoners must obey.
You say I shall, and I must not say nay.

CHAR. Do so, sweet love.


EVST. Till these wars ended be
I prithee sweet love, keep thy heart to me.

TAN. Come Captain, we bequeath you to your charge,
To march with speed toward the holy wars.
This Lady, as our life we will esteem,
And place her in the honor of a Queen.
Exeunt.
Enter ROBERT of Normandy, GOD^REY of Buloigne, and GVY of Lessingham, with
Drum and Soldiers. GODF. What art thou with thy brow confrontest me?


GVY. One that thinks scorn to give least place to thee.


GODF. Thou kno^ me not to set my name so light.


GVY. I reck thee not, my frown thou can not (...).
We are no babe; or if we were, yet know
Thy proud face cannot like a Bug-beare show.

GODF. Thou have struck fire upon a flinty spirit.
Think thou, because thou lead'st the French Kings troops,
And art Commander of a few bold French,
That we will yield the upper hand to thee?
I let thee know thou have dishonored me.

GVY. I let thee know thou have done as much by me.
Think thou, thou can outface me? proud man, no:
Know I esteem thee as too weak a foe.

GODF. Now by my Knighthood I Will revenge this wrong;
And for that word, thy heart shall curse thy tongue.

ROB. What mean these hasty Princes thus to jar,
And bend their swords against their mutual breasts,
Whose edge were sharpened for their enemies crests?

GODF. He shall not march before me.


GVY. But I will.


GODF. Zounds but thou shall not, by this blessed day,
I Will pitch thee like a bar out of my way.

GVY. Thy arms want strength, thou can not toss me so.


GODF. No, can they not? by heaven I Will try a throw.


ROB. Princes, I charge you by the honored zeal,
And love to him for whom ye come to fight,
To cease this envy and abortiue jar.
The fields are broad enough for both to march,
And neither have the vantage of the ground.

GVY. Robert, mine arm shall act a wondrous thing,
I Will hurl him like a stone out of a sling.
Not have the way? I Will fling thee on the earth,
And then march over thee with all my Troops.

GODF. Robert of Normandy, by all the honor
Thou hop'st t'atchiue thee in these holy wars,
Stand from betwixt us, let us but try one fall
I Will cast his corke-like trunk by wondrous skill,
As Hercules threw Lycas from an Hill.

ROB. For Gods sake and our Saviors, in whose book
Ye now are entered as his soldiers pressed,
In whose Camp Royal if ye mutiny*
Ye are found guilty by his martial Law,
And worthy death: I charge you Princes both,
T'abandon this injurious enmity.
Stand you betwixt the Soldiers, lest this sting
Of blind seditions, reign in this our Army
And feed upon our bodies like a plague.
Princes I charge you by your Saviors blood
Shed for your sins, ye shed none at this time.

GODF. Well let him march before, I will resign:
Ro^ert preuailes; Frenchman the right is thine.

GVY. I will not march first; but in courtesy
I will resign that honored place to thee;
But what a King should say, I should not do
With violent rage that would I run into.
Go on, by heaven you shall, I yield it you;
By heaven you shall, the place I freely grant.
Friendship can more with me, then rude constraint.

GOD. Thy honored love with honor I return,
What thou would give me, I resign thee back;
This kind reply to me stands like a charm,
Then royally let us march on arm in arm.

ROB. Such just proportion Princes still should keep.
Brave Lord of Bulloigne join your Troops with ours,
That are by birth approved Englishmen:
And Lord of France that under your conduct
Have ready armed ten thousand fighting men,
To fight with us for fair ^salem,
Di^rest by mis-beleeuing Infidels,
Let us unite a friendly Christian league.
We have entered, valiant Lords, upon our way
Even to the midst of fertile Lumbardy,
By writers termed the Garden of the world.
Half o^ our way we have overcome already:
Then let us here in camp upon these Downs.
But stay, what threatening voice of warfare sounds.

Enter after a Trumpet EVSTACE. GODF. Had not young Eustace in the seas been
drowned,
I should have said, he treads upon this ground.
And but none escaped the dangerous seas save I,
This Frenchman I should think my brother Guy.

EVST. Princes, my Master County Palatine,
Wondering what bold foot durst presume to tread
Upon his Confines without asking leave,
Sends me to know the cause of your arrive:
Or why the armed hoofes of your fiery s^eeds
Dare wound the forehead of his peaceful Land.

DODF. Dare? sends thy Lord in that ambitious key*


GVY. Or has the pride of thy refined tongue
Gilded thy message with these words of scorn?

ROB. Add'st thou unto thy message, Knight, or no?


EVST. The naked tenor of my Masters mind*
Thus I infold; rash saucy insolent,
That by audacious boldness have not feared
To break into my Sovereigns royal pale;
I charge you to return the way you came,
And step by step tell every tedious stride,
That you have measured rashly in his Land:
Or by the honor of his name he swears,
To chase you from the margent of his Coast,
With a^ unnumbered Army and huge Host.

GODF. March back again? Oh scandal to our names*
Have we deserved to be so censured on,
Though not one man upon my part would stand,
Alone I Will pierce the bowels of his Land.

GVY. Basely retire, and thirty thousand strong?
Were the whole worlds power ambusht in our way*
Yet would we on. Return dishonourably?
Forward I Will march, though every step I tread
Plunge me in blood, thus high above my head.

ROB. Princes, have patience, let me answer him.
Knight, I condemn not thee for speaking boldly
The proud defiance that thy Master sends:
But mildly we return our pleasures thus.
We do confess it was some ouer-sight
To march so far, without some notice given
Unto the Lord and Prince that owes the Land:
And we could wish that we had craved his leave.
But since it is thus, that we have marched thus far,
And basely to retire is infamous.
(If not with leave) we forward mean to go:
Despite of King or Emperor shall say no.

EVST, I will inform the Prince my Sovereign so.

Ex^*
GVY. That young Knights face, me thinks, I well should know.


GOD. I see the swords were sharpt against Infidels,
Must be employed to lavish Christian blood.
Upon his soul lie all the heinous guilt,
Who being a Christian Prince, forbids and bars
Our quiet passage to these Pagan wars.

GVY. This bickering will but keep our arms in ure,
The holy battles better to endure.

ROB. Well, God for us, for our intent is good:
Charged be their souls with all this Christian blood.

Enter TANCRD, CHARLES, EVSTACE, Drum, Colors and Soldiers, marching. TANC.
What art thou brau'st the County Palatine?


ROB. My name is Robert Duke of Normandy.


TANC. Speak, will ye all retire the way ye came?


ROB. God keep Duke Robert from so foul a shame.


GODF. Basely retire when we have marched thus far?
^rst we will unpeople this thy Land by war.

CHAR. Then will we drive you back by our maine force,
And seize upon your Troops of Foot and Horse.

GV. So say you: bu^ should you attempt to do it,
We straight should overthrow you Horse and Foot.

EVST. So said, so done, brave Lord, were gallant play.
But you would at the first push shrink away.

ROB. No proud Italians all our ^pirits are fire,
Which burns not down-ward, but is made t'aspire.
Prince we confess we did fo^get ou^ selves,
Presuming on that ancient privilege
Which every Christian brother Prince should claim
One in the interest of another name*
An error we confess, though not a fault.
But basely with dishonor back to fly,
And to be held as cowards we deny.

TANC. And nothing else can satisfy mine ire,
But whence ye came the same way to retire.

ROB. And that I Will never do.


GODF. Nor I.


GV. Nor I.


CHA. Then shall ye on these Lumbard Champaines die.
To Arms brave Soldiers.

EVS. Strike up warlike Dumme.
Prepare you, Christian Princes, now we come.

GOD. Stay brave Prince Tancred, stay great Norman Duke.
Out of my zeal to God and Christendom,
To ^anch the blood which should be broacht this day,
Unto the grief of all that honor CHRIST,
And joy to such as love Idolatry:
I make this challenge general through the Host
Of him that interrupts us on our way.
If any proud Italian dare take up
The honored gage which I have here thrown down,
And fight a single combat for our passage;
These shall be made our strict conditions.
If him I conquer, all our Host shall march
Without all let and contradiction:
If I be vanquished by thy Champions hand,
Our Army shall march ba^ke out of thy land.

CHA. A Princely motion to save Christian blood.
Great Prince of Italy, upon my knee
I humbly beg I may thy Champion be.

TAN. Thou have thy suite; thy valor has been tried:
With a rough brow see thou confront his pride.

ROB. Then what ten thousand Christian lives should right,
These two brave Lords will end in single fight.

TAN. It is agreed.


EVS. Stand to it, brave Outlaw-brother Would I were one of them.


GVY. And I the other.


CHAR. What weapon will thou use?


GODF. That which next comes.
Give me this Partizan: now strike up drums.

CHAR. Give me this soldiers; Trumpet, sound a charge:
I Will stop the passage which he seeks t'enlarge.

GODF. Princes stand off, my warlike arm this day
For all your Troops shall win a prosperous way.

CHAR. Thou can not enter though the way stood open:
My heart, and this, thy passage vows to stop.

GODF. Yet will I through.


CHA. Thou shall not, this says nay.


GODF. Oh but behold! I have this to hew my way.

They fight, and are parted by Robert and Tancred.
TAN. I would not loose my Champion for the world.


ROB. Nor I this Prince: For were these spirits spent,
All Christendom their fortunes might lament.
Part them on equal odds, and equal terms:
Both a like valiant, both have honor wo^ne,
More valorous live not underneath the Sun.

TAN. We will reserve their haughty Chiualries,
To exercise against Gods enemies.

EVST. They have won honor, I have idly stood:
By my good stars I Will have a challenge too,
If any in their Camp dares answer me.
Give me thy Pike, a Pike a Prince may traile,
And at that weapon will I challenge all.
Great Prince, these fiery Princes that came hither
To brave our forces, had a Champion
To challenge us: Are we as valiant,
And shall we ^aile to do the like to them?
Give me but leave, my Lord, to send one boast
T'affright them, like a devil, through their Host.

TAN. It pleases us; then when thou will begin.


ROB. What Champion shall we have to answer him?


GVY. I should esteem him my immortal foe,
That should attempt to take away the honor
Of such a strong encounter from my hand.
Champion appear betwixt our Royal Hoasts,
Let Us seethy strength make good thy haughty boasts.

EVST. I am here; stand thou forth on the adverse part
Survey me well, brave Hector I resemble,
Whose very brow did make the Greeks to tremble.

GV. But I Achilles, proud ambitious boy,
Will drag thy Coarse about the walls of Troy.
Give me thy Pike, I Will toss it like a reed,
And with this bul-rush make mine enemy bleed.
Rapier and Pike, is that thy honored play?
Look down ye Gods, this combat to survey.

EVST. Rapier and Pike, this combat shall decide:
Gods, Angels, Men, shall see me tame thy pride.

GV. Thou do thy self wrong to ore-charge thine arm,
With such a weapon as thou can not weild.
I Will teach thee; thou shall like my zanie be.
And feign to do my cun^ing after me.

EVST. Thou would instruct thy Master at this play.
Think thou this rye-strew can ore-rule my arm?
Thus do I bear him when I use to march:
Thus can I fling him up, and catch him thus: They toss their Pikes.
Then thus, to try the si^ewes of my arm.

GV. But thou should charge him thus, advance him thus,
Thus should thou take him, when thou see from far
The violent horses run to break our ranks.

EVST. All that is nothing, I can toss him thus.


GV. I thus: it is easier sport then the Baloone.


EVST. We trifle time, this shall thy rage withstand.


GV. With this, ou^ Host shall pierce thy Sovereigns Land.

They fight: Robert and the Palatine cast their Warders between them, and part
them.
ROB. That Ho^st should loose ten thousand Pagans lives
With the rich honor of their overthrow,
That should but loose his Champion in this combat
If both should perish, our brave Christian Army
Should be more weak by thousands then it was.

TANC. Their matchless valor have prevailed with us,
Freely enjoy the pleasures of our Land,
Our Army here we do conioyne with yours,
To ^ad them to the fair Jerusalem.

ROB. We pawn our faith to this perpetual league:
And now we show our selves that Christian Host,
In which true peace should flourish and abound:
Unto this peace let Drums and Trumpets sound.
Champions embrace, and all your stern debate Flourish.
Pour in abundance on the Pagans heads.
Princes and Lords, let our united bands
Win back Judea from the Pagans hands.
Exeunt all marching.
Manet the French Lady. LADY. Thus have I maskt my bashful modesty
Under the habit of a trusty Page,
And now my servants servant am I made.
Love, that transformed the Gods to sundry shapes,
Has wrought in me this Metamorphosis.
My love and Lord, that honored me a woman,
Loves me a youth, employes me every where,
I serve him, wait upon him, and he swears
He favors both my truth and diligence:
And now I have learnt to be a perfect Page,
He will have none to trusse his points but me,
At board to wait upon his cup but me:
To bear his Target in the field, but me.
Nay, many a thing, which makes me blush to speak,
He will have none to lie with him but me,
I dream and dream, and things come in my mind:
Only I hide my eyes; but my poor heart
Is barred and kept from loves satiety.
Like Tantal^s, such is my poor repast,
I see the Apples that I cannot taste.
I Will stay my time, and hope yet, ere I die,
My heart shall feast as richly as my eye.
Exit. Flourish.
Enter the old SULTAN, the young SOPHIE, Tables and Forms, and MORETES, TVRNVS,
with drum and Soldiers. SOL. Counsel brave Lords, the Christian Army
marches
Even to our gates with paces vndisturb'd:
The hollow earth resounds with weight of arms,
And shrinkes to bear so huge a multitude.
They make a valley as they march along,
And raising hills encompasse either side.
Counsel, brave Lords, these terrors to decide.

SOP. Jove's great Vicegerent over all the world:
Let us confront their pride, and with our powers
Disperse the strength of their assembled Troops.

SOL. Sion is ours by conquest: All Iudaea
Is the rich honor of our conquering swords.
Shall we not guard it then, and make our breasts
The walls that shall defend Jerusalem?

SO. They shall march over us, that march this way:
Before the Christians shall attain these walls
With dead men's faces we will paue the earth.

SOL. I cannot judge the Christians are so mad
To come in way of battle, but of peace.

SOP. They rather travel in devotion,
To pay their vows at their Messia's Tomb,
And so, as Pilgrims, not as Soldiers come.

SOL. Your own power blinds you and has skreend your eyes,
My hairs do wear experience livery:
But yours, the badge of youth and idleness.
Their Army stands upon a Mountain top,
Like a huge Forest: their tall Pikes, like Pines,
In height do ouer-peere the lower Trees;
Their Horsemen ride like Centaur's in the meads,
And scout abroad for pillage and for prey:
Courage is their good Captain.

SOP. Courage! no.
Pale fear, and black destruction, leads the so.

SOL. I say again, the Christian Princes lead
An Army, for their power, invincible.
Victorious hope sits houering on their plumes:
Their gilded Armor shines against the Sun,
Dazeling our eyes from top of yonder Hill
Like the bright streakes that flow from Paradise.

SOP. Oh conquest worthy the brave Persian swords?
Let us descend from forth the Town and meet them.

SOL. No.


SOP. Yes.


SOL. Should Jove himself in Thunder answer I
When we say no; we would pull him from the sky.

SOP. Should Sultan, Sophy, Priest, or Presbyter,
Or Gods, or devils, or men, gainsay our will:
Him, them, or thee, would the brave Persian Kill.

MOR Quench your hot spleenes with drops of sweet advice,
Temper your rage with coun^ell mighty Kings.

SOL. I say ^e will make peace with Christendom.


SOP. I say the Pe^an scorns to be colleague,
Or to have part with them of Christendom.

SOL. Yet hear my age.


SOP. Yet hearken to my youth.


MOR. My tongue give place unto the Sold^ age.


TVR. But I applaud the Persians youthful rage.


SOL. Stay Lords, our grave experience does forsee
The mischeifes that attend on this debate.
We tread the path of our destruction,
By our dissentions grow the Christians strong,
Whom our united hearts may easily quell.
Brave Persian Sophy, we commend your hate
To them that have abhorred our Pagan gods:
Yet temper it with wisdom, valiant Prince.
It Is our security I would increase,
When with my words I mention gentle peace.

MOR. Experience does instruct the Soldans tongue,
Hearken to him, he speaks iudicially.

SOP. My tongue a while gives license to mine ear:
The depth of your grave wisdoms let us hear.

SOL. Then thus, let us send unto the Christians Host,
To know what cause has brought them thus far armed.
If peaceably they come to visit here
The ancient Relics of their Saviors Tomb;
Peace shall conduct them in, and guard them out.
But if they come to conquer Syons Hill,
And make irruption through our triple walls;
Death and despair shall ambush in their way,
And we will seize the ensigns they display.

SOP. My youth yields willingly to your grave years,
Let it be so. But whom shall we elect
To be created Lords Ambassadors?

SOL. Moretes shall be one, for I am sure
He will employ his tongue, peace to pro^ure.

SOP. Turnus another, he that all things dares,
Will with defiance stir them up to war.

SOL. Moretes and brave Turnus, speed you straight
Unto the Christian Host: Say, if they come
Like Pilgrims, to behold the Sepulcher,
Our gates stand open to receive them in:
And be you painful to persuade a peace.
But if they stand upon their hostile ground,
Say that our breasts are armed, our swords are keen,
Bold are our hearts, and fiery is our spleen,
And so be gone.

MOR. I to persuade a peace.

Exit.
TVR. I go the surious rage of war t'encrease.

Exit.
SOL. We will mean time conduct, our royal host:
One half is mine, the other you shall lead,
To intercept them ere they win the sight
Of these invincible and high-built walls.
Brave Persians, we will both in ambush lie:
Sure now the Christians are all come to die.
Exeunt:
Enter TANCRED with BELLA FRANCA, richly attired, she somewhat affecting him,
though she makes no show of it, ROBERT of Normandy, the four br^en, and the
French Lady like a Page. TANC. B^hold, brave Christian Prince^, all the glory
That Tancred can inherit in this world.

EVST. Part of it is mine.


CHA. And part belongs to me.


GODF. An heavenly mixture, now beshrew my heart,
But Godfrey with the rest could cry half part.

GV. I am all hers.


ROB. That Lady seems to me
The fairest creature ever eye did see.

BELL. Tancred, of all, thy face best pleases me.

in private.
TAN. Fair Lady.


EVST. Madame:


CHA. Mistr^sse.


GODF. Beauteous love.


GV. Bright Goddess.


ROB. Nymph.


FREN. LAD. Love whom ye will say I:
So ye affect not my beloved Guy.

TAN. Lords, she is mine.


EVS. When did my interest cease


CHA. When I am here, you brother Outlaw peace.


GODF. Why should not I enjoy her?


ROB. Why not I?


GV. She can have none but me.


EVST. and CHAR. That we deny:


BELL. Princes, what means this frenzy in your hearts?
Or has some Negromanticke Coniurer
Raised by his Art some ^ury in my shape,
To work sedition in the Christian Camp?
You have confirmed by general Parliament
A Statute, that must stand inuiolate;
Namely, that mutiny in Prince or Pesant
Is death, a Kingdom cannot save his life.
Then whence proceed these strange contentions?

CHA. I seized her first.


EVS. I first her thoughts did prove.


TAN. I plead the composition for my love.


ROB. If wealth will win the thoughts of that chaste Lady,
I*le bid as fair as any for her love.

GODF. If valor may atchieue her, I'mongst many
Will bid more warlike blows for her then any.

GV. N^y, if you go to scrambling, this for me.

Draw.
FREN. LAD. Speed they that list, so you repulsed be.


BELL. Yet hear me Princes.


EVST. Hence with frivolous words.


GODF. Stand we to prate, when others draw their sword^*


CHAR. Speak thou my cause.

Draw.
TAN. This shall my pleader be.

Draw.
GV. Thou art for us.

Draw.
ROB. And sword speak thou for me.


BELL. He that best loves me, pierce me with his sword,
Lest I become your general overthrow.
I do conjure you by the love you bear me,
Either to banish this hostility,
Or all at once to act my Tragedy.
A blow is death proclaimed by Parliament:
Can ye make Laws, and be the first that break them?
Knew I that this my beauty bred this strife,
With some black poison I would stain my cheeks,
Till I looked fouler then an Aethiop.
Still do ye brandish your contentious swords?
This night shall end my beauty, and to morrow
Look to behold my Crystal eyes scratcht out,
My visage martyrd, and my hair torn off:
He that best loves it, ransom it with peace:
I will preserve it, if your fury cease.
But if ye still persist, the heavens I call
As my vows witness, I will hate ye all.

TANC. To show my love, my sword shall sleep in rest.


GODF. I Will keep mine sharp for the brave Soldans crest.


GV. Peace sword.


ROB. The Norman Robert keeps his keen,
T'abate the fury of the Soldans spleen.

CHA. My sword cries truce.


EVST. Blade when thou next art seen*
Thou make thy Lord a King, his Love a Queen.

BELL. You have redeemed my beauty, your last jar
Had made perfection with my face at war.

EVST. Lady, the virtuous motions of your heart
Add to the abundant graces of your fame,
It was your beauty that did blind our souls,
And in our close breasts placed oblivion.
It Is true, we have ordained a strict decree,
That whosoever in our Christian Host
Strikes with a sword in hostile enmity,
Forfeits his life, then break off this debate,
And keep our own decrees i^uiolate.

Enter with a Tucket before them TVRNVS, and MORATES. MO. Health to the
Christians from the mighty Sultan.


TV. Death and de^trustion from the Persian Sophy.


ROB. That tongue brings peace, to thee will I attend.


GODF. That tongue brings war, thy motions we commend.


TANC. Speak peace, thy looks are smoth, we will list to thee.


CHAR. Speak war, bring war, and we to war agree.


MOR. The Babylonian Sultan, mighty Princes,
Sends me to know the cause of this your March
Into a land so far remote from ye.
If ye intend to see your Prophets Tomb,
As holy Pilgrims, peace shall guard your way.

EVST. Peace we defy: let us hear what thou can say.


ROB. Proceed, proceed.


GV. Do; and I Will sound my Drum
To drown his voice, that does for parleance come.

EVST. Why, I am borne to nothing in this world
But what my sword can conquer. Should we yield
Our fortunes to base composition,
I have no hopes mine honor to increase.
Cursed be his base ear that attends to peace.

MOR. Let me conclude my message.


GODF. Pagan, no:
Wars friend speak thou, I am to Peace a foe.

TVR. The Persian Sophy thus instructs my tongue
That Prince amongst you whose heroicke breast
Dares show it self to his triumphant spear,
(Excepting but the name of Christian)
Like to the Persian Gods he honors him.
But should he know a heart in these proud Troops,
And know that heart to be addict to peace,
He Would hate him like a man that should blaspheme.
In Sion Towers hangs his victorious flagge,
Blowing defiance this way: and it shows
Like a red meteor in the troubled air;
Or like a blazing comet, that fore-tels
The fall of Princes.

CHAR. Thine own Princes ^all.


TVR. Then in one word, destruction to you all.


GODF. I had not thought such spirits had remained
Within the warlike breasts of Infidels.

EVST. Dares the Maiesticke spirit of thy King
Answer a challenge? dares he pawn his Crown
Against the hazard of ten thousand lives?

GVY. And who should fight against him?


EVST. I.


GVY. Thou!


EVS. I, against him, and thee, and all the world.
That interdicts my honor.

GV. Me!


EVST. Thee.


GV. Fire, rage, and fury, all my veins do swell.
Be mute my tongue, bright sword my fury tell.

EVST. Fire mount' against his mad fury, check his rage.
Burn out then flame, his blood thy heat shall swage.
They fight, and are parted.
GODF. What have ye done? injustice stains our crests
If for this act ye have not loft their lives.

ROB. I will not bear the badge of Christendom
In such a Bedlam mad society.

CHA. Cease to determine of their haire-braine rage,
Till ye have sent the Pagans from our Tents.

TAN. It Is well adui^'d. Soldiers take charge of the
Till we determine of our Embassy.

MOR. I fear me Turnus, had you known before
The spirits of these haughty Christians,
To Have been so full of envious cheualry,
You would have tempered some part of your rage.
You see they strive, and fight amongst themselves,
To practice hate against they meet with us.

TVR. Morates, no, we scorn all abject fears,
And they shall know our hearts as great as theirs.

GODF. It shall be so. Attend me, Pagan Lords;
We come not with gray gowns, and Pilgrims staves,
Beads at our sides, and sandals on our feet,
Fear in our hearts, entreaty in our tongues,
To beg a passage to our Prophets grave.
But our soft Beauer Fel^* we have turned to iron,
Our gowns to armor, and our shells to plumes,
Our walking staves we have changed to Cemytars,
And so with pilgrims hearts, not pilgrims habits,
We come to hew way through your maine Armies,
And offer at the Tomb our contrite hearts
Made purple with as many Pagans bloods,
As we have in our breasts religious thoughts.
And so be gone, no words in trifling wast,
Death follows after you with wings of have.

TVR. That Prince speaks Music, which does cheer my heart.


MOR. Princes adieu, with terror I depart.

Exeunt.
CHA. Now to these other Captaine-mutiners.
What shall be done with them?

EVST. Even what you please.
We have lived with pain, and we can die with ease:

GVY. What God has made, a Gods name do you mar,
Death is the least I fear, now to the bar.

ROB. Lords give me leave to temper our decree,
The Law is death, but such is our regard
Of Christian blood, we moderate it thus.
Because we know your worths, your lives are saved:
Yet that the world shall see we prise our Laws,
And are not partial should we sit on Kings;
We doom you everlasting banishment
From out the Christian Army.

EVS. Banishment?
T^is was your doing; well, I Will be revenged:
By all the hopes that I have lost, I will.
Princes, your doomes are upright, I obey them,
And voluntarily exile my self.
(Against my furious spirit) I could weep
To lea^e this royal Army, and to loose
The honor promised in the Pagans deaths.
Farewell to all, with tears of gr^fe I go.
Ye are all my friends, thou only art my foe.

GVY. Hold me ^o still; where ere I n^xt shall meet thee,
This sword, like thunder, on thy cr^st shall greet thee.
Banished the Camp I go, but not so far,
But I will make one in this Christian war,
Like an unknown Knight I will bear a shield,
In it engraven the Trade I did profess,
When once I was a Goldsmiths in Cheape-^ide:
And if I prosper, to these arms I Will add
Some honor, and the scutcheon I shall bear,
Shall to the Pagans bring pale death, and fear.
Adieu brave Christian Lords; for I must ^tray,
A banished man can never miss his way.

GODF. Why do you look so sad upon their griefs?


CHA. Ah pardon me. My heart begot a thought
At their departure, which had been of force
To Have strayn'd a tear or two from my moiste eye.
How like was he to Eustace! he to Guy!

GODF. A leaden weight of grief lies at my heart,
And I could wish my self were ^anisht too,
To bear them in their sorrows company.

ROB. These, for examples sake, must be removed,
And though their absence will much weaken us,
Yet we had rather put us in Gods guard,
Lessening our own strength, then to bear with that
Which might in time lead to our overthrow.
March forward Lords; our love we will defer.
Prince Tancred, till our wars chief heat be spent,
Keep still this beauteous Lady in your Tent.
Exe^t. flourish Manent two Ladies.
FREN. LAD. My Lord is banished, what shall poor I do?
There is no way, but I must after too.
But ere I go, some cunning I must use,
To make this Lady my Lords love refuse.

BELL. Fair youth, why have you singled me along?
Is it to share joy, or partake my moan?

FREN. LAD. Whether you please.
Invention help me now, (apart)
To bring her out of love with my sweet Lord,
For should she love him I were quite undone.
Madame, in faith, how many suitors have you?

BELL. More then I wish I had: F^st, the French General.


FREN. LAD. Oh God, I fear, I think I am accursed.
She loves him best, because she names him first.

BELL. The English Robert, County Palatine;
Two Gentlemen that took me in the woods;
One is now banished, but the other still
Stays in the Army; the^, the Bulloigne Duke,

FREN. LAD. And which of all these is the properes^ man?


BELL. 'Faith let me hear thy judgment.


FREN LAD. Prince Robert is a gallant Gentlemen:
But the French Lord uncomely, and vnshap'd.
Tancred's a proper man, but the French Lord,
He has no making, no good shape at all.
I could not love a man of his complexion:
I would not ^ue him if I were a Lady,
Had he more Crowns then C^ar conquered.

BELL. I see no such defects in that French Lord.


FREN. LAD. I, I, it is so. Upon my life she loves him.
I must devise some plot, or they will use
Some means to meet, and m^ry out of hand.
Lady, he was my Master, but believe me,
He is the most in^e man for women,
That ever breathed; nay, Madame, which is more,
He loves var^y, and delights in change.
And I heard him say, should he be married,
He Would make his wife a Cucke-queane.

BELL. Why though he do; it is ver^ in a woman,
If she can bear his imperfections.

FREN. LAD. Upon my life they are made sure alr^ady,
She Is pleased with any imperfections.
What should I do?

BELL. Now fair youth, list to me,
I will acquaint thee with a secrecy.
These Lords so trouble me with their vain suites,
That I am tired and wearied, and resolve
To steal away in secret from the Camp.

FREN. LAD. My Guy is gone, and she would follow him:
I must prevent it, or else loose my love.

BELL. Will thou consort me, bear me company,
And share with me in joy and misery?

FREN. LAD. Madame I will. She loves him, and no wonder.
I Will go, be it but to keep them still assunder.

BELL. Then from their Tents this night we will steal away,
And through the wide woods and the Forests stray.
Exeunt. Flourish.
Enter SULTAN, SOPHIE, TVRNVS, MORETES, Drums, Ensigns, and Soldiers. SOL.
Then your reports sound naught but death and war.


MOR. The Christians would not lend an ear to peace.


SOP. Since they demean themselves so honorably,
This earth shall give them honorable graves.

TVR. By pride her self are their proud Ensigns bo^ne:
War in their tongues sits, in their faces scorn.

SOL. Our resolutions shall control base fears.
We are proud as they; our swords shall answer theirs.

SOP. Did thou deliver our strict Embassy?


TVR. I did, my Lord.


SOL. Did they not quake to hear it?


TVR. No more then Rocks ^hake with a puff of breath,
They come resolved, and not in fear of death.

SOP. Looked they not pale?


TVR. With fury, not with fea^e.
The'were mad, because your forces were not there.

SOL. Did you not da^h their spirits? fell not their (...).
Down to the earth, when thou did speak of us?
Went not a fearful murmu^ through their Host,
When thou did number our unnumbered power?
Did not their faint swords tremble in their hands,
At that name Sultan?

SOP. Or when thou namd'st me,
My power, my strength, my matchless chiualry:
Fell they not flat upon the earth with fear?

TVR. No, but their proud hearts bounded in their breasts,
Their plumes flew bravely on their golden crests:
And they were ready to have fallen at jar,
Which of them first should with the Persian war.

MOR. There was no tongue but breathed defiance forth:
I could not see a face but menaced death:
No hand, but brandisht a victorious sword.
They all cry Battle, Battle, peace defy,
And not a heart but promised victory.

SOL. There Is not an heart shall escape our tyranny,
Since they provoke ou^ indignation,
Like the vaste Ocean shall our courage rise,
To drown their pride, and all their powers surprise.

SOP. My Cemytar is like the bolt of Jove,
That never touches but it strikes with death.
Oh how I long, till we with spears in rests,
Strike out the lightning from their high-plum'd crests.

SOL. I would burn off this beard in such a flame,
As I could kindle with my puissant blows:
Yet the least hair I value at more worth
Then all the Christian Empire.

SOL. Speak, brave Sultan,
Shall our barred horses clime yond Mountain tops,
And bid them battle where they pitch their Tents.

SOL. Courage cries, on; but good advice says, stay.
Experience bids us fight another way.
Why should we tire our Troops in search of them,
That with audacious boldness secke out us?
Let us stand to receive them when they come,
And with a grove of Pikes growing on this earth
Where now no tree appears, toss up their bodies,
Whose coarses by your strong arms kept al^e,
May hang like bloody pendants on your staves.

SOP. Oh sight best pleasing to the P^an gods!


TVR. In the skies forehead shall the bright Sun stand
Amazed to view that glorious spectacle,
And with the pleasing sight forget his way,
To^grace our Trophee with perpetual day.

MOR. But how shall we receive their armed Troops?
What special order will your grace assign
To them that shall command your Companies?

SOL. It shall be thus. This way the Christians march,
The body of our Host shall stay behind,
To be a strength to fair Jerusalem.
But we with certain soldiers secretly,
Will lie in ambush: The great Persian Sophy,
With Turnus, and a chief command of men,
Shall guard that way: my self, and thou Morates
Will keep this p^ssage with a troop select,
To seize on their forerunners, scouts, and spies.
Assist us fate, ere-long the world shall know
Our glories by the Christians overthrow.
This is my Quarter: these my men shall be.

SOP. Morates, thou and these shall follow me.

Exeunt.
Enter ROBERT of Normandy. ROB. Oh whether will blind love conduct my steps?
Prince Tancreds Dear, and English Roberts Joy,
Is fled in secret, and has left our Tents.
Thus like an Errant and Aduenturous Knight,
I have left the Host to follow her fair search,
And durst not trust the air with my intent.
This way, they say, she went; the Campe's secure.
This way unknown, in secret I pursue her.

Enter CHARLES. CHA. This way my love went like a shooting star,
Whose blazing train does guilde the firmament.
Such glorious beauty adds she to the way,
Making the dark night-pathes, shine bright as day.
Ye honored Arms ^arewell, and Camp adieu,
I do forsake my self her to pursue.

ROB. Behold a traveler! I will enquire
If chance has cast his eye upon my love.

CHA. I was about to ask of yonder man,
Whether her beauty had enricht his sight:
But'tis my rival Robert; Charles obscure thee.
For should he see thee, he would quickly judge
What Adamant had drawn me to these woods.
One case I see has made us errants both.
To be found wandering thus I should be loath.

ROB. Love that drew me, has drawn that knight along
Being but a child, a Gyant's not so strong.

Enter SULTAN, MORETES, and Soldiers. SOL. Stand Christians, by your Crosses
on your breasts
Yee're marked for death, and base destruction.

ROB. What are ye, that, like cowards, with such odds
Assault us thus unfurnished for the wars.

SOL. I am the Sultan; these my me^ at arms,
That lie to intercept you, and prepare
For your accursed lives this fatal snare.

CHA. The Sultan, the grand enemy to CHRIST,
The devils Liuetenant, Viceroy under him!
Brave English Robert, since our frowning stars
Have brought us to this narrow exigent,
And trained us hither with a chain of love
To perish by the swords of Infidels:
Stand foot to foot.

ROB. Tush, I am Pagans swords proof, and my stars,
Have marked me for a Conqueror in these wars.

SOL. Upon them, soldiers; pity they despise,
Scarce can the world afford a richer prize.
Alarm. They fight, and are both taken.
CHA. Thou glorious eye of heaven, be ever blind:
Mask thy bright face in clouds eternally:
Dark vapors and thick mysts thy front embrace
And never shine to look on my disgrace.

ROB. A prisoner, Robert! this my comfort be:
He makes me bound that best can set me free.

SOL. Tak^ them to guard, this entrance to our wars
Is full of spirit, and begets much hope.
We will not yet exami^e what ye are,
Till tortures wring it from your slavish tongues.
That done, your bloods these champaines shall embrue
Mean time we will wait for more of your loose crew.

Enter GVY with his Shield, and a Page brings his Sword and Target: in each of
his hands a Pollax. GVY. I am turned wild man since I used these Fo^ests:
And I have won more weapons in these woods,
From Out-lawes, whom my sword has vanquished,
Then I can carry on my back with ease.
I have swords, targets, Pikes, and Partisans,
Pollaxes, maces, clubs, and horse-mens sta^,
Darts, halberds, long swords, Pistols, Petronels,
All which I have conquered. At this Mountain ridge
Two villains with these weapons set upon me:
But with my sword I made them turn their heels,
And leaves these Trophies which I thus support,
And bear upon my shoulders Conqueror-like,
What? do I see an ambush? by their arms
They should be Pagans: Robert prisoner!
With him a Christian Leader! Oh my God,
Thou have either brought me to revive my name
By rescuing these, or here to die with sham^.
Come life, come death; a banished man will try,
To live with honor, or with honor die.
Robert break from thy guard, make them dismayed,
Receive these weapons, God has sent thee aid.

ROB. God, and Saint George.


CHA. Now by the Soldans Crown,
If I can weild this weapon, he shall down.

GVY. The Christians God for us.


SOL. What, are they free?
Alarm Drums, the heathen powers for me.
They fight; the Pagans are beaten off, Guy departs suddenly.
ROB. Some Angel in the habit of a Knight,
Has reskued us: such heavy downright blows
Could never come from any mortal arm.
For every blow he reached, was certain death.

CHAR. What is that power, if heavenly power he be,
That we may laud and praise his Deity?

ROB. Departed on a sudden ere we know,
To whom our freedoms, and our lives we owe!

CHA. By that inscription graven on his shield,
We may perhaps descry him in the camp
Cease admiration then; let these events,
Hasten our steps back to survey our Tents.

Enter severally GODFREY, and TANCRED. TANC. Godfrey!


GODF. Tancred!


TANC. Well met my Lords in these unpeopled paths:
What has your love made you to leave the field.

GODF. Godfr^y never dreamt to have met with Tancred her
The Lady that has fled from our chaste love,
(Whom Tancred I do more affectionate,
Because she much resembles my fair sister)
Has caused me so much to forget my self,
And play the wanderer in these unknown woods. soft march.
But soft, that drum should speak the Pagans tongue:
I fear we are betrayed, I, I, it is so:
Tancred, we are round compast by the foe.

SULTAN, SOPHIE, and Soldiers, encompasse the Christian Princes: Enter
EVSTACE, and set them free. EVST. Thank me for this; for, next The Almighty
Powers,
I have been the means to save your desperate liu^s.
Now, Christian Princes, I am quit with you
For all the grace you have done me in the Camp;
And now you owe me for my banishment.
And though you have exiled me from your Tents,
You have not power to keep me from the wars.
Upon this shield I bear the Grocers Arms,
Unto which Trade I was enrold and bound:
And like a strange Knight, I will aid the Christians,
Thou Trade which did sustain my poverty,
Did helpelesse, help me; though I left thee then,
Yet that the world shall see I am not ingrate,
Or scorning that, which gave my fortunes breath,
I will enlarge these Arms, and make their name
The original and life of all my fame.
But I am tired with travail, Shield lie there,
Oh that I could but see that lusty spirit,
My arch-foe, rival in my banishment,
To be revenged, and end my hostile hate!
I Will dream I fight with him to ease my spleen,
And in that thought I lay me on this Green.
Sleep
Enter GVY with a paper and his Shield. GV. Arms ye are full of hope and
sweet success,
The famous Art, whose honored badge ye are,
First, when I lived amongst London-prentises,
Gave me an honest and a pleasant life,
Now in these woods have won me fame and honor:
And I have rescued Princes with this shield:
And Princes are indebted to these Arms.
And if I live, in memory of this
Within their fair Hall shall this Scutchion hang,
Till some smoth pen Historifie my name,
What obiect's that? A Knight a sleep or dead?
Oh, it is the Basse, and ground of all my hate;
I Will kill the villain: Oh dishonored thought!
Art thou not son unto the Bullen Duke,
And can thou hatch dishonor? Arch-foe live.
I scorn advantage, should I fight with Mars.
He bears this shield I will exchange with his,
And leave a Motto written in mine own
Shall make him quake to read. Be swift my pen,
T'affright his sense when he shall wake again.
It Is done. Then go with me and mine stay here,
Which in despite of thee, base Knight, I wear.
Exit.
EVST. The hours have overrun me with swift pace,
And time has fastened to him swallows wings.
Come sword, come Shield; but soft, thou art a stranger,
And pardon me good shield, I know thee not.
What have we here?
Ask not who that Shield does owe,
For he is thy mortal foe:
And where ere he sees that shield,
C^ty, Borough, Grove, or Field*
He that bears it, bears his bane,
By his hand he must be slain.
Thine, in spite of thee, he will bear,
(If thou dare) his Scutchion wear.
He writ this, that thy shield will keep,
And might have ^ine thee being asleep.
It Is a fine fellow; by this light, he is
An honest Rogue, and has a good conceit.
Wear it? I Will wear it. If I do no^! well,
He needed not to have put in the word (Dare)
For I dare: dare I?, he shall see I dare.
Belike he fears I dare not challenge mine.
Were It fastened to the arm of Beelzebub,
I would fight with him with firebrands for my shield.
But dares he wear mine? On my li^e he dares:
I love him like my brother for this act:
And I will bear this shield with as much pride,
As sat I in a chariot by Jove's side.
Shine bright my Stars, to do me ^ome fair grace,
Bring us to meet in some auspicious place.

Enter the Ladies flying, purfued by the Clow^e. CLOVV. Nay you co^ardly Lady,
that run away from the Camp, and dare not stand to it, I am glad I have
light on you; choose your weapon, choose your weapen; I am a Soldier, and a
martial man, and I will offer you the right of Ar^: If you vanquish me, I Will
be your captine, if you be ca^ down I Will carry you back prisoner.


FREN. LAD. I wear a weapon that I dare not draw:
Fie on this womanish fear, what shall I do.

BELL. Some of my fathers spirit reuiues in me*
Give me thy weapon, boy, and thou shall see,
I for us both will win sweet liberty.

CLOVV. I was never ^o ouer-reacht; and, but for shame, and that I am a man at
arms, I would run away, and take me to my legs. Have at thee sweet Lady.

As they fight, EVSTACE comes in:
EVST. Base villain, dare thou offer violence
Unto a Lady; stay, maintain thy challenge.

CLOVV. You think you have a fool in hand; no by my faith, not I. If you have
any business to the Camp, farewell, I am running thither as fast as I can.


EVST. Mount up my soul, unto the height of joy!
Saving my foe, whose honored shield I bear,
None living did I more desire to meet.

BELL. Saving those Christian Lords that seek my love
None living did I more desire to shun.

EVST. Well met, brave Saint, in these unpeopled paths,
Fear no rude force, for I am civil borne,
Descended from a Princely parentage*
And though an exile from the Christians Camp,
Yet in my heart I wear the Cro^e of CHRIST,
Even in as deep a crimson as the best.
Love me, though I am Landlesse, and remote
From the fair clime where first I breathed this air,
Yet know I bear a Kingdom in this sword,
And ere I die, look to behold this Front
Empal'd and circled with a royal Crown.

BELL. I never marked this Gallant half so much:
He has my brothers eye, my fathers brow,
And he is Eustace all from top to (...).

EVST. I had a sister, Lady, with that red,
That gives a crimson ^cture to your cheek,
With such a hand hid in a glove of snow,
That spoke all music, like your heavenly tongue;
And for her sake, fair Saint, I honor you.

BELL. I had a brother, had not the rude seas
D^priu'd me of him, with that manly look,
That grace, that courage, I behold in you.
A Prince, whom had the rude seas never seen,
Even such another had young Eustace been.

EVS. Eustace! even such an accent gave her tongue,
So did my name sound in my sisters mouth,
Oh Bella Franca, were it thou not obscured
Within a cloud and mask of poverty,
Such fame ere this had thy rare virtues won,
Thus had thy beauty checked the all-seeing Sun.

BELL. It is my brother Eustace.


EVST. View her well.
Imagine her but thus attired, and she
Would Bella Franca, and my sister be.

BELL But strip my brother from his Prentice cote,
His cap, his common soldiers base disguise:
Even such a Gallant as this seems to me,
Such would my brother, my sweet Eustace be.

EVST. Sister!


BELL. Brother!


EVST. Make me immortal then, by heaven I vow,
I am richer then the Persian Sophy now.

BELL. All Asia flows not with more plenteous treasure,
Then I, to embrace my brother, my hearts pl^ure.
How did you escape the waves?

EVST. How have you past
The perilous Land, and crossed the Seas so vaste?

BELL. Where are my brothers, Eustace?


EVST. Oh, those words,
Pierce to my heart like Darts, and pointed swords,
Omit these passions, sister, they are dead.
But to forget these griefs, what youth is this?

FREN. LAD. Page to the Prince of France.


EVST. It Is he I hate,
As chief occasion of my banishment.

BELL. Yet, my sweet brother, do not blame the youth,
Full well he has demeaned himself with me.
He never, since we entered in these woods,
Left me in my distress; when we alone
Sit in these deserts never by rude force
Did do me the least shame, or violence.

FREN. LAD. A good cause why I lead so chaste ali fe,
A jealous man may trust me with his wife.

EVST. Well, sir, for your truth and honesty
I pardon thee, though I detest thy Lord.

FREN. LAD. Then let me change my habit, gentle sir,
Least in this shape I chance to meet my Master.
Then, if you please, I Will cloth me like a Lady,
And wait upon your sister in your Tent.

EVST. Nay, if it please thee; I am well content.


FREN. LAD. My plot is good; well, howsoere it prove,
'T will either end my life, or win my love.

EVST. Come, best part of my self, we now will go
To wayle our fortunes, and discourse our woe.
I will disguised unto the famous siege,
And in these Arms make known my valors proose:
You shall in secret in my Tent abide.
I to atchieue fame will my spirits employ,
After this grief my heart divines much joy.
Exit*
Enter ROBERT, and TANCRED, GODFREY, and CHARLES, with their Shields and
Scutchions, Drum and Soldiers, GODFREYES Shield, having a Maidenhead with a
Crown in it, CHARLES his Shield the Haberdashers Arms. ROB. Behold the high
walls of (...),
Which Titus and Uesp^ once brake down:
From off these Turrets have the ancient Jews
Seen worlds of people mustring on these Plains.
Oh Princes, which of all your eyes are dry,
To look upon this Temple, now destroyed.
Yond^r did stand the great I^ahs House,
In midst of all his people, there he dwelt:
V^ssels of gold did serve his Sacrifice,
And with him for the people sp^ke the Priests.
There was the Arc, the Show-bread, Aarons Rod,
Sanctum, Sanctorum, and the Cherubines.
Now in that holy place, where GOD himself
Was personally present, Pagans dwell.
False Gods are reard, each Temple Idols bears.
Oh who can see this, and abstain from tears?

GODF. This way, this sacred path our Savior trod,
When he came riding to Jerusalem,
Whilst the religious people spread his way
With flowers, and garments, and Hosanna cried.
Yonder did stand the great Church, where he taught,
Confuting all the Scribes and Pharisees.
This place did witness all his miracles:
Within this place did stand the judgment seat,
Where Pontius Pilate with the Elders sat,
Where they condemned him to be whipped and crowned,
To be derided, mocked, and crucified,
His hands bored through with nails, his side with Spears.
Oh, who can see this place, and keep his tears?

CHA. On yond side of the Town he died for us:
At whose departure all these walls did shake,
And the destroyed Temples veil did rend:
The groves are to be seen, from which Ghosts rose,
There stood the Cross, there stands the Sepulcher:
The place still bears the name of Dead men's bones.
And still the Tomb our Saviors Livery wears.
What eye can see it, and not melt in tears?

TAN. No soldier but shall look with reverence
Upon these fair and glorious Monuments.
To swear, or speak profanely, shall be death.
I cast my heart as low as to this earth,
And wish that I could march upon my knees,
In true submission, and right holy zeal.
Oh since our wars are Gods, abandon fears,
But in contrition weep repentant tears.

ROB. Sound a Parlee; I see your hearts are fired,
Your souls with victory from heaven inspired.

Sound a Parlee. Enter upon the walls, SULTAN, SOPHY, TVRNVS, MORATES.
Soldiers. Flourish. SOL. Why swarm these Christians to our Ci^ty walls?
Look (forreiners) do not not the lofty Spires,
And these cloud-kissing Turrets that you see,
Strike deadly terror in your wounded souls?
Go Persian, flourish my vermillion flag,
Advance my Standerd high, the sight whereof
Will drive these stragglers in disordered ranks,
And in a hurly burly throng them hence.

PER. SOP. See how they quake, to view our martial looks!
As when a sturdy Ciclops reares aloft
A boisterous Truncheon amongst a troop of Dwarfes.

GODF. Sultan and Sophy, ye damned hel-hounds both,
So quakes the Eagle to behold a gnat,
The Lion to behold a Marmosat.
I Will beard and brave you in your own belief,
As when the heathen God, whom you call Jove,
Wa^r'd with the Giant, great Encel^dus,
And flung him from Olympus two-topt Mount
The swaynes stood trembling to behold his fall,
That with his weight did make the earth to groan.
So, Sold^n, look, when I have skal'd these walls,
And won the place where now thou stand'st secure,
To be hurled headlong from the proudest Tower,
In scorn of thee, thy false gods, and their power.

CHA. We will assail you like rebounding Rocks,
Bandied against the battlements of heaven:
We Will turn thy City into desert plains:
And thy proud Spires that seems to kiss (...) Clouds,
Shall with their guilt-tops paue the miry streets,
As all too base for us to march upon.
Se^st thou this shield, how ever this device
Seems not to rank with Empercurs; Sold^, know
This shield shall give thy fatal overthrow.

SOL. Such peales of Thunder did I never hear,
I think that very words these walls will tear.

GODF. This shield you see, includes two mysteries;
A Virgin crowned it is the M^rcers Arms,
Withal the picture of my love that is fled.
Both these I Will grace, and add to them thy head.

SOP. Me thinks I see pale death fly from their words:
Their speech so strong; how power^ull are their swords!

CHA. Since first I bore this shield I quartered it
With this red Lion, whom I singly once
Slew in the Forest; thus much have I already
Added unto the Haberdashers Arms.
But ere I leave these fair Iudaean Bounds,
Unto this Lion I Will add all your Crowns.

TVR. Send for some prisoners, martyr, torture them
Even in the face of all the Christian Host.

SOL. It shall be so Moretes, bring them forth.


ROR. No drop of blood falls from a Christian heart,
But thy hearts blood shall ransom.

Enter some bringing forth old Bullen, and other prisoners bound. SOL. Bring
them forth,
Devise new tortures:
Oh for some rare Artist,
That could invent a death more terrible
Then are the ever lasting pangs of hell.

OLD BVL. Oh brethren, let not me move you to ruth:
Happy is he that suffers for the truth.
The joys to come exceed the present grief;
Secure your selves, for CHRIST is my relief.

GODF. Why shrinks the warm blod from my troubled heart?


CHA. Why starts my hair up at this heavy sight?


GODF. Say father, are not you the Bullen Earl?


OLD B. Fair son, I was the happen Bullen Earl:
But now my son --

CHA. Call no man son but me.
Father, my sword shall win you liberty.

GODF. Peace forged Bastard whatsoere tho^ be:
My reverend father, call none son but me,
For in this sword does rest thy liberty.

CHA. Such mercy, as my sword affoords to Paganes,
He finds that calls me bastard; I am Charles,
Father you know me since I reskued you,
I am your only son, the rest are dead.

OLD BVL. I know thee Charles.


GODF. But father, I am Godfrey;
That by my valor have regained your right:
Have got your Dukedom from the insulting French,
And am my self invested Bullens Duke.

OLD B. I know thee Godfrey..


CHA. Godfrey!


GODF. Brother Charles!
The confident assurance of thy death,
Made me to give the lie to my own thoughts.

CHA. The selfsame strong opinion bli^ded me,
Else for my brother I had challenged thee:
Brother, you might have known me by the Arms
Which I have borne in honor of my Trade.

GODF. Ah, but the resolution of thy death
Made me to loose such thought.

ROB. Let us rejoice,
And to your plausiue fortunes give our voice.

GODF. Prince Robert, did the time afford us leave,
We would discourse the sum of our escapes:
But to our fathers reskue.

CHA. Yield him slaves.


SOL. Tush, we will keep him spite of all your braues.


GODF. Be that our quarrel.


CHA. With courage, courage strives,
We fight for CHRIST, our father, and our lives.

SOP. Here stands my Ensig^e, and by it a Crown,
That you shall know the Persian honorable, Sets up his Standard and Crown.
He that can fetch this Ensign from the walls,
(Which I my self will guard) and leave some token
Behind him, that his sword has conquered it,
He shall enjoy them both.

SOL. And here stands mine, Set ^p his Standard and Crown.
The Babylonian Emperors royal Standard.
By it I plant the rich Cicilian Crown,
Guarded by me and my all-conquering troops.
He that but leaves a note he has been here,
And scapes unslain, although he win them not,
That Chris^ian will I honor.

ROB. Drums, alarm.


SOL. As loud and proud defiance our Drum sounds.


GODF. For CHRIST, my father, conquest, and two Crow^es:

Exeunt. Alarm.
The Christians are r^pulst. Enter at two several doors, GVY and EVSTACE
climb up the walls, beat the Pagans, take away the Crowns on their heads, and
in the stead hang up the contrary Sh^lds, and bring away the Ensigns,
flourishing them, several ways. Enter SULTAN, SOPHY, MORETES, TVRNVS, with
Sould^. SOL. Now the first wall is won, the Ensigns seized,
The Crowns surpised, the Christians have the day:
What shall we leave the Town?

ALL. I, leave the Town.


SOP. It Is best, '^is best to take us to the field.


TVR. I think '^is best that we make good the breach,
And have no thought of marching toward the field:
We leave a place of much security.

ALL. Why then make good the breach,


SOL. It shall be so.
Gather our forces to make good the breach.

SOP. Tush, why should we be pent up in a Town?
Let Us open the gates and boldly issue out,
Leaving some few Pikes to make good the breach.
What say you Lords? LORDS Then let us issue out.

ALL. Set open the gates, and let us issue our.


SOL. And ^o expose us to the general spoil.
Keep the gates shut, defend them man^ully.
These Christians fight like devils; keep fast the gates,
And once again let us make good the wall.

ALL. Make good the walls, make good the walls.


Enter at one door ROBERT and CHARLES, they meet EVSTACE with his Trophee:
Enter at another d^re GODFREY TANCRED, they meet GVY with his Trophee. ROB.
Triumphant honor houers ore our Arms
What gallant spirit bravely has borne hence
The Emperors Standard, slaughtered his proud Guard,
And in the ^teed thereof hung up his Shield?

EVST. Witness this royal Crown upon my head,
I seized the Ensign, I hung up that Shield.

GODF. What puissant arm snatched hence the Sophies Standard?


GVY. This Crown upon my head, says it was I.


CHA. Forgetful Charles, brave Robert see the Knight,
Whose valor freed us from the Soldans hands.

ROB. Renowned Christian, ever honored be,
It was thy sword pro^r'd us liberty.

EVST. By heaven not I, I never came in place,
Where Robert or that Gallant were distressed:
But there are others thankelesse, whom I freed,
And now too proud forget that honored deed.

GODF. 'Twas he releast us; honored stranger thanke^,
But they are idle offerings from true hearts.
Prince Tancred and my self, owe thee our lives.

GV. You mock me Princes, never did my sword
Drink drop of Pagans blood to set you free:
But Robert and that Prince unthankful be.

CHA. Whose shield is that?


EVST. Mine.


CHA. Then to you we owe
Thanks for our lives, the Pagans overthrow.

EVST. The shield I challenge, but the act deny,
I never gave you life or liberty.

GODF. Whose shield is that?


GV. Mine.


GODF. Then by thee we live,
Thou did our desperate lives and freedom give.

GV. What mean you Princes to deride a stanger?
These eyes did never see you two in danger.

EVST. Who owes that shield?


GV. I: and who owes that?


EVST. I.


GVY. Thou know me then.


EVST. Thanks fortune, that I do.


GV. Have at the slave.


EVST. Brave foe have at thee too.

Fight, and ^re parted by the Princes.
GODF. What ere your quarrel be, contend no more
He draws his sword'gainst me that fights again:
For I am foe to all descension.

CHA. So are we all, then end these wars in words,
The Pagans ^aue employment for your swords.

EVST. For one blow more, take here my Crown amongst you,
Now that my spleen is up, it will not down,
I Will give you all I have for one bout more.

GV. Lords, take mine too: by heaven I Will pawn my life
Against the Soldans head, to bring it you,
So you will let us try this maistry.

ROB. Kingdoms nor Crowns can hire it at our hands,
It shall not be, we say it shall not be.
What are you Lords? we charge you by his honor
Whom in your outward habit you profess,
To tell us both what and from whence ye are.

GV. You charge us deeply. I a banished man,
Whom you for mutiny expulst the Camp,
Yet was I leader of ten thousand French,
But thought by you unworthy of these wars.
Since my exile (Prince Robert view me well)
I freed you two from base captivity.
'Twas I that brought you weapons in the woods,
And then you termed me some Cele^iall power,
But being now in safety, you forget
Your dangers past, and cancel that great debt.

EVST. Nay I am sure you long to know me too.
I am your Outlaw brother, one of your Leaders,
Banished with him: that from the Persians rage
Freed Tancred, and that valiant man at Arms;
How ever now they can forget my prowess.
What need you more, I am he that won this Crow^,
And from these high walls plucked that Ensign down.

ROB. You have redeemed all your offenses past,
Deserving best in this society:
But when you freed me, you did bear that shield.

GV. I did, but since exchanged it with my foe.


GODF. And you did bear that shield.


EVST. True, I did so.
Ah had I been awake, thou know my mind,
Thou had writ thy ruin in blood.

GV. Thy words are mine.


CHA. Leave brother Godfrey, and the Bullen Duke.


EVS. How!


GV. What!


CHA. Do you not know these faces?


GODF. Brother Charles.


EVST. Brother!


GV. Charles!


GODF. I Will question with them, for may it not be
The might escape the seas as well as we?
I had a brother, sir, resembled you.

EVST. I had a brother too resembled you:


CHA. The Bullen Duke, if ever you have heard
Of such a man, had once a son like you.

GV. I, and another son as much like you.


GODF. My brothers name was E^stace.


EVST. Godfrey mine.


GV. That Duke called his son Charles.


CHAR. Mine called his Guy.


GODF. My brother Eustace!


EVST. Godfrey!


CHA. Guy!


GV. And Charles!


ALL. Brothers!


ROB. This accident breeds wonders in my thoughts.


GODF. Oh let me ^urse that head that envied thee.


GV. Nay curse my heart that emulated thee.


EVST. My brother Outlaw, and my own true brother!


CHA. For ever thus let us embrace each other.


GODF. When I was cast upon the Bullen Strand,
I thought none had escapt the seas but I.

GV. When I was thrown upon the Fr^ch Kings Coast,
I thought none had escapt the Seas but I.

CHAR. I thought the seas had favored none but me,
When I attained the shores of Italy.

EVST. Ireland took me, and there I first touched ground,
Presuming that my brothers all were drowned.

ROB. Were ye the four young London Prentises,
That in the ships were wrackt on Goodwins sands?
Were said to have perished then of no repute?
Now come the least of you to lead an Host,
And to be found the sons to a great Duke?

GODF. Witness my shield the Trade I have pro^est.


GVY. Witness my shield I am one amongst the rest.


CHA. Witness thou mine.


EVST. And witness thou for me.


ROB. We witness all your martial chiualry.


EVST. And now my foe-turn'd brother, end our hate,
And praise that Power Divine who guides our state.

GVY. Divide we hands and hearts: what hatred rests,
Power out in Thunder on the Pagans crests.

EVST. Our joys are not at ^ull, they shall not yet
Know where my sister and their love remains,
Until these warros hau^ end. Oh had our God
Not laid our fortunes open, but a brother
Been brought in triumph to a sisters bed,
Clouds of despair had maskt our Sun of joy.
Yet will I keep her secret, and the rather,
To crown our haps when we have freed our father.

Enter TVRNVS. TVR. Christians once more defiance in my tongue,
Sounds dismal terror in your fearful ears.
The Princes whom I serve, grieve they have mur'd
Such an huge Army in a wall of stone,
And they are thus resolved;
To leave all place of scorned advantages,
And in a pitched field end this glorious war.
Say, will ye meet them?

ROB. Though he trust his strength,
Yet will we meet his forces face to face,
When the dry earth shall quaffe your bloods apace.

GV. And tell the Sold^n from a Christian Prince,
That won from him these colors, and this Crown,
In that pitched field my head this Crown shall bear,
And skar^e-like these athwart my breast I Will wear.

EVST. This for the Persian's sake I Will wear in sight,
And under his own ensign this day fight.

CHA. Go tell the Sultan that he wears my Crown.
Fortune has given it me, it is mine own.

GODF. If thou have more to say concerning war,
Omit thy braues and trifling circumstance:
We Will meet you sooner then you can desire.
Be gone, be gone, our hearts are all on fire.

TVR. Brave Lords, our conquests will be honorable,
Because we have to deal with honored foes:
Our pikes stand to receive you like a wood,
We Will flake our white steeds in your Christian blood.

TAN. Prepare to meet them, and appoint our powers,
This day the City and themselves are ours.

ROB. Thou under whom we fight, this day defend us,
For unto thy protection we commend us.
Exeunt.
Enter at one door with Drum and Colors, SULTAN SOPHIE, MORETES, TVRNVS, and
Soldiers. SOL. Great Monarchs, Kings, and Princes of the East,
Ye come t'encounter with a valiant foe;
Such as have swomme huge Rivers, climbed the Alps;
That can endure sharp hunger; such as shrink not
To have their bloods sod with the dog days heat,
Nor to be crudled with cold Saturnes rod.
What honor were it for an Host of Giants,
To combat with a Pigmee Nation?
No, Lords, the foe we must encounter with,
Is full of spirit and maiesticke spleen,
Strong, hardy, and their hearts invincible.
Dest^oy these, and you win your selves a name,
And all the nations of the earth shall fear you.

SOP. The more renowned the foe is, the more famous
Shall be our conquest, the more great their fall.
Come Lords, divide we our battalions.

SOL. Be yours the Vaward.


SOP. I will give the charge.


SOL. Turnus, have you the Rere-ward. I the battle,
Moretes, thou this day shall lead the horse
Take thou the Cornet, Turnus thou the Archers,
Be thine the Guidon, I the men at Arms
Be mine this Ensign.

SOP. Then mount our Canons, let our flanking pieces
Rail on the Christian Army with wide mouths.
For I this day will lead the forlorn hope,
The Camisado shall be given by me.

TVR. Already they have placed their battery,
Their Ordinance stand fit to beat the Flanks.

SOL. My Cannoniers need no instruction.
Come, let us line our Pikes with Musketeers,
And so attend the Christians fatal charge.

Enter marching, ROBERT, TANCRED, GODFREY, GVY, CHARLES, EVSTACE, Drum and
Soldiers. ROB. Princes, this day we are espousd to death:
A better place to die in, then this vale, in which our Saviors Sepulere
remains,
What man in all our Army could desire?
Speak, how have you disposed our Officers.

GODF. Your Grace is Captain General of the Army.


GV. And Godfrey you high Marshall, and Master of the Camp,
And as assistants you have under you
The Serieant Mayor, Quarter-maister, Provost,
And Captain of the Spyons.

GODF. My brother Guy chief General of the Horse
To serve him his Lifetenant Colonel
Captains and Skout-maisters.

EVST. My brother Charles General of the Artilery,
Under him his Lifetenant commissaries of Munitions,
Gentlemen of the Artilery, Colonel of Pyoners,
Trench Masters, and carriage Masters.

CHA. My brother Eustace Treasurer of the Camp,
And under him the Auditors, Muster-maisters, and Commissaries.

EVST. Prince Tancred is our Royal Secretary,
Without whom nothing is concluded on.
Thus are the special Offices disposed.

TAN. Princes, what order take you for the assault.


ROB. One half maintain the battry beat the walls,
Whilst the other keeps them play in the open fields.

GODF. We shall not need to block the breach with Forts,
Victuals and forage are at pleasure ours.
Stockadoes, Palizadoes, stop their waters.
Bulwarks and Curtains all are batterd down
And we are safe entrencht by Pyoners.
Our Case-mates, Caualiers, and Counterscarfes,
Are well suruei'd by all our Enginers.
Fortifications, Ramparts, Parapets;
That we at pleasure may assault the way,
Which leads unto the gate Antiochia.

GV. Whilst you intend the walls, shall my bard horse
Give a brave onset, shiuering all their Pikes,
Armed with their Greeues and Maces, and broad Swords,
Proof Cuiraces, and open Burganets.

CHA. Yet let us look our battle be well manned,
With shot, Bills, Halberds, and proof Targettiers.

EVST. No man but knows his charge. Brothers and friends,
See where they stand for us; this night shall hide
All their bright glory which now swells with pride.

SOL. Christians?


EVST. Pagans?


SOL. Behold our Camp.


ROB. Sultan, survey o^s too.


SOL. From Ganges to the Bay of Cal^,
From Turkey and the threefold Arabie:
From Sauxin Eastward unto Nubia's bounds,
From Lybia and the Land of Mauritans,
And from the red Sea to the wilderness,
Have we unpeopled Kingdoms for these wa^res,
To be revenged on you base Christians.

ROB. From England, the best brood of martial spirits,
Whose walls the Ocean washes white as snow,
For which you s^rangers call it Albion:
From France, a Nation both renowned and feared,
From Scotland, Wales, even to the Irish Coast,
Beyond the pillars great Alcides reared,
At Gades in Spain unto the Pyr^ H^,
Have we assembled men of dauntlesse spirits,
To scourge you hence ye damned Infidels.

SOP. Within our troops are sturdy bands of Moors,
Of Babylonians, Persians, Bactrians,
Of Grecians, Russians, of Tartarians, Turks,
Even from the floods that grow from Paradise
Unto this place where the Brook Kedron runs.

GV. Within our Troops are English, French, Scotch, Dutch,
Italians of Prince Tancred's Regement.
Even from the Seas that wall in Albion,
As far as any River or Brook runs,
That Christian (...) on, have we people here,

TVR. To make our streets red with your Christian blood.


CHAR. To drown you slaves in a vermillion flood.


MOR. To burn your bodies over your Prophets grave.


EVST. To lead your Emperor Captive like a slave.


SOL. To make your guide trot by my chariot wheel.


TAN. To lash your armor with these rods of s^eele.


SOP. Then to ^rpe you all, ye Persian powers,
Assist our courage, make the conquest ours.

ROB. God match thy might with theirs, protect us to;
To let this people know what thou can do.

SOL. A charge, a charge, rail drums, and Cannons rore,
Christians, at home your friends abroad deplore.

GODF. Christians at home abroad our conquests fame;
Thou God of Hosts this day make known thy name.

Alarm. Join battle: The Christians are beaton off. The Sultan victoriously
leads off his Soldiers marching. Enter CHARLES and GODFREY with Pistols. CHA.
Oh God, that multitude should more then manhood,
That we should thus be borne down with a press,
Be thronged and shouldered from the place we keep!

GODF. For every man we lead, the foe has ten,
Their weapons tops appear above their heads,
In as thick number as the spikes of grain
Upon a well-til'd land: they have more lives,
Then all our tired arms could send to death,
If they should y^eld their bare breasts to our swords.

CHA. What should we do? we are encompast round,
Girded with thousand thousands in a ring.
And like a man left on a dangerous rock,
That waits the climbing tide rise to destroy him:
What way so e^'e he looks, sees naught but death:
So we; the bloody tide grows up apace,
Whose waves will swallow us and all our race.
Where Is Guy and Eustace?

GODF. Gone to scale a Tower
In which our father lies: Oh I did see them
Cut down a wood of men upon the sudden.
Their swords cut lances, as a sith cuts grass:
Their valor seems to me miraculous.
Thou Savior of the world, whose Cross we bear,
Infuse our hearts with courage, theirs with fear.
Ex^nt.
Enter SULTAN, SOPHIE, and Soldiers. Alarm. Enter GVY and EVSTACE with their
father. EVST. A Syon, a Syon.


GV. A Jerusalem.


EVST. A father, and in him a Crown of joy.


GV. A Syon, a Jerusalem, a father.


EVST. Through their Decurians, centu^ions and Legio^,
Captains of thousands, and ten thousands guards,
We have ventured even upon the Cannons mouth,
And scaled the bull warkes where their Ordinance played.
The strength of A^mies triumphs in those Ar^s,
We have surpised the Fortress and the Hold:
My shield I have had cut peece-meale from mine arm.
But now you would have taken me for an Archer,
So many arrows were stuck here and here,
The Pagans thought to make a Quiver of me.
Alarm enter Pagans. See brother, how the foe fresh forces gather!
A Syon, a Jerusalem, a father.

Every one by turn takes up their father, and carries him: Enter the two
brothers, they aid a^ second them. And with a shout carry him away, Alarm:
Enter SULTAN, SOPHIE. SOL. An Enginer, call forth an Enginer.


SOP. Why, what to do, my Lord?


SOL. I*le make these Turrets dance among the Clouds,
Before the Christians shall inhabit them.

SOP. Yet there is hope of conquest, fight brave Sultan.


SOL. These Christians rage, like spirits coniur'd up,
Their thundering Ordinance spit huge clouds of fire,
They run against the walls like iron rams,
And bear them down before them with their breasts.

SOP. Fortune thou art too envious of our glory,
Behold the two great'st Emperors of the earth,
The Babylonian Sultan, and great Sophy;
Vnueile thine eyes, and look upon our falls.

SOL. Fortune and fate, and death, the devil and all,


Enter Moretes and Turnus* Oppose themselves against us. Now what news?

MOR. Death.


SOP. What news bring'st thou?


TVR. Confusion,


SOL. That death was once my ^aue, but now my Lord.


SOP. Confusion was once page unto my sword.
Is the day lost?

TVR. Lost.


SOL. Must we needs despair?


MOR. Despair.


SOL. We will not, we will die resoluedly,
The Palace we will make a slaughterhouse,
The streets a Shambles, Kennels shall run blood,
Down from Mount Syon, with ^uch hideous * noise,
As when great showers of waterfals from Hills.

SOP. Through which way did they make irruption first?


TVR. Through the gate, called Antiochia.
The selfsame breach that Roman Titus made,
When he destroyed this City, they burst open.

SOL. There is some virtue in the Cross they wear,
It makes them strong as Lions, swift as Roes.
Their resolutions make them Conquerours.
They have taken our Royal Standard from the walls,
In place whereof they have advanced their Cro^*

SOP. I will not I survive so ^oule a shame,
Once more unite our powers, (I mean our selfs)
For all powers else have failed us; bravely fight,
That our declining sun may make there night!

Enter the four brethren. SOL. Christians, base Christians, hear us when we
call,
Eternal darkness shall confound you all.
Alarm. The four brethren each of them kill a Pagan King, take of their
Crowns, and e^unt: two one way, and two another way. Retrait.
Enter ROBERT, TANCRED, GODFREY, GVY, CHARLES, EVSTACE, Old Duke, Drum,
Colors, and Soldiers. ROB. Now smoth again the wrinkles of your brows,
And wash the blood from off your hands in milk:
With penitential praises laud our God,
Ascribe all glory to the heavenly Powers,
Since Syon and Jerusalem are ours.

TANC. We do abhor a heart pufft up with pride,
That attributes these conquests to our strength;
'Twas God that strengthened us and weakened them,
And gave us Syon and Hierusal^m.

GODF. Thou that do muster Angels in the sky,
That in thy self have power of victory:
Make thy name shine, bright as the noone-tide Sun,
Since Syon and Jerusalem are won.

OLD D. My former want has now sufficient store,
For having seen this, I desire no more.
How fair and smoth my stream of pleasure runs,
To look at once on Syon and my sons!

GV. Shoures of abundance rain into our lips,
To make repentance grow within our hearts.
What greater earthly bliffe could heaven power down,
Then Syon, our dear father, and this Town?

CHA. Then to confirm these conquests God has given us,
Sealed with the blood of Kings and Emperous;
Let us elect a King, that may maintain
Our honors with the deaths of Monarchs slain.

EVST. Call forth the Patriarch of Jerusalem,
His right hand must be queath that dignity.

GODF. With tears I speak it, lagging in the train
Of the di^ressed Sultan he was (...).

ROB. Praised be our God, we have revenged his death.
Great Potentates consort him to his grave.

CHA. What man, for gravity and sanctity,
May we think worthy of this honored place?

ROB. Whose years, devotion, and most sacred life,
Better can fit that holy place, then his
Whose worthy sons have brought to end these wars?
Princes, join hands, inuest him all at once.
Flourish.
OLD D. My fervent zeal, bids I should not deny:
It brings my soul to heaven before I die.

EVST. But Princes, whom will ye elect the King,
To guard this City from succeeding peril.

GODF. Robert of Normandy.


ROB. Oh chose Prince Tancred rather,


TANC. Too weak is my desert, and I refuse it.


EVST. Then put it too most voices.


ALL. Robert of Normandy.


ROB. Princes, we much commend you for your loves:
But letters from England tell me William's dead,
And by succession left the Crown to me.
I say Prince Godfrey has deserved it best.

TAN. So Tanered says.


ALL. And so say all the rest.


GODF. Princes, ye press me down with too much ho^ors,
And load a soul that cannot bear them up.
Dissuade me not, no counsel I will hear.
Behold a Crown which Godfrey means to wear! A Crown of Thorns.
This made the blood run from our Saviors Brow
No Crown but this ean Godfreyes heart allow.
Prayers are my pride, devotion draws my sword,
No pomp but this can Bullens soul afford.
My vow's irreuocable, state I refuse;
No other Crown but this will Godsrey choose.

TAN. If he refuse the place, elect Prince Guy;
Most voices; shall he have the Scepter?

ALL. I.


ROB. Then Crown him straight, and henceforth let his name
Be through the world called Guy of Lessingham.
All these desire it, I consent with them;
Long li^e Prince Guy, King of Jerusalem.
Flourish:
GV. The Crown is burst, and parted from my head;
I fear the heavens are angry with your choice.

OLD D. Son Guy they are not. By Divine instinct
The heavens have lent me a Propheticke spirit.
This she was thy troublous reign, mutines from far,
Shall fright thy Towns and Provinces with war.

GV. If it be nothing else, Crown me again,
We have a heart our Kingdom to maintain.
What honors do my brothers heads awaite?

ROB. Prince Eustace, you shall wear this Crown of State,
Be King of Sicil and command that Isle.
Lord Charles, the crown of Cyprus longs to you,
That in the fight the King of Cyprus slew.
One general voice at once proclaim them Kings.
Flourish.
CHA. In memory of this solemnity,
Here will I leave this Scutchion borne by me:
That in what coast so e're my bones be laid,
This shield may be an honor to my Trade.

EVST. Mine shall hang there, a trophee of my fame,
My Trade is famous by King Eustace name.

GVY. In memory a king has borne this shield,
I add these Challices to this Argent Field.

GODF. In honor of my first profession
That shield in all these wars by Godfrey borne,
I crown this Maids head with a wreath of Thorn.

OLD D. Oh were my daughter here this joy to see;
How light her soul! how glad would my heart be!

TANC. Would I had now my love.


GVY. Or I that Dame,
That adds to beauties sun a brighter flame.

ROB. Were the fair virgin here, I would renown
Her glorious beauty with the English Crown.

EVST. Princes, I^e fit you all, Lady come forth.


Enter BELLA FRANCA. BELL. The lovely Princes.


TAN. Fair Mistress!


CHA. Lady!


GODF. Madame!


GV. Honored Saint!


BELL. Nay pardon me, love comes not by constraint.
But Princes, will you grant me patience,
Before I part, I mean to please you all.
First holy Patriarch, tell me of all others,
Whom in the world you most desire to see.

OLD D. My daughter.


BELL. Prince Godfrey, Charles and Eustace, whom say you?


ALL. Next your self our sister.


BELL. And whom you?


TAN. My love.


BELL. Who Is that?


TANC. Your honored self fair Maid.


BELL. Nay, I Will make good the words that I have said.
Father, I give a daughter to your hand:
Brothers, behold, here does your sister stand.
Tancred behold the Lady you once ceased,
Only I leave Prince Robert here displeased.

OLD D. My daughter Bella Franca!


BRO. Sister!


TANC. Love!


OLD D. I am to happy, and too full of joy.
Heaven powers on me more good then I can bear:
I that before was steru'd, now surfeit here.

ROB. Princes, and Lady, nothing can displease us,
For we partake in all this glad content,
And with applause rejoice this accident.
Tancred rejoice, your love, and you your friends,
Where you begin with marriage, our love ends.
Kings, and kings Peers, to heaven ascribe the glory,
Whilst we to Chronicles report this story.

GV. Make love unto my sister! it is most strange,
Now Guy I would thy had thy French love here.
My heart should grant her what I then refused.
Now having got this state of dignity,
I grieve that I have so obdurate been,
But for amends would make her Syons Queen.

EVST. And well remembered brother, I must now
Entreat you for a pretty boy your Page,
That has on some occasion ^tray'd from you.

GV. Oh brother, where is the villain?


EVST. Pardon him, and I will tell you.


GV. Great were the offense, I would not clear for you.


EVST. The poor boy, brother, stays within my Tent,
But so disguised you cannot know him now,
For he is turned wench: and but I know the wagge,
To be a ^oy, to see him thus transformed,
I should have sworn he had been a we^ indeed.

GV. Pray, let me see him, brother in that habit,
I would not loose the villain for more gold,
Then Syon would be sold for; he will blush
To be taken tardy in his Maids attire.

EVST. You have pardoned him?


GV. I have.


EVST. Then lack appear:


Enter the French Lady. Nay blush not to be in your woman's geere.

GV. Leap heart, dance spirit, be merry iocund soul,
It Is she undoubtedly.

FREN. LAD. You know me then!


GV. I do, 'twas that disguise,
That all this w^ile has blinded my clear eyes.

EVST. Fie, are you not ashamed to kiss a boy,
And in your arms to graspe him with such joy?

GV. She is no boy, you do mistake her quite.


EVST. A boy, a Page, a wagtaile by this light.
What say you sister?

BELL. Sure he told me so,
For if he be a maid, I made him one.

EVST. Do not mistake the sex man, for he is none,
It is a rogue, a wag, his name is Jack,
A notable dissembling lad, a Crack.

GVY. Brother, it is you that are deceived in her,
Beshrew her, she has been my bedfellow
A y^are and more, yet I had not the grace.
Brothers receive a sister; reverent father
Accept a daughter, whilst I take a wife,
And of a great Kings daughter make a Queen.
This is the beauteous virgin, the French Lady,
To whom my fortune still remains in debt.

EVST. A Lady, then I cry you mercy brother,
A gallan^ Bride would I h^d such another.

FREN. L. A wondrous change! she that your Page has been
Is now at length transformed to be your Q^eene.
Pardon me ` Guy,' my love drew me along,
No ^hamelesse lust.

GVY. Fair Saint, I did you wrong.
If fortune had not been your friend in this,
You had not lain thus long without a kiss.
Father, embrace her; brothers; sister, all.

OLD D. This fortune makes our joys mere comicall.
The fame of our success all Europe rings:
The father, Patriarch, sees his sons all Kings.

ROB. The heavens are full of bounty; then brave Princes,
First in the Temple hang these Trophies up,
As a remembrance of your fortunes past.
You good old father, wear your Patriarchs Roabes,
Prince Godfrey, walk you with your Crown of Thorn^;
Guy with his Lady; Tancred with his wife:
Charles with his Crown of Cyprus, and young Eustace
Crowned with the rich Sicilian Diadem;
I with the honor of the Pagans deaths.
So in Procession walk we to CHRIST'S Tomb,
With humble hearts to pay our Pilgrims vows.
Repair we to our Countries, that once done,
For Sy^n and Jerusalem are won.
Exeunt Omnes.
FINIS.

