An Answer to a Popish Ryme, lately scattered abroad in the West parts, and
much relied upon by some simply-seduced.

By Samuel Hieron, Minister of the Word of God, at Modbury in Deuon.

Math. 10, 17. Beware of Men.

Phil. 3.2. Beware of Dogs.

LONDON Printed by Simon Stafford, dwelling in Hosier lane, near Smithfield.
1604.

To my much esteemed friend, J. L.
YOu will wonder, I am sure (considering my profession, to see me become a
Poet. And indeed I do almost marvel at it my self, knowing my self to want
the two principal furtherances of Poetry: the one is natures instinct They say,
Poeta nascitur: if a man be not, as it were, a Poet borne, he shall never
prove excellent in that faculty.
, which God in his holy providence has denied me: the other is a certain
retired freedom from all such businesses, which may breed distraction, Carmina
secessu^ scribentis and otia quaerunt, Ovid. de Trist.
which my public Calling, besides private encombrances, will not afford me.
Yet notwithstanding, upon this present occasion, I have even forced my self to
this straiter course of Verse-making, though I know, that for mine own case
(having to deal in such a distempered and unruly Subject) that lesse-limited
and freer kind of discourse, which Prose allows, had been more convenient:
Because the rules of Cadence, and number (to which our English Poetry
especially is co^fined) do many times so straiten an unaccustomed Practitioner,
that he is in hazard, either of obscuring the sense (which in a matter of this
nature were something dangerous) or of marring the Verse (which to the
apprehension of every common conceit were very ridiculous.) But howsoever I
have erred in the carriage of this verse, I hope, to you and to others, whose
favor, either because of their Judgment, or their honesty, I desire, this
shall excuse me: that meeting with our common Adversary (who appears sometime
in shape of a Statesman, debating of Titles, and Commonwealth affairs,
Witness the Quodlibets, Dolman, etc.
sometime as a Petitioner to the King and Parliament, At the Kings first
coming, and now since ye Parliament.
sometime as a plausible perswader, Bristowes Motives, and Books of that nature
sometime as a Restorer of the holy Text, to the native purity thereof, Rhem.
Test. and Grego. Martin.
sometime as a man of a very tender Conscience, giving reasons why he cannot
come to our Assemblies, Howlet.
sometime as a Rayler at our government, and an approuer of our open enemies;
The wardword. Quo teneam vultus mutante^ Protea nodo.
that, I say, meeting with this time-seruing Proteus, in the fashion of a Rimer
or Balladine, and crept in (as the manner of false brethren is Gal. 2.4. Similes
habent labra lactucas.
) into both the hands and the hearts of many simply-seduced; I have endeavored
to make the Lettuce like the lips (as the proverb is) and to proportion my
self to him in versing, to whom I am sure (without wilful forsaking the plain
truth of God, manifested in Scripture) I shall never be like in believing.

The Service it self, which is here sent us in by this Runnagate, He
confesses he was a Protestant.
is for substance agreeing with the rest of their Romish Cates, though (to say
the truth) it has come through the hands of a very homely and sluttish Cook,
by whom it is neither seasoned with wit or argument, no, nor yet set forth
after any good ordinary fashion: But it is even a very Gally-mawfrey, of
certain naked and indigested Allegations (as it were the leauings and scraps
of some other) without either order or proof, as though every Papist were a
Pope, and every word of his mouth an Oracle. Belike the Slouen thought it good
enough for those, for whom it was provided; as indeed it is: for those which
turn their ears from the truth, and are given unto fables 2. Tim. 4.4.
; and by some, upon my knowledge (to whom, I fear me, God has sent strong
delusions, that they should believe lies) it is highly magnified, 2. These. 2.11.
as a special Preservative against supposed Heresy, and as a well-framed
Sconce, which none of us all is able to overthrow.

In regard whereof, knowing my self bound among others to contend earnestly
for the maintenance of the Faith, Jude 3.
I have undertaken this which you here see. For my desire and true intent
therein, it is best known to him which sees in secret Mat. 6.4.
, and in his due time will make the counsels of all hearts manifest. 1. Cor.
4.5.


Touching the thing it self, how it is, and how well it is, I submit it to the
censure of the godly-wise, praying them, that with their favorable (if not
allowance, yet at least) conniuence, it may pass to the use of those, to whom
it is intended: And among others, I have directed it especially to you, in part
of recompense for a great deal of kindness, entreating you to entertayne it
with the like measure of love, wherewith it is offered. And so beseeching God
to fill you with the fruits of righteousness, Phil. 1.11.
I commend you to his grace in Christ Jesus.

Modbury, August, 20. 1604. Your very loving friend, SAM. HIERON.

The Papists Ryme.
I Pray thee, Protestant, hear with me, Indeed a man had need to be very
patient, that means to hear thee.

To ask thee Questions two or three:
And if an answer thou can make,
More of thy counsel I will take. Yet I fear, that though thou were brayed in
a Mortar with a Pestell, among Wheat, thy foolishness will not depart from
thee: Pro. 27.22.

Many sundry Sects appear,
Now in the world far and near,
The Caluinist, the Protestant,
The Zuinglian, the Puritant:
The Brownist, and the Family of Love,
And many more which I can prove,
And the Roman faith truly,
Which you call Papistry.
And every one confess IESV,
Saying that their Faith is true:
But amongst these tell me how,
The Truth from feigned lies to know.
All these in very deed,
Rehearse all Articles in the Creed,
And every one of them says,
That theirs is the Catholic Faith:
But this it is that I do seek, I believe, thou art one of those, which are
ever learning, and never come to the knowledge of the Truth, 2. Tim. 3.7. Take
the Lantern which David used, and thou shall soon find the true Church,
Psalm. 119.105.

To know the Church Catholic,
The Communion or Company
Of holy men in Unity.
Catholic.
IN your Bible I have read,
The Church must through the world be spread:
For Christ he his Apostles sent
With power and Commandment,
That to all Nations they should go,
To preach and to baptize also.
Who has done this? to know I will,
For that is sure the Church of Christ. I hope thou will not say that Rome has
don this: the charge was given and undertaken before Rome was converted.

As for example, let me know,
And if thou can I pray thee show,
What Church did take in hand
The first conversion of this Land? The Apostles Church for ought you can prove
to the contrary.

And all other countries every where,
Throughout the world far and near: Who but a Papist, would dare to say this?

If this were not the Church of Rome,
Then will I be converted soon. You build your Faith upon a very sure ground.

Saint Paul in his Epistle faith, Did Paul say that Rome should never deny the
Faith?

The Romans had the Catholic Faith,
Saying it was renowned,
Spoken of, or published
Through the world, over all,
Catholic, Universal:
And if your Churches were even so, Our Church is a part of the Catholic
Church, disprove it if you can.

Then to your Churches I would go. You may come to our Churches, the Pope
gives you leave, so that you keep your hearts to him.

Prophets.
SO says the Prophet Malachy,
There should be offered far and nigh,
A clean Oblation or Sacrifice, When you read, Altar, and Sacrifice, you
think strait that makes for the Mass, not knowing, or not seeming to know the
language of the Scripture.

From place where now the Sun does rise,
To the going down of the same.
And what is that, I pray thee name?
If it be not the holy Mass,
I will be a Protestant as I was. If thou had been of us, thou would have
continued with us, 1. Job. 2.19.

In the eighteenth Psalm I found,
The whole world should hear their sound, Namely, of the Apostles, and their
doctrine; prove our Doctrine to disagree with theirs.

And it this mark you do not want,
Presently I will recant.
Continuance.
THis is another mark most sure,
The Faith of Christ must still endure, Christ's Faith must endure, therefore
Rome is the true Church. A hot Argument.

According as our Savior said,
When for Saint Peter he had prayed.
Simon, thy Faith shall never fail,
The gates of Hell shall not prevail,
The holy Ghost your Comforter,
Shall remain with you for ever.
And I my self, your surest friend,
Will be with you unto the end.
Saint Paul has the like speech,
There shall be always men to preach,
Apostles, Some say they are Apostles, and are not, Re. 2.2.
Doctors, and the like,
In the Church Catholic:
If this be not the Church of Rome, Because you say it, we are bound to believe
it.

Then will I be converted soon.
Visible.
ANother mark there is most clear,
The Church of God must still appear,
As a City on a hill, Some wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction, 2.
Pet. 3.16. Take heed.

Seen and continue still;
As a light on a Candlestick,
So is the Church Catholic.
Our Savior says, If one offend,
And will not be ruled by his friend,
Tell all the Church without delay: Would you have us go to Rome with every
co^playnt? it seems so; for you tie the Church to that See.

And if he will not then obey,
Do thou esteem such a man,
An Heathen or a Publican.
Is not that the Church, wherein we see
Two hundred Bishops thirty three,
To have succeeded each other,
Since the time of Saint Peter? You must first prove that Saint Peter was
Bishop of Rome.

Show me this mark in you, Thou thy self say, there have been successively
63. Bishops in England, since Peter: then either ours is the true Church, or
else succession of Bishops is no sure mark.

And I will say your Faith is true:
If this be not in the Faith of Rome,
Then will I be converted soon.
Unity.
ANother mark there is truly,
The Church must have Unity,
As our Savior has foretold,
One Shepherd and one Fold:
One is my Spouse, one is my Love,
One is my Darling and my Dove:
This is his Spouse, and at some time
He does resemble it to a Vine.
His Father is the Husbandman,
A Branch is every Christian,
This is his Body Mystical,
The which he does his Kingdom call:
Whereof Saint Peter had the Keys, What became of the Keys, when Pope Julius
2. threw them into Tibur.

And his Successors have always: As though no body did succeed Peter, but the
Pope, who is rather the successor of Romulus, then Peter, as Pope Hadrian the
fourth said when he dyed.

And likewise Saint Paul says,
One Baptism and one Faith,
And one Lord IESV:
Have no dissension among you.
If this be not the Church of Rome,
Then will I be converted soon.
Holy.
THis you say in very deed,
When you rehearse the holy Creed, So you say in the Creed, that Christ
sits at the right hand of God, and yet you say also, he is in body present
at the Mass.

One Church Catholic,
Holy and Apostolic.
This is another mark truly,
The Church of God must be holy:
Holy men, Holy Service,
Ceremonies, Sacrifice:
Sacraments and Holy days,
Are observed in her always:
As for the Saints and Martyrs all,
And Virgins, which you Saints do call;
I ask you when they lived and where,
Whose names are in your Calender:
In what Religion they dyed,
By whom they were Canonized? Who made the Pope a Saint-maker?

Prove that these agree with you,
And I will say your Faith is true:
If they were not your company, You stand so much upon Company, that you will
rather go to the Devil, then want Company.

Then is your Faith an Heresy.
Heretics.
Our Savior warns us to have care,
Of false Prophets to beware, That makes us take heed of you.

Which in his name shall come,
Not sent, yet they shall run: There be many of your Church come amongst us
to work mischief, before you be sent for.

Thieves, not entering by the Door, A lively description of the Popes Clergy.

That kill and steal and keep a stoore,
Woolues in Shepherds clothing,
That kill the Soul, and steal the tithing,
Dogs, Foxes, and Masters of lies,
That new Sects will devise,
Bringing in dissension,
And heap thousands to perdition.
Where have you been this many a year,
That none of you durst once appear?
Ever since our Saviors time,
To whom did your Light shine? To those which had eyes to see it.

Where did your principal Pastor sit? In Heaven.

Who kept your keys, who fed your sheep? You have butchered a good sort of
them.

Show some Churches you have built:
I can show many you have spilt.
How might a man have found you out,
To have trial in a matter of doubt: You be too proud to learn: It is the
first lesson you teach your Disciples, to admit no conference.

Where for so many a year
No such company did appear?
Until Luther, a lying Friar, If Luther had continued a true Friar, he had
never been good.

Upon whom the Devil had desire,
Brake his vow, Herod's vow is better broken then kept.
and married a Nun.
And there your Sect Our Sect is the same that Paul's was, Act. 28.22.
first begun, Either thou know this to be a lie, or thou know nothing.

And favored in Saxony
By a Duke that loved liberty:
And in King Edwards time truly, There were Englishmen in England, who bare
witness to this truth, by suffering death for it long before King Edwards time.

It first infected our Country.
For a thousand years you say,
That Papistry did bear the sway:
And during all that space,
No Protestant durst show his face. The more they lay hid the greater was your
Tyranny.

Who kept Indeed you kept the^ so fast, that the people could have no comfort
by them.
the holy Scriptures then
From the hands of wicked men?
Who had authority to ordain,
Our Priests and Bishops again?
For he that enters without Order,
As a thief does kill and murder.
And one thing makes me to muse,
That no Priest you do refuse, A very tale.

Being ordered by the Church of Rome,
But he was accepted soon:
If he would say the new Service,
He should have a Benefice,
Without any further order,
And accounted for the better: He that has once bin an eger Papist, and is
converted truly, is to be the better thought of, because having known the
abomination of Popery, he must needs detest it more.

How can she make a lawful Priest,
If she be not the Church of Christ.
Answer this, O Protestant,
If thou can, I will recant, I believe you will not be so good as your word

But while an answer you devise, A man need not be long in making you an
answer.

I counsel all men that are wise,
To hold the faith mayntained here,
The space of a thousand year,
Brought unto us Englishmen
By our Apostle, Who made him an Apostle?
Saint Austen,
Who from Rome was bisher sent.
When Ethelbert was King of Kent,
Who learned his faith of Gregory, This Gregory accounted him the Forerunner of
Antichrist, who so should seek to be called Universal Bishop: from this
faith you are gone.

His faith was kept successively,
By threescore Bishops and three,
Since Saint Peter's time truly,
Who learned his faith of Christ Jesus,
Who is the Son of God most true.
The Protestants Answer.
I May not (Papist) suffer thee,
Because thy Questions idle be:
And if my counsel thou will take,
Then hear the Answer I will make.
Thou tell of Sects that do appear,
And seemst the truth glad to enquire:
But even in this I malice smell,
And see thy spiteful meaning well.
When thou these diverse sects do name,
Thou would thereby our Church defame, I have reason so to think, because
the multitude of supposed sects amongst us, is a common Imputation. See Brist.
Motives, page 10.

And make fools think that we them loved,
When as with us they are not approved.
We do not hang on Caluins sleeue,
Nor yet on Zuinglius we believe:
And Puritanes we do defye,
If right the name you do apply. Viz. If either by that name, are understood
those ancient Heretics, called Cathari, who dreamed of a state of perfection
in this life: or else such factious ones among us, which have soght the spoil
and havoc of the Church.

All giddy Sects among us crept,
We wish out of our Church were swept:
No name do we delight in more,
Then that at Antioch given of yore. Christians, Act. 11.26

But now what sects you Papists have,
I do but thy own witness crave:
Some Capucines, some Franciscanes,
And some be called Dominicanes:
Some Jesuits, some Seculars, The emulation and difference betwixt these 2.
their Quodlibets do show.

Some gray, some black, some white Friars:
And that your store may not be spent,
New Locusts still from Hell are sent. Reu. 9.3. Those Locusts do well
represent the Popes Clergy: they were bred of the smoke of the Pit; so are
these of Heresy, Ignorance, and Superstition: they destroy the fruits of the
earth; so these spoil the Church.

The reason why the Church is called Catholic.



Thou say, thou would ye Church find out,
So that I see thou art in doubt:
And so indeed Uncertainty
Is still the fruit of Popery.
Catholic.
IN our Bible thou have read.
It Is well in ours, for yours is fled,
And lurketh in a tongue vnusde,
Whereby poor people are abusde.
The Church is Catholic, as you say,
And so say we: but why, I pray?
Because to it, it were disgrace,
To limit it to time or place.
It ever was, and so shall be,
Since Christ, excluding no degree: Col. 3.11. Acts 10.34, 35.

It once was tied unto the Jews,
But now no place Austine says, it is Catholic, because spread over the world,
Ep. 170. and thereto agrees the Scripture, Acts 1.8.
it does refuse.
It is a very fond surmise,
Which you the Papists do devise,
To shut the Church within Rome wall,
And yet to call it general. Catholic and General are all one; and therefore
one of their own Councels says, The Roman Church is not the Universal
Church, but of the Universal Church, Basil. Con. sy. 3

The very name which you pretend.
Whereby your Church you would defend,
To all which do the meaning know,
Does quite your fancy overthrow.
You say, the charge, which Christ once gave,
The Romists well performed have:
But mark how thou thy self do hurt,
And lay Romes honor in the curt.
That charge Viz. of preaching thorough the world.
was given first to them,
Which lived at Jerusalem, The Apostles, Mat. 28. Acts 1.

And thence the Gospel issued out, Acts 8.1.

As Esaias told Isai. 2.3.
the world throughout.
By them the Nations turned were, We read in Histories, as in Eusebius and
others, how the Apostles divided themselves into all the quarters of the world.

And thence of Christ Rome first did hear:
Yet now the place Jerusalem.
which others called,
To Turkish Empire is inthrall'd.
So though 'twere true, which is not so,
And never shall be proved, I know,
That Rome to Christ the nations brought,
Yet this your reason were stark naught.
But now (perhaps) Rome does, you will say,
Bring home the wanderers to the way.
In deed the Spaniards loving Gold,
Have brought the Indians to your fold.
The Frogs from Euphrates come out, Euphrates was a great River running near
the old Babylon in Chaldaea, and was the defense of the City. Cyrus and Darius
could never take the City, until by policy they dried up the river. Now in a
spiritual sense it does signify the honor, wealth and authority of Rome,
which has of later years decayed exceedingly, and does daily; and the frogs,
mentioned in Apoc. 16.13. do well resemble the Jesuits, who feeling Euphrates
to dry up, bestirre themselves, and are croaking like Frogs in every corner,
laboring to maintain the Popes authority.

I mean, the Iesuited Rout
Do spread themselves in each country,
To draw men to disloyalty.
They counsel Subjects kill their kings,
Stabbings they use and poysonings. Our Country and times afford store of
examples to prove this.

Christ gave no such commandment,
When first he his Disciples sent.
Of this Conversion, if you boast,
Whereby, poor soul, Hell has engrost,
I yield you full willyngly,
It well agrees with Popery.
To draw Disciples is no mark,
For so does many a feigned Clarke. 2. Pet. 2.1, 2. Acts 20.30.

The Church to truth which does convert,
We do embrace with all our heart.
Thou say, Romes Faith once over all
The world was famous (so says Paul) Romans 1.8.

And Rome did first convert our Land,
And hereupon you greatly stand.
Romes Faith indeed once bare the bell,
And so it did deserve it well:
But Rome's not now as heretofore;
The faithful City's made a whore. If. 1.21. So it was said of Jerusalem,
which had more excellent particular promises, the^ Rome can allege any.

If new Rome now, were as the old,
Then we with Romanists would hold.
If Rome become Christ's enemy,
Then we from Babylon must fly. Apoc. 18.4.

To say that Rome is therefore sound,
Because of old it was renownd,
It may a Papist satisfy:
But men of judgment it deny.
Paul never Rome did magnify,
As he did those of Thessaly: See 1. These. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Yet now that Church is clean defaced,
And there the Turk himself has placed.
The Asian Churches, Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia,
Leodicea, Apoc. 1.11.
famous once,
Are turned to an heap of stones:
The golden lights Those seven Churches were represented by seven golden
Candlesticks, Apoc. 1.20.
of Saint John's age,
Are now become even Satan's Cage.
Prove thou, that Rome has not declinde
From the ancient Church by Paul refinde:
And then I Will say, thou have done more,
Then ever Papist did before.
But for first turning of our Nation,
I trow thou namest it but for fashion:
For they that look in History,
Thereof can find no certainty.
Simon Zelotes, as some say, Niceph. lib. 2. cap. 40.

Did first Christ's Gospel here display,
Even whilst that Emperor did reign,
By whom our Savior Christ was slain. Gildas Lib. de victoria Aurelij
Ambrosij.

Some say, that he of Arimathy, Joseph, who buried Christ.

In the year of grace sixty three,
From France by Philip Philip the Apostle.
was sent over,
To us the Faith for to discover. So says Gildas also.

Hereto agrees a learned man,
That ancient Clarke Tertullian,
That by the Apostles, Brittanny
Was turned to Christianity. Tertullian in his book against the Jews, amongst
other places couerted by the Apostles, reckons diverse parts of France, and
of Brittayne: So does Origene Hom. 4. upon Ezekiel.

Pope Eleutheriuo long ago, About the year of Christ, 180.

As his Epistle plain does show, This Epistle has bin found out of the
ancient records of the Kings of England.

Unto king Lucius hither sent,
Ere Ethelbert was king of Kent. Which was about 600. years after Christ.

We hold the Faith that then was taught:
But you the same do set at naught: Eleutherius referred K. Lucius to the
Scriptures, clean against the Papists course now, and called him Gods Vicar in
his kingdom: which Title, the Pope alone does now challenge.

When Rome the Truth does once forsake,
Then we of Rome our leaves must take.
If that our Church were Catholic,
To come to Church thou would not stick.
If of the word thou knewst the sense,
Thou soon would leave that fond pretense.
Our Church that Truth does firm embrace,
Which all those hold in every place,
Who leaving men's Traditions clean,
Upon the Scriptures only lean. That is truly Catholic which every where,
always, and by all (viz. true Christians) is believed, Vincent. cont. Haer.
cap. 3. Let Papists prove that ye word Catholic being taken in that sense,
ours is not ye Catholic church,

Prophet.
THou cit'st a Text of Malachy, Mal. 1.11.

Hoping to prove thy Mass thereby.
Alas, the reason is but small,
And helps that Idol not at all.
In it God threateneth the Jews,
Who their great Privilege did abuse,
And thought the Lord was tied to them,
And unto their Jerusalem.
The Prophet tells, that God elsewhere
Will find out those, which shall him fear,
And in an order without blame,
Shall call upon his holy Name.
Speaking to their capacity,
The Legal terms he does apply: So Joel 2.28. the holy Ghost foretelling the
plenty of spiritual enlightening, which the people shall have under Christ,
does deliver it under the names of visions, and dreams, which notwithstanding
were not ordinary in the times of the Gospel,

And calls our Gospel-like Service,
A pure Pure in Christ, being accepted of GOD, through him, 1. Pet. 2.5
and spotless Sacrifice.
What ground is here then for the Mass?
It still remains as it was:
A gross device, defaming Christ,
Who is our true and only Priest. See more of this hereafter, in speaking more
directly of the Mass.

The speech of David of the Skies, Psalm. 19.3. But according to their account
Psalm. 18.

Unto the Apostles, Paul applies, Romans 10.18.

And says, their sound went far and near,
As in the stories does appear.
Tell me, I pray, what good to you,
This place you have alleged can do?
It makes naught for Popery,
Or for your idle trumpery.
Indeed the infamous Fame is spread,
Of Antichrist your hideous head:
And all Gods children him do see,
The man of sin 2. These. 2.3.
alone to be.
The Apostles Faith was far dispersed,
And here in England was reherst.
Since then our doctrine is the same,
To it belongs part of their fame.
Continuance.
YOu say, Christ's Faith must still endure.
I yield that nothing is more sure:
And always God a Church will have,
Though thereat Satan rage and rave. Math. 16.18.

It glads my heart, that Christ has prayed:
Thereby I know my Faith is stayed: Luke 22.32.

The Comfort of Gods holy Sprite,
Is each good Christians sole delight.
This proves there still a Church shall be,
And herein thou and I agree:
To prove the Church tied to one Sea,
Requires yet a better Plea.
The Faith of Christ may still abide,
Though Rome should into Tibur slide:
Gods spirit is free, and is not bound John 3.8.

Within the Lists of Romish ground.
When thou can prove by holy writ,
Christ's Faith to Rome by Charter knit,
Then shall thy tale some credit find,
Where now it turns all to wind.
But yet Continuance is a Note
Of Gods true Church: and Paul has wrote,
That there should still some teachers be: Ephesians. 4.11. etc.

In Rome we this fulfilled see.
I say, Continuance is no sign,
To prove a Church to be divine;
We may not think each doctrine sure,
Which does for many years endure. It is true, that the truth shall continue,
but yet it holds not backwarde, that whatsoever continues, is Truth. The
Devil is a liar from the beginning.

Must not the Tares be let to grow,
Till it be time the corn to mow? Math. 13.30.

And Antichrist shall long time stay,
Even till the very Judgment day. 2. These. 2.8.

The Arrian Heresy years did stand,
Two hundred more then one thousand: Yea, and it was so generally received,
that it was said, the whole world was become an Arrian.

And so since Mahomet first was seen,
A thousand years have nombred been.
Romes name endures, but Rome is changed,
And has from Christ it self estranged:
Quit thou Rome from Apostasy,
Or name not perpetuity.
Paul's words do prove, Ephe. 4.11, etc.
that certainly
The Church shall have a Ministry,
And that there shall be some to feed
The Flock of Christ at every need.
But that these Pastors here or there,
Shall always sit in beauty clear,
This fond Conceit, not one poor word,
The holy Scripture does afford.
In deed in Rome there diverse be,
That bear the name of Prelacy:
Better we Pilates may them call,
Seeking the Churches funeral.
You call your Pope a Shepherd great:
But where is his Spiritual Meat?
I do not hear that he does preach:
That would his greatness much impeach.
Such are his carnal Cardinals,
Or rather bloody Canibals, The people, that live upon man's flesh.

They eat the Fat, and skin the Flock,
And live upon the Churches stock.
An idle sign, a Shepherds Crook
In hand they bear, Their Pastoral staff, made in fashion of a Shepherds
crook.
but can not brook
To preach the word (a Pastors grace)
That duty fittes not their high place.
The key of knowledge they withdraw, Luke 11.52.

And from Gods people steal Jeremy, 23.30.
Gods Law,
They teach traditions to be equally reuere^ced as the Scriptures, Con. Trid.
ses. 4. dec. 1.
And men's deuies on them thrust,
Making them unto Fancies trust.
These are Romes Pastors: woeful sheep,
Which left are to the Wolves to keep.
Thou Shepherd great, and Bishop chief, 1. Pet. 2.25. and 5.4.

Come quickly Revel. 22.20.
quell this Romish thief.
Visible.
THou tell a tale incredible,
How that Gods Church is visible:
And by the Bishops Catalogue,
Would prove thy Romish Synagogue.
The errors here together lap't,
By which the simple are entrap't,
All which your fained Church does hold,
I mean in order to unfold.
The Catholic Church defined aright,
Cannot be subject to our sight:
It is the Elected Company, 1. Pet. 2.9.

And Christ his chosen Family. Ephe. 3.15.

Of this, one part in heaven lives, Called the Church Triumphant.

The other here with Satan strives, Termed the Church Militant.

The part above (you will not deny)
With mortal eyes none can descry.
The same is true of that below,
It is unseen by us also:
How with mine eyes I might discern,
And see the Elect, feign would I learn.
Upon their persons we may look,
Whose names are written in Gods book, The Book of life, Phil. 4.3.

But as for their spiritual Being,
It is a thing does pass our seeing.
Parts of Christ's church, you Papists make
Even those whom God will quite forsake: So does Belarmine, lib. 3. de Eccl.
Cap. 7. and the Rhemists in their annotations upon Io. 15.1.

Which if the matter well be scand,
Cannot with any Scripture stand.
Of the true Church Christ is the Head, Ephesians. 1.22.

In him can be no members dead, They are called living stones, 1. Pet. 2.5.

His Church a Garden Cant. 4.12.
closed well,
In which no Reprobates can dwell: So August. applies the place, contra Cres.
Gram. lib. 2. and Gregory the great, who was a Bishop of Rome, in his
Commentary upon that place.

So that, if fitly we will speak,
The ground you lay is very weak:
In calling it a Mark most clear,
That Gods true Church must still appear.
Of Churches named in several,
In Cities, or else National,
We yield sometime they may be seen,
Though sometime they are darkened clean.
Sometime the Moon with cheerful light
Shines in the height of Heaven bright: Aug. uses that Similitude in Psalm. 9.
and Epist. 48. and Ambrose Hex. 4. C. 8.

Sometime with Clouds it is ouerspred,
And in the Wane clean vanished.
So is the Church in safety still,
Although not always visible:
Sometimes it sittes in glory great,
Sometime it has no certain Seat.
The Woman, which to Desert fled,
From Satan's rage to hide her head, Apoc. 12.6.

By all the Learneds full consent,
The Church on earth does represent.
The famous Church of Israel,
Where God did promise still to dwell, Psalm. 132.14.

Was drowned so in Idolatry,
And superstitious slavery,
That all true worship being gone,
Elias thought himself alone: 1. King. 19.10.

And when Christ comes to judge us all,
Then Faith on earth shall be but small. Luke 18.8.

How is the Church a City then, Math. 5.14.

Raised on a Mount, and seen of men,
And how a light set up on hye,
That all that will may it espy?
How shall we to the Church complain, Math. 18.17.

If of the Church no show remain?
This is thy Popish reasoning,
And Scriptures plain misconstruing.
Christ does the Apostles counsel give, The true meaning of those places.

Soundly to preach, and well to live:
Because their places were in sight,
And 'twas their Office to give light.
They erring, many might misse-lead,
Which in their steps might hap to tread:
If that their Doctrine were unsound,
In falsehood many might be drowned:
It was in vain for them to ween,
In doing ill not to be seen:
You are (says Christ) upon a Mount,
To be well marked, make full account. Thus Chry. and Theophilact expound this
place, Paideusi antous enagonious einai, cai acribeis peri ton bion, os para
panton blepesthe mellontas.

This shows wherein our duty stands,
And what God looks for at our hands:
Who called are to the Ministry,
To labor in Gods Husbandry. 1. Cor. 3.9.

But from hence how may proved be
The Churches visibility?
This place affoords a slender proof,
And little for the Popes behoof.
Yet you perhaps will urge it still,
The Pastors are set on a Hill,
And called Light: even so say I,
But all men can them not descry.
For those which want spiritual eyes, Ephesians. 1.18.

Nor are by searching John 5.39.
Scriptures wise, Ephesians. 5.15, 17.

This mounted City can not see,
Nor where these lightsome Pastors be. This was the answer of Aug. to the
Donatists. Tract. 1. in Ep. Johan.

Christ bids us we the Church should tell,
If things be not reformed well.
By Church, he means all such as be
Endued with Authority. The same which Paul calls Presbyterion, 1. Tim. 4.14.
The Eldership.

These Office-bearers all men see,
In times of settled Souerainty,
Yea, and among them selves they are known,
When the outward state is overthrown.
The Error of this Popish Argument.
When that was said in special,
You turn to Church in general.
Thereby you may deceive some fools:
But soon it will be seen in Schools.
This Argument of outward state,
Which for a Mark you intimate,
Against that thing does strongly make,
Which you to prove do undertake.
Romes state has sometimes bin obscured,
And has disgraces soul endured:
Burnt, By the Goths, 547.
sacked, By Charles, Duke of Burbon, in the days of Pope Clement the 7.
whereupon was made ye clause in the Letany, Sancta Maria, etc. O holy Mary,
pray for Pope Clement, etc.
some Popes imprisoned, John 14. Boniface 8. about the year 1304.

Some glad to fly, John 17. fled to Hetruria.
some banished. Vigilius 18. and Gregory 9. about the year 1227.

Where did your glorious Church abide,
When Popes were glad themselves to hide?
Peace, peace, no more of this for shame:
Rome says thou will her clean defame.
Succession.
Succession comes next in place,
Whereby thou seekst thy Church to grace:
Your turn Succession cannot serve,
If from the Truth Succession swerue.
The Jewish Church from Aaron,
A just descent might stand upon:
Even when they crucifide our Lord,
And hated all that loved his Word.
If we shall say, that Church was true,
Consisting of so vile a crew,
We cast Christ and the Apostles out,
Among the base and damned rout.
The Grecian Churches at this day,
For their defense as much can say: At Constantinople there has been a
perpetual Succession from S. Andrew, Niceph. At Alexandria, from Saint Mark.

Yet you of them do give this doom,
That in Gods church they have no (...).
Yet if Succession were a sign,
Which your graund captain Bellarmine
Dares not avouch, Bellarmine says, it follows negatiuely, yt where there
is no succession, there is no church: but not affirmatively, yt where there is
succession, there is a Church.
I said would see,
How Rome can prove her Pedigree.
You call your Church Saint Peter's chair,
As though the Pope were Peter's Heir;
But if that ground we once deny,
What Papist can it verify?
You cannot prove by holy Writ,
Peter at Rome did Bishop sit:
The only place which you do name, 1. Pet. 5.13. The Rhemists say, that
there, by Babylon is meant Rome, and so they confess Rome to be Babylon.

Returns to your greater shame.
The things you fetch from History,
Touching this point, do not agree, Osorius says, Peter came to Rome in the
beginning of Claudius reign; Hierome, in the 2. year: others, in the 4. year:
other, the 13, year. Damasus says, he came thither in Neroes reign; so yt
there is no certainty in that which they make an undoubted principle

And what our part has herein sed,
By Papists stands unanswered.
But if he Bishop were indeed,
Tell me who next did him succeed?
Some, Clement, The Popes decrees hold so.
and some, Linus hold. Dorotheus, Eusebius. li. 3. cap. 4. Hieron in Catalo.

Thus your succession is controld.
Once was a Pope supposed a man, John 8. Platina: The woman's name was Gilberta,
a Dutch woman of Maguntium.

But proved in time a Courtezan.
Then either your Succession shranke,
Or you must put her in the rank.
When Popes there were some two Two Popes together Anno 1083. and Anno 1058.
and 1062.
or three, Bened. 9. Siluest. 3. Greg. 6. all at one time: and at another time,
Ben. 13. a Spanish Pope, Greg. 12. a French Pope, and John 23. an Italian Pope.

Where the^ might your succession be?
One Schism held almost forty year, 39. years.

From Pope to Pope, as does appear. Let their Ancestors speak.

One Council The Council of Constance.
did these Popes put down,
And to another gave the crown.
When these false Popes the place possessed,
I think you will say Succession ceast.
Unity.
It Is true, Christ's Church is always one,
Tyd unto him as Head alone:
The parts thereof do well agree, Acts 4.23.

Like children of one Family.
But yet not every company,
Together linckt in Unity,
Must by and by be called good.
If Truth by them shall be withstood.
To make a Calfe they all agreed, Exodus 32.1.

All cried, Let Christ be crucified: Math. 27.22.

Great is Diana, with a shoute
At once the people all cried out. Acts 19.34.

John said, they should yield to the Beast.
Even from the greatest to the least: Apoc. 13.16.

As Christ his City is but one,
So is the Devils Babylon. Vt est dei vna ecclesia, sic est diaboli un a
Babylon, Aug. de Ciui. Dei.

The best sometimes do disagree, Peter and Paul, Gal, 2.11. Paul and Barnabas,
Acts 15.39. Chrysostom. Theophilact, and Epiphanius, Augustine and Hierome,
Cyrill and Theodoret.

Each man has his Infirmity:
Better the Discord bringing Light,
Then is agreement without right. Kreisson empathous omonoias he vper eusebeias
diastasis, Nazianz: Oratione prima de pace.

Yet by this Mark, if Rome be tried,
It will fall hard upon your side:
Your ioynt-consent we can not find,
Nor that you all are of one mind.
If we shall credit History,
You can not brag of Unity:
Where twenty several schisms have been, Genebrardus in Chro.

What Harmony may there be seen?
The Laws which one determines,
The Pope that follows cancelleth: Stephen 6. abrogated all his Predecessors
decrees. Formosus took up his body, cut two fingers of his right hand off, and
buried him again.

Yet things by him abolished,
By next Popes are established. The following Popes Theodorus 2. Romanus, Ioh.
10. confirmed all Formosus his acts.

And yet another After all, Pope Sergius disanulled their acts, took up
Formosus his body, and cast it into Tibur, Ex. Poly. Chron.
comes behind,
Who with the former fault does find,
And all which they did quite displace,
Reduces to the former grace.
Thus one sage Counsel does decree,
Another says it may not be: The first Nicene Counsel allowed Priests
marriage, and the Communion in both kinds. The Councels of Consta^ce and Basil
forbade the Laity ye use of the cup. The counsel of Trent forbids both the
Cup to the Laity, and marriage to the Clergy. The third Counsel of Carthage
pronounced him accursed, and called him the Forerunner of Antichrist, whosoever
should term himself Universal Bishop; but now the Council of Trent curses
him, who shall deny the Pope of Rome to be ye head Bishop of the world. The
general council of Constantinople ouerthrewe Images. The second Nicene council
decreed them to be worshipped. Again, the Council of Franckfort, under
Charles the great, determines it to be Idolatry, and accurseth the Nicene
council. Many the like differences might easily be alleged.

That which one Sect In anno 1476. there was a great controversy betwixt the
Franciscanes and Dominicanes, touching ye conceptio^ of ye virgin Mary, whether
she were conceived in sin or not. The Do, held she was, the Fra. the contrary:
but the Pope joining with ye Fr. 4. of the other were condemned and burned at
Berne.
or Author Alph. de Castro li. 1. c. 6. holds the Pope inferior to the Counsel.
The opinion of al ye Jesuits at this day, is, yt he is above the Council.
About the Eucharist they have a world of differences amongst themselves; as
whether Christ did consecrate when he blessed ye bread and wine: or when he
said, This is my body, whether so much bread as is taken only, be consecrated:
whether ye substance of the bread be turned to nothing, or changed into ye
substance of Chr. whether there be a bodily motion in the Sacra. whether the
body of Chr. in the Sacr. can be touched: how the accide^ts in the Sacr. are
with out a subject: whether they stick in ye air, or in the body of Chr. or in
some other subject: whether the accidents can be broken: whether they can
nourish: whether ye water mingled with the wine, be turned into Christ's blood.
Whence come worms in the Host.
likes,
The same another clean out strikes.
I know, you Papists do agree,
To work the Churches misery:
So Herod was made Luke 23.12.
Pilates friend,
To bring our Savior to his end.
Some yield, as fearing to resist:
(Such is the power of Antichrist:)
You may not call this Unity,
But rather bloody Tyranny.
Some join, because they do not see
The very depth of Popery:
To build upon the Church belief,
Of lay-Religion is the Brief.
Some for ease and bellies sake,
Do to your Church them selves betake:
As Monks, and such as Loytryng love,
Whom none but Romists can approve.
This is your Romish Concordance,
Among your selves at variance:
Though all for some respects are led,
To meet together in one Head.
In one point more, I needs must stay,
Though named of you but by the way:
Lest with a Phrase of Peter's Keys,
You dazell should the peoples eyes.
By Keys, is meant the power to preach,
And in Gods Truth the Church to teach: Luke 11.52.

By it Viz. Preaching.
Heauen's opened to receive
All those which truly do believe.
It is the power to loose and tie,
Which Christ gave to the Ministry, Therefore Ministers are said both to have
ye Ministry of Reconciliation, 2. Cor. 5.18. and the Ministry of Vengeance
against disobedience, 2. Cor. 10.6.

It was intended unto all, Our Lord, in the person of one, gave the keys to
all, to show the Unity of all, Cyp. de simp. praelatorum: and Leo, a Bishop of
Rome is of the same judgment, In Sermon de Natiuitate.

Though spoke to one in several.
When to believers we give Hope,
Then is the Gate of Heaven set open:
When Mercies promise is repealed,
Then by the Keys that Gate is sealed. To bind and loose, is no other thing,
but to declare Gods sentence, Hieron. in Mat. 16.

When Peter did his Faith confess,
The Apostles by did mean no less: Austine says, he answered for all, Hom.
in Ioh. 124. and elsewhere often: Vnus pro multis respondit: one made answer
for all: and Lyranus, Confessio Petri, erat confessio alienorum.

And that which Christ to Peter spoke,
We may not from the other take. Cuncti claues Regni, etc. All receive the
keys of heaven, Hier. lib. 1. aduersus Ioui.

Each true and faithful Minister,
Is Peter's rightful Successer:
Then speak no more of Peter's Keys,
Except the art sworn the Pope to please.
Holy. Why the Church is called Holy.

THou say, the Church we holy call.
And so we do acknowledge all:
What in the Creed our mouths confess,
Our hearts within believe no less.
The Purity decayed before, By Adams fall.

Unto his Church Christ does restore.
That which is here in less degree,
The same in heaven shall perfect be.
If thou knewst Romes Impurity,
Thou would brag of Sanctity:
A sincke of sin, a Sea of Evil,
A place possessed of the Devil. Gallus Senonensis wrote above 400 years ago,
that Satan was let loose at Rome, to destroy the church. Th. Becket, a Romish
saint, acknowledged the common proverb to be true, yt there is no right at
Rome. The B. of Worcester, a Papist, told Philpot, that he thought, the
wickedness he saw in Rome made him an Heretic.

Your Popes bear names of Holiness,
But none more full of Wickedness:
Let Stories speak, enquire of them,
What Popes have worn the Diadem.
Some Heretics, Marcellinus Pope, sacrificed to the Idols of ye Painims:
Platin. and Vola ter. Liberius Pope, an Arria^. Plat. and Hiero. in Catal.
scrip. Eccl. and in Chro. Anast. 2. Pope, an Acatian. Plat. Vigil. an Eutchyan.
Liber in breuiario. Honorius, a Monothelite, condemned by the Roman Council,
under Adrian 2.
some Murderers, Pope Alexander 6. poisoned Gemes the great Turks brother,
committed to his custody, Hiero. Marius, Munst. lib. 4. Cosm. Pope Hildebrand
hired one to kill the Emperor, Benno Cardinalis.

Incestuous some, John 13. Pope, committed incest with his two sisters: Luith.
prand. lib. 6. He was wounded in adultry, Platina. Alexander 6. lay with his
own daughter. Vol.
some Sorcerers: Hildebrand: so says Benno the Card. Pope Siluester 2. gave
himself to the Devil, to be Pope. Pla. Ioannes stella: many other were
Magicians, as John 21. Benedict. 9. etc.

Some noted for their Cruelty, Pope Alexander 6. cut off the hands and feet of
one Mancinellus, because he wrote against his filthiness. John 13. cut off the
hands and noses of diverse Cardinals. Plat.

Some for their monstrous Blasphemy. Pope Hildebrand threw the sacrament into
the fire. Benno Card. Io. 22. derided ye gospel, held ye souls to be mortal,
and was therefore by the Council of Constance, 1. 2. ses. 11. called a Devil
incarnat. Leo 10. writing to Cardinal Bembus, calls the story of Christ, a
fable. Io. 13. called the devil to help him at dice, and dra^k to him, Luith.
p. lib. 6

One Pope Pope Sergius 3.
a famous Leuimen Marozia, wife to Guido.
kept,
Whose Bastard to the Popedom crept: John 11. or as some count, Io. 12. See
Plat. and Luithprand.

Another granted Liberty,
To practice beastly Sodomy. Sixtus 4. granted liberty to the whole family of
the Cardinal of Saint Lucy in the three hot months, June, July, August, to
use Sodomitry. Wesellus Groningensis in a Treatise de Indulg. Papalibus, at the
foot of the license, was written, Fiat vt petitur: Be it as it is requested.

Who but the Pope receives rent,
Which from the Stews to him is sent? Every common harlot in Rome paid a Fee
to Pope Sixtus 4. Agrippa in his declam. ad Loua^.

Let Rome and Venice make report,
And all that thither do resort.
Who has in Meeter vile expressed
The sin, which nature does detest?
Let Beneuentum name the man: The Archbishop of Beneuentum, Johannes a Casa,
Deane of the Popes chamber, used Sodomy, and commended it in Italian Meeter:
the book was printed at Venice, by Troianus Nauus: see the writing of Paulus
Vergerius against this Archbishop.

Do thou disprove it, if thou can.
If this among your Heads be found,
How shall we think the members sound?
Lord, bless us from such holy Popes,
And, Lord, make void all popish hopes.
Like to your Popes, your service is, Holy service.

Wanting no store of blasphemies:
Which, lest the people should espy,
You hyde in Latin secrecy.
I need no better witnesses,
Then your allowed Portesses,
Your Missals and your Letanies,
And all your forged Psalteries.
What we to God alone must give,
That to the Saints you do derive.
God will not from his glory part, Isa. 48.11.

Yet you to creatures it convert.
Unto the Saints you prayers make, There is neither commandment in the
Scripture, that we should pray to saints, nor promise, that if we do pray to
them, we shall be heard; upon which 2. every lawful prayer must be built.

And beg salvation for their sake: In their prayers upon the saints days, still
those words come in, that by their merits we may have profit, by their requests
we may be delivered etc. And Lambard says, the Saints do iunare nos merito,
l. 4. did. 45. d. 10.

You do adore a piece of bread, When it is carried in procession; for though it
were true, that the bread in the Sacrament is turned into the Body of Christ,
yet the Sacrament being ended, it must needs return to the former nature.

And make fond They are fond, because touching the estate of the dead, there is
no certainty.
prayers for the dead.
You kneel down to a Cross of wood, All hayle, O Cross, our only hope, etc.
increase righteousness to the godly, and give pardon to the guilty. In
breniario infra, Heb. 4. Quad.

Thinking thereby to purchase good:
And for some things you would have done,
You pray the Virgin, charge her Son. Roga Patrem, iube natu^; iure matris
impera, etc. Pray the father, charge thy son, command by the right of a
mother: In officio beata Maria.

With Christ you do saint Frances join, They say, that Saint Francis could
save all that shall live after him to the end of the world, through his merits,
from everlasting Death. Flosc. beati Francis. Conformit. s. Fran. Tho. lib. 4.
did. 4. art. 3.

And so his glory do purloyne:
One Mediator 1. Tim. 2.5. That place proves, that there is but one Mediator,
as well as that there is but one God.
we do know,
You have joined with him many more. The form of Absolution to Penitentiaries
runs thus: The passion of Christ, and the merits of the blessed Virgin, of
Saint Peter and Saint Paul, and of other he and she Saints, be unto thee in
remission of sins.

We do the Virgin Blessed call, Luke 1.48.

And say she passed women all:
But when you call her, Gate of Grace, Coeli senestra: Regis al^i ian^a, etc.

We say, Christ's honor you deface.
The thing which made her spirit glad,
Was, that she such a Savior had: Luke 1.47.

Can she on him commandment have,
Whose help she needed her to save?
What honor is due to the Saints.
This honor to the Saints we give,
We crave Gods grace like them to live, 1. Cor. 11.1.

We care to keep their memory, Heb. 13.7.

And God in them we glorify. Gal. 1.23.

Holy Ceremonies.
Your Ceremonies idle be,
And savor most of vanity:
You stand so much on out ward show,
That you the substance overthrow.
With Images and Pictures gay,
You steal the peoples hearts away:
Well may you please the outward eye,
The Spirit you do not edify.
A pretty play, to see a Priest
Tossing his God between his fist:
Such Gestures, and such Apish mowes,
Such warbling, and such Anticke shows: Whosoever reads the Cano^ of the Mass,
shall there see a world of idle and ridiculus ceremonies.

Now bends, now ducks, now stands upright,
Then turns him to the peoples sight:
Now sighs, now twenty crosses makes,
And 'ore his head the Wafer shakes:
Then washes, then the Challice lickes,
And shuttes his Idol in the Pixe:
But still the man is much afeard,
Lest ought should hang upon his beard.
Mean while, the vulgar in a maze,
Upon the Caky Idol gaze,
And knock and kneel, and think them well,
That they have heard the sacring Bell.
Tell me, I pray thee, does God will,
With such fond Kites his Church to fill.
They never came into his thought: Iere. 19.5.

Tradition only has them brought. They say indeed, that they have the form
of ye Mass, by the tradition of the Apostles. Rhem. 1. Cor. 11. s. 22. but the
truth is, that it was now a piece and then a piece, patched up by their own
Popes, Sixtus 2. brought in the Sanctus: Innoce^tius 1. the Pax. Leo 1. added
this clause (A holy sacrifice and unbloody Host:) Gelacius, the Prefaces,
Collects, Gradualts. Symmachus, the Gloria in excelsis. Agapetus 1. the
Processio^s. Pelagius 2. nine Prefaces before the Canon. Sergius 1. Agnus Dei:
and Gregory 1. confesses that one Scolasticus made most part of the Canon.

Holy mass or sacrifice.



Your Rites and Mass do well agree,
Both full of gross Idolatry:
Both are unholy and unsound,
Both wantyng holy Scripture ground,
You say that in the Eucharist,
To God is offered by the Priest,
A Sacrifice in wine and bread, Rhem. Heb. 7. s. 8. Council. Trident. ses. 22.
cap. 1.

Both for the living and the dead. Conc. Trid. ses. 22. cap. 3.

Look first what Christ did institute, Mat. 26.26. Mat. 14.22. Lu. 22.19. 1.
Cor. 11.24.

And that one place shall you refute:
What he did, we must do likewise, This do ye, 1. Cor. 11.25.

There Is no word of a Sacrifice.
By this (said Christ) Remember me.
That shows he would not present Bodily.
hi^.
We keep such things in memory,
Which we behold not really.
The Priests of old did every day
Some Offering on the Altar lay. Heb. 10.11.

Christ's holy Offering is but One,
Performed by himself alone. Heb. 10.12.

If Christ shall often offered be,
We shall his sufferings multiply:
As on the Cross he dyed not twice.
So there is no second Sacrifice: Heb. 9.25, 26, 27, 28.

There Is now no sacrificing Priest:
That Office rests upon Christ: Heb. 7.23, 24.

It comes to none successively:
It Is his for all eternity. The office of a Priest, so far forth as we
understand thereby a Sacrificer, whom the Grecians call iereus, belongs only to
Christ, and cannot pass from him to any other, neither the name of Priest in
that sense: but as the name of Priest comes from the Greek word Presbyteros,
which signifies an Elder, it can not simply be misliked.

How can a Mass a Pardon bring,
Since it is a bloud-lesse Offering? Heb. 9.22.

Christ has procured Remission: Heb. 9.12.

What needs a new Oblation? Heb. 10.18.

See then your holy Sacrifice,
A thing without all warantize
Of Scriptures, or of Writers sage,
Which lived in the purest Age. The Mass, as it is now, was not in use in the
Church, 1200. years after Christ: It never came to the full perfection (though
it was in hatching before) until the Council of Lateran, under Inno. 3.

Holy Sacraments.
The Sacraments in number twain,
You ^ek'd have with a longer train,
The seuen-headed Romish Beast, Revelation 17.8.

The Two to seven has encreast.
Both Baptism, Matthew 28.19.
and that holy Feast 1. Cor. 11.24. etc.

Commanded are by Christ's beheast:
Show me but one commandment,
To prove an other Sacrament. No Father within an hundred years after Christ,
acknowledged seven Sacraments of the new Testament: And Augustine says, the
Sacraments are, numero paucissima, fewest in number, Ep. 118. now two is the
least number.

Two in the Old, Viz. Ordinary.
two in the New:
Viz. The form of Gods worship under the law.
So shall we have proportion true:
Name what in the ancient Liturgy,
Your five false Symboles do supply. The Sacraments of the new Testament,
succeed the Sacraments of the old: if then they can name no Sacraments of the
old Testament, in the place whereof their five supposed Sacraments should
come, then they cannot justify them to be Sacraments.

Those Sacraments which holy be,
You stayn'd have with your Pedlery:
In Baptism, oil, lights, spittle, cream,
Your Exorcisme, and coniur'd stream;
Were these invented by Gods Spirit,
Or found you them in Holy Writ?
Whence had you all that rituous store
Used in the Mass and named before?
Holy days.
You speak next of Festiuities,
And Holy day Solemnities:
Thou think by this, with easines
To prove thy Churches Holiness.
Truth is, men's Conscience you enthrall. Bellarmine says, men are bound in
conscience to keep the Festiuities of the Church, lib. 3. ca. 10. prop. 3. and
so do the Rhemists, Gal. 4. s. 5.

To many an idle Festival: Very near 200. if we put those together which
were determined of, Council. Oxon. sub Steph. and which we read in the marginall
Notes upon the Rhemists Testament.

You Will have them be as strictly kept,
As Gods own day by his precept.
Of Feasts some low, some higher be,
Some great, some lesser in degree:
Some double more, some double less:
A treble fault some to transgress.
So with your doubling and redoubling style,
The simple people you beguile:
The Lord is weary of your Feasts, Isay 1.14.

And likes not your devised rests.
All days are like in Holiness,
None holy more, none holy less: The difference betwixt days, is in
observation and use, and not in the nature of the day: if one day had been in
nature holyer the^ another, the Sabbath might not have been altered.

Paul thought his labor was in vain,
Where days distinctions did remain. Gal. 4.10, 11.

Thou hoy'st to put us in some fear,
With speaking of the Kalendere: Saints canonized.

Thou ask'st what Faith all those did hold,
Whose names are found therein enrold?
I tell thee plain, it is naught to me,
What many a one there named might be:
My Fayth's not so set on the Rack,
To seek strength from the Almanacke.
Yet sure I am, what we profess,
Some that are there, believed no less: As Peter, Paul, Mary etc. and some
there named, which suffered persecution in the ten first persecutions of the
Church.

Our Faith and theirs does well agree,
And you with them at variance be.
You Churches make and Holy days,
Unto the Saints, and Martyrs praise:
But us which do bleeeue the same,
You seek to kill and to defame.
Thou ask'st who them canonized,
Whose names are there enregistred?
You say the Pope. I ask again,
Will thou that sainting power maintain? The custom of Canonizing Saints, was
not heard, till one thousand years after Christ, in the days of Alexander 3.
and Gregory 7.

Can any mortal Creature tell,
Who goes to Heaven, and who to Hell?
All Judgment, Paul bid us forbear,
Until the Lord himself appear. 1. Cor. 4.5.

In Heaven to sit or high or low,
Is it in man's power to bestow? Math. 20.23.

What Bishop can, or Saints inuest,
Or shut men from eternal Rest?
Some one Pope does a Saint enstall:
His grant another does recall: Boniface 8. caused Hermannus Ferrariens, who
had been canonized for a Saint 30 years before, to be taken out of his grave,
and burned anno, 1300.

It Is but a silly dignity,
That Is Subject to uncertainty.
Among your Saints even those are seen,
Which to their Prince have traitors been. As Thomas Becket, and Elizabeth
Barton, called The holy Maid of Kent.

Though that our Church such Saints despise.
To it it is no prejudice.
Heretics.
THe Caveat touching Heretics,
Does make against false Catholics;
We know full well, that Popery
Is but a Mass of Heresy.
Those Errors which of old were hatched,
Your Church together bath them patcht, It mayntayneth free will, and merit of
works with the Pelagians. Augustine: The Pelagians held children to be without
sin, Aug. contra Iul. lib. 3. cap. 5. So the Church of Rome says,
Concupiscence is no sin. It holds Imagery with the Simonians, Basilidians, and
Carpocratians: and with the two latter, they secret their Religion, Iren. lib.
1. cap. 23. Epiph. Here Is. 24. It allows praying in an unknown tongue with the
Osseni, Epiph. Haere. 19. It accounts marriage unclean, with Tatianus, hae.
46. and conde^neth wedlock in their Priests; as the Manichees did in their
Chosen ones, Aug. Ep. 74. With the same Heretics it uses bread only in the
Communion, Leo ser. 4. de Quad. and places fasting in the distinction of
meats, Aug. de Morib. Eccl. and Manich. lib. 2. cap. 23. It thinks that all
necessary doctrine is not contained in the Scripture, with Montanus, Ep. Haer.
48. It braggeth of inherent righteousness, with the Cathari, Isid, Etym. lib.
8. cap. de Haer. Christ: It worshippeth Angels with the Angelici, Aug. ad
Quoduuli, cap. 39. It denies the preaching of the word to be a note of the
Church, with the Donatists, Aug. in variis locis: and with them tyeth the
Church to one set place, Cass. in Psalm. 60. It worshippeth the Cross, with the
Armenians, Euthymius in Panoplia. Thus in many other points it partaketh with
the ancient Heretics.

On them she puts a fairer name,
But in effect they are the same.
You razed have the Foundation
Of all Truth and Religion:
You changed have the Sincerity
Of all the Grounds of Piety. As for example, First, the Article of
Justification, the efficient cause of our Salvation and Righteousness by the
Scripture, is Gods love and grace only, 2. Tim. 1, 9. Tit. 2.11. Ephesians. 1.5.
John 3.6. The Papists say, God is moved by our preparing works. So held Maluend
in his disputation with Bucer at Ratisbone: so Bonauenture lib. 1. sen. did.
41. Quest, 1. Touching the matter of our Justification, the Scripture
propounds nothing but Christ's obedience, Romans 5.19. and 10.4. The Papists
place our Righteousness before God in our own works and merits, Con. Trid. s.
6. c. 7. For the Form (as Scholars call it) of Justification, it is by the
Scriptures, the imputatio^ of Christ's righteousness, 2. Cor. 5.21. The Papists
place it in our merits, Rhemist 2. Tim. 4. s. 4. Secondly, it is a ground of
Christian Religion, that the law cannot be fulfilled by us, and that no man is
to expect righteousness of salvation by it, Romans 8.3. Acts 15.10. Gal. 2.15, 16.
and 3.10. The Papists maintain, that men may keep ye law, Con. Trid. s. 6. c.
11. yea, and that they may perform more then the Law binds unto: whence are
sprung the works of Supererogatio^, and Indulgences, which that Council so
highly prizeth. ses. 21. ca. 9. A third ground of Religion ouerthrown by them,
is, that eternal death is due to every sin. This the Scripture avouches,
Romans 5.12. and 6.23. Ezekiel. 18.14. The Papists teach some sins to be in their
own nature pardonable, not deserving death, Con. Trid. ses. 6. c. 11. From
which opinion arose Purgatory. A fourth ground of Religion, is the certainty of
Salvation. That believers may be certain of Salvation, is the doctrine of the
Scripture, Romans 8.38. Heb. 11.1. Luke 10.20. The Papists deny and say, we can
but have hope only, Con. Trid. s. 6. c. 9. and yet therein they confound
themselves, for true hope cannot be deceived, Romans 5.5. It is the Anchor of the
soul, Heb. 6.9. A fifth ground is, that we cannot satisfy God for our least
sins: The Scripture ascribes all satisfaction to Christ, He. 1.3. 1. Pet.
1.24. Re. 1.5. The Papists maintayn that we may and must satisfy, making
satisfaction a part of penance, Con. Trid. s. 14. c. 13. A sixth ground is, that
the Scripture contains all doctrine necessary for our salvation. So says the
Scripture, 2. Tim. 3.16. and the ancient Church, Aug. lib. 3. cont. lit. Petil.
c. 6. and others. The Papists equal traditions to the Scripture, Con. Trid. s.
4. A seventh ground is, that the knowledge of the Scripture is needful to the
people unto salvation, and ought to be read of them. Thereto accords the holy
Text, Ioh. 5.39. Col. 3.16. The ignorance therein is the cause of all error,
Mark 12.24. The Papists forbid the people the use of the Scripture, Rhemists
Preface: and do all in the Church service in an unknown tongue. Eighthly, the
Scripture teaches us to worship God alone, Math. 4.10. The Papists worship
Angels and Saints, yea their Images and Relikes: Their distinction of Latria
and Dulia will not serve them: for they pray to creatures, and that is Latria:
and they acknowledge that which they call Latria, to be due to the Cross, Tho.
p. 3. sum. Quae. 25. art. 4. and Andrad. lib. 9. Orth. expl. Ninthly, it is the
Doctrine of the Scripture, that Christ, according to his humane nature, is only
in Heaven, Act. 3.21. Papists say, he is bodily present in the Eucharist, Con.
Tri. s. 13. ca. 6. Tenthly, Christ ordained the Communion in both kinds,
commanding to do as he did, 1. Cor. 11.24. etc. Papists take the Cup from the
Laity. Con. Trid. s. 21 c. 1. Thus, as in these particulars, so in many other,
it were easy to show, how the Church of Rome has overthrown the maine points
of Holy Doctrine, and have nothing left but the name of the Church, and a Title
and show of Religion.

Thou fall'st now to a railing vain,
And would by this thy Pope maintain:
Leave idle terms, and show some Reason,
Else all these words come out of season.
Show thou what Sects we do devise,
And wherein we deliver Lies:
And prove it so, that all may see,
Lest thou thy self the Liar be.
Foxes and Dogs and Wolves thou nam'st,
And Thieves, wherein thy self thou sham'st:
Or prove all this in us is true,
Eis we return it back to you.
They called Saint Paul an Heretic, Acts 24.14.

A Babbler, Acts 17.18.
and a Schismatike: Acts 24.5. and 28.22.

They said, our Savior was possessed, John 8.48.

And of his preaching made a Jest, Luke 16.14.

Yet Paul no Heresy did teach,
Nor in the Church made any breach:
Nor yet our Savior had a Devil,
He never did or preached evil.
Let Scripture try wherein we err,
We crave no other Arbiter:
Convict us once by such a Judge,
We will not at your raylings grudge.
Now that thy store is almost spent,
Thou come to an old worn Argument:
Where was your Church some years ago,
Before the World did Luther know?
If briefly now I should deny
The Churches Visibility:
It were a word sufficient,
To overthrow this prattlement.
Yet this I say, and will maintain,
That even when Blindness most did rain,
Our Church a certain being had,
Though not with outward Beauty clad:
Like to that holy portion, 1. Kings 19.8.

In that great Superstition,
Which ouerwhelm'd all Israel,
After the Tribes from David David's line.
fell.
Or as some Ears of purer seed,
Amidst a field of noisome Weed,
So God had some even at that time,
When Antichrist was in his Prime.
And now and then out brake the Light,
Even in that long and irksome Night:
Like as the Sun in lowering days,
Sometime sends forth his glittering rays.
Long time ere Luther yet was borne,
Whom you our Founder name in scorn,
There were which showed their enmyty,
Against your vile Idolatry. Bertram wrote against Transsubstantiation, anno
812. a Bishop of Florence was condemned for teaching, that Antichrist was come
anno 1114. Arnulph was murdered in Rome, for preaching against the Pope and
his Clergy, anno, 1128. Henry, a Monk of Tolose, was against prayer for the
dead, pilgrimage, creme oil, etc. anno, 1137. Io. of Salisbury, called the
Clergy, Pharisees; the Pope, Antichrist; and Rome, Babylon, 1151. Gerard and
Dulcimus, which taught the Pope to be Antichrist, were burnt, with 30. more,
about the years, 1164. 1165. 1166. The Walde^ses, which held in many points
against the Pope, were in anno, 1167. and after increasing in diverse places:
Almaris a Bishop burnt in Paris, for holding against Transsubstantiation,
Images, Altars, and praying to Saints, 1206. Many in Sueuia did preach the Pope
to be an heretic, in the years 1236. 1237. 1238. Grosted Bishop of Lincoln
wrote against the Pope, anno 1246. Arnold de noua villa, against Masses, and
Sacrifices for the dead, taught, that the Popes belief, was the devils
belief, anno 1259. All Histories are full of the like examples. These few may
serve for a taste, to satisfy an indifferent Reader, and to stop their
mouths, who say, none were heard of, of our Religion and Church, till Luther.

But now the Lord has let us see
Your Antichrists deformity,
That all men might him fully know,
Before his final overthrow.
Our Pastor chief 1. Pet. 5.4.
in heaven did sit,
And so does still, says holy Writ: Acts 4.21.

On earth, a Universal Priest,
None dare be called but Antichrist. Gregory the great, a Bishop of Rome, said,
that whosoever calls himself, or desires to be called Universal Bishop, is
the Forerunner of Antichrist, Epist. ad Eulogium. lib. 7.

He that our Church and Keys had sought,
By tokens in the Scripture tought,
Our Church and Keys he might have found,
Even when the world was most unsound.
Building of Churches nothing makes
For that which here thou undertakes:
For then commend Demetrius,
Who builded Shrines at Ephesus. Acts 19.24.

Well may the Heathen people boast
Of Piramees and Churches cost:
In houses made, God does not dwell,
As holy Scripture does us tell. Act. 7.48.

Yet neither all the Churches here,
Erected by the Papists were:
Nor are by us abolished
Places where God is worshipped.
If private men have evil done:
For it, blame not Religion:
Those men which do Church-spoyling love,
Our Faith and Church does not approve.
Those Celles and Dens of Idleness,
And Nurseryes of wickedness,
Upon good causes were displaced,
As Baals Temples were defaced. 2. Kings. 10.

Touching Luthers Marriage.
A Lawless vow It is well called a Lawless Vow, because it is of a thing which
is not in man's power. If it be said that by fasting and prayer it may be
performed, and continency obtained: I answer, the gifts of God are twofold:
Some common to all Believers, as Faith, etc, Some peculiar to some only, as
this of Continency. Now, if by fasting and Prayer we labor for the first sort,
we shall in some measure receive them: but we have not the like assurance for
the gifts of the latter sort: because (it may be) the Lord is pleased otherwise
to dispose, Now to make such a Vow, is a sin: but to persist in it, is a
double evil,
of single life,
Luther well brake, and took a Wife.
Better the pure and Spot-lesse Bed, Koite amiantos, Heb. 13.4.

Then by unclean lusts to be led. 1. Cor. 7.9.

Better the married Chastity, Papists do oppose marriage and chastity: but Paul
bids young women to be chaste and subject to their Husbands. Tit. 2.4.5.

Then violent Virginity:
They ought not single to remain,
Who are not gifted, to contain. 1. Cor. 7.9.

Wedlock it self can not defile,
It has an Honorable Style: Heb. 13.4.

God does it not to each man give,
Without the marriage bonds to live. Math. 19.11. And it is allowed to a
Bishop, to be the Husband of one wife, 1. Tim. 3.2.

The forced vows of Singlenes
Have brought forth beastly Filthiness:
Thou may behold in History
The fruits of Monkish Lechery. There were 6000. infants heads found in Pope
Gregory his mote, as appears by the letter of Voluntianus, Bishop of
Carthage, or as some think, of Huldericus, Bishop of Augusta to Pope Nicholas,
against the forbidding of Priests marriage.

Thy poisoned Tongue does further reach
The noble Saxon to impeach:
Because to Truth he did incline,
Thou call him a Libertine.
When God was pleased to let him see,
How Christ his Death has made us free,
Then did he deem it slavery,
To bear the Romish tyranny.
Though Antichrist did Rome possess,
Who kept the Scriptures.
You kept the Scriptures I confess:
And in that long Apostasy,
Those Books were in your custody.
So I a Pirate false have known,
To keep the goods were not his own,
And in the Ship to rule and reign,
When the right Owner has been slain.
So did the Jewish Synagogue
Safely keep Moses Decalogue,
And the other Books, Viz. the Prophets and Psalms; for so is the old
Testament divided, Moses, the Prophets, and Psalms, Luke 24.44.
when cruelly
They did Christ Jesus crucify.
Touching the calling of Ministers.
The Pastors, which did first restore
The Truth which lay long hyd before;
Thereto were called lawfully,
And even by your Authority.
You did them Priests and Doctors make,
And they from you this charge did take, In their admittance.

That they the Truth should soundly preach,
And in the same the people teach.
Hereto you caused them to swear,
That to the Faith they should adheare,
And never should errors endure,
That were against the Doctrine pure.
That whereunto you did them call,
Full well they have performed all:
Truth they have sought to propagate,
And Heresies to ruinate.
As we account your Baptism true,
And never do the same renew,
So may you make a lawful Priest,
Yet be not the pure Church of Christ.
We know that now you wiser be,
And swear your Priests to Popery, In their oaths and admissions, they put in
this clause (The Catholic and Apostolic Church of Rome) which in elder times
was not used.

And bind them to maintain the state
Of your three-Crowned Potentate.
See now (O Papist) thou recant,
Thou Art answered by a Protestant.
I counsel thee, if thou be wise,
No new euasions to devise.
Thy tale of Ethelbert of Kent,
Is but a slender Argument: It is also answered before.

It sails not whence the Faith was brought,
Or who it first amongst us tought.
Let us into the Scripture look, Isay 8.20.

And duly search John 5.39. Acts 17.11.
that holy Book:
Thence shall we know which Church to leave, We have found Christ in the
Scriptures; there we must also find the Church, Aug. de Pastoribus.

And unto which alone to cleave.
These swelling words 2. Pet. 2, 18.
of Unity,
Succession, and Antiquity,
Are but poor groundless fantasyes,
To blind the simple peoples eyes.
Though that an Angel thou should see,
Let him (says Paul) accursed be, Gal. 1.^.

If from the Scripture he does err,
Account him not Gods Minister.
If one arise, and wonders show,
Seeking the Truth to overthrow,
Though that might seem a motive strong,
Yet unto him death does belong. Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 5.

If threescore Bishops here and three,
Have been with us successively,
It either proves our Church is true,
Or else that mark makes naught for you.
That Faith, for which Peter was slain,
Our English Church does still retain,
We hear the voice John 10.27.
of Christ Jesus,
Who is the Son of God most true.
FINIS.

