THE BRIDEGROOM BY SAMVEL HIERON.

LONDON Printed for Samuel Macham, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Bull-head. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND virtuous Lady, the Lady Brigit Halsewell of
Halsewell in Somerset.
MAdam, I pray, pardon my boldness, in that being unknown, I dare thus to
press upon you with these papers. My excuse is; he who first moved me to
preach, and since persuaded me to publish this ensuing Sermon, would needs I
should inscribe it to your Name. It was delivered at the Nuptials of your
hopeful Heir; in that respect, I know it shall find acceptance. But yet the
maine inducement to me, to commend it by this particular direction to your
Ladyship, is the constant report I have received, of your good affection to the
least things. In assurance of this, I was the more emboldened to present you
with this Mite, which if it shall afford any comfort either to your self, or
to any other truly fearing God, I have all that I aimed at, in imparting it to
the common view. For which end I will follow it with my prayers, and to your
Ladyship in particular, will remain, From Modbury,

A true desirer of the only good, SAM. HIERON.

THE BRIDEGROOM.
Math. Chap. 9. Ver. 15. Can the children of the Mariage-chamber mourn, as
long as the Bridegroom is with them? But the days shall come when the
Bridegroom shall he taken from you, and then shall they fast.


BEing entreated to this service, This Sermon was preached as a Marriage.
my desire was to handle some such Scripture, as might occasion me both to
deliver something agreeable to the cause of our present meeting, and withal to
speak that which might concern us all, as we be Christians. Should I speak
nothing of Marriage duties, happily when I had done, it might be said of some,
what was this Sermon to the present business? Should I treat thereof only? many
(perhaps) might go away with a conceit, that they had heard nothing which did
much concern them. This text I trust shall fit both turns; of which I will
not doubt to say, as Jacob did of his pretended venison: The Lord has brought
it to my hands Genesis 27.20.
. I entreat you to sit up and eat thereof, that your souls may bless me,
when you shall find that I have presented you with such sauoury meat, as either
you do love, or else ought, (if your stomakes be well affected) to desire.

The state of the Text.
Touching this Text, I pray you in a word to conceive thus much. Ceremonies have
been in all ages of the Church, because of the diversity of men's affections an
occasion of contention. They which have agreed well together in the Maine, yet
have been exceedingly heated, and (as is said of Paul and Barnabas Act. 15.39.
) stirred one against the other in the Bye, and hereby the chief business
has been much let, and the common enemy much aduantaged. Satan (the
enginer of all mischief) practiced this stratagem in the days of our Savior.
When he perceived how the Truth grew and prevailed by the uniform proceedings
of John Baptist and Christ, he endeavored to make a Rent (if it were possible)
betwixt them by promoting a question about Fasting. John trained up his
disciples in much outward strictness, the follower; of our Savior lived (as
might seem) after a more easy fashion. Here now grew a question; How could the
freedom of Christ's disciples be justified without condemning the austeritie of
John: and if John's strictness was good, surely then the liberty of Christ
could not be approved. This moved the wicked Pharisees to tax them both, and
to say (as they did) that the one had a Devil, and the other was a Glutton
Luke 7.33.34
. This matter was set a foot by some of John's approouers and the Pharisees
joined with them: indeed to them it would have been a joy to have seen Christ
and John by the ears. The challenge is made something peremptorily in the
former verse, Why do not thy disciples fast? Now my Text is Christ's plea for
clearing of himself, and for deciding of the difference: Can the children of
the marriage chamber mourn etc. Wherein he compares himself to a Bridegroom,
and his Disciples to the special guests chosen to accompany the Bridegroom.
Now a Wedding (says he) you all know, is a time of mirth, not of mourning, of
feasting not of fasting; will you that I should now stint my Disciples as John
does his? Should I, during the time of this my comfortable presence with them,
apply them to this sadder course of fasting? It fitteth not with that plenty of
rejoicing, which my being among them does afford. Indeed there is a time
approaching, in which I shall be taken from them, that will be a time of
humiliation, then shall they Fast. Thus have you the state of this Scripture.

For order in handling it, The order in handling is.
I will follow this course. Since it is a similitude fetched from such a
business as has given Being to this days meeting, I will first speak of
such things, as out of the Text may concern the present occasion, and then of
such things as were principally intended by our Savior and do concern us
all. Respectively to the occasion, I will treat of two particulars. 1. The
title of a Bridegroom applied to Christ. 2. The lawfulnes of rejoicing
together, when we are called to the company of a Bridegroom.

It is manifest to al who conceive ought, that by the title of a Bridegroom
our Savior meant himself. In Math. Chap. 25. he which in the first verse is
called the Bridegroom, in the thirteenth, is termed the son of man. The Church
is his Beloved Can. 1.8.
. This life is the time of Wooing and Betrothing. The Ministers of the Gospel
are the Bridegroomes friends Ioh. 3.29.
, and do beseech, as in Christ's steed 2. Cor. 5.20.
, they are busied in preparing the Church for one husband, and to present her
as a pure virgin unto Christ 2. Cor. 11.2.
. The assurances are here drawn up, and he has given his word in his Word,
unto her, that he will marry her unto him for ever, in judgment, in mercy and
in compassion Hos. 2.19.
. Earned is given Ephesians. 1.14.
: A ioynture is made, Thee shall be an Heir annexed with Christ Romans 8.17.
He sends her ever and anon tokens of love, spiritual blessings in heavenly
things Ephesians. 1.3.
, she shall not be destitute of any gift 1. Cor. 1.7.
. He is but gone before to prepare a place for her and her train in the many
mansions of his Fathers house Ioh. 14.23.
. He will return, and the last day of the World, shall be the first day of her
full enjoying him. Now she cries as the mother of Sisera, Why is his chariot
so long, why tarry the wheels of his chariot Judge. 5.28.
? and still beggeth with him by sighs inexpressible, Return my well-beloved
Cant. 2.17.
, but then the marriage shall be consummate, and she shall be ever with the
Lord 1. These. 4.17.
. Thus you see how well the title of a Bridegroom agrees unto Christ: I will
not work so much as I could out of this title, respectively to the matter of
Marriage; only this: This name given to Christ does teach every one that
carries the same title two things. 1. How to choose his Love. 2. How to love his
choice. The 1. Doct.
Touching the former of these I set down this doctrine. That in choosing a
spouse there ought more respect to be had to inward goodness then to outward
goods. Such has been the course of this our Bridegroom. In seeking of a
Church and people to himself, what eye has he carried to nobility of birth,
to betternes of blood, to propernesse of person, to exactness of beauty, to
abundance of wealth, to any manner of outward thing? He sees not as man sees
1. Sam. 16.7.
. He craves no bullock out of the house, nor goat from the fold Psalm. 50.9.
. He delights not in the legs of any man Psalm. 147.10.
. He requesteth not the rich more than the poor Job 34.19.
, but in every nation he that fears God and works righteousness is
accepted with him Act. 10.35.
. All that he requires is to fear him, to walk in his ways and to love him
Deuteronomy. 10.12.
. His maine expectation is, that his beloved be all glorious within Psalm. 45.13.
, that she be decked inwardly with lowlines of mind 1. Pet. 5.5.
, the hid man of the heart is before him a thing much set by 1. Pet. 3.4.
. Now I demand, shall his example who is the author and finisher of our Faith
Heb. 12.2.
be of no value? Should not the same mind be in us, which was even in him
Phil. 2.5.
? Should we not show forth the virtues of him that has called us 1. Pet. 2.9.
? Indeed in true judgment, that which is to be desired of a man is his
goodness Pro. 19.22.
. What is beauty without understanding, but as a Jewel of gold in a swines
snout Pro. 11.22.
? What benefit to have a contentious woman with a wide house Pro. 21.9.
? Better to dwell in a corner where one may sit dry, than to be vexed with
such a continual dropping Prou. 19.13.
. Was Iezabel the better for her paint 2. King. 9.30.
, or had Ahab any whit the better bargain in her because she was the daughter
of a King 1. King. 16.31.
? Better with Booz to take Ruth from among the gleaners, and with Jacob, to
serve seven years for a wench that keeps sheep, then to have an idolatrous
Maacah 1. King. 15.13.
or a treacherous Athaliah 2 King. 11.1.
. The rule of seeking the kingdom of God first Math. 6.33.
ought to take place in all our undertakings, especially in Marriage, of which
the purpose in Gods ordaining it, is a godly seed Mal. 2.15.
: It is the foundation of a family, and a family ought to be the model of a
Church, and therefore in it, that should chiefly be intended, by which
religion may be furthered. It is not denied but outward things in matters of
wedlock may be looked too. It is fit, that, as for years, so for estate and
means there should be a proportion, for God is not the author of confusion 1.
Cor. 14.33.
. David was not apt by and by to entertain the motion of marying so much above
his reach, as with the daughter of a King, himself but the son of Ishai the
Yeoma^ 1. Sam. 18.18.
etc. It is possible for a man to be either too base or too presumptuous in his
choice. Besides, the rule of the Scripture, ( Parents lay up for the children
2. Cor. 12.14.
) binds to a care to dispose so of them, that as much as may be, they may
enjoy, that more blessed thing, to give rather than receive Act. 20.25.
. But the question is now touching the scope in the matter of choice; not
whether Hagar and Sarah may dwell together, but which of the two must be
Mistress. The special thing: which must be sought for, must be this, to have
an even yoke fellow, which shall be fit in bearing that yoke which Christ
calls to Math. 11.29.
. Our Bridegroom propounds this as the maine article in his wooing: Be holy
as I am holy 1. Pet. 1.1.^
. All the world shall not win him to the contract where this wants. He will
have no concord with Belial 2. Cor. 6.15.
. This is the rule of choice. What said Iehu to Ionadab when he was following
his course against the posterity of Ahab and against Baal, Is thy heart
upright as mine is, then give me thy hand King. 10.15.
: such a question were not amiss, for a man to ask the woman, Is thy heart as
mine for matters of religion, thus and thus am I, art thou so also? then give
me thy hand: otherwise as David said to Mephibosheth, why speak thou any
more of thy matters 2. Sam 19.29.
, what should we treat of portions and ioyntures, when we be not like to
agree together in the principal.

The use.
I demand now of you, have the men of this generation no need to be taught this
lesson? I would I could persuade as many to learn it, as I know have need to
be taught it. The truth is, generally in matters of choice, religion bears
the smallest stroke. Me thinks, the choice of many about wives, is like that
in use about bargains and farms. The questions are (mostly) What is it worth
besides the rent? what house upon it, how near the market, the mill, the sand?
When hear you this, How near the Church, or, what Minister in the Parish, or,
what good Preacher dwells by? Thus is it in this matter also; thus it
runs, what portion, what ioynture, how much money in hand, what security
for the rest? Not a word, how for religion, what knowledge of God, how disposed
in things that concern the kingdom of God? Nay, the truth is, men are so
violent this way, that scarsely ordinary natural contentments are looked unto
as they should: where there may be a good lading of that thicke-clay, which the
Prophet speaks of Heb. 2.6.
, or that which Achsah, Calebs daughter craved at her marriage, springs above
and springs beneath Ios. 15.19.
, men will love, they have their affections at command. Wanton Dinah, subtle
Dalilah, scorning Micholl, gainsaying Zipporah, who were not like to be
entertained upon these terms? Were she as obedient as Sarah, as wise as
Deborah, as religious as the Shanamite, as devout as Hannah, as well affected
to the word as Lydia, yet shall she be thrust out with as much contempt as
Thamer was by Ammon, if she want these 2. Sam. 13.17.
. Now, fie upon this misiudging age, nothing does more declare the scarsitie of
religion among men. The Athenians desiring to find out their childrens
inclination, that so they might direct them to such callings as they were fit
for, would bring them into a room full of all manner of instruments: look
therefore what kind of instrument any one did choose, and seemed to take delight
in, to that calling whereto that instrument belonged, their conclusion was he
was disposed. So in this, the manner of men's choice does proclaim their
hearts. It is a sign they have no great love to religion, since they make so
small inquiry for religion. Their maine call is for wealth, this shows that
their principal affection is to the world. I pray God that that which is so
powerful to discover this sin, may be as effectual to reform it, that the
guilty may lament it, and they which are yet to come to the occasion of showing
their disposition in it, may avoid it. And thus far of learning to choose. The
next is of loving where we have chosen.

It is well known that Christ's love to his Church is the pattern of that love
which the husband owes to his wife Ephesians. 5.25.
. Now in Christ's love to his Church two things especially deserve note. 1.
Bounty (he withholds nothing which may be for his Churches good) 2
Perpetuity (he never leaves where he once loves) I have loved thee with an
everlasting love, says he to his Church: Iere. 31.3.
Hence we are taught, The 2 doct.
first, That the Bridegroomes love to his beloved, ought to extend and reach as
far, as any necessity in her shall require a supply. Paul says love is
bountiful 1. Cor. 13.4.
: And indeed this is Bounty, to carry that heart to a wife, as to leave (if it
be possible) no necessity vnsupplied. Is not the love of Christ to his Church
such? Wherein may it be truly said that he has been sparing, or that he has
carried the matter with a pinching hand? Having nothing dearer to himself then
himself, yet in his love he gave himself as an offering unto God Ephe 5.2
: He has bound himself by promise to his elect, not to leave them
comfortless Ioh. 14.18.
: he is touched with a feeling of every infirmity Heb. 4.15.
, and through his riches he will fulfill all their necessities Phil. 4.19.
. Here is the proportion and scantling of the husbands love. What other thing
is required when he is called the Head of the wife Ephesians. 5.23.
but that he should look out every way, to protect, to supply, to furnish, to
remove inconveniences, to procure comforts. What else is intended in that
iniunction, so ought men to love their wives as themselves Ephesians. 5.28.
? Who, unless it be some hateful miser is pinching, to himself? Now, the
necessities of a wife which be to be supplied are of two sorts; either inward
or outward. The inward (which respect the soul) are chiefly to be looked
unto, the soul being the more worthy part. The husband ought to be unto the
wife a kind of domestical instructor. Wherefore else is she to ask him at
home? 1. Cor. 14.35
and how otherwise shall he be the guide of her youth Prou. 2.17.
, if he be not able and willing to guide her feet in the way of peace Luke 1.79.
. Outward wants must be regarded too. This is that which the spirit of God
calls, the spreading of the wing, Ruth. 3.9.
nourishing and cherishing Ephesians. 5.29.
. Indeed I may say as Lot did in another case, Wherefore else is she come under
the Husbands roof Genesis 19.8.
? There must be mainetenance according to her rank and that with
cheerfulness. (Christ leads his Church with benefits and that unsought to);
And there must be due employment; her husbands Heart must trust in her Pro.
31.11.
. There is no love where there is niggardliness, in the one, and causeles
suspicion in the other. Here is the bounty of love: a tender and a kind
respect had to every need.

This reprooueth the common neglect. The use. 1.
Husbands seek little to further the salvation of their wives: some cannot do
it, so great is their ignorance, and some care not to do it, so little is their
conscience. But if thy wife die in her sin, through thy default, thy not
teaching, thy not admonishing, thy not praying with her and for her, God will
require her blood at thy hands. Thou art liable to account for the soul of thy
servant, even his which is behind the ewes Ps. 78.71.
, or at the mill Exodus 11.5.
, much more for hers which lies in thy bosom Deu. 13.6.
, and is ordained to be an heir with thee of the grace of life 1. Pete. 3.7.2
.

Secondly this taxes the straightness of many husbands in matters of outward
conueniency: there is scarcely ought to be gotten from them except it be even
wrung out by importunity, or wrought out by some indirect and unjustifiable
means: There is I know an extremity of too much vxoriousnesse, such as is in
some who are forward to further every vain and idle humor of the wife. But
there must be a mean betwixt a sparing and a dissolute hand. A good man does
measure his affairs by judgment Ps. 112.5.
: and Love as it is bountiful, 1 Cor. 13.4.
so it is discreet, for it rejoices not in Iniquity In vxerem alienam omnis
amor iurpis, in suum numius. Hier.
. To another man's wife all love is dishonest: so is too much to a man's own not
commendable. There may be dotage at home, as well as adultery abroad Remember
the pattern. Christ leaves the church neither in want, nor in wantonness, he
will supply her in the one, and cut her short in the other. Thus far of the
Bounty of Love.

The third doct.
The second thing imitable in Christ's love is Perpetuity. The Doctrine is, That
the husbands love to his wife must be continued in steadfastness to the end.
This is the glory of our Bridegroom, where he loves, he loves to the end
John. 13.1.
: His gifts and callings are without repentance Romans 11.29.
: Nothing is able to separate from his Love Romans 8.39.
. If there be a small fault he hides it, he remits it, he may chasten it, but
he will not cast of for it. When is a man weary of love to himself? When is
the head become an enemy to a limme, if it have a deformity? Nay it does both
tend and tender it so much the more. There is nothing has right to the
abolishment of a man's love to his wife, but that which makes her no Wife, and
that is, Adultery or death: and yet even after death there ought to be a
respect to her memory, and after her separation for adultery, a love of pity,
though not of delight. Rejoice with the wife of thy youth, let her breasts
satisfy thee at all times Pro. 5.19.
. Constancy is the crown of every good action; Indeed good is not good, if it
be not perpetual; and it is one of the qualities of Love not to fall away 1.
Cor. 13.8.
.

This condemns the inconstancy of many men's affections. The use.
Seneca speaks of one, who was so fond, that he tied his wife to him with his
garter: forsooth he could not endure her out of his sight. Such violent love is
in some in the days of their first acquaintance, that they scarce can tell
what belongs to comlines, which yet in time loath as much, as they were over
abundantly kind in the beginning. It is the glory of marriage when there is
both a continuance and a grouth of love, so that the last parting affects,
with greater grief, then the first meeting satisfied with content. He that
would further this had need of good discretion. It must be his glory to pass
by many offenses Pro. 19.11.
; and to temper himself from the ouer-quicke apprehension of every occasion of
distaste. His Love must cover, 1. Pet. 4.8.
yea and labor to recover a multitude of defects. Bitterness and violence must
be no guests in his house, and of all other Wraths, it were pity the Sun
should go down upon his Ephesians. 4.26.
to his wife. The more tender the love, the more hard to be sodered, when it
has received a crack. I may say of such breaches as Solomon does of those
betwixt Brethren, they are as the bars of a Palace Pro. 18.19.
; it is not easy to dissolve them. These things must be watched against, that
love may be perpetual. Thus much how every bridegroom may learn of this
grand Bridegroom, how to choose his love and how to love his choice. In choosing
let religion be the maine enquiry. In loving let there be bounty to supply
every want, and constancy to keep the affection strong unto the End.

Now lest I should be thought to give instructions but by halues, a word let me
add touching her to whom the Bridegroomes love must be thus bountiful, thus
perpetual. Out of his duty she may judge of hers. Is he bound to love and
shall it be free for her, to answer his good affection with neglect. If he
must be bountiful, surely she must be dutiful, if he must not spare to
supply her, she must not fail to obey him. If his love must be to her
without change, her fashion must be such to him as may occasion no distaste. He
must instruct, she must learn; he must guide, she must follow, he must
admonish, she must hearken; he must allow her cheerfully out of his estate,
she must conform her self contentedly to his estate. He must not straiten
her, and she must not undo him: he must trust her, and she must not deceive
him: he must not be bitter, and she must not be stout. In a word he must ever
account her for his Love, and she must ever esteem him as her head. Here is a
sweet proportion. I wish it to you that are espoused this day, it shall be better
unto you then both your estates. So much of that which is to be noted out of
the similitude, agreably to the present occasion.

The next general thing is the Lawfulnes of rejoicing, when we are called to
the company of the Bridegroom. Our Savior secretly insinuates this to be
lawful: for out of the freedom to be more cheerful then usual at a
Marriage, he justifies his course of not binding his disciples to the severity
of fasting, whiles he was present. The 4. Doct.
The Doctrine is thus. That there is a lawfulnes of mutual Rejoicing at
Marriage Solemnities. I have already made it to appear how this Doctrine
springs hence. Christ builds upon this general ground, that a Marriage is
rather a time of gladness then of mourning. It is well known that our Savior
himself, being thereunto invited, afforded his presence at a Marriage feast in
Cana of Galile, yea and by his first miracle supplied there the lack of wine,
p a sufficient testimony of the lawfulness of the liberal use of the
creatures of God upon such an occasion. I remember how in the Prophet Is. 62.5.
, the Lord describes the contentment he takes in his chosen, by that joy
which is upon the marriage day: as a Bridegroom is glad of the Bride, so shall
thy God rejoice over thee. With this sorts the parable, in which the inuiting
and calling of men by the Gospel to the grace of God, is shadowed out by a
Mariage-feast, celebrated by a king at the nuptials of his son, to which many
are entreated Matthew. 22.
. Such courses we read in Scriptures upon like occasions, as Abraham's feast at
Isaacks weaning Genesis 21.8.
, Joseph's feast at the entertainment of his brethren Genesis 43.32.
, the peoples feast after the return from captivity, when the law had been
expounded to them, Neh. 8.10.
the Jews feast, upon their deliverance from Hamans conspiracy Ester. 9.22.
, In the primitive Church they had Loue-feasts Jude v. 12.
. In a word, our Saviors direction how a man should demean himself being
invited to a Mariage-feast, Luke 19.7.
is a sufficient justification of this point: for had the course been unlawful,
he would rather have utterly inhibited it then have delivered rules of
behavior at it.

The use is not, The use.
to persuade to this cause, or to urge it, for although we may do it, yet we
are not bound to do it) but to inform us herein out of Gods Word, that we may
behave our selves in things of this nature as Men of knowledge, which is the
true seasoning unto every course. S. Paul says that the creatures of God are
sanctified by the Word. 1. Tim. 4.5.
Every man eats, and eating in it own nature is not unlawful, but yet every
man's eating is not lawful: So, there is a general use of Mariage-feasts, and
a Mariage-feast in it own nature is lawful, but yet every man's using of it is
not good: and why? because it is not sanctified unto him by the Word, he goes
to it at adventure, his conscience not having any direction and guidance from
the Word, and so that which is lawful in it self becomes a sin unto him.
It is a good course for a Christian to be sure of his warrant for his actions.
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin Romans 14.23.
. Again, the lawfulness of the thing, binds to a care to take heed of
unlawfulness in the use. There be no greater sins committed then in the abuse
of lawful things. The name of (lawful) carries us headlong into evil before
we be ware. Is it not lawful to be merry, lawful to drink wine, lawful to
feast, lawful to make good cheer, lawful to wear good clothes? yes verily;
but under these precepts, come in riot, luxury, intemperance, pride, and a
flood of evils. A Christian has never more need to fear himself, then when
he is to have to do in such things, which in themselves may be used. He is
never, in any thing, so subject to a fall, especially in such meetings to
solemn feasts, lest the Table of plenty should become a snare Psalm. 69.22.
unto him. Job was very jealous of his children, that they blasphemed God in
their hearts Job. 1.5.
when they were at their feasts. What great evils do we find in Scripture,
to have accompanied some great feastings, where the fear of God has not been.
At Nabals, drunkenness 1 Samuel 25.36
; at Abshaloms, murder 2 Samuel 13.29
; at Ahashuerosh his, a woeful breach betwixt him and his wife Ester. 1.10 etc.
; at Belshazzars, terrible blasphemy against God Dan. 5.3.4.
: at Herod's, killing of John Baptist Matthew. 16.6.
. What judgments read we, to have overtaken men in their secure eatings: Elah,
smotten and killed while he was drinking 1 King. 15.9.
: the Israelites, whiles the flesh was yet betwixt their teeth, before it was
chewed, the wrath of the Lord was kindled against them Number. 11.33.
. Jobs children, the house fell upon them at their banquet Job. 1.19.
, I say with the Apostle, These things came unto them for ensamples and were
written to admonish us. 1. Cor. 10.11.
To the end therefore our reioycings and feasting at this or the like occasions,
may not be unlawful, two things are chiefly to be cared for: First that
there be a careful watching to prevent excess. Gluttony and Drunkenness are
works of Darkness Romans 13.13
, and Take heed lest at any time your hearts be oppressed with them, says our
Savior Luke 21.34.
There is a woe to those that continue til they be inflamed Is. 5.11.
. It was one of the sins of the old world, eating and drinking like beasts
Matthew 24*38 (...).
, as long as the stomach would crave: A man's eating should be for strength not
for drunkenness Eccl 10.17.
. The second thing to be cared for, is that God be not banished out of our
thoghts but that still his presence may be remembered and his judgments
considered. The neglect hereof is called a Feeding without Fear s. Jude. 12.
It is one a of the common miseries of feasting now a days; Men (as they
think) must lay aside all thoughts and speeches of God and Godliness, or else
they suppose they cannot be so merry as they would. Truth is by such mean, they
should be restrained from that which is called mad mirth Eccl. 2.2.
, otherwise hereby they should be much quickened to an holy rejoicing. And
thus far of those two things out of this Text, which concern the occasion;
Now it remains to speak of the things especially intended by our Savior
which may concern us all. The 5 Doct.
Can the children of the Marriage chamber etc? Here I will teach two doctrines.
The one is this: That the true ground of the joy and rejoicing of Gods people,
is and ought, to be the presence of Christ Jesus. This is that which our
savior here maintains that the children of God have a kind of immunity from
mouning and from these straiter exercises of humiliation, when the spouse of
the Church the Lord Jesus is among the^: To clear this point, the manner of
Christ's presence must be enquired into. He is either present in body, as he was
at the time of speaking these words, with his disciples or after a spiritual
manner, concerning which is that promise, Lo I am with you always, until the
end of the world Math. 28.20.
: He is spiritually present, either by outward means, or by inward feeling.
The outward means by which he is present, are the public ministry and
preaching of the word, and the free use of the sacraments. Hence is it, that
Christ is said to be in the mids of such assemblings Math. 18.23
, John beheld him in the mids of the seven golden candlesticks Reu. 1.18.
: The Ministers of the Gospel are said to be in his stead 1. Cor 5.20.
: in their teaching, the Wisdom of God pours out his mind Prou. 1.23.
, unto the sons of men. As for inward feeling, when the Lord vouchsafes it, he
is said to be near Ps. 145.18.
, according as when he withdraws it, he is said to absent himself Psalm.
77.7.8.
. So that now the meaning of the doctrine is, that the maine matter of all
sound reioicing unto Gods children, is the liberty of the means of grace, and
the evidence which they feel in their souls of Gods favors? Touching rejoicing
in the outward means, we have for example the joy of the men of Bethshemesh at
the restoring of the Arc 1 Samuel 6.13.
, the joy which was in Jerusalem at the reforming of religion by Hezekia 2
Chro. 30.21.
: the shouting when the foundation of the Temple was laid after the captivity
Ezra. 2.11.
, the extraordinary gladness, when the public teaching of the Law, which had a
long time been disco^tinued, was again established. Nehe. 8.12.
In the new Testament Samaria had great joy, for Philips ministry Act. 8.8.
: Paul while he lay by the heels yet triumphed because Christ was preached
Phil. 1.18.
. By these, we see how the Children of the marriage chamber, take a kind of holy
contentment, when the Bridegroom is among them by the outward means. Now for
reioicing in the inward euide^ces of his presence to the soul and spirit, look
we upon David boasting in that joy of heart, which was given him by the Lords
lifting up of his countenance upon him Psalm. 4.7.
upon the Eunuch, going on his way reioicing, because he felt how faith in
Christ was wrought in his soul Act. 8.39.
: This was Mary's joy, reioicing in spirit, that she knew God in Christ was
become her Savior Luke 1.46.
. This is that joy which is called Joy in the holy Ghost Romans 14.17.
, peace in believing Romans 15.13.
. Peter terms it glorious and unspeakable 1. Pet. 18.
, and Christ says it is such as none can take away Ioh. 16.22. The use.
.

This serves very effectually to show, that they are none of the Bridegroomes
Friends, which in these evidences of his presence find so little sweetness. Men
rejoice in their wealth, in their gettings, in their health, in their beauty,
in their honor, in their belly-cheare, in their gay apparel, in the pleasures
of sin, in the satisfying of their wretched lusts, in the overthrow and fall
of their enemies. Such things as these give a kind of contentment unto many:
But how scarce are they, which unfeignedly rejoice in the liberty of the
Gospel, in the freedom of true religion, in the great mercy and goodness of
God, vouchsafing to reveal unto us the knowledge of himself in Christ Jesus.
Whose spirits are enliued, whose heart leapeth, like the Babe in the womb of
Elizabeth Luke 1.44.
, for joy of this inestimable blessing? Christ is a continual suter to us, by
the Ministry of his word, he does in it make love to our souls, he wooeth us,
he beseeches and entreats us to entertain him, he offreth unto us many
tokens of heavenly kindness, many rich graces to which all the Jewels in the
earth are not worthy thy to be compared. But (alas) how be these things
regarded? who (generally) does not take more pleasure in an idle tale or in a
scurrilous jest, then in these particulars. Well, we see here, Christ accounts
his presence in his Church, whither in body or in spirit, whither visibly or by
means, to be as the presence of a Bridegroom to his best beloved: If we feel
our selves to find no comfort in those things which are reported to be so full
of comfort; it is a sign we are none of the children of the Wedding, but of
those rather, which shall be shut out and dismissed with that heavy voice, when
yet they shall beg and desire to come in, Depart from me I do not know you
Math. 25.12.
.

The next Doctrine hence to be observed is, That it is the wisdom and duty
of gods children in the days of their rejoicing, and then when they have most
comfort by the Bridegroomes presence, yet to think upon and to make provision
for a change. Our Savior here says, that albeit he now uses his disciples
somewhat tenderly, these being (as it were) the days of his first
acquaintance, yet they must not think to live so always, but know rather,
that there be times of more straightnes, and of greater sadness to be looked
for. So that it is plain, that it is the wisdom of Gods children, in the
days of their greatest joy to be in continual expectation of a time of
morning: As the Bridegroom is with them, so they must remember that the
Bridegroom may be taken from them. For this cause Christ often told his
disciples of having affliction in the world Ioh. 16.33
, of weeping and lamenting, when the world was iocund Ioh. 16.20.
, of drinking in his cup Math. 23.22.
, of being hated of all men Math. 24.9.
. The poor Jews were in perplexity, while the King and Haman sat drinking in
the palace Este. 3.15.
. We must resolve to pass through many storms, before we attain to the End
of our Faith the salvation of our souls 1. Pet. 1.9.
. It is worth the noting, how God in all ages, has kept a kind of continual
intercourse in his church, betwixt peace and persecution, betwixt quietness and
trouble. It has neither been always under the cross, nor always flourishing
in an outward setlednes. Sometimes in kingdo^es and states, the gospel has
been freely preached, the sacraments ordinarily administered, public
assemblies usually freque^ted, without danger: Sometimes again it has been
intermitted, nay it has been banished and persecuted, and it has been as much
as a man's life has been worth, to be known to profess it. And as is the
state of the church in general, so is it of Christians in particular. Sometimes
they hear the Bridegroomes voice secretly and sweetly speaking peace to their
souls by his spirit, and this causes much comfort, sometimes they be much
perplexed with doubtings and sad passions, and this occasioneth a great deal
of sorrow: Sometimes they have the voice of joy and deliverance in their
tabernaeles Ps. 118.15.
, and sometimes again, bitter grief in steed of Felicity Is. 38.17.
. How then can it but be wisdom to expect affliction and tribulation. The
expectation of it cannot hasten it, nay, it may prevent it, at the lest it
shall cause it to be the more easy when it comes.

Here is a necessary advertisement for us. The Use.
We now through Gods goodness, do enjoy the Bridegroomes presence, his voice
sounds amongst us in the daily ministry. Happy were we if we rejoiced in it,
as we should. If we do, yet let us not forgette that the Bridegroom may be
taken from us and that there may come days of greater desolation. Who can
tell, nay (considering our sins) who has not reason to fear, that God will
take away from us the means of grace, and deprive us of the comfortablenes of
his blessed word in the commons mones thereof? when we shall see a dimning of
such Lights, by whose bright shining many have been comforted; when we shall
behold Pulpits taken up, with such Prophets as look out vain and foolish
things for the people, not laboring (as they should) to discover their
Iniquity, Lam. 2.14.
, when we shall find in the multitude such a grosnes of heart, as was
sometimes in those of Jerusalem, when, they did not know the things which
belonged to their peace Luke 19.42.
, then let us fear the Bridegroomes going. The present condition of the times
should work somewhat with us: we see or may see, what working, and what
plotting there is among Papists, by treachery and bloody designs, to put out
the Light of the gospel, and to cause the voice of the Bridegr. utterly to
cease. And yet alas we sit still as if there were no danger. It is now
verified, which was said of old, The Lord did call unto weeping and mourning,
but behold, joy and gladness, eating Flesh and drinking wine Is. 22.12.13.
. Thus we go on in a kind of besotted course, till a dart strike through our
liver as an ox that goes to the slaughter, or as a Fool to the stocks for
Correction Pro. 7.22.23.
: Oh that there might be a general humbling of our selves before the Lord,
tears running down as a river, and, our Hearts crying to the Lord Lam. 2.18.
. That mischief may return upon the heads of the co^triuers, and that for his
names sake, for his truths sake, for his son Christ's sake, the glorious gospel
of his son, the gracious voice of the Bridegroom may be continued with us to
the end of the world. We have just cause to fear the beginnings of Gods
judgments, and yet with all to admire eue^ his lothnes to depart, like that of
old, when the glory of the Lord departed by degrees, first from the Cherub, to
the door of the house Ezekiel. 10.4.
, then to the entry of the gate of the Lords house Ver. 19.
, then from the midst of the city to the mountain toward the east side of the
city Chapter 11.23.
. The Lord would as it were have us to entreat him, he looks to be
importuned. Let us therefore even this day vow unto the mighty God of Jacob Ps.
132.2
, that we will prefer Jerusalem to our chief joy Ps. 132.2.
, and that we will eue^ wrestle with the Bridegroom as Jacob did with the
Angel Genesis 32.26.
. Oh if any thing may keep him yet with us, sure he shall not depart. It were
better to fast before to keep him with us, the^ to fast when he is gone, to
restore him to us: Better to weep in Sion, to prevent Babell, then when we sit
by the rivers of Babell, to weep for Sion Ps. 137.1.
: This is the maine use. Albeit the aduertiseme^t may be further stretched, to
every private Christian. Do thou now feel in thy self, euide^ces and
pledges of the favor of God in Christ Jesus, it is good to rejoice in them, it
is good also to know that it is possible for them to be ouerclouded for a time,
and that the Lord may call thee to some inward conflicts: Make ready therefore
for the Combat: The Bridegroom goes and comes not only by giving and
remoouing the outward means, but by giving and remoouing inward feeling.

FINIS.

