A True Discourse of the Two infamous upstart Prophets, Richard Farnham Weaver
of White-Chappell, and John Bull Weaver of Saint Butolphs Algate, now
Prisoners, the one in Newgate, and the other in Bridewell: with their
Examinations and Opinions taken from their own mouths April 16. Anno 1636. As
also of Margaret Tennis now Prisoner in Old Bridewell, with the Heretical
Opinions held by her, at the same time Examined. Written by T. H.



Printed at London for Thomas Lambert, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
sign of the Horse-shooe, near the Hospitall-gate in Smithfield. 1636

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, we have here exposed to thy view New Prophets, and
expounders of the Scriptures, but I must tell thee, far differing from those
of Old: They were called by God, but these have called (or rather miscalled)
themselves: These scorn the names of Doctors, or Scholars, yet being plain
Weavers, (as you may see them discovered in the Frontispeece) understanding
nothing themselves, will undertake to teach others: Such is the stupidity of
blind Simplicity and Ignorance, of which these shuttle-witted fellows are too
much guilty: Nor are they to be much wondered at; for as Solomon says, There is
no new thing under the Sun: So the World produces now no Prodigies, the like
of which it bath not before teemed. As for example, that Pseudocbriftus Hacket,
who for his fearful blaspbemies was executed in Cheapside, and whose
Associates dyed miserably: and Legate, who of more late days for maintaining
the Arrian Heresy was burnt in Smithfield: Let the nominating of these serve
for many. Gentle Reader, this only I entreat thee in the perusal hereof, that
though thou wondrest at their impudence; thou withal pity their ignorance.
Farewell.

A TRUE RELATION of the Examination of John Bull, and Richard Farnbam his
Companion, of the Opinions which they now hold, with their ignorance and
superstition confuted.
LEt no man wonder that such vain triflers are now, who study to bring in new
Doctrines and Opinions into the Church, since it is apparent that even from the
time of the Apostles, no Age has been without them: Needless therefore it
were to enter upon a long discourse of the errors, Schisms, and Heresies that
have heretofore been, or to reckon up a tedious Catalogue, (being so numerous)
of their first founders and abettors: Neither in how many general Counsels
they have been convinced, and utterly exploded, which would take up more time
than needs: fince we know by our Saviors own words, that there should be
false Prophets and Teachers even to the end of the World: only I will give you
a brief Character what (for the most part) one of these Innovators in Religion
is:

An Hypocrite, and of all Actors the worst; as personating him whom he is not,
but would seem to be: double faced, double hearted: In outward appearance
boasting fadnesse and gravity, Whilit within he is all pleasure and alacrity;
and for no other cause, but that he can so craftily delude, and cunningly
deceive. In his demisse looks you may read the Characters of Religion, which
the more he seems to Profosse, he is the further from the practice: A smooth
face, a rugged mind, a sheeps habit, a wolves heart: a simple and straight
garment, a double and large conscience: His heart convinced by his mouth, his
mouth by his actions: He rises early to go into the Temple, and that God
whom in heart he despises, he there seemingly adoreth: where he more regards
who observe what he does, than considers with himself what he ought to do:
his heart not being aware whither his eyes wander. He exclaimes ofthe want of
charity in others, but expresses no part thereof in himself: His seat in the
Church is, where he may be the most seen: In the time of the Sermon he draws
out his tables to take the Notes, but still noting who observes him to take
them. At every place of Scripture cited, he turns over the leaves of his
Book, more pleased with the motion of the leaves, than the matter of the Text:
For he folds down the leaves, though he finds not the place: his eye being
still fixed on his paper, or the Pulpit: He lifts up the whites of his eyes
toward Heaven, when he meditates on the sordid pleasures of the earth; his
body being in Gods Church, when his mind is in the devils Chapel. If he
hear a strange Preacher, he at his coming down, as raptured with his
Doctrine, salutes him with a cringe, and demands his name with a congie; and
offers that person his Hat, whose profession he casts at his heels: but if he
can wind him up to his own Tone, he will Echo to him in the same Tune.

When he takes occasion to speak of the passage of his former life, he will
seem to weep, not for his former wantonness, but his present weakness: not
that he has a will to act, but that he has no ability to perform: not for
the many sins of his youth, but that he cannot so freely commit them in his
age. Other men's errors he will sharply reproove, but his own vices secretly
retain: If he give to the poor, it is not that they should pray for him, but
that thereby he may make a prey of others: He both prays and gives, but
neither of them without company; because he thinks, if God should not take
notice of his works, he can be sure to bring witness of them. If he prove so
rich as to raise an Hospital out of his private usury, it is not for any
virtue, but rather vain glory; as being only built for such as he has
before beggered. He will transform a Gnat into a Cammell, and a Fly into an
Elephant: He preferres his own superstitions before the Churches reverent
Ceremonies, and will sooner deserve a white sheet, than endure a surplesse. He
prescribes his own Laws, and directs his faith by his own Liturgy: standing
whilst others bow, and sitting whilst others kneel. To his Acquaintance
present he is a Gnato, to those that are absent an Aristarchus: he weepeth at
the side of his friend, when his heart wishes him in his grave. He salutes
cheerfully, when he intends churlishly: and to conclude with these full
attributes belonging unto him: though he be held a Saint by his own Sect, he
proves his neighbors calamity, the poison of honesty, the Co^mon-weales
canker, the Churches corrosive, an eye sore by day, a stumbling block by night,
a Taper smoky in the burning, noisome in the extinguishing, faulty in his
promise, false in his oath; who whe^he seems much to favor, ought then most
especially to be feared.

I forbear to speak of any foreign Vipers, only to show you the Spiders
bred under our own roofes, and the Snakes bedded in our native Earth, many new
and upstart Schismatic opinions have lately troubled the peace of the
Church; all different among themselves, only agreeing in this, that they
unanimously conspire to disturb the common quiet. The Father of one sect, a
learned Button-maker well known, the founder of another, a commenting Cobbler,
etc. And now we have 2 Prophesying Weavers (upon whose stupidity or madness
this present discourse isframed) in durance, whose ridiculous absurdities I
shall presently acquaint you with: Only this I feign would know, were there no
Ecclesiastical government, what rubricke should stand? or how, or after what
manner would they have God served? One sect believes we have a Savior, but
counts it superstition to have his name reverenc't, and bowed unto: Some
approove of no Sacraments at all, others allow of Sacraments, but hold, that to
kneel before the Table or Altar when the Blessed Supper of the Lord is to be
received, is merely Idolatrous: Notwithstanding the Church with godly and
mature consideration has enjoined it. Some cavell at the manner of the
standing of the Table. Others would sit at the Lords board with their backs
toward the Wall, as they eat in their houses, or drink in the Tavernes. (yea,
and no doubt, with their heads covered too) One fect challenges the liberty of
all sensuality and pleasure: Others will allow no commendable exercises or
lawful recreations. But if you observe them generally, and withal consider
them judicially, it will easily appear, that as they altogether impugn the
Churches authority, so cunningly and cautelously, they would trench upon the
high Supremacy.

Moreover, some are not more piously devoted to repair Churches and Temples,
than others are divelishly minded to see them ruind and demolisht. Some will
hear a Sermon, but they cannot endure to be present at Common Prayer: Others
could be content to hear divine Service, but abhor it if it be said in a
Popish Surplesse: Nay, there are diverse who make a conscience to hear sermons,
yet they will hear but such and such a man as pleases their own fancies and
affections. But if any of these Predicants shall affect novelty, or
singularity, to introduce any innovating points of Doctrine, deviating from the
true and Orthodoxe way of the mother Church, he shall be sure to be most
highly applauded, and the place wherein he lectureth or preaches to be much
thronged. And if he shall stand out against Conformity in Religion, and for that
cause be questioned, and therefore silenc't; then there are private
collections, gifts, presents, and contributions, and all these to maintain him
in his perverse obstinacies. Again, one loves the Bible, but it must be bound
without the Apocrypha; for that they hold as an abomination: Insomuch, that
many from Schism grow unto Atheism, and in devising new and unheard of ways
how to worship God, grow into that stupidity, to acknowledge no God at all, and
from hearts of flesh, they are grown to have hearts of Iron and Adamant.

As for those that hate Churches, and love to have their conventieles in
private houses, or in VVoods and Groves; to whom may I better compare them than
to the Idolatrous Jews? who leaving the glorious Temple of King Solomon,
sacrificed to Baal-peo^, to Moloch, and diverse others of the Idols of the
Gentiles, in Groves and the high places. But amongst all these diversities of
opinions, if every man (having no super-eminent power over him, to curb his
presumed and refractory liberty) should follow his own private humor, what
manner of Church or Commonwealth should we have amongst us? Would not all
grow into confusion and disorder, and return into that stupidity of ignorance
which swayed in the World before the true Religion was first propagated, and
after received at the last it must necessarily come to mutiny, if not massacre:
for as there is no greater malice, or more invented hatred prosecuted, then
when familiar friends fall at odds, or natural brothers grow into dissension:
so there can no greater hatred, or inveterate malice arise, then when Christian
brethren of a reformed Church, having distanced themselves from all Papal
superstitions, shall inconsiderately and indiscreetly, I may rather say,
foolishly and madly fall into these sottish and ridiculous Chimeraes, to betray
weakness in themselves, and beget distraction in others: being indeed nothing
else than mere illusions of the Devil; the former Ages having been troubled
with the like, as no question, the future shall be. But I come now to the
persons themselves, the one Richard Farnham a Weaver in White-Chappell, the
other John Bull, a Weaver, late dwelling in the Parish of St. Butolphs Algate.

The Examination of Richard Farnham Weaver, taken April the 16. 1636.
THe said examinate says, and constantly affirms, that he has the very
spirit of God, which reveals unto him all secrets whatsoever: and that he is
moreover Anointed, and can predict and foretell whatsoever is to come. He
says also, that there shall be a great pestilence and a Famine, and that he
shall see them, and be delivered from them, as having no power to hurt him. He
likewise affirms, that he must first be slain, and after that rise again,
and after that be made King of that very Jerusalem in which King David and King
Solomon once reigned. He says also that he himself is one of those two
witnesses spoken of in the Revelation, the 11 Chapter, beginning at the third
Verse, and that his brother Bull is another also; and shall be a Priest at the
same time when he is made a King. Now the words of the Text on which they
ground these idle fancies are these: But I will give power unto my two
witnesses, and they shall prophecy one thousand, two hundred, and threescore
days clothed in sackecloth.

These are the two Olive Trees, and two Candlesticks, standing before the God
of the earth.

And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouths, and
devoureth their enemies: for if any man would hurt them, thus must he be killed.

These have power to shut Heaven, that it rain not in the days of their
Prophesying, and have power over waters to turn them into blood, and to Smile
the earth with all manner of plagues as often as they will.

And when they have finished their Testimony, the beast that comes out of the
bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and
kill them.

And their corpses shall lie in the streets of the great City, etc.

The Examination of John Bull Weaver, taken at the same time.
HE besotted with the like Lunacy, constantly affirms also that he is a
Prophet: and one of these two witnesses before spoken of, in all things
agreeing with his brother Farnham, and that he shall also be slain at
Jerusalem where Christ suffered, and shall rise again; and after that his
resurrection, he shall reign there as a Priest. And these two persist in their
obstinacies, and are at this time prisoners, the one in Newgate, the other in
Bridewell: now the blind and besotted ignorance of these poor and senseless
Mechanics I leave to the consideration of any indifferent Reader. But you have
not yet heard all: for such is the presumption of Farnham, and the inflexible
confidence in his own innocence, that to any reverent Divine, or other
well-minded Scholar, who come modestly to dissuade him from these refractory
absurdities, he will say, that his desire is, nay, rather his earnest request
is; that as the Prophet Daniel was cast into a Den of Lions, so he may be also;
to prove himself to be a true Prophet, and a chosen vessel of the Lord: for
as their mouths were shut up against Daniel, so likewise it shall happen to
him: for they shall neither have strength nor power to hurt or damage him.

They further hold themselves to have such power over the Elements, that at
their prayer they can command the clouds to shower down rain upon the earth,
and at their prayer too they can restrain those timely and seasonable drops
which refresh it.

Here too it is further to be observed, that they are simple Tradesmen, who
never looked upon any University, or scarcely have been acquainted with a
Grammar School: who only can read English, though yet know not how to speak
it truly. Yet these poor fellows confidently believe, that the Spirit of God
shall so abundantly fall upon them, that like the Apostles they shall be able
to speak all Tongues and Languages: But especially, when they shall come to
Jerusalem, they shall be inspired with the Holy Tongue, the very same in which
the Patriarchs and Prophets spoke, and prophesied.

Moreover, in all their conference with such as sometimes for novelties sake
come to visit them, they constantly affirm, and confidently believe, that no
mortal man of what estate or condition foever, can have the least power to
harm them: Or if it please the Almighty to suffer them to discipline or
chastise their bodies, yet over their lives they shall have no power at all,
either to hazard them, or take them away. But whosoever shall intend, or
attempt any such violence against them, their hate toward them shall be turned
upon themselves, so that they shall prove their own executioners, such as was
Judas, who betrayed the life of his Lord and Master. But let the Reader here
take notice (in this) how ignorantly and sottishly they contradict themselves,
affirming in this place, that no man shall have the least power to insidiate
their lives, or bring them to any untimely and remarkable death: When before in
Farnhams examination by diverse learned Commissioners, appointed to that
purpose, He (with the other contested, that he must be first slain, and after
rise again, and be crowned King of Jerusalem: And Bull in his examination
attested, That he should be also first slain at Jerusalem where Christ
suffered, and after live again, and like Aaron and his son Eleazar, reign
an High Priest there; which something seems to smell of the Sect of the
Thraskites and Sabbat arians.

I might leave these, and come to a third, namely a woman, now prisoner in
Bridewell, the weakness of whose Sex can be no excuse or privilege for her
horrible blasphemies, which indeed, almost want president, and yet we may see
how far the Devil can work with his own servants. I might set down with
her name Margret Tennis, her examination; the which, for modesties sake I will
forbear to speak of; it being such incredible, and scarce heard-of
Blasphemy, able not only to make the ears to tingle, but the heart to
tremble: which as it horrors me to write, so, I make no question, but
whosoever shall peruse it, it will trouble him to read, and therefore I
forbear to publish it, in regard that it is almost unbeleeveable, that any such
Monster should have being upon the face of the earth; at least, he may well,
and that justly too, suspect that the words which she spoke, came from the
mouth of a Jew, but no Christian. But at this present she is either mad, or
counterfeits madness, wishing with my heart, that she may both return to her
wits, and to true repentance: And as of her, so also I speak of the other,
whom I could wish to have an inspection into their own follies, and having
gone so far astray, to retire themselves into the true sheepfold. Solomon the
wisest of Kings says: He that keeps his mouth and his tongue, he keeps
his soul from affliction, and else where. It is a man's honor to cease from
strife, but every fool will be meddling. There be some that speak words
like the pricking of a sword, but the tongue of a wiseman is health: The
beginning of strife is as one that opens the waters, therefore ere the
contention be meddled with, leave off. He loves transgression that loves
strife: and he that exalts his gate seeks destruction. The froward heart
finds no good, and he that has a naughty tongue falls into evil.

There is no question to be made, but that he who is the Father of Lies, is
also the founder of controversies, who is the Devil: neither is his inveterate
malice against mankind discovered in public hostility only, (as when Arms
are taken up for the differences of Religion, as it has often happened) but in
vain and unnecessary questions: whence truth in the disputing of them may be
darkened: In him is the spirit of contradiction; or rather he may be c^^d the
spirit it self; nor breaths he only almost upon all Academies, Schools,
Rectories and Families, but even upon our mother Church it self, by broaching
Errors, and Heresies, and daily devising new fangle and trifling Innovations,
as having ever been the incendiary to selfe-opinion, and all refractory
disobedience; and these arise for the most part from ignorant, peevish, and
self opiniond Separatists; whose false Tenants the more they are urged upon
them, the more many times to the small understanding of the simple, the truth is
entangled. The apparent Syllogism (says one) ought to be contained in few
words; but if it be too far prosecuted, and unnecessarily continued, the
Syllogism grows into a Paralogisme, which is no better than a perverse
wrangling. And therefore when one proposed to a grave Philosopher a needless
and impertinent Aenigma, of which he desired a short and speedy answer: He thus
replied; (speaking to those that were there present) This fellow desires to
milk a Goat, and would have me to hold a Collender full of holes to receive
it. Now Vtrum stultior (says Erasmus) qui ^ulget Hireum quam qui ^ribram
Supponit. To conclude, I would wish all these stupid novellists, for their
better understanding, since they are so obstinate to forsake Christ's flock, yet
at last to look into that which Pythagoras taught, over whose door it was
thus written: He that knows not what he ought to know, is a beast amongst
men: He that knows no more than he must needs know, is a man amongst
Beasts: But he that knows all things which are fit to be known, is a God
amongst men.

After diverse visitations, by sundry Divines and men of quality; this Richard
Farnham understood by some of them, that it was reported of him that he was
Christ: for the better clearing of that Aspersion laid on him, and some others
in that kind: he has given out these lines, which you may read, that he writ
very late himself in Prison.
THere be many false reports that go of me in the City of London, and I
believe they are spread abroad in the Country. First, some report of me, that
I say I am Christ. Secondly, some say that I am Elias. Thirdly, some report of
me, that I should say, that it should not rain of 3 years, and some say a
longer time, and some say a shorter. Fourthly, some report of me, that I should
say when it raines again, it should rain blood, and some say fire and
brimstone, which are false, the Lord of Heaven and Earth knows that I have
not uttered any of those words: But these things you may report to be truths
from my own handwriting: I say, I am one of those two witnesses that are spoken
of in the 11 of the Revelation, and that the Lord has given me power for the
opening and the shutting of the Heavens: The Lord has moved me by prayer
since I came into this Prison, to be earnest with him for the shutting of the
Heavens; and I am certain, that the Heavens are shut, and that the earth shall
not receive any benefit to speak of, by the Rain that shall fall until the
Lord does moove me to pray for Rain, and I do steadfastly believe that in
the day the Lord does move me to pray for Rain, it shall Rain: but I say
this, if the Lord does continue me praying but 6 weeks longer, as now he
does, I believe there is a great deal of seed sown in this land of England
which will never be reaped nor mowed: I do not mean the whole kingdom, but of
this part of the land where my dwelling is: And this I know, that there are
judgments a coming, Pestilence, Famine, and sword, and I know I shall live and
see them fulfilled, and be preserved. Therefore it behooves every one that has
not made his peace with God, both high and low to repent, and make his peace
with God in a true and unfeigned repentance, that it may go well with the
soul, howsoever it goes with the body: As Solomon says, Riches profit not in
the day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from death.

FINIS.

