PLEASANT DIALOGVES AND DRAMMA'S, SELECTED OVT OF LUCIAN, ERASMUS, TEXTOR,
OVID, etc. With sundry Emblems extracted from the most elegant Iacobus Catsius.
As also certain Elegies, Epitaphs, and Epithalamions or Nuptial Songs;
Anagrams and Acrosticks; With diverse Speeches (upon several occasions) spoken
to their most Excellent Majesty's, King CHARLES, and Queen MARY. With other
Fancies translated from BEZA, BUCANAN, and sundry Italian Poets.

By THO. HEYWOOD.

Aut prodesse solent, aut delectare --

LONDON, Printed by R. O. for R. H. and are to be sold by Thomas Slater at the
Swan in Duck-lane 1637.

To the Right Honorable Sir HENRY Lord CARRY, Baron of Hunsdon, Viscount
Rochford, Earl of DOVER, etc.
Right Honorable,
ELaborate Poems have ever aimed at learned Patrons, who valued Books as your
best Lapidaries praise Jewels, not by their greatness, but their goodness.
This is a small Cabinet of many and choice, of which none better than your
Noble self can judge, some of them borrowing their luster from your own
virtues, vouchsafe therefore (great Lord) their perusal, being devoted to our
sole patronage, whilst the presenter wishing unto you and all yours, a long
fruition of terre^riall graces here, with the fullness of celestial ^yes
hereafter, humbly takes his leave, with that of Catullus to M. Cicero:

Tanto pessimus omnium poeta,
Quanto tu optimus omnium patronus.
Your Lordships in all dutiful observance, THO. HEYWOOD.

To the Generous Reader.
REader, of what capacity or condition soever, I present unto thy favorable
perusal a Miscellane of sundry strains in Poetry; which me thinks should not
come altogether unwelcome to such as affect variety: here thou shall find
choice and selected Dialogues borrowed from sundry Authors, both for the method
and matter, pleasant and profitable. Which though I met with in Prose only,
yet upon better acquaintance, I have taught to go upon even feet and number.

For such as delight in Stage-poetry, here are also diverse Dramma's, never
before published: Which though some may condemn for their shortness, others
again will commend for their sweetness.

From famous Iacobus Catsius, I have extracted Emblems of risk conceit, and
excellent expression in the original; Therefore I hope not to be rejected in
our native Tongue, howsoever by me but rudely and coursely interpreted.

Here are moreover diverse speeches, at sundry times, and upon several
occasions spoken, either to one or both of their sacred Majesty's. And other of
the same condition, before other Noble Personages.

Besides Epithalamions (or Nuptial Songs) with Funeral Elegies, Epitaphs,
Anagrams, etc. Nor doubt I, but in the service of such change of dishes, there
may be found amongst them, though not all to please every man, yet not any of
them but may taste some one or others palate. For the better illustration of
which. I have prefixed before every particular piece its proper Argument, with
Annotations and observations of all such things as may appear difficult or
foreign to the ignorant Reader. Which I entreat thee to accept as well in
plain iake, as were they curiously insculpt in Copper. Complement I cannot to
only that I take my ^eave; Reader farewell. Read perfectly, examine strictly,
but censure charitably.

Thine, THO. HEYWOOD.

To his worthy friend the Author, Master Thomas Heywood.
HEywood, when men weigh truly what thou art,
How the whole frame of learning claims a part
In thy deep apprehension; and then see;
To knowledge added so much industry;
Who will deny thee the best Palm and Bays?
And that to name thee, to himself is praise.
As first, which I must ever first prefer,
Thy skill in Poetry, where thou so far
Have gone, as none beyond thee, and have writ,
That after-ages must despair of wit
Or matter to write more. Nor art thou less,
In whatsoere thy fancy will express.
Thy pen commands all history, all actions,
Counsels, Decrees, men, manners, States, and factions,
Plays, Epicediums, Odes, and Lyricks,
Translations, Epitaphs, and Panegyricks:
They all do speak thy worth. Nor do thou teach
Things mere profane; but thy great Muse does reach
Above the Orbs; unto the utmost sky,
And makes transition unto Deity.
When thou with such high strains detainst our ears,
As might become the Angels, or the Spheres.
What Reader then in justice can decline
From this assertion? Poets are divine,
Rapt with a heavenly fire, which is made known
By no example better than thine own.
SH. MARMION.

To the learned Author Master THOMAS HEYWOOD.
Who can deny but Poets take their birth
From some thing that is more excellent than earth
Since those harmonious strains that fill our ears,
Proclaim their near alliance with the Spheres,
And shows their Art all Arts as far exceed
As does the fiery-Cane, the weakest Reed.
That Matter which six lines of Prose rehearse,
May fitly be contained in one Verse;
Yea, and so pithily (if well compacted)
That out of it whole Books may be extracted.
A President whereof if thou would find,
I prithee gentle Reader bend thy mind
To what this little Volume does contain,
And sure the fruit will recompense thy pain.
The subject with the Authors names agree,
Who all have left unto Posterity
Such Noble badges of their learned fame,
That my weak Pen can no way show the same;
Therefore do thou, o Heywood, wear the Bays
As thy just merit many thousand ways.
For this thy Work, with others heretofore
Shall honor thee till time shall be no more.
D. E.

To my praiseworthy friend Master THOMAS HEYWOOD.
THy Worth unto the Knowing World is known,
Let Critics censure others by their own,
And tinct their foreheads with a purple shame,
When they shall see thy Works, or hear thy Name,
Whilst with thy own, thou setst forth others fame;
Whose lofty Anthems, in our English tone
Thou sing'st, and make them live, though dead and gone.
What barking or untutored Momus then
Will dare to belch against thy learned Pen?
Whose worthier Lines, unto their foul disgrace,
Shall spit defiance in a brazen face;
And when thou art dead, thy Poe^sie shall sing
Such pleasant strains, whereof the World shall ring;
And Envies self, in spite of all Assayes,
Shall crown thy Tombe-stone with eternal Bays.
S. N.

The Table.
THe Dialogue of Erasmus, called Naufragium, Page 1

The Dialogue of Erasmus, called Procus and Puella, Page 16

The Dialogue of Ravisius Textor, called Earth and Age, p. 38

A Dialogue from Lucianus Samosatensis, called Misanthropos, or the Man-hater,
p. 54

A Dialogue of the same Author, betwixt Jupiter and Ganimede, p. 96

A third betwixt Jupiter and Juno, p. 101

A fourth betwixt Jupiter and Cupid, p. 105

A fifth betwixt Vulcan and Appolo, p. 108

A sixth betwixt Apollo and Mercury, p. 111

A seventh betwixt Maia and Mercury. p. 114

An eighth betwixt Jupiter and Vulcan, p. 116

A ninth betwixt Mercury and Neptune, p. 120

A tenth betwixt Mausolus and Diogenes, p. 123

An eleventh betwixt Diogenes and Crates. p. 126

A twelfth betwixt Charon, Menippus, and Mercury, p. 130

A thirteenth betwixt Menippus, Aeacus, Pythagoras, Empedocles, and Socrates,
p. 133

A fourteenth betwixt Nireus, Thersites, and Menippus, p. 138

A Dialogue called Deorum Iudicium, betwixt Jupiter, Mercury, Juno, Pallas,
Venus, and Paris, p. 140

A Drama from Ovid, called Jupiter and Io, p. 155

A second from Ovid called Apollo and Daphne, p. 177

A Pastoral Drama called Amphrisa, or the Forsaken Shepherdess. p 192

Forty six Emblems interpreted from the most excellent Emblematist, Iacobus
Catsius. The Argument, A discourse betwixt Anna and Phillis, p 203

Diverse Speeches spoken before their two sacred Majesty's, and before sundry
other Noble persons upon several occasions, p. 231 etc.

A Mask presented at Hunsdon House, p 245

Prologues and Epilogues upon other occasions, p 247

Funer all Elegies and Epitaphs, p. 250

Epithalamions, or Nuptial Songs, p. 260

Acrosticks, p. 202

Epigrams from Beza, Bucanan, and other Italian and Latin Authers, p. 267

Cum multis aliis, etc.

Tabulae Finis.
The Argument of Erasmus his Dialogue called NAIAGAION, or Naufragium.
HEre you may read an accurate Narration
Of dangers incident to Navigation:
With diverse foolish superstitions used
^y Mariners, (some not to be excused)
Here is described a Tempest to the height,
With casting out of Goods, to case their freight;
And several humors (to the life expressed)
Of men in danger, and by sea distressed:
^ome, to the blessed Virgin call for aid:
^y others, Vows to several Saints are made.
But this our Author will approve of none
To be invok't, but the Great God alone.
The Interlocutors or Speakers, Antonius and Adolphos. The DIALOGUE.
Anthon. THou tel'st me wondrous things; Is that to sail,
Where humane help so little can prevail?
Forbid it Heaven, to come into my thought,
That ever Wit so dearly should be bought.

Adol. What has as yet been spoke are trifles mere,
If to what I shall speak thou lend an ear.

Anth. So much from thee I have already had,
That I still tremble, and it makes me sad,
As I had then been present.

Adol. Dangers past
Are unto me of much more pleasing taste:
That night there happened what much took away
All comfort from the Pilot.

Anth. What, I pray?

Adol. Dark was the night; when by the topmast stand
(Got thither by the help of feet and hands)
One of the ship-men, and as from a It is commonly called the Bowland.
loover
He looked from thence, if so he might discover
Some part of land: when on the instant, near
Unto his side was seen a fiery Sphere;
To Seamen a sad Omen, if it shine
Single: but twins, they better luck divine:
And in the times of old they called such too
Castor and Pollux.

Anth. What had they to do
With Mariners? since those we understand
Were Champions both, and used to fight on land.

Adol. The Poets so would have it. He at the stern
Casting his eye up did the light discern:
Who calling said, My Mate (It is a word
That Sailers interchangeably afford
To one another) speak, do thou not see
The fire above that clings so close to thee?
Who answered thus: I do, and I pray God
That unto us it no misfortune boad.
The flaming Globe straight by the tackles slid,
And came close to the Pilot.

Anth. I! But did
Not he sink down with fear?

Adol. The fright he' endured,
They being to such prodigies inured.
There having staid a while, by the ship sides
It rowles it self, but there not long abides,
But leaping from the hatches, vanished so.
Toward midday the tempest 'gan to grow
More and more raging. Did thou ever see
The Alps?

Anth. I have.

Adol. Those hills appear to be
But warts to such sea billows, (if compared:)
Be judge then, how with us it that time fared;
How often were we lifted up so high,
Till to the very Moon we came so nigh,
To touch it with our fingers. Then again
So low cast, that the Channel rent in twain,
To let us down to Hell.

Anth. Mad men, no doubt,
Who leave the land, to seek such dangers out.

Adol. The Sailers striving with the Storm some space,
(But all in vain) the Pilot with a face
Like ashes, came to us.

Anth. And now I fear,
By his wan color, some strange mischief near.

Adol. I am no more your Pilot now (says he)
My friends, the Winds command both ship and me:
Prepare for all extremes, there is now no hope
Save in our God, no trust in Sail or Rope.

Anth. ('It Was an hard speech.)

Adol. First therefore let us ease
Our ship (says he) by casting in the seas
Her weighty lading; for so now commands
Necessity: It with more safety stands,
By loss of goods, death present to prevent,
Than with them perish here incontinent.
The truth persuades them; Instantly they hoise
unto the Maine, rich Wares, and Vessels choice,
And those in plenty.

Anth. This a Wrack indeed
May well be called.

Adol. Silence till I proceed.
Amongst the rest, a rich Italian there,
Imployd in Embassy, who was to bear
Some Presents into Scotland, and this Lord
Had coffers, caskets, and stuffed trunks abord,
With plate, rings, Jewels, change of garments.

Anth. Say,
Was that man willing to cast all away?

Adol. No: but being asked that question, made reply,
He with his wealth would live, or with it die;
And therefore stormed.

Anth. What said the Pilot then?

Adol. Better it were, of these despairing men,
That he alone should perish, than (to save
His proper wealth) all suffer in the wave:
And therefore told him plainly, But if he
Unto the general safety would agree,
(Need so compeld) that without further plea,
Him and his wealth they would toss into the sea.

Anth. A very Sailers speech.

Adol. So, forced at last,
With his own hands his goods away he cast,
With many bitter curses; much enraged
With gods and devils, that he had engaged
Himself to such a barbarous element.

Anth. A mere Italians prayer.

Adol. Observe the event:
(These our free-offrings notwithstanding) neither
The winds nor waves were sated, but together
Conspired: Our tackles were asunder blown,
And our torn sails into the Ocean thrown,

Anth. Distress indeed.

Adol. The Pilot comes again.

Anth. To preach as at the first?

Adol. In a sad strain
He thus salutes us: Friends, as the case stands,
I wish you would commend you to heavens hands,
And so prepare for death. Some who had been
At sea before, and in that Art well seen,
Asked him, How long he thought he could maintain
His ship to live? who briefly said again,
Not full three hours, (as being then at worst)

Anth. Why this was harder doctrine than the first.

Adol. Which having said, the Sailers he straight bid
To cut the cords asunder: which they did.
And next, To saw the Mainmast by the root:
Who instantly apply themselves vntoo't;
Which, with the sail and saile-yard, they soon threw
Into the sea.

Anth. Why so?

Adol. Because they knew,
Bee'ng torn, a burden they might rather call
Their sails, than help, (now of no use at all)
For all their hope was in the helm,

Anth. Mean space,
What did the passengers?

Adol. A wretched face
Of things you now might see: Some then in place
Began to sing, Hail Mary full of Grace;
And the blessed Virgin Mother to implore:
She, who plain Mary had been called before,
They now style, The Seas Star, The Queen of heaven,
The Lady of the world: Titles not given
To her in sacred Scriptures.

Anth. I indeed
Never that she at sea was yet could reed.

Adol. But Venus (I have heard) once took no scorn
To have the charge of Sailers, (as sea-borne.)
But thinking she had quite given up her care;
All their Devotions now directed are
In stead of her, a mother, and no maid,
Her that was Maid and Mother, to persuade.

Anth. Come now you jest.

Adol. Some of them prostrat lie
Upon the hatches, and for succor cry
Unto the Storm, and (as had they been mad)
poured out into the Maine what oil they had;
Flattring the raging billows of the seas,
As if some angry power they would appease.

Anth. What did they say?

Adol. O Sea most merciful,
O generous Sea, o Sea most beautiful,
O you the most rich Channels of the Deep
Save us, have mercy, us preserve and keep.

Anth. Ridiculous superstition. What the rest?

Adol. Their stomachs some disgorg'd; one in his breast
Was meditating Vows. An English man
(I well remember) said, O if I can
But get to land safe, Pilgrimage I Will frame
Unto the blessed Maid of Walsinghame;
And promised golden mountains. Others vowed
To such a Cross: but that some disallowed.
And named another in a remoat place
Thence many countries distant. In like case
They with the Virgin Mary dealt, who reigns
In sundry Regions: and since need constraines,
They pray to her, but think they are not heard,
Unless they name some Temple to her reared.

Anth. Vain were such Orisons, since the Saints dwell
In heaven above.

Adol. Some said, If they came well
And safe to shore, Carthusians they would be.
One promised, If the sea he once could free,
Bare foot and bare head, naked save his shirt,
And that of male close to his body girt,
Nay, begging all the way, vowed, steps he would tell
To where Saint James yet lives in Compostell.

Anth. Did none think of Saint Christopher?

Adol. I heard
Not without laughter) one to him indear'd:
He in the chief Church of Or Pari
Lutetia stands,
More like a mountain than a man) his hands
Lift up: who with a voice strep'rous and loud
That all they in the ship might hear him) vowed
To set before that Saint a waxen Light
Big as himself. To whom one that fore-right
Before him sat, (well known to him) replied,
After he first had jogged him on the side)
Take heed friend what you promise; should you sell
Your whole estate, which is to me known well,
You cannot make it good. He then in fear,
Lest him perchance S. Christopher might heart)
Answered in a low voice, Peace fool be still,
Think thou my words are suting to my will;
^f once I find safe landing may be had,
I Will of a farthing candle make him glad.

Anth. O stupid brain! Some Hollander?

Adol. None such:
He was of Zeeland sure.

Anth. I wonder much,
None that time of the Apostle Paul did think;
For he was wrackt, and when the ship did sink,
Got to the shore) who knowing shipwreck best,
Would soon have helped them in that kind distressed.

Adol. Of him there was no mention.

Anth. Did they pray?

Adol. Yes; and at once some sung, and some did say
Hail Virgin: others, their Belief: some muttered
Certain peculiar prayers, as had they vtter'd
Soft Magic spells' against danger.

Anth. How distress
Makes men devout? when they think nothing less
Than of their God, if fortune seem to smile,
Or of his Saints. But what did thou the while?
Vowd'st thou to none of them?

Adol. No.

Anth. Why?

Adol. Because
Cov'nants with Saints made, are still with some clause
After the form of Contract: This I give,
If thou perform: If at this time I live,
Then such a thing I Will do; I Will at thy Shrine
Offer a Taper, if I escape the Brine;
Or if thou keepst me, unto Rome I Will go
On Pilgrimage.

Anth. But to none prayd'st thou?

Adol. No.

Anth. Show me the cause?

Adol. I thought, Heaven far extended:
To any one Saint should I have commended
My safety, say Saint Peter, who bee'ng near
Unto the door, most likely was to hear;
Before he could have left the gate, to find
where God was, or delivered him my mind,
I might have perished.

Anth. What then did thou do?

Adol. Took the next course, and did direct unto
The Father my Devotions, and began,
Father which art in heaven, etc. I perceived than,
None of the Saints could sooner hear, nor any
Abler to save or help, though they be many.

Anth. Did not thy conscience prick thee the mean time
Remembering with how many an heinous crime
Thou had offended him?

Adol. Shall I speak true?
Part of my confident boldness it withdrew;
But straight it thus in my conception run:
No Father is so angry with his Son,
But if he spy him in a brook or lake,
Ready to drown, he will by the hair him take,
And pluck him from the danger. Amongst the rest,
A woman who a child had at her breast
Then sucking, in that fear seemed troubled least.

Anth. And what did she?

Adol. Nor clamor loud, nor weep;
Nor promise what she never meant to keep:
Only embraced her infant, softly prayed
Unto her self, none hearing what she said.
Mean time the Bark inclining near the shore,
The Master fearing lest she would be tore
And split to pieces; her with cables bound
From helm to the fore-decke.

Anth. Comfort unsound.

Adol. Up then a sacrificing Priest arose,
Aged sixty years, through doublet and through hose
His torn shirt seen, (called Adam) who his shoes
That had no soles) cast off, and 'gins to unloose
His wretched habit; bidding all prepare
Themselves to swim, who of their lives had care.
And standing on the deck, begins to preach
Alowd to us, and out of Gerson teach
Five truths; what profit from Confession grows,
Wishing we would make ready to dispose
Our selves to life or death. Then present there
Was a Dominican Friar of look austere,
To whom some few confessed themselves.

Anth. But what
did thou mean space?

Adol. I well perceiving, that
All things were full of tumult, soon confessed
My self to God, against whom I had transgrest;
Blaming mine own injustice, and commended
My self to him, whom I had most offended.

Anth. Had thou then perished, whither had thou gone?

Adol. That I committed unto God alone,
As most unwilling mine own judge to be:
And yet a fair hope did still comfort me.
Whilst these things past, the Pilot came again,
With his cies full of tears, and says, In vain
We strive against heaven: each man himself prepare;
The shaken ship in which distressed we are
Cannot the fourth part of an hour well last,
At sundry leaks the water poures so fast.
Soon after he brings news he did descry
A Chapel afar off: bids us apply
Our prayers, the small space that the ship still floated,
Unto that Saint to whom it was devoted:
When suddenly most part are groueling thrown,
Devoutly praying to the Saint unknown.

Anth. Had they but named him, he would sure have heard

Adol. But that they knew not. Then the Pilot steard
His torn ship that way, ready now to sink,
(Such quantity of water forced to drink)
And split she had in pieces in that weather,
Had not the cables bound her fast together.

Anth. 'Twas an hard case.

Adol. It drawing now toward even,
Upon the sudden we so far were driven
Toward the coast, that us the inhabitants spy'de,
And seeing our extremes, called out and cry'de;
And with their hats upon their staves end, stand
Pointing to us the safest place to land:
Then with their arms stretched out, seem to deplore
Our wretched case, distressed so near the shore.

Anth. I long to know what happened.

Adol. Our Bark now
Had took in so much water, that I vow
There hardly any diffrence could be known,
Because the ship and sea appeared all one.

Anth. To the holy Anchor it was time to fly.

Adol. And yet small comfort, seeing death so nigh.
The Sailers hoise the boat, and let it down
^^to the Sea: then there is a tumult grown,
^ho should press soonest in. Some began to exclaim,
^rying, Why throng you thus? Be ruled for shame;
^he Boat's but small, and were you not thus rude,
^ncapable of such a multitude.
They bid them search, and what came nearest, get
^o save themselves. When now there was no let,
^ut every one, that which came next him snatches:
One lights upon a piece of the torn hatches:
^n empty barrel he: another takes
^ planke: that man a pole: and none but makes
^ome shift or other: so themselves commit
unto the sea.

Anth. You have not told me yet,
What of the woman and the child became,
^he only that was heard not to exclaim.

Adol. She got to shore first.

Anth. Tell me how that past?

Adol. Her to a crooked planke we ty'de so fast,
That hardly she could slide thence: in whose hand
We put a board (such as she might command)
^n stead of a small oar: then having prayed
^or her success, as she was thereon laid,
Exposed her to the waves, and with a spear,
Thrust her from off the ship, which now was near
Hid in the sea, her infant she bestowed
^n her left arm, and with her right hand rowed.

Anth. A stout Virago.

Adol. When naught else remained,
One snatcheth an old Image, blur'd and stained,
Part of it eat with rats, which once presented
The mother Virgin: and with that contented,
Begins to swim.

Anth. But came the boat to shore?

Adol. They were the first that perished, none before;
For thirty had therein together got.

Anth. By what ill chance was that?

Adol. 'Twas their hard lot;
For e're they from the ship themselves could free,
The weak boat split, and sunk immediately.

Anth. A sad disaster: But what then?

Adol. I cherisht
Others, and had my self like to have perished.

Anth. As how?

Adol. I stayed till nothing did appear
Helpful to swim.

Anth. Cork had been useful there.

Adol. I tell thee Friend, just at that instant space
I Would rather had a Cork tree to embrace,
Than a rich golden Candlestick. About
Looking, to spy what best I could find out,
I soon bethought me of the poor remain
Of the split Mast, at which I tugged in vain;
And therefore called an helper. We combine
Our double strength, and both to it incline,
Trusting our selves to sea; and in that fright
He by the left part holds: I take the right.
Thus by the billows tossed, the Predicant, whom
I named before, just at our backs did come,
And threw himself upon us: like an hulke
To us he seemed, being of a mighty bulk.
Wherewith much troubled, both aloud 'gan call,
Who is that third who means to drown us all?
He gently us bespake, and bad us be
Of comfort, there was room enough for three.

Anth. But wherefore did he leave the ship so late?

Adol. He purposed in the boat to try his fate
With the Dominican Friar; the rest to grace
Their Orders, willing to afford them place.
But though they both were in the ship confessed,
Belike forgetting some word amongst the rest,
They fell to it again, and somewhat s'ed
^aying ones hand upon the others head:
^eane time the boat sunk, by the waves controld:
For so much, after, to me Adam told.)

Anth. But what of the Dominican became?
^e, first invoking sundry Saints by name.
So Adam said) did strip himself to the skin;
And having left his clothes behind, leapt in.

Anth. What Saints did he invoke?
^e named (thick,
^s fast as he could speak) S. Dominick,
^aint Thomas, and Saint Vincent, and one Peter,
I know not which) but one she-Saint, with sweeter
and fairer words hee'ntreated; and her name,
^atherine Senensis, she, it seemed, the same
To whom he trusted most.

Anth. I, but Christ's aid
^mplor'd he not at all?

Adol. So the Priest said.

Anth. Me thinks he better might have fared that day,
Had he not cast his holy hood away.
For being naked like another man,
^ow could the Saint know the Dominican?
Touching thy self proceed.

Adol. Whilst we were tossed
Near to the bark, still fearing to be lost,
Part of the stern then floating, burst his thigh,
Who held the left part of the mast, whilst I
Made good the right: who soon his hold lets slip,
And so was drowned. Into whose place does skip
Adam the Priest, repeating a short prayer
That his soul (then departing) well might fare;
Exhorting me to be of courage bold,
^tretch out my legs, and with my hands keep hold:
Mean time we drunk much brine out of the Ocean,
It Was not a salt bath only, but salt potion.
(So Neptune then would have it) for which he
(Adam I mean) would show a remedy.

Anth. And what was that?

Adol. Still as he spy'de the wave
To come upon us, he himself to save,
Opposed it with the hind part of his head,
Keeping his mouth fast shut.

Anth. I never read
Of a more stout old fellow.

Adol. Floating long,
And moving somewhat onward, he bee'ng strong,
And wondrous tall, says to me, Be of cheer,
For by my foot I find the ground is near.
But I that time more timorous and afraid,
(Hoping no such good fortune) to him said,
Most certain we are farther from the shore,
Than to hope land. He now encouraged more,
Says to me, With my foot I touch the sand.
Perhaps, said I, some chest driven near the land,
Wrought thither by the sea. He affirms No,
And says, the ground he touches with his to.
We still were tossed, and he again feels shore:
Do what thou will (then said) for here no more
I Will trust my self, but toward land make have;
So farewell, for I Will leave thee to thy mast.
Then watching when the wave began to break,
With speed pursues it, and no more would speak:
But as the billow (shrinking back) he sees,
With either hand embracing both his knees,
He waits for it, drencht over head and ears,
(As Ducks or sea-Birds) and again appears
When the waue's past, and runs. Finding his fate
So well succeed, I thought to imitate
Him in his course: There stood upon the sands
Some people with long javelins in their hands,
Men strong and used to storms; these reached their sta^
To every faint hand that their succor craves.
^ho catching hold, some by that means they drew
^fe to the shore.

Anth. How many of that Crew?

Adol. Seven only, of which, two brought to the fire,
^ut feeling warmth, did instantly expire.

Anth. How many were in the ship?

Adol. Just fifty eight.

Anth. O cruel sea, to ruin such a freight.
I might with the tenths at most have been suffis'd,
^riests ask no more when they are best advised.
^ut of so great a number did so few
Escape the Wrack?

Adol. I speak it who best knew:
And there we found a remarkt approbation
Of a most generous and indulgent Nation;
Who with alacrity and much cheer gave
^arbor, meat, drink, with all things we could crave.

Anth. What country?

Adol. Holland.

Anth. None I take to be
More generous, fuller of humanity,
Though girt with barbarous countries. But I fear
Thou Wilt not to sea in haste.

Adol. Troth not this year,
No nor the next: I Will be no more such pray,
Unless (quite mad) Heaven take my wits away.

Anth. For such discourses I so little love them,
That I had rather hear them far, than prove them.

The Argument to Erasmus his Dialogue, entitled PROCVS and PVELLA.
ERASMUS in this Colloquie
Expresses what pure modesty
There ought to be 'twixt Man and Maid,
When there is a firm foundation laid
Of their affections. His intent
Was, how to leave a president,
All wanton Toys to intercept,
That chaste Vows might be made and kept.
As well the Prince as Peasant hence
May take advice of consequence.
It shows how true Love should be placed,
Forbidding Marriage made in have:
And that the Choice is not confined
Unto the Body, but the Mind.
His Project further does imply
The honor of the Nuptial Ty,
Which is not lawful to proceed
Before the Parents first agreed.
Of the sincere alternate life
Which ought to be 'twixt Man and Wife.
Next, how their Children should be bred,
As both by good Example led,
And Precept taught. What joy, what care
The Good and Bad to Parents are.
Wedlock with Single life compared,
I, and preferred in some regard.
That in the choice of any Bride
'T is Reason ought to be the Guide,
And not Affection. Here Is commixt
Sport, with Philosophy: betwixt,
Various discourse. The matter's ground
Worthy an Author so renowned.
The Speakers, PAMPHILVS and MARY. The DIALOGVE.
Pam. Hail to thee, o thou Cruel, who can vant
Of nothing else save iron and Adamant.

Mar. Hail to thee too (at length) o Pamphilus,
^ow, and as often as thou shall please: but thus
Therefore You should salute me, know I not,
^eemes to me my name you have forgot.
^^ria I am called.

(...). Had thou thy right,
^ou Martia had been named.

(...). I cannot fight,
Or know I what Mars means: Pray wherefore then
^^ke you me with that murderer of men?

(...). Because I hold thee more obdurat far,
^ thirsting blood, than is the god of War.
^kills for sport, (but such as he does hate)
^ thou thy Lovers, (Cruel and ingrate.)

(...). Good words I pray; to make me better skilled.
^v me the strage of those whom I have killed?
where is the blood?

(...). One Corse liuelesse and cold
^ou look upon when thou do me behold.

Mar. What do I hear? Did any ever know
A dead man (like thee) both to speak and go?
Should no more terrible Ghosts to me appear,
Trust me I never should be struck with fear.

Pa. Thou jest'st with me, and mean time strik'st me dead
And by degrees I Am hourly massacred,
Worse than if thou with steel should pierce my breast
For now with lingering death I am oppressed.

Mar. How many childing women with wet eyes
Were present to lament your obsequies?

Pam. And yet my palenesse argues (to my cost)
I am more bloudlesse than a walking Ghost.

Mar. And yet that palenesse has a violets hew:
You so look pale, as we in Summer view
The ripening Cherry, and your cheek is died
Like the Autumn Grape that is purpled on one side.

Pam. In sooth you do not well to jeere and flam
Me, knowing in what wretched case I am.

Mar. If thou beleev'st me not, there is a glass by,
Reach it, and that will speak as much as I.
No glass I wish, no Mirror can allow,
Save that in which I do behold me now.

Mar. What Mirror's that you speak of?

Pam. Your clear eyes.

Mar. You'ar the same Sophister, and still so wise
As you were ever: but I pray make it plain,
How you are liuelesse? and by me how slain?
Or is it the use of Shadows to take meat?

Pam. They do (like me) but taste not what they eat.

Mar. What is their food?

Pam. Leekes, Mallows, Pulse.

Mar. Indeed?
But sometimes you on Cock and Partridge feed.

Pam. But to my pallat are as much default
As should I feed on sallads without salt.

Mar. O miserable man! yet by this light
To me Y'appeare fat, fresh, and in good plight:
But can the Dead discourse?

Pam. Yes, they may speak,
But with a voice (like me) low, faint, and weak.

Mar. And yet (but lately) when revenge you vowed
Upon your Rival, you spoke shrill and loud.
But tell me further, as the Shadows talk,
Are they (like you) apparel'd? Can they walk?
Or do they sleep?

Pam. They do, such is their fate:
Nay more than that, sometimes subagitate
After their kind.

Mar. You trisle finely now:

Pam. But will you in your judgment yield and bow,
If it by Achillcan proofs be try'de,
That I am dead, and you the homicide?

Mar. Far be that Omen from us: But proceed
With that your Sophisme.

Pam. First then it is agreed,
Death's nothing but the absence of the Soul
From the frail body: (none can this control)
And that you will grant.

Mar. Well.

Pam. That which you agree,
You Will not recall hereafter.

Mar. 'T shall not be.

Pam. You Will not deny, That such as take a life
From any other, kill?

Mar. It Is without strife.

Pam. You Will likewise yield to that approved long since
By Authors, such as no man can convince,
Namely, That from the body the soul moves,
And is not where it lives, but where it loves.

Mar. Therein the advantage you of me have got;
Pray make it more plain, I understand it not.

Pam. In that I Am most unhappy, since I see
You are not alike sensible with me.

Mar. Then make me so.

Pam. You might with like pretense
Bid me to teach the Adamant to have sense.

Mar. I am a Maid, not stone.

Pam. And yet most sure,
Than the hardest Adamant you are more obdure,

Mar. Well, recollect your self.

Pam. (Though to be' admired)
All that with divine Raptures are inspired.
It Is said, nor hear, nor smell, nor see, nor feel,
Although you wound them with transpiercing steel.

Mar. So I have heard.

Pam. Know you the cause?

Mar. Not I:
Explain it you who read Philosophy.

Pam. Because the Soul's in heaven, when it does affect,
And absent from the flesh in that respect.

Mar. What then?

Pam. What then? thou Cruel? why this makes it plain,
Thou art the Murdresse: I the man new slain.

Mar. Where Is then thy soul?

Pam. Why where it loves?

Mar. But who
Has took it from thee? Wherefore sigh'sts thou so?
Speak freely, and unchecked?

Pam. One cruel, yet
She whom in death I never shall forget.

Mar. Y' are witty: But (my rare Philosopher)
Why likewise take you not a soul from her,
Repaying like with like?

Pam. Nor think it strange;
Nothing could prove more happy than such change,
And make me more essentially blessed,
Then mine in hers, if hers in mine would rest.

Mar. Shall I have leave (as thou but late with me)
That I may play the Sophister with thee?

Pam. The Sophistresse.

Mar. Can it with probability be sed,
That the same body is alive and dead?

Pam. But not at the same time.

Mar. The soul confine,
The body's dead, nor can thou call it thine.

Pam. I grant.

Mar. Nor quickens but when it is in place.

Pam. Well, be it so.

Mar. Speak then, how stands the case?
That being where it lives, in former state,
It keeps the body, whence it shifted late;
Or where it elsewhere lives, if it give breath,
How can it (whilst it lives) be taxt of death?

Pam. In Sophistry I see well skilled you are,
Yet can I easily euade this snare,
The Soul which does the living body sway,
^nproperly (me thinks) title you may
^ soul, when those that do the men control,
^re truly some small relics of the soul,
and nothing else. As when you take a Rose,
and smell to it, howeuer you dispose
^f the flower after: being gone again,
^he sent thereof will on your hand remain,

Mar. I see they only shall lost labor win,
^ho seek to catch an old Fox in a gin:
^t there is one thing more that I demand,
and I from you would gladly understand;
^^th not he act, that is staind with murders gilt?
^d suffer not all such whose bloods are spilt?

Pam. Most true.

Mar. How comes it then, when as the Wooer
This case may be said to be the doer,
^^ she that is wooed, the Patient (which is plain,
^^ stiffely to oppose it were but vain)
that is beloved, no such intent pursuing,
Should not be that? he cause of his own ruin.

Pam. Quite contrary: he (we see daily proved)
Suffer, who loves: she acts that is beloved.

Mar. The (a) Areopagitae (Grammar-skil'd)
In this cannot evince me.

Pam. You Are selfe-will'd:
Yet shall (b) the Amphictriones by Logic do it.

Mar. There Is one doubt, prithee answer me untoo't;
Whether is this your love free, or constrained?

Pam. Most willingly I love, though thus disdained.

Mar. Since not to love, men likewise have free will,
Who ever loves, does aim himself to kill:
And the indictment well against him laid,
'Twere great injustice to accuse the Maid.

Pam. She is not said the Lover to have slain,
Because beloved, but not to love again.
For all such persons may be said to slay,
Who can preserve, and will not when they may.

Mar. Say a young man unlawfully should dote
Upon a Vestall, from the world remote;
Or cast his eye upon another wife:
Must these lie prostrat, to preserve his life?

Pam. But where this young man his affection vows,
The act both Law and Piety allows,
And yet is slain. But if that murder he
A sin that does appear so slight to thee.
I can of Witchcraft challenge thoe.

Mar. O fie!
Witchcraft? Forbid it you blessed Powers on hye:
Would thou make me a Circes?

Pam. I divine,
Thou art worse far, because a Bear or Swine
I Would rather be, than as thou see me now,
Senseless and without life.

Mar. Pray tell me how,
Or by what kind of Witchcraft do I kill?

Pam. By fascination.

Mar. Is it then thy will
^ turn my noxious eyes from thee?

Pam. Not so,
^ut rather let them still dwell here.

Mar. Fie no.
^ in mine eyes there be effascination,
^ow comes it there is no such alteration
^n others I behold? Now I divine,
^he witchcraft's not in mine eyes, but in thine.

Pam. Is It not enough, thy vowed friend to transperse,
^ut thou will still insult upon his hearse?

Mar. O pleasant dead man, that can talk so free:
^ut I pray speak, When shall thy funeral be?

Pam. Sooner than thou do deem, (I am afraid)
Unless thou suddenly afford'st me aid.

Mar. Can I work such a wonder?

Pam. Thou may do
A greater act, and with small labor too,
^estore the Dead to life.

Mar. Had I the weed
Called (c) Panaces.

Pam. Of Simples there is no need:
Only repay my love, that is void of lust,
(Than which, what thing more easy, or more just)
^here's nothing else can thee of murder clear.

Mar. But at what bar shall I be called to appear?
Before the Areopagitae?

Pam. No,
But at the bar of Venus.

Mar. Those that know
That goddess, say she is placable.

Pam. So ye'haue heard;
^ut there is none to be more dread and feared.

Mar. Carries she lightning?

Pam. Not.

Mar. Or does she bear
A Trident?

Pam. Neither.

Mar. Does she use a spear?

Pam. Not any: but she is goddess of the seas.

Mar. I do not use to sail.

Pam. But more than these;
She has a Boy.

Mar. His age can none affright.

Pam. But he is perverse, reuengefull, and of might.

Mar. What can he do to me?

Pam. What can he? All
The gods forbid, that you should prostrat fall
Beneath his fury: loath would I presage
Ill unto her, to whom my self I'engage.

Mar. I am not superstitious, speak thy mind.

Pam. I shall: If thou hereafter prov'st unkind,
Or shall appear so peevish or so fond
To one whose love with thine may correspond:
Should such a suit to Venus be commenced
By her the Boy would be so much insenc'd,
To aim a shaft in (e) Stiptick poison dipped,
By which thy hard breast on the sudden ripped,
It shall besot thee on some sordid Swain,
Which shall thy love repay with cold disdain.

Mar. An horrid punishment thou talkst of, I
A thousand times had rather wish to die,
Than perditly to'affect one base and vile,
And he his heart toward me not reconcile.

Pam. Yet of a Virgin subject to like fate
There has been known a sad example late.

Mar. What place?

Pam. Aurelia.

Mar. Since how many years?

Pam. How many months you would say, Still appear
The lamentable ruin, and the fame
I loud and frequent.

Mar. Speak, what was her name?
Why do thou pause?

Pam. I know her even as well
^s I do thee.

Mar. Then why do thou not tell
What her name is?

Pam. It Is for the Omens sake.
Which does not please me: I wish she could take
^ome other name upon her. You may gather
What hers is, by your own.

Mar. Who was her father?

Pam. A man of quality, and one that lives
amongst the Lawyers, unto whom he gives
No common luster.

Mar. I am now ambitious
^o know what his name is.

Pam. He Is called Mauritius:

Mar. But his syrname?

Pam. Aglaius.

Mar. Lives her mother?

Pam. No, but of late changed this life for another.

Mar. But of what sickness died she?

Pam. Would thou know?
^f sorrow, that her child was shipwrackt so.
^er father too, of valor proved and try'de,
^id little want but of conceit had died.

Mar. How was her mother styled, pray tell me true?

Pam. I will: Sopbronia: one that none but knew.
^ut what mean all these questions? do you think
speak a thing that is forged?

Mar. It cannot sink
^to my head: you rather may suspect
^ur fex for that, since fables we affect.
^t say, what happened to her then?

Pam. The Maid
Was borne in honest place, as I then said,
Of happy dower, and amiable feature:
Why should I hold you long? She was a creature
Fit for a Princes bed; and sought by one
Then every way her equal: there was none
More meriting.

Mar. How called?

Pam. The Omen does offend: yet thus
Receive his name, he was called Pamphilus:
Who though he proved all possible ways to win her,
Yet save disdain, when he found nothing in her,
Grief wasted him away: when she soon after
Doated upon a Groom composed for laughter;
Whom you might rather call an Ape than Man.

Mar. What is it you say?

Pam. So poorly, that I can
Scarce give thereof expression.

Mar. She so fair,
To dote on one deformed?

Pam. Thin his hair,
Besides, disorderd and vnkembd, his crown
Picked, made steeple-wise, and ouergrowne
With scurfe and dandruffe; bald he was beside,
Extremely squint-eyd, and his nosthrils wide
And bending upward, with a mouth most spacious,
His teeth both gagged and furred, his tongue ungracious
Stammering at every word; a scabbed chin,
And easily seen, because his beard was thin;
Crookt-backt, gow-bellied, bending at the knee
His legs.

Mar. Thersites thou describ'st to me.

Pam. Nay more; They say he has but one ear lost.

Mar. Perhaps the the other was in war bereft.

Pam. Most sure 'twas lost in peace.

Mar. Such an affront
What Is he durst give him?

Pam. Now I think upon it,
was the hangman.

Mar Notwithstanding this,
^^rhaps what in his feature is amiss,
^s substance may make good.

Pam. But he is no better
^^an a mere Bankrupt, one that is a debtor
^^ his own soul, and he has pawnd it often.
and yet she that is so tender, smooth, and soft,
^oth with this Monster bosom, drink, and eat;
^ay, at his churlish hands is often times beat.

Mar. A wretched tale, if truly understood.

Pam. And yet so Venus.
Nemesis has thought it good.
^ost true it is, nor could the goddess long
^efer due vengeance for the young man's wrong.

Mar. Than such a monster of a man to brook,
rather wish here to be thunder-strooke.

Pam. Then let not Nemesis be justly moved,
^rovoke her not, love where thou art belo'vd.

Mar. Would that suffice, with all my soul I Would do it.

Pam. Speak not the word, unless thou stand vntoo't.
^ wish moreover, That your love may be
^asting, and only proper unto me.
A wife, no mistress, I have now in chase.

Mar. I do not doubt it: yet in such a case,
When as our vows continue with our fate,
Behooues us long time to deliberate.

Pam. I have long enough considered.

Mar. Lest you err,
Take heed, for Love's but a bad Counselor,
And as they say, he is blind.

Pam. Blind love I scorn;
But that love sees, which is of judgment borne.
Thou do not therefore seem to me so fair,
Because I love thee; but I therefore dare
To love thee, since thou art as thou appear'st.

Mar. And yet beware how you esteem me dearest:
When you pull on your shoo you best may tell
In what part it does chiefly pinch you.

Pam. Well,
Dice must be cast for that, I and the rather,
Because by many Auguries I gather.
Things better may succeed.

Mar. An Augur too?

Pam. I am.

Mar. But what can your sooth-saying do?
Saw you the night-Crow fly?

Pam. 'Thad been in vain;
She only flies to such as have no brain.

Mar. Or did you see two Turtles take their flight
Either upon the left hand or the right?

Pam. Tush these are toys: yet one thing I have seen,
And long time marked; The goodness that has been
Derived unto you, nor does it foretell
Any bad Omen, to be borne so well;
Nor foreign unto me were their conditions,
Or with how many wholesome admonitions
Thy education from the first has bin,
With fair examples free from sight of sin.
"And better it is (the Dowrre to adorn)
"To have one well instructed, than well borne.
There is another Augurie beside:
My Ancestors (I speak it not in pride)
Are not of meanest rank, and in times past
With thine made league, which to this day does last.
And that, not vulgar, from our cradles we
Have known each other; but to disagree
Were never known: there is a parity
In our two years; in the nobility,
Riches, and honor of our parents. More,
(Which in this match I should have placed before)
Your sweet indowments and behauior rare
Did in all points with my condition square:
But whether mine with yours have suited well
In correspondence, that I cannot tell.
These are the Birds which I observed to fly,
Predicting only by their Augurie.
And these presage a marriage to ensue,
Happy and blessed, nay always seeming new.
Unless from your most delicate warbling throat
Should now proceed some harsh unpleasing noar
To erosse my hopes.

Mar. Say, What song do you wish?

Pam. I will begin, now answer you to this,
It Is but two words, and they soon learnd; I am thine:
Now echo unto me, and sing, Thou mine.

Mar. It Is a short song, and has as short a theme,
And yet it bears a long (f) Epiphoneme.

Pam. What matters it how long, so it be sweet.

Mar. And yet I should be loath, as we now meet,
That I to any motion should consent,
Of which perhaps in time you may repent.

Pam. O cease to boad us ill.

Mar. I may grow strange,
When age or sickness shall my beauty change.

Pam Crazed or in health, thou shall to me be one,
Equal in both, so dear unto me none.
gaze not on this building, rare and near;
The guest within I love.

Mar. What guest Pentreat?

(...). Thy mind, whose splendour with thy years does grow.

Mar. He had need of more than (g) Lynceus eyes, that so
Can through so many roofes at once espy.

Pam. Thy mind by mine I see perspicuously.
To add to these, we in our children may,
^s we wax old, grow younger every day.

Mar. I, but Virginity mean time is lost.

Pam. Tell me, if you your self had laid great cost
Upon an Orchard, you would think it sin,
Should nothing else but bare flowers grow therein:
Had you not rather (all the flowers bee'ng cropped)
To see the trees full branches underpropped,
Laden with ripe fruit?

Mar. O, you argue fine.

Pam. Or answer me: To see a drooping Vine
Fallen, and there putrefying where it is laid?
Or see one by her own kind claspings staid;
And round about some fair grown Elm to run,
Whilst her full clusters ripen against the Sun?
Which is the goodlier sight?

Mar. Now answer me:
Which of the two sights had you rather see:
A milk white Rose still shining in its thorn:
Or cropped, and in some durty bosom worn,
To lose her fair leaves?

Pam. As I understand,
That Rose is happier, gatherd by the hand,
And withers, after it does both delight
The nose with the sweet smell, the eye with sight.
Rather than that which gives no more content,
Than to the Brier forfeit both leaves and sent.
It grew for use, first to be gathered, then
To wither after So the wine that men
At merry meetings jovially down pour,
Is happier far, than what (vndrunke) grows sour.
Nor is the Virgin flower maturely grown,
Blasted as soon as cropped. Some I have known,
Before their marriage languish and look sickly,
Who after congresse have recovered quickly,
As if they had but then begun to spring.

Mar. And yet Virginity (you know's a thing)
Gracious and plausible to all.

Pam. It Is true,
Than a young Virgin, nothing to the view
More grateful: but what object can there be
^orse, than an old and wrinkled maid to see?
^nlesse thy mother had let fall her flower,
^hy blossom had not flourisht at this hour.
and if our future marriage (as I hope)
Do not prove barren, we shall then have scope,
Though that Virginity be lost and gone,
To yield the world a many for that one.

Mar. And yet pure chastitie's a thing (they say)
To God most grateful.

Pam. And I therefore pray,
He Will send me a chaste Virgin to my wife,
With whom to lead a chaste vnquestion'd life:
And by that means shall grow the greater Tie,
Of minds, then bodies; so shall you and I
Get to the public weal, to Christ beget,
Then how far distant is this wedlock set
From true Virginity: it may so fall,
That we in time may prove as conjugall
As Joseph lived with Mary. Mean time we
Shall practice 'twixt our selves a chastity,
To whose sublimitie none can come near,
Upon the sudden.

Mar. What is this I hear?
Must chastity be violated, and
Then after learnd?

Pam. What else? (Pray understand)
As when by drinking of a lesser draught,
We, by degrees, abstemiousnesse are taught:
In this affair with us so stands the state.
Which of the two hold you more temperate;
He at a full and furnished table placed,
And of no tempting delicate will taste;
Than he, removed from all that might accite,
Or any way provoke his appetite?

Mar. I hold him of a temperance far more great,
Who, when beset with dainties, will not eat.

Pam. In case of Chastity which stand you for?
Him that has made himself an Eunuch; or
One that is able bodied, strong, and sound,
And yet in whom there is no intemperance found?

Mar. Upon the last I dare bestow the Bays;
On the first, madness, and no other praise.

Pam. All such as by the strictness of their Vow,
No matrimonial Contract will allow,
What do they else but gueld themselves?

Mar. You say it.

Pam. It is not virtue, not to copulate.

Mar. How is it not?

Pam. Observe me: If it were
A virtue in itself, not to cohere;
It must be then a vice to have congresse.
But that to be most lawful we may guess,
By mutual consocietie. Again,
Marriage is honorable.

Mar. Make it more plain,
Why you infer this?

Pam. Since so often it falls:
As, to the loving wife the husband calls
For due benevolence; it only being
For issues sake.

Mar. But say there is disagreeing,
When it proceeds from wantonness and lust;
Then, to deny him, is it not right and just?

Pam. Rather admonish and entreat him fair;
That you may do: howeuer, bound you are
To yield to him, being instant. In that strain
Scarce hear I husbands of their wives complain.

Mar. But liberty is sweet.

Pam. Yet further hear;
Virginitie's a weighty load to bear.
But I thy King, and thou my Queen shall be;
We Will rule and reign in our own family:
^an that appear to thee a servitude?

Mar. But I have often heard marriage, by the rude
and Vulgar, called an Halter that fast ties.

Pam. All those that sacred marriage so despise,
^re of an halter worthy. This decide:
^^ not thy Mind unto thy Body ty'de?

Mar. It seems to be so.

Pam. Even just as you see
Bird incage'd; whom ask to be set free,
^e will deny't: and wherefore? Can you tell?
because her bondage does content her well.

Mar. Our means are but indifferent.

Pam. Therefore more
^^fe. The best way then to increase our store,
your good houswifery at home, whilst I
broad will use my utmost industry.

Mar. But many children still bring many cares.

Pam. And many pleasures too: I have known heirs,
or all the troubles and incessant fears,
^he cost and charge that in their tender years
^hey have put their parents to; being grown men,
^aue paid them back with double use again.

Mar. A miserable thing it were, I vow,
^o have had children, then to lose them.

Pam. Now,
^e you not childelesse? But at no good rate,
^ doubtful things thus ill you ominate.
which wish you rather to your lot might fall,
^ borne to die, or not be borne at all?

Mar. Why of the two, borne (as I am) to die,

Pam. So much more wretched is that Orbitie
^^d deprivation, which yet never had,
^ ever shall have issue; (to make glad)
they more happy are, borne to the earth,
^an they, nor borne, nor ever to have birth.

Mar. But who are they that are not, nor shall be?
Nay hear me yet a little further: He
Who humane frailties shall refuse to bear,
(To which even all men while they sojourne here,
Are equally obnoxious; keep the State,
Or be they low degreed) must yield to Fate.
But as for thee, let come what can betide;
For thou shall bear but half, I will divide
The burden with thee: nay, the greater share
I Will cast on mine own shoulders, (in my care)
But so, that in each joyful accident
Doubled shall be thy pleasure in the event.
If ought disastrous; my society may
Take (of the grief) the greatest part away:
And for your self (did but the Fates so please)
I wish on me no greater joy might sease,
Nor would I further happiness desire,
Than in thy sweet embraces to expire.

M. That which by Natures common course does chance
You men digest with easiest countenance.
But I see with some parents how it fares,
In whom their childrens manners breed more cares,
Than can their deaths.

Pam. But please you be content,
It lies in us that danger to prevent.

Mar. As how?

Pam. I Will make it plain; because we see
Never bad Fruit proceed from a good Tree,
As touching the condition, Nor is 't read,
That ravenous Kytes of gentle Doves are bred.
Let us first study goodness; then provide,
That from the milk we may their youth so guide,
By holy precepts and good admonitions,
That we may rectify their bad conditions:
It Is of great consequence, what is infused
Into a Vessel when it first is used.
A^de to the rest, in our domesticke state,
^xamples, such as they may imitate.

Mar. It Is hard you speak.

Pam. No wonder, because fair;
^d that is some reason why so hard you are,
^t the more difficult it seems to be,
will ask from us the greater industry.

Mar. Me of a pliant metal you shall find;
^^ then you cast and shape me to your mind.

Pam. Pronounce three words in the interim.

Mar. 'Twere small pain;
^^ words once past, fly never back again.
^^ give you counsel, and consider of it,
which may no doubt redownd to both our profit.
^ic to you our parents to this match,
^^ey once agreed, we would make quick dispatch.

Pam. You would have me, the bush to beat about,
^en in three words you may resolve this doubt.

Mar. Whether I can, is yet to me unknown,
cause I am my parents, not mine own:
other did Contracts in times past proceed,
^esse by the Elders they were first agreed.
^ howsoever, I presume, 'twixt us
is match will prove the more auspitious,
^e casual too, to both, and much more sweet.
^y our parents free consents we meet.
^ move them in it, your office it is, you know,
^use in me it comely would not show:
^ginitie loves to be forced; maids still,
^t they give freely, grant against their will.
Before I move them, shall I thus indent;
I presume I have your free consent?
Thou have, my Pamphilus, then be of cheer.
You Are now to me religiously dear.
But your own voice I Would wish you still suspend,
e're begin, consider first the end.
Do not Affection unto Counsel call,
But summon Reason, which should govern all:
For what Affection swayes is apt to vary,
And is (indeed) no more than temporary:
But that which Reason dictates, be thou sure,
Is permanent, and ever shall endure.

Pam. How sweetly play you the Philosopher?
And I shall no way from your counsels err.

Mar. It shall not much repent you. But again,
There is one doubt that much distracts my brain.

Pam. Now let all scruples vanish.

Mar. Is It your will
I marry to a dead man?

Pam. I live still,
Revived by you.

Mar. The scruple is removed;
And now at length, farewell my best Beloved.

Pam. Be that your care.

Mar. I wish you a glad night.
Whence came that deep suspire?

Pam. From no affright.
A glad night did you say? Now as I live,
What you last wished, would you had will to give.

Mar. It is not fit that too much haste be made,
For yet you see your harvest's in the blade.

Pam. Shall I bear nothing from you?

Mar. This sweet-Ball,
Take it to cheer your heart.

Pam. A kiss withal.

Mar. By no means, since to bring thee, I desire,
A chastity unblemished and entire.

Pam. Can that detract from modesty?

Mar. Desist:
Or would you I by others should be kissed?

Pam. Reserve them then, as these you solely owe
To me and to my use.

Mar. I Will keep them so:
^et I could tell you of another cause
Wherefore I dare not kiss.

Pam. Speake't without pause.

Mar. You say, your whole soul, or the greater part
^ fled into my body; and your heart
^mpty'd of vital heat, (or little there
^emaining still) it therefore is my fear,
^est by a kiss, the little which is left,
^drawing, you be quite of life bereft.
^ut take this hand, symbol of that affection
which mutually confirms our free election.
^o once again farewell: be for my sake
^arefull (I entreat) in that you undertake.
^ean time I Will pray, what yet remains undone,
^ay in a fair and prosperous course be run.

The Argument of the Dialogue betwixt EARTH and AGE.
IN EARTH and AGE is to the life expressed,
How bad all Men are, when they are at best:
How frail, how fading, and in their greet'st glory
Unsettled, wretched, vain, and transitory.
It shows all Learning, Beauty, Youth, and Strength,
All Pomp, all Wealth to nothing comes at length:
No Statue, Structure. Trophee, so sublime,
Which is not quite lost and defaced by Time.
O who can then our common EAR^
I arent blame,
Since all things she produces that have name,
As they have birth from her still-teeming womb,
So the same place is likewise made their tomb.
No wonder then her grief so far exceeds,
Since she is forced to bury all she breeds.
The DIALOGUE.
Earth. What Is he so many tongues can m^ low,
As he had eyes who watch:
(a) Pharian Cow?
So many mouths to me who is he can give,
As Fame reports the (b) Sybels years did live?
^ad I as many words my thoughts to express,
^s (by the (c) Ascraean Poet) we may guess,
^he ancient gods lived days? Had I beside,
^s many brazen throats open and wide,
^s Xerxes shot darts, (after fight begun)
Whose number from the earth shadowed the Sun?
^o many rivulets of tears what is he
^^an to mine eyes infuse, as was by thee
^^rus (if we may trust antiquity)
^et into Ganges drops, thereby to breed
^ry waste unto that (d) Channel drowned his steed?
Who can my clamorous words supply with sorrow?
^o many deep suspires where shall I borrow;
^s Valiant Roman Spirits (scorning to yield)
^ell in one fatal day at (e) Canna's field?
O my great grief, which in the height appears,
Not to be calmed with words, nor washed with tears.
When (f) Phaeton fell from the Suns bright throne,
^ow did his mournful sisters him bemoane?
Who from their rough rindes where they be enclosed,
Weep precious Amber still. Phoebus, opposed
Against (g) Niobe, (her children having slain)
O how she still in marble does complain?
What sorrow, musical Orpheus, did thou feel,
When thy Euridice, stung in the heel,
and dying, borne unto the infernal shade,
Thou with thy harp through hell free passage made?
What more than madness did corrode thy breast,
Andromache? when (Hector laid to rest)
^hou saw thy (i) son, the hope of Troy and thee,
Dropped from a tower: what sorrow might this be?
^^'n such was thine, (k) Aegaeus, to behold
Thy sons black sails returning: which so cold
crook to thy heart, thou thinking Theseus slain,
^eapt from a rock, and gav'st the sea thy name.
The torment of a mighty passion thou
(l) Iocasta felt, to see thy two sons vow
Their mutual ruins by revengefull Arms?
Sad (m) Daedalus, what pitiful alarmes
Were in thy breast given, to behold from hye,
Thy son with his feint wings drop from the sky?
There to be food for fishes, and to add
A name unto that sea, it never had?
Or should I speak how much (n) Progne lamented
Her husbands spowse-breach? or how discontented
(o) Anthonoe was after Actaeon torn?
Or of (p) Antigone, sad and forlorn,
Leading blind Oedipus over rocks along?
Within the compass of my passionate song
Bring all the torments of the former age,
Gyves, Manacles, and Fetters, all that Rage
Or Fury can inflict; want, hunger, thirst,
Whip, post, or prison, labor, or what is worst,
The melancholy dungeon, gallows, rack,
The forke or stake, what on the homicides back
Law can impose, the Traitor or the Thief;
All these are toys, if rated at my grief.
By stings of Serpents, or their teeth, to die;
Rough winter gusts, where Boreas blows most hye:
A thousand wounds were nothing to endure,
Or mounted on a gybbet, there chained sure,
And live to gorge the Ravens, or to bleed
Beneath the Lions jaws; after to feed
Her whe^ps, were nothing.

Age. Of the gods high strain.
What, or whence are you, that so loud exclaim?

Earth. EARTH, Parent of all things.

Age. Why weep you?

Earth. Why?
Have I not just cause? (who so great as I?
Being a Mother) in this wretched state,
To see my Sons hourly snatched hence by Fate,

Age. You have just cause to do it.

Earth. I pray what less
^rceiue you in the untamed Lioness,
^hen she but one whelp misseth from her den?

Age. She mournes.

Earth. What of the ravenous Tygre then,
^ lose her young she tendered with such care?

Age. She grieves and raves.

Earth. How does the poor Hen fare,
^ocking amidst her brood, when in her sight
^he Chicken is snatched from her by the Kite?

Age. She sorrows.

Earth. What does the fleece-bearing Dam,
^hen before her face the Wolf deuours her Lamb?

Age. Laments.

Earth. Does not the Cow with bellowing tear
^he air, to find her Calfe spoyld by the Bear?

Age. Alas she lowes.

Earth. What does the Sow, to spy
^ut any of her Pigs stolen from her stie?

Age. She calls loud after.

Earth. O then what should I?
whatsoever I produce or cherish,
^^ocreate or bear, I see before me perish?
^t not wondrous, Forests should at length
^e putrefaction, rot, and lose their strength?
^e shadowie tree Time of her beauty 'reaves,
spoiling her both of her fruit and leaves.

Age. It Is wondrous I confess, but so 't must be.

Earth. What is it then, that I behold and see
^e brazen statues of the gods decay,
^e monuments of Princes turn to clay;
^ghty (q) Colossi, Temples decked with Veins,
^^ported with rich Columns (by the brains
the best Architects) made wide and large,
^th spacious arches, sacred, in the charge
Of many a golden Relic: these to fall,
And in a few short seasons perish all.

Age. So it has pleased the gods.

Earth. The gods are then
Too cruel and austere to us and men;
Since whatsoever the Earths fertile womb
Brings forth to air, and in the world to have room;
Whatever in her bosom she has taken
To feed and foster: what does now remain,
Or shall hereafter be? That all these must
Needs be involved in rottenness and dust.

Age. It Is fit.

Earth. O anguish never to abate,
Or have cessation!

Age. So the gods will have it.

Earth. Then, as I said before, they are too severe,
And mercilesly in this kind austere.
Is It not enough strong walls are beaten down,
And lofty turrets levelled with the ground;
Cities are sacked, to ruin made a pray,
The famous statues of the gods decay;
That rust the iron does consume and waste,
And pleasant Orchards of corruption taste;
But Man must perish too, and cannot shun
Times fearful havocke, but to ruin run?

Age. The Fates so will.

Earth. What pity can there be
Ascribed to any powerful deity?
But what art thou? What goddess? or how styled?

Age. AGE I am called.

Earth. Hence false Virage, vyld
Infernal Fury; for it is thou alone
Bringst all my Issue to confusion:
Swift feather-footed TIME and ravenous AGE
Devour all things in their remorselesse rage.

Age. What Is sublunarie, Fate will have to fall.

Earth. Say Tyranness, thou AGE, consuming all,
^here be those high Pyramides so famed,
^ which the barbarous (r) Memphis first was named,
^^ar'd by so many workmens sweat and toil?

Age. As all things else, even these have suffered spoil.

Earth. Where Is Pharos Isle? the Sepulcher renownd
^f King (s) Mausolus? where is the Image crowned
^f chaste (t) Diana? Strumpet tell me.

Age. Gone.

Earth. Where Is the (u) Tarpeian Mass, a structure none
^ore famous? where is the hundred gated Town
^alld Thebes? or strong immured Babylon?
Where Is populous Ninive? what is Romes sublime
^ast Theater by Caesar built? by TIME
^onfounded all; where is the Colosse of Rhods?

Age. Their ruins all were foreseen by the gods.

Earth. What Is Troy? old Sparta? or Corinthus hye?
What Is Solomon's Temple, Harlot?

Age. All these lie
^n dark oblivion buried; and in vain
You fret, chide, wrangle, and perplex your brain,
Dear Mother EARTH; weep rivers from thine eyes,
With clamors cleave thy jaws, make thy lungs rise
Consume thy marrow, break thy back, and tear
Thy intrals out; the Fates are so severe,
Thou can not break their order, their strict laws
^nviolate are, and will admit no clause:
^or them the mightiest Kings cannot oppose,
^he Soldiers shield has no defense against those;
The rich man's purse, the learning of the Wise,
No nor the Poets Verse (let that suffice.)

Earth. If then with such ferocitie they be
^o deeply incenst; and that the gods agree
^n such inclemencie: advise me how
^ shall demean me?

Age. You of force must bow
To their eternal doom, though you complain,
Grieve, sorrow, and lament, all is but vain.

Earth. I will not therefore.

Age. Your best is to advise
Man to leave the earth, and look up to the skies:
To put no confidence in Mundane Glory,
Which (like himself) is merely transitory.
Not to grow proud of Beauty, Wisdom, Wealth,
Nor of his Strength, since Age by silent stealth
Will rifle him of all. To him relate,
Of far famed men the most unhappy state.

Earth. Your consolable words have given relief
To my suspense, and now exiled all grief.

Age. That Is all.

Earth. I will obey. Man, answer me.

Man. Who Is that?

Earth. Thy Mother.

Man. Mine? It cannot be.

Earth. Thy mother Earth.

Man. Dear mother then All hail;
What seek you?

Earth. I lament.

Man. Can tears prevail?
Dear Parent cease to grieve: lies it in me
To give least ease to your calamity?

Earth. No, Son.

Man. Why mourn you?

Earth. Have not all things birth
From me thy wretched and sad mother Earth?

Man. I know it well.

Earth. Do thou not see how I
Give to the woods production as they lie?
Sap to the Trees, Increase unto the Grain;
Hug in my fertile bosom stones? Again,
Afford the Vine Grapes, and the tough Oak Mast;
Food to the Fish, and to the Birds repast:
It Is I that to the embroidered meadows yield
^y, to the Gardens Flowers, Grass to the Field:
^d last, as to the best of all my brood,
^th unto Man; and after bearing food.

Man. I do confess it, Mother.

Earth. I much lament,
^are Child, and from hence grows my discontent,
^at having such a fertile womb, so free,
^d ever-teeming; only that by me
^^ many shapes and bodies hourly grow,
^^^firme in substance, and so fair in show,
that nothing can her ravenous throat assuage,
^t all must die and be consumed by Age:
^e ruins Forests, the hard marble wears,
^ets iron, wastes Palaces, strong bulwarks tears,
^ciles Camps, does Citadels demolish quite;
^en the gods sacred statues takes from sight.
^e not high consecrated Temples spares,
^t that which tears and torments to my cares
^ll adds, That Man she ruthlesly deuoures,
and makes him perish at uncertain hours:
therefore beware, my sweetest Child, take heed,
^st tympanous pride within thy bosom breed,
^f this beware, my son.

Man. Mother I shall.

Earth. Then first, lest warlike glory thee assail,
and make thee to forget thou art but Dust;
^eare unto what the god-like Heroes trust,
Whom Age has worn out of all memory.

^ector. Lest any in his potencie rely,
^r in his military arms take pride,
^r powerful skill in (w) Geticke weapons tryde,
^et him consider me, puissant indeed,
^ector the strongest of all Priams Seed,
^otent in battle, and whilst I did stand,
^um was safe, secured by sea and land:
(In borrowed arms) 'twas I Patroclus slew;
Before me, Legions of the Grecians flew,
When I came armed in fury: Troy oppressed
With ten years siege, I guarded with this breast,
I whom alone Achilles quak't to see,
Have yielded unto Fate, and unto thee
Andromache (a widow) left my son.
Thus AGE ends all things an the earth begun.

Achilles. The Trojans terror, Great Achilles, I
In sinewie strength excelling, and thereby
Famous of old, the only hope and stay
Of the Greek Heroes, who alone made way
Through all the Dardan host. 'Twas I alone
Was dreaded in the field, and but me none.
Alone of far-fam'd Hector was I feared,
And Priam quak't when he my name but heard:
Able my nerves, and matchless might my grace,
In body mighty, terrible my face,
Big shoulderd and broad brested, stern my brow;
Yet to (x) Minerva's Altar as I bow,
Paris behind me steals, and with his dart
Wounds me in the heel, which rankles to my heart.
And thus the Valiant perish, and thus AGE
All things consumes in her devouring rage.

Alexander. What Is life but frailty, bubble, or a blast,
A cloud, a smoke, no sooner-seene than past?
Years, like a ball, are voluble, and run;
Hours, like false Vows, no sooner spoke than done:
Time quickly wastes by unwary days,
Nothing can bribe the Sisters to delays.
The horrid sword of Death whosoever would fly,
Let him but look into mine age, how I
Am gone and spent; I that was called and known
By name of Alexander Macedon:
Whose fame has from the Suns vprise been heard
Beyond the place Jove's Son his pillars reard.
Through Hespery and all the Eastern lands
^ave I been famed, whom none (opposed) withstands.
^he populous city Thebes my arm o'rethrew,
many thousand Persian soldiers slew;
^hoenicians, Ciclicks, Paphlagonians, all
^y sword subdued: thrice did Darius fall
^^ neath my potencie: great Babylon,
^ighty in walls, I sieg'd, and seized on.
and after, golden-wav'd Hidaspes past;
^orus (four cubits high) I queld at last,
Whom, conquered, I set free. This done, I then
from India saild, to Babylon again.
^eturning, I fell sick, soon after did;
Thus Time and ravenous AGE shall all things hide,

Sampson. Let Fame, the admirer of all Ancestrie,
And such as are renowned for Chivalrie,
Here show her self, and in her shape divine;
^urveigh all places where the Sun does shine,
^n which large progress let her see the head
Of flowing Nile: or say that she be fled
Unto the Sunburned (y) Garamanti, there
To enquire news, or what she else can hear
From the Numidians or remoat estates
Of (the oft-shifting place) the (z) Sanzonats.
Search Thetis Empire through, or further go
To what the fabric of the world can show,
She shall not find that mortal wight that dare
With me in nerves or strength of arms compare,
I am the mighty Sampson, famous yet,
To whom for strength Alcides would submit:
To strangle Lions was no more than play,
Or to outrun swift Tygres on the way.
What though I with the jaw bone of an ass
A thousand slew, and through their army pass?
What though the city gates I rend and tear,
And (after) them upon my shoulders bear?
Yet notwithstanding my great power and strength,
I yield to death, Age swallows all at length.

Earth. Know now my Son, that such most happy are,
Whom others harms can teach how to beware.
See, whatsoever I produce or bring,
Nurse or give fostring to, even every thing
Devouring Age consumes. Do thou not see
Renowned Hector yield to Destiny?
How great Achilles, after wars rough storms,
Despoiled of life, to be the food for worms?
Sampson and Alexander in their prime,
Though strong, yet they both perished: This can Time.
Now lest fair Feature should in thee breed pride,
Natures indowments, or ought else beside;
See women next, in face and form excelling,
Swallowed in dust; all Beauty Age expelling.

Hellen. O you blind men, with feminine shape oretaken
Whose amorous hearts are with their culture shaken,
Now do I find too late, and grieve to think,
All mortal beauty must in Lethe sink.
We kembe these hairs, and trim them up in gold.
(Our curled tresses with rich gems inrol'd)
Our fronts we burnish, and there cannot pass
One blemish, but corrected by the glass.
By art we adorn our heads, and by art we
Dispose the face and hair; by art we see.
And yet these hairs, this head, these eyes, this face,
Vanish like moving waves which flote apace.
Behold! I that was fair, am worms meat made,
My flesh corrupt, and buried in the shade.
Behold (I say) that Grecian Hellen, she
Raped, Menelaus, in her prime from thee:
Me (a) Theseus ravished first, and left me so,
That saving kisses I did nothing know.
False Paris last (by Fate or Fury led)
Hosting with me, made stealth into my bed:
Fool that he was, he little then did know,
^his snare for me was Troys sad overthrow.
This putrified Coarse by him so bought,
was after by a thousand ships re-sought.
O Greece, what preparation did thou make,
To fetch that flesh which now the worms forsake?
What broiles? what strage? what slaughter to destroy,
Did this loathed carcass breed 'twixt Greece and Troy?
Became it thee, friend Paris, to forsake
Thy household gods, and such a journey take,
To hazard seas, only to fetch away
from Greece this rottenness, this putrid Clay?
and you the (b) Atrides, would you sail so far,
and for this dust maintain a ten years war?
that this vile earth, this stench you might return,
To close these ashes in my fathers urne?
^ais. If any fables have bin sung in praise
Of Prostitutes, what fame their shapes could raise;
^ the Corinthian Lais, choice and best,
^aue been the crown and grace to all the rest.
^y chin the Ivorie stained, Lillies my brow,
^o match mine eyes the world then knew not how:
^y neck was long and straight, and my veins blew,
often lips, in my clear cheeks fresh roses grew;
^y nose was neither crooked, long, nor flat,
^y visage it became, it graced that:
^y wanton paps like two round hillocks grow,
^^om which moist springs two milky rivers flow.
^y belly comely sweld, for it became
^ike a plumpe Peacocks, soft as the young lamb:
^y stomach like the temperat Turtles feeding;
^odest my diet, and no surfets breeding;
^y arms much whiter than the Lillies shwoing,
^r flowers, (d) Alcinous, in thy garden growing.
^ho that my leg did look on, but did think
^e burnt in flames, or in the seas did sink?
Or who my back parts did behold, but sed,
O that I were a flea in Lais bed.
Or who my foot, but wished himself a stone,
With upward eyes for me to tread upon.
And yet this face, these cheeks, these lips, these eyes,
This neck, these hairs, these temples, legs and thighs,
This stomach, belly, back, arms, hands, and feet
Are worms meat now, and with corruption meet.
Learn young man then, that which we trust in most
Is dust and filth; in Age are all things lost.
Thisbe. The Babylonian Thisbe is my name,
Noble my birth, my beauty great in fame;
No lovely Maid that had in the Orient place,
But with much envy gazed me in the face.
Enraged Jove I with a smile could please,
Or pull his threatening thunder back with ease.
Juno her self of me has jealous bin,
And feared lest Jove in Babylon would sin.
The white (d) Caistrian Bird to me did yield,
And to my blush the Roses of the field.
Yet not this feature, not this front or face,
Nor these mine eyes, to which the stars gave place,
Could ransom me from the worms fearful rage,
Or the rude phangs of all-devouring Age.

Lucretia. Who the divining Sybels shall commend,
Or thee, (e) Penelope, and not offend?
Of (f) Dido's feature who shall smoothly write?
Or the (g) Leucadian sisters beauty cite?
Behold me Lucrece, softer than the down,
Or the swans breast, and whiter: who was known
More tractable than wax; fresh as the air,
Softer my skin than the ripe Melons are.
With this fair body I the worms have fed,
And a small urne contains me being dead.
These paps, that (h) Cato the Severe would turn,
Or chaste (i) Hippolitus in ardor burn.
This precious flesh, this shape is changed to dust
and putrefaction, to which all may trust.
(...) him, the earth brings forth, but Age can wast,
(...) and the same fate meets with all at last.

Earth. Consider then, my Son, these shapes you have,
(...) endor nor feature, ransoms from the Grave:
That all things suffer change, neck, breast, and throat,
^ips, cheeks, brow, stomach, all on which we dote,
^onvert to ashes. Yet lest thou be won,
Thinking to escape by other gifts; my son
^trend with prepared ears, hear what the Learnd,
^he Rich and others have 'tofore discernd;
These and the rest have the same accent sung:
^ow whilst they speak, thou still suppress thy tongue.

Virgil. If Learning from himself shall man divide,
and make him like the Peacocke strut with pride,
^e offends in madness, sencelesly is vain.
^e hold, I Virgil, of the learned strain,
^f Poets Prince, their glory and their grace,
^o whom Apollo did afford prime place;
^e the most sacred Muses favored still,
^or me the (k) Driades their laps would fill
With various flowers, and the Napaec bring
^haplets of Bays to crown me when I sing.
^o the Palaces of Emperors accited,
and to the banquets of great Kings invited:
and yet I died. What profit did it breed,
that I first taught the wanton Goats to feed,
^o till, to sow and reap; or be sam'd far
^or the rude slaughters of a ten years war?
^et was I food for worms. What Is Poesy then?
^stable Age ends what she will, and when.

Xerxes. Lest opulencie should elate man high,
and make him set his face against the sky,
^^ust to his youth, or what his riches brings,
^ehold me Xerxes, mightiest of all Kings,
And most magnipotent, I that have bin
Possessed of such an infinite Magozin
Of gold and treasure, so immense a store,
As never Persian King enjoyd before;
That when my pride toward Grecia'gan to aspire,
Gave to so many soldiers food and hire;
So many legions from the Orient brought,
That in the first great battle which we fought,
Such store of shafts and darts my camp did yield,
As kept the Suns bright luster from the field:
So many ships of mine the Ocean swayd,
As made astonished Neptune fly, afraid,
And hide him in his Deeps, What Is plenty then?
Or what does Pomp or Greatness profit men?
We vanish all like shadows: and even thus
Died (l) Croesus, (m) Crassus, (n) Midas, (o) Priamus,
(p) Pigmalion, whom both Age and Death constraines
To walk with Xerxes in the Elysian plains.

Nero. If any air to Tyrants breathing gives;
If any (q) Catiline or (r) Marius lives;
Or if there any stern (s) Mezentius be,
Contemner of the gods: these look on me,
I the base sink of sin, the ship of shame,
Quaffer of humane blood, Nero, the same
Whose murders have been bruted over all,
From the Suns uprise, to his Western fall:
Whose gluttonies and lusts Nilus knew plain,
And (t) Calpes, to the farthest parts of Spain.
To rip my mothers womb was my desire:
Who knows not too, I set great Rome on fire?
Who knows not, that my fury did betray
The lives of Lucian and wise Seneca?
Who knows not, that Saint Paul and Peter tryde
My sword, by which most of the Senate died?
But what was then my miserable fate?
Pressed by my fears, and by the peoples hate,
Scornd by each sex, abhorred in mine own land,
Contemned of all, I fell by mine own hand:
Thus Nero died, thus none can AGE withstand.

Sardanapal. Lest soft effeminacie, lust, and abuse
Of Natures gifts, might plead the least excuse;
I am that Sensuallist Sardanapal,
Who to my self thinking to ingrosse all
Voluptuousness, decked in their womanish suits,
I spent my time amongst common Prostitutes;
False periwigs upon my head I wore,
And being man, the shape of woman bore.
Yet this rank body a small urne contains;
To this we must, to this, AGE all constraines.

Earth. Son do thou see how all things Age outweares?
How the Strong perish, with the prime in years?
How the Fair falls, and how the Learned decay?
And how the Rich consume and fade away?
How Tyrants dye? How death the Wanton tastes?
And, to conclude, how swift Time all things wastes?

Man. What (Mother) shall I do? If I live chaste,
I am not therefore safe: or if I wast
My hours in Venus sports, I am not free:
If ever weep, what shall become of me?
If ever sport, what profit can it bring?
And though I ever mourn, or ever sing,
All Is one, for die I must. Since Death ends all,
Let my corrupted body die and fall
To dust, to earth or worms, pleasure's my store,
Let me enjoy that, I desire no more.

Earth. Thus I conclude; Though man's life be vnstayd,
And as we see, by Custom hourly fade,
Even as the parched leaves by Autumn change
And fall to nothing; yet (which is most strange)
Of his own fruit he is unmindful still,
And follows what proves to himself most ill.

The Argument of the Dialogue entitled MISANTHROPOS, or the Man-Hater.
This Dialogue of Riches does entreat;
Of their true use: how they with lucre great
Are long acquired, and how soon lost. The cause
Of this Discourse is grounded from the applause
Timon first had in Athens, where he swayed,
For his wealths sake, being honored and obay'd.
Who after a most riotous expense,
Having consumed his state, and grown to sense
Of Poverty; such as he raised he tries,
But finds them now his person to despise.
He seeing how base avarice did blind
The world that time, in hate of all Mankind,
So devious from Virtue, did propose
A new name to himself, MISANTHROPOS;
Which gives this Tractat name. The Authors intent
Being to show, how proud and insolent
Riches make men: and have it understood,
How they pursue the Bad, but fly the Good.
Read and observe, this Dialogue affords
Much excellent matter, coucht up in few words.
The DIALOGVE.
Timon. O Jupiter, loving and sociable,
That art domestical and hospitable,
The lightning-blaster, Oath and Iury-shaker,
Cloud-gathering god, and the great Thunder-maker:
Or if thou any other syr-name have,
^uch as by the ancient Poets in times past
Has to thy deity been madly given,
To patch their halting Verse, and make 't run even,
For thee a thousand nicknames are pursuing,
^o help their Lines, and keep their Rymes from ruin)
Where Is now thy all-fear'd lightning, breeding wonder?
Where Is thine high streperous and loud voic'd thunder?
Thy radiant and bright burning bolts (once dreaded)
What, are thy late keen pointed darts unheaded?
^ll these, since thou with-heldst thy terrible stroke,
^ppeare vain trifles, and Poeticke smoke,
and of thy great power nothing else proclaims,
^ave mere verbositie, and noise of Names,
^or these thy Poetised tools for war,
Which being drawn, both reached and wounded far;
^ know not by what means, but now at length,
^unt is their chastning edge, and lost their strength;
^o cold and frozen they about thee lie,
That of thy wrath no spark we can epsy
^^ndled against the Nocent. These perjurers
^esting at sufferance) make themselves assurers
Of their own safety: being no more afraid
^f thy unquenchable lightning, than dismayed
^t common fire extinguished: it shows l^ke
^o them, as if thou should some Tition strike,
and they look on; dreading no more thine ire,
^han his whose struggling breathes forth Aetna's fire:
Presuming no more wound belongs vnto't,
Than only to be smudg'd and grim'd with soot.
From hence it comes, that (a) Salmoneus dare
With thee in thy loud thunders to compare:
Nor strange; he a man that bold and daring is,
And thou a god so sufferant and remiss:
What could he less do than such revels keep,
Since thou have drunk (b) Mandragora, to sleep
And snort away thy time? even still forbearing
Such as blaspheme and never cease forswearing.
Besides, like one that such misdoers tenders,
Not plaguing them, thou plumpst up great offenders.
Some hold thee blind, and cannot see what is done:
Some, easy to be foold: like rumors run,
That thou art deaf on both sides: others hold,
Thou art decrepit, and of late grown old.
When thou wast in thy former youth and prime,
Thou did not sloathfully mis-spend thy time;
Then thou had spleen, and unto wrath wast prone,
Vengeance and just infliction graced thy throne,
And wast indeed such an all-dreaded god,
No male factor could escape thy rod:
Thou heldst with such no covenant, but thy darts
Were still in action to amase their hearts;
Thy invulnerable arm advancing hye,
Whilst through the earth thy flashing lightnings fly,
Drawn from thy quiver, where they late did stick,
Shot as from warring Archers, swift and thick.
Besides these, fearful earthquakes, which were man
such as her reverend breast tare up and cranny
Mountains of snow by drifts made, hail in such
Abundance, that of late we see none such:
Impetuous showers of rain made torrents rise.
And rivers over their banks to tyrannise.
It has been said, In good (c) Deucalions age
Such sudden inundations 'gan to rage,
That all mankind being drowned in one account,
^arse was one skyffe saved on (d) Licoris Mount;
^ that, Humanities small seeds reserving:
^^om whence a generation less deserving,
and much more impious grew: they imitating
^hat's bad, and worse and worse still propagating.
Nor is there cause thou should with them be wroth;
^eceiving but the guerdon of thy sloth.
^ho now unto thy Altars offerings bring?
^r to thy dreadful name loud Poems sing?
^hou now have neither sacrifice nor praise,
^or is thy ruinous Temple hung with Bays;
^nlesse by chance some by Olympus pass,
and call to mind that such a god once was,
And rather too for fashion sake, than fear)
^erhaps some thrifty Offering may leave there:
^ike Saturn they would deal with thee (I tell thee)
and (as thou him) so from thy throne expel thee.
I here omit, whilst thou have elsewhere trifled,
^ow often thy great Temple has been rifled,
^ansackt and spoild, whilst thou the loud tongued Crier
O'regrowne with sloth, as if thou did desire
Thine own undoing) not once wake nor call
The dogs there kenel'd, make them bark and ball,
Nor raise the drowsy neighbors, sleeping fast,
^o present rescue, till the thieves were past:
^ut thou the generous Giant tamer, who
^ost boast in the great Giants overthrow,
Did like a sot sit neither graced nor feared,
Whilst from thy chin they shaved away thy beard:
Yet thou even at that instant were so strong,
^o hold a dart that was ten cubits long.
O thou so famous, what will thou endure
^n the end, if still thou will be thus secure?
Or at what time will thou extirp the seeds
By thy just vengeance) of those gross misdeeds?
How many bold aspiring Phaetons, or
Deucalions can thou find? Hie expiat for
This inexhausted wickedness still flowing
From corrupt mankind, and thou all this knowing
Impertinent things I will submit to Fate,
And pass in silence: only now relate
Mine own particular wrongs. How many great
And mighty of the Athenians, to the seat
Of known sublimitie has Timon raised,
Creating them from beggars? whilst they praised
And magnified my bounty. Unto all
I spread my open hand and liberal;
In which most men (before me) I exceeded,
As generally supplying such as needed,
My riches' among my friends parced and given,
Till I my self to penury was driven.
Then suddenly a stranger I was grown,
And to my most familiar friends not known:
Those (when I past them) that would croutch and ben^
In adoration: those that did depend
Upon my grace, my presence cannot brook,
Nor on my wants so much as daigne a look.
If (as sometimes) I chance to cross the street,
And any one of these my Creatures meet.
"As of some statue, by long time decaid,
"They shun my shadow, of my fall afraid.
And others likewise that from far espy me,
Into some by-lane skrew themselves, so fly me,
Make me an ominous spectacle of Fate,
As if malevolent and unfortunate:
Who in my better days was their Director,
Styled by themselves, their Father and Protector.
These mischiefs growing, to be made so vile,
My own deep counsels I'gan reconcile,
Snatched up this mattocke, chus'd a field out, where
The Earths fair breast I am forced to wound and ear^
And thus my time in labor wear away,
^^^ng hyr'd for some four half pence by the day.
^us with my spade in solitude here I
^de to my self mine own Philosophy.
^e profit reapt hence is, to be remoat,
^^d live out of the sight of such as dote
^ smoky vanities, those that inherit
^nty of all things, and yet nothing merit;
^^d that does most torment me. Now at length,
Jupiter
^aturn and Rheas offspring show thy strength;
^y profound sleep shake off, for thou indeed
sloth do (e) Epimenides exceed.
and once again thy Trisulk, and retire
^ Oeta, and there kindle 't with new fire:
^ng full of flames, when they most hotly glow,
^rt of that vengefull indignation show
which to thine high Tribunal did belong,
^hen thou were Jupiter the young and strong:
^e still to those reproaches subject be,
^e Cretans cast upon thy Tomb and thee.

Jupiter. What is he, so vociferously exclaimes,
Mercury, and Us so often names?
^s tedious clamors in mine ears sound shrill
^eere unto Athens) from Himettus hill,
^^ at the mountains foot, deject and sad,
^e, meager, lame, and in a goats skin clad?
seems to me that delving is his trade,
^s eyes cast down, he leanes upon his spade:
is a bold speaking fellow, confident too
what he says. After this sort to do
^losophers were wont, and they alone,
^d it is a wonder but this fellow's one,
^^at dares against our deity devise
^h impious and unheard of blasphemies.

Mercury. Do you not know him (Father) thus forlorn,
^n to Echicratides, in Collite borne;

Timon his name, with whom we both have guested,
And in our annual Sacreds often feasted:
He on the sudden with such plenty filled,
Who at the altars of the gods has killed
Whole Hecatombs, and in his height of wealth
Has quaft unto us many a grateful health.

Jupiter. Whence comes this sudden change? But is this
The honest rich man that was known so free,
Whom Athens with her loud encomiums graced,
And such a multitude of friends embraced?
How happens it he is so poorly arrayd,
So miserably dejected and dismayed?
I guess him by the spade on which he leanes,
Some painful labourer that works for means.

Merc. You see how his humanity has changed him
And freeness, from his dearest friends estranged him:
His mercy unto others, being so kind,
And then amongst so many not to find
One grateful, has distraction in him bred,
Still to be living, but to them thought dead.
Considering next how he is scorned, derided,
And his revenue and estate divided,
Not amongst Crows and Wolves, but worser far,
Ravenous and tearing vultures, who still ar^
Gnawing upon his liver; those whom he
His friends and best familiars thought to be.
For they who now in his abundance swim,
Were more delighted in his feasts than him:
Nay, those who at his table did applaud him;
When even unto the bare bones they had gnawne him
They sucked his very marrow, and then fled;
So to the world gave him both lost and dead:
Being so far, from misery to free him,
They would not seem to know him when they see ^^
These brought him to this base despised trade,
And hurld him from the Scepter to the Spade;
^^'d him out of his purple, here to sweat
^ hardly earne his meat before he eat:
which he is so possessed with mortal spleen
^nst mankind that so ingrate has been;
^e whom his bounty raised and brought to fame,
^se now remember Timon had a name.

(...). Yet one (believe me) not to be rejected,
^ for his former piety respected.
^ blame I him his anger to be such,
^en ungrateful to endure so much.
^s zealous and good man not to redeem,
favor his afflictions we might seem:
we much pity him, who to maintain
^ adoration, has before us slain
many Goats and Bulls, and those the best
at his flocks yielded; so that I protest,
^^d approve them for my service meet,
^ose savor in my nosthrils still smells sweet.
^s for the boldness of that infinite Crew
^ase perjurers, who forsware what is true;
^ikewise those in self-conceit so strong,
^y make no conscience of what is right or wrong;
^^ as insult by rapine and rude force,
pressing without mercy or remorse,
Sacrilegious too, such as forbear
^^eir public robberies, not through love but fear;
many the are in number, (though I strive)
their misdeeds I no way can connive.
^t mine eye of late on Athens, where
many strange Duels and fencings were,
^ Pro's and Contra's, quarrels in the schools,
^e mad men railing, some; others like fools
^ing: in uproar all, shrill acclamations
^colding Disputants; such vociferations,
I those so loudly thundered in mine ear,
^^ suppliants plaints I could by no means hear.
Therefore with stopped ears I must silent sit,
Or with their confused noise be tortured yet.
There Is a new toy imagined by these Nodies,
Of things essential, and yet wanting bodies;
Mere fantasies, which they with might and maine
(Though nothing) to have being would maintain:
Which is the cause I have been so unkind,
As this well meaning man not once to mind.
It now remains his goodness to requite:
Hye therefore Mercury, Plutus accite,
With all speed possible command him hither,
And bring with you a magozin together
Of new coined gold, more than the man can tell.
He with his treasure shall with Timon dwell.
Nor shall they easily be removed from thence,
Though by his bounty and too large expense,
He would expel them from him. For those Chattere^
Parrots and Pyes, with other oily flatterers
And Parasits that have ungrateful bin,
I now will study to chastise their sin,
So soon as I my vengefull darts have viewd,
And my three-forked thunder stone renewed:
Some of the rays are broke, others rebated,
Which with all speed I must have inst^urated:
The points are dulled, since I insenced was
Against the Sophist Anaxagoras,
Who to his Scholars openly professed,
The gods or were not, or were naught at least:
But I through error mist, Pe^icles bestrid him,
And with his body from my vengeance hid him.
The bolt averted light upon the phane
Where the two brothers deify'de remain,
(Castor and Pollux) burnt it to the ground.
And not one stone was left about it sound.
But what a punishment will this appear
Unto those envious wretches, when they hear,
Timon, in whose oppression they agreed,
^all them in wealth and potencie exceed;

Mercury. O but much more availes it for a man
^o stretch his throat with all the power he can,
^o be obstreperous and heard from far;
^o not mean the balling at the Bar,
^ud railing for fat fees and gain of gold;
^t those like Timon, clamorous and bold,
^ho in his Orisons has been so shrill,
^ make great Jove attentive against his will;
^ho had he (smothering grief) sat still and mute,
^^ght have long labored in a threadbare su^e.

Plutus. To him, o Jupiter, I will not go.

Jupiter. Tell me, o excellent Plutus, wherefore so?
^pecially when thou by us art sent.

Plutus. Because I have a fearful president:
^ he with many injuries afflicted,
^hen I was wholly to his love adicted,
^e shook me off, as one that did deride me,
and into mamocks and small bits divide me,
^en cut me into pieces: would not sell me,
^t being his domesticke friend expel me
^ith forks and prongs, as one insenc'd with ire,
^ casting from his hand hot coals of fire.
and shall I once again enter his doors,
^ be consumed on Sycophants and whores,
^^atterers and such? Send me, o Jove, I entreat,
^o some that understand a gift so great,
^^m that to incorporat and hug me strives,
^ such as prize me dearer than their lives.
^his stupid fellow has a covenant made
^ith Poverty, preferring a poor trade:
mattocke and a skin-coat from her took,
fore my golden and all-tempting look:
no now with four small halfe-pence can make shift,
^d yet has given ten talents at a gift.

Jupiter. But Timon no such thing hereafter dares
Against thy person: rather he prepares
To honor thee, as one whom Toil and pain
Has reconciled, to welcome thee again;
His intrals with long fast and hunger clung,
Has with his mind now likewise changed his tongue
But thou art too complaintive, who accuses
First Timon to me for his late abuses,
Because he with his gates set open wide,
Gave thee free-leaue, there or elsewhere to abide;
Not keeping thee in obscure prison fast,
(As being jealous of thee) where thou have
Thy liberty. Again, thou art enraged
Against those Cormorants that have incag'd
And shut thee up; complaining, Beneath locks,
Keys, bolts, and seals thou art kept as in the stocks,
From whence thou can not move, from light exclud^
Living in dungeons and dark holes contruded:
Of such thou have complaind to me, and wept,
To be so long, so close in darkness kept;
Looking withal so meager, pale, and wan,
Oppressed with care as had thou been a man,
Starved and shrunk up, thy sinues drawn together,
Thy fingers clutcht and lamed; I know not whether
Hoording up gold this Apoplex compelling,
Or numnesse, made by thy assiduat telling;
Willing to stay with them by no persuasion,
But apt to leave them on the least occasion.
And what above thought makes thee ill bested,
Is, in an iron or a brazen bed
(As thou have heard of Danae) to be laid,
As there for ever to be kept a maid,
By impious overseers schoold and taught,
Who save in gain and usurie know naught.
Their gross absurdities I have heard thee note,
Who on thy person above reason dote;
And being in their power, dare not employ them,
Or lying prostrat to their lust, enjoy them:
They all the while strict vigilancie keeping,
With guard upon the place where thou art sleeping,
^ying the bolts and bars, and winking never,
^s in great hope thou will supply them ever,
and have much profit from thee. Not that they
^ean to make blessed use of thee though they may,
^ut only keep thee in such strict tuition,
because none else of thee should have fruition.
^st like a dog that in the manger lies,
^ho though himself the provender despise,
^s to his pallat a distastefull meat,
^et will not suffer the poor horse to eat.
I likewise have observed thee laugh at those,
Who though they have thee at their free dispose,
^ost gripple are in sparing. In a word,
^hou holdst it most radiculous and absurd,
that such (mean time) should starve themselves, not knowing
^o whom (their flower being withered) thou art growing:
^o what Executor, Servant, or Page,
^eward or Pedagogue, who their spent age
^aue not bestowed on thee, but on thy come,
^o seize by force, or else by stealth purloine;
and then for his safe hoording and close hiding,
^he wretched Master (new deceast) deriding,
^ho did so charily in his life time lock it,
and with a snuff half burnt within the sockit,
^r dry rush light, keep wakefull his faint eyes
upon his (now) all-forfeit vsuries.
^^t not therefore, Plutus, ill in thee,
that have of these so often complained to me;
^hy fickle thoughts so suddenly to vary,
and blame in Timon the clean contrary?

Plutus. Yet if my cause to censure be referred,
^e shall confess that I have no way erred:
Nor is there reason why I should dispense
With Timons lightness, rather negligence,
In stead of study, care, and that good will,
Respect, and love, that should attend me still.
Nor of the adverse part do I approve,
Those that embrace me with an over-love,
Imprisoning and obtruding me so close,
To make me every day more huge and gross;
Franking me up, to fat me, with intent
I may appear to them more corpulent;
Yet they themselves, nor use me in my neatness,
Nor show me unto others in my greatness.
All such I contumelious hold and mad,
Who notwithstanding all good from me had,
Put me in shackles, where I starving ly,
Oppressed with hunger, and with thirst still dry:
Not understanding they must shortly leave me
To such as stand wide gaping to receive me.
Nor do I of those Prodigass allow,
Apt to part with me, and not caring how:
Such only I approve amongst the rest,
Who hold a mediocritie the best;
That neither vow to keep an absolute fast,
Or having plenty, are inclined to wast.
Consider this, o Jove, Say that a man
Find for his choice the fairest Maid he can,
To make his Bride; and when the Nuptial night
Invites them both to rest, he sets her light,
Neither observes her, nor is tender over her,
But sets his doors and gates broad wide before her,
To gad and wander at her pleasure, trusts
Her night and day to prostrate where she lusts:
The man that gives such liberty to vice,
What does he (not preventing) but entice
To lewdness? as inviting folk to prove her:
Can such an one be said truly to love her?
Again, If any shall a Fair one wive,
And bring her to his house; when he should strive
To play the husband, and to procreate
Children as hopeful as legitimate:
Even then of all due Mariage-sweets should grutch her,
Nor in her flourishing prime of beauty touch her;
Unwilling from a loathsome Jail to free her,
Where nor himself nor any else may see her.
But thus secluded, barren, and deprived,
Shall keep her still a virgin, though long lived:
And then, That all this was for love pretend,
Preferring her thus old and near her end,
With an exhausted body, color pale,
Deep wrinkled cheeks, and sunk-in eyes that fail;
Would you not think that man quite from his senses,
Who when by lawful and most just pretenses
He might have hopeful Issue, and possess
A goodly sweet young woman, and no less
Amorous, yet suffers her in care and anguish,
^adly like one of Ceres Priests to languish?
Thus used and I abused, am sometimes torn,
^^fled and plucked in pieces, and in scorn
^affled and kicked: by others kept alive,
^mprison'd like some branded fugitive.

Jupiter. Why fretst thou against those made to endure
^trange punishments for sins black and impure?
Or wherefore art thou at such slaves astonished,
Who in themselves see their own vices punished:
The one like (h) Tantalus, in sight of meat,
And always gaping, but forbid to eat:
With such dry chaps they gape upon their gold,
Hot with that sated which they still behold.
The other, though they have it in their paws,
^eady to glut themselves; from their starved jaws
The Harpies snatch it, as from (g) Phineus, spoiling
those dainties for which he so long was toiling.
Go thou from Us to Timon without fear,
To whom (no doubt) thou will be henceforth dear.

Plutus. But think you that at length he will forbear
To pour me into leaking vessels, where
Though with great labor you maintain it still,
The liquor runs out faster than you fill;
Sooner exhausting me, to draw me dry,
Than I my self can with my self supply:
He fearing when I shall with plenty crown him,
I have but merely laid a plot to drown him.
I shall be as in (i) Danaus daughters tons,
No sooner ought poured in, but out it runs;
So many holes being in the bottom drild,
That it draines faster than it can be filled.

Jupiter. But though the liquor through the vessel breaks,
And that he has no will to stop these leaks,
But by perpetual dropping and effusion,
All must of force be wasted in conclusion:
Yet amongst the lees and dregs no doubt he will find
His leathern pelt and spade still left behind.
Go you mean time and see the man possessed
Of treasure in abundance, and the best.
That done, o Hermes, call at Aetna, where
The (k) Cyclops are at work, and (do thou hear?)
Bid them repair to me at my first sending,
For tell them that my three tynd bolt wants mending.
Both edge and point is dulled and in my spleen
I now must have it sharpened and made keen.

Merc. Plutus let us walk. But stay (thou of such fame)
Tell me how on the sudden came thou lame?
What, and blind too?

Plutus. These imperfections lie
Not always, Hermes, in my foot or eye;
Only at some set times. For being sent
By Jove, I am thus lame incontinent,
I know not by what means compeld vntoo't,
But instantly I halt on either foot,
And ere the place before me reach I can,
I am grown a lame decrepit weak old man.
But if I be to part from such, I fly
Swifter than birds make way beneath the sky;
No bars can stop me, furlongs are no more
To me, than narrow strides, I strip before
The winds swift wings, and can deceive the eye
With my unparaleld velocitie:
Nay even the public Criers have agreed
To crown me Victor for my pace and speed.

Merc. I now perceive thou Plutus idly pratest,
Since all things are not true that thou relatest:
How many have I known but yesterday
Ready to hang themselves, that could not pay
One single halfpenny down upon the nail,
To buy an halter with: yet now they sail
In gold and purple; some in Chariots ride,
That had not late a poor Ass to bestride,
Wealth flowing on them in so swift a stream,
That they themselves have thought it but a dream.

Plutus. A thing quite contrary it is, I vow,
Of which, o Mercury, thou twitst me now:
For know, I walk not on mine own legs when
I am sent by Jove to honest and good men.
But if god (l) Dis shall once command, I run,
For his behest is in an instant don.
He of the great gift-Giuer bears the name,
His Magozin's in hell, whence gold first came:
And therefore when I shift from man to man,
With all the industry and care they can,
They take me, wrapped and swathed in Bonds and Bills,
Where one conveyance a whole sheep-skin fills:
So, signed and sealed, me in some box they smother,
And toss me 'twixt one party and another.
The owner dead, left in some obscure place,
Where Dogs and Cats may piss upon his face.
Those that have hope to enjoy me are soon found
In The Courts, and those hot sented as the hound,
Yawning like to the Swallows infant brood,
When the dam fluttering to their nest brings food.
Now when the seale's discovered on the Will.
And the string cut that bound the roll up, still
They gape to see the parchment op't and read,
To know the Executor to the late Dead.
Then instantly a new heir is proclaimed.
And either, there, some greasy kinsman named,
Some Sycophant or fawning Parasite,
Or else perhaps a debosht Catamite.
He with a new shaved chin, being of this treasure
Possessed, then studies noveltie and pleasure,
With all rarieties at the height rated,
Which the dead hoorder in his life time hated.
He must be then a gentleman at least,
And with his wealth his Title (needs) encreast,
With change of name: for he that was before
Known by the name of (m) Pyrrhias, Drono, or
Tibias; although the man be still the same,
Must either Megabyzus have to name,
Megacles or Protarchus: his mind swelling
With vain ostent to gain a style excelling.
Even those that did not yawne with deep inspection
(Though at the first in like state and election)
Into these hidden Mines; now all dis-jointed,
When they behold each other disappointed,
Although they truly mourn, seen but to feet,
To see the small fish Tuny escape the net;
Who as he living did but little eat,
So being dead could not afford much meat.
Now he that grovelling falls upon this Mass,
(Some fat fed Budget, or dull witted Ass,
Who of no good parts or clean life has bin)
Enters upon it with an unwasht skin:
None treads so softly by him, but he fears,
And like a curre then starts up with pricked ears,
His fellow footmen he despises now,
To the Temple and the Horse-mill does allow
An adoration equal. Who to dispense
^s able now with his great insolence?
^nsufferable he grows, the Good despising,
And over his Like and equals tyrannising;
Vaunting in mighty things, till Lust, incited
With some fair whore, or otherwise delighted
^n keeping Dogs and Horses, or by hearing
His trencher-Flies about his table jearing,
And whispering to him, He is grown more fair
Than the Greek (n) Nereus, Homer made so rare:
The mischiefe's, he believes it; their verbositie
Persuading him, That in true generositie
^ Cecrops and Codrus come behind him. One
Tells him, Ulysses unto him alone
^ubmits in wisdom, and persuades the Beast
To be more rich than Croesus was, at least
^y sixteen fold: exhausting by this mean,
And in one breath of time consuming clean
What was by piecemeale gathered, and did rise
From base extortions, thefts, and perjuries.

Merc. These are no question true: but when thou go
On thine own feet (being blind) say how thou know
The way thou art to take? how can thou find
^uch men as are of good and honest mind?
To whom (as now) my father often times sends thee,
and in his care and providence commends thee.

Plutus. Think thou I find those I am sent unto?

Merc. By Jove not I: if so, how did thou do,
When lately being to Aristides sent,
^hou to Hipponicus and Callius went,
and other base Athenians, scarce worth thought,
Or a poor single halfpenny, to be bought?
What is the course thou take upon the way?

Plutus. Now high, now low, in each blind path I stray,
Till unawares upon some one I fall,
And be he what he will, that man gets all:
He that is next me and can first catch hold,
To fasten on me, having seized my gold,
Secludes me to some obscure place, possessing
What he long wished, then openly confessing,
In prayers and vows, he is to Hermes bound,
By whose assistance this great fortune's found.

Merc. Is Jove deceived, presuming that thou go
To inr^ch such as he affects most,
And thinks them worthy of his largess?

Plutus. Right,
O Mercury, and justly too, my sight
Being defective, and at such times blind;
And sending me to seek that, which to find
So difficult is, and scarcely has a Being,
Is that a task with my dim sight agreeing?
In which had quick eyd Argus in my sted
been his inquisitor, he scarce had sped:
The path so narrow and obscure, beside,
It being so rare to see a good man guide
A Cities weal; for those corrupt still sway,
And those in numbers flocking in my way:
I groping, can I possibly eschew
To avoid the many, and select the few?
The wicked always yawning after gains,
(The others not) how can I escape their trains?

Merc. I but how comes it, when thou art to forsake
These wretches, thou such voluble speed do make?
And without rub or the least stumbling, when
Thou can not see the path before thee?

Plutus. Then
Both eyes and feet assist, and then alone,
When Time invites and calls me to be gone.

Merc. Another thing resolve me: Tell me how
^comes to pass (o god of Wealth) that thou
^rst being blind, next, of a pale complexion,
^st, crippled in thy feet, can gain the affection
^f so many great friends and lovers, such
^ think they cannot gaze on thee too much?
^or can imagine they are truly blessed.
^^fore of thee undoubtedly possessed?
^gaine, If he that after thee enquires,
^ance to be frustrat in his hot desires;
^or such I have known many, and some noted,
that so debashtly on thy person doted,
that at their courting if thou seem'dst but coy,
^ave ready been their own lives to destroy:
Who when they saw they Plutus could not please,
themselves from hye rocks cast into the seas.
and yet I know, and thou must needs confess,
View but thy self as I do) thou will guess,
^ not conclude, it is not love, but madness
^akes them despair in doting on thy badnesse.

Plutus. But think thou, Mercury, I to them appear
^ the same form as thou beholdst me here,
Or lame or blind, with such defects about me?

Merc. O by no means, for I should then misdoubt me
that they were blind as thou art.

Plutus. But not quite,
^ Mercury, like me deprived of sight:
and yet there falls on them, as by some chance,
^ kind of error or blind ignorance,
Which occupies them all, over their eyes
^asting a shadowie filme, which does disguise
^y deformed parts; so I appear to them
a golden habit, stuck with many a gem:
^ pictured vesture I seem, passing by,
and thousand colors, to deceive the eye.
These fools imagining, what I present,
To be my sole and native ornament:
And therefore being enamored on my form,
If not eniov me, then they rage and storm.
But should I be before them naked laid,
And my misshapen ouglinesse displaid,
No doubt they would condemn themselves, pursuing
A seeming good, which leads them to their ruin:
The are only apt themselves to reconcile
To things their own nature base and vile.

Merc. But when it comes unto such pass that they
Are filld with wealth, and supplied every way;
When they have hedged, nay walld their riches in,
Some notwithstanding look so bare and thin,
Withal so gripple, you may sooner tear
Head from the body, than impart what is there?
Besides, it is not probable, but such
As have with greedy eyes perused thee much,
Must needly know, (however they proudly boast,
Thy outside tin-foild, or but guilt at most?

Plut. These my defaults (with others) to supply,
I have many ready helps, o Mercury.

Merc. Name them I prithee.

Plut. They no sooner fasten
With greediness upon me, but they hasten
To open their gates wide, then with me by stealth
Enter (for always they attend on wealth)
Haughtiness, Boasting, with the minds destraction,
Effoeminacie, and to make up the faction,
Oppression and Deceit, with the interest
Of thousand more; with which the heart possessed,
Is suddenly subjected and brought under,
To admire toys which are not worth the wonder,
And covet that which they ought most to fly.
Now with this band of Pensioners guarded, I
When thus attended they my state behold,
Thy never dream of other god than Gold:
with such adoration they respect me,
endure all torments, rather than reject me.

Merc. How smooth and slick thou art, no where abiding,
when men think thee safest, swiftly gliding
^row their fingers, neither can I spy
^andle or an haft to stay thee by,
we hold pots and glasses; they slip through
^ hand as snakes and serpents use to do.
When Poverty, to thee quite contrary,
^ere e're she takes her Inn is apt to tarry:
^mmy cleaves like Bird-lime, uncompeld,
^ to be seized, and easy to be held;
^ing a thousand catching hooks, and so
out her placed, that hardly she lets go.
^ whilst we trifle here, there is one maine thing
^ had forgot.

Plut. What?

Merc. That we did not bring
^asure along, it being Jove's intent,
^ the chief business about which we are sent.

(...). For that take thou no care: I do not enter
on the earth, (being called, and leave my Center,
I have still a care upon my store,
my departure to shut fast my door,
^ich only opens to me when I call.

Merc. Let Us thither then, and Plutus lest thou fall,
^d by my cloak, and follow till we come
^o the place assigned.
Hermes well done,
lead me thus; for if thou should forsake
as I am, I might perchance mistake
way, and wandering, through my want of sight,
Hyperbolus or on Cleon light.
stay, What noise is that? I hear some one
^ith his pick-axe striking against stone.

Merc. It Is Timon, who laboriously does wound
A piece of mountainous and stony ground.
O wondrous! Poverty by him fast stands,
And the rough fellow Labor, with galld hands.
Here Is Wisdom, Health, and with them Fortitude,
And besides these, a populous multitude
Of such like Grooms, Need them to work compelli^
And yet a troop (methinks) thy Guard excelling.

Plut. Therefore let us post hence with what speed we
For, Hermes, how shall we invade a man
Girt with so great an army?

Merc. Be not afraid,
It Is Jove's command, whose will must be obayd.

Pov. O whether lead'st thou Plutus?

Merc. To enlarge
Timon from hence; for so Jove gave in charge.

Poverty. Comes he again to Timon, whom (bereaved
Of health by many surfets) I received,
To Wisdom and to Industry commended,
And in his cure so far my skill extended,
I soon restored him (as he still does find)
Sound in his body, and upright in mind.
Have I deserved such scorn, or do I merit
A wrong, what is mine own not to inherit?
That you are come, with colorable pretense,
Him (now my sole possession) to take hence?
Whose ruined virtues with exactest care
I have much toyld and labored to repair.
Being again in that blind gods protection,
He Will bring them vassald to their late subjection,
Fill him with arrogance, disdain, and pride,
And every ill that Goodness can mis-guide;
And when all hope of fair amendment's past,
Return him back as I received him last,
Essoeminate, sloathfull, frantic, or what not,
A thing of nothing, a mere brainlesse Sot.

(...). Thou hear'st Jove's will.

Poverty. And I to it agree.
^^^wledge and Laber do you follow me,
^^ all my train: he will shortly to his cost
He what a mother he (in me) has lost;
^t a good helper, what a true instructor.
^ll good arts a tutresse and conducter:
whilst with me he had commerce, was still
^e and healthful, having strength at will,
^ding a manly life, turning his eyes
^n his breast, and of proud vanities
^^ gaudy frailties had at all no care,
^^held them trifles, as indeed they are.

Merc. They now are gone, let us approach more near.

Timon. What slaves be these that to mine eyes appear?
^y are you come? what would you? what require?
^a poor laboring man that works for hire?
^ shall not part hence laughing, for know, I
^e store of stones that round about me ly.

Merc. Assault us not, o Timon, for in vain
^ou shall do so, we are not of the strain
^mortall race, but gods: I, Mercury:
^is, Plutus, sent from the great Deity,
^o does at length commiser at thy state,
^h purpose now to make thee fortunate:
^ shall be well, we come to ease thy pain,
^ave off thy work, henceforth be rich again.
^ Though to your selves the name of gods you borrow,
^^pe off, or I shall give you cause of sorrow:
^me not too near me, I at random strike,
^ gods and men I now hate both alike:
for that blind slave, him I Will first invade,
^ow to rap him soundly with my spade.

(...). Let us be gone, o Mercury, he is mad,
^t some sad mischief from his hand be had.

Merc. This barbarous spleen good Timon strive to hide,
And thy ferocitie cast quite aside.
With gratitude receive what Jove has sent,
I strike thee luck, be rich incontinent:
Prince of the Athenians thou shall henceforth be,
And to contemn them that disdained thee,
Punish their base ingratitude, be it their grief
To see thee raised, live happy, and their Chief.

Plut. I have no need of you, pray give me leave
To use my labor, and at night receive
My competent wages, it is a gainful trade,
I have wealth enough in using this my spade:
I should be happy if you would forbear me,
But then most blessed if no man would come near me.

Merc. Thou speakst too inhumanely; Timon I
This thy harsh language and absurd reply
Will tell my father: Say that from man's breast
Thou Have had more wrongs than thou can well digest
Yet it is not good the gods thou should despise,
Who as thou see all for thy good devise.

Tim. To thee, o Mercury, Jove, and the rest
Of the Celestial gods, I here protest,
I hold my self much bound, and thank them for
Their care of me, but Plutus I abhor,
And him I Will not receive.

Merc. Why?

Tim. Because I guess
Him the fool author of my great distress
And mischiefs manifold, as first betraying me
To oily smooth-tongu'd flatterers, and then laying m^
Open to those insidiated my state.
Envy and hate he first did propagate,
Corrupted me with vices, then disclosed me
To all reproach, and after that exposed me
To spleen and cankered malice which exceeded,
And last of all left me when most I needed.
Excellent Poverty contrariwise
(...) me unto pains and exercise
^^comming Man; truly and freely we
^^gether lived in consocietie,
^pplying me with all things, garments, meat,
^^ich tasted best, being seasoned by my sweat.
^ vulgar things she taught me to despise,
^^d look on frailties with unpartiall eyes;
^^rsuading me, that Hope has steadfast root,
^ere man's own industrie's assistant to it:
^wing what Riches should be our delight,
^h namely as no soothing Parasite,
^ fawning Sycophant, no mad and rude,
^y stupid and seditious multitude;
^ Orator that gathers from lewd tongues
^d tales, and heralds them to others wrongs:
^ Tyrant that lies craftily in wait:
^en none of these can undermine our state,
^en we are truly rich. Labor has made
^ able-bodied, whilst I daily trade
this small field, from whence I cannot see
thousand ills that in the City be.
^e tools I work with plenteously supplying
^th needful things, vprising and down lying.
^d therefore Mercury return I entreat,
^re with thee Plutus back to Jove's high seat;
^th fond delirements let him others charm,
^ for my part he never more shall harm.

Merc. Not so, good man, let me advise the best,
^dy thine own peace, and let others rest.
^is peevish (rather childish) spleen forbear,
^d from mine hand receive god Plutus here.
man it is profanation to despise
^h blessings as Jove sends the Just and Wise.

Plut. Will thou, o Timon, hear me to the end,
^ilst I against thee mine own cause defend,
^^d suffer me with patience?

Timon. Speak, but briefly,
Avoiding Proems and preambles, chiefly
Used by damned Orators: see thou be'st short,
I Will listen to thee, but thank Hermes for it.

Plut. More liberty by right I ought to claim,
Whom thou of wrongs injuriously do blame;
Thy invective is with bitterness extended,
Yet innocent I in nothing have offended,
Who thee of all delicious things provided,
At thy free will to be disposed and guided:
I was the author and chief instrument
Of thy authority and government;
I gave thee crowns, and furnished thee with treasure,
Made thee conspicuous, to abound in pleasure.
In all rarieties I thee instated:
By me thou were observed, and celebrated.
If since, ought ill have unto thee betided,
(Cause thou perhaps my goodness have misguided)
By seeming friends or servants, can thou blame
Plutus for this? I rather should exclaim
On thee, for many contumelies past,
Pouring me out among sordid knaves so fast:
Who only sweld thee with vainglorious pride,
Devising strange prestigious tricks beside,
Only to draw me from thee. In The last place
Where thou have uttered to my foul disgrace,
I left thee in thy want to starve and pine,
Be witness Hermes if the fault were mine:
Who after injuries not to be borne,
Did cast me from thee in contempt and scorn,
Hence comes it, for thy cloak of purple die,
Thy late beloved Mistress Poverty
Has wrapped thee in this skin coat. I attest
Thee, Mercury, how much I was oppressed:
And but that Jove commands, by no facility
Could I be won to atone this our hostility.

Merc. But Plutus thou now find'st how he is changed,
and from his former humor quite estranged.
therefore have free commerce, dig Timon still,
and in the mean time Plutus use thy skill,
that as by Jove's behest thou art assigned,
^ delving deep he may this treasure find.

Timon. Well Hermes, I obey, and am prepared
^o be again made rich: For man it is hard
^o wrestle with the gods. Observe, I'ntreat,
^^to what miseries and mischiefs great
^hou have headlong cast me, who (I vow) until
^his hour lived happy, as I might do still.
that ill have I deserved, now to be vexed,
^^d once again with infinite cares perplexed,
(...) fastening on this treasure?

Merc. And yet take
^l, I entreat, in good part for my sake;
^are it, however weighty and indeed
^most intolerable, be it but to breed
^vy in those base Claw-backs: I mean time
^ving past Aetna, must Olympus clime.

Plut. He Is mounted, having left us, making way
^ith his swift wings: but thou, o Timon, stay
Il I depart, and to thy power commit
^masse of wealth, solely to manage it.
^t strike hard, harder yet; and now to thee
^peake, o Treasure, most observant be
^^to this Timon, with what speed thou have,
^fer thy self by him to be embraced;
^^g Timon lustily, thy stroke fetch higher,
^d work apace, it is time that I retire.
^o't, my good spade, use both thy edge and strength,
^d be not too soon dulled, till I at length
^ve from the Earths deep intrals brought aloft
^y hidden luster, and here coucht thee soft
^on this grassy verdure. O Jove, father
Of prodigies, or what we else may gather
From thy Divine Power: o my dearest friends
The (f) Caribanthes, how your love extends?
And thou light-bearing Mercury, behold,
And freely tell me, Whence is all this gold?
It is some dream, I am deceived, I fear,
These are quick glowing coals new waked here.
No sure, it is excellent gold yellow and bright,
Most ravishing, all-pleasing to the sight,
Beautiful Coin: O let me hug thee then,
Thou art the goddess of Good-lucke to men:
It flames like fire compact, in this huge cluster
Both night and day it keeps it is glorious luster.
Approach to me my Dearest, how to miss thee
I know not now: Most Amorous let me kiss thee.
Till now I did not credit what was told
Long since, That Jove himself was changed to gold.
What precise Virgin could retain the power
Not to hold up to such a golden shower?
Or being the chastest of all humane daughters,
Not meet him dropping through the tiles and rafters.
Take Midas, Croesus, and the Magozine
Heapt by the offerings made at Delphos shrine;
Compared with this Mass they are nothing to it,
And take the Persian Monarchy to boot.
O Spade, o Skin-coat, late to me most dear,
To Pan the rural god I leave you here.
I Will buy a field remote hence, and obscure,
Where having built a strong tower to secure.
This mountainous heap, I Will study (being gone)
How I may best live to my self alone.
There will I build my tomb too, e're I dye,
That none may know where Timons ashes lie.
I have decreed, and it is established in me,
That none from this sequestered life shall win me,
Nor hate against all mankind. Henceforth a guest,
A friend, or a companion, I protest,
Are names forgot in me: The Altar of Pity,
So much esteemed and honored in the City,
I Will hold as a mere trifle. Commiseration
On those that grieve or make loud acclamation,
To give the Needy, or their wants supply,
Shall be to me as black iniquity.
Subversion of good manners I Will allow,
A sad and solitary life I vow,
Such as Wolves lead, bloodthirsty to the end,
For only Timon shall be Timons friend;
All else my foes, with whom I am at strife,
As those that still insidiate my life:
To intercourse with any that has bin
Before my friend, I le hold a capital sin,
Deserving expiation: and the day
I hat I encounter Kinsman in my way,
I Will think unprosp'rous: for no more I pass
For Man, than statues made of stone or brass;
With such I Will hold no covenant. Solitude
Be thou mine aim and end: as for those rude
Of mine own Tribe, Cousins and Nephews, or
Mine own domesticke servants I abhor;
My Country likewise: I to all their shames
shall count them as mere cold and barren names.
The are mad men's Saints, but trifles to the Wise;
Be thou alone rich, Timon, and despise
All else: Thy self on y thy self delight,
And separated live from the loathed sight
Of Sycophants, (the remnant of thy days)
Who only swell thee up with tympanous praise.
Offer thy gifts unto the go^s alone,
Feast with thy self, be thine own neighbor, none
Near thee: whatever is thine partic pate
Unto thy proper ends, 'nd Rivals hate.
It likewise is decreed, That Timon will
Himself use gently and humanely still,
Be his own page and servant, when his breath
Leaves him, his own eyes he will close in death.
If love vainglory, he will himself renown;
On his own head his own hand place a crown:
No style of honor be to him so sweet,
As to be called Misanthropos, it is meet,
Because he hates Mankind: the Character
That in all ages I desire to wear,
Is Difficulty and Asperitie,
Fierceness, Rage, Wrath, and Inhumanitie:
For should I see a poor wretch wrapped in fire,
And he to quench him should my help desire,
I would but laugh to see him fry and broile,
Seeking to feed the flame with pitch and oil.
Again, f passing by a rivers brinke,
And spying one fallen in, ready to sink,
And holding out his hand imploring aid,
Craving to be supported up and staid;
What in this case think you would Timon do?
Even dive his head down to the bottom too.
There are no other laws confirmed, than these,
By Timon, son to Echecratides,
Even Timon of Collytte, with his hand
Subscribes to them, which he will not countermand.
O now at what a dear rate would I buy,
That present news might into Athens fly,
And all of them upon the sudden know
What store I have, how little to bestow.
What noise was that? See, multitudes come posting,
Clouded in dust, and breathless, this way coasting?
I wonder how they smelt my gold? Were It best
I clime up to yon hill, from whose high crest
I with more ease with stones may palt them hence?
Or shall I rather for this once dispense
With my harsh laws? to show them all my store,
With the bare sight thereof to vex them more?
I hold that best; their coming here I Will stay:
But soft, what is he that is foremost on the way?
Gnatonides the Flatterer, who but late
When I was in my miserable estate,
And begged of him some food for charity,
Cast me an halter: yet ungrateful he
A thousand times has at my table eaten,
I am glad yet he comes first, first to be beaten.

Gnaton. Did I not ever think the gods above
Could not neglect, but still this good man love?
Hail Timon, thou most fair, most sweet, most kind,
Bounteous, and always of a generous mind.

Tim. Hail too Gnatonides, (the corruptest slave
That ever gourmandis'd) what would thou have,
Thou more than many Vultures still devouring?

Gnaton. It was his custom always to be pouring
Harsh jeasts upon his friends; his quick dicacitie
Would evermore be taunting my voracitie,
And it becomes him well. Where shall we dine,
Or whether go to quaffe thy health in wine?
I have a new song got into my pate,
Out of quaint (p) Dythirambs I learned it late.

Timon. But at this time I rather could advise
That thou would study doleful Elegies,
Such as this spade can teach.

Gnaton. O Hercules!
Strikes Timon then? with thee, I witness these,
Before the Arcopagitae I
Will have thee called in Court: o I shall die,
See, thou have wounded me.

Timon. Nay be not gone;
Two labors thou may save me so in one:
Thou shall complain of murder.

Gnat. Timon No:
But rather on my broken pate bestow
Some of thy gold to apply to it, and be sure,
It Is both a speedy and miraculous Cure.

Tim. Still stay'st thou?

Gnat. I am gone. Wondering he is grown
Of late so rude, that was so civil known.

Tim Who Is he comes next, all bare and bald before?

Philiades: I know him of the store
Of Sycophants most execrable, who wound
Me in not long since for a piece of ground,
Besides two talents for his daughters dower,
And all that substance did the slave devour,
Because he praised my singing: when the rest
Were silent all, he only did protest
And swear, that I did admiration breed,
Nay, dying Swans in sweetness much exceed.
I since being sick, desiring him to have care
Over my health, the Villein did not spare
To spurn me from his gate.

Philiades. Ungrateful age,
Do thou at length know Timon, he, the sage
And wise good man: full well did he requite
Gnatonides the soothing Parasite,
And Temporiser, who is only friend
To such as of their wealth can know no end.
But he has what he merits, a just fate
Depending on the Unthankful and Ingrate:
But we that have been table-guests of old,
Equals, and fellow Citisens, enrold;
Who' twixt us interchang'd the name of brother,
And were not chargeable one to another,
We should renew acquaintance: Sir, God save you,
And beware henceforth how you do be have you
To sacrilegious Parasits that appear
Always at banquets and abundant cheer:
They are only Smell-feasts, waiting on the Cooks,
But little differing from base Crows and Rooks,
Men are of late so'bnoxious unto crimes,
^here is no trust to any of these times;
^nthankfull they are all, and bad: but I
^nowing thy wants, and willing to supply
^hy present uses, purposed to have brought
^ talent with me; fearing thou had owght
To some harsh Creditor; or might have need
^or other ends: but by the way indeed,
learing to what a surplusage of gain,
^hou have arrived, I held it a thing vain.
^et came I of thy bounty to make proof,
and counsel thee of things for thy behoof:
^ut needless were it, Timon being so wise,
That (if he lived) he Nestor might advise.

Tim 'Twas kindly done, Philiades, come near
and see what welcome I have for thee here.

Phil. Thou wretched churl; what undeserved punishment
^ast thou repaid me for my late admonishment?
^^ fear he has broke my neck.

Tim. Behold a third,
Demeas the Orator; indeed a Bird
Of the same feather: he has bills, records,
^ables, a man merely composed of words.
^e calls himself my kinsman; who in one day
Of mine) to the Cities Chamber had to pay
^xteen whole talents, he then in execution:
^et I redeemed him, and made full solution
Of all his debts; when he was fast in hold,
^freed him thence: yet was the slave so bold,
That coming after unto eminent place,
Where he with Erichtheiades had grace,
Who had the charge of the whole Treasury,
and money by account then due to me)
^e being my feed Advocate as then,
^rotested that I was no Citisen;
Therefore not capable my due to claim:
Most loudly lying without fear or shame.

Demeas. Save thee, o Timon, thou, of all thy race
The greatest ornament and the prime grace,
Of the whole State the Column and the stay,
By whom protected and supported, they
Live safe: thou art the stay of Greece, we know,
The people frequently pronounce thee so,
With either Court: but hear what I have writ
In thy great praise, and then consider it.
Timon, of Echecratides the son,
Borne in Collytte, who has never don
But what became him well; who as he was
Of unstained life, in wisdom did surpass
The Grecian Sages; who from himself did steal
His precious hours, to benefit the Weal.
He was so good a Patriot, besides strong,
And from the Olympicke wrestling brought along
Great honors by his swiftness, by his force,
The four wheeld Chariot and the single horse.

Tim. I have not so much as spectator bin
Of what thou say I am so eminent in.

Demeas. All Is one for that, we Orators are free,
And what is not yet done may hereafter be:
These are but things of course, and aptly fitted,
I see no reason they should be omitted.
But the last year, no longer since, how well
Did he demean himself, nay how excel,
When he against the Achernenses fought,
And their great army unto ruin brought?
The Spartans in two battles he subdued.

Timon. How can these be? Do not my sense delude:
I never being soldier, nor had mind,
Or the least purpose to be so inclined.

Demeas. It Is modesty in you, I must confess,
To be so sparing of your worthiness.
But as for us, we should be most ingrate,
^ we your great worth did not celebrate.
^esides, in Laws, which (truly understood)
^ave been inacted for the public good;
^n private consultations about war
Or peace, he did transcend all others far,
And brought unto the public State such profit,
That there is none can speak too loudly of it.
^or these just causes it is held convenient,
and by the Lords and Commons thought expedient,
Being a man so generally respected)
To have a golden statue erected
To this great Commonwealths man Timon, graced
^o far, as to be next Minerva placed,
^n her own Temple, shaking in his hand
As imitating Jove) a fulminous brand,
Bright rays about his head, and at the least,
Decked with seven Crowns, to have his name inereast.
Next, to have all his glories open laid
^n the new Tragedies to Bacchus made.
These solemn Sacreds must be kept this day,
And who more fit than he to act them, pray?
^emect to this decree does first subscribe,
Because he counts himself of Timons tribe,
His near Ally and kinsman, or indeed
His scholar rather, for he does exceed
^n learning the superlative degree,
As being all what he can wish to be.
This is the general suffrage, and thy due:
But how had I forgot? that to thy view
I did not bring my son and heir, the same
Whom I have since called Timon, by thy name.

Tim. How can that be, o Demeas, when thou have
No wife at all, pretending to live chaste?
Thou art a Bachelor.

Them. Tush, do not fear,
My purpose is to marry the next year.
If heaven permit, and thou shall hear relation,
That all my study shall be procreation.
Then my first Borne (a boy it shall be sure)
I Will Timon call, to make thy name endure.

Tim. But if in this sad stroke I not miscarry,
'Twill be a doubt if ever thou shall marry.

Demeas. O me, what means this outrage? art thou wise
That do upon thy friends thus tyrannise?
To beat him hence, that has more quick conceit
And apprehension in this broken pate,
Than thou in thy great Mazard: neither can
This justify thee for an honest man,
Or a good Citisen: This outrage don,
Shall question thee before the setting Sun;
For I dare justify, thou durst aspire
To set the Cities Citadel on fire.

Tim. That calumny will to thine own shame turn,
Because the place has not been seen to burn.

Them. But being rich, it may suspected be,
That thou have robbed the common Treasury.

Tim. The bolts and locks are whole, and 'twill appear
Most vile to such as shall thy scandals hear.

Them. It may be robbed hereafter; in the mean time
Thou thus possessed art guilty of that crime.

Tim. Mean time take that, 'twill speed thee if 't hit righ

Them. O me; that blow 'twixt neck and shoulders light

Tim. Sh^eeke not so loud, o Demeas, if thou do,
Here Is a third for thee. Methinks it were most
Ridiculous, that being unweapon'd, I
Two mighty Spartan armies made to fly,
And one poor snake not vanquish: so in vain
The honors from Olympus I should gain,
To championise and wrestle. Soft, what is he?
Grave Thrasicles the Sophist it should be:
The same; I know him by his promise beard,
And beetle brows: Some things that are not heard
^^ mutters to himself, and his squint eye
^sts toward the Moon, as should his wits there lie:
^s unshorne hair beneath his shoulders flowing,
about him scattered with continual blowing:
^ke Boreas or some Tryton he appears;
^t such as Zeuxes (since not many years)
^ tables used to figure them. Now he,
^ habit rare and thin, makes toward me,
^cing a modest, but affected gate,
^^ if he had new crochets in his pate.
^e ^useth too: wonder you would to hear
in every morning, with a look austere,
^^spute of Virtue and her excellent quality,
^eproving all delights, only frugalitie,
Which he affects) extolling. His first care
^ first to wash, then instantly prepare
^imselfe to meat, but at some others charge.
^^ soon as set, the boy brings him a large
and brim-filld bowl; no liquor him can escape,
^ it be strong and pressed from the pure Grape,
^ike Lethe's water, down the wine he poures
^is yawning throat; talks, At his early hours
that his Positions were and Disputations;
^roubling the hearers with his vain narrations.
^ow he begins to gourmandise, and sits
^ouering upon the choice and fattest bits,
As if the table could not room afford)
^e strikes his neighbors elbow from the board,
^ earnest feeding; crumbs hang on his beard;
^ith several saucers all his chaps are smeared.
^eing almost gorged, upon the fruits he flies,
and almost grovelling over the platters lies;
^umbling and searching with insatiat mind,
^s if in them he virtue hoped to find.
^ith his long finger having scraped the dish,
and slapt up all the sauce of flesh or fish,
So clean, that not a waiter, sparelier fed,
Shall have ought left wherein to dip his bread:
Still sits he as his greasy fists have shaped him,
Vexed, that some glorious morsel has escaped him;
Though he alone whole custards has devoured,
And his wide throat with tarts and marchpanes scoured
Yet he is not satisfied, although at least
He has gormandiz'd a whole hog at a feast.
Now the best fruits that grow from this voracitie,
Is to be loud, and prate with great audacitie.
His guts full stuffed, and brains well toxt with wine,
Himself he spruceth, studieth to be fine;
Either prepares his squealing voice to sing,
Or dancing, hops about as he would fling
His gouty legs off from his rotten thighs.
Wearied with these, again he does devise
Of new discourse, and that must chiefly be
Of temperance and grave sobriety.
Now is he made a sport to all the Board,
Stammers and lisps, speaks not a ready word;
Then drinks even unto vomit: Last of all,
To take the nasty fellow thence they call.
Then there is with both hands lifting; loath he leaves
The place, and unto some she Minstrell cleaves,
Ready to ravish her in all their view,
To show that Lust does Drunkenness pursue;
Nay in his best sobriety applying
Himself to boldness, avarice, and lying;
In which none can out-match him, he is a Chief
Both with the soothing flatterer and Thief:
For perjurie there is no man that transcends him,
Imposture ushers, Impudence attends him.
He is an Object of mere observation,
Or (truly looked into) of admiration;
A spectacle of scorn, that wonder brings,
Being made complete from mere imperfect things:
^ll his imperfections, more or less,
^ming a kind of modesty to express.
Most strange! O Thrasicles, What make you here?

Thrasicles. Not with the mind of others I appear,
Timon, who come flocking to behold
^ee and thy mighty Magozin of gold,
^^^haps to steal and pilpher, to be guests
^usive to thy table and thy feasts;
^o daub thee with pyde flatteries, that indeed
^^ a man simple, and do Counsel need;
^rainlesse Prodigal, wholly given to wast,
^ily parting with what coin thou have.
Besides, thou art not ignorant, I am sure,
^at spare and thirfty diet I endure,
^e Chop or Fragment best with me agreeing,
^n just so much as will maintain a Being:
^^ onion is a meat to taste my pallat,
^ a few water Cresses a choice sallat;
^^ttle salt cast on them, then it is rare,
^ I account it most delicious fare.
^ thirst the Athenian fountain sates and fills,
^ich by seven cocks it plenteously distills.
^s threadbare cloak by me is prizd more hye
^an the best robe dipped in the Tyrian dye:
^ Gold, thou know that I esteem't no more
^n I do pebbles scattered on the shore.
^et for thy sake I hither made access,
^ing thy wealth, thy goodness might oppress;
^^g corrupt and vile in it is own being,
^ no way with thy temperature agreeing,
^ rout of irrecoverable ills,
^^ich seeming most to comfort, soonest kills.
^ul'd by me, Go instantly and cast
^ the Ocean all the wealth thou have:
at need of Gold, when all things we supply
contemplation of Philosophy?
But cast it not into the depth I prethes,
But near the shore, when only I am with thee;
Enough it is if the wave but overflow it,
To cover it, and (save my self) none know it.
If this dislike thee, that thou holdst it vain,
I have another project in my brain,
And 't may prove the best course; From forth thy do^^
Precipitate and tumble all thy store;
And to express a pure abstemious mind,
Of all thy Mass leave not a piece behind.
There is a third way (like the second) speedy,
Namely, by distributing to the needy;
Who in all ears shall thy donation sound:
To him five drams, give that man a pound,
A talent to another. If by chance,
Philosophers of austere countenance
Hither to taste thy largess shall repair,
Give such a double, nay a treble share,
As to the men most worthy. This (alas)
I for mine own part speak not, but to pass
Thy bounty unto others that more need,
And would be thankful, of thy gift to feed.
For my particular use I crave no more
Than so much at this present from thy store
As would but fill my Scrip, the bulk being small,
Holds two Aegina bushels, and that is all:
To be content with little, moderation
And temperance becomes men of my fashion:
We Sophists, that in wisdom all outstrip,
Should aim at nothing further than our Scrip.

Tim. All that thou speakst I (Thrasicles) allow;
Yet e're I fill thy wallet, hear me now,
I Will stuff thy head with tumors, having made
True measure of thy skull with this my spade.

Thrasic. O Liberty! o Laws! near a free City,
Thus to be used by one devoid of pity!

Tim. Why, Thrasicles, thus angry do thou show thee?
^ave I not paid thee the full debt I owe thee?
^ay but a little, and to express my love,
^ure measures thou shall have over and above.
that further business have we now in breeding?
^ultitudes hither flock, in throngs exceeding;
^ere's Blepsias, Laches, Cniphon, and in brief,
thousand more that hasten to their grief,
^ if they ran for blows; see how they flock:
therefore I Will clyme to the highest part of this rock,
^old that course is for the present best,
and to my wearied spade to give some rest:
^f scattered stones I Will gather me an heap,
and from that place I Will make them skip and leap,
^uring my hail on them.

Bleps. Hurl not, we pray,
Timon, instantly we will trudge away.

Tim. And yet thou shall with difficulty do it,
without some bloodshed and deep wounds to boot.

The Argument of the Dialogue entitled IVPITER and GANIMEDE.
Jove's Masculine love this Fable reprehends,
And wanton dotage on the Trojan Boy.
Shaped like an Eagle, he from the earth ascends,
And bears through the air his new Delight and Joy.
In Ganimed's expressed a simple Swain,
Who would leave Heaven, to live on Earth again.
The DIALOGVE.
Jupiter. NOw kiss me, lovely Ganimed, for see,
We are at length arrived where w^ would be:
I have no crooked beak, no tallons ke^
No wings or feathers are about me seen;
I am not such as I but late appeared.

Ganimed. But were not you that Eagle who late feared
And snatched me from my flock? where is become
That shape? you speak now, who but late were dumb

Iupit. I am no man, fair Youth, as I appear,
Nor Eagle, to astonish thee with fear:
But King of all the gods, who for some reason
Have by my power transhap't me for a season.

Ganim. What Is that you say? you are not Pan, I know:
^here's the^ your pipe? or where your horns, should grow
^on your temples? where your hairy thighs?

Jupiter. Thinks Ganimed that godhood only lies rural Pan?

Ganim. Why not? I know him one:
^e Shepherds sacrifice to him alone.
spotted Goat into some cave we drive,
^d then he seiseth on the beast alive.
^ou art but some Childe-stealer, that is thy best.

Iupit. Have thou not heard of any man contest
Jove's great Name? nor his rich Altar viewed
Gargarus, with plenteous showers bedewed?
here seen his fire and thunder?

Ganim. Do you then
^ffirme your self the same, who on us men
^ late poured haile-stones? he that dwells above us,
^^d there makes noise; yet some will say does love us?
^ whom my Father did observance yield,
^^d sacrificed the best Ram in the field.
^^y then (if you of all the gods be chief)
^^ve you, by stealing me, thus played the thief;
^^en in my absence the poor sheep may stray,
the wild ravenous Wolves snatch them away?

Iupit. Yet have thou care of Lambs, of Folds, of sheep,
^^at now art made immortal, and must keep ^ietie with Us?

Ganim. I no way can
^^nceive you. Will you play the honest man, ^^d bear me back to Ida?

(...). So in vain
^ap'd me like an Eagle, if again ^ould return thee back.

Ganim. My father, he
this has made inquiry after me; ^^d if the least of all the flock be eaten,
I in his rage am most sure to be beat.

Iup. Where shall he find thee?

Ganim. That Is the thing I fear,
He never can clime up to meet me here,
But if thou be a good god, let me pass
Into the mount of Ida where I was:
And then I le offer, in my thankful piety,
Another well fed Goat unto thy diety,
(As price of my redemption) three years old,
And now the chief and prime in all the fold.

Iup. How simple is this innocent Lad? a mere
Innocuous child. But Ganimed now hear.
Bury the thoughts of all such terren dross,
Think Ida and thy fathers flocks no loss:
Thou now art heavenly, and much grace may do
Unto thy father and thy country too.
No more of cheese and milk from henceforth think,
Ambrosia thou shall eat, and Nectar drink,
Which thy fair hands in flowing cups shall fill
To me and others, but atte^d us still;
And (that which most should moove thee) make thy' abo^
Where thou art now, thou shall be made a god,
No more be mortal, and thy glorious star
Shine with refulgence, and be seen from far.
Here thou art ever happy.

Ganim. But I pray,
When I would sport me; who is here to play?
For when in Ida I did call for any,
Both of my age and growth it yielded many.

Iup. Play-fellowes for thee I will likewise find,
Cupid, with diverse others to thy mind,
And such as are both of thy years and sise,
To sport with thee all what thou can devise:
Only be bold and pleasant, and then know
Thou shall have need of nothing that is below.

Ganim. But here no service I can do indeed,
Unless in heaven you had some flocks to feed.

Iup. Yes, thou to me shall fill celestial wine,
and wait upon me when in state I dine:
^hen learn to serve in banquets.

Ganim That I can
^ready, without help of any man:
^r I use ever when we dine or sup,
^o pour out milk, and crown the pastoral cup.

Iup. Fie, how thou still remember'st milk and beasts,
if thou were to serve at mortal Feasts:
^ow, this is heaven, be merry then and laugh;
^hen thou art thirsty thou shall Nectar quaffe.

Ganim. Is it so sweet as milk?

(...) Pris'd far before,
which tasted once, milk thou will ask no more.

Ganim. Where shall I sleep a nights? what, must I ly
^^h my companion Cupid?

(...). So then I
^vaine had raped thee: but I from thy sheep
^ purpose stole thee, by my side to sleep.

Ganim. Can you not lie alone? but will your rest
^me sweeter, if I nuzzle on your breast?

(...). Yes, being a child so fair:

Ganim. How can you think
beauty, whilst you close your eyes and wink?

(...). It is a sweet inticement, to increase
^^ntented rest, when our desire's at peace.

Ganim. I, but my father every morn would chide,
^^d say, those nights he lodged me by his side
^uch disturbed his rest; tumbling and ^ossing
^wart the bed, my little legs still crossing
^ either kicking this way, that way sprawling,
^f he but removed me, straitwaies yawling:
^^ grumbling in my dreams, (for so he sed)
often times sent me to my mothers bed:
then would she complain upon me worse.
Then if for that you stole me, the best course
Is even to send me back again; for I
Am ever so unruly where I lie,
Wallowing and tumbling, and such coile I keep,
That I shall but disturb you in your sleep.

Iupit. In that the greater pleasure I shall take,
Because I love still to be kept awake.
I shall embrace and kiss thee then the ofter,
And by that means my bed seem much the softer.

Ganim. But whilst you wake I Will sleep.

Iup. Mercury, see
This Lad straight taste of immortality;
And making him of service capable,
Let him be brought to wait on us at table.

IVPITER and IVNO.
The Argument of the Dialogue.
IVno of Ganimed is jealous grown,
And much vpbraids Jove with the Phrygian Swain;
^illing (before him) to prefer her own:
^^d therefore blames her husband, but in vain.
Although this Fable to the gods extends,
Base sordid lust in man it reprehends.
The DIALOGUE.
^^^o. SInce this young Trojan Swain to heaven thou have brought,
O Jupiter, thou set'st thy Wife at naught.

Jupit. Of him too art thou jealous, a poor Swain,
^ough beautiful, yet innocent and plain?
^s in hope thou only had a spleen
women, such as I before have been
^^miliar with.

(...). Nor have thou made expression
thy great deity in such transgression,
^r done such things as have thee well beseem'd;
^o being a god above the rest esteemed,
Descendest down to earth, making it full
Of thy Adulteries: some imes like a Bull;
Then like a golden Shower, and keeping still
Those Prostitutes below to s^te thy will.
But now again, Thou, mightiest of the dieties,
Lest that there should be end of thy impieties;
Being now inflamed with an unheard desire,
Have this young Phrygian Lad snatched from his Sire,
Brought hither to out-brave me, and set ods
Betwixt us, filling Nect^r to the gods.
Is there such want of Cup bearers? or weary
Is Hebe yet, or Vulcan, to make merry
Thy Gu^sts inv^^ed? that no so^ner thou
Take from his hand the bowl, but straight to bow
And kiss his sweet lip, nay in all our sight:
In that kiss seeming to take more delight,
Than in the Nectar drunk: but which is worst,
Often callst for drink when there is no cause of thirst;
And as in sport (but sipping) thy arm stretchest,
And the full Chalice to the Wanton reachest,
And he but tasting, as shall please him best,
Then to his health carowsest all the rest;
And in the same place where his lip did touch,
Thou take thy draught, thy lewd desire is such,
With heedfulnesse and care noting the brim,
So, at once kissing both the cup and him.
Not long since too, this King and potent Father
Of men and all mortality, the rather
To sport with him, his Scepter laid aside,
And thunders, with which late he terrify'de
The lower world. And speak, was not this wrong
To a Brow so great? a Beard so full and long?
All this I have seen, all these I have endured,
And nothing's done that is to me obscured.

Jupiter. Why's this to thee so grievous, o my wife,
That it should raise betwixt us the least strife?
That a young Lad, so f^ire and sweet as this,
should please me both with Nectar and a kiss?
^houldst thou but taste those lips (which I am Ioth)
^hou would not blame me to prefer them both
before all Nectar and Ambrosia too;
^ay, if thou did, even so thy self would do.

Juno. These are the words of masculine love, much hated,
^^ or am I mad, to be degenerated
^ base effeminacies as to take delight
^ the loathed kisses of a Catamite.

Iup. Pray (you most generous) do not so deprave
those loves and pleasures I am pleased to have:
^his pretty sweet effeminat Lad to me
^ dearer far -- but I Will not anger thee.

Juno. I wish in my place you had that Lad wedded,
^ith whom you ofter than with me have bedded
^nce his arrive: your loathed wife shall bethink her,
^ow better to behave her toward your Skinker.

Iup. Is It only fit, Vulcan thy son should fill
^ectar, who being lame is apt to spell;
and bluntly running from the furnace, smells
^ smoke, dust, sweat, and what I know not else,
^ith sparks scarce quenched, before the gods to stand,
^s sooty tongs new laid out of his hand,
^o take from him the goblet? which being done,
^o embrace, then kiss thy most deformed son;
whom scarcely thou his mother would so grace,
^aring his smudg'd lips should begrime thy face.
^he that only sweet Youth must adorn
^he gods high banquets, being made their scorn?
^^d therefore must this Phrygian be confined,
^^cause he is clear in looks, as pure in mind?
those face so smooth, whose tongue does so excel,
^^d in all points becomes the place so well.
^t that which most torments thee, since his kiss
any degrees more sweet than Nectar is:

Juno. Now Vulcan unto thee (o Jove) seems lame,
His forge, his apron, tongs, and tools, thy shame:
What nastinesse? What loathsomeness? but he
Now at this instant does appear to thee
Infected with; whilst thou before thee have
That fair faced Trojan Lad? but in times past,
None of this foul deformity was seen,
No sparks, no soot, no dust to move thy spleen:
His furnace in those days did not affright thee,
But then his filling Nectar much delight thee.

Iupit. Thou make thy self sick of thine old disease,
O Juno, and this Trojan does more please,
Because of him thou art jealous: if thou scorn
From him to take the Cup; of thy self borne
Thou have to fill thee, Vulcan, one so smug,
As if he gaped still for his mothers dug.
But thou, o Ganimed, to me alone
Reach the rich bowl. Two kisses for that one
I Will give thee still, when I receive it first,
And when return it, having quenched my thirst,
Why weep'st thou? fear not, they that mean thee harm
Mischief are sure to taste. Sweet boy thine arm.

IVPITER and CUPID.
The Argument.
GReat Jupiter on wanton Love has seized,
Ripping up injuries before time done;
And hardly is the Thunderers rage appeased,
^ut holds him fast that is about to run.
^he childish wag submissive language uses,
and with what art he can himself excuses.
The DIALOGVE.
Cupid. WHerein have I, o Jupiter, transgrest;
That by thy power I should be thus oppressed?
Being a child, and therefore simple?

Jupiter. Thou
^ child at these years, Cupid? who I vow,
^rt older than Iapetus, hop'st thou to win
^avor, because no hair upon thy chin
^ppeares? and thou art beardlesse? but beguild
^ust we be still in holding thee a child?
^eing both old and crasie?

Cup. I pray tell
^his subtle old man, whom you know so well,
that wrong he'hath done, that you would bind him?

Iup. See,
Thou wretch, do think it a small injury,
To make me such a mockery and a jest
To all men: that a god should to a beast
Transhape himself: into a Satyr, than
Into a Bull, an Eagle, and a Swan:
Next to a golden Shower? all these thou have made me.
But that wherein thou chiefly have betrayed me,
My will by force or slight I must obtain,
But never love, to be beloved again:
Nor by thy power have I more gracious been
To my wife Juno the celestial Queen;
But forced to use prestigious strange disguise,
In all my scapes to hide me from her eyes.
Besides, our mutual pleasures are not full,
They only kiss an Eagle or a Bull:
But should I in my personal shape appear,
Even at my sight (poor things) they die with fear.

Cupid. That only shows thy power and divine might,
Since mortal eyes cannot endure thy sight.

Iup. How comes it, Hyacinthus is so dear,
And Branchus. to Apollo? Is his Sphere
More bright than ours? yet they about him cling,
In his own shape.

Cup. But Daphne that coy thing,
Though he showed young and beardlesse, his cheeks red,
And each way lovely, his embraces fled.
If love then would be amorous, and apply
Himself to Love, his shield he must lay by,
And fearful thunders, smoothly kembe his hair,
And part it both ways, to appear more fair:
Wear on h^s head a Chaplet for a Crown,
And flowing from his shoulders a loose gown
Died in Sidonian purple: on his feet
Sandals, whose the with golden buckles meet:
Unto the Pipe and Timbrell learn to dance,
And foot it to them finely: so by chance
More glorious Beauties may to him incline,
Than Menades attend the god of Wine.

Iup. Away: I more esteem my regal state,
Than to appear so poorly effeminate:

Cup. Love not at all, and that is more easy far.

Iup. Yes, love I must, whilst here such Beauties ar,
And gain them with less trouble, mauger thee.
^o for this time be gone.

Cup. I now am free.

VULCAN and APOLLO
The Argument.
'Twixt Vulcan and Apollo speech is held
Of young Cillenius, Maia's newborn son;
How he in cheats and theevings has excelled:
Relating strange things in his cradle done.
Since whom, all infants borne beneath his star,
In craft and guile exceed all others far.
The DIALOGVE.
Vulcan. Have thou not seen (Apollo) the young Brat^
So late brought forth by lovely Maia? tha^
Looks in his swathes so beautifully fair
Snarling on all such as about him are;
Whom no one that beholds him, but surmises
That he is borne for some great enterprises?

Apollo. Shall I (o Vulcan) him an infant call?
Or think him borne for any good at all?
Who for his craft and subtlety (I vow)
Is than Iapetus older.

Vulcan. Tell me how?
What wrong can this young Baby do, I pray,
Who came into the world but yesterday?

Apollo. Ask Neptune that, whose Trident he has stolen:
Demand of Mars, (with rage and anger swollen)
Whether his brain least subtlety afford?
Out of whose scabberd he has stolen his sword?
Or let me speak what by my self I know:
From me unwares my quiver and my bow
He slily snatched.

Vulcan. How can it be, his hands
Being tied up so close in swathing bands.

Apollo. Yet be not thou too confident, I entreat thee,
For come he near thy shop, he will likewise heat thee.

Vulcan. He was with me but now.

Apollo. Do thou misdoubt thee
Of nothing lost? have all thy tools about thee?
What, not one wanting?

Vulc. None.

Apollo. Free from his wrongs
Art thou alone?

Vulc. By Jove I miss my tongs,
They Are stolen out of my forge.

Apoll. These thou shall find
About him hid, do but his swathes unbinde.

Vulc. Has he such catching fingers? (past believing)
^ure in his mothers womb he studied theeving.

Apollo. Did thou not hear him, Vulcan, talk and prate
With voluble tongue, and phrases accurate?
Now in his infancy, so young, so small,
Offering to be a servant to us all.
^o sooner borne, but Cupid he did dare
To try a fall with him, and threw him fair.
^im Venus for his victory embraced,
^or which he steals her girdle from her wast.
Jove smiling at the theft, and therewith pleased,
^ean time the crafty wag his Scepter seized:
^o steal his Trisulke he had made a shift,
^ut 'twas too heavy for his strength to lift.

Vulc. Thou telst me of a Lad active and daring,
A nimble juggling Jack.

Apollo. Nay, he is not sparing
To profess Music too.

vulc. How is that known?

Apoll. The invention too he seeks to make his own:
Having the shell of a dead Tortoise found,
He makes an instrument thereof for sound;
To which a crooked neck he first made fast,
Boring therein round holes, and in them placed
Pinnes to wind up the cords by: to the Shells back
A belly frames: seven strings, which he does slack,
And sometimes stretch, he fixes; which but touch,
They yield a sweet sound that delights much.
Whose notes I envy, be they flat or sharp.
Since he contends to exceed me in my Harp.
Even Maia's self I often have heard complain,
She cannot in the heavens her son contain:
His ever-waking brain, in action still,
Can take no rest: by night (against her will)
In silence he conveyes himself to hell,
Whether to steal ought thence she cannot tell.
Besides, he has wings, a Caducaeus too
Of a miraculous power, and force to do
Things wonderful, by which he can bestow
Souls hence departed, in the fields below,
Or thence convey them hither.

Vulc. Most sure I will
Add something to encourage his rare skill.

Apoll. Which he has well requited; for to day
(No longer since) he stole thy tongs away.

Vulc. 'Twas well done to remember me of this,
Because my tongs are tools I cannot miss.
Somewhere about him they are still, no doubt:
But first the fire I Will in my forge put out.

MERCVRY and APOLLO.
The Argument.
OF Jove and of Alcmena: The long night
In which the great Alcides was begot,
^his Fable speaks. And if I guess aright,
(...) this the Author much profaned not,
To tax the heathen Idols his pretense is,
Since men are punished for the gods offenses.
The DIALOGVE.
Mercury. TO thee, o Phoebus, Jupiter does say,
Forbear to mount thy Chariot for this day;
The next too, and the third, disclose no light,
^t for that time make it continual night.
^^epe in, command the Hours thy steeds to untrace,
and thy bright Sun beams pluck from off thy face.
^r, without intermission being oppressed
^ith such long pains, it is fit thou should have rest,

Apollo. Thou telst me a new thing, unheard till now;
^^ve I transgrest my course, or been too slow,
^^ over-swift? that Jove should prove a way
^^ make the night thrice longer than the day.
There Is no such thing; he only has intent
At some one aim on which his mind is bent,
And this time only (but not still to be)
To have this one night made as long as three.

Apollo. Where is he now, or from whence art thou sent To tell me this?

Merc. Boetia's continent;
And from (If I shall make a true confession)
Amphitrio's wife, with whom he has congression.

Apoll. With her his courage then and strength he tries
But for his lust will not one night suffice?

Merc. O by no means, since in this copulation
Must be begot one that shall awe each Nation;
Of a most potent arm, and daring much,
And therefore it is not possible that such
A mighty work as making up Jove's son,
Should in one night be perfected and don.

Apollo. Well, I but little have to say unto him,
But with this great work much good may it do him.
These things, o Mercury (we are alone)
In The ancient days of Saturn were not known;
He did not turn from Rhea, nor misled
Could he be to adulterat her chaste bed:
Nor did he leave the heavens, in Thebes to sleep;
The day was then day, and true course did keep,
The night within her certain hours was bounded,
No times, no seasons in his reign confounded:
He had with mortal creatures no congresse.
But now for one poor woman's sake (I guess)
All things are topside-turn'd, and must be made
Prepostrous henceforth, and run retrograde.
My Steeds with rest will grow more fierce and hot:
The way more hard and difficult, because not
In three days past: Men miserably dwell
Here on the earth in darkness, as in hell.
And these are the fair fruits of his foul lust,
That sublunarie creatures suffer must;
Warning at once the absence of the Sun,
and waiting till this mighty work be don.

Merc. Phoebus no more: had Jove intelligence
^f what thou speakst, his rage it would incense.
^e to the Moon and Sleep, and what in charge
^ad from him, deliver them at large:
^o her, to change the course she late did keep:
^o him, to setter them in bonds of sleep,
^o fast, they may not dream of that great wrong,
^o have been kept from sight of day so long.

MERCVRY and MAIA.
The Argument.
HErmes his tedious labors does complain,
As troubled more than all the gods besides,
Not able his employments to sustain,
As one that in no certain place abides.
Yet by his mother he at length is swayd,
Who tells him Jove's bests must be still obayd.
The DIALOGVE.
Merc. IS there amongst the gods (o Mother) any So wretched as my self, though
there be man

Maia. Take heed, my son, what thou spea^ rashly.

Merc. Why?

Can you name one that has such cause as I?
Who have so many businesses in hand,
And those so great I scarce beneath them stand;
Into so many services divided,
I am tired and spent, and for my pains derided.
For in the morning, e're I can devise
Of what my dreams were, I betimes must rise,
Then my first office is to sweep the house
Where all the gods must banquet and carouse
That done, I next prepare the Consistory,
Whereas the Deities in all their glory
^ppoint their meetings: all things I make fit,
That they in ease as well as state may sit.
Then at Jove's elbow I attend, where he
^till sends me on his errands: I must be
^ere, there, and every where, and these too all
^urrying together; for he will sometimes call
^s soon as I am sent. When the whole day
^ have toild, not having time to wipe away
The dust and sweat, new labor I begin,
^upper comes on, and I must then serve in
Ambrosia: e're the Phrygian had to do
With Jove's crowned Cup, I filld him Nectar too.
^ut what of all is most tedious, and accites
^e to this spleen, I cannot rest a nights;
^or whilst each other god upon his bed
^akes due repose, even then I of the Dead
and new deceast have charge, and through the shade
^o Pluto's Court I see them safe convay'd.
^hese done, I cannot rest me where I list,
^ut at their general Sessions I assist,
^or nothing's done without me. 'Tmight suffice,
that I all daily business enterprise:
^^ Wrestlings I am present, at the Bar,
^here Causes and Lawsuits determined ar',
^struct such Orators as Fees desire;
^^metimes supply the place of common Crier.
^or would these things appear so great a trouble,
^t that the affairs of hell make them seem double.
^^e sons of Laeda much more happy be,
^hey interchangeably have leave to see
^he heaven and hell by turns; while one does show
^^mselfe above, the other stays below.
Than these how much more miserable am I,
That in one person both their pains supply?
Alcmena and Semele (of mortal seed
Descended both) have free access to feed
Amongst the Deities: yet I on these
(Being son of Maia Atlantiades)
Am forced to' attend, I came from Sidon late,
As sent from Jove, to know in what estate
Cadmus fair daughter was. Almost quite spent,
Not having time to breathe, but I was sent
To Argos and fair Danae, in that tower
Where he was welcomed in his golden shower.
In thy return come by Boetia back,
(Says Jupiter) o Hermes do not slack
To visit fair Antiope by the way.
My resolution is no more to obey
Unto his busy hests: To gain mine ease,
I had much rather (did the Fates so please)
My self for ever to the earth retire,
As a day-Laborer, and work for hire.

Maia. No more, my son, for thou too much have said;
Thy father must in all things be obay'd.
Able and young thou art, prepare again,
To Argos first, and to Boetia then:
Hazard not stripes of him that swayes above:
Such are most angry that are crossed in love.

VULCAN and JUPITER.
The Argument.
VVlcan obeying to Jove's high design,
With his keen hatchet cleaves his head in twain:
^rm'd Pallas, who there full ten months had lain,
^t this incision leaps out of his brain;
^hen entering first the world. Whence we may gather,
^nowledge and Arts had birth from Jove their Father.
The DIALOGVE.
Vulcan. WHat must I do, Jove? Prithee let me know:
See, I am come, for thou commandedst so;
^^d brought with me an Axe sharp above wonder,
those very edge will cleave a rock in sunder.

Jupiter. It Is well done, Vulcan, 't must be thus apply'de,
^ou with that hatchet must my head divide.

Vulc. Would thou persuade me unto madness? say
^at's to be done, or pack me hence away.
^ pleasure is, with a strong blow and full,
^^th all thy force thou part in two my skull.
If thou refuse to do it, as fearing skath,
Thy timerousnesse will but increase my wrath
And deep displeasure: therefore strike I say,
Instantly, boldly, and without delay:
Quickly deliver me, I am full of pain,
A thousand throws are laboring in my brain.

Vulc. Well look to it Jupiter, my axe is keen,
Nor can this birth be without bloodshed seen.
'Twill be a dangerous wound made in thy head;
Beleeve't, Lucina brings not thus to bed.

Iupit. Strike boldly then, o Vulcan, fear not blood,
For I know best what for my self is good.

Vulc. Though against my will, I shall, who dares withstand
When Jupiter himself shall give command.
What Is here? A woman armed leaps on the Plain:
O Jove, thou had much mischief in thy brain.
No marvel thou were angry and much paind,
When in thy Pia matter was containd
A live Virago, armed, and having spread
Castles and towns and towers about her head;
She leaps and capers, topt with rage divine,
And danceth (as she treads) the Matachine,
Shakes her steele-pointed Lance, and strikes her Tardge
As if she had the god of War in charge.
Nay, which is more, she is exceeding fair,
And ripe for marriage, made in all parts rare,
And amiable, only she has blew eyes,
But those her graceful helm does well disguise:
And therefore Jupiter, because I have
Thus played the midwife for thee, what I crave,
Grant me for my reward, namely that she
May be my wife, this day espoused to me.

Jupit. Thou demandst that which cannot be allowed,
For this Minerva is a Virgin vowed,
Nay, a perpetual Votary: but if I
In this could do thee any courtesy,
Thou might presume't.

Vulc. It is my great desire,
and to my best of wishes I Will aspire
^ waiting time to rape her.

^upit. O my son,
^hou aimst at that which never can be done:
^e vows to live a Virgin, let that guide thee,
^rsue not things which never can betide thee.

NEPTVNE and MERCVRY.
The Argument.
THE abortive Infant from the womb took late
Of dying Semele, Jove does translate
Into his own thigh: but the time expired
For mature birth, which (pregnant) he desired;
This child, by one conceived, borne of another,
Bacchus, enioyes the name of Bacchus bimater^
double Mother.
The DIALOGVE.
Nep. MAy I not see my brother?

Merc. Neptune, no.

Nep. I do entreat thee, Nephew, let b^ know
That I attend without.

Merc. It cannot be,
And therefore leave this importunity;
You must not at this present be admitted.

Nep. He Is then in bed with Iano?
No, (Gross witted.)
Or Ganimed? Prithee resolve me quickly.

Merc. Neither; but Jove at this time's weak and sic^

Nep. How comes it that thou likewise lookst not well?

Merc. There is a cause in it, which I blush to tell.

Nep. What e're it be, the secret do not hide
From me thine Uncle, and so near ally'de.

Mer. He Is newly brought to bed.

Nep. Mercury fie,
Not possible; it is a thing that I
Cannot believe: it would have come to light
^re now, had Jove been an Hermaphrodite.
Besides, I never perceived his womb to swell.

Merc. It Is true, in that (o Neptune) thou say well:
His childing burden did not lie within.

Nep. Now to conceive thee better I begin;
^ome other Pallas from his skull is taken;
My Brother ever had a teeming brain.

Merc. Not so; this burden in his thigh was bred,
Took from the womb of Semele, late dead.

Nep. Wondrous! This generous god, by thy relation,
Will teach to us new ways of procreation.
But what is that Semele?

Merc. Of Cadmus race,
A Theban Damsel, in whom Jove had place,
And left her great.

Nep. Most kindly it was done,
To spare her throes, himself to bear her son.

Merc. Ghest somewhat near; not altogether, tho,
^umping with truth. But wonders will thou know,
From thee yet foreign? Juno (jealous still)
By strange deceit seeks means the wench to kill;
Persuades her (their united loves to sunder)
To beg of Jove, to bed with her in thunder
And blasting lightning (cause of all her grief.)
To her the credulous Wanton gives belief;
The craves, Jove grants, descends in glorious fire,
And in these flames the poor Girl does expire.
Who grieving the fair Theban so should die,
Caused me to rip her womb up instantly,
And bring the Infant, now seven months conceived,
Whom from my hand he gratefully received:
Not knowing better how to make provision
For this Abortive, he made deep incision
In his own thigh, and there it three months lay,
Till (now mature) it for it self made way.
This day he is delivered, and now grows
Somewhat distemperd by his painful throws.

Nep. But where is the Infant?

Mere. Him I did transport
To Nisa late, where the fair Nymphs resort,
By them with great care to be educated,
And by the name of Bacchus celebrated,
Or Dionysius.

Nep. Then of this thy brother,
As Jove the father is, so he is the mother.

Mere: It so appears: but Neptune I am gone,
For other things I now have thought upon;
I must go fetch him Lotion for his wound,
Yet green, and will in few days scarce be sound.
There Is nothing but to him we must apply,
That Is done to women that in childe-bed lie.

DIOGENES and MAUSOLUS.
The Argument.
THe dead Mausolus does himself advance
Before all others of the buried Throng:
And therefore he erects his countenance,
Because on earth he was so fair and strong.
Diogenes derides his boastings vain,
And proves himself more happy of the twain.
The DIALOGUE.
Diog. ATtend, o Carrion, what is thiue intent
To be even still so proud and insolent?
Prating of thy great worth, others to brave,
As if thou for some great desert would have
Before us all precedence.

Maus. I first claim
Prioritie, raised from a kingdoms name,
(O Synopesian) for I empir'd over
All Caria: next, I pierced the Lydian shore,
There governed Nations barbarous and rude:
Besides, I many other Isles subdued.
The great'st part of Ionia I laid wast,
And my great army to Miletum past.
Nay more, I was of beautiful aspect,
Tall and well shaped, and (what I much affect)
In power (before me) I exceeded all.
But that which made me most majesticall,
Of costly marble from the rock dissected,
I have a stately monument erected
In Halicarnassus, famed for magnitude,
With rare and never equaled pulchritude,
So fair, so large, that all that see it know,
No King that ere deceast the like can show.
Statues of men and horses 'bout it stand,
Graven and carved by a most elaborat hand;
In which expression Artists were at strife,
Not one of them but imitating life;
Of such admired height and spacious room,
It rather seems a Temple, than a Toome.
What wrong is it then, my glories not to smother,
And to claim a precedence before other?

Diogenes. Is It potencie? is it beauty? or rich stones
In such huge number heaped upon thy bones,
That swells thee with such pride?

Maus. By Jove the same.

Diog. And yet Mausolus, thou that have the name
Of Beautiful, thy strength is not all one,
Nor face that was; both now are past and gone:
For an unpartiall Vmpire should we choose
To point the Fairer out; let him but use
An unsway'd eye, not squinted with affections,
Shall find small difference in our two complexions:
For both our heads are bald and alike bare,
Having no lips, our teeth apparent are;
Neither of us a nosthrill has to show,
But through these empty holes alike we blow.
This being granted, if because thy shroud
Beneath so great a Structure make thee proud,
And that thy countrymen that Mole retain,
Boasting of it with ostentations vain,
To show to strangers the rare excellence
Of polisht stone; what profit reapst thou thence,
Thou exquisite man? unless thy shallow wit
Account thy greatest hurt a benefit;
To have of huge stones, wondrously convay'd,
Agreater heap than others on thee laid.

Maus. Am I no whit the better then for these?
^s Mausolus one with Diogenes?

Diog. Not so, good man, no paritie's confessed;
The Carian King shall be with grief oppressed,
Excruciated and perplexed in mind,
To think of his great pleasures left behind,
Honors and wealth: Diogenes the while
At thy vexation stand aloof and smile.
Thou in thy lasting memory shall have
The art and charge bestowed upon thy grave,
By thy fair sister and thy widdowed Queen,
^n Halicarnassus still to be seen.
When as Diogenes yet does not know
Whether on earth he have a grave or no;
Therefore can take no care for it. My fame lies
Tomb'd in the bosoms of the Just and Wise.
Stories to future times deliver can,
^ lead a life that did become a man.
Time shall thy Structure wast, but never mine,
Thou impure Carian) for it is made divine:
^ly monument grows nearer to the sky,
^s built in place much more sublime and hye.

CRATES and DIOGENES
The Argument.
NAture with too much darkness overcast,
Is maskt and blinded with the worlds affairs,
Still doting upon things that cannot last,
As on vain frailties fixing all their cares.
" Man that on mundane things himself assures,
" Cheats all his hopes; it is Virtue sole endures.
The DIALOGVE.
Crat. TEll me Diogenes, have thou not known
Rich Moerichus, the man so overgrowne
With wealth superfluous, that from Corinth came
With ships so richly fraught? the very same,
Cousin to Aristaeus thought to be,
By computation full as rich as he:
Tkese two betwixt themselves use Homers phrase,
Claw me, I Will claw thee; Let Us live many days.

Diog. What was the reason, Crates, first did move
These monied men to enterchange such love?

Crat. The cause they were intyr'd so, and called brother,
Was, aiming to be heir to one another,
Being equally possessed: and therefore they
Published their Wills; If Moerichus his day
Should before Aristaeus chance to fall,
He the succeeder then should enjoy all.
So Aristaeus, If he died before,
Then Moerichus was heir to all his store.
This by Indenture sealed, they cog, speak fair,
Flatter, in hope to be each others heir,
With gifts and presents mutually contending,
Yet still one gaping for the others ending.
Insomuch that Diviners (whether skild
In The stars or no I know not) all have filled
Their itching ears with Novels. Dreamers too
Like the Chaldaeans) have enough to do
To mock them with vain hopes, and at high rate
Having betwixt them cast so even a fate,
Phoebus himself was pusled: first agreeing,
That Aristaeus should have longest being;
And then again, That Moerichus the Old
Should count new days when he had all his told:
Not knowing whose ambition should prevail,
Their Fates being balanced in so even a skale.

Diog. But what is become of this their time out-wearing?
^peake freely Crates, it is a tale worth hearing.

Crat. Those that each others state sought to betray
^y bribes and flatteries, both died in one day;
and that huge Magozin did chance to arrive
To those whom they scarce thought of, being alive,
Thrasicles and Eunomius their Alliance:
^et the Diviners in their great pre-science
Never spoke of them. Now the two rich men, they,
^earelesse, still hoping with the Fates to play,
^eing from Sycion unto Cyrra bound,
^ere in the mid way near Iapygium drowned.

Diog. No matter, Crates, but when we were living,
There was no emulation, no such striving
To be each others heir; never did I
Desire of heaven, Antisthenes should die,
To be made his Executor; or sum
His days, in hope his staff to me might come.
Nor do I think thou ever did desire
(O Crates) I the sooner might expire,
To inherit my possessions, and to strip
Me from my Tun, and pulse left in my scrip.

Crat. I had no need of them, nor thou to claim
His staff for legacy, since thou did aim
At a much fairer heritage, to be
Bettered by him, as I have bin by thee;
And that in treasures richer and more hye,
Such as the Persian Empire cannot buy.

Diog. And what be those?

Crat. Wisdom, frugalitie,
Truth and good life, in all these liberty.

Diog. By Jove, I well remember I had store
Of these from him, but thou (o Crates) more.

Crat. Yet others that have thought themselves more wise
All such inheritances much despise;
Nor sycophant they us, such things to attain
By us, as we from him were proud to gain,
They only thirst and hunger after gold.

Diog. No marvel, since they all of them have sold
Themselves to Ignorance, not capable
Of Knowledge and instructions profitable;
Having their minds with dissolute lusts infected,
Like foul and loathsome dishes long neglected,
Grow fur'd and sluttish with voluptuous sin,
Corrupting the most choice Cates served therein.
The are full of rifts and cranies, every hour
Greater than other: therefore should we pour
Into these leaking Vessels, Judgment sound,
Or Truth, or Freedom, all drop to the ground,
Through their crazed bottomes, and lie spilt and wasted,
Much with their putrid noisomnesse distasted:
So Danaus daughters here in hell are said,
^aboring with Sives a flowing Spring to unlade)
And yet even those that can no goodness keep,
Will watch gold falling from them, and shun sleep,
Hoording it with all care.

Crat. And so it is best
We do those virtues we in life possessed.
^ocke they their stuffed bags in chests never so strong,
They shall but one poor halfe-penny bring along,
and that no further than to Charons barge;
The Ferriman will ease them of that charge.

CHARON, MENIPPVS, MERCVRY
The Argument.
CHaron the Ferriman exclaimes upon
Menippus, for not paying him his fare,
By him being wafted over Phlegeton;
For which these two at great dissension are.
Charon is forced to pardon it in the end;
For he that nothing has must nothing spend.
The DIALOGVE.
Char. PAy me my fare, thou wretch.

Menip. Nay, scold outright,
If thou to hear thy self speak take light.

Char. My due for thy trajection down here lay.

Menip. I prithee how can he that has not, pay?

Char. Is It possible there any one can be
That is not worth a single halfpenny?

Menip. I know not to whom else thou pratest here,
But for mine own part I have none I swear.

Char. I Will bast thee with this ship-rope, if my hire
Thou tendrest not.

Menip. Then shall my staff aspire
To fly about thine ears.

Char. So long a cut
Must I take pains to waft thee, and thou put
To no expense at all?

Menip. Let Hermes stand
^ngag'd for me, who gave me to thine hand.

Merc. By Jove, in time I shall be ill bested,
^f I be put to pay fares for the dead.

Char. He shall not so pass from me,

Men. For his sake
^ontinue still thy course, and quickly make
^owards the shore; What to thy share can fall
^^om him who (as thou see) has naught at all?

Char. Did thou not know what thou should bring along?

Menip. It Is true I did, but can excuse the wrong;
^ad it not, because I want to give,
^t therefore fit that I should ever live?

Char. Will thou be he then, who alone can boast
^^ have ferried this great river without cost?

Menip. Not so, o Charon, wanting to defray,
^hou have my pains, I pumpt part of the way,
^^en tug'd at the oar, being that only soul
^ho in thy barge did neither mourn nor houle.

Char. Tush, these are nothing to my fare that is due,
^y down my halfpenny, my fare, in view.

Men. Not having it, best way to end this strife,
That thou Charon bear me back to life.

Char. For that Gramercy, so I might be sure,
^^om Aeacus a beating to endure.
^his base Ghost would persuade me to the whip.

Men. Be not so peevish then.

Char. What Is in that scrip
^^ou keepst so close about thee?

Men. A small cheat,
^ittle pulse for Hecate to eat.

Char, Tell me, o Mercury, whence have thou brought
This Dog to us? a wretch that minds naught.
What strange things talked he by the way, I guiding
The helm, whilst he was all the while deriding
The passengers? what a loud coile he kept,
He only singing whilst the other wept?

Merc. Know thou not him? he has a spirit daring,
He Is bold, free spoken, and for nothing caring:
This is Menippus, (Fool.)

Char. Well, if again
I take him here, --

Men. Thou threatnest me in vain:
This passage, though not for 'twixt shore and shore,
Yet once being past, cannot be traveld more.

MENIPPVS, AEACVS, PYTHAGORAS, EMPEDOCLES, and SOCRATES.
The Argument.
IVdge Aeacus does to Menippus show
The obscure Ghosts and Sulphur Vaults below.
And after that he brings him to the Plain
Where both the Valiant and the Wise remain:
^ho as the freeness of his tongue him guides,
(Wretched himself) their sorrows he derides.
The DIALOGVE.
Menip. NOw even by Pluto I entreat thee show
(O Aeacus) to me the Vaults below.

Aeac. Not all, Menippus, that were hard to do:
^ut such especially as belongs unto
^hy late demand, namely the prime and choice;
^ these content, I Will listen to thy voice.
^hou know that to be Cerberus, and him
^he ferriman, who from the rivers brim
^ajected thee: this, Periphlegeton:
that the Lake Styx, thine eyes now dwell upon.

Men. I know both thee and these, Aeacus the Great,
Who in this portch has a determined seat.
To observe all entrance, I have likewise seen
The Furies, with the internal King and Queen.
The men of old I now desire to see,
Precelling others in nobility.

Aeac. This Agamemnon is, Achilles he,
That Idomen, a third rankt in degree,
And next them placed: The fourth discovered,
Ulysses, Ajax then, next Diomed.
The rest, the far famed Grecian Hero's are.

Menip. O thou ingenious Homer, see how bare,
How grovelling and how dejected lie,
How low the heads of thy great Rapsodie:
Ignoble and obscure they now are all,
Ashes and dust, trifles in value small;
For (as thy self said) nothing has production,
But's mutable and subject to corruption.
Now Aeacus what is he?

Aeac. Cyrus he is called.
Now he that next him sits so much appal'd,
Croesus the Rich; Sardanapalus then,
Who was the most effeminate of men:
Beyond these Midas, and that Xerxes,

Menip. How?
Is it my fortune then to meet thee now
(Thou wickedest of wretches) in this plight,
Who once did put whole Greece into affright?
That over the raging Hellespont made bridges,
And with thy fleet had purpose over the ridges
Of mighty mountains to have saild ('it is known.)
But what a poor Snake is that Croesus grown?
Pardon me, Aeacus, for above all,
I have a great mind with Sardanapal
To go to present buffets.

Aeac. Do not so.
He is so weak and womanish, the least blow
Will break his skull to pieces.

Men. As I can
I Will gripe him tho, half woman and half man.

Aeac. Will thou see those in wisdom did surpass?

Menip. By any means.

Aeac. Behold Pythagoras.

Men. Hail, thou Euphorbus, or Apollo, or what
Thou would be called by else, I give thee that.

Pythag. Hail to thee likewise.

Men. Speak and do not lie,
Have thou about thee still thy golden thigh?

Pythag. I have it not. But tell me, I entreat,
If thou have ought within thy scrip to eat?

Men. Pulse, nothing else: Thy words are merely wast,
For that I know thy pallat cannot taste.

Pythag. Yet give me part; amongst us here below
Doctrines are taught which then we did not know.
As namely, That there nothing is to boot
Between a Bean and a Satyrion root.

Aeac. Cast thine eyes further now, for besides these,
Here Is Solon, son to Ercecestides,
^^ales and Pittachus, With the other Sages,
Whose memories shall live to after-Ages:
and these alone seem pleasant amongst the rest,
^econd and free, as with no cares oppressed.

Menip. Covered with ashes from the toe to the head
that might he be, that looks so like to bread
^k'd on an hearth unswept, blister'd beside,
^s if he late had roasted been, or fry'de?

Aeac. Empedocles.

Men. He that from Aetna came,
^alfe broild of late, I know him for the same:
^hou excellent of foot, what was the cause
^hou threwst thee headlong into Aetna's jaws?

^^ped. Madness it was, Menippus.

Menip. Not, by Jove;
But a vain arrogance, pride, and self-love,
With madness added, though thou did not see it:
These scorcht thee, with the sandals on thy feet.
Thou Worthless, what have all thy feignings bred,
Being now as others thrust amongst the Dead.
But Socrates, o Aeacus, where is he?
The only man I now desire to see.

Aeac. With Nestor and Palamedes consorting,
And those with whom he best loves to be sporting.

Menip. Yet were he here, I would salute him feign.

Aeac. Behold then that bald Fellow.

Menip. All are plain
And without hair: it is an equal note,
As well amongst these, as in place remote.

Aeac. He without nose.

Menip. Why, amongst great and small,
I cannot spy one wise amongst them all.

Socrat. Do thou seek me, Menippus?

Menip. Thee alone.

Socr. How stand all things in Athens? long agone
It is since I came thence.

Menip. Many young men,
Puny and junior Sophists, such as then
Durst not have talked in public, now look hye,
and openly profess Philosophy.
Nay, who their habits shall observe, the gate
Must needs confess that they still imitate
The old Philosophers. Thou Have seen, I know,
How Aristippus to these Vaults below,
And Plato came: daubd with sweet unguents, the one:
The other in smooth flatteries, cast upon
The Tyrant of Sicilia.

Socrat. But of me
What censure they?

Menip. A blessed Ghost to be,
And one, in those days, whose predicting tongue
Spoke of all things that to this place belong.
And therefore they admire thee, hold thee rare,
With whom none of the Sages might compare;
Above them skild, of such things speaking truest,
Yet (sooth to say) I think more than thou knew.

Socr. I spoke of these things as my skill enabled,
Which they held dreams, and that I merely fabled.

Menip. What are these three about thee?

Socr. In a word,
Charmides, Phedrus, Clima's son the third.

Menip. It Is well done (here too) to profess thy Sect,
And use those thy fair followers with respect.

Socr. What can I better do, my self to please?
Come then, sit down, and by us take thine ease.

Menip. Not I, by Jove, but instantly return,
To hear Sardanapal and Croesus mourn:
Next to these two my mansion I will keep,
Of purpose to deride them when they weep.

Aeac. I must be gone too, and have special care
Lest some ghost steal hence whilst we absent are.
My place is where thou foundst me, next the door;
When next we meet, I Will show thee ten times more.

Menip. I thank thee Aeacus, even with my heart:
We have seen enough at one time, now let us part.

NEREVS, THERSITES, MENIPPVS.
The Argument.
BEtwixt Thersites and Aglaia's Son
A sudden emulation is begun,
Which of them both (being dead) is now most fair.
The Moral shows, In death alike we are.
The DIALOGVE.
Ner. TO end this newborn strife, Thersites see
Here comes Menippus, he shall Vmpire be.
Prithee thou Cynick thy free censure tell
Which of us two in beauty most excel.

Menip. Resolve me first, Who are you that thus seek
To make me judge?

Ner. I Nereus the fair Greek.

There Is. Deformed Thersites I.

Men. But tell me now,
Which (a) Nereus, which (b) Thersites? for I vow
I cannot guess.

There Is. In this thou art overcome,

Nereus: Menippus cannot give his doom,
We are so like. What though blind Homer boast,
And style thee fairest of the Grecian host?
What though my thin and unkemb'd scattered hair
Fell in long Elfe-locks from my scalpe, now bare?
Do not my living ouglinesse revile,
Death ranks us now together in one file.
Therefore to have this difference quickly ended,
Now judge (c) Menippus.

Ner. Am not I descended
From Charopes and Aglaia, famed so far
Bove all that came unto the Trojan war,
For my rare beauty?

Menip. But Nereus know,
None bring their beauty to these Vaults below.
Of the fine flesh thou bragst of, worms have fed,
Leaving thee naught save bones, like us now dead.

Ner. Ask Homer, of what fame Nereus was then,
And he will answer, The most fair of men;
Ascribing Beauties praise fully to me.

Men. Thou tellst me dreams: I judge by what I see.
If amongst them that knew thee in those days
Thou were so famous, seek from them thy praise.

Ner. Am I not then the fairest?

Menip. Nor he, nor thou,
Nor any one that is amongst us now,
Can claim precedence: for equality
Reigns amongst the Dead.

There Is. And that is enough for me.

IVPITER, MERCVRY, IVNO, PALLAS, VENUS, and PARIS.
The Argument of the Dialogue, entitled Deorum Iudicium.
THe Trojan Paris, being yet a Swain,
Is made the Judge of Ates golden Ball.
Three goddesses contend, but two in vain;
Venus (fair Beauties Queen) prevails 'bove all.
With Youth, her frail gifts are more potent charms,
Than Juno's state, than Pallas Arts or Arms.
The DIALOGVE.
Iupit. TAke (Mercury) this Apple, and make speed
To Phrygia, there where Priams son does feed
His herds of Cattle; thou art sure to find him
In Ida mount, the part that is now assigned him
Called Gargarus: and thus much to him say
From Jupiter, That we command him stay
All other his affairs; for being young,
And beautiful withal, of a quick tongue,
Whom most for amatorious things commend,
Him we appoint this doubtful cause to end,
And he alone shall the prime Vmpier be,
To tell which goddess is the fairest of three:
She that is crowned Victresse by the Trojan Boy,
For meed this golden Apple shall enjoy.
This is the hour that calls you to be gone:
I am no competent judge to take upon
Me this arbitrament, since I approve,
They all have equal portion in my love;
And, were it possible, I would renown
Each several Beauty with a Victors Crown,
As bee'ng to me like dear. Whosoever shall give
The Palm to one, he cannot choose but live
In envy of the other: therefore I
Allow me no fit Judge. Go then, apply
Your selves in haste unto that Phrygian Swain,
Who is descended of a regal strain,
And Cousin to my Ganimed; a Youth
Simple, (as mountain-bred) who naught save truth
Knows, and there is none that has beheld his face,
But would esteem him worthy this great grace.

Venus. For my part, Jupiter, what would I care,
If in this censure, Which should be most fair,
Thou would us instantly to Minos send,
What can he find in me to reprehend?
However I am confident, yet these
It Is likewise fitting the young man should please.

Juno. Neither have we, o Venus, cause to fear,
Should Mars your Sweetheart be made Vmpier here.
But to this Youth selected we assent,
And (be he what he will) we rest content.

Iup. Is this your mind, my lovely Pallas? Tush,
I now perceive you turn your eyes and blush:
Such bashfulnesse becomes chaste Virgins still;
I take thy silence for consent, thy will
I find with theirs has correspondence: Go,
And from young Paris thy precedence know;
But take this charge from me, In those that speed not,
Malice or spleen against the Judge it breed not,
Nor the young man with any mischiefs threat,
Since all of you alike cannot be great.

Merc. Proceed we then: this path directly leads
Unto those Phrygian pastures and fair Meads;
I Will show the way, you follow me apace,
Be all of courage, I both know the place,
And Paris too, a beautiful young man,
And in these amorous contentions can
As much as any; fit to undergo
This charge, and will not judge amiss, I know.

Venus. All this is as it should be: I delight
In one not partial, that will censure right.
But is he yet a Bachelor, can tell,
Or does some Wife or Damsel with him dwell?

Merc. I cannot say he is altogether clear
And free from women.

Ven. How Is that? let me hear.

Merc. There lives with him a smug Idaean Less,
Sufficiently fair, and one may pass
Amongst the rest, but rusticall, as bred
In the same mountain where his herd is fed:
Often in familiar conference I have seen them,
But took no note of any love between them.
Why ask you Venus?

Ven. For no ill intent;
It came into my thoughts by accident.

Miner. Ill do thou, Mercury, and us much wrong,
To hold us in fad conference so long.

Merc. Not so Minerva, lovely Venus spoke
Nothing against you; only she chanced to make
A question, if this Paris had a Bride.

Mincrv. If nothing else, why did thou closely hide
Such talk from us?

Merc. She spoke the word by chance;
To keep't from you was but my ignorance.

Miner. Has he none then?

Merc. It seems not.

Miner. Does he incline
To military Arts and discipline?
Is he of warlike spirit, from a strain
Ambitious after glory? or mere Swain?

Merc. In that you plunge me; but as I can guess,
Being young and strong, what can he promise less,
Than prove a hopeful soldier?

Ven. Well, you see
I'plaine me not, nor is it grief to me,
That you two spoke in private; these complaints
Fit jealous heads, but none of Uenus Saints.

Merc. Take nothing ill, fair Venus, I beseech,
For truly to resolve you, her late speech
To yours had reference: Then (as you are wise)
Presume this, naught can bate you of your prise;
The self same answer that to you I made,
I gave to her. In The mean time whilst we trade
In this discourse, the greatest part assigned us
Of this our way we have past, and left behind us
The stars already; Phrygia is not far,
For in our view Ida and Gargarus ar';
And if I be not much deceived, I spy
Paris the Judge that must your beauties try.

Juno. But I see no such man.

Merc. Close by me stand,
And cast your eye that way, toward the left hand,
Not to the mountain top, but to the side,
Where you may spy a caves mouth gaping wide,
By which a fair herd's grasing.

Juno. No such sight mine eyes are guilty of.

Merc. Look here forth-right,

Merc. Just as my finger points, and in your sight
Will fall a goodly herd of Beeves and Cowes;
Not where the rock unto the steepest grows,
But toward the middle part, somewhat descending,
Behind them comes a Swain, it seems, intending
To keep them close together, lest they stray,
Down from the rocks he makes his speediest way;
Holding withal a sharp goad in his hand.

Juno. Now Hermes I begin to understand:
If that be he, I spy him.

Merc. It Is confessed:
But being now so near the earth, it is best
(If so you think it fitting) we descend.
And toward him a moderat pace extend;
Lest sousing on the sudden from an hye,
The frighted Swain may take his heels and fly.

Juno. Hermes speaks well: Let Us all at once alight,
You (Venus) in this way have best insight,
As she therein best skild, who (as Fame tells)
Upon this mountain often in caves and cells,
To satiate your lust, and pay Loves debt,
In Vulcans absence with Anchises met.

Venus. Juno, your scoffs and taunts are ill apply'de,
Nor do they move me.

Merc. Come, I Will be your Guide,
These well known paths I did of custom tread,
When Jupiter first loved his Ganimed;
They were then frequent with me, as being sent
Still to and fro, to accomplish his intent:
When hither like an Egle he descended,
I present was, (for always I attended,
And in his rape assisted) at what time
He snatched him hence, unto you place sublime.
The Lad by chance close by his Fold was fitting,
Voice to the pipe, the pipe to his voice fitting.
Jove soaring high, down on the sudden shifteth,
Behind him falls, and at an instant lifts
Him gently from the earth, his crooked bill
Fastening upon the wreath the Lad kept still
About his brows, griping and holding fast
Yet (without harm) the affrighted Youth, who' aghast,
Turns his head the clean contrary way,
Not knowing what to think, much less to say:
His oten pipe he then let fall through fear.
But leaving this discourse, we now draw near
The Judge we came to seek for. Herdsman God save thee.

Paris. The like to thee young man: I only crave thee
To be resolved, What art thou? and to tell
What are these fair ones that in shape excel?
They are not such as daily we behold
Upon these hills their flocks to graze and fold,
But fairer much.

Merc. Know, these no women be,
But of more high strain and sublimitie;
That, Juno; that Minerva; Venus she,
And I the son of Maia, Mercury.
Jove greets thee thus: Why do thy spirits fail?
Why trembl'st, and so suddenly lookst pale?
^eare not, there is no danger, his command
^s, Thou 'twixt these the impartial Vmpire stand,
Of their choice features: Thus he bad me say,
^ince thou thy self art beautiful, and may
Though in this Ida there be Lovers many)
Yet in these complements compare with any.
Therefore to thee this judgment I commit,
As unto him that best can censure it:
^ehold this Golden Apple, and advise,
^Tis of the choicest beauty, the rare prise.

Paris. Pray give me leave, what is there inserib'd to view;
^ive to the Fairest this as Beauties due.
^ow can I, my Lord Mercury, bee'ng humane,
and least of Mortals, a mere rustic swain,
Be a sufficient judge? that Jove should prove me
In matters weighty and so far above me?
Such desceptations would be better try'de
In cities walled, where men are solely apply'de
To delicacies: what more can you expect
From me, than censure those that I protect;
To say, that she Goat is than this more fair,
And that this Heifer may with that compare:
To judge of such I may perhaps have skill;
But these are beautiful alike, and still
The more my ravished eyes upon them dwell,
The more they seem in beauty to excel:
Such admirable parts in all I spy,
From none of them I can retract mine eye;
Where first it fastens it insists, and thence
I hardly can withdraw mine Optic sense:
How am I then distracted several ways,
Where still the present Object I must praise?
Where having dwelt with pleasure, if by chance,
Upon a second I shall hap to glance,
Mine eye's took captive and surprised again,
For thence I strive to ransom it in vain.
What judgment can I give, when I protest,
The beauty that is nearest will show best:
Then what a tumult it within me breeds,
When as by birthright each of them succeeds?
In brief, who to my true sense can restore me,
Their pulchritudes being circumfus'd all over me?
As if my weak conceivements to confound,
At once they circle and involve me round;
Now I could wish I'had eyes behind, before,
And that I were like Argos, (eyes all over)
Just, only I shall then my judgment call,
When I this Apple can dispose to all.
Let me collect my self! This is the Wife
And Sister to Great Jove, with whom to have strife
Were dangerous. These two his daughters, and
Against them how can my opposition stand,
Without much prejudice?

Merc. All I can say,
It Is Joves command, thou must perforce obey.

Paris. One thing persuade them, Mercury, I entreat,
That the two Vanquished would nor rage nor threat;
But to impute it, if they lose the prise,
To the frail weakness of a Mortals eyes.

Merc. They so have promised: but the time draws on,
That now thy sentence must be called upon.

Par. Then to please one, I Will dare the spleen of two,
For in this straight what less can Paris do?
Yet one thing, Hermes, I with leave would know,
Is it enough to judge by the outward show,
Perusing them thus habited and clad?
Or were not fit a nearer course were had?
To have them all stripped naked, that mine eye
May view them with more curiosity?

Merc. A question that from sound discretion grows,
And being Judge, they are at thy dispose.

Paris. At my dispose? Then I will have all three
Stripped to their skins.

Merc. He'hath spoke; so it must be.
Unbrace your selves, put off, and nothing hide;
Whilst he surveighs each part, I Will turn aside.

Juno. Well apprehended, Paris, and see, I
Disrobe me first: Now this way turn thine eye,
Behold my white wrists, and my arms quite bare,
And are not these incomparably rare?
I am nor staring, nor yet narrow ey'de,
These two the marks of Cowardice or Pride;
Where e're thy curious eye shall now invade,
I Am equally and uniformly made.

Paris. Disrobe you likewise, Venus.

Minerva. Not in haste,
Till she has taken her girdle from her waste,
And cast it by; that first thing let her grant thee,
For, Paris, she is a Witch, and will inchant thee,
Being long studied in prestigious guiles,
And apt to circumvent thee with her smiles.
Nor was it meet she should have come thus gay,
Trickt up in colors and such rich array,
Her cheeks with sundry paintings plaistred over,
Like to some Prostitute or obscoene Whore:
When nothing but bare form and feature true
Should be exposed unto the Judges view.

Paris. Of that enchanted Belt you well advise;
Cast it away.

Venus. Why does not she likewise
Her glorious plumed helmet cast aside,
Or heave the brim that does her forehead hide,
Displaying her uncovered face and breast,
But with her truncheon strikes upon her crest,
As if she meant the Judge to terrify,
That he th'upright cause might not verify?
Or else (her threatening Burgaret cast hence)
Her blew faint eyes might give the Judge offense.

Miner. There lies mine helmet.

Venus. There my girdle by.

Juno. We now all bare to thine inspection ly.

Paris. O Jove, thou Wonder-maker, make me bold.
What glorious objects do I now behold!
What pulchritude? What extasy'de delight?
What a rare Virgin's that? how fair, how bright?
But she, how venerable? nay, divine?
What royal power within her front does shine?
What majesty? yet intermixed with love,
She alone worthy to be wife to Jove
How lovely shines the the other in my face?
With what a moving irresistible grace?
Her tempting lips, so paralleld in meetnesse,
Whisper to me all blandishment and sweetness.
Of this unbounded surplusage of pleasure,
I am now sated in abundant measure:
Therefore so please them to my will atone,
I gladly would peruse them one by one;
Being ambiguous in my self, and doubt,
(Distracted thus) I shall not long hold out:
How can my brain or eye be truly guided,
Being at once so many ways divided.

Venus. So let us do.

Paris. You two your selves retire;
But Juno stay.

Juno. It is my sole desire.
And when thou have with thy acutest eyes.
Perused this feature, void of all disguise,
And with thy most inquisitive eyes made way
Through all that thou can possibly display,
I Will give the rest place. Great is my donation,
If I prevail by thee: make proclamation,
That I am Vict'resse, and take Juno's word,
I Will of all Asia make thee King and Lord.

Paris. I am not swayed with gifts; but be you gone,
What Is right and just must now be thought upon.
Draw near, Minerva.

Miner. See, I am at hand:
If in this strife of Beauty first I stand,
And thou pronounce me fairest; from thy cattle,
I Will bring thee unto many a glorious battle,
From whence thou, vanquished never shall retire;
I Will make thee a prime General, and aspire
To deeds of fame and honor, in all which
Thou shall be conqueror, crowned with triumphs rich.

Paris. Of thundering wars I (Pallas) have no fear;
Peace (as you see) is published every where,
Phrygia and Lydia are now both at rest,
Neither with foreign nor home-broiles oppressed,
My fathers Empire is in quiet: yet
Think not that I your noble gifts forget;
You may hope well, yet know me thus far stayed,
I being Judge must not with bribes be swayd:
Take up your garments, put your Helmet on,
I'have seen sufficient, you may now be gone.
Now your time calls you, Uenus.

Venus. I am here,
And be not sparing, Paris, with eyes clear
Contemplate me in all and every member,
Pass nothing cursorily, but still remember
What now thou see; fix both thine eyes and heart
Not in one place, but all and every part,
And where the object pleases let them dwell;
Then truly judge if I the rest excel.
Whilst the other senses are full feasted here,
Lend me (o Fair one) for a while thine ear;
I'have seen thee often, and have observed thee long
To be a Youth more beautiful and strong
Than any other here in Phrygia bred;
So I have thought, so I have often sed.
Yet as I for thy curious parts commend thee,
For some things I of force must reprehend thee;
Who amongst these crags and rocks consum'st thy prime
Spending thy beauty, which will fade by time,
In solitudes, with beasts that peopled are,
And not in cities, who can judge what is rare:
What (prithee) in these mountains can thou gain?
Thy Beeves and Cowes shall censure thee in vain,
Thou' art lost amongst them: it should be thy pride,
(Richly arrayd) to seek thee out a Bride,
No Shepherdess or rustic Damsel, such
As Ida in abundance yields too much.
I would have thee find out some Crecian Queen,
Such as in Argos are, or Corinth seen,
Or in Lacena. Now I call to mind,
There Is Spartan Hellen; o that thou could find
And compass her: to thee I make confession,
She Is young and beautiful beyond expression,
Nay in all parts both outward and interior,
(Still view me) no way to this shape inferior;
And what above these should inflame thy mind,
She is not coy, but affable and kind:
Who had she seen, as I behold thee now
(All fortunes quite relinquisht) would, I vow,
As knowing no way to be better sped,
Fly to thine arms, thy bosom, and thy bed.
Perhaps of such an one you have heard tell.

Paris. Never, o Venus, but you please me well
In her description: on: to whatsoever
You speak of her, I Will give attentive ear.

Uenus. She was the child of Laeda, than her mother,
(^ill she outstript her) lived not such another.
For Laeda was Jove's Paramor, who then
To have of her fruition, like a swan,
Down sowsing came from heaven, by whose congression
Hellen, is Jove's own daughter, by succession.

Paris. Of what aspect is she?

Venus. White without spot;
And needs she must, being 'twixt two Swans begot:
That she is soft and tender, agrees well;
Conceived and born too in a smooth white shell;
Naked she wrestles often for exercise,
And from these games returns with many a prise:
^utors from all parts have come thronging to her,
And happy he could find the grace to woo her.
Nay, such as have bin forced to go without her,
Not only threatened, but raised war about her.
Even Theseus held her choice of all his blisses,
Nor could he stay till she were ripe for kisses,
^ut ravished her yet young: but when she came
^o a full feather, her unequaled fame
Grew with her feature: then the Optimates,
Princes, and of the Argives the chief States
Solicited her Nuptials: the prime man
Was Menelaus the Pelopidan,
He wood and won; and yet if thou agree,
Her and her Dower I will confer on thee.

Paris. What Is this you speak? will you your pains employ
To give me, whom another does enjoy?

Venus. Is that a thing which difficult appears?
Thou art as young in knowledge as in years.
I promise what I can perform with ease.

Paris. Show me the means how, and it well shall please,

Venus. Then thus; Thou shall a voyage undertake
To travel through all populous Greece, and make
That thy design. Now when thou shall arrive
At Lacedemon, Helena will strive
To give thee welcome. What shall then succeed
Leave to my care, for thine it shall not need.

Paris. But this appears incredible to me,
Impossible and merely absurd, that she
Should leave a husband, kingdom, and a Crown,
Subjects and servants, and all these her own,
Forsaking land, to hazard the seas danger,
To follow me, a rude guest and a stranger.

Venus. Be thou of courage; for the same intent
I have two lovely children shall be sent
Thy Guides and Captains, who with all facility
Shall work my ends: (Cupid and Amabilitie)
Cupid shall altogether undermine her,
And to thy self impulsively combine her.
With thee shall Amabilitie persever,
At all occasions be about thee ever;
By whose infusion thou shall be inspired
To' appear to her much lovely, most desired.
I will be present there, the more to friend thee,
And will entreat the Graces to attend thee,
Who shall be thy companions; all together,
What cannot we compel her to? and whether?

Paris. And yet, fair Venus, I am still in doubt,
By what safe means this may be brought about.
I love that Hellen, though as yet unknown,
And (by what means I know not) I am grown
Inamor'd of her; for beholding thee,
(O Venus) now methinks I Hellen see.
Methinks for Greece I now am under sail,
In Sparta am safe landed, and prevail;
That I behold her in her beauties pride,
And bring from thence a bright and glorious Bride.
Why, e're begin, do I applaud the end?
I grieve I act not what I apprehend.

Venus. Be not too forward in thy love, I prithee,
But (o thou fairest of Near herds) take me with thee;
Dote not too soon, nor be thou over-speedy,
Till I my self thy Bride bed have made ready,
Having first reconciled you: with condition
That I of this great prise may have fruition.
'Twill grace your mariag^ when as Victresse I
Shall present be at that Solemnity,
And after all such busy pain and toil,
Unto my triumph add thy glorious spoil.
Do but thou make this golden Apple mine,
She with her love and bride-bed are all thine.

Paris. And yet perhaps when you have gained this prise,
You may neglect, and me (a Swain) despise.

Venus. Shall I swear to thee?

Paris. No, it shall suffice,
That you have past your promise.

Venus. Hear me then,
(O thou most fair and beautiful of men)
^ vow, all lets and cavils set aside,
This hand shall give thee Hellen for thy Bride;
That from all future dangers I Will defend thee,
And in thy journey carefully attend thee,
That she shall follow thee, and prostitute
Both will and body to thine amorous smile:
That I Will be there to see howall things stand,
And have in all these an assistant hand.

Paris. But will you bring along rankt in their places
Cupid and Amabilitie, with the Graces?

Venus. Doubt not I will, and to make quick dispatch,
Desire and Hymen, to conclude the match.

Paris. For these, and these alone, as fairest of all,
Uenus, to thee I give the golden Ball.

IVPITER and IO.
The Argument.
IO, of whom we next discuss,
Daughter toth' River Inachus,
(The fairest Nymph that lived that time,
As being in her youth and prime)
Was seen by Jove loved, and comprest.
Queen Juno, Her, as of the rest,
Grown Jealous over, does project lay,
How in their sports them to betray.
Whom to prevent (J know not how)
But Jove transhapes her to a Cow.
The Goddess knowing how indeard
She was to him, comes to the Heard,
And begs this Heifer. He not dared
(However the request seemed hard)
Her to deny. She Is now her charge,
And naught her freedom can enlarge.
The passages that hence may grow,
The sequel will hereafter show.
Enter 16, Daphne, with other Nymphs called Naiades, the Daughters of the
Rivers near adjacent. Io. HEre, Daphne, by your father Peneus streams
(which falling from the top of Pindus mount,
Waters Hemonian Tempe) let us sit,
All daughters to the Rivers flowing near:
There old Apidanus steals (murmuring) by;
Next, Poplar-shadowed Enipeus glides:
Not far, Amphrisus, Aeas, and amongst these,
(Not least) my father, good old Inachus
Lifts up his reverend head, with fresh flowers crowned,
Prescribing laws and limits to his streams,
To bound them in their channels, curb their torrent,
Lest in their pride they should o'reswell their banks;
Commanding them, through thousand strange indents
To pay his plenteous tribute to the seas.

Daphne. And how much are we bound unto the gods,
(Fair Io) to be Nymphs, not generated
From marish Meares, nor yet from standing Lakes,
From sedgy brooks, thick pooles, or shallow foords,
Nor yet from violent and robustuous seas.
Their waters keep a smooth and gentle course,
Not moved to fury by the warring winds;
Nor when loud fluxes fall to swell their bounds,
And make deep inundations on the meads:
Nor can the parching drought so dry their springs,
But that their channels keep a temperature:
Their modest shallowes serve us for cool baths
In summer time to play and wanton in:
Their depths, to bate our hooks with worms and flies
Fastened to lines made of small twisted silk,
And so betray the creatures of the flood.
Their crystal waves are Myrrhors, in the which
We dress our heads, and put these curles in form,
Sometimes so cunningly, as if that Art
Had power to exceed Nature: and again,
With careless, but so curious a neglect,
As if mere Chance did antecede them both.
This makes us of the Satyrs so admired,
And of the Faunes and Swains so much beloved.

Io. Why, have you Suitors, Daphne?

Daphne. Besides such,
For these my father, by whose will I am swayd)
Accounts as mean) of Gallants I have change;
^oth City and the Court.

(...). But I may claim
Prioritie above all water Nymphs,
Nor can the Naiades compare with me;
No, Daphne, not your self. The rural Swains,
^hey gather from these banks mellifluous flowers,
and make you chaplets to adorn your brows,
and shadow your choice beauty from the Sun,
^ay think them costly Presents: but I Am one
To whom the gods themselves have offered gifts.
Then before all the daughters of these floods
^ claim a just precedence.

Daph. By what dream,
^r rather by what brain-sicke fantasy
^ath Io been deluded?

(...). My apprehensions
^^e no weak fantoms to beguile the sense,
^^t real, and in action; with their form
^hey bear a being substance.

Daph. Has your Beauty
^^d amongst men such long and strange neglect,
^^at Io would to color such disgrace,
^ccuse the gods of weakness?

(...) Let earths Beauties
^ensure of Earth, mere terren as yours be,
^^d aim no further: the while this of mine
^^all be new questioned by the Powers Divine.

Daph. Now by what gods, for Heavens sake?

(...) Not the meanest,
^^ such as we call under-deities,
^ melancholy Saturn, (by his son
^il'd and banished from the supreme rule)
Phoebus, a mere Vassal to the earth,
And forced each natural day to measure heaven;
As Neptune, Sovereign over the Seas, to whom
Our tributary rivers hourly pay:
As Mercury, though son to Jove himself,
No better than his Footboy or his Page,
Compeld at every summons to his speed:
But of the potent Thunderer.

Daph. He of whom
You have learned to thunder these impossible braves.
Io, I am ashamed.

Io. Yes, that your beauty's
Composed of the grosser elements,
Want that attraction to call Jove himself
Down from his heavenly Fabric, to behold
Us in our eminence.

Daph. Strange wonder sure,
To look upon that face in which we Mortals,
And value it at best, can nothing spy,
Breed admiration in a Deity!
A noise of thunder. Enter Jupiter in his glory, his Trisull in h^^ hand
burning; at sight of whom they stand afrighted.
Io. Appear, Jove, in thy glory, let them know
Ei, shamed confess their fond surmises vain,
And what it is, thy godhead to profane.

Daph. Fly, fly, lest we be thunder-strooke, away;
Let Us seek our safety, danger's in our stay.
(...)
Iup. Thou Daphne, who Jove's presence now do shun,
Swifter ere long shall from, Apollo run.
But there lie that which makes us terrible,
Affrighting gods and men. Io to thee
In calmes I come, and Fair one make me proud,
To seal the love which I so long have vowed.

Io. What steal? what vow?

Iup. Both thou shall find impressed
On thy smooth cheek, soft lip, and Ivory breast,

Io. Forbear to handle; yet I never knew
A man so bold and rude: Can gods dispense,
To teach us Women unknown impudence?

Iup. Nay rather we solicit you to prove
What yet you have not try'de, the sweets of love.

Io. Things that I would not learn.

Iup. A Truant still?
If you want art, Io, I can teach you skill:
Give me your hand, your lip: why these but are
The Prologue to a pastime much more rare.
Women by nature are ambitious, and
Long to know what they do not understand.
I Will practice you in that which you before
Never knew.

Io. In all this lip-sport? or what more
Is in these kisses meant? I am so dull, --

Iup. All these my Comment shall explain at full.
In vain you strive.

Io. Should I do ought save well,
I were undone, my fathers floods would tell;
These are his banks, they will blab: What mean you? fie;
They swell above their bounds, only to spy
And see what we are doing. Pish, away,
Such deeds of darkness can you do by day?
Besides, shall I consent to what you mean,
Not all these silver drops can wash me clean.

Iup. Where I do stain I can again make pure:
And that Day shall not hinder us, be sure:
Arise you fogs and damps, your vapors gather,
To shroud us both from Juno and thy father.

Io. You make me blush.
A great damp arises.
Iup. These blushes none shall see;
Behold these mists, to curtain us and thee.

Io. Well, when what most you sue for, you have won,
My comfort is, I see not what is done,

Iup. And Io now I Will teach thee sports untry'de,
In darkness best a Virgins blush to hide.
Exeunt Enter Juno.
Juno. Not in the heavens? where then? In vain it were
To search the seas; the blew vein'd Nor^ae,
And green hair'd Dorides with all their brats,
Styled by the names of water goddesses,
(Though Prostitutes to Neptune) amongst them all
Yield not a face to please his curious eye.
Where then? The earth? I that, if any place,
Yields choice of tempting Beauties: Argos bred
A golden Danae, Thebes afforded an
Alcmena and a wanton Semele;
Pelagia, a Calisto; Sparta nursed
A swan-like Laeda, (Strumpets) of all which
I sought a sure, but found a vain revenge.
Why may not then Thessalian Tempe yield
Like fascination, since their impudence
Is more and more encouraged by my wrongs:
Here then I make inquiry. The day's clear;
Whence come these foggy mysts that choke the air,
In so serene and bright an hemisphere?
Aut ego fall^r, aut ego ledar.
If from the earth, this sudden overcast
Would smell of thick and suffocating damps:
If from the air, or any sulfurous fire,
It would be found by their caliditie.
If from the Rivers, or these moorish fennes,
Humiditie would tell us whence they were.
No, these are forced, and by some god-like power,
Created for a more peculiaruse:
And now my jealousy most truly prompts me.
It Is some illusion, made to blind mine eyes
From a new injury; which if I find,
On this one Strumpet I will study more,
Than all that have my vengeance escaped before.
Exit. Enter Jupiter, and Io transformed into a Cow.
Iup. The clamorous Queen's descended from the Spheres,
To find the cause of this illusive Fog:
But Io I have so transhap'd thee now,
That she by no means can discover thee;
And in that confidence I Will front her boldly.

Iun. Jove hear? my jelousies are then not vain,
However I Will give him gentle entertain,
Concealing what is within.

Iup. My lovely Juno?

Iun. My Brother and my Husband Jupiter?

Iup. What make you here on earth?

Iun. What other reason,
But that I mist my sovereign Lord in heaven;
And then I yoakt my Peacocks, to their bills
Tied silken bridles, and in my light chariot
Made of fine gold, and decked with Estrich plumes,
Descended as you see. But what affair
Might Juno be so bold to ask her Lord)
Detaines you now in Tempe?

Iup. Though it fits not
Your Sex to ask a thing that ill beseemes,
Or pry into the counsels of the gods;
Yet thus much I Will resolve you? I came down
To censure here some causes amongst men,
And set things crooked upright.

Iun. Now I spy
That which has drawn him headlong from the sky,
And I will make the Adulterer himself
^uthor of my just vengeance.

Iup. Thou once gone,
Spoken aside. ^e were again transhap'd, and we both one.
^weet Juno will you once more mount your Chariot,
and keep your state above My designs ended,
^ will not long be from you.

Iun. My craft now
Shall match his cunning; if there be in me
A godhead, I have cast her destiny.
Dear loving Lord, since 'twas my kindness drew me
To see unto your safety (though I know
The Deities in every place secure)
Give me some gift on earth, that I in heaven
May applaud your royal bounty.

Iup. Be it bred
Beneath the Moon, it is my Saturnia's.

Iun. I have not seen so sweet and lovely a Beast
White without spot or stain; Is she of the herd
Belonging to these Meadows?

Iup. She is, no doubt.
Why does my Juno ask?

Jun. To make her mine.

Iup. A gift too small for Juno to entreat,
Or Jove to grant; Demand some greater boon.

Iun. This Cow or nothing.

Iup. She Is not for thy use;
What would my Love do with her?

Iun. Only this,
(Being above the rest most beautiful)
To sacrifice her to your Deity.
(Jupiter starts.)
Iup. Not for the triple world: What was it, Sweet,
That you of me demanded?

Juno. Now to know
(Aside) What put you in this fear? Nay I have begged,
And must not be denied. And have I found you?

Iup. In what a straight am I? her to betray,
And give her up into her enemies hand,
In man would prove a savage cruelty,
Much more in us: and to deny a gift
Appearing of so small a consequence,
Would but augment her too much jelousie,
And open that which is as yet concealed.

Juno. What hope have I to enjoy greater things,
That am denied a trifle?

Iup. Say I will not,
(Aside) And give no reason; it may then appear,
This Heifer to be no such as she seems.
Well, she is yours; but how will you dispose her?

Iun. So carefully, because she is your gift,
My servant Argus with a hundred eyes
Shall guard her from all dangers.

Iup. It Is enough,
In that, to us you shall express your love.
But prove he to her churlish or unkind,
(Aside. There Is one, at once his hundred eyes shall blind.
So, she is now your charge.
Exit.
Jun. And being mine,
I Will teach base Earth to injure what is divine.
Where is my servant Argus?
Enter Argus with a hundred eyes.
Argus. Who Is that calls?
The sacred goddess Juno? What new service
Will you command your vassal?

Jun. Take It in brief;
Beholdst thou This? This? This no matter what,
Not worth a name; only a thing I loath;
Out on thee: But I Will spare my railing words,
To express my hate in action.

Arg. What Is the cause
The poor beast trembles that?

Jun. A Beast indeed:
Like such she shall be used; behold her, Argus;
Are these lips fitting for a god to kiss?
These hoofes apt palms to gripe? these tears fit pillowes?
On which a Deity should breast himself?
These, eyes to tempt? or this an hide to touch?
These horns? (o me) in mine own heraldry
She mocks me without blushing.

Argus. In all this
How will you use my service?

Juno. As a Spy:
An hundred eyes thou have, of all which number
I will allow thee two to sleep by turns;
The rest to watch this Strumpet; and of all,
But two to wink, the rest to gaze at full:
Behind thee thou have eyes, both sides, before;
Which way soever thou turnst she is in thy view.
"A thousand he had need, all piercing bright,
"To watch a Lover from his choice delight.

Arg. And is this all?

Juno. Something I had forgot:
Thou art an Herdsman, Argus, and thou know
To tame unruly cattle; she is such:
In some unworthy halter bind her neck,
For such a Beauty the first Ca^kanet.
Her browsing be the Brakes and bitter couche,
For dainties feed her with the sourest herbs;
Lead her through briers and brambles, which may scratch
Her itching skin even till her soft sides bleed,
Raise up the mud in clear springs when she drinks,
Keep her from shadow, in the parching Sun,
Till she be stung with horse flies, and the brees:
Let her not rest but where the ground's still bare;
Feather her bed with thistles and sharp thorns;
And for her footing choose the barren paths
Strow'd with loose pointed flints to gall her hoofes.
Argus farewell, I leave her to thy trust,
A sweet revenge for her insatiate lust.
Exit.
Argus. Drawing this piece of Beasts flesh thus along,
Methinks I look like Lybian Hercules
Leading the Dog of hell: nay I shall fit her
According to my charge, and I will keep thee
(Calfe with the white face) safe enough from bulling,
The longest day that I have eye to see.
What do you hang an arse? Ptrow, come along,
I Will lead you to bare feeding, and find sallets
To take down your full flanks and these plump cheeks.
Along, I Will watch thee well enough from shrinking
Neck out of collar. Nay, on; thou shall find,
Though my face from thee, I have eyes behind.
Exit. Enter Inachus the father of Io, Peneus, Appidanus, Amphrisus, (all
Rivers) Daphne, and the other Nymphs, etc.
Inachus. Speak not to me of comfort, Jo's lost!
Had she miscarried on the earth, her body
Would have given instance of her timelesse fate:
Or had she been by savage beasts devoured,
Her garments stained with blood would tell her death.
Had she in mine or these my neighbor floods
Perished, they would have borne her gently up,
And cast her on some bank for burial.

Peneus. Dear Inachus do not torment your self,
Nothing so lost, but may be found at length:
For having seen no token of her death,
There Is of her life some hope.

Amphr. Behold, Amphrisus
With this your ancient neighbor Appidan,
Peneus and others, as we moan your loss,
So in our pity come to comfort you.

Appid. O, brackish not your waters with your tears,
That yet run pure and fresh; but be of comfort.

Inach. In vain you speak of what you cannot give,
As I in vain lament mine Io's loss.
Enter Argus leading in Io.
Arg. How now, cursed Cow? What, start you at that name?
I Will make your long horns shorter.

Jnac. Io, where?
If under earth, I Will send my springs in search
As low as to the Center, Io, where?
If snatched up in the air, like dew exhaled,
With eyes fixed upward I will still thus gaze,
Till from the bosom of some gentle cloud,
Thou drop into mine arms. Fair Io, where?

Arg. I think the beast has breezes in her tail,
She cannot keep her still.

Inach. But stay, what is he
That leads the fairest Heifer tether'd fast,
That e're drunk of my streams; for Io's sake
I love all creatures that are beautiful.

Arg. How now you Harlatry?

Inach. Thou churlish heardsman,
I know thee, Argus, jealous Juno's Spy,
Why can thou be so fierce to one so fair?

Arg. What Is that to thee, or any of you all.

Pen. Amongst all creatures Nature ever made,
Some to have native beauty 'bove the rest,
Commanding soft affection, this is such.

Arg. With all mine eyes I spy no difference,
But love all beasts as beasts.

Inach. The more beast thou.

Pen. But why should this, the fairest of all herds,
Cast such a pitteous moving eye on you,
As wooing your acquaintance?

Inach. And it is true,
Where ere I go, her sad eye follows me,
So she too, did not Argus keep her back:
See, see, how gently she endures my touch,
And makes an offer (had she power) to speak.
Hear, take these flowers, and now she kissed mine hand,
Whilst pitteous tears drop down her tender cheeks.
What should I say? poor beast I pity thee,
And all the good I can do is to grieve,
The have such a churlish Keeper.

Pen. Inachus, I fear
There Is something greater in it.

Inach. What greater can be,
Unless there live some understanding spirit
In this irrational and savage shape:
What would thou have, that in this bestiall figure
Beg'st humane pity? what intends she, think you,
By pawing on the ground? Observe her, brethren,
It seems she has writ something in the dust,
And see, two letters are imprinted fair,
As if it were my Io's Character, And here I read Io.

Pen. Io: and see, in every step she has trod,
That word impressed.

Inach. This she? whom I so long in vain have sought,
Through forests, groves, and mountains, fields and floods?
This she, whom I in finding shall most lose?
O miserable wretched Inachus,
More miserable Io, thus transformed:
I term thee lovely, till I knew thee such;
But when thy former beauty I record,
Thou ougly art, mishap'd, and terrible.
Can the gods suffer this?

Arg. Leave this your howling.
Forbear, or in this cord I lead her forth,
I Will strangle her. Dare not to follow me,
There Is danger in me both ways; she shall perish,
And you must bleed. Come, Minion we will clime
You craggy mountain top, a prospect fit
For Argus only, who (not moving) can
Behold at once from whence the four winds blow,
And there with her I Will like a Beacon stand,
To watch and to give warning. Will you drive?
I say pursue me not, for if you do,
I Will make her sure, and you repent it too.
Why ptrow there.
(Exeunt Argus and Io.
Amph. With what a pitteous action, wailing tongue,
She gave a loving, but a loath farewell.

Apid. But that the high Powers are not limitable,
Who would believe this wonder possible.

Pen. We must not question what the gods can do,
Yet in the extremity of all extremes,
And worst of bads, despair not, Inachus.

Inach. How easy it is for those that taste not grief,
Bid others be of comfort.

Amph. Reverend Sir, --

Inach. There is no reverence due: not to the gods,
If this be seen and suffered: O my Io.
With acclamations I will fill the Meades:
In stead of prayers, I Will execrate and curse,
And to the burden of mine untuned shreeks
The rocks and caves shall echo to thy name.

Pen. But Inachus. --

Inach. But when your Channels swell,
You can have dammes and sluices to discharge
Superfluous waters, lest your torrents rage;
And will you bar the conduits of mine eyes
To ease the flux of my surcharged heart?
My care was, Io, to provide a man
To be thine husband; but I now must find
One of the bellowing heard to call me son:
To have some pretty infant draw thy breast,
But now must some py'de urchin suck thy teats.
But that I am immortal, and the doors
And gate to death against me are debarred,
I Would weep my self to nothing, and this Being
Scatter amongst my floods, that mixed with them,
They might (in less than drops) amongst their waves,
Convey me to the all-devouring seas,
To mix my brine with his, and be so lost;
And lost, forgotten: But I am still the same,
And Io, I Will still call upon thy name.
I xeunt. Enter Jupiter and Mercury.
Iupit. How am I moved with Inachus exclaimes?
Why are the ears of gods kept open still,
But first to hear, then pity? have thou not, Mercury,
Seen Io's tears? Perceived her scalding sighs,
And even thus far heard her suspires and groans,
Tortured beneath that Neatherd churlish groom,
More savage than the beasts he feeds?

Merc. I have.

Iup. How often has she, thinking to heave her hands
For divine pity; when she spy'de her hoofes
Cast them to the earth, with them her head with shame,
And bellowing when she would complain her grief,
Started at her own sound?
How often, when grazing on her fathers banks,
(These fruitful banks on which she used to sport)
Offering to drink, when in his Crystal streams,
In which so often she with pride has looked,
On her white brow, red cheek, and golden curles:
Now when she spies those lips a god has kissed,
Stretched to so vast a wideness, penthous'd over
With enlarged nosthrils; looking on those eyes,
(In which 'twas once my sole delight to look)
To see them broad and glaring; her clear brow
Late decked with shining jewels, pressed with horns.
How often has she (more frighted than ashamed)
Thought, from her self, in vain, to hide her self?

Merc. This can you see? not study how to help?

Iup. I do, and will, by thine aid, Mercury;
Hye therefore to the top of Pindus mount,
(There Argus keeps his watch) in some disguise;
Thy Caduceus and thy wings laid by,
Find with the slave some conference, till by cunning
Thou charm'st his waking eyes, and being fast,
Cut off his head, and with one blow extinguish
So many lights at once.

Merc. Great Jove I will:
But thus conditioned, you will interpose
Your awful power 'twixt me and Juno's hate.

Iupit. Presume the art safe in us.

Merc. Then Argus dies;
One fatal stroke shall shut an hundred eyes.
Exit Enter Argus leading Io in an halter.
Argus. How do thou like thine usage, madam Cow?
Your lodging and your diet? How do think
This hempen chain becomes thee? Will you see
Your sweet face in the river once again?
Or how does your fair beastship feel your self?
Would thou not have some Bulchin from the herd
To physic thee of this venereall itch?
If not, I Will see what Nettles muddy streams,
Couch-grasse and weeds, thorns, briers, and flints can d^
These failing, here is a goad to prick your sides.
If all these medicines will not tame your lust,
I Will muster new inventions. Nay, I know
You look for pity, but it lives not here.
In this high watchtower stand I sentinel,
To spy who comes and goes. I am made thy guardian,
I Will guard thee both from danger and from rest;
'Twas in thy hearing, Juno's late behest.
Enter Mercury like a young formal Shepherd.
Merc. This shape may prove suspectlesse, and the fittest
To cloud a godhead in; my plumed hat
And fether'd sandals, by the which I am known,
I have left at foot of this descending hill:
My snaky Rod I have to this sheephooke turned.
Accommodated thus, to Argus now,
Aristors son: behooves him keep good watch,
Whom Mercury (Jove's son) intends to catch.
But Many-eyes have spy'de me.

Arg. How now shepherd,
There Is none who in that simpl shape or name
Needs treason fear. Should any come prepared
For mischief, I have lights about me shine
Sufficient to prevent it: but thou seem
None of such rank. Come sit by me and talk.

Merc. The servant to the great Saturnia
Does me no common grace.

Arg. Thou know me then?

Merc. What shepherd but not only knows your name,
^ut fears your strength?

Arg. Nay sit (by me thou art safe)
And tell some pretty tales to make me laugh:
^ have not long been merry.

Merc. First resolve me;
^s that fair heifer of some neighbor herd,
You drag thus in an halter?

Arg. She Is my charge,
A witty Brute, a most ingenious beast,
A very apprehensiue Animal,
That can do tricks: she has been taught, I tell thee,
To write and read.

Merc. Argus, not possible.

Argus. It Is as I said before: but having her,
Some pretty tale, I prithee.

Merc. But what if
Some goddess should live in this shape disguised,
To whom you are so churlish. I could tell you
A story to that end.

Arg. Such toys I love.

Merc. Thus the Pierides report: The Giants
Assembled and made war against the gods,
Heap Ossa upon Pelion, Caucasus
Upon Pernassus, Pindus above them;
Hill upon mountain, mountain upon hill,
Till they had made a scale that reach to heaven.
The conflict then began: the monstrous Typhon
Was Captain of the Giants: Of the gods
Great Jove, Archduke. The Generals met and fought.
In brief (to cut off circumstance) the earth
Prevaild against heaven. The gods are forced to fly:
Jove, chased by Typhon into Egypt, changed
Himself into a Ram: Apollo, frighted,
Turns to a Crow, Bacchus into a Goat,
Juno a Cow, Diana to a Cat;
Venus into a Fish, and took the sea;
Mars to a Pigmy, lest he should be known:
And Mercury, syrnam'd the crafty god,
Into a Fox.

Arg. A Fox? But I would meet
That craft which could beguile Argus bright eyes.
Proceed, proceed, good shepherd.

Merc. Why may not then
Some goddess be included in this shape?

Arg A goddess, say thou? think me equal then
With one of these huge Giants, if not greater,
That have the power and potencie to lead
A godhead in a string. But ha, what music
(Music Was that struck up? 'Twas sweet and delicat,
Nor have I heard the like.

Merc. My fellow shepherds
Behind that rock (from whence an echo grows)
For the more grace have chus'd that place as fittest,
Pressed to bestow their cunning upon you,
Whom they have heard, much tired with watching long

Arg. And shall we have some merry Madrigall
To pass away the time with?

Merc. What you please.

Arg. I fame would know how first these Pipes came up
That make this dainty music?

Merc. First from Pan
The god of Shepherds. In the memory
Of the Nymph Syrinz, Music strike and tell,
How in the Arcadian plains it once befell.
Mercuries Song.
Syrinx, one of Dian's train,
Hunting with her on the plain,
Armed alike with shafts and bow;
Each from other would you know?
Which from which could not be told,
Save ones was horn, the others gold.

Arg. Hey ho; very fine music I promise you.

Merc. Now it begins to work.
Pan he sees himself makes fine,
In his cap he pricks a Pine:
Now grows careless of his heard,
Sits by brooks to prune his beard,
Meets her, and has mind to woo,
Much he speaks, and more would do.

Arg. It Is pleasing, but it makes me melancholy,
And drowsy too withal.

Merc. 'Twill do anon.
(A side. Still he profers, she denies;
He pursues (for Syrinx flies.)
Past her knees her coats up flew,
He would feign see something new:
By the leg and thigh he guest
(It seems) the virtue of the rest.

Arg. Were it not for my charge I Would take a nap.

Merc. This adds wings unto his pace,
The goal for which he is in chase.
She adds feathers to her speed;
Now it was no more than need.
Almost caught, Alas she cries,
Some chaste god my shape disguise.

Arg. The rest may sleep secure, so I can keep
But two eyes waking.

Merc. Here Is a charm for them.
Laedon hears, and girts her round,
Spies a reed that makes sweet sound:
Such is Syrinx. Wondering Pan
Puts it to his mouth anon:
Yet Syrinx thou art mine he said,
And so of her his first pipe made.
My charm has took effect; with these thine eyes
Take thy last sleep, thou have not one to see;
My task is done, and Jo thou now free.
(Cuts off his head. Exit. Enter Juno.
Juno. The dying groans of Argus called down,
To know what of his luster is become.
What, all extinct? and is no memory
Extant of their known brightness? has one night
(Whose nature should be to be proud of stars)
Shut at one time an hundred? nay at once?
Should every piece of time deprive so many,
How shortly would these lights innumerable
Be vanished into nothing? But dear Argus,
That all may know thou had a loving mistress,
Grieuing thou should thus perish for her sake;
And that these eyes (now blind) in aftertimes
May give a light to perpetuity,
And memorize thy name, thy faith and fall,
Thy hundred eyes (who wast for Juno slain)
I will transport into my Peacocks train;
Whilst such a bird has breeding, and can be,
Her painted feathers shall remember thee.
Enter Jupiter and Mercury.
Jup. And whilst an heifer graseth on the plain,
Io, her hoof shall still imprint thy name.
My Juno are we friends? Let her long divorce,
My fair entreats, with Inachus exclaimes
Invoke thy love and pity, by my life.

Juno. You use me like a sister, not a wife,
My bed is still so empty.

Iup. Now by Styx,
An oath no god was ever known to break,
Sign her release, she shall hereafter be
To Jove as a mere stranger.

Juno. Since by that you swear,
What Is past is lost, it cuts off future fear,
Saving my quarrel, Mercury, to you.

Merc. Madam, I did your servant no great wrong,
^ave teaching him to relish a new song.

Juno Where jars are mediated, vain it were
Call injuries in question. As with Jupiter,
With you we are atton'd.

Iup. Now Mercury,
^ince Juno is appeased, fetch Io hither,
^^ her own native beauty, whom we will
Restore unto her father.

Merc. Sir I shall.
Enter Inachus with the other Rivers, etc.
Inach. O Jupiter! o Juno!

Iup. Inachus,
^^rcease exclaimes, thy prayers have had access,
^hy tears been pitied, and thy loss bemoaned;
Argus is slain, and fair Saturnia pleased,
and Io to her pristine shape restored.
Enter Mercury with Io.
Inach. Thanks you immortal gods.

Merc. No sooner was this mighty Queen appeased,
^t the rough hair dropped from her tender skin,
^er horns fell off, her eyes appeard to shine
^ a less orb, her mouth and lips contracted
^oth into compass, and their native sweetness,
^^r shoulders are restored, fingers and hands;
^^r parted hoof divided into five,
^ow with two feet contented, for on them
^e straightway stood erect, and of a Cow,
^^ve whiteness, naught retaining, and even yet
^e fears to speak, lest she in stead of words
^ould bellow forth her mind.

(...). Yet will I dare
^s give my father greeting.

Inach. O my child.

(...). I am still jealous of that face: What Is he
that makes but a mean sport of wedlocks breach,
But thinks to violate an oath no sin,
Though calling testates all the Stygian gods?
Great King and Lord, Brother and Husband too,
If I be worthy of those attributes
Yourself have daignd, and all the gods approve,
Grant me a second boon.

Iup. For thy remissness
In Io's late affliction, speak, it is granted.

Juno. Then from these fields of Tempe banish her,
As far as into Egypt.

Inach. From her father?

Iup. Be you pleased,
And Juno shall, I hope, be satisfied.
Io, you shall to Egypt be confined,
Be that your punishment for Juno's hate:
Which executed you shall taste our love.
In Egypt held a goddess thou shall be,
Adored and worshipped in thine heifers shape;
Oblations shall be daily offered thee,
And Incense burnt to thy divinity,
And this for ever. Juno, in vain you sorrow,
Jove's word is past, and cannot be revoked.
And now with this one Maxim we conclude;
Where lust is punished, though the blood be tainted,
It (after such long Penance) may be sainted.
Exeunt
FINIS.
APOLLO and DAPHNE.
The Argument.
AFter many a loving greeting,
Mars and Venus point a meeting;
And that Vulcan might not have
Least note thereof, they choose a Cave
Obscure and dark, to which they trust,
Intending there to sat their lust.
But when themselves most safe they think,
The rising Sun pries through a chinke,
Sees all, and what he sees discovers
To Vulcan, touching these two Lovers.
The enraged Smith taking foul scorn
To be affronted with the horn,
Provides for them a subtle (...),
In hope to take them both therein.
His plot prevailed, and now being fiery
In just revenge, by strict inquiry,
To find where these by custom met,
He by his art contrives a Net,
More fine than is the Spiders thread,
And yet of wire; which he so spread
About the place, all things compact
So well, he took them in the act:
And then does all the gods invite,
Who came at once to view that sight.
Some jeered, some pitty'd their disgrace,
One wished himself in Mars his place.
Tet for all this, the churlish Sir
So kept them that they could not stir.
Mars chafes and threats, and struggling keeps:
But Venus blushes first, then weeps.
And when tho gods could laugh no more,
Then Vulcan freed them, not before.
Now Venus knowing all this done
Was first discovered by the Sun;
Against him open war proclaims,
And at him her revenge she aims:
Cupid she uses as her instrument.
And that is of our Scoene the sole argument.
Enter the river Peneus the father of Daphne, Daphne, Amphrisus and Apidanus
two Rivers that were Suitors un^ her; two Nymphs Attendants on Daphne. Peneus.
WHy lovely Daphne, will you lose yo^ Youth,
And let your best hours pass yo^ Well you know,
Beautie's a Flower, which not being cropped in time,
Soon withers on the stalk, and then (alas)
Will neither serve for use nor ornament.
You owe me sweet grandchildren, pretty babes,
Even for your birth you do: it is a debt
That I would see discharged: I to my parents
Paid it in thee; it is a Bond stands firm,
'till canceld in thy sweet posterity.
See, I have brought thee Suitors, choice ones too,
Two noble Rivers, both residing near,
Amphrisus, and still-flowing Appidans,
Young, and of means, both active and of strength
To wrestle against barrenness, and give
The hug the foil. Being dead, I live in thee:
Live thou too in thine issue; so successively
Our Line and memory shall never perish,
But last as long as Time.

Amph. Your father (Daphne)
Counsels with judgment, and this argument
I could by many reasons amplify.
As, That without succession (one age past)
Mankind should cease to be. O what a punishment
Deserve they from the gods, that would destroy
^o glorious a creation, and to leave
^o wonderful a fabric as the world is,
To no admirers?

Appid. Save the Plants and Beasts;
And what can they distinguish?

(...). Therefore, Daughter
Make use of time: a season being past,
Can never be recalled, no, not a month.
A month? no day, no hour, no minute can:
therefore make use of opportunity
Which throws it self upon thee: but being straightened,
Will after prove a stranger; the least instant
^y long repentance cannot be redeemed.

Daphne. To you I bow in duty, as to a father;
And these affront in noble courtesy,
Not wronging him, to show my breeding base,
^coffing your profer'd love with womanish scorn.
^is counsels, your persuasions, I commend,
^nowing both fitting, were they seasonable.
that Maids should love men I am not ignorant,
^^ that the breeding world should still increase;
that Progeny should reach from age to age,
and that the gods make it a necessity,
^o have all their miraculous works admired:
^^l this I know; but

^^ph. I Will proceed: But what
Can you produce against this?

Daph. Hear me out:
But when I in my best considerat thoughts
Ponder my youth, and what it is to love;
That vows are ties not easy to be loosed,
And that the smallest finger can pluck on
What not the hand and arm can well put off:
That Marriage is a Maze, which entered in,
The line is snatched thence which should guide us out.
Ere hazard then that unknown labyrinth,
Much blame me not to pause.

Pen. What needst thou fear?
Fond timorous Girl, did not thy mother this
Long time before thee?

Appid. Nay, hereafter too
May not your daughter do so?

Daph. I Will resolve you
That, when I have a daughter of my years,
And tutored by her mother.

Amph. Excellent Nymph,
These are evasions mere unnecessary;
We know you to be ripe, and our selves grown,
Betwixt us is equality in state,
And paritie in years: nor is our course
Irregular or indirect, we come
Admitted by your father, as a way
Plain, and not interdicted: nor is our suit
So far with cradle it may childish seem;
Nor so old, to appear decrepit: we are two
Rivals, yet friends; so you choose one of either,
Even he that is despised rests satisfied,
Nor is our love divided.

Daph. I commend you:
There is of you less danger, and least fear
That you should die of love; when both of you
Come with like premeditation to digest
A rigorous answer.

Appid. Pray what should we do?
Our service we have offered equally:
The world is wide, and if we speed not here,
We must provide us elsewhere.

Daph. Worthy friends.
To be most plain, to me most pleasing is:
Then take as plain an answer; I confess me
Weak as I am) unworthy of your love.
And yet not so low pris'd, but have bin courted
Both by as great and good. Nor can you blame me,
If I in adding to your worths, shall spare
From mine, in the least kind to derogate.
To you then, as my equals, I entreat;
Or if you shall deny me, Daphne then
Proclaims it as her will. I must retire me
For some few months, in them to meditate
What marriage is, and truly study man,
(A book in which I yet have truanted.)
Now, if I in my more maturitie,
And after some cessation of your suits,
Can ground this Maxim, Man is worthy us,
And we of him; we will breviat your long motions
Within a few short terms.

Amph. You speak but reason:
And so long we will attend you.

Appid. Most fit, that such as bargain for their lives,
should read us over and over, before they set
Their hands to that Indenture. We are pleased.

Daph. And I that you are so. Nor can my father
At this be discontented.

^nach. Not I, Child;
I would not hurry on my joys too fast,
Having such hope of them. And yet, sweet Daphne,
The more thou hasts their harvest, the ripe crop
Shall be to them more welcome. For this time
It Is best to leave her to her privacie:
More leisure that she has to meditate,
Less time you have in which to be resolved,
'Twill shorten expectation.

Amph. May these hours
That add unto your years, still as you grow,
Increase toward us your love.

Appid. Friend you pray well,
And in that hope I take a loving leave,
By kissing your fair hand.
Exit.
Daph. You understand a courtesy as well,
Once being done, as she that knows to do it.
Farewell. Where be my maids?

1 Nymph. My Lady, at hand.
Daph. Does either of you know what this love is,
That men so much affect it?

2 Nymph. Trust me, not I: I never looked so far into man
and most sure I am, man never yet entered so far in^^
me, that I should know how to define it. But can y^^
tell the reason why this little god is still portraid like
child?

Daph. I think, because that dotage which he breeds
Only belongs to children. 1 Nymph. But why naked

Daph. Either to affright the Modest; or to such
As vow to him, to express their impudence.

2 Nymph. But why with bow and arrows?

Daph. That denotes
Inconstancy, because the shafts of love
Are ever shot at random.

1 Nymph. Wherefore hood winkt?

Daph. However his shafts are aimed, it shows his kind
Because they strike the eyes of Reason blind.

2 Nymp. Then am I with Love quite out of love, beca^^
at these years I should be loath to have one to lead ^^

Daph. Yet do I love the beauty of the spring,
To listen to the birds, with various lays
To welcome in his coming. I affect
The pride and warmth of Summer, to behold
Abundant Autumn pour his harvest forth
In plenteous sheafes; to see the presses bleed
A flowing vintage. But I most admire
The glory of the Sun who comforts these:
For without him, what were the earth? what heaven?
If all were darkness, who should then discern
The luster of the one or of the other,
The fresh fertility proudly adorned
With choice and change of all discolored flowers?
More than a cased up Jewel, what were Beauty,
Without the Sun to give a brightness to 't?
What Is ornament, without the Sun to judge it?
What to be fair or foul, without the Sun,
To censure and distinguish which is best?
The Sun's the deity which I adore.
Here then upon this verdure cast your selves,
And rest a while; not long it is e're he will
In all his glory mount the Eastern hill.
They lay themselves down, then enter Venus and Cupid.
Venus. Here on the top of the mount Ericine
Ambush thy self, (a place sacred to me)
Where thou may boldly front the god of Light,
Who has by this already chased hence night.
I Will leave thee now: strike, but strike home, my son,
I Will in these shades absent me whilst it is done.

Cupid. He mocks my bow, but Phoebus soon shall find
Cupid has power to strike the Sun-god blind.
Enter Apollo with his glittering beams.
Apollo. The stars are frighted from the firmament,
And at the sight of our illustrious beams
Darkness unto the black Cymmerians fled.
Now to our daily progress through the Signs.
But stay, what is he that with our honors, armed,
(The Bow and quiver, proper sole to us)
Braves us upon high Erix Promontorie?
I know him now, it is Paphian Venus son,
To whom some fools have vowed a deity.
I Will know the reason why the bastard brat
Dares thus assume my trophies. 'Morrow Cupid.

Cupid. As much to Phoebus.

Phoeb. Weak brat resolve me,
By whose inticement thou have bin so bold
To take to thee the emblem of my power?
Is It not sufficient, thou with brain-sicke toys
Can fill the heads of mad men and of fools,
Who'ascribe to thee a godhead, merely usurpt?
But thou must wear my due Impresa insculpt,
And ('bout thy shoulders) those known ornaments,
Apollinis insignia? (Apollo's Ensigns)

Cupid. And why thine?

Apoll. Because I am styled the god of Archerie;
And where I aim I hit, my prey or enemy,
Kill near or far. The monstrous serpent Python
(Whose bulk being slain, an hundred acres spread)
Had from this bow his wounds, and I my honors:
And shall a child boast eminence with me?

Cup. Phoebus, thy bow has monsters struck to ground,
But mine has power the gods themselves to wound,
Of which thou art not least. Mother he is sped, He shoot
I have pierced him home with my shafts golden head.

Ven. Thou art mine own sweet boy, thy darts never fail^
And now Apollo languish and look pale,
More wan than did thy sister Moon once prove,
When for Endymion she was sick of love,
Whilst I laugh and rejoice. Now make all sure,
And strike fair Daphne whilst she sleeps secure,
But with contempt and hate.

Cup. My arrow flies,
And as it hits, sick of disdain she lies.
Now mother let us away.

Ven. Phoebus, I divine,
Thou'It say his shafts can wound as deep as thine.
Exit.
Apoll. What alteration's this I feel? a heat
Beyond mine own fire, kindled at mine eye.
Daphne starts up.
Daph. All sleep is still in darkness, yet our souls
See when our eyes are shut. My brest's in uprore;
And yet a dream tells me, the morning gray
Says the Sun's up, I shame to look on day.

Apoll. What Beautie's this on earth, transpiercing more,
Than can the beams from my celestial Orb?

Daph. The Sun is up; Awake: What, shame you not
That he should find you sleeping?

Apol. Sweet Nymph stay.

Daph. The shades best please me, I in them will play;
The Sun's too hot and sultry.

Apol. I am he
That measures out the year; and shun you me
Fairest of thy sex, behold the Suns bright eye,
That all things sees, by whom you all things spy.
Will you in everlasting darkness dwell?
Light is heavens emblem, and becomes it well:
Where I appear, I comfort and make glad;
Be comforted in me, why are you sad?
Would you in blindness live? these rays of mine
Give that reflect by which your Beauties shine,
For what are artificial lights? when I
Appear in fullness they soon faint and die.
They only put on counterfeits: my rays
False colors find, and give the true the praise.
If yours be such, then prove them by my light,
The world will censure they are pure and right.

Daph. His piercing beams I never shall endure,
They sick me of a fatal Calenture.

Apol. What are you better to be lovely born,
If not beheld? What Is state, if not observed?
Or wherefore before Cottages do we
Prefer the stately Palace, and the sumptuous roof?
What virtue were in jewels without me?
Else should they be with pibbles equal pris'd.
Wherefore did Nature make you with bright eyes,
Which profit not in night without my beams?
Why should the Rose be red? the Lilly white?
The Violet purple? and the Holly green?
All rhese my creatures. But when I decline,
And night usurps upon the Universe,
Their tincture's not discerned: but white and red
Which in your peerlesse cheeks exceed all flowers,
What luster bear they? When my beams are gone,
The fair and foul in darkness seem all one.

Daph. That darkness does best please me: let us away,
My beauty will be sun burnt if I stay,
He Will blast me like an Ethiope.
Exit running.
Apol. Do thou fly me?
Love bids me follow, and I must pursue:
No vault, no cave or cavern so obscure,
Through which I will not pierce, to find thee out,
The Antipodes for ever want my rays:
To gaze on her, I Will this Meridian keep,
And till attain the saint that I adore,
Here ever shine, where night shall be no more.
Exit. Enter Venus and Cupid.
Venus. Laugh Cupid, laugh, for I am half revenged,
And shall e're long be fully, when this Blab
Shall in his course, or too much lag or speed
Post sometimes, and again run retrograde.
Where by his too long presence the earth is scortcht,
Or by his absence the other world shall freeze:
And all that lies beneath the Moon complain:
And that the gods at man's request shall call
Disorder into question. What can then
Both heaven and earth conclude when this is done,
But this thou did to avenge me of the Sun.

Cup. Will not Mars thank me for it?

Uen. And kiss thee too.
O still by his example punish those
That shall our sweet adulterate sports disclose.
Exeunt. Enter Daphne flying, and Apollo pursuing her.
Apollo. Why flies my Daphne, knowing it is in vain:
Love makes me swifter than thy fear can thee.

Daph. O me, I am so tortured with the Sun,
I hate my very shadow.

Apol. I pursue not
As Eagles, Doves do; or the Lions, Hearts;
Or Wolves, the Lamb. Love is my cause of have:
Run not so fast, lest thou should trip perhaps,
And do thy self some damage: the ground's rough,
Should thou but slide, and I the Author on it,
How much would it offend me? To prevent which,
Stay but thy have, and I will slack my speed.

Daph. I am almost breathless.

Apoll. See, I am no Satyr,
Shepherd, or such as live by grazing herds,
Delphos is mine, Pharos, and Tenedos:
Thou know not who thou fly'st, I am Apollo,
The only god that speaks by Oracle:
Jove is my father, and the Muses nine
Are all my daughters: I am Patron held
Of Numbers, Raptures, and sweet Poesy.
My shafts are ever certain where they aim,
(Yet one more certain, which has pierced me deep)
Physic is mine, I first devised that Art,
And could it help me, I were then assured:
But Love is by no Simples to be cured.

Daph. O now I am quite spent; help, goddess Juno,
(Queen of chaste marriage) bright Diana, help
One of thy true vowed Virgins: change my shape,
That I this hot adulterous Sun may escape.
Sudden Music, and she is turned into a Laurel tree. Thanks, o ye Powers
divine: the Spheres assent
To my chaste prayer: your heavenly dooms are just.
Here grow I fixed against all powers of lust.

Apoll. Strange prodigy! Less hope is in her stay,
Than in her speed: her body's round incompast
With a rough rind, in which her warm heart beats.
Her hair is all grown upward into boughs,
Here milk white fingers and her arms advanced
To great and lesser branches: her fair feet
But late so swift, fast rooted in the earth:
And I, whom Love late blinded, now may see
My Daphne turned into a Laurel tree.
Her life still struggles in the churlish bark,
And from her lips I feel her breath still flow.
One blessed kiss at parting, but in vain,
The very tree shrinks from me in disdain.
And yet in lasting memory of thee
And of my love, thou shall be ever mine:
In all ovatious triumphs and rich shows
The Laurel shall ingirt the Conquerors brows.
All eminence shall think it graced in thee.
Poets, the Muses darlings, shall from thee
Receive their honor, and the best esteemed
Be crowned Laureat, and no excellence
But have it is noble estimate from hence.
Emperors shall prise thy leaves above pure gold:
For thou shall ever wait on victory;
And as my youthful and still unshorne hairs
(Unchanging) of this golden hew are seen,
So shall the boughs and branches still be green,
And arm against Jove's lightning. And all these
Shall be for our sake by the gods approved,
In memory that Daphne we once loved.
Exit. Enter Aurora attended by the Hours.
1 Hour. How comes it, fair Aurora, we the Hours
Are thus disturbed?

2 Hour. One halts, whilst the other runs;
Sometimes made longer by a many minutes,
Sometimes not full three quarters?

Aurora. Am not I
As much distempered, being forced to rise
So often before my time? which makes my husband
Old Tython jealous (for he bedridden lies)
I have light on some new Love.

1 Hour. All Is out of order.
Enter the four Seasons, Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter.
Spring. How comes this strange confusion rise of late?
My spring to grow so forward by the Sun?
Summer complains that I usurp on her.

Sum. As much as I on thee, Autumn on me,
And says, that in my ripening I include
His harvest, and so rob him of his due.

Aut. Have I not cause? when thou not only claimst
The honor of my crop: But frozen Winter,
He keeps a coile too, swearing, I intrude
Into his bounded limits.

Wint. This I am sure
I am curtaild of my right; my snow is melted,
And has not time to cloth the mountain tops:
September is like May, January as June:
And all my bright and precious Isicles
Melting to nothing: What Is the reason trow we?

2 Hour. It Is the Suns slacknesse, or his too much speed,
That breeds all this distraction.

1 Hour. The Sun, say you?
Break he, or not directly keep his day,
Seasons and Hours all out of order stray.
Enter Day.
Some. Behold her whom you speak of, Day, whence come ye?

Day. I parted now with Night, who had bin here,
But that both must not in one place appear.

Auror. And what says she?

Day. Like you, railes on the Sun,
And says he does her wrong: nor blame her, when
Being full twelve hours, he scarce affords her ten.

Autumn. Day, you are the Suns mistress, has he not
Reveald the cause to you?

Day. No, his known brightness
Has unto me been only dark in that.
Nor am I of his counsel.

Winter. Fine world grown,
When every drunken Sexton has the skill
To make his giddy clock go truer far
Than can the best Sun dyall.
Enter Apollo.
Apollo. What are you
That murmr thus against our Deity?
Are you not all our creatures? though we give you
Full sails on earth, do not we steer the helm?
Disposing you both where and how we please;
And dare you thus rebel?

Omnes. The god of Light
Is our great Lord and Sovereign.

Apoll. This submission
Has somewhat calmed us: had you still stood out,
Disorder, we had to Confusion turned,
And so you all been ruined. But henceforth
Morning shall keep her hour, Hours measure day,
In a true scope the Day proportion Weeks,
Weeks, Months; Months, seasons; to sum up the year.
And we our course in that, perfecting time:
That nothing in this concordance appear
Either preposterous or unseasonable.
For which our grace, wherever you shall find
This new sprung Laurel, you Aurora I charge,
With your moist tears bathe her green tender boughs:
From whence I will exhale them with my beams.
Hours, do you wait upon her gentle growth.
Day comfort her: Ver cheer her with thy spring.
Thou Summer give her warmth: and Autumn, thou
Dare not to spoil her of her plenteous leaves:
Nor Winter thou with thy robustuous gusts,
To blait her lasting verdure. These observed,
Still flourish under us. And that this unity
May last amongst you many fortunate years,
End in a Hymn tuned to the chiming Spheres.
The Song.
Howsoever the Minutes go,
Run the hours or swift or slow:
Seem the Months or short or long,
Pass the seasons right or wrong:
All we sing that Phoebus follow,
Semel in anno ridet Apollo.
Early fall the Spring or not,
Prove the Summer cold or hot:
Autumn be it fair or foul,
Let the Winter smile or skowle:
Still we sing, that Phoebus follow,
Semel in anno ridet Apollo.

FINIS.
The Argument of AMPHRISA the forsaken Shepherdess.
THe innocence, truth, and simplicity
Of country Damsels: What felicity
They arrive to in their low estate;
What freedoms they participate,
What joy, what solace, what content
To their innocuous life is lent.
The humble shed and cottage held
More safe than gorgeous houses, swelled
With pomp and wealth. It likewise proves
More simple truth in their chaste loves,
Than greater Ladies, tympany' de
With much more honor, state, and pride.
Here Is of the Willow wreath dispute,
How, and why worn. What best does suit
Forsaken Virgins, read and find
Their characters who prove unkind.
Enter two Shepheardesses, Pelopoea and Alope. Pel. GOod morrow.

Alop. So to you, fair Shepherdess.

Iel. What news in our Arcadia?

Alop. I know none:
For well you wot it is no news with us,
That men should prove inconstant.

Pel. Think you so?

Alop. Thought's free.

Pel. I pray can you define me Thought?

Alop. Let me bethink my self, I think I can:
For I have thought of many things e're now.

Pel. But can you guess what I think?

Alop. I (perhaps)
May jumpe with your conceit, come neere't at least.
Of colors there are none so opposite
As white and black: and of the Elements
Than fire and water none more contrary:
Nor is there ought so antipathy' de in men,
As what they think and speak.

Pelop. Now let me help you:
Men's thoughts like Courtiers clokes are often shifted,
And change as often as they are truly sifted.

Alop. This then has been the cause of women's sorrow;
Men think to day ill, to do worse to morrow:
Witness Amphrisa's servant.

Pel. Pity it is,
^o fair a body, and so sweet a soul
should be so foulely dealt with. Her false Lover
^nkindely has forsook her.

Alop. That Is the reason
^hee's grown into so deep a melancholy.
^ wonder any woman dare trust man,
^nce, like as the Chamelions change themselves
unto all perfect colors saving white;
^ they can to all humors frame their speech,
^e only to prove honest.

Pel. You say well.
^t as no worms breed where they feel no warmth,
^o Vultures watch where they can find no prey;
^o Pirat roves but where he hopes for spoil:
^ none of these false servants wait, but where
^hey find a yielding Mistress.

Alop. Indeed light minds are caught with little things,
and Phancie smells to Fennel.

Pel. But Amphrisa
Is held to be the wisest shepherdess
That lives in our Arcadia.

Alop. But I have heard,
Late wit and cheated wisdom to be counted
Next neighbors unto folly. Shepherds now,
The holier that they seem in outward show,
The hollower are their hearts. By subtle sophistry
(As I have heard) the best Philosophy
May be perverted. And men's flatteries
Are just like Circes riches, which can turn
Vain glorious fools to Asses, credulous Fools
To Woodcocks, pretty wanton Fools to Apes,
And proud Fools into Peacocks.

Pel But amongst these,
Amphrisa had no place.
Enter Amphrisa seeming discontented.
Alop. See, here she comes
That for her self can answer.

Pelop. But 'twere sin
In us, not to be answered, thus to suffer her
To pale the cheerful blood in her far cheeks,
Through wilful passion. Which I Will not endure.

Alop. Then rowse her from these dumps.

Pel. You Are sad, Amphrisa:
Sweet may we know the cause?
Amphrisa. You have prevented
A strange conceit which somewhat troubled me;
But by your interruption almost lost.

Pel. Nay recollect your self, pray let us hear't.

Amph. I was thinking, why Parrasius, drawing Youth,
Made Love to tickle one side with a feather,
To move a smile; and with the other hand
To sting it with a Scorpion.

Pel. You Are stung then.
But I was thinking on Praxiteles,
Who drew his mistress thus: Look on her one way,
She laughed upon him: Strait before, she wept:
But change the side, and cast your eye adverse,
And then she appeared sleeping. And so you,
Fit but your phansies unto such a face,
You Will never complain of servant.

Amph. Then it seems,
My storie's told aforehand.

Alop. Yes, and rumor'd
Through all Arcadia.

Amph. And none pity me?

Pel. There Is none so marble brested, but does melt
To hear of your disaster.

Amph. Is there one,
To whom the cause of my disease is known,
That can prescribe me cure for it?

Pelop. Without feeling
Your pulse, I know the nature of your grief:
You have an heat, on which a coldness waits,
A pain that is endured with pleasantness,
And makes those sweets you eat have bitter taste:
^^ puts eyes in your thoughts, ears in your heart:
^Twas by desire first bred, by delight nursed,
And has of late been weaned by jelousie.

Amp. But how can these disgusts be remedied,
Which Reason never yet could comprehend?

Pel. By patience.

Amp. That Is a physic all prescribe,
But few or none does follow. Pray what is it?

Pel. It is the best receipt that can be took
Both against love and fortune (Crossed in both.)

Alop. To wish the best, to think upon the worst,
And all contingents brook with patience.
^s a most sovereign medicine.

Pelop. And moreover;
What cannot be redrest with peevishness,
Ought to be borne with patience.

Alop. Patience?
^he is so like to Fortitude herself,
That by her sweet aspect she appears to be
Her sister or her daughter.

Pel. The only remedy for injuries, is
By patience to forget them. And more noble
It is to yield your self in triumph to it
Then to be drawn by force.

Amp. You have prevaild,
For I am now your Patient; and entreat you,
Like skild Physicians, study for my health.

Alop From their Doctors
The sick expect more art then eloquence:
And therefore what defect you find in words,
Expect in our Prescriptions.
Enter their Queen and two Nymphs.
Queen I never was with pastime better pleased;
So clear a morning, and such temperate air;
The Sun so bright, yet sparing of his heat,
Made all the toil we took (to chase the Stag)
To seem no labor, but an exercise.
The wily beast to shun our swift pursuit,
Forsook the Plains, to take the mountain tops.
Yet maugre the opposure of the Rocks
And clifts depending to molest our speed
Our well-tride Nymphs, like wild Kids clim'd those hills
And thrild their arrowie Iavelins after him:
Nor left the chase, till all those golden heads
Were new stained in his blood.

1. Nymph. It proved, great Queen
Your active Nymphs were better breathed than he,
For whom we could not overtake, we tired:
That done, we touched our Beagles, and so made
Both hills and valleys echo to his death.

2. Nymph. He stood so long, and made us stray so far,
Amongst the Swains and lovely Shepheardesses,
That use to graze their Flocks upon these downs;
The Sun must needs pass the Meridian,
E're we can reach the Lodge.

Qu. The Arcadian Girls
Are of no common beauty; as their habits
Much grace the fields; so many of those features
Mine eye by chance has glanc't on in the Chase,
In mine opinion would become the Court.
They say, these virgins are acute in wit,
And fluent in conceit, to speak or sing;
As having often drunk from the Muses spring.

1. Nym. See, Royal Queen, where three (not of the meanest
Or least to be respected) are retired.

Qu. Be not too loud, These bows will shelter us;
Let Us l^sten how they fashion their discourse,
And how far short the Folds and Cottages
Come of the Court or City.

Amp. Nay pray prescribe. It Is said of all Physicians
What good comes by their Physic, the Sun sees:
But in their art, if they have bad success,
That the earth covers. Howsoever I suffer,
You blameless are.

Alop. All those that are unskilful
Will flatter grief 'till it grow desperate.
But though you know the use of Physic sweet,
To taste it is unsavory.

Amp. Howsoever I am prepared.

Pel. Imagine first, You never had a servant.

Alop. Not so: for who can know the sweet of ease,
That never was in pain?

Pel. Or say she had,
Think that he never played false.

Alop. A mere relapse,
Before the first be cured, to think him faithful,
Were but to enter her disease anew,
To make her grief more violent.

Amp. But one speak:
The medicine that is proposed of contraries,
Can never breed peace of mind.

(Qu. All, solid sense.)
For I perceive, those that are sound themselves,
Have still more will to help, than skill to cure.

Pel. Well, Mistress Doctor I Will give way to you.

Alop. Think then you had a servant, and he false;
For whose sake never more trust per jur'd man.
And though some say Jove winks at Dovers Oaths,
It Is (after) with broad eyes to punish them.
Words should not credit men, but men their words:
For he that breaks his promise lies to heaven;
And whom Heaven hates, who but would fear to love
Most cursed it is to flatter and forswear;
And dearth of oaths is blessed barrenness.
You Are sick at heart: the only help for that
Is, Let your heart abhor his treachery,
And him, for it. You Are pained too in the head,
She present a wrea^ of will^^ For that here is balm made or a willow wreath.
Let this charmed c^^ ele but impale your brows,
It Is present help for both.

Amp. Make this apparent.

Alop. Thus: All the Arcadian Swains and Nymphs that ^^
Your brows ingirt with this for saken wreath
Will take note of his falsehood, and your faith;
Your innocence, and his inconstancy:
And those that wear tears in their eyes for you,
Of love and pity, to be thus abused,
Will steep their tongues in wormwood and in gall,
To brand him for his open perjury;
Their pity, with your patience joined,
(With this to boot) will prove an absolute cure.

Amph. Some ease I find already, crown me then.
She is crowned with Willow.
Alop. May, wheresoever your head you softly pillow,
Be never more troubled, whilst thus wreathed in willow

Amph. Nor shall it, Alope, for from this hour,
Hearts grief nor heads pain shall of me have power.
I now have chased hence sorrow.

Queen. This conceit
Has took me highly; and great pity it is,
That such choice wits should find no other ears
Than those that Swains, and flocks, and fowls have. Wit
So spent, is only treasured in the air.
The earth has least part on it. Virgins, Good day.
Nay, do not fall too low.

Pel. You are our Queen.

Alop. And Lady of our fortunes.

Qu. By that title
I do command you then to spare your knees.
Nay rise.

Amp. It Is only by your Grace and goodness
We breathe and live.

Qu. It is enough to me,
That you present us such acknowledgement.
And as for you, fair Virgin, I could wish
Your Willow were a Laurel. Nay, so it is:
Because all such may be styled Conquerors,
That can subdue the ir passions.

Alop. Our fear is,
That if our rude discourse have touched your ear,
The coursenesse might offend you.

Qu. Pleased us highly:
Which that you may perceive in mee's vnfeignd,
I charge you, as I am your Soveraignesse,
All coyness and evasion set apart,
To be most free in language.

Pel. Imposition
That comes from you is unto us a Law,
Which ought to be kept sacred.

Qu. I Will as freely
Command then, as you willing are to obey,
For were I not a Queen, I Would wish to be
As one of you, a witty Shepherdess.
Pray sing me something of your country life,
To make me more in love with it.

Amp. It Is our fear; A life that is so mean, so ill expressed
As needs it must be, (if imposed on us)
May make you rather loath it.

Qu. I had thought
Courts only had been filled with complement,
Of which I see, the cottage is not clear.

Amp. Give not our simple truth, and fear to offend,
A character we know not (gracious Queen)
But howsoever, if you make us faulty,
You have the power to pardon.

Qu. And presume
That Is granted, e're the offense be.

Amp. Then thus, Madam.
She sings. The Song.
We that have known no greater state
Than this we live in, praise our fate:
For Courtly silks in cares are spent,
When Countries russet breeds content.
The power of Scepters we admire;
But sheep-bookes for our use desire.
Simple and low is our condition;
For here with us is no ambition.
We with the Sun our flocks unfold,
Whose rising makes their fleeces gold.
"Our music from the birds we borrow;
"They bidding us, we them, good morrow.
These last two lines twice
Qu. Nay, fair ones, what you have begun in song,
Continue in discourse: We would hear more
Of your pleased life.

Amp. Your highness may command.
Our habits are but course and plain,
Yet they defend from wind and rain.
As warm too, in an equal eye
As those be, stained in Scarlet dye.
Those that have plenty wear (we see)
But one at once; and so do we.

Alop. The Shepherd with his homespun Less
As many merry hours does pass,
As Courtiers with their costly Girls,
Though richly decked in gold and pearls:
And though but plain, to purpose woo,
Nay oft-times with less danger too.

Pel. Those that delight in dainties store,
One stomach feed at once, no more.
And when with homely fare we feast,
With us it does as well digest:
And many times we better speed;
For our wild fruits no surfets breed,

Amp. If we sometimes the Willow wear,
By subtle Swains that dare forswear.
We wonder whence it comes, and fear,
The have been at Court, and learned it there.
If any Lady then shall please,
Whose cheek looks pale through my disease,
By any faithless servant, or false friend,
(Being cured myself) this I can give or lend.
She offers the willow.
Qu. Beleeve't, a sweet conclusion: for oft-times
Such things fall out. But we have further heard
(Besides what now our ears are witness to)
That as your words keep time, your voices tune;
So has the curious motion of your feet
Been taught to know true measure. You can dance?

Amp. Yes royal Princess, as we sing and speak,
After such rural fashion.

Qu. If no worse,
It may become a Theater of eyes,
Yet wrest no blushes from you. Will you then,
Since that we parallel in number thus,
Help us to fill a measure?

Pelop. So we thought
There might no jarring discords grow from us,
To spoil your better music.

Qu. No such fear.
Come then, such music as the place will yield,
We Will instantly make use of.
Music sounds, and they dance the measure.
Qu. Complete in all: You have made us now Eie-witnes
Of what, Relation sparingly has spoke.
To encourage which, and that so great a merit
Pass not without some meed, receive these favors,
And wear them for our sake.
Jewels given. Time bids us part.
Greater than these we have for you in store,
And mean hereafter to employ you more.

FINIS.
An Emblematicall Dialogue, interpreted from the Excellent and most learned D.
Iac. Catzius; which shows how Virgins in their chaste loves ought to bear
themselves.
1. The Argument.
TWo modest Virgins, of unequal time,
The One past, the other growing to her prime,
(Anna and Phillis) interchange some chat
Of Love, of Marriage, and I know not what.
2. The Argument.
ANne hearing Phillis her rude Love relate,
(Whose tender breast was free from all deceit)
Fears lest her youth to lust she might engage,
And bids her to be couns^l'd by her age.
A Virgins office, and how Maids be caught,
(Says she) three times vine Winters have me taught:
Take me thy Guide, and no way thou can ^^re,
Who before Venus sweets, chaste love prefer.
Which in alternate language whilst they plead,
In view and presence of the Marriage bed,
Phillis, whom youth and fresh love does possess,
Her amorous thoughts begins thus to express.
We, when in health, for sick folks counsel find,
But sick our selves; we quickly change our mind.
Without Marriage there is no courage.
Phi. Whilst near my Fathers house I observed but late
Two Turtles bill, and either court it is mate,
I called to mind the palm which I might spy
Drooping, because the male plant was not nigh,
Whom with erected looks when she beheld,
She buds, she bloome, with fruit her branches sweld,
At which I said (O Venus) were I dead,
But that I think it a sweet thing to wed!
Which as I spoke, (and more would have expressed)
I felt soft love to steal into my breast.
Trees have their Ardor, and the birds their flame,
The Mountain bo^es, and wild beasts have the same
Nor does the scaly fish want their desire,
Why then should only Virgins shun this fire?
Concerning which the Poet Lucretius is thus read.

Each generation that on earth abides,
Whether of beasts, or men, (whom reason guides,
Horses or Cattle, what is beneath the Sun,
Into this fiery ardor madly run.)

Most things unprov'd cannot content us,
Which being tryde they often repent us.

An. Into the Brides yoke will thou madly fly,
Thinking there Roses, and sweet. Apples lie?
If such a thing as pleasure be? search round;
In man's rude arms it never can be found.
What is this snare to which young Virgins haste,
But like the Osier weel in rivers placed?
The fish yet free, to enter wind about,
Whilst they within are laboring to get out.
Boys in their first heat, want the wit to tarry,
And Girls (not ripe) are mad until they marry;
When scarce the one has warmed the others side,
But they wish beds and houses to divide.

Diog Laert tells us that it was a saying of Socrates, that young batchelers
desirous of marriage were like to fishes who play about the we will, and gladly
would get in, when on the contrary they that are within strive how they should
get out.

The family of the unmarried is lame.
Phi. Though you say, Wedlock does such troubles breed,
Love bids, and Hymen prompts me to proceed.
The tedious silence of a forlorn bed
To me is hateful, therefore must I wed:
Look how the Ducks mourn when they miss the male,
No one but droopes her wings, and flags her tail,
But he once come, the pond with clamor rings,
And you then see another face of things.
The good man absent: then the fire does freeze,
The house is sad, the wife her mirth does leese.
(They all are troubled,) when the maid does ask
To go to rest, she is put to some new task.
A beard's the houses prop, (besides is none)
There can be no delight to sleep alone.

Impose the burden of virginity on none (says Ignatius the ancient
Theologist) being a yoke which even the Vrgin Vestal? (of old) in Rome were
not able to bear, to whom only five years were enjoined to abstain from
marriage, and to keep the holy fire from going out.

Bind in thy flames.
An Though thou have such a will to change thy state,
Yet gently hear me what I shall relate,
The flame (too raging) that by heat is blown,
To fit the marriage bed was never known.
Observe the Cooper when he joins his tun,
That the con racted planks may evenly run,
(The sury of the violent heat to tame)
In a round Iron cradle keeps his flame,
By his example thine hot fires suppress,
Lest this or that way fondly it digress.
With amorous tales let not thine ears be tainted.
Before thy mother be therewith acquainted;
She Will tell thy Father; so take off thy care,
They well provide to keep thee from the snare.

Cicero tells us that it is fit, men should be brought within the compass of
reason and learning

And Cipri. that the tutors or guardians, namely, the Father, Grandfather, or
Brother, were wont of old to contract young Virgins, which ancient custom is
upon great consideration observed in these days, And amongst other causes,
especially in regard of the weakness, and bashfulnesse of the sex: and we
read in Euripides that when Orestes solicited Hermione for marriage, Her
answer was, My espousals remain in my Fathers power, and not mine.

By the finger, not the tongue.
Phi Shall I then clamor for an husband? no,
My virgin shame forbids me to do so,
Three lusters, and three years ore past, I pray,
Is It not enough? what more can virgins say?
Look how that watch does the swift hours divide,
And with its hand does to the figures guide,
It nothing speaks, yet points (early and late
To what it means, such is our virgins state,
Although the mind be silent, and sit mute,
Her mature age (though tongueles) moves her suit.
It shows her to be enterd in her prime,
And tells the parents that she loses time.
Her round breasts speak, fresh cheeks and brows so faye
Thus the whole girle's dissoly'd to silent prayer.

That Father is much to be blamed, who when h^^ Daughter is in her full
maturity provideth her not ^^ Husband. Well therefore said Ignatius, A ripe
Virgin to prevent the wrinckles of age, may speak to her Father in private, to
dispose of her in marriage.

And we read Claudian thus:

The virgins ripe age breeds the fathers cares,
Who, for her sake neglects his Lords affairs.
The Colony is to be removed elsewhere.
Phi. When the earth helps the Vine her sprigs to bear,
It Is fit they should transplanted be elsewhere.
The dresser calls and says these same will bud,
And prosper bravely if the soil be good.
I have two swelling breasts that twins can feed,
A lap besides to dandle those I breed:
And my virginity (say what you can)
Proclaims me now that I am ripe for man.
I look on Wives, and wish that I were such,
But grieve my Father will not see so much:
Yet long he shall not bar me from that bliss
Which law allows, or I am taught amiss.

That daughter who has past the age of five and twenty, if she marry without
her fathers consent, by the law of some Nations cannot be deprived of her
dowry, because the father ought to consider in time convenient to provide his
daughter of an husband, and himself of a Son-in-law: but when our Phillis
professes her self not to be much above fifteen, it is ridiculous in the
maid longing for marriage, to wrest the law, and apply it unto her own
purpose.

After the wound, in vain is warning.
An. What Is shame to speak, is it not sin to act,
To blush at words, and not to blame the fact.
No girl that is wise to lovers will incline,
The choice should be thy parents, and not thine.
Courtship inchaunts, when lovers vow they faigne,
And enterd once, there is no way back again.
Vain is it for the wounded Whale to fly,
Who careless erst before the stroke did lie.
Loves arrows to remove, or ease their smart,
As vain it is, if once they touch the heart.
Then of thy parents counsel first be sure
Before thy choice: once wounded there is no cure.

If regard be to be had of dignity, comlines or honesty; then in the
contracting of marriages, it is more decent and seemly, if the parents troth
plight their daughters to their husbands, and tie them together with their own
tongues, than if they themselves immodestly in their own language subject
themselves to one another power. Cypr.

They that in gathering Venus flowers are free,
Say daily, these to morrow such will be.
Mean time soft fires into our bosoms creep,
And the worst trees still root themselves most deep.
Ovid. The more haste, the worse speed.
An. In hast's no help: if follow love, 'twill fly,
Lovers hate such as come to every cry.
Of any sudden conquest they are sick,
Nor what they covet, would have come too quick.
When the Lord sends to bid the Cook make haste,
He straight gives charge the spit turn not too fast,
Less speed is made, the meat's the sooner ready.
He hinders and not hasts that is too speedy.
She that in Cupids Kitchen would command
Must have dull motion, and a tardy hand:
It Is speed that spoils all, spurs are in delay,
No lover stoopes unto a yielding prey.
All delay is odious, yet it brings on wisdom.
Sen. You that would marry, though you both make speed,
Delay't awhile, small stay great gain may breed.

Delays oftentimes bring to pass that he who should have dyed, has killed
him who might have lived. Clem. Alexand.

For what we can, we care not
An. We see in birds for whom the pitfall's set,
Such as would feign be took, escape the net.
Others that would fly thence, the strings combine,
Their captive legs intangling in their twine.
She that first craves deserves a scornful smile,
As both in maid or woman hold most vile.
She Is only certain to be caught that flies,
She teaches to be su'd to that denies.
Coy Dames the breasts of lovers most besot,
The sweetest kisses are by struggling got.
That game best pleases which is sur'st in chase,
Not that being swollen, and lies dead in the place.
What I most wish may for a time be spared,
Nor pleases me the conquest that is prepared. Petron.

To this purpose is that of Sencea the Philosopher, it ^ameth me to enter
conflict with a man prepared to be ^vercome. The sword-player holds it a
great indignity ^^ be matched with his inferior, as knowing it can be ^o
glory to him to subdue that man, who is vanquished without danger.

Press occasion.
^^i. What means this Ann? think thou me mad, that I
What my heart thinks should with my tongue deny?
Past loves, in vain she studieth to recall,
Who to her friend has showed no grace at all,
Whilst golden Venus with a cheerful face
Smiles on our acts, let us lose nor time nor place.
The wary Ospray whilst the fishes play
Above the wave, stoopes down to cease her prey.
That Bird for our example is we know,
Who slips no time, parts conqueror from his foe.
Catch at occasions, look e're he pass by thee,
Let him escape, and Venus too will fly thee.

If in the very moment of occasion the opportunity ^ere of by thy delay or
negligence thou have o'reslipt, in ^ne it is to complain upon it being past.
Live.

The honor of virginity perishes in the lasting
While th'envious Rose, wrapped in new leaves we find,
She hides her beauty in a thorny rind.
Forbear your hand (boys) for their pricks are found
Nor can you crop the bud without a wound.
But stay the time, the flower it self will spread,
But if not gathered then, the leaves will shed.
Sweet are young maids to lovers in their prime,
And pleasant love rejoices in that time.
She that is long a maid, scarce such appears,
Virginity still wastes with her years.
Let Cupid have our vigor, and youths fire,
Maids young deny, what old, they most desire.
Standing streams gather mud, but running rive^ are fresh and sweet.

Such as resist love, must either have no brain, or ^ eyes. Protogenes.

Ambition and love are impatient of delay: li^ gring grows loathsome where
necessity craves has^ Quintilian.

No prize if not provoked.
An. A deeper Sea I now perforce must sail,
And lay my sheats open to a freer gale.
Such as the subtle trains of love would fly,
Let them upon this emblem cast their eye.
Thou see that net which hangs in the glade,
A train for Woodcocks by the Fowler made;
He does not touch the strings, but remote stands,
Whilst her own weight compels her into bands.
If took or not, the traveller scarce knows,
Because the net enforced about her flows.
Virgins beware by this, if took at all,
Catch not thy self, but by thy suitor fall.
Draw not upon thy self that subtle frame,
So shall thou make the Fowler his own game.

Many virgins at their contractings rather com^ then speak, especially if
their parents be then presence, lest they should appear to desire a husb^^^
which in maids is not seemly, and Baldus observes, it is ingrafted in the
nature of women to be silent, especially at the time when there is a treaty of
their marriage; moreover it is a great sign of virginal modesty, to blush
when marriage is but named: according with that of the Poet.

Quale coloratum Tithoni conjuge Coelum
Subrubet, aut sponso visa puella novo.
Like to the colored Heaven, by' the morning did,
Or blushing maid by her new husband spyde.
It lights, but leads not.
An. If to more proper rules a mind thou have,
Take these: and more, I Will not allow thee chaste.
On the vast Seas the Beacon does display
Its light: directing ships their safest way.
The flame does show the harbor to be near,
Yet does not help the Mariner to steare:
It Is they must guide the Sails, and ply the Oar,
Save light from it, they can expect no more.
If thy face, speak thee not of Cynthias train,
And thou the Vestals modest dress disdain:
Thou only on the shore, to light them, stand,
But let the Sayler labor how to land.

It much behooves a virgin to be very circumspect in cases of matrimony, that
for the honor of her sex, she neither seem to offer her self, or to do any
thing against modesty: lest it happen unto her, as (we read) it did to Icasin
a noble and learned virgin, who when she became so gracious in the eyes of
Theophilus Emperor of Constantinople, that he seemed to offer her a golden
apple as a pledge of nuptial faith and contract: She was taxed for her too
ready answer and acception thereof, and for grief of mind confinde her self
into a Monastery. Cypri.

No play without some pray.
Phi. If it be harmefull then for maids to woo,
What we are barred may not our Fathers do?
Trust me, to tardy lovers sport it lends,
And love has often grown from bare commends.
The Latian King would needs Aeneas draw,
To take his daughter, whom (before he saw)
The Trojan loved: but fathers that are wise
With better art these contracts may disguise.
More private slights there are: by agents, best
Where many are, still one may help the rest.
By Birds, the Fowler to his net, birds drew,
Yet in the act, seemed as he nothing knew.

Parents of old made proffer of their Daughters to Husbands before they sought
after them, neither did they imagine in that to have done any thing uncomly or
undecent. We read in the first of Kings, chapter eighteenth, Saul offered his
Daughter unto David Homer reports that Alcinous did the like to Ulysses. Virgil
that Latinus did the same to Aeneas: Terence, that Chreme^ did it to Pamphilus.
Herodotus, that it was done by Megacles to Pisistratus, and Zonoras and others,
that Darius did as much to Alexander, etc.

Try ere you trust.
An. Wary's thine art, but not from danger sure,
For do thou think that craft can be secure?
Wretch thou art deceived. We live in corrupt times,
Nor can craft long conceal her subtle crimes.
Add that the profferd bride few humors fits,
As fearing there be baits laid in their bits.
Whilst aged Priam to Achilles sues
To take his child, he does the match refuse.
Let Fathers pause until their minds they know,
and whether they be well disposed or no.
The Fox his ear unto the Ice does lay
E're venture on; if hear them crack, he will stay.

Whilst Darius to Alexander, Priamus to Achilles ^ Alcinous to Ulysses, without
due circumspection made offer of their daughters, they were altogether
frustrate in their hopes and expectations, therefore the wiser are of opinion:
that nothing ought to be profferd, which has not before been proved.

Too much light dimmes the sight.
An. Concerning Habit, which in Love's not least,
Receive these few rules fit to be impressed.
Cost (within compass) does the young man taste,
Neatness best pleases love, where there is no waste.
When once thy virgins habit is laid by,
And thou art a wife, thy gifts will then grow high.
If thou (before) in princely jemmes shall shine,
He Will say; my gifts are slight, she needs not mine.
Rich vesture I have seen Lovers to'affright,
Youth starts at Jewels when they shine too bright,
Much oil chokes lamps. The Lysard when he lies
Too open to the hot Sun, faints and dies.

A cleanliness is to be used by women, neither despised, nor too exquisit,
only let it avoid clownish and sordid negligence. Cicero.

She that has too much care over her attire, shows she has little regard of
her virtue. Cato Cens.

Husbandmen praise best those ears of corn which bow down, and make the stalk
crooked, more then such as grow straight and up right, as being assured to find
more grain in the one than in the other. Humblenes in heart and habit, is both
pleasing to God, and acceptable with man.

Cheeks often painted, are soon tainted.
An. A grave man supping with my Father said,
(What in my breast, I ever since have laid)
Then Peach trees (when they flower) nothing more fair,
And none more sordid when their bows are bare.
That wife grows often loathsome by neglect,
Who (yet a Maid) her self too nicely decked.
How comes this too much liberty of dress?
When a whole day is spent in it (and no less)
Too curious trimming maids has often misled,
Nor did it ever suite the marriage bed.
It often falls out, such as most leisure find,
To paint their cheeks, their husbands do not mind:
But from all ages, this a maxim was,
None loves her distaffe, who admires her glass.

Let not thy habit be too rich nor too base, make it neither for admiration,
nor contempt; their ornament is called womanly neatness, by which is meant
modest handsomnesse, free from curiosity or cost: and Vives in the same place
proceeds thus: in thy garments it is enjoined thee that they be not over nise
or precious, but without spot or stain. For I cannot imagine how much the
purity of the mind rejoices at the matronlike neatness of the body.

Fire from Frost.
An. But say the reine be given up to thine hands,
And the sad suitor at thy mercy stands;
Though burn within, persuade him thou do freeze
For still to smile, will much advantage leese.
The Sun shines clearest breaking from a cloud,
Sweet is the North Wind when it breaths not loud.
Heat flies, love bates, and suitors weary grow,
When the fond Girl does too much favor show.
Water does make the lime-chalk scortch with heat,
And the Smiths flame by water grows more great.
Learn to say nay, love heightens by denial,
And has through wounds and difficult things best trial
Better the Be on flowers does feed,
Having first tasted on a weed.
The stars of greater luster show,
After the North Wind leaves to blow.
When Lucifer has chac't hence night,
The blushing morning shows more bright. Boeth.

It may be called a disease rather than mirth, ever to smile on them who
always laugh at thee, or to frame the countenance unto every man's humor.
Seneca.

The light to keep,
snuff not too deep.

Ph. Too strict thy rules are, golden Venus cries,
To no such laws she tender virgins ties.
If like the Sabines we contract the brow,
Give them bad words, use them we care not how;
We shall our loves make weary of their lives,
As far more fit to be made Soldiers wives.
Cupid inured to lie soft and secure
In Venus shades, no hardness can endure.
Say, brittle be his shafts, that their points turn,
Flashie his fire, and cannot ever burn.
To clear the taper, if you snuff too deep,
Out goes the lighr, in the dark you may go sleep.

When one churneth milk he brings forth butter: and he that wringeth his
nose causes blood to come out: so he that forces wrath brings forth strife.
Pro. 30.

Thy secure pastime should be mixed with fear,
Or else thy favors he will not hold so dear.
Passions too high, will speaking lie.
An. If chide; it is nothing, there is no danger, know:
(I speak strange things) love does by brauling grow:
He first retyres and must go back some step,
Who has a mind to make the stronger leap.
The further Cupid draws his elbow back,
He deeper strikes, and makes the greater wrack.
War begets peace, jarre to atonement tends,
Thus Mars and Venus quarreld, and were friends.
Add this: his wrath up to the height to wind,
To search what gall thou in his breast can find.
Anger will lay his heart wide open, and bare,
In rage, (for men to hide their thoughts) it is rare.

Those Doves, who late, each other sought to wound,
Now join their bills with murmr and sweet sound.
Ovid. Lovers stray, where there is no way.
^^. Court, kiss, drink deep, strew roses when you meet,
And let your banquets be of junkets sweet.
In little, little space, unhappy thou,
With a sad soul beneath his feet shall bow.
The beane-stalke by a slender wand does clime,
Shooting his head up to the air in time.
The top it aims at, having reached unto't,
He bows his wanton head down to the root.
Lovers rash heat unto the utmost aims,
And though thou grant it much, yet more it claims.
Give all; it is not enough, unless thou grant
(Of what he has) He to his friend may vaunt.

This also is to be admonished them, that virgins smile not on all such as
laugh upon them: which indeed is not seen in any but such as are rather
immodest on mad, she ought not also to suffer her self to be tugged or
over want only touched, but rather to shun the place, or forbear the company.
If she cannot otherwise avoid it. Vives.

They care nor fear, For what they swear.
An. Let neither promise, nor complaint persuade,
Nor his laments thy tender breast invade.
See thou that Reed, which when the North wind blows
Bows down it is head, and like a suppliant shows;
But the gust past, it grows straight as a line,
And of the former storm remains no sign.
The Be makes honey till his sting be gone,
But that once lost, he soon becomes a Drone.
The suitor sues, and seeks, and gives good words,
Whilst she stands off, and no kind grace affoords:
But with contempt and scoffing he will retire,
When he has once obtained his wished desire.
Rash oaths by raging lovers uttered, bind
Like words inscribed on water, or in wind.

Hot love grows soon cold; and faith plighted with feigned vows as it is
tied without conscience, so for the most part it is broken without care.

Touch it with salt,
it turns to nothing.

An. That thy prime age, thou without stain may wear,
See thou to no obscene talk lend thine ear,
When wanton youth against modesty makes war
To make it captive, such their weapons are.
Therefore, if any with a blushlesse face,
And talk uncomely, press into the place;
Grace nothing, but a brow censorious take
And answer him, as if some Matron spoke.
Observe the snaile, on which if salt you cast,
To water first it turns, to naught at last.
Let but thy words into loud thunder break,
And instantly, he will have no word to speak.

Posthumia the vestall, because she was free in laughter, and more liberal in
discourse with men, then became her order, was called in question about incest:
but being acquitted of that crime by Spurius Minutius, then High Priest or
Flamin, he admonished her that thenceforward she should conform her language
to her life. Plutarch.

As the North Wind drives away the rain, so does an angry countenance, the
slandering tongue. Prove. 25. 23.

There Is much danger, to trust a stranger.
Phi. To marry, in my thoughts much better were,
It strengthens bashful shame, preventing fear.

An. But light and hasty will, does fraud provoke,
Who eats with too much speed may hap to choke.
When Palamedes birds the rusticks take,
They snares of paper, daubed with birdlime, make.
The meat the foul loves, in the midst is placed,
Which whilst the hungry bird desires to taste,
The slimy paper blinding both her eyes,
She now a pray before the fowler lies.
Most justly they the Cities scorn are made,
Who will be caught, yet see the train that is laid.

The way to marriage is doubtful and double, the one leads to misery, the
other to happiness: therefore before thou give thy self into that way, it
behooves thee to be of that solicitous deliberation which is reported of
Hercules traveling where two ways met: for if once in marriage, it has
happened unto thee ill, there is no art by which thou can correct it; for thou
art fallen into the number of those, of whom the proverb speaks, He deserves
no pity, that chooses to do twice amiss.

It is more honest after thou have once determined, to love, rather than begin
to determine when thou have loved

Sometimes fair words, wound worse than swords.
An. If any one unworthy seek thy bed,
From thy chaste house let him be banished:
Admit him not, so much as to be jeered,
Some scoft at first, have after proved indeer'd.
If he have any wit at all, he will show it,
And prove in sundry strains to let thee know it,
Embracing first, strive a forced kiss to win,
Such kisses have to virgins fatal been.
So by degrees into thy breast love steals
And wanders round, but his soft steps conceales;
Whilst Fowlers play upon their pipes, and sing,
Th'unwary foul into their nets they bring.

Wonder not that thou art deceived by him that speaks thee fair and flatters
thee, but rather wonder how thou have escaped from not being deceived by him
Demosthenes.

Sic avidis fallax indulget piscibus Hamus,
Callida sic stultas decipit esca feras.
So the deceitful hook the fish betrays,
So beasts, by crafty baits, a thousand ways.
Spare for no cost, where nothing's lost
Phi. To embrace, or kiss, why should a maid deny?
Since neither shame, nor fame we lose thereby.
Who can believe a soft kiss can eclipse
Our honor, coming from a young man's lips.
The Be the violet kissed, and the Suns flower,
And laden with sweet juice, hies to her bower,
Yet neither one nor other is since dride,
But both still flourish in their wonted pride.
What with compulsive strength the young man took,
The maid wipes off, and keeps her former look.
If it be lawful light from light to take,
Why should we maids to kiss, such scruple make?
Why swelst thou Satyrist, kisses are vain,
And thine own spit will wash them off again. Ex Gr, Ep.
True honor is so pure, It will no touch endure.
An. Kisses, soft gripes, and blandishing persuades,
From amorous suitors; harm not those young maids.
No Poet (howsoever his vain please)
Shall sway me; but there is poison in all these.
Touch not the purple grape: for then it is ripe,
And that pure color cannot brook the gripe.
It Is fresh, now the Vines grace, and has affinity
Unto the Genius of untoucht virginity;
Shun them, they have sweet poison mixed among:
The lip but touched, does wear the impresse long:
For wash thy face a thousand times, the sin
Thou can not wipe thence, for that lies within.

Nothing is more tender than the fame and reputation of women, or more subject
to injury: in so much that it may be properly said to hang by the small thread
of a Spider. Vives.

No Father can have too great a care of preserving his daughters chastity.
Plaut, in Epidic.

Once shamed, ever blamed.
^^. Not sin alone, but what may such appear,
If thou be wise (maid) studdy to forbear,
It Is not enough, thine acts are free from blame,
Since thou (meanetime) may suffer in thy fame.
If the Nuts-shels, thou shall asunder draw,
Do what thou can, there will remain the flaw.
Thy fame once touched, be thy mind never so pure,
Yet scandal shall thy chastity endure.
Though thou the ruin studiest to repair,
Thou can not make it good with all thy care.
How-ever join the shells, the breach is seen,
Though hide thy wounds, yet will they still be green
Her modesty once blamed,
She is for ever shamed.

Remember still thy fame to cherish,
That lost, thy self does likewise perish.
Ovid. It behooves the chaste one, not only to abstain from crime, but also to
avoid the sordid aspersion o^ blame. Dion.

His slave she lives, to whom she gives.
An. Be It then the virgins care and labor still,
That of her carriage, no tongue can speak ill.
Hear me with patience and I Will teach thee then,
What dangerous rocks to avoid, both where and when
Part to thy Love with nothing that thou haste,
Far be free hands to virgins that are chaste.
If give but trifles, he will for greater look:
Part has been offered, when the whole was took.
Besides, thy gifts to every one he will show,
Speaking them thine, to all whom he does know.
Fat spilt in frying, makes the flame so great,
That it both wastes it self, and spoils the meat.

Let the woman give nothing to the man: for whosoever she be that presents a
gift, prostrateth her self Vives.

And there may be reason rendered, that whosoever gives may be thought to
insinuate himself into the man's favor to whom he gives; alluding to that a
Martial.

Thou sent'st me presents, oh but why?
Because with thee I should comply.
All things by Gold,
are bought and sold.

An. Give not said I? Now, do not take, I say,
Gripple we are, gifts will our sex betray:
They weaken us: she that has long out-held
(A gift received) to yield has been compeld.
The baser coin they to the Seas commend,
But the choice Gold, to the white bosom send.
Where steel can force no entrance, Gold is free,
Let Danaes brazen Tower witness for me.
Then Steel give place, to Gold thy strength resign,
(Woe me) that choler, has a power divine.
By Iron some few; Their number, who by Gold
Have been made prostrate: never can be told.

There is nothing so sacred which is not to be viola^ed and profaned, nothing
so defenced, which is not to be scaled, and entered by money. Cicero.

Gods, Chastity, and Faith have faild,
Gold only, over them prevaild.
Receive no gifts, (a hook lies in the meat)
None but have birdlime, and their poison's great.
M. Verinus. Trust none in the giving vain;
Lovers give not but to gain.

^^. Be It then thy care, (if care thou have to stand
Upright) from Lovers gifts to keep thine hand.
See thou Love painted naked in all drafts
With quiver only, and some few small shafts?
He wears no pocket, but hates all their tribe,
Who in Loves free converse expect a bribe.
Can Diamond, Iemme, or golden chain beguile
Thy modesty so far; to become vile?
The gaping Oyster, intertaining stones,
By The Crab injected, is dispoild at once.
Once guilty of a gift [if put to trial)
Thou have not power to make the least denial.

^o receive a gift, is to sell thy liberty. Seneca.

Often by too much play,
Virgins themselves betray.

An Now trifles I injoyne, and I confess
They 're such, yet worthy to be read, (no less)
To tumble on the grass, urge them to try
Maistries: These fit for chaste ones I deny.
A Bee's hid in the flower, a maid does come,
To crop it 'tweene her finger and her thum.
No stays, no rest, her tender flesh it stings,
It smarts, it swells, she cries, her hands she wrings,
And says, why Be, thus seek'st thou me to kill,
I came to sport, and purposed thee no ill.
When maids with youngmen try, they do not we
But often catch stings, which make their flesh to swell.
Sporting has been the occasion of many evils, we may read. Horace.

Sport has begot both sudden strife and rage,
Anger, contention, war, commixt with strage.
In pastime and sport, women's breasts are easily discovere according with that
of the Poet.

We are careless then of what we do or say,
Our very minds lie open in our play.

Most hold such bad, as love to gad.
An. In all things Ovids book I cannot praise,
For he allows the virgins foot that strayes,
He does advise the Roman girls to meet
In I heatres, and gad about the street,
In my opinion, he amiss persuades,
If I be judge; it is no work for maids.
In streets lust rages, there thou can not be
Safe; then keep home, that is the best place for the
The sheep that through the briers and thorns do^str^
Much of his wool, often loses by the way:
Neither can she her modesty keep long,
Who much frequents the * Dionaean throng.

The ornament of women is to flourish in hon^ and elegancy of manners: and for
the most pa^^ keep within at home: to prescribe limits to her lips, eyes, and
cheeks, and not often to put her foot over her own threshold. Greg. Nazian.

There Is danger, strictly to confine
Either young wenches, or new wine.

Phi. Must we be then in lasting darkness tide,
As in close houses ever to abide?
Is it enough that we a mistress fear,
And from her teasty fingers blows often bear?
Our mind's now stronger grown, love bids us play,
And of the City take a free surveigh.
Locks cannot let, Venus sets wide the door,
When lovers entrance to closed maids implore:
Love hates all durance, he was ever free,
And Bacchus too delights in liberty,
New wine: young maids: by too strict keeping still,
Hazard the caske, and house: Both apt to spill.

No woman can be restrained against her will.
Lib. Amor. 3. That which is most kept from us, most we crave,
The prey calls thieves, few love what they can have.
Id. Such as have leave to sin, commit least ill,
The power to offend, often takes away the will.
Id. That less pleases us to which we are most persuaded: that rather we
desire from which we are most dissuaded.

There can be given no strong security,
For Maiden heads in their nativity.

Phi. Maids, if you look to roast your Chestnuts well,
Observe first with a knife to wound the shell:
If with unbroken skin it touch the fire,
'Twill break in pieces, and with noise retire.
Who to chaste love shall make her breast obdure,
From Venus, oh what panges shall she procure?
She burns, nor can her youth take least content,
That Is cloistred, and at home in prison pent.
The bridle once took off, she grows untame,
And then, with greater fury burns her flame.
Some I have seen at lawful love repine,
And after, madly to base lust incline.

Dangerous is the custody of a virginity, and most difficultly is she to be
restraind, to whom 'the yoke of virginity is imposed. Egn.

That which Tacitus spoke of the plebe or multitude, may not unfitly be
construed upon young virgins, vid. They are altogether impatient of mere
servitude, or absolute liberty.

To free thy self from danger clean,
Shun the extremes, and keep the mean.

An. I do not prisons on young Maids confer,
Only would curb their feet lest they should err.

Phi. You charged me to no suitor lend an ear,
What Husband shall I have then? let me hear.

An. Marry one grave, of masculine virtue, who
No loose veneriall sports is pleased to know,
On whom Apollo smiles, Themis does grace,
He will direct thy path, secure thy place.
If rude (thy self) one ruder thou shall try,
Neither the nuptial office can supply.
Join two unlighted Tapers without flame,
(How so thou will,) the darkness is the same.
What profits it thee to grate one tooth against another. Martial.

Young Maids fancies are inclind,
To'affect the shape, neglect the mind.

Phi. Would have a maid to take into her bed,
A Sophist of stern brow, like Cato bred,
Whom, courts by day; by night, his books afflict,
In curtain business, will not he be strict?
Whilst he his clients cause does only mind,
Small right (alas) the bed is like to find.
The gown the loadstones brain has, hard things draws,
But in soft amors cannot plead a cause.
Laws not of Benshes of judgment.
Benshes, but the bed I love
The austeere brow I have no will to prove.
Give me the man that is deeply read in kisses,
And sure my love aims at no further blisses.

Let us remember that the sex in its own nature is weak, as not in body, so
neither in mind being able to under go things serious and weighty, therefore
we must allow them retirement, and relaxation from their cares, and give them
some liberty of sporting, and telling tales amongst their friends and
neighbors: provided, no curiosity be used, etc. Vives.

Merry Suitors, make mad Husbands.
An. What madness is it of kissing thus to prate,
When thou a sacred bed should intimate?
Leave lusts to Venus, Husbands are a treasure,
And holy Hymen hates the name of pleasure.
No groom or squire of Venus can be fit
To take a houses charge and manage it.
These The Sun of the morning.
Memnons statue follow (in their suite)
Who when the Sun shines, clamor, else are mute.
Whilst thy choice He was slain at Troy.
Paris in his first love raged,
'Twixt you a thousand kisses were ingadg'd.
But that heat past, thou (to thy grief) have tried,
The art only an unworthy soldiers bride.

It is hard to maintain credit where truth is suspe^^ed: but howsoever
suspicion may enter a false action, ^^ truth will never bring in her plea, to
suspect where ^ere is cause is sufferable: but where there is no cause, it ^
intolerable. Octavius Caesar Domum suam non solum cri^^e, sed suspitione
criminis, vacare voluit. i. Augustus Caesar, ^ould have his house not only
free from fault, but even ^^m the very suspicion of crime.

Sorrow treads, where folly leads.
^^. On the bright fire whilst some fish too much gaze,
Fixing their eyes upon the tapers blaze:
They neither mind the fishers nor their boats,
Nor their sharp knives prepared to rip their throats.
Whilst the young man, whom mad love does surprise
Admires his mistress front, and star-like eyes:
Or whilst the girl whom childish folly blinds,
His new sprung beard and feature only minds.
All faults lie hid, there is no further stay,
It Is now enough if they can kiss and play.
T'wixt these where itching makes such quick dispatc^
It Is often seen Megaera spoils the match.

As Circe enjoyed not those whom she transformed in to Swine, Lions, etc. but
affected Ulysses in his own perfectness above all others: So those women who
by a morous potions (too which I add whorish blandishments) have got their
husbands, for the most part lead with them an unquiet life, through madness.
Plutarch.

Where virtue ties, love never dies.
An. The Rose does yield a savor sweet and strong,
After it is shed, or in the Sun lain long.
Fond is the love of feature, which does fade,
And putrid grows, when age does once invade,
Agues deface, and cares the beauty stain,
And these in young men often breed disdain.
But wit's more steadfast; 'twill to age endure,
A thousand ways that, favor can procure.
Gray hairs, nor wrinckles, can such ardor quench,
Nor love (on virtue built) in Lethe drench.
If match with one, whose mind his shape excels,
That love, till death lasts only, and none else.
In us we naught immortal find,
Saving the goods of breast and mind. Ovid.
Couples ill matched, like garments patcht.
An If love thy self, do not an old man wed,
Lest thou lie frozen in a desolate bed.
If any; thou a posthume birth shall bear.
He, if thy child call father, cannot hear.
Or should he have choice whom to make his heir,
Fame, to speak largely of thee will not spare.
Mean time the fair flower of thy youth is spent,
And thy best days thou sadly shall lament.
Why does the Ivy 'bout the Elm so cling?
Alas; one must perish, if the other spring,
Whilst it (ambitious) 'bout the top branch twines,
The drooping Tree hangs down the head and pines.

Matrimonium ita demum tranquille exigi potest, si mulier ^ca, maritus surdus
fiat, etc.

Then marriage may be said to be past in all quietness, ^hen the wife is
blind, and the husband deaf. The na^^^e of women is subject to jealousy, from
whence grows ^amour and noise, and the wives garrulity and prating ^sends the
husband, which he should be far from, if ^ wanted his hearing, etc.

Children in law, breed may a flaw.
(...) Hence brats in law? maids, mothers the first day,
What make thou in a widdowed bed I pray?
When Hymen joins you single: these are bred
Are the best pledges of thy maidenhead.
To graft a branch with ripe fruits if thou strive,
^Tis a mere burden, and it cannot thrive.
The withered apples fall (unfit to taste)
For both the stock and graft endure like waste,
Slyps without fruit, transpose unto thy tree,
So shall thy fruit in Autumn better be.
Do It whilst the gum in the green rind does swell,
Plants without mutual sap never prosper well.

A small benefit may arise to a great profit, if it be sea^ably conferred, says
Curtius.

Time is the best counselor, and the chief president counsels, says
Antisthenes, and Cicero calls it the most sect Herald of truth.

To have thy will, be humble still.
Now thy injunctions please: but, won with gold,
My father aims me at a man that is old.
What shall I do? my love I will not slave
To an old King, (though he my love should crave.)
An. If he to one unworthy would thee tie,
What ere he urge, let not thy voice sound hye,
Prayers arm the virgin, If entreat; it is done,
Stern fathers, by no other art are won.
Smooth foreheads more prevail, than these averse
Hard hearts, submission, and not fear can pierce.
The Pine Tree Nut thou can not break with blow
But a soft fire, the shells wide open throws.
Mild power does compass that which rough violence never can. Claud.

Where men by favor strive to git
Gods favor, and encourage it,
But the same gods when force is used,
(As angry) think themselves abused.

1.
An. We are in har bour, thou shall be a bride,
Hear something in that state thy self to guide.
The grafter, all the native sprigs does strip,
That the whole sap may feed the adopted slip.
All wandering fancies she must quite expel,
Who in a lawful match would prosper well.
No sooner shall thy nuptial Tead take fire,
But thou on him must fix thy whole desire.
Not thy old play-fellow must thine house frequen^
Nor he with whom (before) thine hours thou sp^
Let mother and thy sister now go by,
Lest former love the adopted sap should dry.
Let men obey the laws, and women their husband Socrates. Silence and patience
makes concord betw^^^ married couples. A good husband ought to be wise words,
wary in conversation, careful in provision, ^^gent in ordering: a discreet
master, a careful fat^ A good wife must be grave abroad, well governed home,
patient to suffer, constant to love, to her neighbors friendly, courteous to
her servants, careful of her children. Theophrastus.


2.
An. Am I deceived? or more else should be spoke,
To such as newly enter Hymen's yoke.
The stock which late had branches of his own,
Must now by a strange leaf and fruit be known,
The top cut off, it boasts not its own seed,
But bears what another branch did breed.
When married; thou thy self wilt then withdraw,
For now thy husband is to thee a law.
What he prescribes: to that thou must agree,
(If wise) so partner of his counsels be.
By his direction, all thine actions sway,
To yeeld's to conquer, and (to rule) to obey.
A chaste Matron by obeying her husbands will, get^eth command over him, Bias.
But give thy wife no pow^^ over thee, for if this day thou suffer her to
tread upon thy foot, she will be ready by to morrow to spurn at ^y head, etc.


3.
^^. Grafting has more on which thy mind may rest,
Graft then these precepts likewise in thy breast.
Tree's grace the graft, by sap themselves do spend,
And their own ornament to others lend.
If with thy golden dower thy house shine bright,
And swell his coffers which before were light:
Be not thou proud, nor thine own wealth proclaim,
Let all thine house rest in thine husbands name.
Who would not think that clamorous woman mad,
To cry This, That, from me, my husband had.
These were, and are still mine. It is not known
How wives can bost of ought that is their own.
That the law make men lords, there is no doubt,
And it is a right, that goes the world throughout.
Marriage teaches, that a woman should hold her husband to be all things unto
her, and that he alone shall succeed in all loving and dear nominations, which
(a^ we read in Homer) the most virtuous Andromache confer^ upon her husband
Hector.

What father, mother, brother, else can be,
Thou, thou, sweet husband art all these to me.

The Epilogue.
Proceeding further we were struck with fear,
Because of noise which Anna first did hear:
Enough if not too much, come now let us break,
This having said, she blushed, and ceast to speak.
FINIS.
Sundry Fancies writ upon several occasions. By the same Author.
The Queen feasting the King at Somerset house, upon his Birth day, hers
falling in the same week, this was there spoken unto them.
WE cannot read in any flourishing state,
Whether by King sward or by optimate,
A greater blessing happening to one Nation,
By two such births beneath one constellation.
For being in one month, one week; small let October.
There was, these two blessed birth-dayes had not met:
Yet has the powerful hand of heaven so guided,
(Though) by small distance of two days divided:
These stars who then, their influence had alone
Are now combined, fixed in one glorious Throne:
From whose^ joint rays another's risen since,
(Lusterd from both) a sweet and hopeful Prince.
O may be from your virtues so much gain,
That little Charles may prove our Charlemaine.
To them both at parting. The Romans of their birth-dayes had such care,
They kept them sacred, and not one might dare,
In all their families to work, but play,
Observing that, as an high festival day.
The Emperors birth-dayes were called Albae, white,
As the sole luster, and their Kingdoms light.
In you: how much does heaven your Nations bless,
To enjoy two such: the greater, and the less.
A speech spoken to their two excellent Majesty's, at the first Play played by
the Queens Servants, in the new Theater at White Hall.
When Greece, the chief priority might claim
For Arts, and Arms, and held the eminent name
Of Monarchy; They erected diverse places,
Some to the Muses, others to the Graces:
Where Actors strove, and Poets did devise
With tongue and pen, to please the ears and eyes
Of Princely Auditors; The time was, when
To hear, the rapture of one Poets pen,
A Theater has been built, By the fates doom,
When the Empire was removed from thence to Rome.
The potent Caesar's had their Circi, and
Large Amphitheaters: in which might stand
And sit, full fourscore thousand, all in view,
And touch of voice: This great Augustus knew.
Nay Rome, it is wealth, and potency injoyd,
Till by the barbarous Goths these were destroyed.
But may this structure last, and you be seen
Here a spectator, with your Princely Queen,
In your old age, as in your flourishing prime,
To outstrip Augustus both in fame and time.
To the King and Queen upon a New-yeares day at night: to Two-fac't Ianus with
a great golden Key in his hand, the Presenter.
Where is my Son December? yong'st and last
Of twelve? what sleeping now? now snorting fast?
In this joys festival? from years agone,
Solemnis'd one thousand six hundred thirty one.
Can neither music, sport, nor mirth awake thee,
But to eleven months sleep must thou betake thee?
Why does not January then appear,
Before old Janus father of the year?
My eldest boy? now I remember. He,
Is busied in this annual Iubilee.
And still the one hand with the other shifts,
In giving and receiving New-yeares gifts.
But stay; two faces Ianus? one to view
The past year; the other, that which shall ensue.
Shal't be imputed to thine age or sloth Meaning their 2. Majesty's.

To neglect these; the glory of them both?
No; fall thus low, to celebrate that throne
In which the two great lights are met in one
Without eclipse; This key commands the screw,
That locks the past year up, and opes the new,
This shuts up all disaster, dearth, disease,
Opening to you all glad things that may please,
To crown your blessedness, and as that gone.
Has crowned you with an Heir (as yet alone)
There Is by auspitious Jove a second breeding,
Our hope, and honor of the year succeeding.
As in the last, may Heaven in this defend them,
Whilst Ianus with his twelve sons shall attend them.
The Epilogue spoken by the same Ianus.
Health, strength, and many a glad new year,
A constant solace, joyful cheer,
Wait ever on that awful throne,
Where rest two Princely hearts, made one.
From which blessed union, may supply
Of issue to eternity
Grace and become it: These presages
Prove fortunate to after ages,
Which long succession hence may see,
Till time and hours shall cease to be.
A Prologue spoke before the King, when her Majesty was great with child.
Health, joy, peace, plenty, and a flourishing state,
A dexter omen; an auspitious fate,
Attend you ever, like Hiperion shine
In his meridian, never to decline.
And may your royal Cynthia who has run
Six annual courses with you, and begun,
Now on the seventh, who to your Kingdoms Cheer
And your great joy, at this time fills her sphere,
In a most hopeful plenitude: so waine
After blessed issue, that your glorious reign,
May see your Sons Sons Princes of such name,
That the whole world may echo to their fame.
From her chaste womb may such fair daughters spring,
That each may prove the consort to a King.
And both survive to see it: this we entreat
May come from her who is so good, so great.
The Epilogue.
Those heavenly Guardians that with patents large,
Have in tuition Kings and Kingdoms charge,
Protect you both, that as we daily see
Nations, that far remote and foreign be
Send hither as to an Oracle to know,
What Is for their safety best: you may still grow
In wisdom and in power, till your command
May extend it self so far by Sea and Land,
That through the Christian world it may be said,
All beg of Charles, but he needs no man's aid.
Another spoken at White Hall before their sacred Majesty's.
Exuberant joys, delights transcending wait
About the orb of this illustrious state.
All sad disasters fly beyond those Seas
That ebb and flow unto the Antipodes.
Or if they chance to linger by the way,
May they with Mahomet, and Ali stay:
But never in these Climes find place of rest
Or shelter, where the sacred truth's professed,
But in their stead, prosperity and peace,
Abundance, health, with numerous increase
Of royal issue 'bout your throne be seen,
To glad my sovereign, and rejoice his Queen:
So shall your Nations in bright luster shine,
Figuring in these your Persons, powers divine.
The Epilogue.
Miriads of joys your royal he arts surprise,
Yea more than any rapture can devise,
The heart of man conceive, or tongue express,
That in your more than common happiness,
All your true subjects with unanimous voice,
May both in you, and your blessed seed rejoice.
A Prologue spoken to their sacred Majesty's at Hampton Court.
If Caesar, greatest in great Pompeis fall,
As being made the sovereign over all
The (then known) world; or if Augustus; He
Who left his ample name Hereditarie
To all succeeding Emperors; If to the last
Of the twelve Caesar's, Theaters were graced,
And when the Julian family expired
In many ages after were admired?
And the more fame from foreign parts to win,
Adornd without, and beautified within.
If by succession we can draw them down
Through nations, realms and tongues, even to our own,
Proving these flourishing Kingdoms prosperd well,
And never faild before these structures fell:
Or were suppressed; for it is a bad presage,
(All mirth exiled) still follows wrack and strage.
If then a factious peevish malcontent,
Envying a blessed state; shall his malice vent
In bald unlicenc't papers? so much daring
As neither Sovereign, nor the subject sparing:
Assuming in a strange libellious strain,
To think all wisdom treasured in his brain?
Be all such frustrate in their vain endeavor,
Whilst you oh Royal Caesar live for ever.
The Epilogue.
Jove's Influent Planet boading power and state
For ever, on this high tribunal wait.
Apolloe's fire, add verdure, to your days,
And crown your long reign with his Daphnes bays.
Hermes attend you with his peaceful star,
And Mars protect you in all menacing war.
May Venus and the Moons bright constellations,
With their best fulgence smile on all your Nations:
But on all malcontents let Saturn lower,
Such as malign your glory and your power.
Spoken to their two Majesty's at Hampton Court. Prologue.
Amongst the Greecians there were annual feasts,
To which none were invited as chief gests,
Save Princes and their wives: Amongst the men
No argument could be desputed then
But who best governed; and (as't did appear)
He was proclaimed sole Sovereign for that year,
The Queens and Ladies argued at that time
For beauty and for virtue, who was prime.
And she had the like honor. Two here be,
For Beauty one, the other Majesty.
Most worthy, did that custom still persever,
Not for one year, but to be sovereigns ever.
Epilogue.
Still the more glorious that the creatures be,
They in their native goodness are more free
To things below them: so the sun we find
Impartially to shine on all mankind,
Denying light to none, and you we may
Great King, most justly call our light, our day,
Whose glorious course may never be quite run,
Whilst earth has sovereign, or the Heavens a Sun.
Spoken to their two Majesty's at White Hall. Prologue.
Whom Heaven with all choice graces has endowed,
Whom even the Angels praise and men admire!
On whom your Maker has his bounty showed,
Where nothing wants that man's heart can desire,
Your peoples joy, your Peers selected pleasure.
Your Kingdoms admiration, Nations wonder,
Of foreign climes the praise, of ours the treasure.
O never may that sacred union sunder.
That whilst we daily of high heaven importune,
You may be in your royal issue blessed,
You may still grow in greatness, fame and fortune,
All which at seeming height, be still increast.
Prove thou a prophet muse, say it is decreed,
All Christendom shall flourish in your seed.
The Epilogue.
Could we all Panegyries put in one,
That have been on the ancient Heroes writ,
They might all be conferd on you alone,
And you great Princes justly merit it.
O may you in your happy loves persever,
Diurnally augment, but not decline,
That this your people may admire you ever,
Till heaven that gave you us make you divine.
And that which we of aged Nestor read,
May of you two be chronicled indeed.
Spoken to their excellent Majesty's upon the like occasion. Prologue.
Excellent Princes may you ever be,
As great as good, each year a Iubilee.
That as heavens bounty crowns you with the increase
Of honor, glory, and domestic peace.
You, with like liberal hands instated here,
May to each subject and deserving Peer:
Like the bright Sun your glorious favors throw,
To comfort and make flourish what is below.
Whilst we like the woods Quiristers still sing
Loud Hymns to you the Lord of this our spring.
The Epilogue.
You that are Emblemes of that light divine,
Which equally on all estates does shine,
The Palace and the Cottage, flower and weed,
Of whose bright luster all have use, and need,
Even from the Scarlet, to the Russet: Gray
As well as Purple: Had we power, as they
That are in eminent place; there could not be
Those, should express more gratitude than we.
The rich may pay in gold, that which he owes,
But we our debt, only in words and shows.
Spoken to the King and Queen, at the second time of the Authors Play called
Cupids Mistress or Cupid and Psiche, presented before them. Cupid, the
Prologue.
Yes; sure 'twas here, where some few hours I past
The very time that I descended last.
Yes; here it was, I know it by a face,
To which my Mistress Psiche must give place.
A presence; that from Venus takes all power,
And makes each place she comes in, Cupids bower.
Though in their several spheres each Planet tried,
(With all the Gods) to feast me and my bride,
With Nector and Ambrosia, yet that waste
Of god-like fare, could not my palate taste,
But I must all celestial sweets forbear,
To review earthly Jove and Juno here.
Whom having seen; Hail to you once again.
Long as the Spheres continue may you reign
In Majesty, in power, with issue blessed
Be all these, with your fortunate years increase,
Till Cupid ever young, with time grow old,
And you this Iron age changing to gold,
Repur'd by your two virtues, These, Ethereall
May change to brighter chayres in the heavens Imperial
The speech spoken to their two Majesty's, eight days before, being the Kings
birthday: presented at Somerset house, by the Queens appointment, she then
feasting the King. Cupid, the Prologue.
Who so unread; does not of Plato hear
His Annus magnus, and his vertent year?
In which the Stars and Planets, Moon and Sun,
Tired with continual labor, having run
So many ages long peregrination,
Each returns fresh and new to their first station.
This is the year sure; rather this the day
Able to turn November into May.
This day's in heaven a Iubilee of joy,
Where Angels sing in quires Vive la Roy.
This is the royal birthday of a King,
Then Men with Angels, Io Poean sing.
I'had almost lost my self: when my intent
Was to tell why I come; and from whom sent;
From one, to whom I Am but a shadow; she
The very soul of amabilitie.
One that without my quiver and my bow,
Commands the hearts, and eyes of high and low.
Whose name inscribed here did you but behold,
I'would change the sooty Ink to liquid gold.
Of fulgent beauty, but so pure a mind,
As if tinctured from heaven, and so divined.
^ Love from Love am sent, but she the right,
Then grace great King the Triumphs of loves night.
The Mask concluding with a stately measure, of the Gods and Planets, Cupid
(they all standing about him bending) the Epilogue thus concludes.
Now royal Princes let me turn to you,
Daigne from loves mouth to take this nights adieu.
Think all these Planets that on earth here move,
(Shadows of these celestial ones above)
Breath on you their best influences: Vulcan, He
Shall henceforth take charge of your Armorie.
Juno the marriage Queen, shall bless your bed,
The Sun shall take the bright beams from his head,
To increase your glorious luster, and the Moon
Attend on you, to make your midnight noone.
Cores with plenty shall in rich your store,
And Mercury shall fly from shore to shore
Upon your errands: prove your happy ranger,
Homebred to espy, and foresee foreign danger.
Venus with sweets, and I, with love will charm you,
And after all these Jove with power shall arm you.
I'have kept you waking long: good night, it is late.
Many such birth-dayes may you celebrate.
Spoken to his Majesty upon a New years day at night. The Prologue.
Renowned King, we to your ears commend
These our unpolisht labors, harsh and low,
Hoping your grace will like the Sun extend,
Those glorious beams that make the Cedars grow,
Shine on the basest shrubs, his virtue's seen
As well in weeds as flowers, for both are green.
Then let your Majesty by whose aspect
All these sweetgarden flowers, these Trees still flourish
The least part of your glorious shine reflect
On us: your beams great Britains land does nourish.
Still moving in this bright and luminous sphere,
To joy your Court with many a glad New-yeare.
Among other presents, high and sacred King,
This solemn day presented at your seat
Their tribute love, your humble vassals bring.
But though our gifts be small, our wills are great,
We come, though naked of desert or merit,
Yet armed with wishes, and devoutest prayer,
Trusting you many ages may inherit
That high Tribunal, peace and love prepare,
That this first day which enters a new year,
On which the two faced Ianus looks with joy,
May many seasons hence, with gladsome cheer,
Be hallowed still, that heavens hand may destroy
Your enemies: and so your friends maintain.
They many years hence may admire your reign
Another spoken at the Court to the like purpose. Prologue.
As all small rivers to the ocean run,
As to the sovereign of their silver streams,
As all less lights do borrow of the Sun,
From whom alone they take their golden beams.
So to this glorious Sun we pay our light,
Without whose face we live in endless night.
O you, on your own earth soly divine,
Who fill your fair Court with your beams of grace,
With one small glimmering on our pastimes shine,
The Sun bars none the beauty of his face.
Poets that have like Larkes already sung,
Unto the morning of your prosperous reign,
Shall with an Angels quill and Cherubs tongue,
Your grace and goodness through the world proclaim.
But when you reach the noontyde point, then stay,
And in the height of glory shine for aye.
Epilogue.
Most high and sacred Sir, we now are cast
^ow as the earth, struck mute with fear and terror,
Lest through our want of judgment we have past
Words rudely placed: or duty mixed with error.
The Shepherds Pipe made of an Oaten Reed,
Cannot compare with great Apollos lyre:
Nor should our Muse, that no delight can breed
Unto your high and Princely ears aspire.
We bring a mite that would present a mine,
Our loves we pay, to whom our lives we owe,
Water we bring, who could afford it wine,
Our art you see, our hearts we cannot show.
O if we could! we would enrich this place
With joys essential, blessings above measure.
Heaven, Earth, Air, Sea, all power upon your grace,
Their special bounties, and their richest treasure.
In our last wish all your desires attain,
Life, safety, health, with a long-lasting reign.
A Prologue spoken at the right Honorable the Earl of Dover house in
Broadstreet, at a Play in a most bountiful Christmas he kept there; the
Speaker Hospitality a frollick old fellow: A Collar of Brawne in one hand, and
a deep Bowl of Muscadel in the other.
Where is that rich man's Minion, called Frugality?
What has he quite hence banished Hospitality?
In days of old, when yea and nay did pass
For current troth, I and old Christenmasse
Were of acquaintance; but of late I find
Frugality quick sighted, my self blind.
He goes through Court, through Country, City, and
Finds entertainment, for each frugall hand
Still bids him welcome: yet a novice he:
But I, that am of more antiquity
Than Paul's (alas) by time and age decayed,
Nay almost since this Cities ground-sills laid,
Walk up and down and knock at each man's door,
And find the same cold welcome as before.
But hark, a Cock crowd, and I heard a Swan
Ecchoing to him, that here did live a man,
Noble, and of that high and ancient strain,
To call back Hospitality again.
Then by the good Lords and kind Ladies leave,
Since their wide Gates stand ready to receive
So great a stranger, and (in me) these guests
^o often invited to their annual feasts.
This blessing take, oh whether in this place,
Or where so else this blessed time you so grace,
May your warm Chimneyes smoke, and hot fires glow,
Whilst Thames breeds Swans, or Cocks against Christmas crow.
It is to be observed that the Earl in Heraldry gives the Swan, and the
Countess the Cock, etc. The Epilogue presented by delight.
^e see bright day succeeds dark night,
^isaster past, then comes delight,
from seeming death revived to tell,
that here she henceforth means to dwell,
^hen hospitality has grace,
^elight should ever there find place.
^eceive her then your household guest,
^his night to attend you to your rest:
and when your quiet sleep is spent,
^wake you to your more content,
^home, abroad, handmaid, and guide:
^^ether you sit, lie, walk or ride,
^ort, purpose serious meditation,
^^d thought, still have to me relation,
^^d so for ever, as this night,
^waited on by choice delight.
Spoken to the right Honorable the Earl of Dover, at his house in Broadstreet
upon a Candlemas night. The Prologue.
^^ downy Swan though yoakt in Venus Teame,
Yet of all birds that ever loved the stream,
Is held to be the chiefest: Pallas Owl
In Athens famed for many a learned scrowle,
Composed in Ink and Oil, the emblem of watch,
By which the most laborious students catch
At Arts (however, benighted) was not more
Famous, in Greece, then on Caister shore
Your sacred Bird, which the nine Sisters strove
To make the symbol of conjugall love,
With which the Cock, the Bird of Mars combined,
A double guardian knot, to be untwin'd
Never: It Is now made fast, so intricate,
Not Alexanders sword, not time, not fate
Can e'ver untye, for what is in virtue laid,
Envy can never blast, nor age invade.
In this blessed state both you, and yours, now stand
As first disposed, so strengthened by that hand,
Which as it makes, protects; you have begun
To grace the City with your presence: run
That happy course still: you and your loved wife
Have to dead hospitality given new life.
Still cherish it: old Christenmasse almost starved
Through base neglect, by you has been preserved.
O give him still like welcome, that whilst he
Has name on earth, you may his harbourer be.
Epilogue.
What man can wish his bliss to crown,
Or in abundance heaven power down.
Health, plenty, solace, all delights
That lengthen days, or shorten nights.
Heavens favor, and the Courts best grace,
Attend the great Lord of this place.
Old Christenmasse hunger-starved and dry,
Who erst did drink deep and fared hye
You welcome, and with Princely cheer,
Feast Ianus father of the year.
The sparing Chuff could be content
To thrust the twelve days into Lent.
You Englands custom, wake from sleep,
Which all the Christian world still keep:
For which may you thus stored with guests
Long celebrate these annual feasts,
That you and your good Lady may
Together, many a New-yeares day,
Rejoice in your blessed Issue till
The hours shall fail, and time stand still.
A speech spoken before the right Honorable the Earl of Dover, at his House
at Hunsden, as a preparation to a Mask, which consisted of nine Ladies.
Presented the last New-yeares night.
The silver Swan soft gliding in the stream,
Called to the Cock then pearching on a beam,
And said to him; why, Chanticleere, when I
Move on the waves so low, thou sit'st so high?
The Cock replide: O thou my best loved Sister
Well known in Poe, Meander, and Caister,
But, best in Thamesis; Do thou not know
The reason, why we in December crow?
More than before, or after? who again
Thus answered: we of nothing can complain
Being of all the birds that are, most white,
Loyal and chaste, and taking our delight
In rivers only, bathing there our feet
To make our rare-heard music sound more sweet.
Yet one thing to resolve, would make me proud,
To tell why at this time thou sing'st so loud?
Who said: none of our ancestors but knew
That ever since Saint Peter's Cock first crew,
We are enjoined to make loud proclamation,
Of our most blessed Saviors Incarnation.
^o which the Swan, (then in a Tone much higher)
Said, in this Caroll I will fill the quire:
Which being voyc't, did sound so sweet and shrill,
That where the Swan and Cock were heard, did fill
The air with such an echo, thither came
Upon that summons, both the blind and lame,
Hungry and thirsty, poor, of all estates,
And none but fully sated at these gates.
Long may your bounty last, and we rejoice,
To hear both City and the Country voice
Your Hospitality, to your loud fame,
Whilst Time indures, or Christmas bears a name.
And now great Lord and Lady both prepare,
To know what Sports in agitation are.
Truth presenting the Maskers.
Plain Truth who only has the power
To steare the way to virtues bower,
By these clear Tapers shining bright,
Does celebrate this joviall night.
But by the Bird of Mars that crows,
I now perceive the morning grows.
Her love to Phoebus to express,
And put his steeds in glorious dress
Who shows you what chaste virgins dwell,
Within the bosom of this Cell,
Appear then O thou treble Trine
Of number, with the Muses nine.
(Appolloes sacred daughters) still
Frequent about Pernassus hill.
Or if you number them by Threes,
The first are the three Charitces,
Handmaides to Venus, Graces styled,
On whom their Father Jove still smiled.
The second Chorus does contain
Those beauties, by the Trojan swain
On Ida judged: The third we call
The Virtues Theological,
Faith, Hope, and Love, happily meet here,
To crown the parting of the year,
With Roses fresh of Swan-like hew,
Which from a royal Stem first grew,
And the brave Yorkists long since bore,
These virtues bower, do best decore,
Flowers redolent, which Heralds say,
Ianus does wear, as well as May.
Far may they spread, be ever seen,
With milk white leaves, and branches green,
Folded in amorous twines together,
Which Winter never may blast or wither.
A young witty Lad playing the part of Richard the third: at the Red Bull: the
Author because he was interessed in the Play to encourage him, wrote him this
Prologue and Epilogue. The Boy the Speaker.
If any wonder by what magic charm,
Richard the third is shrunk up like his arm:
And where in fullness you expected him,
You see me only crawling, like a limme
Or piece of that known fabric, and no more,
(When he so often has been viewed before.)
Let all such know: a Rundlet never so small
^s called a vessel: being a Tun; that is all.
He Is termed a man, that shows a dwarfish thing,
No more's the Guard, or Porter to the King.
^o Pictures in small compass I have seen
Drawn to the life, as near, as those have been
Ten times their bigness: Christenmas loaves are bread,
So's your least Manchet: have you never read
Large folio Sheets which Printers over-looke,
And cast in small, to make a pocket book?
^o Richard is transformed: if this disguise
^how me so small a letter for your eyes,
You cannot in this letter read me plain,
He Will next appear, in texted hand again.
The Epilogue.
Great I confess your patience has now been,
To see a little Richard: who can win,
Or praise, or credit? eye, or think to excel,
By doing after what was done so well?
It was not my ambition to compare,
No envy, or detraction: such things are
In men of more grown livers, greater spleen,
But in such lads as I am, seldom seen.
I do, but like a child, who sees one swim,
And (glad to learn) will venture after him
Though he be soundly duckt for it, or to tell
My mind more plainly, one that feign would spell,
In hope to read more perfect: all the gains
I expect for these unprofitable pains,
Is, that you would at parting from this place
Do but unto my littleness that grace
To spy my worth, as I have seen dim eyes
To look through spectacles, or perspectives,
That in your gracious view I may appear,
Of small, more great; of coming far off, near.
A Prologue to the Play of Queen Elizabeth as it was last revived at the
Cockpit, in which the Author taxes the most corrupted copynow imprinted,
which was published without his consent. I rologue.
Plays have a fate in their conception lent,
Some so short lived, no sooner showed, than spent;
But borne to day, to morrow buried, and
Though taught to speak, neither to go nor stand.
This: (by what fare I know not) sure no merit,
That it disclaimes, may for the age inherit.
Writing 'bove one and twenty; but ill nursed,
And yet received, as well performed at first,
Graced and frequented, for the cradle age,
Did throng the Seats, the Boxes, and the Stage
So much; that some by Stenography drew
The plot: put it in print: (scarce one word true:)
And in that lamenesse it has limp't so long,
The Author now to vindicate that wrong
Has took the pains, upright upon its feet
To teach it walk, so please you sit, and see it.
Epilogue.
The Princess young Elizabeth you have seen
In her minority, and since a Queen.
A Subject, and a Sovereign: in the one
A pitied Lady: in the royal Throne
A potent Queen. It now in you does rest
To know, in which she has demeand her best.
Upon his Majesty's last birth-night, he being then thirty five years of age,
and the Queen great with child.
A Star appearing of bright constellation,
More luminous than those of the same station,
The powers Celestial much amazed there at
To know the cause thereof, in Council sat,
And summond Mercury the winged god
To search and find what wonder it might bode,
Who brought them word that Lachesis then drew
A thread from Clothoes distaffe, which to' his view
Was of such splendour, and withal so fine,
The substance gold) and of so close a twine,
No edge could sunder, and that Star (so bright)
Rose five and thirty years since, as this night.
You are (if time we may compute) by story
In the meridian of your age and glory.
Your Cynthia too that shines by you so near,
And now with such rare splendour fills her sphere,
Whose birth-dayes almost meet, as if that fate
Would add a double luster to your state.
Never may your two golden threads be spun.
Whilst the Moon guides the night, or day the Sun.
Epilogue.
What Muse so mute, but both with voice and strings
Will strive to celebrate the births of Kings.
Kings birth-dayes, of such goodness and renown.
Ceres should fill with plenty, Bacchus Crown.
Mirth should exceed it is limite, Joys abound,
And (after praise to heaven given) Healths go round.
No other language then let this night coin,
But Vive, vive la Roy, vive la Royne.
Spoken to the Palsgrave at his first coming over, in the presence of his
Majesty, etc.
The bright hayr'd Comets are of all the best,
Boading most good, when aiming toward the West.
(So Astrologians say) and when such shine,
Gross clouds they scatter, and the air refine.
Now such an one appears; a glorious thing,
As if the Eagle from her spacious wing
Had her prime feather dropped, which to regaine,
She (almost) would give Almaigne, Rome, and Spain.
A feather to be stuck in Venus fan.
The like to it, not Iunoes Peacock can
In all her moon'd train boast: may your fame fly,
Mounted upon those plumes that soar most hie:
Of which, make two rare presidents, We entreat,
One of Charles little, the other Charles the Great.
Epilogus.
A numerous fruit, sprung from a golden Tree,
Such (as old Atlas, was ne're-seene by thee
In thine Hesperian orchard) long to endure
And prosper in the world: now grows mature.
And the fair blossoms ready even to spread
Their leaves abroad, and top the Eagles Head
(The Root still safe) wherever shall be seen
Scient, transplanted, may it still grow green,
So may none issuing from King James his Stem,
But be thought fit to wear a Diadem.
Would you a president by which to steare
So fair a course? you may behold it here.
If you to Honors Apex would attain,
Let the bright Stars that guide you be Charles waine.
Funeral ELEGIES and EPITAPHS.
A Funeral Elegy upon the death of the thrice noble Gentleman Sir George
Saint Poole of Lincoln -shire my Countryman.
IT is a maxim, neither birth nor state,
Honor nor goodness can divert our fate.
If these, or more, that did in him accrue
(For these with his gifts valewd were but few)
Could do it; St. Poole had lived to Englands good,
Since all these did nobilitate his blood.
Antiquity; which though it cannot save
From death, yet helps to decorate the grave,
Heralds his gentry, and does highly advance
His pedigree from the St. Pooles of France,
Which, from the Norman Innovation till
His expiration has been eminent still.
That was his least, though some extol it most.
Of that which is not ours why should we boast?
That Is our best nobleness which our virtues win,
Not that, to which w' are borne, and claim by kin.
He was possessed of both, and in full measure,
Did in his bosom many virtues treasure,
Which on the earth he did but put to lone,
He now in heaven receives them ten for one.
Vpheld he has, and husbanded that fame
Which from his ancient Predecessors came.
Being much in him augmented: his revenue
Graced, and ennobled by that fair retenue.
He kept about him still not like this age,
Changing his train, to a Footboy or a Page.
Free hospitality exiled the Reame,
He took in charge, which like a plenteous stream
On his full tables flowed (now a strange thing)
It rather seemed a torrent than a spring,
His hand was ever open, but before
All others, to the virtuous and the poor;
Not as most men are bounteous now; to those
That either need not, or with cunning gloss.
They that were nearest bosomed, knew, his heart,
Beyond all favor still preferred desert.
Religious zeal with which he was inspired
Bove common measure, made him both admired,
And loved: besides upon that honored place
Where he had voice, always the poor man's case
He would first hear, and howsoe re the rest
That sat with him were swaid, favored the oppressed.
In all moralities, as courtesy,
Bounty, love, generous affability,
And other of like kind, each way so rare,
He has left few, that may with him compare.
Of Arts, a Patron to the learned, still
A known Moecena's, and to all of skill
A favourer, witness that annual fee,
Which (Oxford) in his death he bequeathed thee.
But wherefore should my duller Muse aspire,
To express what I better should admire,
Which rather may extenuate, then with praise
Condign, and worthy his high virtues raise.
Then, with the Country who his death deplore,
With these, whom he still patronized, the poor,
The wronged, who miss his justice, with the weal,
Which will soon want him, with the men of zeal,
And most religious; with the nobler spirits
With whom he was companion, Lords and Knights,
With his Allies and friends; and with his train
(Of servants, who have most cause to complain
The loss of such a Master, in's best years
Snatched from the earth) my Muse concludes in tears.
A Funeral Elegy upon a virtuous Maid, who dyed the very day on which she
should have been married.
O Hymen change thy saffron weeds,
To habit black and sable:
Change joyful Acts, to Funeral deeds,
Since nothing's firm or stable.
My bridals are to burials turned,
My day of mirth to sorrow:
Show me the man who most has mourned?
From him my grief I Will borrow.
In stead of love and second life
A dead corpse I embraced:
Received a Coffin for a wife,
With herbs and flowers inchaced.
Her beauty better had becom'd
A Bride-bed than a grave:
But envious fates her days have sum'd
And crossed what I did crave.
All lovers that Have truly loved,
Bear part in my laments:
Amongst thousands scarcely one has proved
My tragic discontents.
Heaven mourn her death in stormy clouds,
Seas, weep for her in brine.
Thou earth which now her body shrouds,
Lament though she be thine.
That music which with merry Tones
Should to a bridal sound,
Sigh out my grief and passionate groans,
Since she is toomb'd in ground.
An Epitaph upon the death of Sir Philip Woodhouse Knight Baronet.
from valiant John this Philip Woodhouse springs
^ee (of the Chamber to the greatest Kings
^enry the fifth) who'at famous Agincourt
^oon that eternis'd Motto, Frappe fort,
^natcht from a noble Frenchman, when by force
^^ the mid-field, he beat him from his horse,
and brought him prisoner, for which warlike deed,
As Soldiers still deserve their valors meed)
^ll Heraldry has to his Crest allowed
^ Hand and Club extended from a cloud.
This John had issue Edward: Edward then
Thomas: and Thomas, Roger: He again
Thomas, and Thomas, Roger, who was father
To this Sir Philip, Him, whose dust we gather,
^o mix with his brave Ancestors, the last
^f six successive Knights whose fates are cast;
^hus was he borne, thus lineally descended,
^or whom this pious Sacred is commended.
Aged sixty one, Knighted in Spain, and he
^f Baronets in rank the fortieth three,
^y order and precedence, here now sleeps,
^or whom this monumentall Marble weeps.
Reader, who e're thou be, conceive this done
By the due office of a grateful son.
(...) Epitaph upon one Mr. Robert Honywood and his Mother, and of their
numerous Issue.
^^crease and multiply God said: to thee
^o doubt he spoke O Honywood: for we
^now, thou as Sire and Grandsire, have to Heaven
^dded, of souls one hundred twenty seven,
^^d yet thy mother did thee far surmount
^hree hundred sixty seven, her age could count.
Sacrum Amoris. Perpetuitati memoriae Katharinae Skip: obijt Anno salutis mill
simo Sexcentesimo Tricesimo. A^tatis suae, Vicesimo nono.
Can four weak lines comprise her virtues? no,
Not volumes can, here lies beneath this stone,
All that her sex since Eve could learn or know,
(Alas) where shall they harbor now she is gone?
Of Mr. Thomas Skipp her husband since deceased, and buried in the same Tomb,
whose Statue is placed in a circle of Books, for the great love he bore to
learning.
What stronger circle can Art-magick find
Wherein a Scholars spirit can be confind,
Then this of Books? next how he spent his time,
Scorning earths droffe to look on things sublime.
So long thy love to learning shall be read,
Whilst fame shall last, or Statues for the dead.
An Epitaph upon a worthy Gentlewoman whose name was Patience.
Impatience, why from Patience should thou grow?
Or why such sorrow raise from sweet content?
From pleasures spring, why should displeasure flow?
Or our late joys turn to such sad lament?
But that we see, as time to death is hasting,
Nothing on earth is permanent and lasting
Saving Impatience, sorrow and displeasure,
Laments and strange disasters that still fall,
The loss of solace, comfort and of treasure,
And of these named this loss includes all.
A loss indeed this Grizels loss implies,
Since here with her all women's patience lies.
An Epitaph upon a virtuous young Gentlewoman, who after seven years marriage
expired.
Well borne, well bred, brought up with cost and care,
Sweet Infant, hopeful child, and virgin chaste.
Marriage which makes up women, made her rare,
Matron and maid, with all choice virtues graced,
Loving and loved of all (her husband chief)
Lived to our great joy, did to all our grief.
Upon a Toomb-stone which covers the body of a worthy Citizen, on which is
engraven a white hand pointing to a Star.
Pure Heart, white hand, one shadowed, the other seen,
^oints to a Star, to show what both have been.
The Heart devout: in life a constant giver,
The Hand that gift, as ready to deliver,
^ such alternate goodness, both agreeing,
^s seldom to be matched when they had being.
The Heart bequeathed, the Hand did still bestow,
^oth reap in Heaven, what they on earth did sow.
Funeral Elegy upon the death of Mistress Mary Littleboyes, Daughter to Master
George Littleboyes of Ashburnham in Sussex, Esquire.
^e was a virgin tall, as toward Heaven growing,
^ho had she by Emergent Venus stood,
^er dewy locks about her shoulders flowing,
and Cupid viewde them both at once) He wooed
Not able to distinguish one from the other)
^ave leapt into her lap, there toyde and played,
^^d (though a maid) mistook her for his mother.
^faire she was; But thus all beauties fade.
^ the choice virtues, moral and divine,
that ever graced the sex, comprised in one,
Did in her fair breast mutually combine,
And where shall they find harbor now she is gone?
Whom heaven did love, who merited man's praise,
Modest, wise, pious, charitable, chaste,
Whose virtues did in number pass her days,
Now (woe the while) in darkness sleeps her last.
Well borne, well bred, brought up with cost and care,
Of singular parts; the sole admired amongst many,
In all her graceful carriage, choice and rare.
But what of these? we see death spares not any.
Besides all other rich decorements she
So sweetly sung, her voice did rapture breed,
No springtide bird to her compared might be,
Who Orpheus did, and Thamiras exceed.
And what is of rare remarke; even all that day,
(The saddest to her friends that ever came)
When she (sweet soul) upon her deathbed lay,
She to choice musical notes her voice did frame.
Her Funeral Dirge the dying Swan so sings,
Then Angels waited to make up the Guire,
And bear her soul on their celestial wings,
Unto that place she living did desire.
Were all the pens of Poets joined in one,
Dipped in like Ink, and sworn, to write her true;
Let them spend all their spirits on her alone,
Yet can they not ascribe to her her due.
Apollo write thy self, for this does ask
No humane skill, to give her merited praise.
Thy Daphne dead, now take in hand this task,
Do It as it ought, and ever wear thy bays.
The Inscription upon her Tombe-stone lying in Clerkenwell Church.
Hereunder lies a Casket, that containd
A life unspotted, and a soul unstaind,
A virgin chaste, beyond example fair,
^or outward gifts remark't, for inward, rare,
Of natures pieces, one the prime and choice,
^o nurturd, that for needle, book and voice
^re was unpeer'd: matchles in mind and face,
and all the virtues that her sex most grace.
^ho after twenty years scarce fully expird,
^rriv'd at that safe port she most desird:
^ life, to friends and parents fresh joys bringing:
^ death; to God sweet Halelujaes singing.
Obijt Die Mart. 8. Anno Aetat. 20. An. salutis. 1636.

Epithalamions or Nuptial Songs.
An Epithalamion or Nuptial Song upon a you sweet virtuous Gentlewoman. F. L.
An Acrostick upon her name.
Flame Himens torch with luster clear and bright,
Rare stars break from thee, such as still affright
All cloudy Omen hence: may you appear
Not aged to your selves; though time each year
Charge hours upon you, live together long,
Ever (though old) still to each other young.
Smile O thou marriage Queen on this sweet pair
Lucina when her throws of childbirth are,
Offer thy best help; Issue procreate
Numerous, and happy, free from all sad fate,
Grow great, and good, and both these still ascending
Ever to last, and never to have ending.
Himens blessing upon the same.
Faelice^ter and Amplius
quos Irrupta tenet Copulae.
I bring you Himens blessing, hearts entire,
First warmed, then kindled at his holy fire.
The Grecian Ladies kept these nights to mirth
Sacred, and from their marriage, not their birth
Counted their age; This knot so doubly tide
May no disaster, or sad fate divide.
May peace and love in all your looks be read,
A plentious table, and a fruitful bed
Be never wanting, jealousy and strife
Be far exiled, that a contented life
May sweeten all those hours that are t'ensue.
And as your Parents now rejoice in you,
May you in your blessed Issue, and spread name,
That when to them I kindle a new flame,
As at this feast, where like occasions meet,
Both Sires and Grandsires may be proud to see it.
And this to many generations prove,
As the best fruits of true conjugall love.
To a virtuous Gentlewoman at the parting from her own Fathers house, to live
with her husband at her Father-in-lawes.
May it please you think I am the place which now
You ready are to part from, which whilst you
Were present, seemed a paradise, and full
Of all delights, but now grown sad, and dull.
Me thinks it stands, as by an Earthquake shaken,
When it perceives it is by you forsaken,
And though it self all mute and silent be,
Think that it is Genius does speak thus in me.
Farewell sweet Lady; all the choice delights,
The comforts of the day, the joy of nights,
The friendly hours (the handmaides unto time.)
The seasons: Winter, August, Summer, prime;
^y day, the cheerful Sun; by night, the Moon,
^eepe or awake, at midnight, or at noone,
Protect you: All things happen to you well,
^o please your eye, your ear, touch, taste, and smell.
Where e're you walk, the air fresh breath bequeath you,
The earth on which you tread, prove smooth beneath you.
^ stand, time stand still with you, or seem slow;
^ move, may Angels wheresoever you go
^ttend you; or if sit; the chair to ease you
love soft, as Iunoes throne. If ride, to please you
^ay your Caroch wheels run as swift and fair,
^ Venus Chariot mounted in the air.
If lie to rest, then gently may ye sleep;
Whom, He that made you sweet, as sweetly keep.
Your dreams be such; that waking, you may say
Darkness to me as pleasing was as day.
So sleep, so wake, so walk, so ride, so rest,
With all contentments, treasured in your breast,
Till this sad house, which now you leave, to mourn,
May be made joyful in your quick return.
A nuptial song, devoted to the Celebration of a Marriage betwixt Master
James, and Mistress An. W. An Acrostick.
Illustrious Himen, let this bridal feast
Abound in plenty of all choice delights,
Make it a lasting Iubilee, not least
Ennobled by thee; all their tedious nights
Shorten in pleasure; To their future days
Add length and light without eclipse or cloud,
No unkind breath betwixt them tempest raise,
No word be heard too silent, or too loud.
And when the full time of her Issue grows,
(Which may they prove as numerous as blessed)
Awake Lucina to her painful throws,
And summon Juno to prepare her rest.
Dispose their board, their bed; that they may find
Each in their age, as in their youth like kind.
A Song at their uprising.
Pack clouds away, and welcome day,
With night we banish sorrow:
Sweet air blow soft, mount Larks aloft,
To give my love good morrow.
Wings from the wind to please her mind,
Notes from the Lark I Will borrow:
Bird prune thy wing, Nightingale sing,
To give my love good morrow,
To give my love good morrow,
Notes from them both I Will borrow.
Wake from thy nest Robin red breast,
Sing birds in every furrow:
and from each Bill let music shrill
Give my fair love good morrow.
^lackbird and Thrush, in every bush,
Stare, Linet, and Cock-sparrow:
^ou pretty Elves, amongst your selves,
Sing my fair love good morrow.
To give my love good morrow,
Sing Birds in every furrow.
^ Anagram upon the name of the right honorable Sir Thomas Coventry, Lord
Keeper of the great Seal, etc.
THOMAS COVENTRY.

To charm out sin.

An Acrostick upon the Anagram.
^o charm out sin, to you the power is given,
^aving your Caducaeus lent from heaven;
^ may your Mace, the Emblem of that power
^akes good, and great: even to your latest hour
^ble them both in you: May you appear
^till Pilote to that Helm, which you now steare.
^onscience your Court; in constancy persever,
^pposing what you have affronted ever,
^yce, howsoever disguised in virtues weeds.
and as you have begun: so shall your deeds
^ot unremembred in the grave forsake you,
^ime (here so spent) shall there immortal make you.
^ecorded it shall be what you have bin,
^ our justice being made To charm out sin.
Another of the same.
THOMAS COVENTRY.

O Hye constant Mure.

An Acrostick upon the Anagram.
The Hye and constant Mure girt you about,
Hedging your person in, from all detraction.
Open you lie not to the vulgar rowt,
Maligning goodness, and inclined to faction.
AFort you are, built on the Rock, not Sand,
Stable, all storms of envy to withstand.
Continue in your justice, mercy, piety,
Oppression and extortion still keep under,
Virtue, in which man comes most near a Diety,
(Excellent Sir) shall your best merits wonder.
Never shall your uprightness be forgot;
Never; a conscience so unstained and pure
Time shall to Lethe leave, or scandal spot.
Remain it shall, whilst Moon or Stars endure,
You guarded still, with an Hye constant Mure.
Of the right Honorable Sir Henry Carey, Lord Hunsden, Earl of Dover, etc.
HENRY CAREY: The Anagram. Rain Rich. An Acrostick upon the Anagram.

Honored Sir, If content a Kingdom be,
Ever reign rich, graced with that inward crown,
None is (then you) in true nobility
Richer; in virtue, issue, or renown,
You need not fear fortunes inconstant frown.
Conscience unstained, justice, integrity
A bound in you, by all which you are known.
Remarkt you are for your sincerity,
Ennobled Sir, and in your blessed posterity
You shall reign rich, still making these your own.
Of Sir Ranoulphe Crewe, once Lord Chief Justice of England.
The Anagram. Now Helper, Crave. An Acrostick upon the Anagram.

Rare it is such as have helped, now help to crave,
A president of this, in you we have,
None ever in your place of Justice sat,
Or graver, or more wise to arbitrate,
Vows you have kept made to the Judge on hie,
Lystned, (as he does) to the poor man's cry,
Protecting Widows, Orphans, and indeed,
Helping all such as did your justice need.
Eminent Sir, your virtues are your shield,
Conquering base envy who has lost the field,
Reproacht, for so maligning your renown,
Eternity shall all your actions crown,
Whilst those that sought your goodness to deprave,
Ever shall need your helping hand to crave.
Of the most excellent Lady, the Lady Anna Carre, sole daughter to the right
Honorable Robert Earl of Somerset, Knight of the Garter, etc,
ROBERT ANNA CARRE.

The Anagram, Rarer cannot bear.

An Acrostick upon the Anagram.
Rarer than you either for breast or brain,
O can the earth bear? or shall it again
^ud a more hopeful bloome? with this new year
Entering, by Janus leave, may you appear
^ are Lady like bright Cinthia in her Carre,
That Is always seen with some conspicuous star.
Amply, Heaven has endowed you for a Bride,
None of your age more nobly qualifide.
None (than your self) more virtuous, chaste and fair,
And therefore worthy to be counted rare.
Challenge you may amongst the virtues place,
And to the former three, add a fourth grace.
Raptured I am, and I presume, Jove would
Rain in your lap, a liquid shower of Gold
Even now: did he your sweet aspect behold.
Of that worthy and most religious Knight, Sir Paul Pindar. His Anagram.
Prayer in D. divus vel Sanctus.
D. Paul's.

An Acrostick upon the Anagram.
Sir Paul, of all that ever boar that name,
You to Saint Paul most dear are, and may claim
Rare privilege; (I might say) above all
Priority, that bear the name of Paul.
A course like yours, how to continue prayers
Unto succession, who has left his heirs?
Let this your piety proceed to 'th full,
Pursue your good work, and bring on the dull
Insensible gross Earth-wormes, such as prise
No god but gold, nor will be heavenly wise.
Dedicate on; make others like sincere,
A noble president you shall appear,
Read, whilst old Ianus ushers the new year.
A Distick.
Saint Paul, Sir Paul, both traveld: one with care
To build Christ's Church: Paul's the other to repair.
EPIGRAMS.
Epig. ex THEOD. BEZA.
1. To his Library having been sometime absent thence.
Salvete incolumes mei Libelli,
Meae deliciae, mei lepores, etc.
HAyle to my books safe and in sight.
You, all my mirth; my choice delight.
My Cicero and Plinies both,
All hail to you; whom I was loath
To leave one minut: Cato, Columel,
My Varro, Livy, all are well.
Hayle to my Plautus, Terence too,
And Ovid say, how do thou do?
My Fabius, my Propertius,
And those not least beloved of us,
Greek Authors, exquisite all over,
And whom I should have named before,
Because of their Cothurnat strain,
And Homer then, whom not in vain,
The people styled great: next I see
My Aristotle, hayle to thee
Plato, Tymaus, and the rest
Of you who cannot be expressed
In a phaleucik number; all,
Hayle to my Books in general
Again, and thrice, again all hayle,
And may my prayer thus far prevail,
O you my best loved books I pray,
(For I have been six days away)
My absence ye will not distaste,
But with this love I left you last
You will receive me, which I vow,
Was fervent and sincere to you,
And if you grant this small request,
I further unto you protest,
Henceforth from you I Will be away
No week, no week said I? no day,
No day? no hour shall loose my care,
No minutes space that I can spare.
2. Of Erasmus, pictured but from the girdle upwards.
Ingens ingentem, quem personat orbis, Erasmum,
Haec tibi dimidium picta tabella refert, etc.
This painted table to thy view,
But half Erasmus lends.
Of great Erasmus, whose loud fame
Through the great world extends,
But why not his whole portraiture?
Cease Reader to complain,
He was so great that the vast earth
His fame cannot contain.
3. Of Lucrece.
Si fuit ille tibi Lucretia, gratus adulter,
Immerito merita praemia morte petis, etc.
If to thy bed the adulterer welcome came,
O Lucrece, then thy death deserves no fame.
If force were offered, give true reason why,
Being clear thyselfe thou for his fault would dye?
Therefore in vain thou seekst thy fame to cherish,
Since mad thou fal'st, or for thy sin do perish.
4. Upon the Venetian History written by Petrus Bembus.
Clarae urbi Venetum, Debes natalia Bembe,
vrbs eadem clara est munere Bembe tuo.
O Bembus Venice in thy birth is famed,
And in thy worth the Cities worth proclaimed,
Thou happy in that City, and again,
It happy to have thee a Citizen;
Yet thou O Bembus by thy learned book,
Gav'st back more to it, than from it thou took.
What thou receiv'st, was mortal, and must die;
What thou returnst, shall live eternally.
5. Of Helionora the French Queen.
Nil Helena vidit Phoebus formosius una,
Te regina nihil pulchrius orbis habet.
Then Hellen Phoebus could no rarer view,
Nor all the world a fairer yield than you.
Both beautiful! yet you in this excel;
She brocht dissension, discord you expel.
6. Of Johannes Secundus an excellent Poet of the Hage in Holland.
Excelsum seu condis opus magnique Maronis,
luminibus offerre studes, etc.
If an high work thou undertak'st; to rise
In Virgils strain, and look out with his eyes;
Or if light Elegies art pleased to sing,
Such as from Ovids vein were known to spring;
If to the ly'r of Pindarus thou fit
Thy various notes, to make him blush at it;
If thou make Belbulus his brows contort,
To see how he in Epigrams can sport;
These four thou shall excel: even thou alone
Secundus, who art second unto none.
7. Against Philenus who carpt at Erasmus.
Erasmus ille, quo fatentur plurimi,
Nihil fuisse nec futurum doctius, etc.
Erasmus whom as many say,
None shall or has been to this day
More learned: yet to thee thou gull,
Most stupid he appears and dull,
And what aspersions thou can frame
To calumnise his noble name,
By thee or others are collected,
In hope to make him disrespected.
Bark still Philenus with the rest,
Since it is apparent to the best,
That learned Erasmus much more knew,
Than is unknown to all of you.
8. To Lodovick Masurus of his verses made of the fall of Babylon.
Dum Masuri rudiore tonas Babylona ruentem, Cantata est quanta Troja nec ipsa
tuba, etc.
Whilst Masurus thou with a louder tongue
Soundst Babels fall, then ever Troyes was song,
Thou have given cause Homer should thee envy,
Or Maro (greater) that thou writ'st so hye,
Yet Masurus one error may be found
In thy brave work for all its stentors sound,
That in so great a verse thy fame pursuing
Thou buildst for ever what thou striv'st to ruin.
9. Upon three the most excellent Divines of France then living.
Gallica mirata est Calvinum ecclesia nuper quo nemo docuit doctius, etc.
The Church of France, late Calvin did admire,
Then whom no one more learned could teach.
Turellus, who to thunder did aspire,
Then whom none could more strongly preach.
The Honey tongud Viretus, He who still
Nothing save sweetness does deliver.
France, thou by these may saved be if thou will,
Or else be lost for ever.
10. A comparison betwixt Poets and Monks.
Accipe Francisco cur componamus Homerum,
Et Monachos, credo vatibus esse pares, etc.
Receive, why the Franciscan I compare
To Homer: and think Monks and Poets are
Both like. Francis (we read of old) was blind,
And so was Homer, as we written find;
He of his eyes, the other in his mind.
A beggar Francis was, Homer was poor,
And both sung Hymns at every rich man's door.
The vast world both their rapsodies admires,
From the one's Poets, from the others Friars.
Poets at first in remote woods did dwell,
The Monks at first chus'd out the Cave and Cell.
The Woods forsook, the Monks themselves betake
Unto the Towns, and Poets then forsake
The Groves to live in Cities: Night and day
The Poet sings, and so the Monk does bray,
And in their music both alike delight.
The Muse the wanton Poet does accite,
To have his Cinthia, and the shaven Friar
Not one alone, but many does desire.
With water if the Poet chance to meet
In stead of Wine, his verse comes off unsweet.
And if unto the Monk you water bring
When he would drink, he will but sadly sing.
The Poet when his Harpe's about him tide,
His pleasant notes most sweetly will divide:
And so the Monk too will sound nothing dull,
When as the Flagon at his girdle's full.
The one in an Atheists fury does exclaim,
The other an Enthean rapture does inflame,
And still the Thvrsian favor he does wear,
As the other crosses does about him bear.
The victor Poets Mirtles and Bays renown,
And the Monks honor is his shaven crown.
The excellent Poet George Buchanan, upon a Diamond cut like an Heart, and sent
from Mary Queen of Scots, to the most excellent Lady Queen Elizabeth.
Non me materies facit superbum,
Quod ferro Insuperabilis quod igni, etc.
Not that my substance neither can be bowed,
Or flaw'd by fire or steel, does make me proud,
Nor clearnes wanting stain, not that I still
Shine with perspicuous light, not the Artists skill
Who gave me form, and clothed me thus in gold,
That I might seem more glorious to behold:
But if in me appear the least ostent,
It is because I Am made to represent
The heart of my sweet Mistress, and so near,
That if the same Heart in her bosom were,
With eyes to be surveyed, more constant none,
More clear, more spotless could be looked upon,
Both splenderous alike, and without stain,
In all things equal, save there does remain
A difference in our hardness: but to me
A second favour's lent, a hope to see
Of you Heroic Lady, the bright face:
Then which there cannot be a greater grace.
Hope of which grace I almost was bereft,
After I once had my dear mistress left.
O that my fate so much to me would daine,
That I might in an adamantine chain
Link your two hearts, in such a strong condition,
As that no emulation, no suspicion,
Nor spleen, nor age, nor hate, could break asunder,
So should I of all stones be held the wonder.
So I more blessed were than all stones by far,
So I more bright were than all stones that are.
So then all stones I were more dear indeed,
As I in hardness do all stones exceed.
Of Chrisalus.
Flava Ceres longi spes interceperat amti,
Aruerat pigro vin^^ t^ll^ gel^.
Grain the long years hope in the ear does pine,
The tedious frost does pinch thy forward kine:
Rot kills thy sheep, thieves steal thy gotes; and now
Thy laboring Oxen perish at the plow.
Loss after loss when Chrisalus had found,
And he himself unwilling to be found
Alone: when his whole state was ceased, bethought
To hang himself so he might do it for naught.
But soon that purpose in his mind was lost,
When he considerd what a rope would cost,
For he would die of free-cost: he thinks then
To kill himself with a sharp sword, but when
He looked about and saw none, nay says he,
To buy a sword were too much charge for me.
He then says to himself: doubtless that knave
The Sexton expects something for my grave,
And somewhat those that put me in my shroud,
And somewhat must the bearers' be allowd.
The Priest, the candles, ringing of the bell:
And prayers too, must cost somewhat I know well.
Therefore to save all charges, this I say,
^le drown my self, and that is the cheapest way.
He did so, And thus speaking in his fall,
^ee thus for nothing I discharge them all.
In Romum.
Non ego Romulea miror quod pastor in urbe
Sceptra gerat: pastor conditor urbi^ erat.
^ wonder not a Shepherd Rome should sway,
^ Shepherd Romes foundation first did lay,
My wonder is since, Romulus the first
That reard the same, was by a shee-wolfe nursed,
That even to these days as we plainly see,
^o many raging Wolves in Rome should be.
This only does my admiration breed,
A Wolf should keep the fould, and the sheep feed.
An Epitaph upon Iacobus Sylvius.
Silvius hic situs est gratis qui nil dedit unquam
Mortuus, and gratis quod legis ista dolet.
Here Sylvius lies, who when he lived
Gave nothing, and being dead,
He yet laments, that what is writ here,
For nothing should be read.
Ex Angelo Politiano. Epigram In Pamphilum.
Mittis vina mihi, mihi Pamphile vina supersunt,
Vis mage, quod placeat mittere? mitte sitim.
Thou sendst me wine O Pamphilus.
I had enough at first.
Wilt send me what shall better please?
Then prithee send me thirst.
Against Mabilius a bitter railing Poet.
Ore tibi pauci, sed nulli in carmine dentes
quum sint, atque illi sunt putridi and veteres, etc.
There be but few teeth in thy jaws,
But in thy verse are none,
And those thou have be rotten, or
Their use by age is gone.
And though thou can not bite at all,
Yet bark thou do mean space.
Which shows thee (though in shape a man,)
Yet of a dogged race.
Ex Accij sinceri sannazarij Neopolitani viri patricij. Epigram. Of the
admirable City Venice.
Viderat Adriacis Venetam Neptunus in undis,
Stare urbem and toto p^nere jura Mari, etc.
Neptune in the Adriatic maine saw stand
Venice whose power did all the Sea command,
And says, now Jove show thy Tarpeian Towers
And walls of Mars, unto this site, now ours.
If thou before the mighty Ocean dare
The petty River Tiber to compare,
Behold both Cities there give up this doom,
The Gods built Venice, Men erected Rome.
Ex M. Anthonij Fla^^^inij. Epigram. Of Cardinal Pooles Picture.
Si velut egregia pictura maxim Pole,
Est expressa tui corporis effigies, etc.
Great Poole, as in that excellent Table we
The picture of thy body plain may see,
So could one paint the beauty of thy mind,
No rarer thing, we on the earth could find.
Of a fair gilt Bowl sent unto him from Benedict Accoltus Cardinal.
Hanc pateram Chio spumantem autoque nitentem
Accoltus vati donat habere suo, etc.
This golden Cup swelling with Chios juice,
Given by Accoltus to his Poets use,
Part of this wine Bacchus to thee I send,
And part to thee Apollo, I commend.
Now Muses take the Cup, and it brim-fill
With Nectar, which may to my brain distill,
That worthy thanks I may Accoltus give,
In such high verse as may for ever live.
Ex Mario Molsa. Of the City Rome being late wasted by the Germans.
Flagrati cineres si nunc Catilina videret,
Imperij and Latium consenuisse decus.
The Empires burnt ashes did thou now behold
O Catiline, and her glory waxt so old,
The Capitol, and high Tarpeian spires,
Could thou but view defaced by foreign fires,
Now coverd in long ruins, thou would run,
And loudly cry, This by the gods was done.
For amongst mortal men, what is he once durst
Do this to Rome, which I had menac't first?
O how much better had it been that I
Had been the cause of all thy misery!
Whilst buried Rome from darkness thou do strive
To raise (O Blondus) and keep still alive
Dead Romulus and Remus: by thy wit,
They a rude City did erect, but it
Thy labor has rebuilt, making it shine
So to the world, it is almost held divine.
And though the barbarous Foe it overthrew,
Thy lasting verse, has still repaird it new.
A Tomb to thee, triumphant Rome did give,
That it to thee, and thou to it may live.
Ex Antonio Titaldeo. An Epitath upon Joannes Mirandula.
Ioannes jacet hic Mirandula, caeter^ norunt.
Et Tagus and Ganges, forsan and Antipodes.
Mirandula here tombed lies;
Would thou know more? ask these,
Tagus and Ganges best knows, and
Perhaps the Antipodes.
Ex Benedicti Theocreni. Epigram. Upon a Comet which Jews of Savoy saw a
little before his death.
In festum sibi cum sciret Ludovica Cometam,
Seque peti: Illius crinibus horrificis, etc.
A bearded star when Jews did espy,
With horrible aspect his life to threat,
Lo here, a Torch says he that from on high
Lights me to heaven, (his spirit was so great.
Ex Joanne secundo Hagiensi. Of one Charinus who had married a deformed wife.
Nuper Charine conjugem,
Vidi tuam, tam candidam, etc.
Charinus I beheld of late,
Thy wife so sweet, so delicate,
So fair, so chaste, so neat, so fine,
That almost I could wish her mine.
And if great Jove would give me three,
In all respects but such as she
I two would unto Pluto grant,
To take away that paravant.
Ex Henrici Stephani Epigram. Of Phillis who was delivered within five months
after her marriage.
Ante legitimum statumque tempus,
Cum puerpera facta Phillis est.
Phillis late married as it is sed,
Before her time was brought a bed;
The noise of which, (to her disgrace)
Was spoken of in every place.
Which brought to her by one she knew,
Who told her how such rumor grew,
She smiled, and thus excused the crime,
The vulgar mis-compute the time:
Nine months I know they will allow
A teeming woman, and I now
Exceed that limit; Five months he
It Is well known, has been wed to me,
^o five months I to him have been
^n wedlock joined, then where is the sin?
Add five months unto five, and then
Who knows not but they make up ten?
Upon Pompe's death.
Dux Pharia quamvis jacu Inhumatus arena,
Non ideo fati est saevior ira tui, etc.
Though thou great Duke inhum'd do lie
Upon the Pharian shore,
Blame not the fates who thought thereby
To honor thee the more.
Unworthy was the earth thy bones,
Which thou subdude by force;
Only the Heavens, and they alone
Were worthy of thy Coarse.
Ex Ioanne Colta. Of the City Verona.
Verona, qui te vider it,
Et non amarit protinus
A more perditissimo, etc.
Verona whatsoere he be,
Who when he first shall look on thee,
It does not his affection move
To dote on thee with perdit love,
I think he not himself respects;
And that he wants true loves affects,
His senses are not in good state,
Nay all the graces he does hate.
Ex Petro Bo^bo. An Epitaph upon one Thebaldaeus an excellent Musician.
Qui ripis te saepe suis stupuere Canentom,
Eridanus Tiberisque; parens ille, hic tuus Hospes, etc.
Eridanus and Tiberis flood,
Who when upon their banks thou stood,
Admired thee singing (in one bred
And by the other nursed and fed)
Most credible it is that thou
In the Elysian fields singst now,
And make such music with thy tongue,
That all the Gods about thee throng.
Ex Baltasser Castlli^ne. An Epitaph upon a Virgin whose name was Gratia.
Siste viator, dum proper as hoc aspice marmor,
Et leg^, ni plores, tu quoque marmor eris, etc.
Stay Travailer, and look upon
This Marble ere thou part.
Read here, and if thou dropst no tears,
Thou likewise marble art.
Sweet Grace is dead, for cruel death
Takes both the fair and wise,
(Alas the while) and here beneath
This stone, intombed lies,
She both her sisters took along,
So that we now may say
All the three graces in her death
Did perish in one day.
Ex Antonio Casanova. Of Lucrece.
Dicite, cum melius cadere unte Lucretia posset,
Cur potius voluit post scelus illa mori.
Why Lucrece better might her self have slain
Before the act, than after her black stain,
Can any tell? no crime she did commit,
For of all guile, her hand did her acquit.
Her ravisher she slew by that brave stroke,
And from her Countries neck took off the yoke.
From thine own hand thy death most willing came,
To save thy Country, and preserve thy fame.
In praise of Archery.
BRave Archery what rapture shall I raise.
In giving thee thy merit, and due praise?
Divine thou art, as from the Gods begot:
Apollo with an arrow Python shot,
And Cupid the fair Venus son we know
Is always figured with his shafts and Bow.
The chaste Dlana with her Nymphs in chase,
Will with no other arms their shoulders grace.
A mighty Bow the great Alcides drew,
When he (to save his bride) the Centaur slew.
It is the powerful hand of Heaven that bends
The all-coloured Rainbow that so far extends,
Before the Tormentary art was found,
The jarring string did make the dreadfulst sound.
And that invulner'd Greek unskard, by steel
Was shot, and slain by Paris in the heel.
The naked Indian does on armor lack
His bow being bent, and quiver at his back.
And the wild Tartar does no danger fear,
His arrow nockt, and string drawn to his ear.
The Parthian in this practice has such skill,
That when he flies he can shoot back and kill.
For us; What foreign Chronicles, but sing
Our honors purchased by the Gray-goose wing?
Brave Cordelion with a feathered band
Beat the proud Sultan from the holy Land.
O what an honor did the Black Prince gain,
When he with English Archers conquered Spain!
So ancient, so divine, so nobly famed;
(Yet for the bodies health there is nothing named.)
It is an exercise (by proof) we see
Whose practice does with nature best agree.
Obstructions from the liver it prevents,
Stretching the Nerves and Arty'rs gives extents
To the spleenes oppilations, cleares the breast
And spungy lungs: It is a foe professed
To all consumptions: More, what need I name?
The State approves it for a lawful game.
What won our honor, is now made our sport,
Witness Poicteirs, Cressy, and Agincourt.
Upon a Book late published by one Bird a Coachman, called Byrds business.
Reader, who ere thou be; approach man,
And hear the Iornall of a Coachman,
(In which he is not too prolix)
Who with two Horses, four, or six,
If let him have a good Postillion,
Shall drive with any for a Million.
We read in Stories long agon,
That there was one Antomedon,
Great Hectors Charioter, Another
Who of the same trade was a brother
Whom Archeptolemus men name,
And he, Achilles steeds did tame.
These could their Horses turn, and wind,
And check, and curb them to their mind,
Wheeling with many a strange Meander,
In the most famous field Scamander.
I wonder Homer was so rash
To praise those expert in the lash,
But he was ignorant and blind,
Who knew not Byrd should come behind.
Who had he lived then; might King (...)
Have served, or great Agamemnon,
And taught their Palphre yes how to draw,
But they alas to him were raw.
I must confess they had the brains,
In the day time to guide the raines,
And in plain ground to use the whip,
And one another to outstrip.
But this our Bird, although no Owl,
His Horse is able to control,
And them to govern I dare say,
(And guide) as well by night as day,
As in his travels may appear,
Which largely are discoursed there.
And though I know not how, or when,
Yet all described by his own pen.
In which to exceed so much he strives
That whether he better writes or drives
May well be questioned; Reader judge,
Pay for thy Book, and do not grudge.
And now if any question make
In this work he did undertake,
Why he in number or in rhyme,
Should so much fail? observe the time
And place withal, where these were writ.
And he no doubt will both remit.
Neither does it the Author, wrong,
To make one verse short, the other long,
As you may find often in his book,
He suites them to the way he took.
If any line against his will
Go lagging on: he drove up-hill.
Again: If any pass it is length,
Down hill he ran, and had not strength,
Though take unto him all his force,
Either to stop it, or his horse.
I will appeal to all who use
The trade, and they will that excuse.
When he was driving in even way,
The verse runs smooth (perceive you may)
But being rough, then think he feels
Some deep foul slough to clogge his wheels.
Here in his praise my sail I strike,
Let any Coachman do the like.
Against a base and infamous Balladder, who dispersed a scandalous riming
Libell, in which he maliciously traduced the noble exercises weekly practiced
in the Artillery Garden.
What might thou be I wonder? whose bald rhyme
Thus railes against the virtues of our time,
Of what birth? name? what nation? what degree?
Since thou conceal'st these from the world and me,
I will enquire: well-bred thou art not sure;
No generous spirit could ever yet endure
To hear a Soldier branded: Such love Arms,
And grace the practice of our loud alarmes,
Our quick and active postures they admire,
Which teach us when to charge, and when retire.
This proves thee borne out of some dunghill race,
That nere durst look a Soldier in the face.
Then of what name? Is It so dark and obscure,
Or else so blur'd, it dares not now endure
The Sun and Day? but Owle-like is it gone,
And forfeited to night? or have thou none?
Or wast once good? let this afflict thee most,
Thou art half hanged, for thy good name is lost.
Then of what Country? Did thou never hear
Of Talbot, Norris, Essex, Sidney, Vere?
Or have thou of our conquering Princes read,
And durst affirm thou were in England bred,
Scotland or Ireland? Kingdoms, that still afford
Arms Nursery, and Soldiers of the sword?
Sure thou art not French; unless thou were begot
In their disease, the pock^, and therefore not
Sound in thy joints, and that is the cause, thou here
Rayl'st against these Arms thou have not limbs to bear.
Then from what Country, nation? from what strain
Can thou derive thy being? not from Spain,
For all their prid's in Arms, a Soldiers name
As the earths glory, at which most they aim.
To Italy for birthright should thou fly,
Caesar himself would give thee then the lie,
With thousand valiant Romans, and all swear
A Groom so base had never breeding there.
So of all others; Nay thy impudent work
Would blush the very person of a Turk.
Their Bashaes and their Ianisaries be
Bold Leaders, and approved for Chivalree.
Were not the Worthies Soldiers? (worthles slave,)
A title that antiquity first gave,
To eternize them; and others to aspire
To the like height; That we might ours admire,
As former ages them: For thy degree
I cannot think how I may censure thee.
Art thou a Citizen? and can repine
At practice of such needful discipline?
If so; thou art some bastard, and 'twere pity
But all like thee were spewed out of the City.
Thou art no Scholar; Arts and Arms conspire.
Scholars praise Arms, we Soldiers Arts admire.
Nay art thou Christian? that with rymes so vain
Durst task the divine Pulpit? O profane
And irreligious wretch: good subject? No
Such thou art not, whose obscene meeters flow
To The jangling Music of each Fiddlers string,
Against that which Patrons Country, peace, and King.
Since neither then good Subject, Christian; nor
One that loves Arts; whom City does abhor,
And Country has disclaimed, one whom no clime
But is ashamed to challenge, whose base ryme
Has forfeited his name, and obscure birth
From every language, Nation, from all earth;
I thus conclude. To which sound Drum and Fife
He' has lost his name, why should he keep his life?
FINIS.
The ANNOTATIONS upon PROCUS and PUELLA.
IN this Dialogue (to whose Author I am not able to give a meriting character)
I presume there is nothing contained which does deviate either from modesty or
good manners. It is only a mere expression, of what is, or ought to be,
betwixt a young man and a maid, in the initiating of their affection, the
prosecution of their love, and the perfecting of their contract. Here is
neither childish discourse, loose language, or any impertinency, which is not
agreeable, with wholesome instance, and commendable example. For in all
marriages there is to be observed, Parity in birth. For as Dion says:
Disparity in Wedlock is a great enemy to love: then conformity in education,
and lastly equality in state. The first begets acquaintance, the second
confirms it, and for the last we read Euripides thus: women without dowry
cannot claim the privilege to speak their own thoughts: And Menander says:
That man is most unhappy who marries being poor, and raises his fortunes by
a rich maid or widow. But howsoever marriage in itself is honorable: in so
much that Homer informs us, That the Ladies of Greece, used to count their
years from the time of their Nuptials, not the day of their Nativity, as
forgetting all the time of their virginity, and intimating, they were never to
be said truly to live, till they came to that state, legally to lend life
unto others, which was by lawful wedlock. Imagine then this our Pamphilus
proved an happy husband, and Maria a fortunate wife: He a provident Father, and
she the fruitful mother of a numerous and thriving issue. They blessed in their
children, and their children alternatly in them: For so i^ (for the most part)
happens in all such contracts. Where virtue over-ruleth vanity, and reason
swayeth passion and affection. Of him I may say with Boethius, lib. 2. Metr. 8.

Hic and conjugij sacrum
Castis nectit amoribus.
With the sacred Nuptial tie,
His chaste love did well comply.
And to do her the best right I can, I make bold to borrow thus much from the
Poet Statius, lib. Silvar. 5.

Si Babylonis opes, Lydae si pondera gaza
Indorumque dares, etc.
If thou the Babylonian wealth should proffer,
Or rifle (for her) the rich Lydians coffer;
The potent wealth could thou before her lay,
From India brought; or that from Africa?
Yet rather then transgress her nuptial vow,
She would choose death not caring where, nor how.
Et quo non possum corpore, mente feror. Annotations upon the Dialogue of EARTH
and AGE.
(a) MEaning Io transformed into a Cow, by Jupiter (who had before stuprated
her) to conceal her from the jealousy of his wife Juno: the whole story you
may read in the Dialogue entitled Jupiter and Io: she lived in the year of
the world 2200. according to Hell.

(b) The Sibils were in number ten. Persica, Libyca, Delphica, Erithraea,
Samia, Hellesponti^ca, Tiburtina, Albinces, (...), Cumana: of these you may
read Varro, Gellius, Augustine, Suidas, and Lactantius. And of the long life of
Cumana, Uirgil in his Aeneids.

(c) Ascraean, so titled from Ascra a Town in Boetia, near unto the mount
Helicon, where the famous Poet Hesiod was borne, from which place he had the
surname Ascraeus.

(d) King Cyrus, because he had a Steed whom he much loved, drowned in the
river Ganges: to be revenged thereof, caused so many currents to be cut, that
he dried the Channel.

(e) It has reference to the great battle fought by Hannibal against the
Romans near unto the Village Cannas, where he slew 80. thousand in that one
conflict: from thence the people of Italy are called Cannenses.

(f) Concerning the History of Phaeton, and his sisters, I refer you to the
reading of Ovid, where it is with great elegancy described. Metamorph.

(g) You may read the like of Niobe the daughter of Tantalus, and wife to
Pelops: who had six Sons, and six Daughters, all which Latona the mother to
Apollo and Diana, (in whom are figured the Sun and the Moon) caused to be
slain, for the pride of Niobe, who presumed to compare with her: for grief
whereof she lost her speech, and remained stupid and without motion, which
gave the Poets occasion to feign that she was changed into a marble statue.
Calvis. reports that she lived in the year of the world, 2240.

(h) Euridice was the wife of Orpheus, who flying from Aristheus who would have
ravished her, was stung with a Serpent, of which she dyed. Orpheus took his
harp, And went to Hell for her, and by his excellent Music so far wrought
with Pluto and Proserpine, that they suffered him to bear her thence, but upon
condition, that he should not look back upon her till he had past the
infernal shades, and came to the upper light, which through his over love he
breaking, so lost her. The fable is thus moralliz'd, Euridice signifies the
soul of man, and Orpheus the body to which the soul is married. Aristaus is
true happiness which would gladly ravish the soul, but she flying through
grassy fields and meadows, is at length stung to death by a Serpent, that is,
by the blandishments of immoderate pleasure: she then descends into Hell, which
implies dull and deep melancholy, with the trouble of a perplexed conscience,
where she is rescued by comfortable music. But so, that unless she submit
herself to the rule of reason, she shall quickly fall again into the same
agony: she lived in the year 1700. according to Natal Comes.

(i) Astianax was the Son of Hector and Andromache, who after the taking of
Troy, was by the Grecians precipitated from an high tower and so slain.

(k) Aegaeus was the Son of Neotune, and King of Athens, in whose reign King
Minos of Creete to revenge the death of his Son Androgous, made most cruel
war on the Athenians, forcing them yearly to send seven Noblemens Sons
into Creete to be devoured by the monster Minotaurus. Three years this
continued, and in the fourth the lot (amongst others fell upon Thesius, the
elect Son of the King, who being of a noble and heroic courage, put them in
great hope that he was able to kill the monster: At his departure his father in
joined him, that if the ship he went in returned prosperously he should set up
a white flagge in token of victory, and pluck down the black one which they
then bore in sign of mourning. But after when Theseus by the counsel of
Ardiane daughter to King Minos had overcome the monster, and with a clew of
thread escaped the labyrinth, sailing homewards again with joy toward his
Country, he forgot his fathers commandment concerning the white flagge. The
old King much longing to see the safe return of his son, used every day to
ascend an high promontory, which overlooked the Sea, to take view of all such
ships as past that way, at length knowing his sons ship, and seeing the same
sable flagge in the top, with which they first launched from that shore,
supposed he had been dead, and therefore surcharged with grief, cast
himself headlong from the rock into the Sea, which was after called by his name
Aegeum mare. He lived in the 48. year after Athens was first made a Kingdom;
and in the year of the world 2680. about the time that Gideon judged Israel.

(l) Iocaste was the mother of Oedipus, who after her first husbands death
married with him, being her own natural son, (but not knowing so much) by
him she had Eteocles and Polynices, who in a single combat slew one another,
and they also dyed miserably.

(m) Dedalus was the son of Micion borne in Athens, the most excellent
Artificer of these times. He made the Labyrinth into which Minos put him, and
his son Icarus, at length having got feathers and wax, he made thereof
artificial wings for himself and his son, and so flew from Crete into
Sardinia, and thence to Cuma, where he built a Temple to Apollo, but Icarus in
the way soared so high, that the beams of the Sun, melted the wax, and his
wings failing him, by that disaster he fell into the Sea, from it has still
retained the name of Mare Icarium, the Icarian Sea, according to that of Ovid.

Icarus Icarijs nomina fecit aquis. (n) Progne was the daughter to King
Pandion, who because her husband Tereus King of Thrace, had ravished her sister
Philomela, and after cut out her tongue, she having notice thereof, in a
barbarous revenge, at a feast dedicated to Bacchus: slew her son Itis, and
after dressed his limbs, and served them up to her husbands table, etc. She lived
about the year of the world 2510. according to Helv.

(o) Autonoe, was the daughter of Cadmus and Hermione, who much lamented the
death of Acteon.

(p) Antigone, was daughter of Oedipus King of Thebes, who when her blind
father was banished, took upon her to lead him, and afterward being at the
burial of her two brothers Eteocles and Polynices with Argia, was slain by
the command of King Creon, whose murder Theseus soon after revenged.

(q) Colossae vel Colossis, was a town of Phrygia, near unto Laodicea, which
was demolisht by an earthquake in the time of Nero.

(r) Memphis was built by King Ogdous, and took name of his daughter (so
called) it is a great and spacious City in Egypt, famous for the Pyramides and
stately scpulchers of King there set up: it is at this day called Alcayrum, or
Grand-Cayre.

(s) Mausolus, was King of Caria, to whose memory his wife Artimesia reared a
most sumptuous Tomb which was reckoned one of the seven wonders of the world,
this Monument was reared in the year of the world 3590.

(t) It has reference to the stately Temple of Diana in the City of Ephesus:
which was afterward maliciously burnt down by Herostratus.

(v) Tarpeian alludeth to Tarpeia, a Vestall virgin in Rome, who covenanting
with the Sabines their enemies, to betray the Capitol, for the bracelets they
wore on their left arms, when they entered the City, and she stood ready to
receive that which she had contracted for, in stead of their bracelets, they
cast their Targets upon her, by which she was smothered and pressed to death:
this happened in the year of the world 3205. The Tarpeian Mount was so called
because she was there buried, and Jupiter was surnamed Tarpeius, because there
worshipped.

(w) By Getick weapons are meant these which the Getae used, a people of
Scythia in Europe, Aelius Spartan. From them derives the Nation of the Goths,
who after conquered Italy and Rome.

(x) By Minerva's Altar, is intended that which stood in the Temple of Pallas
within the City of Troy, where Achilles at his marriage to Polyxena daughter to
King Priam and Hecuba was slain by Paris.

(y) They were called Garamantes of Garamus, a King of Lybia, who built a City
there, which he called after his own name: their Country lies along by the
bank of Numidia, in a tract of ground from the Atlanticke Ocean, by the river
Nilus. They were held in old time to be the farthest people Southward.

(z) The Sauromat's are a Septentrionall Nation which some Authors, as Ortelius
and Scaliger held to be the inhabitants of Russia and Tartaria.

(a) Helena was in her Nonage first raped by Theseus before her marriage to
Menclaus King of Sparta, and after by Paris ravished, and carried to Troy.

(b) Atrides, were the two brothers, Agamemnon and Menelaus, so called from
their father Atreus.

(c) Alcinous was King of the Phoeacians, and lived in Corcyra, who much
delighted in Orchards and Gardens. (d) The Swans are called Caistrian birds, from
the river Caister, where they are said to breed in great number.

(e) Penelope the wife of Ulysses, famous for her beauty and constancy.

(f) Dido was otherwise called Elisa, the daughter of Belus King of Tire, and
espoused to Sychaeus, one of Hercules Priests, whom her brother Pigmalion slew
for his wealth, she after built the famous City Carthage, and in the end (as
Virgil relates) killed herself for the love of Aeneas.

(g) Leucades two beautiful sisters, rapt by the two famous brothers Castor
and Pollux, the sons of Laed^ the mother of Helen, who was comprest by
Jupiter.

(h) Cato, for his austerity called Censorius.

(i) Hippolitus, the son of Theseus and Hyppolita the Amazon, who when his
father was abroad, his stepmother Phaedra solicited him to incestuou love,
which he refusing, she accused him to his father that he would have forced her,
but when he perceived him to give credit to her false information, he took
his Chariot and horses to fly his fury, but by the way his steeds being
frighted with Sea-calves, ran with him to the mountains, and dashed the Coach
in pieces, and him also, he lived in the year of the world, 2743.

(k) The Driades were Nymphae, or Sylvarum Dea, that is Wood-fayries or Druides.

(l) Croesus a rich King of Lydia.

(m) Crassus surnamed Marcus, therichest man amongst the Romans, who held no
man worthy to be called rich, who could not within his yearly revenue maintain
an Army: he was extremely covetous, and managed war against the Parthians,
by whom, both he and thirty thousand Romans were slain, and because the
barbarous enemy conjectured that he made an assault upon them for their gold:
therefore they melted a great quantity, and powered it into his dead body, to
sat him with that, with which in his life time; he could never be satisfied.
He lived in the year of Romes foundation 693. and before the Incarnation 57.

(n) Midas, a rich King of Phrygia who asked of Bacchus whom he feasted, that
whatsoever he touched might be turned into gold, etc. He lived in the year of
the world 2648. about the time that Debora judged Israel.

(o) Priam King of Troy potent in wealth, and strength, but after slain, and
his City utterly subverted by the Grecians.

(p) Pigmalion, an avaritious King (before spoken of) brother to Queen Dido.

(q) Catiline, a seditious Conspiratour of Rome whose plots were brought to
light by Marc Cicero then Consul of Rome with Antonius.

(r) Marius, one that was seven times Consul of Rome, and after much pestered
the City, by the division betwixt him and Sylla: He lived the year before the
Incarnation 65.

(s) Mezentius, was King of the Tyrenians, remembered by Virgil in his Aeneids,
to be a great contemner of the gods.

(t) Calpe, is one of the hills in Spain, called Hercules Pillars.

Illustrations upon Timon Misanthropos.
(a) SAlmoneus, was said to be the son of Eolus, not he whom the Poets feign
to be the god of the winds, but one of that name, who reigned in the City of
Elis in Greece. He willing to appear unto his subjects to be a God, and no
man, and so to assume unto himself divine adoration, made a bridge of brass
over a great part of the City, over which he used to hurry his Chariot, whose
wheels were shod with rough iron, thinking thereby to imitate Joves thunder,
for which insolence, Jupiter being justly incenst against him, stroke him with
a true thunderbolt, and sent him quick to hell. A type of pride, justly
punished.

(b) Mandragora, an herb so called, because it bears Apples sweet smelling,
of an extraordinary greatness, the Latins call it Malum terrae, id est, the
Apple of the earth It is that which we call the Mandrake.

(c) Deucalion, was the son of Prometheus, and married Pyrrha the daughter of
Epimetheus. Whilst he reigned in Thessaly came the universal Deluge, which
drowned all the world, only he and his wife, got into a ship and saved
themselves: their vessel first touching on the hill Pernassus, where the dry
land first appeared, which was merely a fiction of the Poets, who had heard or
read of the general Innundation, in him figuring Noah and his Arc. Others
think that this flood happened only in Greece and Italy, and that in the
year of the world 2440. after Noah's flood 744.

(d) Lycoris Mount, by which Lucian intends no other than the two topt
Pernassus, before spoken of.

(e) Epimenides, was a Poet of Creet, whom Saint Paul in his Epistle (as Beza
is of opinion) cited. It is reported of him, that his father sending him into
the field to keep his Cattle, by chance he light into a Cave where he slept
75. years, whence a Proverb against all sloathfull men grew, Vltra Epimenidis
somnum dormisti, id est, Thou have slept beyond the sleep of Epimenides. At his
return he found his brother a very old man, by whom he understood, all that
happened in his absence, and was after worshipped as a god. He lived in the
year of the world 3370. much about the time of the destruction of H^erusalem,
etc.

(f) Cibels Priests, they were called Corybantes, of one Corybantus, the prime
of her first attendants. They in all the celebrations of her feasts, used to
dance madly, beating upon brazen Cimbals, making a confused noise, from whence
such Instruments were called, Era Corybantia: when they danced about the
streets their custom was to beg money of the people, from whence they took
the denomination of Collectores Cibeles, or Circulatores, id est. Iuglers:
these first inhabited the mount Ida in Phrygia etc.

(g) Phineus, was a King of Arcadia, and the Harpia were the daughters of
Pontus and Terra, dwelling in Islands, partly by Sea, partly by land, so called,
a rapiende, or ravening: they are feigned to be fowls, with faces like
virgins, and hands like tallons or claws. Some call them Jupiters dogs: and
these, whatsoever the forenamed King provided to eat, snatched from his table,
and greedily devoured: they were after destroyed by Hercules.

(h) Tantalus, was the son of Jupiter and Plota, the Nymph, grandfather to
Agamemnon, and Menelaus, who entertaining certain of the gods at a banquet, to
make trial of their divinity, killed, dressed, and served his son Pelops at
the feast; which fact, the gods after they had discovered, so abhorred, that
for the loathsome banquet he made them, they provided him another as
distasteful, for being confined to hell, they set him in water up to the chin,
and ripe Apples above his head touching his lips, yet gave him not power to
stoop to the one to quench his thirst, nor reach to the other, to satisfy his
hungry appetite. But for Pelops his son, so miserably massacred, Jupiter
revived him, and for his shoulder which Ceres unadvisedly had eaten up, he made
him one of Ivory; who after this went and sojourned with Oenomaus the father of
Meleager, and Deianira, which as Helv. re'ports, was about the year of the
world 2650.

(i) Danaus daughters: This Danaus was a King of the Argives, and dwelt in the
City Argus. He called the Country, formerly called Achaia, Danaae, and the
general Nation of the Grecians, Danai. He had fifty daughters, whom he caused
to slay in one night the fifty sons of his brother Aegyptus, to whom they were
wedded, for whch theywere punished by the gods with a perpetual I corment,
namely that with bottomless pales, they were to fill a tun without a
bottom. They lived in the year of the world, 2510.

(k) Cyclopes, they were so called because they had but one eye, and that was
orbicular and round, they were Vulcans ministers, and forged or framed his
thunderbolts, there are three amongst them themost eminent, according to the
Poets, namely, Brontis, Sterope, and Pirachmon, they were mighty great men, and
called Giants, etc.

(l) Dis, is the god Pluto, who takes that denomination a divitijs, of riches,
because they are dig'd and torn from the bowels of lower parts of the earth.

(m) These names, Pythias, Dromus, Tibias, Hyperbolus, and the like, are given
according to the Authors fancy, or perhaps aiming at some particular men of
like condition then living.

(n) Nireus, a fair young man, whom Homer loved, and whose beauty he much
extolled.

(o) Cecrops, was also called Biformis; he was the first King of Athens, and
first invented amongst them marriage; he found out Images, builded Altars, and
offered Sacrifices amongst the Greeks. He erected the City of Athens, and
called it after his own name Cecropia, he flourished in the year of the world
2394. soon after the birth of Moses.

(p) Dithy^ams, were songs sung in honor of Bacchus.

(q) Areopagitae. Judges or Senators amongst the Athernians, so called of the
place where they sat.

(r) Erictbeides, whom some think to be Ericthonius, or Ericthaeus, the fourth
King of Athens; he first found one the use of Coaches, because his seet were
deformed. Hs lived in the year of the world 2463. about eleven year after
Isreal's departure out of Egypt.

Annotations upon Nireus, Thersites, etc.
(a) NIreus was a young man amongst the Greeks who came to the wars of Troy,
whose beauty and feature Homer in his Iliades mightily commended: to whom I
refer such as desire to be more fully satisfied of him.

(b) Thersites, a misshapen and deformed Captain in the Grecian Host, as
crooked in mind as body, who bitterly railing against Achilles, he being
mightily enraged against him, slew him with a blow under the ear; his
deformity was so great, that from thence arose a Proverb which has continued
even to this day, Thersite foedior, asperst upon any stigmatick, and crooked
fellow; you shall read him fully described and characterd by Homer in his
first and second book of Iliads.

(c) Menippus was a Poet, and master to Cicero the famous Orator: but by this
personated by Lucian, is intended a Cynick Philosopher, dogged both in his
behavior and writings, in imitation of whom, Varro the Orator writ a Satyr,
and entitled it Satyra Menippea. It is reported of him, that such money as he
had hoorded together by usury and the like fordid means, was so dear unto
him, that being robbed thereof, he grew into despair, and miserably hanged
himself. His whole life ye may read described at large by Diogenes L^^rtius.

Annotations upon Jupiter and Io.
(a) SPaerchius, a River whose banks were round beset with Poplar trees, and
therefore called Popuifer, Enipoeus, Apidanus, Amphisus, and Aeas, etc. only
the names of Rivers, whose currents and channels were famous in those parts of
Greece: for your better satisfaction, I refer you to Ovid his Metamorph. lib.
1. upon the same argument.

(b) Pindus, was a mountain in Thessaly, sacred to Apollo and the Muses, etc.

(c) Hemonian Tempe, Tempe was a pleasant valley flourishing with trees,
herbs, and flowers, situate in Thessaly at the foot of the hill Hemus. It was
much celebrated by the Muses, as lying betwixt Ossa and Olympus. The River
Peneus, Larisa, and the Aegean Sea, etc.

(d) Naiades, were Nymphs or Fayries of the wells, and fountains.

(e) Pierides, were the Muses, so called from Pierus, or else a mountain in
Greece of that name: this Pierus had nine daughters, who contended with the
Muses in singing, and being vanquished by them, were transformed into
chattering Pyes: in glory of which victory the Muses would be called by their
names.

(f) Syrinx, an Arcadian Nymph, who flying from the embraces of Pan, the god of
the Shepherds, at her intercession to the gods changed into a Reed, her prayer
being to preserve her virginity.

(g) Styx, a certain well in Arcadia, the water of which is so cold and
venomous, that whosoever drinks thereof, immediately dies. It eats and
wastes iron or brass, neither can it be contained in any thing, but the hoof
of a Mule; some say Alexander the Great was poisoned with the water of this
river, by Antipater, at the persuasion of Aristotle, the great Philosopher, and
Tutor to Alexander. The Poets feign it to be a river in hell, and so sacred to
the gods, that if any of them swear by it, and break his oath, he shall be
deprived of his god head, and drink no Nectar for an hundred years after.

Annotations upon the Dialogue
Entitled Jupiter and Cupid.
(a) GArgarus, so called of Gargarus, the son of Jupiter, it is commonly taken
for the top or Apex of the high hill Ida, where the said god had an Altar
consecrateunto him, it is situate betwixt the ^ropontis Abidos, and the
Hellespont in Greece, in ongitude 55. in latitude 42. It is also a town under
the hill so called.

Upon Mercury and Maia.
(a) ALcmena, the wife of Amphytrio the Theban, in whose absence Jupiter came
in the shape of her husband, comprest her and begot Hercules.

(b) Semele, the mother of Bacchus, begot on her by Jupiter, from whence he
took the denomination of Semeleius.

(c) Maia, the daughter of Atlas, and Pleiones, and therefore Atlantiades, of
whom Jupiter begot Mercury.

(d) By Cadmus fair daughter is intended Semele before spoken of.

Upon Crates and Diogenes.
(a) MOcricus, Aristaeus, Thrasicles, etc. are names of men whom the Author
aimed at (living in those times) according to his fancy.

(b) IApygium, or Iapyges, these derived their names from ^apyx the son of
Dedalus, and were said to be Cretenses by their original, and wandering abroad
to seek C^laurus, son of Min^is, came unto the same place, where after they
inhabited, these in time grew to such a profuse riotise, intemperance and
wantonness, that forgetting their Country modesty and honesty, they painted
their faces, and wore other folks hair, and were never seen abroad but
sumptuously, and richly appareld; their houses were as beautiful as the
Temples of the gods. At length they came to such a height of pride and
insolence, that they cast off all religion, entering and seasing on the
ornaments, revenues and donaries of the Churches. And at length were all
consumed by fiery globes falling from heaven, etc.

Upon Menippus, Aeacus, Pythagoras.
(a) EVphorbus, was a noble Trojane, the son of Panthus, who wounded
Patroclus, and was after flaine by Achilles, being hurt in the thigh; he was
said to have one made him of gold. Pythagoras said, that his soul was in him
in that time of the Trojan war, that he might better persuade his Scholars.
Concerning the opinion which he held concerning the transmigration of men's
souls, from one body to another.

What other difficulties you shall find in these short Dialogues, you shall
find in some or other fully explicated.
(a) CImmerians, were people dwelling in Italy, between the Baiae and Cumae,
so environed with hills, that the Sun never appeared unto them, hence came
the Proverb Tene^ra Cimmeria, the Cimmerian darkness.

(b) Erix, Promontory: Erix was the son of Venus, slain by Hercules, and
buried in a mountain of Cicilia, so called after him, in which place Venus had
a Temple erected unto her, and from that she had the denomination of Eriana,
etc.

(c) Python, was a mighty huge Serpent, which Juno sent unto Latona when she
was with child by Jupiter, to devour her, but she went to her sister Astrea,
who protected her, and she was after delivered of two twins, Apollo and Diana.

(d) Endymion, was beloved by the Moon, who courted him upon Latmus hill; and
therefore said to look pale by reason of the great affection which she bore
unto him.

(e) Tithon, or Tithonus, was the son of Laomedon, who desiring long life,
was so wasted with old age, that the Poets feigned him to be turned into a
Grasshopper: he was also said to be beloved of Aurora, the mornings because he
used to rise early, which was thought to be the reason why he preserved his
life so long.

I conclude this Work, suiting with the present, concerning the worth of
Physic, and Physicians, deriving my president from a worthy Gentleman called
M. Perisaulus Faustinus.
THere is a gift that is sacred, lent to man
By God and Nature, by which Art he can
Of all diseases know the perfect ground,
And render the cras'd body, whole and sound.
If this Art please thee then, whose hight to gain
Must be the labor of a polisht brain;
Thou into Natures secrets must inquire,
And (far as humane wisdom can) aspire.
From best approved Authors seek direction,
Till thou into all medcines have inspection:
And when thou shall be frequent in all these,
Thou shall be held a new Hippocrates,
Exc^ed Machaon, and Phillerides,
With the Epidaurian, godlike skill impart,
And bright Apollo, Patron of that Art.
Thou shall be health to Nations, people save,
And such as are expired, keep from grave.
To animate the dead thou shall have skill,
It Is at thy pleasure whom to save or kill:
Hence shall great sums of wealth to thee arise,
With fame, and honor, such as never dies.
But as we see in diverse flowers and weeds,
Where sweetness is, thence bitterness proceeds,
And from one stalk how many thousand ills
From the same Lymbeck drop, that good distills,
How many discommodities attend
Upon this Art, which all so much commend;
On it, how many thousand labors wait,
By turning over Books, early and late,
Assiduate study, with an infinite care,
For all the sundry maladies that are,
To provide wholesome medcines, how to please
The sick man's taste, and find th'unknowne disease,
To know what hurts, what helps; his care being such
Not to prescribe too little, nor too much.
No night in which thou down to rest shall lie,
But ere sleep fastens on thy tender eye,
Loud at thy gate, some one or other knocks,
As if he meant, to force both bolts and locks,
Calls for the Doctor to get up in have,
The patient's ready to expire his last.
His bowels ache, or he complains his head,
Tossing and tumbling on his restless bed,
Still clamoring till he perforce must rise:
Thus (be it night or day) in post he flies.
He feels his pulse, to know how slow they beat,
Then must he make conjecture from his sweat,
And to find out where the disease does dwell,
Forced sometimes at his chamber pot to swell,
Then Antidotes are suddenly prepared
With Amulets, and Pills, made round and hard,
Emplasters are to such a place applyde,
Unguents, and Salves to this or to that side.
Suppositories, Clisters, fomentations,
Pultesses, opening veins, boxing, frications,
Electuaries, sweating, and what not?
According to the Fever, cold or hot.
He searches where the pain lies most extreme,
Whether it rise from Choler, or from phlegm.
The Megrim, Pleurisies, great or small Pox,
The Measils, Worms, the Scouring, or the Flocks.
Consumption, Ptysick, laundies, black or yellow,
Convulsion (or what scarce can find a fellow
For sudden killing Squinsy in the throat,
Obstructions, Dropsies: each disease of note
Is known unto him how and whence it grows,
The Ague, Cough, the Pyony, the Pose.
Aches within, and accidents without,
Strangurian, colic, Apoplex, the gowte,
Ruptures, the fretting of the guts, the Stone,
Who Is troubled with the Spleen, who Liver-growne,
Cramps, numnes in the joyntures, Inflammations;
Swelling in the secret parts, Impostumations,
Warts, Blisters, Tumors, Pimples, Tetters, Wheales,
Even Leprosy itself, his medcine heales.
And yet when he has used all his Art;
If suddenly, the patient do not start
From his cras'd couch, and instantly headstrong,
The vulgar murmur, and the Artist wrong,
And say; who first begot this superstition,
That the sick-man should seek to the Physician?
What madness is it, their trifling Art to trust?
If they could keep themselves from being dust,
And their own bodies free from all disease,
Not yield to death, when so the Parcae please,
As all else do; I should approve their skills,
And yield to taste their Potions and their Pills.
Till then; I hold them made up of abuses,
Mere cheating with their Cordials, and their Juices.
Thus, though they often redeem men from the grave;
This, for their merit is the meed they have.
To add to these: the Doctor is still tide
Amongst sad folks, and mourners to abide.
Where nothing's heard but sighing for the sick,
And most contagious maladios reign thick,
Nay, though the Plague, or pest itself be there,
In him there must be found no cause of fear:
Such are the hazards and the toils we know,
Best Artists still are forced to undergo.
FINIS.

