The late Lancashire WITCHES.

A well received Comedy, lately Acted at the Globe on the Banke-side, by the
Kings Majesty's Actors.

WRITTEN, By THOM. HEYWOOD, AND RICHARD BROOM.

Aut prodesse solent, aut delectare.



LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper for Benjamin Fisher, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the Sign of the Talbot, without Aldersgate. 1634.

THE PROLOGVE.
COrrantoes sailing, and no foot post l^te
Possessing us with New; of foreign State,
No accidents abroad worthy Relation
Arriving here, we are forced from our own Nation
To ground the Scene that is now in agitation.
The Project unto many here well known;
Those Witches the fat Iaylor brought to Town,
An Argument so thin, persons so low
Can neither yield much matter, nor great show.
Expect no more than can from such be raised,
So may the Scene pass pardon^d, thoug^ not praised.
ACTVS, I. SCENA, I.
Enter Master Arthur, Mr. Shakstone, Mr. Bantam: (as from hunting.) Arthur. WAs
ever sport of expectation,
Thus crossed in th* height.

Shak. Tush these are accidents, all game is (subject to.


Arth. So you may call them
Chances, or cros^es, or what else you please,
But for my part, I Will hold them prodigies,
As things transcending Nature.

Bantam. O you speak this,
Because a Hare has crossed you.

Arth. A Hare? a Witch, or rather a Devil I think*
For tell me Gentlemen, was it possible
In such a fair course, and no covert near,
We in pursuit, and she in constant view,
Our eyes not wandering but all bent that way,
The Dogs in chase, she ready to be ceased,
And at the instant, when I durst have laid
My life to gage, my Dog had pincht her, then
To vanish into nothing!

Shak. Somewhat strange, but not as you enforce it,


Arth. Make it plain
That I am in an error, sure I am
That I about me have no borrowed eyes.
They are mine own, and Matches.

Bant. She might find some Muse as ^hen not visible to us,
And escape that way.

Shak. Perhaps some Fox had eathed there,
And though it be not common, for I seldom
Have known or heard the like, there squat her self,
And so her escape appear but Natural,
Which you proclaim a Wonder.

Arth. Well well Gentlemen, be y^u of your own faith, but (what I see
And is to me apparent, being in sense,
My wits about me, no way tossed nor troubled,
^o that will I give credit.

Banth. Come, come, all men
Were never of one mind, nor I of yours.

Shak To leave this argument, are you resolved
Where we shall dine to day?

Arth. Yes where we purposed.


Banth. That was with Master Generous.


Arth. True, the same.
And where a loving welcome is presumed,
Whose liberal Table's never unprepared,
Nor he of guests unfurnisht, of his means,
There Is none can bear it with a braver port,
And keep his state unshaken, one who sels not
Nor covets he to purchase, holds his own
Without oppressing others, always pressed
To indeere to him any known Gentleman
In whom he finds good parts.

Bantham. A Character not common in this age.


Arth. I cannot wind him up
Unto the least part of his noble worth.
It Is far above my strength.
Enter Whetstone.
Shak. See who comes yonder,
A fourth, to make us a full Mess of guests
At Master Generous Table.

Arth. Tush let him pass,
He is not worth our luring, a mere Coxcombe,
It is a way to call our (...) its in question,
To have him seen amongst us.

Bant. He has spied us, there is no way to evade him.


Arth. That Is my grief; a most notorious liar, out upon him.


Shak. Let Us set the best face on it.


Whet. What Gentlemen? all mine old acquaintance?
A whole triplicity of friends together? nay then
It Is three to one we shall not soon part Company.

Shak. Swcet Mr. Whetstone.


Bant. Dainty Mr. Whetstone.


Arth. D^licate Master Whetstone.


Whet. You say right, Mr. Whetstone I have bin, Mr. Whetstone I am, and Mr.
Whetstone I shall be, and those that know me, know withal that I have not my
name for nothing, I am he whom all the brave Blades of the Country use to whet
their wits upon; sweet Mr. Shakton, dainty Mr. Bantham, and dainty Mr. Arthur,
and how, and how, what all lustick, all froligozone? I know, you are going to
my Uncles to dinner, and ^o am I too, What shall we all make one randevous
there,

You need not doubt of your welcome.


Shak. No doubt at all kind Mr. Whetstone; but we have not seen you of late,
you are grown a great stranger amongst us, I desire sometimes to give you a
visit; I pray where do you lie?


Whet. Where do I lie? why sometimes in one place, and then again in another,
I love to shift lodgings; but most constantly, wheresoere I dine or sup, there
do I lie?


Arth. I never heard that word proceed from him
I durst call truth till now.

Whet. But where so ever I lie it is no matter for that,
I pray you say, and say truth, are ^ot you three now
Going to dinner to my Uncles?

Bant. I think you are a Witch Master Whetstone.


Whet. ^ow? A Witch Gentlemen? I hope you do not mean to abuse me, though at
this time (if report be true there are too many of them here in our Country)
but I am sure I look like no such ugly Creature.


Shak. It seems then you are of opinion that there are Witches, for mine own
part, I can hardly be induced to think there (...) any such kind of people.


Whet. No such kind of people! I pray you tell me Gentlemen, did never any one
of you know my Mother?


Arth. Why was your Mother a Witch?


Whet. I do not say as Witches go now a days, for they for the most part are
ugly old Belda^s, but she was a lusty young Less, and by her own report, by
her beauty and fair looks bewitched my Father.


Bant. It seems then your Mother was rather a young wanton wench, than an old
withered witch.


Whet. You say right, and know withal I come of two ancient Families, for as I
am a Whetstone by the Mother-side, so I am a By-blow by the Fathers.


Arth. It appears then by your discourse, that you came in at the window.


Whet. I would have you think I scorn like my Granams
Cat to leap over the Hatch.

Shak. He has confessed himself to be a Bastard.


Arth. And I beleeve't as a notorious truth.


Whet. Howsoever I was begot, here you see I am,
And if my Parents went to it without fear or wit,
What can I help it.

Arth. Very probable, for as he was got without fear,
So it is apparent he was borne without wit.

Whet. Gentlemen, it seems you have some private business amongst your
selves, which I am not willing to interrupt, I know not how the day goes with
you, but for mine own part, my stomach is now much upon 12. You know what
hour my Uncle keeeps, and I love ever to be set before the first grace, I am
going before, speak, shall I acquaint him with your coming after?


Shak We mean this day to see what fare he keeps.


Whet. And you know it is his custom to fare well,
And in that respect I think I may be his kinsman,
And so farewell Gentlemen, I Will be your forerunner,
To give him notice of your visit.

Bant. And so intyre us to you.


Shak. Sweet Mr. Whetstone.


Arth. Kind Mr. Bybl^w.


Whet. I see you are perfect both in my name and surname; I have (...) ever
bound unto you, for which I will at this time be your Noverint, and give him
notice that you Universi will be with him per praesentes, and that I take to
be presently.

Exit.
Arth. Farewell As in praesenti.


Shak. It seems he is piece of a Scholar.


Arth. What because he has read a little Scriveners Latin, he never
proceeded farther in his Accidence than to Mentiri non est meum; and that was
such a hard Lesson to learn, that he stuck at ment^ri; and cu'd never reach
to non est meum: since, a mere Ignaro, and not worth acknowledgement.


Bant. Are these then the best parts he can boast of?


Arth. As you see him now, so shall you find him ever: all in one strain,
there is one only thing which I wonder he left our.


Shak. And what might that be:


Arth. Of the same affinity with the rest.
At every second word, he his commonly boasting
either of his Aunt or his Uncle.

Enter Mr. Generous. Bant. You name him in good time, see where he comes.


Gener. Gentlemen, Welcome, it is a word I use,
From me expect no further complement:
Nor do I name it often at one meeting,
Once spoke (to those that understand me best,
And know I always purpose as I speak)
Has ever yet suffiz'd: so iet it you;
Nor do I love that common phrase of guests,
As we make bold, or we are troublesome,
We take you unprovided, and the like;
I know you understanding Gentlemen,
And knowing me, cannot persuade your selves
With me you shall be troublesome or bold,
But still provided for my worthy friends,
Amongst whom you are lifted.

Arth. Noble sir, you generously instruct us, and to expr^sse
We can be your apt scholars: in a word
We come to dine with you.

Gener. And Gentlemen, such plainness does best please me, I had notice
Of so much by my kinsman, and to show
How lovingly I took it, instantly
Rose from my chair to meet you at the gate.
And be my self your usher; nor shall you find
Being set to meat, that i will excuse your fare,
Or say, I am sorry it falls out so poor;
And had I known your coming we would have had
Such things and such, nor blame my Cook, to say
This dish or that has not bin sauc'st with care:
Words, fitting best a common Hostess mouth,
When there is perhaps some just cause of dislike
But not the table of a Gentleman;
Nor is it my wives custom; in a word, take what you find, and so

Arth. Sir without flattery
You may be called the sole surviving son
Of long since banished Hospitality.

Gener. In that you please me not: But Gentlemen
I hope to be beholden unto you all,
Which if I prove, I Will be a grateful debtor.

Bant. Wherein good sir.


Gener. I ever studied plainene^e, and truth withal.


Shak. I pray express your self.


Gener. In few I shall. I know this youth to whom my wife is Aunt
Is (as you needs must find him) weak and shallow:
Dull, as his name, and what for kindred sake
We note not, or at least, are loath to see,
Is unto such well-knowing Gentlemen
Most grossly visible: If for my sake
You will but seem to wink at these his wants,
At least at table before us his friends,
I shall receive it as a courtesy
No^ soon to be forgot.

Arth. Presume it sir.


Gener. Now when you please pray Enter Gentlemen.


Arth. Would these my friends prepare the way before,
To be resolved of one thing before dinner
Would something add unto mine appetite,
Shall I entreat you so much.

Bant. O sir you may command us.


Gener. In The mean time
Prepare your stomachs with a bowl of Sack.
My Cellar can afford it; now Mr. Arthur
Pray freely speak your thoughts.
Exit Bant. and Shak.
Arth. I come not sir
To press a promise from you, take it not so,
Rather to prompt your memory in a motion
Made to you not long since.

Gener. Wast not about
A Manor, the best part of your estate,
Morgag'd to one slips no advantages
Which you would have redeemed.

Arth. True sir the same.


Gener. And as I ^hinke, I promised at that time
To become bound with you, or if the usurer
(A base, yet the best title I can give him)
Perhaps should question that security,
To have the money ready. Wast not so?

Arth. It was to that purpose we discourst.


Gener. Provided, to have the Writings in my custody.
Else how should I secure mine own es^e.

Arth. To deny that I sho^d appear ^oth' World
Stupid, and of no brain.

Gener. Your monie's ready,


Arth. And I remain a man obliged to you.
Beyond all utterance.

Gener. Make then your word good
By speaking it no further, only (...)*
It seems your Uncle you trusted in so far
Has failed your expectation.

Arth. Sir he has, not that he is unwilling or unable.
B^t at (...) time ^fit to be so^cited;
For to the Co^ries wonder and my sor^ow,
^ee is much to be pitied.

Gener. Why I entreat you.


Arth. Because he is late become the sole discourse
Of all the country; for of a man respected
For his discretion and known gravitie,
As master of a governed Family,
The house (as if the ridge were fixed below,
And groundfils lifted up to make the roof)
All now turned topsie turvy,

Gener. Strange, but how?


Arth. In such a retrograde and preposterous way
As seldom has hin heard of. I think never.

Gener. Can you discourse the manner?


Arth. The good man, in all obedience kneels unto his son,
He with an austere brow commands his father.
The wife presumes not in the daughters sight
Without a prepared courtesy. The girl, she
Expects it as a duty; chides her mother
Who quakes and trembles at each word she speaks,
And what is as strange, the Maid she dominiers
Over her young mistress, who is awed by her.
The son to whom the Father creeps and bends,
Stands in as much fear of the groom his man.
All in such rare disorder, that in some
As it breeds pity, and in others wonder;
So in the most part laughter*

Gener. How think you might this come.


Arth. It Is thought by Witchcraft.


Gener. They that think so dream,
For my belief is, no such thing can be,
A madness you may call it: Dinner stays;
That done, the best part of the afternoon
We Will spend about your business.
Exeunt.
Enter old Seely and Doughty Seely. Nay but understand me neighbor Doughty.


Doughty. Good master Seely I do understand you, and over and over understand
you so much, that I could e'ene blush at your fondness; and had I a son to
serve me so, I would conure a devil out of him.


See. Alas he is my child.


Dough. No, you are his child to live in fear of him, indeed they say old men
become children again, but before I would become my childs child, and make
my foot my head, I would stand upon my head, and kick my heels at the sides.


Enter Gregory. See. You do not know what an only son is, O see, he comes now
if you can appease his anger toward me, you shall do an act of timely charity.


Dou. It is an office that I am but weakly versd in,
To plead to a son in the fathers behalf,
Bless me what looks the devilish young Rascal
Frights the poor man withal!

Greg. I wonder at your confidence, and how you dare appear before me.


Doug. A brave beginning.


See. O son be patient.


Greg. It is right reverend council, I thank you for it, I shall study
patience shall I, while you practice ways to beggar me, shall I?


Dough. Very handsome.


See. If ever I trangresse in the like again --


Greg. I have taken your word too often sir and neither can nor will forbear
you longer.


Dough. What not your Father Mr. Gregory?


Greg. What Is that to you sir?


Dough. Pray tell me then sir, how many years has he to serve you.


Gre. What do you bring your spokesman now, your advocat,
What fee goes out of my estate now, for his Oratory?

Dou. Come I must tell you, you forget your self,
And in this foul unnatural strife wherein
You trample on your father. You are fallen
Below humanity. You Are so beneath
The title of a son, you cannot claim
To be a man, and let me tell you were you mine
Thou should not eat but on thy knees before me.

See. O this is not the way.
This is to raise Impatience into fury.
I do not seek his quiet for my ease,
I can bear all his chidings and his threats,
And take them well, very exceeding well,
And find they do me good on my own part,
Indeed they do reclaim me from those errors
That might impeach his fortunes, but I fear
Thunquiet strife within him hurts himself,
And wastes or weakens Nature, by the breach
Of moderate sleep and diet; and I can
No less than grieve to find my weaknesses
To be the cause of his affliction,
And see the danger of his health and being.

Dou. Alas poor man? Can you stand open eyed
Or dry eyed either at this now in a Father?

Greg. Why, if it grieve you, you may look of ont,
I have seen more than this twice twenty times,
And have as often ^in deceived by his dissimulations
I can see nothing mended.

Dou. He is a happy ^re that has brought up his son to this.


See. All shall be mended son content your self,
But this time forget but this last fault.

Greg. Yes, for a new one to morrow.


Dou. Pray Mr. Gregory forget it, you see how
Submissive your poor penitent is, forget it,
Forget it, put it out o'your head, knock it
Out of your brains. I protest, if my Father,
Nay if my fathers dog should have said
As much to me, I should have embraced him.
What was the trespass? It c'ud not be so heinous.

Greg. Well Sir, you now shall be a Judge for all your jeering.
Was it a fatherly part think you having a son
To offer to enter in bonds for his nephew, so to endanger
My estate to redeem his morgage.

See. But I did it not son?


Gre. I know it very well, but your dotage had done it,
If my careh^d not prevented it.

Dou. Is that the business: why if he had done it, had he not bin
sufficiently secured in having the morgage made over to himself.


Greg. He does nothing but practice ways to undo himself, and me: a very
spendthrift, a prodigal sire, he was at the Ale but the other day, and spent a
foure-penny club.


See. It Is gone and past son.


Greg. Can you hold your peace sir? And not long ag^ at the
Wine he spent his teaster, and two pence to the piper,
That was brave was it not?

See. Truly we were civily merry. But I have left it.


Greg. Your civility have you not? For no longer ago than last holiday evening
he gam'd away eight double ring'd tokens on a rubbers at bowls with the
Curate, and some of his idle companions.


Dou. Fie Mr. Gregory Seely is this seemly in a son.
You Will have a rod for the child your father shortly I fear.
Alas did he make it cry? Give me a stroke and I Will beat him,
Bless me, they make me almost as mad as themselves.

Greg. 'Tw^re good you would meddle with your own matters ^ir.


See. Son, son.


Greg. Sir, Sir, as I am not beholden to you for house or Land, for it has
stood in the name of my ancestry the Seelyes above two hundred years, so will
I look you leave all as you found it.


Enter Lawrence. Law. What is the matter con yeow tell?


Greg. O Lawrence, welcome, Thou will make al well I am sure.


Law. Yie whick way con yeow tell, but what the foul evil done ye, here is
sick an a din.


Dou. Art thou his man fellow ha? that talkest thus to him?


Law. Yie sir, and what ma' yoew o'that, he mainteynes me to rule him, and i will
deu't, or ma'the heart weary of the weambe on him.


Dou. This is quite upside down, the son controlls the father, and the man
overcrowes his masters coxscombe, sure they are all bewitched.


Greg. 'Twas but so, truly Lawrence; the peevish old man vex't me, for which I
did my duty, in telling him his own, and Doughty here maintains him against
me.


Law. I forbodden yeow to meddle with the old carle, and let me alone with him,
yet yeow still be at him, he served yeow but weell to bast ye for it, ant he
were stronk enough, but an I faw foul with ye an I swaddle ye not savorly
may my girts brast.


See. Prithee good Lawrence be gentle and do not fright thy Master so.


Law. Yie, at your command anon.


Dough. Enough good Lawrence, you have said enough.


Law. How trow yeou that? A fine World when a man cannot be whyet at heame for
busy brained neighpors.


Dou. I know not what to say to any thing here,
This cannot be but witchcraft.

Enter Ioane and Winny. Win. I cannot endure it nor I will not endure it.


Dou. Hey day! the daughter upon the mother too.


Win. One of us two, choose you which, must leave the house, we are not to live
together I see that, but I will know, if there be Law in Lancashire for it,
which is fit first to depart the house or the World, the mother or the daughter.


Ioane. Daughter I say.


Win. Do you say the daughter, for that word I say the mother, unless you can
prove me the eldest, as my discretion almost warrant it, I say the mother shall
out of the house or take such courses in it as shall sort with such a house and
such a daughter.


Joan. Daughter I say, I will take any course so thou will leave thy passton;
indeed it hurts thee child, I Will sing and be merry, wear as fine clothes, and
as delicate dressings as thou will have me, so thou will pacify thy self, and
be at peace with me.


Win. O will yo^ so, in so doing I may chance to look upon you. Is this a fit
habit for a handsome young Gentlewomans mother, as I hope to be a Lady, you
look like one of the Scottish wayward sisters, O my heart has got the hickup, and
all look (...) green about (...); a merry song now mother, and thou shall be
my white girl.


Joan. Ha, ha, ha! she is overcome with joy at my conversion.


Dough. She is most evidently bewitched.


Joane. Song.
There was a deft Lad and a Less fell in love,
with a fa la la, fa la la, Langtidowne dilly;
With kissing and toying this Ma^den did prove,
with a fa la la, fa la la, Langtidowne dilly;
So wide ^' th wast, and her Belly so high,
That unto her mother the Maiden did cry,
O Langtidowne dilly, O Langtidowne dilly,
fa la la Langtidowne, Lang^idowne dilly.

Enter Parnell. Parn. Thus wodden yeou done and I were dead, but while I live
yoeu fadge not on it, is this aw the warke yeou con ^ine?


Dough. Now comes the Maid to set her Mis^sses to work.


VVin. Nay p^i'thee sweet Parnell, I was but chiding the old wife for her
unhandsomnes^e, and would have been at my work presently, she tells me now she
will wear fine things, and I shall dress her head as I list.


Dough. Here Is a house well governed?


Parn. Dress me no dressings, lessen I dress yeou beth, and learn a new
lesson with a wainon right now, han I bin a servant here this half dozen
o'yeares, and con I fee yeou idler then my selve!


Ioa. VVin. Nay pritheesweet Parnell content, and hark thee --


Dought. I have known this, and till very lately, as well governed a Family as
the Country yields, and now what a nest of several humors it is grown, and
all divellish ones, sure all the Witches in the Country, have their hands in
this homespun medley; and there be no few it is thought.


Parn. Yie, yie, ye shall ye shall, another time, but not naw I thonke yeou,
yeou shall as soon piss and paddle in it, as ^lap me in the mouth with an awd
Petticoat, or a new pair (...) shoine, to be whyet, I cannot be whyet, no^ I
wonnot be whyet, to see sicky doings I.


Lawr. Hold thy prattle Parnell, aw's com'd about as ween a had it, wotst thou
what Parnell? wotst thou what? o dear, wo^st thou what?


P^rn. What Is the fond wexen waild trow I.


Lawr. We han bin in love these three years, and ever we had not enough, now
is it com'd about that our love shall be at an end for ever, and a day, for we
mun wed may hunny, we mun wed.


Parn. What the Deowl ails the lymmer lowne, bin thy brains broke lowse trow
I.


Lawr. Sick a waddin was there never in Loncoshire as ween couple at on Monday
newst.


Par. Awa awaw, sayn yeou this sickerly, or done you but jaum me?


Lawr. I jaum thee not nor flam thee not, '^is all as true as book, here is
both our Masters have consented and concloyded, and our Mistresses mun yield
toyt, to put aw house and land and aw they have into our hands.


Parn. Awa, awaw.


Lawr. And we mun marry and be master and dame of aw.


Parn. Awa, awaw.


Lawr. And theyn be our Sijourners, because they are weary of the world, to
live in frendiblenesse, and see what will come on it.


Par. Awa, awaw, agone.


Seel. and Greg. Nay it is true Parnell, here is both our hands on it, and give
you joy.


Joan. and VVin. And ours too, and 'twill be fine Ifackins.


Parn. Whaw, whaw, whaw, whaw!


Dou. Here Is a mad business toward.


Seel. I will bespeake the Guests.


Greg. And I the meat:


Joan. I Will dress the dinner, though I drip my sweat.


Law. My care shall sumptuous parrelments provide.


VVin. And my best art shall trickly trim the Bride.


Parn. VVhaw, whaw, whaw, whaw.


Greg. I Will get choice music for the merriment.


Dough. And I will wait with wonder the event.


Parn. VVhaw, whaw, whaw, whaw.


ACTVS, II. SCAENA, I.
Enter 4. Witches: (severally.) All. HOe! well met, well met.
Meg. What new devise, what dainty strain
More for our mirth now then our gain,
Shall we in practice put.

Meg. Nay dame,
Before we play another game.
We must a little laugh and thank
Our feat familiars for the pranck
They played us last.

Mawd. Or they will miss
Us in our next plot, if for this
They find not their reward.

Meg. It Is right.


Gil. Therefore sing Mawd, and call each spright.
Come away, and take thy duggy,
Enter four Spirits.
Meg. Come my Mamilion like a Puggy,


Mawd. And come my puckling take thy teat,
Your travels have deserved your meat.

Meg. Now upon the Churles ground
On which we are met, lets dance a round;
That Cocle, Darnell, Poppia wild,
May choke his grain, and fill the field.

Gil. Now spirits fly about the task,
That we projected in our Mask.
Exit Spirits.
Meg. Now let us laugh to think upon
The feat which we have so lately done,
In the distraction we have set
In Seelyes house; which shall beget
VVonder and sorrow amongst our fo^s,
VVhil^t we make laughter of their woes.

All. Ha, ha, ha!


M^g. I can but laugh now to foresee,
The fruits of their perplexity.

Gil. Of ^eely's family?


Meg. I, I, I, the Father to the Son does cry,
The Son rebukes the Father old;
The Daughter at the mother Scold,
The wife the husband check and chide,
But that is no wonder, through the wide
World it is common.

Gil. But to be short,
The w^dding must bring on the sport
Betwixt the hare-brayn'd man and maid,
Master and dame that over-sway'd.

All. Ha, ha, ha!


Meg. Enough, enough,
Our sides are charmed, or else this stuff
Would laughter-cracke them; let us away
About the Iig. we dance to day,
To spoil the Hunters sport.

Gil. I that, be now the subject of our chat.


Meg. Then list ye well, the Hunters are
This day by vow to kill a Hare,
Or else the sport they will forswear;
And hang their Dogs up.

Mawd. Stay, but where
Must the long threatened hare be found?

Gill. They Will search in yonder Meadow ground.


Meg. There will Ibe, and like a wily VVat,
Until they put me up; i will squat.

Gill. I and my puckling will a brace
Of Greyhounds be, fit for the race;
And linger where we may be taken
Up for the course in the by-lane;
Then will we lead their Dogs a course,
And every man and every horse;
Until they break their necks, and say --

All. The Devil on Dun is rid this way. Ha. ha, ha, ha.


Meg. All the doubt can be but this,
That if by chance of me they miss,
And start another Hare.

Gil. Then we'll not run
But find some way how to be gone.
I shall know thee Peg, by thy grissel'd gut,

Meg. And I you Gilian by your gaunt thin gut.
But where will Mawd bestow her self today?

Mawd. OF the Steeple top; I Will sit and see you play.

Ex^unt.
Enter Mr. Generous, Arthur, Ba^tam, Shakstone, and VVhetstone. Gener. At
meeting, and at parting Gentlemen,
I only make use of that general word,
So frequent at all feasts, and that but once; you are welcome.
You are so, all of you, and I entreat you
Take notice of that special business,
Betwixt this Gentleman my friend, and I.
About the Morgage, to which writings drawn,
Your hands are witness.

Baxt. and Shak. We acknowledge it.


Whet. My hand is there too, for a man cannot set to his Mark, but it may be
called his hand; I am a Gentleman both ways, and it has been held that it is
the part of a Gentleman, to write a scurvie hand.


Bant. You write Sir like your self.


Gener. Pray take no notice of his ignorance,
You know what I foretold you.

Arth. It Is confessed, but for that word by you so seldom spoke
By us so freely on your part performed,
We hold us much engaged.

Gener. I pray, no complement,
It is a thing I do not use my self,
Nor do I love 't in others.

Art^. For my part, could I at once dissolve my self to words
And after turn them into matter; such
And of that strength, as to attract the attention
Of all the curious, and most itching ears
Of this our Crittick age; it could not make
A theme amounting to your noble worth:
You seem to me to super-arrogate,
Supplying the defects of all your kindred
To innob le your own name: I now have done Sir.

Whet. Hey day, this Gentleman speaks likes a Country
Parson that had took his text out of Ovids Metamorphosis.

Gener. Sir, you Hyperbolize;
And I coo'd chide you for it, but whilst you connive
At this my Kinsman, I shall wink at you;
'Twil prove an equal match.

Gener. Your name proclaims
To be such as it speaks, you, Generous.

Gener. Still in that strain!


Arth. Sir, sir, whilst you persever to be good
I must contiuue grateful.

Gener. Gentlemen, the gr^atest part of this day you see is spent
In reading deeds, conveyances, and bonds,
With sealing and subscribing; will you now
Take part of a bad Supper.

Arth. We are like travelers
And where such bayt, they do not use to Inn.
Our love and service to you.

Gener. The first I accept,
The Last I entertain not, farewell Gentlemen.

Arth. We Will try if we can find in our way home
When Hares come from their coverts, to reliffe,
A course or too.

Whet. Say you so Gentlemen, nay then I am for your company still, it is said
Hares are like Hermophrodites, one while Male, and another Female, and that
which begets this year, brings young ones the next; which some think to be the
reason that witches take their shapes so often: Nay if I lie Pliny lies too, but
come, now I have light upon you, I cannot so lightly leave you farewell Uncle.


Gener. Cozen I wish you would consort your self,
With such men ever, and make them your President,
For a more Gentile carriage.

Arth. Good Master Generous --

Exeunt, manet Generous.
Enter Robert. Genesis Robin.


Rob. Sir.


Genesis Go call your Mistress hither.


Rob. My Mistress Sir, I do call her Mistress, as I do^ call you Master, but
if you would have me call my Mistress to my Master, I may call loud enough
before she can hear me.


Gener. Why she is not deaf I hope, I am sure since Dinn^r
She had her hearing perfect.

Rob. And so she may have at Supper too for ought I know, but I can assure you
she is not now within my call.


Gener. Sirrah you trifle, give me the Key oth' Stable,
I will go see my Gelding; in the mean time
Go seek her out, say she shall find me there.

Rob. To tell you true sir, I shall neither find my Mistress here, nor you
your Gelding there.


Gener. Ha! how comes that to pass?


Rob. Whilst you were busy about your writings, she came and commanded me to
saddle your Beast, and said she would ride abroad to take the air.


Gener. Which of your fellows did she take along to wait on her?


Rob. None sir.


Gener. None! has she used it often?


Rob. Oftener I am sure then she goes to Church, and leave out Wednesdayes and
Fridayes.


Gener. And still alone?


Rob. If you call that alone, when no body rides in her company.


Genesis But what times has she sorted for these journeyes?


Rob. Commonly when you are abroad, and sometimes when you are full of
business at home.


Gener. To ride out often and alone, what says she
When she takes horse, and at her back return?

Rob. Only conjures me that I shall keep it from you, then clappes me in the
fist with some small piece of silver, and then a Fish cannot be more silent
then I.


Genesis I know her a good woman and well bred,
Of an unquestioned carriage, well reputed
Amongst her neighbors, reckoned with the best
And ore me most indulgent; though in many
Such things might breed a doubt and jealousy,
Yet I hatch no such frenzy. Yet to prevent
The smallest jarre that might betwixt us happen;
Give her no notice that I know thus much.
Besides I charge thee, when she craves him next
He be denied: if she be vexed or moved
Do not thou fear, I Will interpose my self
Betwixt thee and her anger, as you tender
Your duty and my service, see this done.

Rob. Now you have expressed your mind, I know what I have to do; first, not to
tell her what I have told you and, next to keep her side-saddle from coming
upon your Gueldings back; but how soever it is like to hinder me of many a
round tester.


Gener. As often as thou deny'st her, so often claim
That teaster from me, 't shall be roundly paid.

Rob. You say well in that sir, I dare take your word, you are an honest
Gentleman, and my Master; and now ^ake mine as I am your true servant, before
she shall back your Guelding again in your absence, while I have the charge of
his keeping; she shall ride me, or I Will ri^e her.


Genesis So much for that. Sirrah my Butler tells me
My Seller is drunk dry, I mean those Bottles
Of Sack and Claret, are all empty grown
And I have guests to morrow, my choice friends.
Take the gray Nag in the stable, and those Bottles
Fill at Lancaster,
There where you use to fetch it.

Rob. Good news for me, I shall sir.


Genesis O Robin, it comes short of that pure liquor
We drunk last Term in London at the Myter
In Fleet Street, thou remembrest it; me thought
It was the very spirit of the Grape,
Mere quintessence of Wine.

Rob. Yes sir, I so remember it, that most certain it is I never shall forget
it, my mouth waters ever since when I but think on it, whilst you were at supper
above, the drawer had me down into the Cellar below, I know the way in again
if I see it, but at that time to find the way out again, I had the help of
more eyes than mine own: is the taste of that Ipsitate s^il in your pallat sir?


Gener. What then? But vain are wishes, take those bottles
And see them filled where I command you sir.

Rob. I shall: never c'ud I have met with such a fair opportunity: for just
in the mid way lies my sweetheart, as lovely a less as any is in Lancashire,
and kisses as sweetly (...) see her going or coming, i will have one smouch at
thy lips, and be with thee to bring Mal Spencer.

Exit.
Genesis Go hasten your return, what he has told me
Touching my wife is somewhat strange, no matter
Be It as it will, it shall not trouble me.
She has not lain so long so near my side,
That now I should be jealous.

Enter a soldier. Sold. You seem sir a Gentleman of quality, and no doubt but
in your youth have been acquainted with affairs military, in your very looks
there appears bounty, and in your person humanity. Please you to vouchsafe the
tender of some small courtesy to help to bear a soldier into his country.


Genesis Though I could tax you friend, and justly too
For begging against the Statute in that name,
Yet I have ever bin of that compassion,
Where I see want, rather to pity it
Than to use power. Where have thou served?

Sold. With the Russian against the Polack, a heavy war, and has brought me to
this hard fate. I was took prisoner by the Pole, and after some few weeks of
durance, got both my freedom and pass. I have it about me to show, please you
to vou^ase the perusal.


Gener. It shall not need. What Countreyman.


Sold. Yorkshire sir. Many a sharp battle by land, and many a sharp storm
at sea, many a long mile, and many a short meal, I have traveled and suffered
ere I c'ud reach thus far, I (...) you sir take my poor and wretched case into
your worships noble consideration.


Gener. Perhaps thou love this wandering life
To be an idle loitering beggar, than
To eat of thine own labor.

Sold. I sir! Loitering I defy sir, I hate laziness as I do leprosy: It is
the next way to breed the scurvie, put me to hedge, ditch, plow, thresh, dig,
delve, any thing: your worship shall find that ^ love nothing less than
^oitering.


Gener. Friend thou speak well.


Enter Miller (his ^ands and face scratcht, and bloody. Miller. Your Mill quoth
he, if ever you take me in your mill again, i will give you leave to cast my
flesh to the dogs, and grind my flesh to powder, betwixt the Milstones. Cats
do you call them, for their hugeness they might be cat a mountains, and for
their claws, I think I have it here in red and white to show, ^ pray look
here sir, a murreine take them, i will be sworn they have (...), where I am ^ure
it itcht not.


Gener. How came thou in this pickle?


Ml. Yoiu see sir, and what you see, I have felt, and am come to give you to
unde^stand i will not endure such another night if you would give me your mill
for nothing, they say we Millers are thieves: but I c'ud as soon be hanged as
steal one piece of a ^ap all the night long, good Landlord provide your self
of a new tenant, the noise of such catterwawling, and such scratching and
clawing, before I would endure again, i will be tied to the ^aile when the
wind blows sharpest, and they fly swiftest, till I be torn into as many
fitters as I have toes and fingers.


Sold. I was a Miller my self before I was a soldier. What one of my own
trade should be so poorly spirited frighted with cats?

Sir trust me with the Mill that he forsakes.
H^re is a blade that hangs upon this belt
(...) spite of all these Rats, Cats, Wezells, Witches
Or Dogs, or Devils, Shall so conjure them
I Will quiet my possession.

Gener. Well spoke Soldier.
I like thy resolution* Fellow, you then
Have given the Mill quite over.

Mil. Over and over, here I utterly renounce it; nor would I stay in it longer,
if you would give me your whole estate; nay if I say it, you may take my word
Landlord.


Sold. I pray sir dare you trust your mill with me.


Gener. I dare, but I am loath, my reasons these.
For many ^oneths, scarce any one has lien there
But have bin strangely frighted in his sleep,
Or from his warm bed drawn into the floor,
Or clawd and scratcht, as thou see this poor man,
So much, that it stood long untenanted,
Till he late undertook it, now thine eyes
Witness how he has sped.

Sold. Give me the keys, i will stand it all danger.


Gener. It Is a match: deliver them.


Mil. Mary withal my heart, and I am glad, I am so rid of em.

Exeunt.
Enter Boy with a switch. Boy. Now I have gathered Bullies, and filled my belly
pretty well, i will go see some sport. There are gentlemen coursing in the meadow
hard by; and it is a game that I love better than going to School ten to one.

Enter an invisible spirit. I. Adson with a brace of greyhounds. What have we
here a brace of Greyhounds broke loose from their masters: it must needs be so,
for they have both their Collers and slippes about their necks. Now I look
better upon them, me thinks I should know them, and so I do: these are Mr.
Robinsons dogs, that dwells some two miles off, i will take them up, and lead
them home to their master; it may be something in my way, for he is as liberal
a gentleman, as any is in our country, Come Hector, come. Now if I c'ud but
start a Hare by the way, ^ill her, and carry her home to my supper, I should
think ^ had made a better afternooones work of it than gathering of bu^lies.
Come poor curres along with me.

Exit.
Enter Arthur, Bantam, Shakstone, and Whestone. Arth. My Dog as yours.


Shak. For what?


Arth. A piece.


Shak. It Is done.


Bant. I say the pide dog shall outstrip the brown.


When. And i will take the brown dogs partagainst the pide


Bant. Yes when he is at his lap ^oule take his part.


Arth. Bantam forbear him prithee.


Bant. He talks so like an Ass I have not patience to endure his non sense.


Whet. The brown dog for two pieces.


Bant. Of what?


Whet. Of what you dare; name them from the last
(...) with the double rings, to the late
Coy'nd (...) which they say are all counterfeit.

Bant. Well sir, I take (...): will ^ou cover these, give them into the hands
of either of those two gentlemen.


Whet. What needs that? do you think my word and my money is not all one?


Bant. And weigh alike: both many grains too light.


(...)* Enough of that, I presume Mr. Whetstone, you are not (...) what belongs
to the sport of hunting.


Whet. I think I have reason, for I have bin at the death of more (...).


Bant. More then you shed the last fall of the leaf.


(...). More then any man here I am sure. I should be loath at these years to
be ignorant of hairing or whoring. I kn^w a hare close hunred, clime a tree.


Bant. To find out birds (...)


Whet. Another (...) into a river, nothing appearing above water, save only
the tip of her nose to take breath.


(...) Nay that is very likely, for no man can fish with an (...) but his Line
must be made of hare.


W^et. You say right, I kn^w another, who to escape the
Dogs has taken a house, and leapt in at a window.

Bant. It is thought you came into the World that way.


Whet. How mean you that?


Bant. Because you are a bastard.


Whet. Bastard! O base.


Bant. And thou art base all over.


Arth. Needs must I now condemn your indiscretion,
To set your wit against his.

Whet. Bastard? that shall be tried; well Gentlemen concerning Hare-hunting you
might have hard more, if he had had the grace to have said less, but for the
word Bastard, if I do not tell my Uncle, I and my Aunt too, either when I would
speak ought or go of the s^ore for any thing, let me never be trusted, they
are older than I, and what know I, but they might be by when I was begot; but
if thou Bantam do not hear of this with both thine ears, if thou have them
still, and not lost them by scribbling, instead of Whet-stone call me
Grind^-stone, and for By-bl^w, Bulfinch. Gentlemen, for two of you your
company is fair and honest; but for you Bantam, remember and take notice
also, that I am a bastard, and so much i will testify to my Aunt and Uncle.

Exit.
Arth. What have you done, 'twill gri^ve the good old Gentleman, to hear him
baffled thus.


Bant. I was in a cold sweat ready to faint
The time he staid amongst us.

Shak. But come, now the Hare is found and started*
She shall have Law, so to our sport.
Exit. Enter Boy with the Greyhounds. A Hare, a Hare, hall^e, halloe, the
Devil take these curres, will they not stir, halloe, halloe, there, there,
there, what are they grown so lither and so lazy? Are Mr. (...) dogs turned
tykes with a wanion? the Hare is yet in sigh^, halloe, halloe, mary hang you
^or a couple of (...) (i^ you were worth ha^ging, and have you served me thus?
(...) ^erve you with the like sauce, you shall to the next bush, there will I
(...) you, and use you like a couple of curs as you are, and though not lash
you, yet lash you whilst my switch will hold, nay since you have left your
speed, i will see if I can put spirit into you, and put you in remembrance what
halloe, halloe means.

As he beats them, there appears before him, Gooddy Dickison, and the Boy upon
the dogs, going in. Now bless me heaven, one of the Greyhounds turned into a
woman, the other into a boy! The lad I never saw before, but her I know well;
it is my gammer Dickison.


G. Dick. Sirah, you have served me well to swindge me thus.
You young rogue, you have used me like a dog.

Boy. When you had put your selfinto a dogs skin, I pray how c'ud I help it;
but gammer are not you a Witch? if you be, I beg upon my knees you will not
hurt me.


Dickis. Stand up my boie, for thou shall have no harm,
Be silent, speak of nothing thou have seen.
And here is a shilling for thee.

Boy. I Will have none of your money gammer, because you are a Witch: and now she
is out of her four legged shape, i will see if with my two legs I can outrun her.


Dickis. Nay sir, though you be young, and I old, you are not so nimble, nor I
so lame, but I can overtake you.


Boy. But Gammer what do you mean to do with me
Now you have me?

Dickis. To hug thee, stroke thee, and embrace thee thus,
And teach thee twenty thousand pretty things.
So thou tell no tales; and boy this night
Thou must along with me to a brave feast.

Boy. Not I gammer indeedla, I dare not stay ont late, My father is a fell man,
and if I be out long, will both chide and beat me.


Dickis. Not sir, then perforce thou shall along,
This bridle helps me still at need,
And shall provide us of a steed.
Now sir, take your shape and be
Prepared to hurrie him and me.
Now look and tell me where is the lad become.
Exit.
Boy. The boy is vanished, and I can see nothing in his stead
But a white horse ready sadled and bridled.

Dickis. And that's the horse we must bestride,
On which both tho^ and I must ride,
Thou boy before and I behind,
The earth we tread not, but the wind,
For we must progress through the air,
And I will bring thee to such fare
As thou never saw, up and away,
For now no longer we can stay.
She catches him up, and turnin^ round* (...)
Boy. Help, help.

Enter Robin and Mall. Thanks my sweet Mall for thy courteous entertainment,
thy cream, thy cheese-cakes, and every good thing, this, this, and this for
all.

kiss.
Mal. But why in such have good Robin?


Robin. I confess my stay with thee is sweet to me, but I must spur Cut the
faster for it, to be at home in the morning, I have yet to Lancaster to ride to
night, and this my (...) of bottles, to fill to night, and then half a score
mile to ride by currie-combe time, in the morning, or the old man chides Mal.


Mal. He shall not chide thee, fear it not.


Robin. Pray Bacchus I may please him with his wine, which will be the hardest
thing to do; for since he was last at London and tasted the Divinity of the*
Miter, scarce any liquour in Lancashire will go down with him, sure, sure he
will never be a Puritan, he holds so well with the Miter.


Mal. Well Robert, I find your love by your haste from me, i will undertake you
shall be at Lancaster, and twice as far, and yet at home time enough, and be
ruled by me.


Rob. Thou art a witty rogue, and think to make me believe any thing, because
I saw thee make thy broom sweep the house without hands the other day.


Mal. You shall see more than that presently, because you shall believe me; you
know the house is all a bed here: and I dare not be mist in the morning.
Besides, I must be at the wedding of Lawrence and Parnell to morrow.


Rob. I your old sweet heart Lawrence? Old love will not be forgotten


Mal. I care not for the loss of him, but if I (...) him not hang me: but to
the point, if I go with you to night, and help you to as good wine as your
master desires, and you keep your time with him, you will give me a pint for
my company.


Rob. Thy belly full wench.


Mal. I Will but take up my milk payle and leave it in the field, till our
coming back in the morning, and we will away.


Rob. Go fetch it quickly then.


Mal. No Robert, rather than leave your company so long, it shall come to me.


Rob. I would but see that.


The Payle goes. Mal. Look yonder, what do you think on it.


Rob. Light, it comes; and I do think there is so much of the Devil in it as
will turn all the milk shall come in it these seven years, and make it burn
too, till it stink worse than the Proverb of the Bishops foot.


Mal. Look you sir, here I have it, will you get up and away.


Rob. My horse is gone, nay prithee Mal. thou have set him awa^, leave thy
Roguerie.


Mal. Look again.


Rob. There stands a black long-sided jade: mine was a trussed gray.


Mal. Yours was too short to carry double such a journey.
Get up I say, ^ou shall have your own again in the morning.

Rob. Nay but, nay but.


Mal. Nay, and you stand butting now, i will leave you to look your horse. Payle
on before to the field, and stay till I come.


Rob. Come away then, hey for Lancaster: stand up*

Exeunt
ACTVS, III. SCENA, I.
Enter old Seely and Ioane his Wife. Seely. COme away wife, come away, and let
us be ready to break the (...) over the Brides head at her entrance; we will
have the honor of it, we that have played the Steward and Cook at home, though
we lost Church by it, and saw not Parson Knit-knot do^ his office, but we shall
see all the house rites performed; and. (...) what a day of jollity and
tranquillity is here toward?


Ioane* You are so frolic and so cranck now, upon the truce is taken amongst
us, because our wrangling shall not wrong the Wedding, but take heed (you were
best) how ye behave your self, lest a day to come may pay for all.


Seel. I fear nothing, and I hope to dye in this humor.


Joan. Oh how hot am I ^ rather then I would dress such another dinner this
twelve month, I would wish Wedding quite out of this years Almanac*


Seel. I Will fetch a Cup of Sack Wife --


Joan. How brag he is of his liberty, but the holy day carries it.


Seel. Here, here sweetheart, they ar^ long me thinks a coming, the Bells have
rung out this half hour, hark now the wind brings the sound of them swe^tly
again.


Joan. They ring backwards me thinks.


Seel. I fack they do, sure the greatest fire in the Parish is in our Kitchen,
and there is no harm done yet, no (...) some merry conceit of the stretch*
ropes the Ringers, now they have done, and now the Wedding comes, hark, the
Fiddlers and all, now have I lived to see a day* come, take (...) stand, and be
ready for the Bride-cake, which we will so crack and crumble upon her crown:
o they come, they come.


Enter Musitian^, Lawrence, Parn^ll, Win. Mal. Spencer, two Country Lasses
Doughty, Greg. Arthur, Shakton, Bant (...) and Whe^stone. All. Joy, health; and
children to the married pair.


Lawr. and Parn. We thank you all.


Lawr. So pray come in and fare.


Parn. As well as we and taste of every cate:


Lawr. With bon^y Bridegroom and his lov^ mate.


Arth. This begins bravely.


Doug. They agree better then the Bells eene now, 'slid they ^ung tunably till
we were all out of the Church, and then they clatter'd as the devil had been
in the Bel^ry: on in the name of Wedlock, Fiddlers on.


Lawr. On with your melody.


(...). Enter the Gates with joy,
And as you enter play the sack of Troy.

The Fiddlers pass through, and play the battle. The (...) appears. Joan.
Welcome Bride ^arnell.


Seel. Brideg^ome (...) (...),
In you before, for we this cake must break.
Over the Bride --
Forgi' me- what is become
OF the Cake wife!
Exit Lawrence. As they l^ft up the Cake, the Spirit snatche^ it, and powers
down (...).
(...). It (...) out of my hand, and is (...) into (...) I think.


Dough^. (...)? the devil of crum is here, but bran; nothing but bran, what
prodigy (...) this?


Parn. Is my best Brides Cake come to this! o wea warth it.


Exit (...), (...), and Maids. (...) How daintily the Brides hair is powdered
with it.


(...). My (...) stands (...) to see it.


(...). And mine.


(...). I was never so amazed!


Dougb. What (...) mean?


(...). Pax, I think (...) but some of m^ Father and Mothers ^oguery, this is a
Law-day with 'em, to (...) what they list.


(...). I never fear any thing, so long as my (...) but ^idden me think of
her, and (...) me.


Dough. Well Gentlemen, let us follow the (...) in, and fear nothing yet, the
house smells well of good (...).


Seel. Gentlemen, will it please you draw near, the guests are now all come,
and the house almost full, meat's taken up.


Dough. We were now coming.


Seel. But son^e Greg^, Nephew Arthur, and the rest of the young Gentlemen, I
shall take it for a favor if you will (it is an office which very good
Gentlemen do in this Country) accompane the Bridegroom in serving the meat.


All. With all our hearts.


Seely. Nay neighbor Doughty, your years shall excuse you.


Dough. Peugh, I am not so old but I can carry more meat then I can eat, if
the young (...) coo^d carry their drink as well, the Country would be quieter
--


Knock (...), as at dresser. Seel. Well fare your hearts, -- the dresser calls
in Gentlemen,

Exeunt Gentlemen. It Is a busy time, yet will I review the Bill of fare, for
this days dinner -- (Reads) for 40* people of the best quality, 4. messes of
meat; viz. a leg of Mutton in plum-broth, a dis^ of Marrowbones, a (...)
white-broth, a Surlovne of beef, a Pig, a Goose, a Turki^, and two Pyes: for
the second course, to every mess 4. Chickens in a dish, a couple of Rabbets,
Custard, Flawn, Florentines, and stewd pruines, -- all very good Country fare,
and for my credit, --

Enter (...) playing before, Lawrence, Doughty, Arthur, (...) Bantam,
Wh^tstone, and Gregory, with dishes: A Spirit (over the door) does some action
to the dishes as they enter. The service enters, O well said (...), play up the
meat to the Table till all be served in, ^e see it pass in answer to my bill.


Dough. Hold up your head Mr. Bridegroom.


Lawr. On before Fiddlers, my (...) in my honds.


Seely. Inprim^, a leg of Mutton in plum-broth, -- how now Mr. Bridegroom,
what carry you?


Lawr. 'Twere hot ^ne now, but now it is caw'd as a steane.


Seel. A stone, it is horn man.


Lawr. Aw --

Exit Fiddlers.
Seely. It was Mutton, but now it is the horns (...).


Lawr. Aw where is my Bride --

Exit.
Dough. 'Zookes, I brought as good a Surloyne of Beef from the Dresser as
Knife coo'd be put to, and see -- I Will stay in this house no longer.


Arth. And if this were not a Capon in white broth, I am one in the Coope.


Shak. All, all is transformed, look you what I have!


Bant. And I.


Whet. And I! Yet I fear nothing thank my Aunt.


Greg. I had a Pie that is not opened yet, I Will see what'^ in that -- live Birds
as true as I live, look where they fly!

Exit Spirit.
Dough. Witches, live Witches, the house is full of witches, if we love our
lives let us out on it.


Enter Joane and Win. Joan. O husband, O guests, O son, O Gentlemen, such a
chance in a Kitchen was never heard of, all the meat is flowne out of the
chimney top I think, and nothing instead of it, but Snakes, Bat^s, Frogs,
Beetles, Hornets, and Humble-bees; all the Sallets are turned to Iewes-eares,
Mushromes, and Puck fists; and all the Custards into Cow sheards!


Dought. What shall we do, dare we stay any longer?


Arth. Dare we! why not, I defy all Witches, and all their works; their
power on our meat, cannot reach our persons.


Whet. I say so too, and so my Aunt ever told me, so long I will fear nothing;
be not afraid Mr. Doughty.


Dough. Zookes, I fear nothing living that I can see more then you, and that is
nothing at all, but to think of these invisible mischiefs, troubles me I
confess.


Arth. Sir I will not go about to overruled your reason, but but for my part I
will not out of a house on a Bridal day, till I see the last man borne.


Dough. Zookes thou art so brave a fellow that I will stick to thee, and if we
come off handsomely, I am an old Batchelour thou know, and must have an
heir, I like thy spirit, where is the Bride? where is the Bridegroom? where is
the Music? where be the Lasses? have you any wine in the house, though we make
no dinner* lets try if we can make an afternoon.


Joan. Nay sir if you please to stay, now that the many are frighted away, I
have some good cold meats, and half a dozen bottles of Wine.


Seel. And I will bid you welcome.


Dough. Say you me so, but will not your son be angry, and your daughter
chide you.


Greg. Fear not you that sir, for look you I obey my Father.


Win. And I my Mother.


Joan. And we are all at this instant as well and as sensible of our former
errors, as you can wish us to be.


Dough. Na, if the Witches have but robbed of your meat, and restored your
reason, here has been no hurt done to day, but this is strange, and as great a
wonder as the rest to me.


Arth. It seems though these Hags had power to make the Wedding cheer a
Deceptio visus, the former store has escaped 'em.


Dough. I am glad on it, but the devil good 'hem with my Surloyne, I thought to
have set that by mine own Trencher -- But you have cold meat you say?


Joan. Yes Sir.


Dought. And Wine you say?


Ioane. Yes sir.


Dought. I hope the Country wenches and the Fiddlers are not gone.


Win. They are all here, and one the merriest Wench; that makes all the rest so
laugh and tickle.


Seel. Gentlemen will you in?


All. Agreed on all parts.


Dought, If not a Wedding we will make a Wake on it, and away with the Witch; I
fear nothing now you have your wits again: but look you, hold 'em while you
have 'em.

Exeunt.
Enter Generous, and Robin, with a Paper. Gener. I confess thou have done a
Wonder in fetching me so good Wine, but my good Servant Robert, go not about
to put a Miracle upon me, I will rather believe that Laneaster affords this
Wine, which I thought impossible till I tasted it, then that thou coo'dst in
one night fetch it from London.


Rob. I have known when you have held me for an honest fellow, and would have
believed me.


Gener. The art a Knave to wish me to believe this, forgi'me, I would have
sworn if thou had stayed but time answerable for the journey (to his that
flew to Paris and back to London in a day) it had been the same Wine, but it
can never fall within the compass of a Christians belief, that thou could
ride above three hundred miles in 8. hours: You were no longer out, and upon
one Horse too, and in the Night too!


Rob. And carry a Wench behind me too, and did something else too, but I must
not speak of her lest I be divell-torne.


Genesis And fill thy bottles too, and come home half drunk too, for so thou
art, thou would never a had such a fancy else!


Rob. I am sorry I have said so much, and not let Lancaster have the credit of
the Wine.


Genesis O are you so! and why have you abused me and your self then all this
while, to glorify the Myter in Fleet Street?


Rob. I could say sir, that you might have the better opinion of the Wine, for
there are a great many pallats in the Kingdom that can relish no Wine, unless
(...) be of such a Tavern, and drawn by such a Drawer --


Genesis I said, and I say again, if I were within ten mile of London, I durst
swear that this was Myter Wine, and drawn by honest Jack Pain.


Rob. Nay then sir I swore, and I swear again^, honest Jack Pain drew it.


Gener. Ha, ha, ha, if I coo'd believe there were such a thing as Witchcraft, I
should think this slave were bewitched now with an opinion.


Rob. Much good do you sir, your Wine and your mirth, and my place for your
next Groom, I desire not to stay to be laughed out of my opinion.


Genesis Nay be not angry Robin, we must not part so, and how does my honest
Drawer? ha, ha, ha; and what news at London, Robin? ha, ha, ha; but your stay
was so short I think you coo'd hear none, and such your haste home that you
coo'd make none: is it not so Robin? ha, ha, ha, what a strange fancy has good
Wine begot in his head?


Rob. Now will I push him over and over with a piece of paper: Yes sir, I have
brought you something from London.


Genesis Come on, now let me hear.


Rob. Your honest Drawer sir, considering that you considered him well for his
good wine --


Genesis What shall we hear now?


Rob. Was very careful to keep or convay this paper to you, which it seems
you dropped in the room there.


Gener. Bless me! this paper belongs to me indeed, it is an acquittance, and
all I have to show for the payment of one hundred pound, I took great care
for it, and coo'd not imagine where or how I might loose it, but why may not
this be a trick? this Knave may find it when I lost it, and conceal it till
now to come over me withal. I will not trouble my thoughts with it further at
this time, well Robin look to your business, and have a care of my Guelding.

Exit Generous.
Robin. Yes Sir. I think I have netled him now, but not as I was netled last
night, three hundred Miles a Night upon a Rawbon'd Devil, as in my heart it
was a Devil, and then a VVench that shared more of my back then the said
Devil did of my Bum, this is rank riding my Masters: but why had I such an
itch to tell my Master of it, and that he should believe it; I do now wish
that I had not told, and that he will not believe it, for I dare not tell him
the means: 'Sfoot my Wench and her friends the Fiends, will tear me to pieces
if I discover her; a notable rogue, she is at the Wedding now, for as good a
Maid as the best o'em -- O my Mistress.


Enter Mrs. Generous, with a Bridle. Mrs. Robin.


Rob. I Mistress.


Mrs. Quickly good Robin, the gray Guelding.


Rob. What other horse you please Mistress.


Mrs. And why not that?


Rob. Truly Mistress pray pardon me, I must be plain with you, I dare not
deliver him you; my master has taken notice of the ill case you have brought him
home in diverse times.


Mrs. O is it so, and must he be made acquainted with my actions by you, and
must I then be controlled by him, and now by you; you are a sawey Groom.


Rob. You may say your pleasure.

He turns from her,
Mrs. No sir, I Will do my pleasure.

She Bridles him.
Rob. Aw.


Mrs. Horse, horse, see thou be,
And where I point thee carry me.
Exeunt Neighing.
Enter Arthur, Shakston, and Bantam. Arth. Was there ever such a medley of
mirth, madness, and drunkenness, shuffled together.


Shak. Thy Uncle and Aunt, old Mr. Seely and his wife, do nothing but kiss
and play together like Monkeyes.


Arth. Yes, they do over-love one another now.


Bant. And young Gregory and his sister do as much overdoe their obedience now
to their Parents.


Arth. And their Parents as much over-doat upon them, they are all as far
beyond their wits now in loving one another, as they were wide of them before
in crossing.


Shak. Yet this is the better madness.


Bant. But the married couple that are both so daintily whitled, that now they
are both mad to be a bed before Suppertime, and by and by he will, and she wo'
not; straight she will and he wo' not, the next minute they both forget they
are married, and defy one another.


Arth. My ^ides eene ache with laughter.


Shak. But the best sport of all is, the old Batchelour Master Doughty, that
was so cautious, and feat'd every thing to be witehcraft, is now wound up to
such a confidence that there is no such thing, that he dares the Devil do^
his worst, and will not out of the house by all persuasion, and all for the love
of the husbandmans daughter within, Mal Spencer.


Arth. There I am in some danger, he put me into half a belief I shall be his
heir, pray love she be not a witch to charm his love from me. Of what
condition is that wench do thou know her?


Sha. A little, but Whetstone knows her better.


Arth. Hang him rogue, he will belie her, and speak better than she deserves, for
he is is love with her too. I saw old Doughty give him a box of the ear for
kissing her, and he turned about as he did by thee yesterday, and swore his
Aunt should know it.


Bant. Who would ha'thought that impudent rogu^ would have come among us after
such a baffle.


Sha. He told me, he had complained to his Aunt on us, and that she would
speak with us.


Arth. We will all to her to patch up the business, for the respect I bear
her husband, noble Generous.


Bant. Here he comes.


Enter Whetstone. Arth. Hark you Mr. Byblow do you know the less within?
What do you call her, Mal Spencer?

Whet. Sir, what I know i will keep to my self, a good c^vile merry harmless
ro^e she is, and comes to my Aunt often, and that's all I know by her.


Arth. You do well to keep it to your self sir.


Whet. And you may do well to question her if you dare. For the testy old
coxcombe that will not let her go out of his hand.


Sha. Take heed, he is at your heels.


Enter Doughty, Man, two country Lasses Dough. Come away Wenches, where are
you Gentlemen?
Play Fiddlers: lets have a dance* ha my little rogue.
Zookes what ails thy nose.
Kisses Mal*
Mal. My nose! Nothing sir. -- turns about -- Yet me thought a fly touched
it. Did you see any thing?


Dou. No, no, yet I would almost ha'sworn, I would not have sprite or goblin
blast thy face, for all their kingdom. But hangt there is no such thing:
Fiddlers will you play?

Selengers Round. Gentlemen will you dance?


All. With all our hearts.


Arth. But stay where is this household?
This Family of love? Let Us have them into the revels.

Dou. Hold a little then.


Sha. Here they come all
In a True-love knot.

Enter Seely, Ioane, Greg, Win. Greg. O Father twenty times a day is too
little to ask you blessing.


See. Go too you are a rascal: and you houswife teach your daughter better
manners: i will ship you all for new England else.


Bant. The knot's untied, and this is another change.


Ioane. Yes I will teach her manners, or put her out to spin two penny tow: so
you dear husband will but take me into favor: i will talk with you dame when
the strangers are gone.


Greg. Dear Father.


Win. Dear Mother.


Greg. Win. Dear Father and Mother pardon us but this time.


See. Ioa. Never, and therefore hold your peace.


Dough. Nay that's unreasonable.


Greg. VVin. Oh! -- Weep.


See. But for your sake i will forbear them, and bear with any thing this day.


Arth. Do you note this? Now they are all worse then ever they were, in a
contrary vain: What think you of Witchcraft now?


Dou. They are all natural fools man, I find it now.

Art thou mad to dream of Witchcraft?


Arth. He Is as much changed and bewitched as they I fear.


Dough. Hey day! Here comes the pair of boyld Lovers in Sorrel ^ops.


Enter Lawrence and Parnell. Lawr. Nay dear hunny, nay hunny, but eance, eance.


Par. Na, na, I han' swarne, I han' swarne, not a bit before bed, and look yeou
it is but now dancing time.


Dough. Come away Bridegroom, we will stay your stomach with a dance. Now
masters play a good: come my Less we will show them how it is


Music. Selengers round. As they begin to dance, they play another tune,
then fall into many. Ar. Ban. Sha. Whether now, hoe?


Dou. Hey day! why you rogues.


Whet. What does the Devil ride of your Fiddlestickes.


Dou. You drunken rogues, hold, hold, I say, and begin again soberly the
beginning of the World


Music. Every one a several tune. Arth. Bant. Shak Ha, ha, ha, How Is this?


Bant. Every one a several tune


Dou. This is something toward it. I bad them play the beginning of the World,
and they play, I know not what.


Arth. No it is running of the country several ways.

But what do you think on it.


Music cease. Dough Think! I think they are drunk Prithee do not thou
think of Witchcraft; for my part, I shall as soon think this maid one, as
that there is any in Lancashire.


Mal. Ha, ha ha.


Dough. Why do thou laugh?


Mal. To think this Bridegroom should once ha'bin mine, but he shall rue it,
i will hold him this point on it, and that's all I care for him.


Dough. A witty Rogue.


Whet. I tell you sir, they say she made a payle follow her the other day up two
pair of stayres.


Dough. You lying Rascal.


Arth. O sir forget your anger.


Mal. Look you Mr. Bridegroom, what my care provides for you


Lawrence. What, a point?


Mal. Yes put it in your pocket it may stand you instead anon, when all your
points be taken away, to trusse up your trinkits, I mean your slopes withal.


Lawr. Mal for awd acquaintance I will ma'thy point a point of preferment. It
shan be the Foreman of a haell Iewrie o'points, and right here will I wear it.


Par. Wy'a, wy'a, awd leove woe no be forgetten, but ay's never be jealous the
mare for that.


Arth. Play fiddlers any thing.


Dou. I, and lets see your faces, that you play fairly with us.


Musicians show themselves above. Fid. We do sir, as loud as we can possibly.


Sha. Play out that we may hear you.


Fid. So we do sir, as loud as we can possibly.


Dough. Do you hear any thing?


All. Nothing not we sir.


Dough. It Is so, the rogues are bribed to cross me,
And their Fiddles shall suffer, I will break em as small as the
Bride cake was to day.

Arth. Look you sir, they will save you a labor, they are doing it themselves.


Whet. Oh brave Fiddlers, there was never better scuffling for the Tudberry Bu^t.


Mal. This is mother Johnson and Gooddy Dickisons roguerie, I find it but I
cannot help it, yet I will have music: sir there is a Piper withour, would be
glad to earne money.


Whet. She has spoke to purpose, and whether this were witchcraft or not: I
have heard my Aunt say twenty times, that no Witchcraft can take hold of a
Lancashire Bag-pipe, for it self is able to charm the Devell, i will fetch him.


Dough. Well said, a good boy now; come bride and bridegroom, leave your
kissing and fooling, and prepare to come into the dance. We Will have a
Horne-pipe, and then a posset and to bed when you please. Welcome Piper, blow
till thy bag crack again, a lusty Horne-pipe, and all into the dance, nay
young and old.


Dance. Lawrence and Par^ell reele in the dance. At the end, Mal vanishes,
and the piper. All. Bravely performd.


Dou. Stay, where is my less?


Arth. Ban. Shak Vanished, she and the Piper both vanished, no body knows how.


Dou. Now do I plainly perceive again, here has bin nothing but witcherie all
this day; ^herfore into your posset, and agree among your selves as you can,
i will out of the house. And Gentlemen, if you love me or your selves, follow me.


Ar. Bant. Sha. Whet. I, I, Away, away.

Exeunt.
See. Now good son, wife, and daughter, let me entreat you be not angry.


Win. O you are a trim mother are you not?


Ioa. Indeed child, i will do so no more.


Greg. Now sir, i will talk with you, your champions are al gone.


Lawr. Weell sir, and what wun yeou deow than?


Par. Whay, whay, what is here to do? Come awaw, and whickly, and see us into
our Brayd Chember, and delicatly ludgd togeder, or we will whap you out o'dores
ith morn to sijourne in the common, come away.


All. We follow ye.

Exeunt.
ACTVS, IIII. SCAENA, I.
Enter Mistress Generous and Robin. KNow you this gingling bridle, if you
see it again? I wanted but a pair of gingling spurs to make you mend your pace,
and put you into a sweat.

Robin. Yes, I have reason to know it after my hard journey, they say there be
light women, but for your own part, though you be merry. Yet I may be sorry
for your heaviness.


Mrs. Gener. I see thou art not quite tired by shaking of thy self, it is a
sign that as thou have brought me hither, so thou art able to bear me
back, and so you are like good Robert. You will not let me have your masters
gelding, you will not. Well fir, as you like this journey, so deny him to me
hereafter.


Rob. You say well mistress, you have jaded me (a pox take you for a jade.)
Now I bethink my self how damnably did I ride last night, and how divellishly
have I bin rid now.


Mrs. Do you grumble you groom? Now the bridl's of, I turn thee to grazing
gramercy my good horse, I have no better provender for thee at this time, thou
had best like Aesops Ass to feed upon Thistles, of which this place will
afford thee plenty. I am bid to a better banquet, which done, i will take thee up
from grass, spur ^utt, and ^ake a short cut home. Farewell.


Robin. A pox upon your tail.


Enter all the Witches and Mal, at several doors. All. The Lady of the feast
is come, welcome, welcome.


Mrs. Is all the cheer that was prepared to grace the wedding feast, yet come?


Gooddy Dick part of it is here.
The other we must pull for. But what is he?

Mrs. My horse, my horse, ha, ha, ha.


All. Ha, ha, ha.

Exeunt
Rob. My horse, my horse, I would I were now some country Major, and in
authority, to see if I would not venture to rowze your Satanicall sisterhood:
Horse, horse, see thou be, and where ^ point thee, ca^y me: is that the trick
on it? the devil himself shall be her carrier next if I can shun her: and yet
my Mr. will not believe there is any witches: there is no running away; for I
neither know how nor whether, besides to my thinking, there is a deep di^ch, and
a hye quick-set about me, how shall I pass the time? What place is this? it
looks like an old barn: i will peep in at some cranny or other, and try if I can
see what they are doing. Such a bevy of beldames did I never behold; and (...).
like so many Cormorants: Marry choke you with a mischief.


Gooddy Dickison. Whoope, whurre, here is a stir, never a cat, never a curre,
but that we must have this demurre.


Mal. A second course.


Mrs. Genesis Pull, and pull hard
For all that has lately bin prepared
For the great wedding feast.

Mal. As chief.
Of Doughtyes Surloine of roast Beef.

All. Ha, ha, ha.


Meg. It Is come, it is come.


Mawd. Where has it all this while been?


Meg Some
Delay has kept it, now it is here,
For bottles next of wine and beer,
The Merchants cellers they shall pay fo^'t.

Mrs. Gener. Well,
What sod or roast meat more, pray tell.

Good. Dick Pull for the Poultry, Foul, and Fish,
For empty shall not be a dish.

Robin. A pox take them, must only they feed upon hot meat, and I upon nothing
but cold sallads


Mrs. Gener. This meat is tedious, now some Farie,
Fetch what belongs unto the Dairie.

Mal. That's Butter, Milk, Whey, Curds and Cheese,
We nothing by the bargain leese.

All. Ha, ha, ha.


Goody Dickison. Boy, there is meat for you.


Boy. Thank you.


Gooddy Dickis And drink too.


Meg. What Beast was by thee hither rid?


Mawd. A Badger nab.


Meg. And I bestrid
A Porcupine that never pricked.

Mal. The dull sides of a Bear I kicked.
I know how you rid Lady Nan,

Mrs. Gen, Ha, ha, ha, upon the knave my man.


Rob. A murrein take you, I am sure my hoofes paid for it.


Boy. Meat lie there, for thou have no taste, and drink there, for thou have
no relish, for in neither of them is there either salt or savor.


All. Pull for the posset, pull.


Robin. The brides posset on my life, nay if they come to their spoone meat
once, I hope theil break up their feast presently.


Mrs. Genesis So those that are our waiters nere,
Take hence this Wedding cheer.
We will be lively all, and make this barn our hall.

Gooddy Dick. You our Familiers, come.
In speech let all be dumb,
And to close up our Feast,
To welcome every gest
A merry round let us dance.

Meg. Some Music then ith air
Whilst thus by pair and pair,
We nimbly foot it; strike.
Music.
Mal. We are obeyed.


Sprite. And we hels ministers shall lend our aid.


Dance and Song together. In the time of which the Boy speaks. Boy. Now
whilst they are in their jollitie, and do not mind me, i will steal away, and
shift for my self, though I lose my life for it.

Exit.
Meg. Enough, enough, now patt,
To see the brides vexed heart,
The bridegroomes too and all,
That vomit up their gall
For lack o'th wedding chere.

Gooddy Dickison. But stay, where is the Boy, look out, if he escape us, we are
all betrayed.


Meg. No following further, yonder horsemen come,
In vain is our pursuit, let us break up court.

Gooddy Dickison. Where shall we next met?


Mawd. At Mil^*


Meg. But when?


Mrs. At Night.


Meg. To horse, to horse.


2. Where Is my Mamilian.


1. And my Incubus.


Robin stands amazed at this. 3. My Tiger to bestri'd.


Mal. My Puggie.


Mrs. Genesis My horse.


All. Away, away,
The night we have Feasted, now comes on the day.

Mrs. Come sirrah, stoop your head like a tame jade,
Whilst I put on your Bridle.

Rob. I pray Mistress ride me as you would be rid.


Mrs. That Is at full speed,


Rob. Nay then I Will try Conclusions.

Mare Mare, see thou be,
And where I point thee carry me.
A great noise within at their parting. Exeunt.
Enter Mr. Generous, making him ready. Genesis I see what Man is loath to
entertain,
Offers it self to him most frequently,
And that which we most covet to embrace,
Does seldom court us, and proves most averse;
For I, that never coo'd conceive a thought
Of this my woman worthy a rebuke,
(As one that in her youth bore her so fairly
That she was taken for a seeming Saint)
To render me such just occasion,
That I should now distrust her in her age;
Distrust! I cannot, that would bring me in
The poor aspersion of fond jealousy;
Which even from our first meeting I abhorred.
The Gentile fashion sometimes we observe
To sunder beds; but most in these hot months
June, July August, so we did last night.
Now I (as ever tender of her health)
And therefore rising early as I use,
Entering her Chamber to bestow on her
A custom'd Visit; find the Pillow swelled,
Vnbruis'd with any weight, the sheets unruffled,
The Curtains neither drawn, nor bed laid down;
Which shows, she slept not in my house to night.
Should there be any contract betwixt her
And this my Groom, to abuse my honest trust;
I should not take it well, but for all this
Yet cannot I be jealous. Robin^

Enter Robin. Genesis Is my horse safe, lusty, and in good plight?
What, feeds he well?

Rob. Yes sir, he is broad buttock'd and full flanck'd, he does not bate an ace
of his flesh.


Genesis When was he rid last?


Rob. Not sir since you backed him.


Genesis ^irrah, take heed I find you not a Knave,
Have you not lent him to your Mistress late?
So late as this last Night?

Rob. Who I sir, may I dye sir, if you find me in a lie sir.


Gener. Then I shall find him where I left him last.


Robin. No doubt Sir.


Gener. Give me the Key o'th Stable.


Robin. There Sir.


Genesis Sirrah, your Mistress was abroad all night,
Nor is she yet come home, if there I find him not,
I shall find thee, what to this present hour
I never did suspect; and I must tell theee
Will not be to thy profit.
Exit.
Rob. Well sir, find what you can, him you shall find, and what you find
else; it may before that, instead of Gramercy horse, you may say Gramercy Robin;
you will believe there are no Witches! had I not been late brideled, I coo'd
have said more, but I hope she is tied to the rack that will confess
something, and though not so much as I know, yet no more then I dare justify
--

Enter Generous. Have you found your Gelding sir?


Genesis Yes, I have.


Rob. I hope not spurred, nor put into a sweat, you 'may see by his plump belly
and fleeke legs he has not bin sore travailed.


Gener. You Are asawcy Groom to receive horses
Into my Stable, and not ask me leave.
Is It for my profit to buy Hay and Oats
For every strangers jades?

Rob. I hope sir you find^ none feeding there but your own, if there be any
you suspect, they have nothing to champeon, but the Bridle.


Gener. Sirrah, whose jade is that tied to the Rack?


Rob. The Mare you mean sir?


Gener. Yes, that old Mare.


Rob. Old do you call her? You shall find the mark still in her mouth, when
the Bridle is out of it? I can assure you it is your own Beast.


Genesis A beast thou art to tell me so, has the wine
Not yet left working? not the Myter wine?
That made thee to believe VVitchera^t?
Prithee persuade me,
To be a d unken Sot like to thy self;
And not to know mine own.

Rob. I Will not persuade you to any thing, you will believe nothing but what you
see, I say the Beast is your own, and you have most right to keep her, she
has cost you more the currying, then all the Combs in your Stable are worth.
You have paid for her Provender this twenty years and upwards, and furnished
her with all the (...) that she has worn, of my Knowledge, and because she
has been ridden hard the last Night, do you renounce her now?


Gener. Sirrah, I fear some stolen jade of your own
That you would have me keep.

Rob. I am sure I ^ound her no ^ade the l^st time I rid her, she carried me the
best part of a hundred Miles in less then a quarter of an hour.


Gener. The devil she did!


Robin. Yes so I say, ^ither the d^ell or she did; an't please you (...) in and
take off her (...), and then tell me who has more right to her, you or ^.


Genesis Well Robert, for this once I Will play the Groom,
And do your office for you.
Exit.
Rob. I pray do Sir, but take heed lest when the Bridle is out of her mouth,
she put it not into yours; if she do, you are a gone man: if she but say once*
Horse, horse, see thou be. Be you rid (if you please) for me.


Enter Mr. Generous and Mrs. Generous, he with a Bridle. Genesis My blood is
turned to Ice, and my all vitals
Have ceased their working! dull stupidity
Surpriseth me at once, and has arrested
That vigorous agitation; Which till now
Expressed a life within me: I me thinks
Am a mere Marble statue, and no man;
Vnweave my age O time, to my first thread;
Let me loose fifty years in ignorance spent:
That being made an infant once again,
I may begin to know, what? or where am I
To be thus lost in wonder.

Mrs. Genesis Sir.


Genesis Amazement still pursues me, how am I changed
Or brought ere I can understand my self,
Into this new World.

Rob. You will believe no Witches?


Genesis This makes me believe all, I any thing;
And that my self am nothing: prithee Robin
Lay me to my (...) open, what art thou,
Or this new transformed Creature?

Rob. I am Robin, and this your wife, my Mrs.


Gen, Tell me the Earth
Shall leave it is seat, and mount to kiss the Moon;
Or that the Moon enamored of the Earth,
Shall leave her sphere, to stoop to us thus low.
What? what is this in my hand, that at an instant
Can from a four legged Creature, make a thing
So like a wife?

Rob. A Bridle, ^ ^ugling Bridle Sir.


Genesis A Bridle, hence enchantment,
A Viper were more safe within my hand
Then this charmed Engine
Casts it away. Robin takes it up.
Rob. Take heed Sir what you do, if you cast it hence, and she catch it up, we
that are here now, may be rid as far as the Indies within these few hours,
Mistress down of your Mares bones, or your Mary-bones whether you please, and
confess your self to be what you are; and that is in plain English a Witch, a
grand notorius Witch.


Genesis A Witch! my wife a Witch!


Rob. So it appears by the story.


Gener. The more I strive to unwinde
My self from this Meander, I the more
Therein am intricated; prithee woman
Art thou a Witch?

Mrs. It cannot be denied, I am such a cursed Creature.


Genesis Keep aloof, and do not come too near me, O my trust;
Have ^ since first I understood my self,
Bin of my soul so charie, still to study
What best was for it is health, to renounce all
The works of that black Fiend with my best force
And has that Serpent twined me so about,
That I must lie so often and so long
With a Devil in my bosom!

Mrs. Pardon sir.


Genesis Pardon! Can such a thing as that be hoped?
Lift up thine eyes (lost woman) to yo^ Hills;
It must be thence expected: look not down
Unto that horrid dwelling, which thou have sought
At such dear rate to purchase, prithee tell me,
(For now I can believe) art thou a Witch?

Mrs. I am.


Genesis With that word I am thunderstrooke,
And know not what to answer, yet resolve me
Have thou mad^ any contract with that Fiend
The Enemy of Mankind?

Mrs. O I have.


Genesis What? and how far?


Mrs. I have promised him my soul.


Genesis Ten thousand times better thy Body had
Bin promised to the Stake, I and mine too,
To have suffered with thee in a hedge of flames:
Then such a compact ^ver had bin made. Oh --

Rob. What chee^e sir, show your self a man, though she appeared so late a
Beast; Mistress confess all, better here than in a worse place, out with it.


Genesis Resolve me, how far does that contract stretch?


Mrs. What inter^st in this Soul, my self coo'd claim
I freely gave him, but his part that made it
I still reserve, not being mine to give.

Genesis O cunning Devil, foolish woman know
Where he can claim but the least little part,
He will usurp the whole; the art a lost woman.

Mrs. I hope not so.


Genesis Why have thou any hope?


Mrs. Yes Sir I have.


Genesis Make it appear to me.


Mrs. I hope I never bargained for that fire,
Further then penitent tears have power to quench.

Genesis I would see some of them.


Mrs. You behold them now.
(If you look on me with charitable eyes)
Tinctured in blood, blood issuing from the heart,
Sir I am sorry; when I look toward Heaven
I beg a gracious Pardon; when on you
Me thinks your Native goodness should not be
Less pitiful than they: against both I have erred,
From both I beg atonement.

Gener. May I presum't?


Mrs. I kneel to both your Mercies.


Gener. Know thou what a VVitch is?


Mrs. Alas, None better,
Or after mature recollection can be
More sad to think on it.

Genesis Tell me, are those tears
As full of true hearted penitence,
As mine of sorrow, to behold what state
What desperate state thou art fallen in.

Mrs. Sir they are.


Genesis Rise, and as I do, so heaven pardon me;
We all offend, but from such falling off,
Defend us. Well, I do remember wife,
When I first took thee, 'twas for good and bad;
O change thy bad to good, that I may keep thee,
As th^n we past our faiths, till Death us sever.
I will not aggravate thy grief too much,
By Needles iteration: Robin hereafter
Forget thou have a tongue, if the least Syllable
Of what has past be rumored, you loose me;
But if I find you faithful, you gain me ever.

Rob. A match sir, you shall find me as mute as if I had the
Bridle still in my mouth.

Genesis O woman thou had need to weep thy self
Into a fountain, such a penitent spring
As may have power to quench invisible flames
In which my eyes shall ayd^; too little all,
If not too little, all is forgiven, forgot;
Only thus much remember, thou had extermin'd
Thy self out of the blessed society
Of Saints and Angels, but on thy repentance
I take thee to my Bosom, once again,
My wife, sister, and daughter: saddle my Gelding,
Some business that may hold me for two days
Calls me aside.
Ex^unt.
Rob. I shall Sir, well now my Mistress has promised to give over her
Witchery, I hope though I still continue her man, yet she will make me no more
her journey-man; to prevent which the first thing I do shall be to burn the
Bridle, and then away with the Witch.

Exit.
Enter Arthur and Doughty. A^th. Sir you have done a right noble courtesy,
which deserves a memory, as long as the name of friendship can bear mention.


Dough. What I have done, I ha'done, if it be well, it is well, J do not like
the bouncing of good Offices, if the little care I have taken shall do these
poor people good, I have my end in it, and so my reward.


Enter Bantam. Bant. Now Gentlemen, you seem very serious.


Arth. It Is true we are so, but you are welcome to the knowledge of our
affairs.


Bant. How does thine Uncle and Aunt, Gregory and his sister, the Families of
Seelyes agree yet, can you tell?


Arth. That is the business, the Seely household is divided now.


Bant. How so I pray?


Arth. You know, and cannot but with pity know
Their miserable condition, how
The good old couple were abused, and how
The young abut'd themselves; if we may say
That any of hem are their selves at all
Which sure we cannot, nor approve them fit
To be their own disposers, that would give
The governance of such a house and living
Into their Vassailes hands, to thrust them out on it
Without or Law or order, this considered
This Gentleman and my self have taken home
By fair entreaty, the old folks to his house,
The ^oung to mine, until some wholesome order
By the judicious of the Commonwealth,
Shall for their persons and estate be taken.

Bant. But what becomes of Lawrence and his Parnell?
The lusty couple, what do they now?

Dough. ^as poor folks, they are as far to seek of how they do, or what
they do, or what they should do, as any of the rest, they are all grown
Idiots, and till some of these damnable jades, with their divellish devises be
found out, tod scharme them, no remedy can be found, I mean to lay the Country
for their Hagships, and if J can anticipate the purpose, of their grand Mr.
Devil to confound'em before their lease be out, be sure i will do 't*


A shout within. Cry. A Skimington, a Skimmington, a Skimington.


Dough. What Is the matter now, is Hell broke loose?


Enter Mr Shakstone. Arth. Tom Shakstone, how now, can tell the news?


Sha. The news, ye hear it up in the air, do you not?


Within. A Skimington, a Skimington, a Skimington.


Sha. Hark ye, do you not hear it? there is a Skimington, toward gentlemen.


Dou. Ware Wedlock hoe.


Bant. At whose suit I prithee is Don Skimington come to town.


Sha. I Will tell you gentlemen, since you have taken home old Seely and his wife
to your house, and you their son and daughter to ^ours, the housekeepers
Lawrence, and his late bride Parnell are fallen out by themselves.


Arth. How prithee?


Sha. The quarrel began they say upon the wedding night, and in the bride bed.


Bant. For want of bedstaves?


Sha. No but a better implement it seems the bridegroom was unprovided of, a
homely tale to tell.


Dou. Now out upon her she has a greedy worm in her, I have heard the fellow
complained on, for an over mickle m^n among the maids.


Arth. Is his haste to go to bed at afternoon come to this now?


Dough. Witchery, witcher^, more witcherie still flat and plain witchery. Now
do I think upon the codpeece point the young jade gave him at the wedding:
she is a witch, and the was a charm, if there be any in the World.


Arth. A ligatory point.


Bant. Alas poor Lawrence.


Sha. He Is coming to make his moan to you about it, and she too, since you
have taken their masters and mistresses to your care, you must do them right
too.


Dough. Marry but i will not undertake her at these years, if lusty Lawrence
cannot do it.


Bant. But has she beaten him?


Sha. Grievously broke his head in I know not how many places: of which the
hoydens have taken notice, and will have a Ski^mington on horseback
presently. Look ye, here comes both plaintiff and defendant.


Enter Lawrence and Parnell. Dough How now Lawrence, what has thy wedlock
brought thee already to thy nightcap?


Lawr. Yie gadwat sir, I ware wadded but aw to seun.


(...). Han yeou reeson to complain or ay trow yeou gaffer Downought? Wa warth
the day that ever I wadded a Downought.


Ar. Ban. Sha. Nay hold Parnel hold.


Dough. We have heard enough of your valor already, wec know you have beaten
him, let that suffice.


Parn. Ware ever poor maiden betrayed as a^ ware unto a swagbellied Carle that
cannot aw waw that cannot.


^ou. What says she?


Dou. I know not, she catterwawles I think. Parnel be patient good Parnell, and
a little modest too, it is not amiss, we know not the relifh of every ear
that hears us, lets talk within our selves. What Is the defect? What Is the
impediment? Lawrence has had a lusty name among the Batch^llors.


Par. What he ware when he ware a Bachelor, I know better than the best maid
ith tawne. I wad I had not.


Ar. Ba. Sha. Peace Parnell.


Par. 'Tware that, that cossen'd me, he has not now as he had than?


Ar. Ba. Sha. Peace good Parnell.


Parn. For then he could, ^nt now he connot, he connot.


Ar. Ba. Sha Fie Parnel fie.


Par. I say agean and agean, he connot, he connot.


Ar. Ba Sha. Alas poor ^arnel.


Par. I am not a bit the be^ter for him sin wye ware wad. Cries


Dou. Here Is good stuff^ for a jurie of women to pass upon.


Arth. But Parnel, why have you beaten him so grievously?
What would you have him do in this case?

Dou. He Is out of a doing case it seems.


Par. Marry sir, and beat him will ^ into his grave, or back to the Priest,
and be unwaddded agone, for I wonot be baund to lig with him and live with him
the laife of an honest woman for aw the layves good in Loncoshire.


Dou. An honest woman: that's a good mind Parnel What say you to this Lawrence?


Law. Keep her of of me, and I shan teln ^eou, and she be by I am no body: But
keep her off and search me, let me be searched as never witch was searched, and
find any thing mor or less upon me than a sufficient mon should have, and let
me be hon^ by it.


Art. Do you hear this Parnell?


Par. Ah leear, leear, deell tacke the leear, troist ye and hong ye.


Dou. Alas it is too plain, the poor fellow is bewitched.
Here Is a plain Maleficium versus hanc now.

Ar. And so is she bewitched too into this immodesty.


Ban. She would never talk so else


Law. I prayn yeow gi' me the lere o'that Latin sir.


Dough. The meaning is, you must get half a dozen bastards Within this
twelvemoneth, and that will mend your next marriage.


Law. And I thought it would ma' Parnel, love me i would be sure on it, and gang
about it now right.


Sha. You Are soon provided it seems for such a journey.


Dou Best tarry till thy head be whole Lawrence.


Pa. Nay, nay, ay's white casten away ent I be vnwadded agen^
And then ine undertack to find 3 better husbands in a bean cod.

Sha. Hear^e gentlemen, the show is coming.


Ar. What shall we stay and see it.


Ban. O by all means Gent.


Dou. It Is best to have these away first.


Par. Nay mary shan eou not sir, I hear yeou well e^ogh, and I con the meaning
of the show well enogh, and I stay not the show and see not the show, and ^a'one
in the show, let me be honckt up for a show i will ware them to mel or ma with a
woman that mels or mae's with a testril a longie, a dow little losell that
connot, and if I skim not their skimingtons cockskeam for it, ma that warplin
boggle me a week lonker, and that's a curse eno'for any wife I tro. from the
board, and yet for ought I can see I am never a whit the nearer What not one
kiss at parting (...)?


Mrs. Well Cozen this is all you have to do:
Retire the Gallants to some private room,
Where call for wine, and junckets what you please,
Th^n thou shall need to do no ^ther thing
Than what this note directs thee, observe that
An trouble me no farther.

Whet. Very good, I like this beginning well: for where they slighted me
before, they shall find me a man of note.

Exit.
Mal. Of this the meaning


Mrs. Marry Less
To bring a new conceit to pass.
Thy Spirit must borrow more,
To fill the number three or four;
Whom we will use to no great harm,
Only assist me with thy charm.
This night we will celebrate to (...):
It Is all for mirth, we mean no hurt.

Mal. My Spirit and my self command;
Mamillion, and the rest at hand, shall all assist.

Mrs. Withdraw then, quick,
Now gallants, there is for you a (...).
(...)
Enter Whetstone, Arthur, Shakstone, Bantam. Whet. Here Is a more private room
gentlemen, free from the noise of the Hall. Here we may ^alke, and throw the
chamber out of the casements. Some wine and a short banquet.


Enter with a B^quet, Wine, and two T^pers. Whet. So now leave us.


Arth. We are much bound to you ma^er Whetstone.
For this great entertainment: I see you command
The house in the absence of your uncle.

Whet. Yes, I thank my A^nt; for though I be but a daily guest yet I can be
w^lcome to her at midnight.


Shak. How shall we pass the time?


Bant. In some discourse.


Whet. But no such discourse as we had last, (...) each you.


Bant. Now master Whetstone you reflect on me.
It Is true, at our last meeting some few words
Then (...) my lips, which I could wis^ forgot:
I think I called you Bastard.

Whet. I think so too; but what is that amongst friends, for I would feign know
which amongst you all knows his own father.


Bant. You are merry with your friends, good master ^Blow, and we are guests
here in your Uncles house, and therefore privileged.


Enter Mistress (...), Mal and Spirits. Whet. I presume you had no more
privilege in your getting than (...). But tell me gentlemen, is there any man
here amongst you, that has a mind to see his father?


Bant. Why, who shall show him?


Whet. That's all one; if any man here desire it, let him but speak the word,
and it is sufficient.


Bant. Why, I would see my father.


Mistress Gener. Strike.

Music.
Enter a Pedant dancing to the (...); the strain don, he points at Bantam, and
looks full in his face. Whet. Do you know him that looks so full in your
face;


Bant. Yes well, a pedant in my fathers house.
Who being young, taught me my A, B, C.

Whet. In his house, that goes for your father you would say: For know one
morning, (...) your mothers husband rid early to have a Nisi prius tried at
Lancaster Syzes, he crept into his warm place, lay close by her side, and
then were you got. Then come, your heels and tail (...), and kneel (...)
your own dear father.


All. Ha, ha, ha.


Bant. I am abused.


Whet. Why laugh you Gentlemen? It may be more men's cases than his or mine.
Bant. To be thus (...).


Arth. Come, take it as a jest
For presume 'twas meant no otherwise.

Whet. Would either of you two now see his father in earnest


Shak Yes, can thou show me mine?


Mrs. Genesis (...).


Enter a nimble Tailor dancing, using the same posture to Shakstone. Whet He
looks on you speak, do you know him?


Shak. Yes, he was my mothers Tailor, I remember him ever since I was a child.


Whet. Who when he came to take measure of her upper parts had more mind to
the lower, whilst the good man was in the fields hunting, he was at home (...).

Then, since no better comfort (...) be had,
Come down, come down, ask blessing of your dad.

All Ha, ha, ha


Bant. This cannot be endured.


Arth. It is plain Witchcraft.
Nay since we all are bid unto one feast,
Lets fare alike, come show me mine too.

Mrs Gener. Strike.


Enter Robin with a switch and a Currycombe, he points at Arthur. Whet He
points at you.


Arth. What then?


Whet. You know him.


Arth. Yes, Robin (...) groom belonging to this house.


Whet. And never served your father?


Arth. In's youth I think he did.


Whet. Who when your supposed father had business at the Lord Presidents Court
in York, stood for his Attorney at home, and so it seems you were got by
deputy: what all a mort? if you will have but a little patience, stay and you
shall see mine too:

And know I show you him the rather,
To find who has the best man to his Father.

Mrs. (...) --


(...). Enter a Gallant, (...) before to him. Whet. Now Gentlemen make me your
President, learn your duties, and (...) I do -- A blessing Dad.


Whet. Come, come, let us home, we will find (...) other time,
When to dispute of these things --

Whet.: Nay Gent. no (...) in (...) begun in (...), let us not end in (...); you
see (...) are more By-blowes than bear the (...); It is grown a great kindred
in the Kingdom. Come, come, all friends; Let Us into the Cellar and conclude
our Revels in a lusty health.


Shak. I feign would strike, but cannot.


(...). Some strange fate holds me.


Arth. Here then all anger end,
Let none be mad at what they cannot mend.
Exeunt.
Mal. Now say what is next?


Mrs. In The Mill there lies
A Soldier yet with unscratcht eyes,
Summon the Sister-hood together
For we with all our Spirits will thither;
And such a Catterwalling ^eepe,
That (...) in vai^e shall think to sleep.
Call Meg, and Doll, (...), (...), (...) Iug,
Let none appear without her Pug.
We Will try our utmost Art and skill.
To fright the stout Knave in the (...).
Exeu^.
ACTVS, V. SCENA, I.
Enter Doughty, Miller, Boy in a C^p* Doughty* THou art a brave Boy, the honor
of thy Coun try; thy Statue shall be set up in brass upon the Market Cross in
Lancaster, I bless the time that I answered at the (...) thee: ^okes did I
ever thin^ that a Godson of min^ should have ^ought hand to fist with the
Devil!


Mil. He was ever an unhappy Boy Sir, and like enough to grow acquainted with
him; and friends may fall out sometimes.


Dought. Thou art a dogged Sire, and doestnot know the virtue of my Godsonne,
my son now; he shall be thy son no longer: he and I will worry all the
Witches in Lancashire.


Mil. You were best take heed though.


Dough. I care not, though we leave not above three untainted women in the
Parish, we'll do it.


Mil. Do what you please Sir, there is the Boy stout enough to justify any
thing he has said. Now it is out, he should be my Son still by that: Though he
was at Death's (...) before he would reveal any thing, (...) ^nable jades had
so threatened him, and as soon as ever he had told he men^ed.


Dought. It Is well he did so, we will so swing them in twopenny halters Boy.


Mil. For my part I have no reason to hinder any thing that may root them all
out; I have tasted enough of their mischief, witness my usage in th Mill,
which could be nothing but their Roguerie. One night in my sleep they set me a
stride stark naked a top of my Mill, a bitter cold night too; 'twas day light
before I w aked, and I durst never speak of it to this hour, because I
thought it impossible to be believed.


Dought. Villainous H^gs


Mil. And all last Summer, my Wise could not make a bit of butter.


Dough. It would not come, (...) it?


Mill. No Sir, we could not make it come, though she and I both together,
churn'd almost our (...) out, and nothing would come, but all ran into thin
waterish geere: the Pigges would not drink (...).


Dought. Is It possible*


Mil. None but one, and he ran out of his wits upon it, till we bound his head,
and laid him a sleep, but he has had a wry mouth ever since.


Dought. That the Devil should put in their hearts to delight in such
Villainies! I have sought (...) these two days, and he^ of a (...), though none
mortal, but could not find whom to mistrust for a Witch till now this boy,
this happy boy informs me.

And they should near have been sought for me if their affrightments and dive^
devices, had not brought my Boy into such a sickness; VVhereupon indeed I
thought good to acquaint your worship, and bring the Boy unto you being his
Godfather, and as you now stick not to say his Father.


Dought. After you I thank yo^ Gossip. But my Boy thou ha^ (...) fied me in
their names, and thy knowledge of the women, their turning into shapes, their
dog-trickes, and their horse tricks, and their great Feast in the Barn (a pox
take them with my Surloyne, I say still.) But a little more of thy combat with
the Devil, I prithee; he came to thee like a Boy thou say, about thine own
bigness?


Boy. Yes Sir, and he asked me where I dwelt, and what my name was.


Dough. Ah Rogue!


Boy. But it was in a quarrelsome way; VVhereupon I was as stout, and asked him
who made him an examiner?


Dough. Ah good Boy.


Mil. In that he was my Son.


Boy. He told me he would know or beat it out of me,
And I told him he should not, and bid him do his worst;
And to it we went.

Dough. In that he was my son again, ha boy; I see him at it now.


Boy. We fought a quarter of an hour, till his sharp nails made my ears
bleed.


Dough. O the grand Devil pare 'em.


Boy. I wondered to find him so strong in my hands, seeming but of mine own
age and bigness, till I looking down, perceived he had clubb'd cloven feet
like Ox feet; but his face was as young as mine.


Dought. A pox, but by his feet, he may be the Club-footed Horse-coursers
father, for all his young looks.


Boy. But I was afraid of his feet, and ran from him toward a light that I
saw, and when I came to it, it was one of the Witches in white upon a Bridge,
that scared me back again, and then met me the Boy again, and he struck me
and laid me for dead.


Mil. Till I wondering at his stay, went out and found him in the Trance; since
which time, he has been haunted and frighted with Goblins, 40. times, and
never durst tell any thing (as I said) because the Hags had so threatened him
till in his sickness he revealed it to his mother.


Dough. And she told no body but folks on it. Well Gossip Gretty, as thou art
a Miller, and a close thief, now let us keep it as close as we may till we
take 'hem, and see them handsomely hanged of the way: Ha my little Cu^^e-divell,
thou art a made man. Come, away with me.

Exeunt.
Enter Soldier. Sold. These two nights I have slept well and heard no noise
Of Cats, or Rats; most sure the fellow dreamed,
And scratcht himself in 's sleep. I have traveld' Deserts,
Beheld Wolves, Bears, and Lions: Indeed what not?
Of horrid shape; And shall I be afraid
Of Cats in mine own Country? I can never
Grow so Mouse-hearted. It is now a Calm
And no wind stirring, I can bear no sail;
Then best lie down to sleep. Nay rest by me
Good Morglay, my Comrague and Bedfellow
That never fayl'd me yet; I know thou did not.
If I be waked, see thou be stirring too;
Then come a Gib as big as Ascapart
We Will make him play at Leap-frog. A brave Soldiers lodging,
The floor my Bed, a Millstone for my Pillow,
The Sails for Curtaynes. So good night.
Lies down.
Enter Mrs. Generous, Mall, all the Witches and their Spirits (at several
doors.) Mrs. Is Nab come?


Mal. Yes.


Mrs. Where Is Jug?


Mal. On horseback yet,
Now lighting from her Broome-staffe.

Mrs. But where is Peg?


Mal. Entered the Mill already.


Mrs. Is he fast?


Mal. As senseless as a Dormouse.


Mrs. Then to work, to work my pretty Laplands
Pinch, here, scratch,
Do that within, without we will keep the watch.

The Witches retired: the Spirits come about him with a dreadful noise: he
starts. Sold. Am I in Hell, then have among'st you devils;
This side, and that side, what behind, before?
I Will keep my face unscratch'd dispight you all:
What, do you pinch in private, claws I feel
But can see nothing, nothing pinch me thus?
Have at you then, I and have at you still;
And still have at you.
Beats them off, follows them in, and Enters again. One of them I have paid
In leaping out oth' hole a foot or ear
Or something I have light on. What all gone?
All quiet? not a Cat that is heard to mew?
Nay then I Will try to take another nap,
Though I sleep with mine eyes open.

Exit. Enter Mr. Generous, and Robin. Genesis Robin, the last night that I lodgd
at home
My Wife (if thou remembrest) lay abroad,
But no words of that.

Rob. You have taught me silence.


Genesis I rose thus early much before my hour,
To take her in her bed* It Is yet not five:
The Sun scarce up. Those horses take and lead'em
Into the Stable, see them rubbed and dressed,
We have rid hard. Now in the interim I
Will step and see how my new Miller fares,
Or whether he slept better in his charge,
Than those which did precede him.

Rob. Sir I shall.


Genesis But one thing more --


Whispers. Enter Arthur. Arth. Now from the last nights witchcraft we are freed,
And I that had not power to clear my self
From base aspersion, am at liberty
For ^ow'd revenge: I cannot be at peace
(The night-spell being took of) till I have met
With noble Mr. Generous: in whose search
The best part of this morning I have spent,
His wife now I suspect.

Rob. By your le^ve Sir.


Arth. O you are well met, pray tell me how long is it
Since you were first my Father?

Rob Be patient I beseech you, what do you mean Sir?


Arth. But that I honor
Thy Master, to whose goodness I am bound,
And still must remain thankful, I should prove
Worse th^n a Murderer, a mere Paricide
By killing thee my Father.

Rob. I your Father? he was a man I always loved
And honored. He bred me.

Arth. And you begot me? oh you used me finely last night?


Genesis Pray what is the matter Sir?


Arth. My worthy friend, but that I honor you
As one to whom I am so much obligd,
This Villain could not stir a foot from hence
Till perished by my sword.

Gener. How has he wronged you?
Be of a milder temper I entreat,
Relate what and when done?

Arth. You may command me,
If ask me what wrongs, know this Groom pretends
He has strumpe^ my mother, if when, blazed
Last night at midnight. If you ask me further
Where, in your own house; when he pointed to me
As had I been his Bastard.

Rob. I do this? I am a horse again if I got you, Master, why Master.


Genesis I know you Mr. Arthur, for a Gentleman
Of fair endowments, a most solid brain,
And settled understanding. Why this fellow
These two days was scarce sundred from my side,
And for the last night I am most assured
He slept within my Chamber, 12. miles off,
We have nere parted since.

Arth, You tell me wonders.
Since all your words to me are Oracles,
And such as I most constantly believe.
But Sir, shall I be bold and plain withal,
I am suspicious all is not well at home;
I dare proceed no farther without leave,
Yet there is something lodged within my breast
Which I am loath to utter.

Genesis Keep it there,
I pray do a season (O my fears)

Whet. In my Uncles absence who but I should comfort my Aunt,
Am I not of the Blood, am not I next of Kin?
Why Aunt?

Mrs. Gen Good Nephew leave me.


Whet. The Devil shall leave you ere i will forsake you, Aunt, you know, ^ic is
So, and being so sick do you think i will leave you, what know I but this Bed
may prove your deathbed, and and then I hope you will remember me, that is,
remember me in your Will.

(Knock within.) Who Is that knocks with such authority. Ten to one my Uncles
come to town.


Mrs. Genesis If it be so, excuse my weakness to him, say I can speak with none.


Mal. I will, and escape him if I can; by this accident all must come out, and
here is no stay for me

(Knock again) Again, stay you here with your Aunt, and i will go let in your
Uncle.


Whet. Do good Mal, and how, and how sweet Aunt?


Enter Mr. Gener. Mal, Arthur, Soldier, and Robin. Genesis You Are well met here, I
am told you often frequent
This house as my Wives choice companion,
Yet have I s^ldome seen you.

Mal. Pray, by your leave Sir,
Your wife is taken with a sudden qualme
She has sent me for a Doctor.

Genesis But that labor i will save you, Soldier take her to your charge.
And now where is this sick woman.

Whet. O Uncle you come in good time, my Aunt is so suddenly taken as if she
were ready to give up the spirit.


Genesis It Is almost time she did, speak how is it wife
My Nephew tells me you were took last night
With a shrewd sickness, which this Maid confirms.

Mrs. Yes sir, but now desire no company.
Noise troubles me, and I would gladly sleep.

Gener. In company there is comfort, prithee wife
Lend me thy hand, and let me feel thy pulse,
Perhaps some Fever, by their beating I
May guess at thy disease.

Mrs. Genesis My hand, it is there.


Genesis A dangerous sickness, and I fear t death,
It Is odds you will not escape it. Take that back
And let me prove the the other, if perhaps
I there can find more comfort.

Mrs. Genesis I pray excuse me.


Gener. I must not be denied,
Sick folks are peevish, and must be ore-rul'd, and so shall you.

Mrs. Genesis Alas I have not strength to lift it up.


Gener. If not thy hand Wife, show me but thy wrist,
And see how this will match it, here is a Testate
That cannot be out-fac'd.

Mrs. Gener. I am undone.


Whet. Has my Aunt bin playing at handee dandee, nay then if the game go
this way I fear she will have the worst han^ on it.


Arth. It Is now apparent
How all the last nights business came about,
In this my late suspicion, is confirmed.

Genesis My heart has bled more for thy cursed relapse
Than drops has issued from thy wounded arm.
But wherefore should I preach to one past hope?
Or where the devil himself claims right in all,
Seek the least part or interest? Leave your Bed,
Up, make you ready; I must deliver you
Into the hand of Justice. O dear friend
It is in vain to guess at this my grief
It Is so inundant. Soldier take away that young
But old in mischief.
And being of these Apostat's rid so well,
I Will see my house no more be made a Hell.
Away with the^.

Exeunt. Enter Bantam, and Shakston. Ban. I Will out of the Country, and as soon
live in Lapland as Lancashire hereafter.


Shak. What for a false illusive apparition? I hope the devil i^ not able to
persuade thee thou art a Bastard.


Bant No, but I am afflicted to think that the devil should have power to put
such a trick upon us, to countenance a Rascal, that is one.


Shak J hope Arthur has taken a course with his Vnclc about him by this time,
who would have thought such a fool as he could have been a Witch?


Bant. Why do you think there is any wise folks of the quality; Can any but
fools be drawn into a Covenant with the greatest enemy of mankind? yet J
cannot think that VVhetstone is the Witch? The young Queen that was at the
Wedding was in the house ye know.


Enter Lawrence and Parnell, in their first Habits. Shak. See Lawrence and
Parnell civilly accorded again it seems, and accoutred as they were wont to be
when they had their wits.


Lawr. Blessed be the hour I say may hunny, may sweet Pall, that Ay's becom'd
thaine agone, and thou's becom'd maine agone, and may this ea kiss ma us tway
become both eane for ever and a day.


Parn. Yie marry Lall, and thus shadden it be, there is naught getten by fawing
out, we mun faw in or we get naught.


Bant. The world's well mended here; we cannot but rejoice to see this,
Lawrence.


Lawr. And you been welcome to it Gentlemen.


Parn. And we been glad we han it for you.


Shak. And I protest I am glad to see it.


Parn. And thus shan yeou see it till our deeing hour.

Ween eon leove now for a laife time, the Dewle shonot ha the poor to put us
to pieces agone.


Bant. Why now all is right and straight and as it should be.


Lawr. Yie marry that is it, the good hour be blessed for it, that put the wit
into may head, to have a mistrust of that pestilent Codpeece-point, that the
witched worch Mal Spencer go me, ah woe worth her, that were it that made aw so
naught.


Bant. and Shak. Is It possible?


Parn. Yie marry it were an Inchauntment, and about an hour since it come
intill our hearts to do, what yeou think, and we did it.


Bant. What Parnell?


Parn. Marry we take the point, and we casten the point into the fire, and the
point spitter'd and spatter'd in the fire, like an it were (love bless us) a
laive thing in the fair; and it hopet and skippet, and riggled, and frisket in
the fair, and crept about laike a worm in the fair, that it were warke
enough for us both with all the Chimney tools to keep it into the fair, and
it stinket in the fair, worsen than any brimstone in the fair.


Bant. This is wonderful as all the rest.


Lawr. It wolld ha scared any that hadden their wits till a seen't, and we
werne mad eoht it were deone.


Parn. And this were not above an hour sine, and you connot devaise how we han
loved t'on the other by now, yeou would ^en bliss your seln to see it.


Lawr. Yie an han pit on our working geere, to swinke and serve our Master and
Maistresse like intill painful servants agone, as we shudden.


Bant. It Is wondrous well.


Shak. And are they well again?


Parn. Yie and weel's laike heane bliss them, they are awas weel becom'd as
none ill had ever been aneast'hem; Lo ye, lo ye, as they come.


Enter Seely, Ioane, Gregory and Win. Greg. Sir, if a contrite heart struck
through with sense
Of it is sharp errors, bleeding with remorse
The black polluted stain it had conceived
Of foul unnatural disobedience
May yet by your fair mercy find Remission;
You shall upraise a Son out of the gulf
Of horror and despair, unto a bliss
That shall for ever crown your goodness, and
Instructive in my after life to serve you,
In all the duties that be fit a son.

Seel. Enough, enough, good boy, it is most apparent
We all have had our ^rrors, and as plainly
It now appears, our judgments, yea our reason
Was poisoned by some violent infection,
Quite contrary to Nature.

Bant. This sounds well.


Seely. I fear it was by Witchcraft: for I now
(Blessed be the power that wrought the happy means
Of my delivery) remember that
Some 3. months since I crossed a way ward woman
(One that I now suspect) for bearing with
A most unseemly disobedience,
In an untoward ill-bred son of hers,
When with an ill look and an hollow voice
She muttered out these words. Perhaps erelong
Thy self shall be obedient to thy son.
She has played her pranke it seems.

Greg. Sir I have heard, that Witches apprehended under hands of lawful
authority, do loose their power; And all their spells are instantly dissolved.


Seel. If it be so, then at this happy hour,
The Witch is taken that over us had power.

Joane. Enough Child, thou art mine and all is well.


Win. Long may you live the wellspring of my bliss,
And may my duty and my fruitful Prayers,
Draw a perpetual stream of blessings from you.

Seely. Gentlemen welcome to my best friends house,
You know the unhappy cause that drew me hither.

Bant. And cannot but rejoice to see the remedy so nee^e at ^and.


Enter Doughty, Miller, and boy. Dought. Come Gossip, come Boy -- Gentlemen you
are come to the bravest discovery -- Mr. Seely and the rest, how is it with you?
you look reasonable well me thinks.


Seely. Sir, we do find that we have reason enough to thank you for your
Neighbourly and pious care of us.


Doughty. Is all so well with you already? go to, will you know a reason for it
Gentlemen: I have caught a whole Kennel of Witches. It seems their Witch is
one of 'hem, and so they are discharm'd, they are all in Officers hands, and
they will touch here with two or three of them for a little private parley,
before they go to the Justices. Master Generous is coming hither too, with a
supply that you dream not of, and your Nephew Arthur.


Bant. You are beholden Sir to Master Generous in behalf of your Nephew for
saving his land from forfeiture in time of your distraction.


Seely. I will acknowledge it most thankfully.


Shak. See he comes.


Enter Mr. Generous, Mrs. Generous, Arthur, Wherstone, Mal, Soldier, and Robin.
Seel. O Mr. Generous, the noble favor you have showed
My Nephew for ever binds me to you.

Gener. I pittyed then your misery, and now
Have nothing left but to bewail mine own
In this unhappy woman.

Seel. Good Mistress Generous --


Arth. Make a full stop there Sir, sides, sides, make sides, You know her not
as I do, stand aloof there Mistress with your darling Witch, your Nephew too
if you please, because though he be no witch, he is a wel-willer to the
infernal science.


Gener. I utterly discard him in her blood
And all the good that I intended him
I will confer upon this virtuous Gentleman.

Whet. Well Sir, though you be no Uncle, yet mine Aunt's mine Aunt, and shall
be to her dying day.


Doug. And that will be about a day after next Sizes I take it,


Enter Witches, Constable, and Officers. O here comes more o'your Naunts, Naunt
Dickenson and Naunt Hargrave, ods fish and your Granny Johnson too; we want but
a good fire to entertain 'em.

Arth. See how they lay their heads together?

Witches charm together.
Gill. No succor.


Maud. No relief.


Peg. No comfort!


All. Mawsy, my Mawsy, gentle Mawsy come,


Maud. Come my sweet Puckling.


Peg. My Mamilion.


Arth. What do they say?


Bant. They call their Spirits I think.


Dought. Now a shame take you for a fardell offooles, have you known so many
of the Devils tricks, and can be ignorant of that common feate of the old
Iugler; that is, to leave you all to the Law, when you are once seized on by
the tallons of Authority? I Will undertake this little Demigorgon Constable with
these Commonwealth Characters upon his staff here, is able inspite of all
your bugs-words, to stave off the grand Devil for doing any of you good till
you come to his Kingdom to him, and there take what you can find.


Arth. But Gentlemen, shall we try if we can by examination get from them
something that may abbreviate the cause unto the wiser in Commission for the
peace before we carry them before 'em.


Genesis and Seel. Let it be so.


Dought. Well say, stand out Boy, stand out Miller, stand out Robin, stand out
Soldier, and lay your accusation upon 'em.


Bant. Speak Boy do you kno^ these Creatures, women I dare not call 'em?


Boy. Yes Sir, and saw them all in the Barn together, and many more at their
Feast and Witchery.


Rob. And so did I, by a Divellish token, I was rid thither, though I rid home
again as fast without switch or spur.


Mill. I was ill handled by them in the Mill.


Sold. And I sliced off a Cats foot there, that is since a hand, who ever wants
it.


Seel. How I and all my family have suffered you all know.


Lawr. And how I were betwitched my Pall. here knows.


Parn. Yie Lall, and the Witch I know, an I prayen yeou go me but leave to
scrat her well-favorely.


Bant. Hold Parnell.


Parn. Yeou can blame no honest woman, I trow, to scrat for the thing she
leoves.


Mal. Ha, ha, ha.


Dough. Do ^ou laugh Gentlewoman? what say you to all these matters?


Mrs. Genesis I will say nothing, but what you know you know,
And as the law shall find me let it take me.

Gil. And so say I.


Mawd. And I.


Mal. And I, other confession you get none from us.


Arth. What say you Granny?


Peg. Mamilion, ho Mamilion, Mamilion.


Arth. Who Is that you call?


Peg. My friend, my Sweetheart, my Mamilion.


Witches. You are not mad?


Dought. Ah ha, that is her Devil, her Incubus I warrant; take her off from the
rest they will hurt her. Come hither poor old woman. I Will dandle a Witch a little,
thou will speak, and tell the truth, and shall have favor doubt not. Say art
not thou a Witch?

They storm.
Peg. It Is folly to dissemble yie sir, I am one.


Dought. And that Mamilion which thou call'st upon
Is thy familiar Devil is it not? Nay prithee speak.

Peg. Yes Sir.


Dough. That Is a good woman, how long have had's acquaintance, ha?


Peg. A matter of six years Sir.


Dought. A pretty matter. What was he like a man?


Peg. Yes when I pleased.


Dought. And then he lay with thee, did he not sometimes?


Peg. It Is folly to dissemble; twice a Week he never failed me.


Dough. Humh -- and how? and how a little? was he a good Bedfellow?


Peg. It Is folly to speak worse of him than he is.


Dough. I trust me is it. Give the Devil his due.


Peg. He pleased me well Sir, like a proper man.


Dought. There was sweet coupling.


Peg. Only his flesh felt cold.


Arth. He wanted his great fires about him that he has at home.


Dough. Peace, and did he wear good clothes?


Peg. Gentleman like, but black black points and all.


Dought. I, very like his points were black enough. But come we will trifle w'yee
no longer. Now shall you all to the Justices, and let them take order with you
till the Sizes, and then let Law take his course, and Uivat Rex. Mr. Generous I
am sorry for your cause of sorrow, we shall not have your company?


Gener. No sir, my Prayers for her souls recovery.
Shall not be wanting to her, but mine eyes
Must never see her more.

Rob. Mal, adieu sweet Mal, ride your next journey with the company you have
there.


Mal. Well Rogue I may live to ride in a Coach before I come to the Gallows
yet.


Rob. And Mrs. the horse that stays for you rides better with a Halter than
your gingling bridle.

Exeunt Genesis and Robin.
Dought. Mr. Seely I rejoice for your families atonement.


Seel. And I praise heaven for you that were the means to it.


Dough. On before Drovers with your untoward Cattle.

Exeunt severally
Bant. Why do not you follow Mr. By-blow. I thank your
Aunt for the trick she would have fathered us withal.

Whet. Well Sir, mine Aunt's mine Aunt, and for that trick I will not leave her
till I see her do a worse.


Bant. You Are a kind Kinsman.

Exeunt. Flourish.
FINIS.
Song. II. Act.
1
Come Mawsy, come Puckling,
And come my sweet Suckling,
My pretty Mamillion, my Joy,
Fall each to his Duggy,
While kindly we buggie,
As tender as Nurse over Boy.
Then suck our bloods freely, and with it be jolly,
While merrily we sing, hey Trolly Lolly.
2
We Will dandle and clip ye,
We Will stroke ye, and le^pe ye,
And all that we have is your due;
The feats you do for us,
And those which you store us
Withal, ties us only to you.
Then suck our blo^ds freely, and with it be jolly,
While merrily we sing, hey Trolly Lolly.
THE EPILOGVE.
NOw while the Witches must expect their due
By lawful Justice, we appeal to you
For favorable censure; what their crime
May bring upon'em, ripenes yet of time
Ha^ not revealed. Perhaps great Mercy may
After just con^mnation give them day
Of long^r life. We represent as much
As they have done, before Laws hand did touch
Upon their guilt; But dare not hold it fit,
That we for Justices and I^dges sit.
And personate their grave wisdoms on the Stage
Whom we are bound to honor; No, the Age
Allows it not. Therefore unto the Laws
We can but bring the Witches and their cause,
And there w^ leave'em, as their Devils did,
Should we go further with them? Wit forbid;
What of their story, further shall ensue,
We must refer to time, our selves to you.

