Londini Artium and Scientiarum Scaturigo* OR, Londons Fountain of Arts and
Sciences*

Expressed in sundry Triumphs, Pageants, and Shows, at the Initiation of the
Right Honorable NICHOLAS RAYNTON into the Maiorty of the famous and far
renowned City LONDON.

All the Charge and Expense of the laborious Proiects both by Water and Land,
being the sole undertaking of the Right Wersoipfull Company of the Haberdashers,

Written by THOMAS HAYVVOOD.

-- Redeunt Spectacula. --

SERVE AND OBEY.
coat of arms or blazon

Printed at London by Nicholas (...) 1632.

To the Right Honorable Nicholas Raynton, Lord Mayor of this renowned
Metropolis LONDON.
Right honorable,
COncerning the Dignity of your place, and Magnificence of your Inauguration:
The first equaling, the latter precelling all the famous Magistracies in
Christendom. I shall not much stand to dispute, as being a Maxim already
granted: yet one thing I cannot omit, as most worthy remarke; namely, how many
of like Judicature have borne the Sword in this famous and flourishing City,
who breathed their first air in the County of Lincoln; from whence you derive
your self, as Sir John Stockton Mercer, borne at Bratost, L. Mayor 1470. Sir
Nicholas Aldwin Mercer, borne at Spalding, L. Mayor 1499. Sir William
Rennington Fishmonger, at Bosten, L. Mayor 1500. Sir William Forman
Haberdasher, at Gainsborow, L. Mayor 1538. Sir Henry Hobbershorne
Merchant-Tayler, at Wadingworth, L. Mayor 1546. Sir Henry Amcoats Fishmonger,
at Astrop, L. Mayor 1548. Sir John Langley Goldsmith, at Althrop, L. Mayor
1576. Sir John Aldot Fishmonger, at Limbergh, L. Mayor 1590. Sir George Bowls
Grocer, at Gosperton, L. Mayor 1617. and now in present your Honored self
Nicholas Raynton borne at Heighington, L. Mayor 1632. not so many having
attained to the same Dignity bred in any one County, the City of London
excepted. Worthy observation it is also, that at one time in the reign of
Queen Elizabeth, most of the Prime Officers of State, were Countrymen of the
same County: As the Archbishop of Canterbury, Whitguist: the L. High Treasurer
of England, L. Burbeigh Cecill, the L. Keeper of the Great Seal, Sir John
^uckering, Viz. Chamberlain and Chancellor of the Duchy, Sir Thomas Hennidge
one of her Majesty's Privy Council: The Lord Chief Justice, Judge Wraye, etc.
Moreover it may be justly spoken of you to your great Reputation and Honor,
that since the year 1209. from Henry Fitzalwin the first L. Mayor of this
Honorable City, and Reter Duke, and Thomas Necle the first Sheriffs of the
same, never had any Magistrate a more general, free, and affectionate Election
even to this present Year 1632. Now Time and your own Demerit Right
Honorable, have raised you to this Eminence and Dignity, the universal eye
and expectation of all men is upon you, who well know, that a wise Magistrate
preferres consideration before Conclusion: And (according to the saying of King
Agesilaus) Magistrates who govern by just Laws, must strengthen them by good
example: judge by Providence, Wisdom and Justice, and defend by Power, Care
and Vigilance; and thus I humbly take my leave of your Lordship with this
Sentence, Non sat est te tuum officium fecisse, si non id fama approbat.

Your Lordships Countreyman and Servant, THOMAS HEYWOOD.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Hugh Perry, and Henry Andrews* the two Sheriffs of
the Honorable City London, last Elected.
Right Worshipful, and every way worthy; Your Arms displayed in the Front of
this Show, approve your Gentry, and your Traffic and Commerce, (being free
Merchant-aduentures) testifis to the World your Noble Profession; as Trading in
the East Indies, Turkey, Italy, Spain, and France, etc. to the Honor of our
Nation abroad, and singular Profits redounding to the Realm at home. Your more
private Employments heretofore, as well in furthering Arts, as incoureging
^^rmes, adding no common Luster to these Offices, unto which Time and your own
Demerits have at this present called you. Then as that Public weal is most
blessed and flourishing where the Governors are as well beloved in their Persons,
as feared in their Places: So likewise it belongs to all such as are in
Authority, to fieare themselves by the rule of Socrates, that is, To hear
courteously, answer discreetly, consider seriously, and sentence impartially.
But I presume not to advise, where I rather desire to be instructed; shatting
up my present Service with that of Seneca, Id facere laus est quod decet, non
quod licet.

Your Worships to be commanded. Thomas Heywood.

Londons Scaturigo.
THe Title of the Show is Scaturigo, (...) the Fountain and Wellspring of all
the Liberal Arts, and Sciences, or Mysteries whatsoever; which as they have
been long since planted, and encouraged: so they are at this time the more
liberally watered, and therefore more plenteously enriched by their blessed
Mother and bountiful Nurse, the most illustrious City London: For the first,
namely, the Arts and Studies of the Brain; How many Grammar Schools have
been by her and her indulgent Children erected (through all, or most of all)
the Shieres and Counties of England, to the propagation and advancement of
Learning, to the furnishing of the Accademies with Students, and from them, the
four flourishing Kingdoms (now under the Sword and Scepter of his most Sacred
Majesty) with profound Theologists* expert Physicians, learned Philosophers,
skillful Mathemati^ians, etc. If any man desire to be further instructed, in
the number of their Free-schooles, Hospitals, Almes-houses, Lectures,
Exercises, (scarce to be numbered) with the names of the founders, and the
Annual revenues still continued, and daily enlarged? for their perpetual
maintenance* I refer them unto our English Annalls, where they may be
plenteously satisfied; neither can these few Sheets of Paper contain them,
much rather require a Volumne.

So much for the Studies of the Brain.
Now for all other Sciences, Mysteries, Trades, and Manufactures, (including
as well Merchants as Mechannicks) What City in Europe yields more plenty? more
variety? In so much that by reason of Bartering, Bargening, Trade and Commerce*
(besides the Bosse or Exchange, daily throngd with Merchants of all Countries.)
The populous Streets rather appear an open Matt, then an ordinary Market; she
not favoring and fostering her owns Natives only, but Strangers, and of all
foreign Nations whatsoever. Here they suck the Milk of her breasts, here
they are fed, here cherished by this excellent City, and therefore neither
impertinently, nor improperly may she be styled: Artium and Scientiarum
inundans Scatarigo.

The show by Water.
It represents Arion with his Harp in his hand* riding upon the back of a
Dolphin, behind him for ornament old Oceanus and Amphetrite, mounted upon two
Sea horses, holding each of them a Staff and a Banner, wherein are displayde
the Arms of the two Sheriues now in place, of him it is thus commented.

Arion was borne in Methimnus, whom Pyranthus, (or as Gellius and Herodatus
please to name him) Periander, for his excellent skill upon the Harp, greatly
delighted in: Dycaearohus describes him for a noble Ditherambick Lib. de
Dionis. Certaminib.
Poet. He having got great store of Treasure, was desirous to cross from
Corinth into Sicilia and Italy, to whom Apollo appears (the night before his
imbarking) in a Dream, and willed him to attire himself in his Robe and
Laurel, and to be ready in any danger to sing unto his Harp, and not to fear
any thing. The next day (being far from shore) the Mariners having notice
what Treasure he had aboard, conspired amongst themselves to cast him into the
Sea, which he perceiving, begged of them so much respite, that habited as he
was, he might sing one funeral farewell to his Harp, which granted, so
sweet was his Harmony, that the Dolphins came sporting about the ship, as
much delighted with his Music: amongst whom he cast himself, and they
supported him, and bore him back unto Corinth; where having told this
wondermeat, the King graciously entertained him; soon after the same Bark
being by a tempest drouen into the same Harbor, notice thereof being given
unto the King, he strictly questioned them concerning Arion, they affirmed him
to be dead at Sea, to which when they had sworn, he caused Arion suddenly to
appear before them* who confounded with shame, were commanded to death:
Appollo after translated Arion for his Music, and the Dolphin for his Pity
amongst the Stars.

Arions Speech directed to the River Thames.
The first speech by Water.
Fair Thamesis, upon whose silver breast
Arion with his Dolphin new does rest.
How I admire thy Glory, State, and Pride,
Upon this Solemn day thus beautified?
Ganges renowned in all foreign Lands,
Nor T^gus boasting of her golden Sands
Can parallel thy Riches; Not Caister
Famous for Swannes, nor Po her clear streamed Sister:
Winding Meander, nor yet Simois Flood,
Which Fame says, at the Trojan Seige van blood.
Swift Rubicon, whose memory shall last,
Because it, Caesar with his Army post.
Choaspes, that almost guirts Persia round:
Nor Issa, by Darius aeath renowned.
The Amazonian Thermedon, the Nyle
That breeds in it the weeping Crocadile.
The Euphrates, the Volga, and the Ryne,
Nay Jordan too, that waters Palestine:
What Paris Some, or Romes swift Tyber be,
The one a Brook, the other a Ditch to thee*
And my Crowned Dolphin does proclaim thee thus,
Thou Art the choice Darling of Oceanus.
And if thou have a Genius, (as it is guest
All Rivers have?) know wherein thou art most blessed.
Not that thy Banks are so defenc't and stable,
Nor within Land thou art so far nauigable,
Not for thy Flux and Refluxe, (Ebbs and Tides)
Or the rich Meddowes bordering round thy sides.
Not that being pleased, thou art smooth, being angry, curled,
Nor thy rare Bridge not equald through the World.
Not for those goodly Buildings reard so bye,
To make these line to perpetuity.
Not for thy spacious Limits and Extents,
(And yet all those vnriuald Ornaments.)
But if I truly shall to thee commend,
That bliss wherein thou others do transcend,
Behold this Day the Honor and the State
Of this thy Great and God like Magistrate.
Not waited on by Boats made of the Trunks
Of Canes, or hollowed Trees, or petty Iunks,
Or wanton Gondelaes: but Barges, strong,
And richly decked, who as they plowe along
Thy breast, with their smooth keeles to make their way,
See how the Wind does with their streamers play,
How beautiful thy Waves how throngd thy shoares,
And what a Musick's when they strike their Oars*
To see them with Grave Magistrates so Manned,
Powerful by Sea, and potent too by Land.
So many Sciences, and Mysteries
Distinguished into several Companies,
In sundry bottomes: and each Art and Trade
Known by the Flags and Pendants here displaid.
And London which Metropolis we call,
The Fount and Scaturigo of them all.
Grave Praetor, now this Day to be invested
The Head of al these, pass on vnmolested,
In your great Inauguration proceed,
Which to your lasting Honor is decreed.
In your return baske you shall understand,
Those Triumphs that attend on you by Land.

Perseus, Andromeda with the Sea Monster are only showed upon the Water, but
their expression I refer to their place by Land.

The first show by Land.
Of which the first presentment is in Paul's Churchyard: Namely, St. Katherine,
Patroness of this Worshipful Company, upon a Lion, bordered about with the
Sea-waues* (the Arms of the Haberdashers) she is Crowned as being a Queen,
bearing a Wheel in her hand, full of sharp cutting Irons, the Embleame of her
Martyrdom: Her attendants to beautify the plat-forme, are four Virgins,
Humility the first: Of which Virtue Senec. i^ Thiess.
Seneca thus speaks, Laus vera humili sepe contingit vito. The second Truth,
which scaleth the Heavens, illustateth the Earth, maintains Justice,
governs Cities, kills Hatred, cherishes Love, and discovers Treasons: The
third Zeal, of which it is thus laid; Office is strengthened by Zeal, and
Zeal makes authority invincible. The fourth, Constancy: according with that
of Lib. 5. de bell. Civil.
Lucan, Intrepidus quicunque datis mihi Numina mortem ^ccip^am --
All which are necessary in a Magistrate, as needful in a Martyr: Of the
Etymology of her Name, her Royal Birth, her Breeding, her Life and Death, in
the last years Discourse I gave a large Charactar, and therefore preceede to
her Speech, which is as follows.

St. Katherines Speech.
Does any wonder, why St. Katherine, she
St. Katherins speech.
The Patroness of this fair Company
Is mounted on a Lion? Let such know,
That (being a Queeney this kingly beast does owe
Me duty by in^tinct: Besides I come
Both with Virginity and Martyrdom,
Sainted moreover, and (of these) the least
Able to tame the most insulting Beast.
But this is he the billows does divide,
And therefore justly on his back I ride:
All these belonging to this Worthy Trade,
The Lion, Sea-waues, and the Princely Maid*
That for the Arms: note next what I display
In this my Banner here, Serve and obey*
Rare Moral in this Motto, (if well scand)
For Kings are Gods, Viz-gerents, and command
By Sword and Scepter: and by their good Grace
Can prefer others both to power and place.
As you this Day behold this Scarlet worn,
And Sword of Justice thus in public borne;
The Cap of Maintenance, Collar of Esses,
(Which Travelers in all their large progresses
Can in no City parallel, that is site
In the earths division, known quadrupertite:)
So, whosoever shall himself oppose
Against this Magistrate, (as one of those
The King deputes as Chief) himself he brings
To be a rebel to the King of Kings:
Far be it an arch*traytor in that kind
Amongst all these goodly Companies, (combind
In mutual love and league:) should dare to appear
In the fair Progress of this Praetors year.
Behold, and view who my attendants be,
Constancy, Zeal, Truth, and Humility.
Be constant then unto this Grave Lord Mayor,
And the two Shrieues that his assistants are;
Chose by the public Voice and Senats Doom,
As Censors, and the Tribunes were in Rome;
Do it in Zeal, in Truth, and all submission,
That their be found no cross interposition
Betwixt Power and Obedience, so shall all
Arts, Mysteries, and Trades Mechannicali,
Thrive* prosper, and increase, so long as they
Honor the King, the Magistrate obey.

The second show by Land.
This discovers Andromeda the Daughter of King Cepheus, and Cassiopeia, tide
to a Rock* and ready to be devoured by a Sea Monster: But rescued by Perseus
the Son of Jupiter and Danae, who is mounted upon a Pegasus, or Winged-horse,
who is said to be bred from Neptune and Medusa, and in Hellicon a Mountain in
B^^tia, striking a Stone with his hoof, opend that Fountain. called (from
him) Hyppocrene, much celebrated by the Muses. Perseus in one hand has an
Harp or crooked Sword, and upon his left arm a Shield with a Gorgons head
figured therein: In Perseus are comprehended all the prime Virtues acquired in
a Noble Magistrate: In Andromeda Chastity and Innocence: I cannot here insist
Meta-
upon the Hystory, but rather refer the Reader to Ovid, who has most
elegantly expressed it; but come to the Speech delivered by Perseus.

Perseus his Speech.
I Perseus, Jove's son, borne of Heavenly Stead,
Mounted upon a swist Pegasian Steed,
Who with his hoof struck up the Muses Well,
Whence Euthusia^ma's and hie Ruptures swell.
As through the ayery tract I forced my way,
Spyde here the Lovely Maid Andromeda,
Cheynd to a Rock, on whom (so Fate has lowerd)
Ready by a Sea-whale to be deuourd.
Know there is figured in this Princely Maid,
Chastity, and Innocence, which Divine aid
Is ready to assist still from above,
By one or other of the Sons of Jove.
Of which denomination, none, more Grace
Can claim than you, who are in power and place,
And hold this Day in chief; then Perseus like,
Keep that your Sword still drawn, ready to strike;
Making such Monsters of your Justice taste,
Who insidiate the Innocuous and the Chaste.
Observe (Grave Sir) the Atmes and Shield I bear,
Such as your self, and others ought to wear,
Both for Defense and Offense: and in me
Embleam'd, all those prime Virtues that should be
In Persons of your Power, my Sword resembles
Impartial Justice, at which guilt still trembles;
My Winged-horse, Celerity and Speed:
In doing it, that no illegal deed
May pass vnscourged, and there be took no rest,
Until relief be given to the oppressed.
This Shield that bears the Gorgons head imblaz'd,
Upon whose Snaky locks who ever gazed,
Were turned to statues of cold senseless stone,
Is that (Grave Magistrate) you now put on.
Whilst on your Arm you wear this constant Targe,
Bearing your self uprightly in your Charge.
All such as shall in Malice or in Pride
Your Purple State detract from, or deride,
Discover this before them, it has power
To freeze them into Marble the same hour
Strive you to imitate what I have done,
Since you this day, are Perseus and Jove's son.

The third show by Land.
(...)
This is more Mimicall then Material, and inserted for the Vulgar, who rather
love to feast their eyes, then to banquet their cares: and therefore though it
be allowed place amongst the rest: (as in all Professions we see Dunces
amongst Doctors, Simple amongst ^ubtle, and Fools intermixed with Wisemen to
fill up number) as doubting whether it can well appollogy for it ^^lfe or no, at
this time I afford it no tongue.

The fourth show by Land.
The Right Honorable the Lord Mayor in present, though free of this
Worshipful Company of the Haberdashers, (at whose sole charge, the High
Solemnity of this Day is celebrated) yet was by Profession a Mercer, and his
chief Trading was in Florence for Sattins, Taffaties, and Sarsnets; in Luca
for Taffaties and Sarsnets, in Gene for Gene Veluets, Damasks, etc. In Bolognia
for Sattins, Cypress, and Sarsnets. As also in Pysa, now because the
materials of which these Stuffes are made, are brought from the farthest
remote Countries upon the backs of Cammels, Mules, Dromidaries and Elephants: I
made choice of this Beast, especially, of whose incomparable strength and most
pregnant understanding, if any desire to be fully satisfied, I must refer
them to Pliny, Gesner, but more essentially to Don Sebastian de Cobarruias
Oroz^o En el Tesoro de la Lengua Castellana, (from whom Minshaw borrowed his
Etymologicall Spanish Dictionary) upon the word Elephante, where are diverse
Stories of them, which but for the Gravity of the Author, might almost appear
incredible. The Elephant is guided by an Indian, upon his back is a fair
Castle furnished with change and variety of objects, etc. the Speech delivered
by the Indian as follows.

The Indians Speech.
No beast of all the Wilderness can vant
Like Srength or Wisdom with the Elephant.
And therefore, (if considerd well) none may
Better become the Triumphs of this Day.
What Hieroglificke can a man invent,
Embleame or Symbol, for a Government
In this high nature, apter or more fit
Devised before, or to be thought of yet.
He bears a Castle (as this day we see,
But of what strength and puissance must you be
Supporting this great City? who must lay
Your shoulders to a burden; such as may
Make Atlas shrink bencath it; Temples, Towers
Rial^oes, spacious Mansions, Suburb bowers.
A weight to make the Hesperian Giant droope
And Hercules, (who bore up Heaven) to stoop.
Next, of what Understanding* Apprehension,
What Judgment, Knowledge, Wisdom and Retention?
Of what Foresight? what Body and what Brain?
What an Antomedan to guide the rain Antomed. Hectors Charister. Palinur: Pi
lot to Aenea

Of Steedes vnmannag'd? what a Palinure
To steare this Helm? and such a Bark assure
In a Sea troubled, where can be no trust
In an unconstant Surge or angry Gust?
Yet such an Elephant we hope to find
Of you, both in the ability of Mind
And strength of Arm, by that encouragement
The former passage of your life has lent:
Showed in your Judgment and Experience,
Your Gravity, and unchanged Temperance;
All general Virtues that become such State,
Behouefull in so Great a Magistrate:
So after Times unto your Fame shall story
How you have borne up in her pristine Glory
This flourishing City, not once shrinking under
So great a burden, (to successiue wonder)
Since no skild Pilot better could command
By Sea, or expert Charicter by Land.

The fist show by Land.
Is the Scaturigo or Fountain of Virtue, from which all Arts and Sciences are
watered: I need not to spend Time in the description thereof, it being able
sufficiently to express it self, the nature thereof being in the Poem laid
open even unto the meanest capacity. There are twelve sundry persons to
beautify the Mo^ell, suiting with the number of the twelve Companies as the
Saints that pancrize them; and every of them a (...) on their arm, bearing
their several Scu^chions properly belonging to the Halls. The Speech from the
Fountain is thus delivered.

The Speech upon the Fountain.
Twelve hours twice told, distinguish night and Day,
Twelve Caesar's of the Julian Line did sway
Romes Empire, and in cuery case of striffe
Where Action's tryde or if concerning life,
Twelve makes the Jury full: the Zodaiacke Lines
Are likewise filled by twelve Celestial Signs,
Amongst which one in your Emblazons borne
Is numbered by the name of Capricorn.
Twelve Sibills we account* and they foretold
Things happened since, although they spoke of old
By twelve: the blessed Word in the Church instated
Was at the first divuldg'd and propagated.
Twelve Companies you are in Chief, 13. here
Present that number with those Arms they bear.
And hence the Inundant Scaturigo grows,
Which through our Kingdoms large Dominions flows,
By founded Schools, by Colleges, by Trade*
By Traffic, ^by Commerce, by Project laid.
For thrifty Bargain and all competent Gain,
Asswell arising from the Hand as Brain.
London the Mother and the Fountain styled*
And you of all her Sons new eldest Child;
(Heir to her great good Works) encourage still
These pious Acts, and by Example fill
Void places with the like, and in this State
You bear, as being now chief Magistrate:
So order this your numerous Charge, that they
May God, the King, Your self Serve and Obey.

^^ the Sup^^rters of (...) Arms
A word or two concerning the supporters of the Arms of this Worshipful
Company. Parmentsius a Greek Author thus relates, King Mel^^seus who ruled in
Creete, had two Daughters, to whom Jupiter in his Infancy was sent of the
C^^pany.
to be nursed, to preserve him from the fury of his Father Saturn: but they
being at that time dry-brested, caused him to suck of a Goat called
Amalthaea, by whose Milk he was nourished, till the time that he came to be
weyned, (this Goat usually brought forth two twins) Jupiter after in requital
of so great a benefit received by her, translated her amongst the Stars. This
Goat is that Capricornus one of the 12. Celestial Signs, The two Kidds (her
twins) placed in the Heauensolso, were first observed by the great Astrologer
Cl^ostrates Tenedi^s. The last Speech at Night is delivered by Arion, which is
a short commemoration of the former passages of the Days Triumph in these
words following.

Now has the Sun put off his golden beams,
Watring his hot Steeds in cold Ister streams,
And tired with his days travel, in the West
Took up his Inn: But ere you go to rest,
Remember what Arion still proclaims
In the due honor of the noble Thames.
Next, how your Queene-like Saint directs the way
For you to rule, for others to obey.
Then to be called Jove's Son you have the Grace,
And that in Persaus figured is your Place.
That in this able Elephant's implyde
Your Strength to bear, your Judgment to decyde.
Last, that you are the Spring and Fountain made
To water enery Science, Art, and Trade;
Observing those, your Honor shall shine bright,
And so a happy and most blessed goodnight.
I come last to the Artist, the Moddellor and Composer of these several
Pieces, Master Gerard Christmas, of whom (si paruis componert, magnalicet) as
Augustus Caesar, speaking of Rome, boasted, that he found it of Brick, but
he left it built of Marble: So he who found these Pageants and shows of
Wicker and Paper, rather appearing monstrous and prodigious Births, then any
Beast (presented in them) in the least kind imitating Nature: has reduced them
to that sollidity and substance for the Materials, that they are so far from
one days washing to deface them, that the weathering of many Winters can not
impeach them: and for their excellent Figures and well-proportioned lineaments,
(by none preceding him) that could be said to be paralleld: In regard
therefore there be so many strangers of all Countries, and such as can judge
of Workmanship, come to be spectators of these Annual Triumphs, I could wish
that the undertaking thereof might be hereafter conferd (for the Honor of the
City) upon men like able and sufficient. For his own particular I conclude:
Hunc aliquis vix imitando superare potest.

FINIS.

