A FUNERAL Elegy, Upon the death of the late most hopeful and illustrious
Prince, HENRY, Prince of Wales.

Written by THOMAS HEYWOOD,

Quid numeras Annos? vixit maturior Annis.
Acta senem faciunt; haec numeranda tibi.
LONDON, Printed for William Welbie, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign
of the Swan. 1613.

To the right Honorable, Edward Earl of Worcester, Lord of Chepstoll,
Ragland, and Gower, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Master of
the Horse, and one of the Kings most Honorable Privy COUNCIL.
AS to the most compassionate in this general mourning (right Honorable) I
dedicate this Funeral Elegy to your gracious protection: wishing with my
soul, I might have had a more pleasing subject, both for my Pen, and your
Patronage, but since the Heavens have given us this cause it is a duty to
entertain the occasion, and an vnswerable negligence to omit it; pity it were
that Pen should ever more cast ink, that would not make the whitest paper
mourn in so universal a sorrow: To whom then may I so aptly consecrate these
Tears, as to your Honor? whose entire zeal to the Prince living (as I am
confident) equaled the Best: so (I am no less assured) your sorrow for his
death has exceeded the most, and (if I may offencelesse speak it) contended
with the greatest. Accept, I entreat your Honor, this my obliged duty to him,
and ever acknowledged service to you; wishing all future occurrences, to be
true, and essential causes of your ioies: and this last, the last of your
Tears.

Your Honors most Affectionately devoted, THOMAS HEYWOOD.

TO THE READER.
WHy should I unto any private Peer,
Commend these sorrows for a Prince like dear?
To all sorts, Sexes, Titles, and estates.
Lives there a man, that when his friend relates
This Princes Fate, (though he before were glad
With surplusage) when he but thinks we had,
But have him not, though he knows he is Divine,
And cannot betterd be; his eyes drop brine;
If I may (among these sad ones) then include
The Gentle, Base, the Polisht, and the Rude.
If from the Head to th'Heele, this Land complain,
As well the learned Clarke, as the ignorant Swain,
If neither Country, City, Camp, nor Court
Has escaped this deluge; but we may report
All drench't in it: every man to have wept his turn,
And still in heart (though not in habit) mourn.
To thee (o Reader) whoso-ere thou be,
I dedicate this Funeral Elegy.
But thou that can not read, can thou but hear?
If thy attention can but force one tear,
Eor that it is as welcome to thy hand,
As unto those I love, that understand.
Thine T. H.

A Funeral Elegy, Of the late most High and Illustrious Prince, HENRY, Prince
of Wales.
IS all the Land in sorrow, and can I
Still silent be? when every Muse exclames
On Time, on Death, and on sad Destiny,
FOR HENRY'S loss, cursing the fatal Dames.
Mournes Christendom? and in a general cry,
Vp-roares her griefs, whilst some weak Physic blames
Accusing Galen of his want of skill
That where he once can save, does oft-times kill.
Others on Sovereignty, that has given power
To Princes, others forset lives to save,
Yet to their own Times cannot add an hour,
Or keep their bodies from th'abortiue Grave.
Oh greedy Earth, whose hunger could denoure
So choice a gem! thou never leau'st to crave,
More ravenous then the most raging fires,
Earth still the more it eats, the more desires.
What Muse shall I inuoke? To whom commit
The guidance of my weak unable brain?
Whose humble thoughts never aspired yet
A pitch so lofty, or so high a strain,
A subject for my weakness far unfit,
As never having like cause to complain.
Was ever like to this? seen, heard, or read?
The Hope of three kingdoms (nay the World) is dead.
Whom shall I blame for this great Cross of Crosses?
This present want, which Earth cannot supply,
To general Europe, the great Loss of Losses.
Had we put all our sins to usury,
Could they have yielded us such Dross of Drosses?
Had all the world devised one Tragedy,
And drawn the project from a thousand years,
From the spectators could it draw more tears?
This Universe imagine a Theater,
Nations spectators, and this land a stage.
Was ever Actor, made by the Creator,
That better scean'd his part unto his Age?
Amongst all composed of fire, air, earth and water,
So gravely young, and so vnmellowed sage:
Whose Trunk the Tomb exacts, as of a detter,
Subject or Prince, none ever acted better.
Nay who so well? yet as oft-times we see
(Presented in a lofty buskind style)
Achilles fall, Thersites to escape free,
The eminent Hector on the dead-mans file
Numbered and rank't, when men morebase then he
Survive the battle of less worth and style.
So thousands have suruiu'd these mortal brals,
Whilst amongst millions, standing, Henry falls.
Whom shall I blame for this? Just heaven? oh no,
Stars are their eyes, and (with so many) seeing,
What cloud can hud-winke all? besides we know,
The Maker that gave Them and Us our being,
Whose out-streacht hand steares all things here below
The imprisned souls from their base bondage freeing,
Being all goodness, he can never err:
Then unto whom shall we the blame transfer?
To Earth? we know she naturally breeds
Both Trees for use, and Plants that only spring.
But neither bear nor build: both flowers and weeds,
Simples, herbs, roots, and every other thing,
For smell or pallat, that delights, or feeds.
Should fair Pomona to Vertumnus bring
Her choycest store, she could not deck her bower
With such a sweet, fair, odoriferous flower.
Is not the Earth a Mother? and could she
Contentedly part with her best-lou'd Son?
In whose creation Nature was so free,
That to compose him, she was half undone
Her store she had so wasted: for, to be
As he was late, Ages must backward run,
And her great Warehouse, as in it first pride,
With her first plenty must be new supplied.
It was not Earth then sure: might it be Nature?
Would she her choycest worke-manship destroy?
Her best of fabrickes: both for beauty, stature,
And all perfections mankind can enjoy?
And in his growth, before he was full Mature,
Unto her own pride could she prove so coy,
As to this height of spite to have transcended,
To spoil so brave a work ere 'twas full ended?
Unless I could imagine one so fond
To build a gorgious palace, but to race it:
A cunning painter that has gone beyond
His skill, in a fair picture, to deface it
Before the world his cunning understand.
For one to make a rich suit, and ere grace it
Cut it to shreds. Imagine these to be,
Else from his sad fate I must Nature free.
On whom shall I this black aspersion cast?
Upon the Furies, Fiends, and Hagges below,
And say that Hell had hand in it at the last?
Although I hate Hell, I Will not iniur't so;
As stands Ioue's Tree, whom lightning cannot blast,
So high, so broad, so green, this plant did grow.
As is the Laurel from all Tempests free,
So thousand Hels could have no power over Thee.
If neither Heaven, Earth, Nature, nor yet Hell,
Or would not, or else could not act thy ruin,
If none of these such sorrows might compel,
Both to this present Age, and Times ensuing.
What was it then? or who? Muse can thou tell?
Resolve the world, and to their general viewing
Present the cause why in his prime of years,
So great a people should be washed in tears.
It was not Fate, his virtues and choice graces,
(Gifts both of Heaven and Nature) mixed with state,
Had in his bosom chose such sovereign places,
That he was armed against all power of Fate:
Nor Time, though he before him drives, and chaces
Minutes, days, months and years: till he call late
Every new season; to have saved his Prime,
From his own days he would have lent him time.
I must excuse Age, and extent of years:
For they (alack the while) nere saw each other.
Oh had they met, we then had spared these tears,
And saved this grief, which is too great to smother,
So mild, so grave, so reverent, Age appears
He would have joyed to embrace him as a brother,
As youth his hopes: he would have strived to raise
His fortunes, being clothed in ancient days.
The Muses and the Arts I can acquit:
For they are all too good to act such ill,
Preposterous 'twere to think them opposite
So far to their own life, as seek to kill
Him through whose eyes they did receive their sight,
And to whose practice they consigned their will:
Whose actions were his deeds, in whom they saw
All virtues graced with a Maiesticke awe.
Nor would the Muses have given such occasion
Of their own tears, which they so freely shed.
What purpose then? what motive? what persuasion
Has been the cause that we lament him dead?
Or how came Death to make this proud invasion,
And casket up this gem in stone and lead?
Himself could not, (for he was all perfection)
Bring his fair body to this low deiection.
'Twas that which shattered Sylo, made the earth
Gape, and at once devour both Tribes and Tents:
That made the spears shower fire, all Natures birth
Confined into one Arc: that all discents,
Degrees and Titles in one general dearth,
Swept from the earths face, that beyond all extents,
Limits and bounds, incenst Jove's indignation,
To drown the world in a deep inundation.
What monster may we call this? Sin: our sin,
When one alone (and but one) that of pride,
Cast Angels from the highest Cherubin,
All their bright gloryes in the Abisme to hide;
Since many millions we are wrapped in,
As ugly and as horrid: deep sins died
In blood, and death; no wonder if they pull
This wrath on us, to make our griefs more full.
They were our selves then, that our selves have made
Thus haplessely distressed, thus inly sad.
Yet as we read, to have the rage allai'd
Of a deep gulf: the Romans notice had
From the Oracle, that breach could not be staid
Till Romes best Jewel stopped it. Curtius clad
In his best Arms and mounted on his steed,
To save a People did a Torrent feed.
So since this best of Jewels England stored,
Has stopped the gaping entrails of the grave:
Let after ages of this Prince record,
He freely gave a life, a land to save.
As gold the Misers God (by them adored)
Depends upon the Sun, from him to have
His purity of Temper, and as glass,
Shows the utmost virtue that the fire can pass.
By which they have the pureness not to be
Others then what they are, strange forms to take,
And loose their native esse: even so He,
Being the perfect'st work Nature could make,
Cannot convert to Dust and Earth as We,
Or his first Beauty in the grave forsake.
Since Nature in his birth to him has done,
More then to Glass or Gold, the Fire or Sun.
The more we joyed to see his virtues grow,
The greater are our sorrows for his lack:
Excess of joy begets excess of woe,
Often general weal precedes a general wrack,
Oh! why should our best pleasures perish so,
Like waters that pass by but never run back?
And yet to make us ever think of Tears,
Though the waves fleet, the River still appears.
I Will show the cause. Jove seeing earthly Pleasure,
By Man so honored that the Gods he hated:
(Being adored by Mortals above measure)
Called her to Heaven there to be new instated,
She straight disroabes her of all Earthly Treasure,
As all must needs do, that are so translated.
Grief banished Earth, whilst Pleasure here made stay,
Finding her Habit steals it quite away.
And in that forged Roabe she has deluded
The world with fading joys and transitory:
For since she first into that shape intruded
There was on Earth no true essential glory.
All constancy from Mankind is excluded,
Joy has no permanence: find me a story,
That ever has recorded Man so blessed,
But happied once, he has been twice distressed.
To tell his worth were but to add to sorrow,
Like him that being robbed, still casts the sum:
The present fright so much from grief does borrow
That the instant feels not whence the passions come;
The ecstasy once past, when, on the morrow
The cause is weighed, the voice no more is dumme:
The eyes that had their conduits stopped before,
Now freely run, and the hearts grief deplore.
No Oracles were weightier then his words,
Those that should counsel him he could advise:
Art had in him her Mansion: Princes swords
Should defend Art, and Art make Princes wise,
They had ioin'd league: his fluent brain affoords
A Library of Knowledge, and unties
The knotted'st soryte; fair Pernassus well,
The Muses did abandon, there to dwell.
As Metals by the sound, so could he try
The flashy from the sollid when they spoke:
Clear was his judgment, as his spirit was hye,
His smile was mercy, but his frown did shake.
His aim was to know Art and Chiualry,
Save when to heaven he did his vows betake.
He studied Man: but to be better far
Then man can be: He was half Love, half War.
He was not swaide by Favors, but Desert,
Merit, not Flattery still inioy'd his pay:
He would advise before he spared his Heart,
But lending it, not easily take it away.
He had that constant Virtue not to start,
Or let (in his designs) his judgment stray.
Those that were next him, and his Favors wore
May speak him better, not lament him more.
Before he graced he would both prove and know,
He was not idly lost, nor rashly won,
His maine was Virtue, none might near him grow,
But such as truly knew to choose or shun
Good things and bad: to punish he was slow,
But apt to pardon: He was as the Sun
Amid the Planets, seeming so diuin'd,
That all about, and near him he out-shin'd.
Posterity, with greater admiration
Then I can blaze him, shall embrace his Fame,
Those deluges of Tears showered from this Nation:
Rather to blemish seem, then blanch his name:
Since all our Elegies begot from passion,
Come from rent hearts, and those that griese proclaim.
Confused thoughts the best conceits destroy,
And are more harsh then when we sing of joy.
Being great in Name, his study did agree
To make Him great in Purpose: and his deeds
Answer his Style: His Goodness was so free,
It wanted bound: one Royal action breeds
A second still; the end of one's to be,
The entrance to another that succeeds.
Honor (the Manna of each generous Spirit)
Was to him as the Crown he was to inherit.
For well he knew if Fire it self should hide,
By his own Smoke it would it self betray,
Or if that Water should it self divide,
(As weary of the world) and steal away:
Yet by the Reeds placed by the River side,
She might be trained, and so be made to stay.
But Honor fled, with it, it bears His tracke,
No Time, no Age can stay or call him back.
His Spirits were all active, made of fire,
Which (save in travel) can admit no rest.
High were his thoughts, yet still surmounting hy're,
His very Motives Industry professed.
To be in Action was his sole desire,
And not to be so he did most detest.
To end his Praise, and prove him past compare,
To all his Fathers virtues he was heir.
He was but yesterday, and now is faded,
Who when we held him dearest, was then lost:
So Lands that think them saf'st, are often invaded,
And when they least fear, are afflicted most.
So the clear'st skies with blackest clouds are shaded,
So Pleasures (thought most certain) soon'st are crossed.
For it is a Maxim that shall ever stand:
Pleasure and Sorrow still march hand in hand.
As Hector, had he suruiu'd Tray to see,
From Isliams lofty Tower his young son cast:
Or such grief Priam, as it was to thee
When worthy Hector, both the first and last
Of all Troyes hopes, sunk dead; me thinks I see
In Royal IAME's, thy sorrows quite surpast,
With double anguish, trebole passions fired,
When he first heard Prince Henry was expired.
And you Maiesticked ANNE, when Hecub saw
Sweet, Polymnestor, all the poor remain
Of her brave Issue, beat by many a flaw,
And to the shore forced by the billowy Maine:
Methinks from her face I your grief could draw.
And you Prince Charles, next of that royal strain;
In young Polytes I your tears can tell,
That day in field his brother Troylus fell.
For you (most hopeful Princess) I comprise
Your passions in a Dame though not so fair,
Yet as those Times affoorded, beauteous, wise,
And with the best of that age might compare:
Your Tears I read in bright Pollixen's eyes,
That son which she beheld saw none so rare,
Though you (but once) she (often) had cause of woe,
Her, as in beauty you in grief out-goe.
But in this plangor, whom had I forgot,
You my Mecaenas? oh it cannot be
That I am so ingrate; believe it not,
Though passion almost takes my sense from me:
Oh let me never wear so foul a spot,
As worthy Earl not to remember Thee.
Thrice noble Worster gave my Muse first wing,
And from his bounty she had voice to sing.
So should my bosom harbor something new,
Ingratitude, with me, no way agreeing:
Then should I not remember whence I grew,
Or from what power I first received my being:
To mine own heart I should not then be true,
First hands forget your use, my eyes their seeing:
My tongue thy office, and my Muse her skill,
That nere more ink drop from her ragged quill.
Pious Aeneas still when I record,
(A man in whom all virtues were complete)
When Priam's best of sons fell by the sword,
How he abandoned rest, joy, comfort, meat,
So often have I remembered you grave Lord,
Equal in virtues, and your grief as great.
All those glad hopes you from his life did borrow
You in his death have back rapai'd with sorrow.
Yet why should you bewail him since he is past
This Transitory reign, for one ay-during,
To vex your selves would but his soul distaste:
He has but left a Crown of earths assuring
For one immortal, that can never wast:
Subject to Time nor Age: there is no alluring
Of mortal pomp can counteruaile the least
Of heavens pure bliss (so are there ioies increast)
Auerre we then (and without contradiction,)
The loss is ours, but his eternal gain,
It Is his best good, all be it our affliction,
That such a general sorrow we sustain:
Death that has given him this new jurisdiction,
Doubles his joys, as he augments our pain.
Then as we loved him, let us rejoice in this,
The greater was our loss, the more's his bliss.
Not for Him then, but for our selves lament:
He needs them not, it is we have use for tears,
He soiournes where can come no discontent,
It Is we that labor under sickness, years,
Heates, colds, Distemprature of Element,
Dangers of body, and th'amaze of fears.
From all misfortunes to the world decreed,
(Of which we stand in doubt) he is happy freed.
Not for him then, but for our selves expend
Soorses of sad and direful lamentation,
Who see our Griefs live, and our Hopes have end:
Since Death has in one blow wounded a Nation,
Since Heaven no greater glories can extend
Then she enioyes, leaving us naught but Passion,
Since should Death break his Dart, and never shoot more,
He cannot cure the hurt he made before.
He that will act the wonders of his praise,
Shall find the world a Theater too small.
Fame with her Trumpet shall his glories blaze;
Yet (ere to their full height) grow hoarse withal,
Whom who shall strive to imitate, or raise
An equal Hope to his, needely must fall
Prostrate, confounded with his own ambition,
So far shall be precede him in condition.
Therefore what my Pen scants him in his merit,
With mine own inward Passions I Will supply.
More then an Earthly Prince, he is now a Spirit,
Throned in a Kingdom, unto which the Sky
Is but a Foot-pace, ever there to inherit,
Beyond all Time, to all eternity.
Where I lament not He is Throned and placed,
I only grieve that He has made such hastle.
Thomas Heywood.

FINIS.

