To the Mayor, Aldermen, and Inhabitants of N.
THat which heretofore I have propounded to you (right Worshipful and beloved)
in teaching, I do now publish to all men by printing, to wit, mine opinion of
the unlawfulness of games consisting in chance. My desire is either
information, if I err in judgment, or reformation of so lewd a practice. But
whether I err or no (which yet I would gladly understand, Romans 3. 7.
for I ought not to teach an untruth, though to Gods glory) yet there is none,
zealous indeed against sin, desirous from the heart to reclaim sinners, and
who deeply considers the grievous abuses, which accompany dicing and
carding (as horrible swearing, dangerous quarelling, loss (I say not of good
hours, but) of nights and days, and the pitiful undoing of too too many)
but will remembe that 1. Cor. 6. 12.
all things are not expedient, which are lawful, and therefore abstain from
such Heathenish passe-times, that, if by their example they cannot reform,
they may be sure 1. Cor. 8. 9.
they do not confirm gamesters in their inordinate walking. Which respect, the
7. Iniunction forbidding Ministers to use these unlawful games, may be
supposed to have. Now that which authority exacteth of Ministers, does
Religion require of all true Professors. For as the one are to be 1. Tit. 5. 3.
ensamples to the flock, so the other are to be Phil. 2. 15.
lights in the world. And therefore as PAVL says. 1 Cor. 8. 10. 13
If meat offend my brother, I will eat no flesh while the world stands. So
every true Chistian should say, and that with more resolution (for Play is not
so necessary as meat.) If play offend my brother, who seeing me having
knowledge, play, is boldned to follow gaming, I will not play while the world
stands. Which care unto edification if all, who have the Psalm. 50. 1^. 17.
word in their mouths, and would not be thought to hate to be reformed, would
manifest in their sincere conversation and if Magistrates, who should not Rom
13. 4.
carry the sword in vain would do what they may by 33 H. 8. c. 9 5. (...) 25.
law, to banish these forbidden past-times, or rather lost-times, I doubt not,
but that preaching and writing against them would more mightily prevail, and
this good would come of it, many would apply themselves to better exercises,
there would be less time misspent in Alehouses, and God less provoked to
displeasure against us. But these things I refer to the consideration of the
wise and this my Dialogue to the judgment of the Godly, chiefly to you, whose
good I wish especially. Farewell.

A Dialogue against playing at Cards and Tables.
Professor SIr howsoever I am persuaded by that which I read in the common
places of Peter Martyr, Par. 2. page 525. b. that Dice (condemned both by the
Civil laws, and by the Fathers) are therefore unlawful, because they depend
upon thaunce: yet not satisfied with that which he writes of Table-playing,
page 526. b. I would crave your opinion concerning playing at Tables and Cards.


Preacher. Saving the judgment of so excellent a Divine, so far as I can
learn out of Gods word, Cards and Tables seem to me no more lawful (though
less offensive) the dice. For Table playing is no whit the more lawful
because Plato compares the life of man thereunto, then a thief is the more
justifiable, because Christ compares his second coming, to Burglarie in the
night, Matt. 24. 43. 44. Again, if Dice be wholly evil, because they wholly
depend upon chance, then Tables and Cards must needs be somewhat evil,
because they somewhat depend upon chance. Therefore consider well this reason,
which conde^neth the one aswelas ye other: Lots are not to be used in sport,
but games consisting in chance, as dice, cards, Tables, are lots, therefore not
to be used in sport.


Profes. For my better instruction, prove that Lots are not to be used in sport.


Preach. Consider with regard these three things: First, that we read not in
the Scriptures that Lots were used but only in serious matters both by the
Jews. Ioh. 8. 48. 1. Cor. 11. 16
Ios. 18. 10. and Gentiles Ion. 1. 7. Secondly, that a Lot in the nature
thereof does as necessarily suppose the special providence and determining
presence of God as an oath in the nature thereof does suppose the testifying
presence of God. Yea so, that (as in an oath) so in a Lot prayer is expressed or
to be understood, 1. Sam. 14. 41 Thirdly, that the proper end of a Lot (as of
an oath, Heb. 6. 16.) is to end a controversy and therefore for your better
instruction examine these reasons. Whatsoever directly, or of it self, or in a
special manner, tends to the advancing of the name of God, is to be used
religiously, Mal. 1. 6. 7. and not to be used in sport: as we are not to pray
or swear in sport. Exodus 20, 7. Esa. 29. 13. Ier. 4. 2. but the use of Lots,
directly of it self and in a special manner tends to advancing of the name of
God, in attributing to his special providence in the whole and immediate
disposing of the Lot. and expecting the event, Pro. 16. 33. Act. 1. 24, 26.
Therefore the use of Lots is not to be in sport. Again, we are not to tempt
the Almighty by a vain desire of manifestation of his power and special
providence, Psalm. 78. 18. 19. Esa. 7. 12 Matt. 4. 6. 7. But by using Lots in
sport we tempt the Almighty, vainly desiring the manifestation of his special
providence in his immediate disposing, Therefore, etc. Lastly, whatsoever God
has sanctified to a proper end, is not to be perverted to a worse, Matt. 21.
12 13. But God has sanctified Lots to a proper end, namely to end
controversies, Number. 26. 55. Pro. 18. 18. therefore man is not to pervert them
to a worse: namely to play, and by playing to get away another man's money,
which without controversy is his own. For the common saying is, Sine lucro
friget lusus, no gaining, cold gaining.


Profes. God has sanctified Psalms to the praise of his name, and bread and
wine to represent the body and blood of our crucified Savior, which be holy
ends: and the children of God may sing Psalms to make themselves merry in the
Lord, and feed upon bread and wine not only for necessity but to cheer
themselves why then may not Gods Children recreate themselves by lottery
notwithstanding God has sanctified the same to end a controversy?


Preach. Because we find not in the scriptures any dispensation for recreation
by lotterie as we do for godly mirth by singing. Iam. 5. 13. and for religious
and sober chearing our selves by eating and drinking, Deuteronomy. 8. 9. 10. And
therefore (it being withal considered that the ends you speak of, be not
proper, though holy) it follows, that God who only disposes the Lot touching
the event, and is therefore a principal actor, is not to be set on work by
lottery in any case but when he dispenses with us, or gives us leave so to
do: But dispensation for recreation by lottery cannot be showed, Therefore, etc.


Profes. Lots may be used for profit in a matter of right, Number. 26. 55. why not
for pleasure?


Preach. Then others may be used for pleasure, for they may for profit, in a
matter of truth, Exodus 22. 8. 11. But indeed lots (as oaths) are not to be used
either for profit or pleasure, but only to end a controversy.


Profes. The wit is exercised by Tables and Cards, therefore they be no lots.


Preach. Yet Lotterie is used by casting Dice, and by shufling and cutting,
before the wit is exercised. But how does this follow? Because Cards and Tables
be not naked Lots, consisting only in chance (as Dice) they are therefore no
lots at all. Although (being used without cogging, or packing) they consist
principally in chance, from whence they are to receive denominatio^. In which
respect a Lot is called in Latin Sors, that is, chance or hazard. And Lyra upon
Prou. 16. says, To use Lots, is, by a variable event of some sensible thing,
to determine some doubtful or uncertain matter, as to draw cuts, or to cast
Dice. But whether you will call Cards and Tables Lots, or no, you play with
chance or use Lotterie. Then consider whether exercise of wit does sanctify
playing with lotterie, or playing with lotterie make such exercising of wit a
sin, Hag. 2. 13. 14. For as calling God to witness by vain swearing is a sin,
2. Cor. 1. 13 so making God an vmpier, by playing with lotterie must needs be a
sin: yea, such a sin as makes the offender (in some respects) more
blameworthy. For there be mo occasions of swearing then of lottery. Secondly,
vain oaths most commonly slip out at unawares, whereas Lots cannot be used but
with deliberation. Thirdly, swearing is to satisfy other whereas this kind of
lottery is altogether to fulfill our own lusts. Therefore take heed, that you be
not guilty of perverting the ordinance of the Lord, of taking the name of God
in vain, and of tempting the Almighty, by a gamesome putting off things to
hazard, and making play of lottery, except you think that God has no
government in vain actions, or has dispensed with such lewd games.


Profes. In shooting there is a chance by a sudden blast, yet shooting is no
lottery.


Preach. It is true: for that chance comes by accident, and not of the nature
of the game, to be used.


Profes. Lots are secret, and the whole disposing of them is of God, P^o. 16.
33. but it is otherwise in Tables and Cards.


Preach. Lots are cast into the (...), man, and (...) should be suspected: but
the disposing of the chance is secret, that it may be chance indeed, and
wholly of God, who directs all things, Pro. 16. 13. 9. 33. So in Tables, man
by fair casting Dice truly made, and in Cards, by shuffling and cutting, does
openly dispose the Dice and Cards so, as whereby a variable event may follow:
but it is only and immediately of God that the Dice be so cast, and the Cards
so shuffled and cut, as that this or that game follows, except there be
cogging and packing. So that in fair play man's wit is not exercised in
disposing the chance, but in making the best of it being past.


Profes. The end of our play is recreation and not to make God an vmpire: but
recreation (no doubt) is lawful.


Preach. It may be the soldiers had no such end when they cast lots for Christ
his coat, Matt. 27. 25. but this should be your end when you use lottery, as
the end of an oath should be, to call God to witness. Therefore as swaring, so
lottery, without due respect is sin. Again, howsoever recreation be your
pretended end, yet remember that we must not do evil that good may come of it,
Romans 3. 8. And that therefore we are to recreate our selves by lawful
recreations. Then see how Cards and Tables be lawful.


Profes. If they be not abused by swearing or brawling, playing for too long
time, or too much money.


Preach. Though I am persuaded that it is not lawful to play for any money,
considering thanks cannot be given in faith for that which is so gotten, Deuteronomy.
23. 18. Esa. 61. 8. Gamesters work not with their hands the thing that is
good, to be free from stealing, Ephe. 4. 28. and the looser has not an
answerable benefit for his money so lost, Genesis 29. 15. contrary to that
equity which Aristotle by the light of nature has taught long since, Eth. l.
5. c. 4. yet I grant that Cards and Tables so used as you speak, be less
sinful, but how they be lawful I see not yet.


Profes. Good men and well learned use them.


Preach. We must live by precepts, not by examples, except they be undoubtedly
good. Therefore examine whether they be good, and well learned in so doing or
no. For every man may err, Romans 3. 4.


Profes. It is not good to be too just, or too wise, Eccl. 7. 18.


Preach. It is not good to be too wicked or too foolish, Eccl. 7. 19. in
despising the word of God. Pro. x. 22. and not regarding the weakness of
other, Romans 14 21. Let us therefore beware that we love not pleasure more then
Godliness, 2. Tim. 3. 4.


Imprinted at London for Richard Boil.


