AN INSTRVCTION How to Pray and Meditate well. DISTINGVISHED Into Thirty six
Chapters. COMPOSED At the request of certain lovers of Piety, desirous to
advance themselves in perfection.

By the Reverend Father, IGNATIUS BALSAMO Priest of the Society of JESUS.

And translated out of French into English, by JOHN HEIGHAM.

At S. Omers. Which license of Superiors Anno 1622.

TO THE RIGHT WORTHY AND VIRTUOUS Lady, the Lady LOVELL
RIght worthy MADAME Having in my hands an abhortiue infant, which has a
father, but wants a mother, my breast (the tables wherein I ever write the
loves of those to whom I am obliged) had many impulsions, hamblie to present
this little gift to your protection; encouraged in this, that honorable persons,
do not balance oblations according to their bigness; nor weigh so much the
gift, as the good will of the giver; nor yet respect the matter, but the mind
of the offerer

You are not ignorant, that even the very left things in this world, ar often
times those which, of the most noble and curious of all, are chiefly required.
Orient pearls are little in quantity, but rich in apri^^ment. Archimides
sphere contained no more in its enclosure, save only the bigness of a hazell
nut, but for that it so ingeniouslie represented what so ever was admirable in
the motion of the heavens, it ravished the spirits of all behoulders

Holy Scripture does also teach us, that the daughter of king Pharao was not
offended at the littlenes of Moses (whom she termed so, because she took him
forth of the waters) moved with pity and commiseration toward him, by
reason of the singular beauty which shined in him.

This motherles child, of far greater price then any Orient pearl, admirably
surpassing Alchimides Sphere, and shining in all sort of beauty like the infa^t
Moses, might happily nevertheless have incurred like misfortune, if he had not
had the good hap, to be taken up into the arms of so worthy a mother as your
self, far surpassing King Pharaos daughter, in pity, compassion, with many
other divine and holy virtues, whereof that unchristian Queen must needs be
incapable.

Conceive then (Right Courteous Madam I do beseech you) of this my present, as
of a pearl of unspeakable price, or at the least, as of a Messenger by whom
I send you, my best, my truest, and hartiest ^e^ire of your spiritual profit
and aduanceme^t in virtu. If I have offended in presuming to write without
sufficient pretext, to so worthy a person your self (virtuous Madam) be
pleased at the least to disburthen me of some part of the blame, finding my
self bound here unto, by the sundry bonds of honor, benignity, with diverse
most singular favors which you have demonstrated both unto me, and to mine:
which, together with your gular piety and zeal to virtu, have pressed my pen,
in part to acquit me of mine own duty, and of your desert Wishing you
continual increase of all virtues, with long life, health, and happiness in
this world and everlasting life in the next, I take my leave, Remaining
evermore.

Your Ladyships humble servant and unworthy gossip. JOHN HEIGHAM.

AN INSTRVCTION How to Pray and Meditate well.
CHAPTER I.
AMongst all the exercises of a spiritual life, there is none more difficult,
nor more necessary, then the exercise of Prayer, and meditation the which many
holy person ages have witnessed, and reason and experience do sufficiently
show us: wherefore on the behalf of man is required a great desire, care and
diligence in this affair. One may learn to pray well in three manners, or by
three particular means. The first means, or Master, is, the holy Ghost: for
if all things be the gift of almighty God, specialy the gift of Prayer, is
this gift. Wherefore we must instantly ask the same of Almighty God, saying
with the Apostles (Luc. 11) Domine doce nos orare. Lord reach us to pray, for
if thou (o Lord) teach us not to pray, never shall we know how to pray well.

The second means is, the self same Prayer, my meaning is, that in praying
and meditating, a man shall learn how to pray and meditate, as other arts or
occupatio^s. And even as he who should not write at al, or only once in a
month, should never learn to write: so he who never, or s^ldom prays and
Meditateth shall never learn to pray and Meditate. The third Master shall be,
some spiritual Father, well seen and experie^ced in these affairs. For as S.
Hiero^ says, writing to Rusticus, de Monach* institut. Nulla ars sine
Magistro. None can ever learn any art without a Master: whence we read in the
Gospel of S. Luke (c. 11) that S. John Bap. taught his disciples to pray, and
our Lord and Savior his.

To Meditate and make Mental Prayer, two things are very necessary, to
wit, the Manner, and the Matter, that is to say, that one must know the
method how to do it, and next have the subject in a readiness, to employ
himself thereupon: and for want of these two things or of the one of them,
many are cast backward, and cannot attend to this holy Exercise. We will
endeavor then, to aid them in the other. But first we must note and
understand two things; The one, what Prayer, Meditation, and their species
means; The other, what things help, and what things hinder Prayer, and
Meditaion.

CHAP. III. An Explication of the words Prayer, Meditation, and such others.
THis word Prayer, is taken in three manners, the second being the most
proper. So^times Prayer is called Petition, in English, demand, or request:
so S. John Damascen takes it. (Lib. 3. de Fide cap. 24.) when he says. Oration
est Petitio decentium a Deo. Prayer is a dema^d of Almighty God, of things
that are decent.

Othertimes, Prayer signifies the speech, discourse, or Colloquie of the soul
with Almighty God, be it in in asking something of him, be it in thanking him,
or otherwise conferring with him. And in this sense S. Chrysostom takes it
(Hom 10. in Gen.) saying, Ortio est colloquium cum Deo. Prayer is a Colloquie
of the soul with Almighty God.

Other times, this word Prayer signifies generaly all the interior acts of
the understanding, of the will, and of the other faculties, when they are
addressed to almighty God. And in the same sense, the selfsame S. John
Damascene says in the place before alleged, Oration est ascensus mentis in
Deum. Prayer is the asce^ding up of the mind into Almighty God; So that
Meditation, Contemplation, Praising of God, Thanksgiving, Petition,
Obsecration, Oblation, Promise, Accusation of a man's self, Complaint, Examen
of Conscience, Admiration, and other like Acts, are all species of Prayer; and
to Meditate, Contemplate, Give Thanks, Offer, and examine of Conscience, all
this is Prayer; yea, to read some spiritual book by way of devotion, is also
to Pray. For when one reads in this fashion, Almighty God speaks with man,
as in praying man speaks with Almighty God. For this cause S. Bernard in his
book. De scala Claustraliu^ has placed the reading of spiritual books,
amongst the parts of Prayer

To Meditate, is as much to say, as to think on some kind of thing or matter
diligently, and attentively, to the end to pray, and to speak, with God.
This I say, because to consider some mystery of our faith, or other like
thing to explicate in class, or for other like end, is not an espece of
Prayer.

This Meditation, or Consideration, is an act of the understanding, whence
forthwith follows the act of the will; for man knowing some good or evil,
moves it to love or hate the same, Whence the Holy Prophet said. Psalm. 38. In
meditation emea exardescet ignis. In my Meditation, fire shall be kindled
within mine heart. And for this reason it is, that Prayer and Meditation, go
ordinarily together, and are in such wise conjoined, that oftentimes one
cannot treat of the one, without the other.

Contemplation, is an excellent and affectuous Meditation, which is made
without discourse, and without pain, the soul being united with his God both
byknowledge and love together, as one who beholds steadfastly a beautiful
Image, without moving his fight this way, or that way, and therein taking his
contentment.

The Praise of God, is to laud and bless him, for the virtues and perfections,
which are con^ained in him.

Thankesgiuiing, is to render him Thanks for the benefits we have received of
him.

Petition, or demand is simply to ask some thing of him.

Obsecration, is a dema^d interposing some other sacred thing agreeable unto
him, to the end to enclyne him: as saying, by the precious blod of thy Son, I
beseech thee.

Oblation, is to offer some thing unto him, as our soul, our body, or the
works which we perform.

Examen of Conscience, is to search out our faults before Almighty God to crave
pardon, and to amend and correct our selves.

Admiration, is an excellent act of Prayer, when the soul being in
Contemplation, comes to wonder, and to be astonished at the Wisdom, Bou^ty
Patience, and other works of almighty God: whence do follow Exclamatio^s, and
sometimes Ecstasies, or Rauishme^ts.

Now taking Prayer properly in the second signification, there are three
sorts of Prayers, to wit, Mental, Vocal, and Mixed. And the reason is, for
that in three sorts or manners, a man may speak with Almighty God, by Heart, by
Mouth, and with the one and the other together: but we are to understand them
well.

Mental Prayer is, when the soul speaks to God interiourlie, without
pronouncing any word at all, showing unto him what she desires, with the
motion of the lips; This is true and perfect Prayer, and in the which God
delights him, as our Savior said to the Samaritan woman (S. John cap. 4) God
is a spirit, and they that adore him, must adore in in spirit.

Vocal prayer, is that which is made with the voice, forming and reciting the
words; But mark, that this ought to proceed from the heart, that is to say,
that we must consider the words which we speak, or have at the least,
intention to Pray, for if one Pray only with the Mouth, without any
inte^tion, using no endeavor todriue away distractions, and the wandering of the
spirit; such Prayer is neither vocal Prayer, nor any Prayer, but rather sin,
the which God reproacheth unto his people by the Prophet Esaias (cap. 29. and in
Mat. cap. 5.) saying. This people honors me with their lips, but their
heart is far from me: This Prayer therefore, is not called Vocal, because
it is made only with the mouth, but to be distinguished from that which is
Mental: because that Mental Prayer is made with the heart only, and Vocal,
by adding to the thoughts, the words also.

Mixed Prayer, is as much to say, as composed of Mental and Vocal together, and
is, when a man Prays unto God, partly by heart, partly by by mouth; so that
it is not mixed Prayer, when on prays with spirit and word together,
considering or pondering what one says (as some suppose) but it, is Vocal
Prayer. But mixed Prayer, is so called, when after one has prayed in spirit, he
do add thereunto some prayer by words.

CHAP. III Of that which we must do, and whereof we must beware, to the end, to
Pray and Meditate well.
THere are very many things which further, and are requisite, yea, very
necessary, to Pray and Meditate well; and likewise many which do hinder, and
whereof we must carefuly take heed. And this is one of the causes, for the
which this exercise is so difficult: it is also the cause, that there are so
few in the world that do perform it well, because we bring not that which
the thing requires, nor countergarde our selves from the things that are
contrary; which thing, every one may know, examining himself, after we
shall have explicated the the same. Of these means and impediments, the R. F.
Lewis of Granade, has treated wonderful well, and amply in his second book
of Prayer and Meditation.

The time.
First, he must determine and set down, a certain time, to employ in this
holy exercise every day. And touching the same, sundry things are to be noted.

1. First that one cannot give a general rule for all, to employ thus much or
thus much time because of the great diversity of persons, Notwithstanding,
every on according to his estate, ought to depute one hour, or at the least
half an hour, or two hours, or as shall seem best unto himself: and
withal, to determine the hour wherein he do the same, either in in the
morning, or in some other time.

2. Having resolved to allow so much time unto Prayer and Meditation, and at
such an hour, he must neither omit it for any affayre in the world
(understanding that this business is of the greatest importance of all others,
and ought to be preferred before al others) nor change the same into an other
hour; for the subtle enemy endeavors to have it deferred to another time
more inco^modious, to render the Prayer and Meditarion so much the worse, or
wholly to forsake it: nor to cut off, or shorte^ the time designed whereof shall
be spoken after. Nevertheless, this ought to be understood, saving obedience
and charity: for if whilst we pray, either our Superior call us, or some
work of Charity presents it self to assist our neighbor, we ought then to
leave Prayer, understanding that Almighty God will have it so, and we shall have
the greater merit.

3. When such a case shall happen, that we leave for just cause, one part, or
al our Prayer, we must not forget to recompense the same, and to do it some
other time, on the same day, if it may be possible: even as he who having bin
let to dine at his accustomed hour, does not forget to take his refection
afterward.

4. The time most proper to attend to Meditation and Mental Prayer, is the
Midnight, because of the great silence and quietness thereof. After this
time, the Morning houldeth the second rank, after we are up, and before we
set hand to any other work or study. For in the first place (as our Savior
says in S. Matthew, cap. 6.) We must first before al things, seek the
kingdom of God. And after the Morning, the most proper time is the Evening
before supper.

5. Furthermore, a fit time to pray and Meditate is, when the Spouse calls
the soul interiourlie, and preuenteth her with his heavenly grace, in such
sort that she finds her self wholly disposed to pray and Contemplate. As
also when the soul longs and desires to make her prayers: as the body,
which has an appetite to eat.

Moreover, on Holy days, we must attend a longer time to Prayer and
Contemplation, and to do no other thing on those days, if it be possible,
because for this they were ordained and instituted. And by how much the
solemnity, and the mystery which is celebrated is greater, by so so much more
the more ought we to give our selves to this holy exercise.

The Place.
There must likewise be a proper place, and the best, is the most secret and
remote from noise, as God himself has taught us, both in the new Testament,
and in the Old. I will lead him (says the Prophet Ose, cap. 2.) into the
desert, and there will I speak to his heart. And our Savior in the Gospel of
Saint Matthew. cap. 6. When thou shall pray, enter into thy Chamber, and having
shut the door, pray to thy Father in secret. And albeit this may be understood
spiritualy, as much to say: enter within thy self, and shut the gate against
all other affairs and cogitations, yet there is no doubt, but it is to be
understood also according to the letter. Wherefore we must shut the gate that
none disturb us, and with all the windows, because the place which is
obscure, is the more proper and most does aid the exercises of the spirit.

Also the Church or Chapel (provided there be no noise) is a place very proper
to Pray and Conte^plate, especialy if the B. Sacrament of the Altar be there.
But if every one ought to have in his own house, a devout Oratorie, there to
withdraw himself and to make his devotions.

Contrition and bodelie Chastisement.
Penance does maruelloufly help to pray well, as well the interior, which is
to have Contrition, Compunction and sorrow for sins, as the exterior, which
is to mortify the flesh by Fastinges, Disciplines, Haire-cloth, and other
austerities, to render it subject unto the spirit, and by how much the more any
one shall love these two sorts of penance, so much the better will he make
his Prayers and meditations. And contrariwise, who is no great friend thereof,
it impossible that he pray well, or that he advance him self in spiritual
exercises; For Prayer and Mortification, be inseparable companio^s. Every one
therefore, ought to inform his Ghostly father, what he does in this case,
and to do nothing without his advise and approbation. Abstinence.

Amongst exterior Pennances, Abstinence and Fasting do help thee most to pray
and Meditate well, because Abstinence does easily eleuate the spirit unto
Almighty God, as Holy Church sings in time of Lent: and contrariwise, the
body being filled with meat, does render the spirit unapt to his functions.
Wherefore, who so desires to unite himself with God by Prayer and
Contemplation, it behooves that he be very sober in his eating and dringing,
and that he have great regard to the quantity, quality, and manner of eating,
repressing and mortifying his sensuality, as much as he may; being wholly
persuaded (as trueit is) that the sensual man can never Pray nor Meditate well,
because the flesh and the spirit are things contrary. And this sobriety, is
especially requisite in the Evening, to the end to be the better disposed to
atte^de to devotion in the Morning.

Silence and keeping of the senses.
No less requisite and necessary is, the careful keeping of the Tongue, and
of the other Senses, as the Seeing, and the Hearing; Because curiosity to see
and to hear, causes distraction, and hinders devotion (and to talk much, a
great deal more.) as contrary, taciturnitie, and not to care to see and to
hear, does greatly help to conserve the same wherefore, who so desires to
profit in this holy exercise ought to be very vigilant, to keep these gates
or passages carefully shut, to wit, the mouth, the eyes, and the ears, and to
live, as much as he may, as one du^be, blind, and deaf.

Solitude, Recollection, and Iaculatorie Prayer.
For the selfsame reason, Solitude and Recollection of a man's self, are
singular helps to Pray and Meditate Well, that is to say, to be retired, and to
love his chamber, and not to converse with men no more then necessity does
require. Also always to co^tayne him within himself, and recollected in the
presence of Almighty God, eue^ admidst exterior occupatio^s, using often
Iaculatory Prayers, which is a thing exceeding profitable; For in so doing,
when the time of Prayer approaches, a man is wholly disposed, forth with
enters and finds what he desires. But contrary, the man that is
distracted, when the time of Prayer arriueth, he finds in himself great
pain, having his spirit filled with diverse fancies of which he cannot rid
himself.

Multitude of affairs.
For the same cause also, one of the things which do most hinder Prayer and
Meditation, is to have ouermanie affairs and occupations, what soever they be,
in which the time passes, and distraction enters, and our understanding
becomes dry and tastlesse toward spiritual things. Wherein ofttimes the
enemy beguyleth, and perniciouslie deceaueth sundry zealous servants of
Almighty God, making them to addict themselves overmuch to such affairs, and
to forget themselves, or at the least to post-pose their own salvation, or
advancement in spirit, under the pretext of the honor of God, good of souls,
charity, obedience, and the like, and see not the poor whom they oppress,
doing contrary here in to the will of God, and perverting both the order of
Charity and of nature, by the which we are bound to love our selves much more
the^ others. Wherefore it is necessary, that every on beware of this deuilish
deceit, and that he do not ouer-burden himself, to the end he may atte^de to
Prayer and Meditation.

Interior peace.
As the Bridell and Mortification of the exteririour senses, is altogether
necessary to Pray and Meditate well (as has been said) so likewise ar the
mortificatio^ of his inward passions, contergarding himself from all
unquietness, trouble, and vexation, and from all disordinate affection
toward any creature what soever, keeping himself always in true peace and
tra^quility of spirit without loosing the same for any event or worldly
accident; For it written (Psalm 75.) Factus est in pacelocus eius. God does
lodge in the place of peace; and into troubled waters, one cannot see clearly.

Spiritual Lecture and Health of the body.
Spiritual Lecture, does greatly help, Prayer and Meditation, wherefore it
be hooueth to have spiritual books, and sometimes to serve a man's self of
them, according to the opportunity and necessity of every one. Of this
lecture and books, shall be spoken in his place.

Heal^h, and the good estate of the body, is as much necessary unto this
exercise, as any other thing, because if the body which is the instrument of
the soul in its functions, be not well, the soul cannot pray and Meditate
well; Even as if the Pen be il made, the writers shall write nothing to the
purpose especi^llie heed must be taken, that the he ade be well disposed.

Discretion with a right intention.
Albeit that to this exercise of Prayer, and Meditation, a man must bring all
possible diligence, enforcing himself to perform from point to point, all
that which is required, nevertheless, he must diligently take heed of
indiscreete violence, in the soul, or to the body, which is, diabolical
illusion, to hinder us afterward to pray: as to obtain tears by force, to
constrain the body, to set one his knees, and to overcome himself; but he
must rather carry himself, sweetly and humbly, and and say with the Prophet
(Psalm. 48.) Audiam quid loquatur in me Domiminus Deus. I will listen what my
Lord God says within me.

Beside this, he must have herein, as in every other thing, a good and holy
intention, not seeking him self, or his proper gust and consolation, but
purely the honor, and good pleasure of Almighty God.

Simplicity, Humility, Reverence, and Purity of Conscience.
Simplicity ought to be the companion of prayer, not searching curious things
in Mediditation, as are rare conceptions, or elevated vivisions for God
pleases him not with the curious, but with the simple. Et cum simplic* bus
sermocinatio eius (Pro. 3.) and the simple are more capable of Prayer and
Meditation.

Also Humility, and both inward and outward Reverence, prostrating himself
before God, in heart, and in body (yet with the aforesaid discretion)
remembering himself, that he is in the presence of the divine Majesty, as
herafter shall be said.

Prayer likewise requires a great purity of Conscience, and a life that is
holy, for Beati mundo cord, Blessed are the clean in heart (Mat. 5.) Those
which have their heart pure and clean are capable to see Almighty God. This
is the cause, that those who have a large Conscience and make no great account
of faults, which are but little in their conceit, shall never attain to be men
of Prayer.

Conference with others preparation, and perseverance.
It serves also to pray well, to conferwith others, and to talk and discourse
of spiritual things, and concerning devotion. For such discourses do
enkindle the heart, as witnessed the two Disciples which went to Emaus, and our
Savior with them, discoursing of the mystery of our Redemption. (Luc. 24.
13.) Wherefore those parsons who please them selves to speak of other things,
shall never have the grace to Pray and Mediditate well.

Finally, two things are more necessary then all others: diligent
Preparation before Prayer, (whereof shall be spoken in his place) and
perseverance, continuing until the last hour of our life, this so important
and hard an enterprise, and that with a great confidence in Almighty God, and
ditrust of himself, and surmounting all manner of difficulties which may
present themselves Whereunto may be applied, that which our Savior says, we
must Pray always, and not be weary. (Luc. 18.)

CHAP. VI. How Mental Prayer is to be made.
Mental Prayer, is a Colloquie or interior speech of the soul with Almighty
God speaking to him in spirit, what she will, without exterior words.

This may be done in two manners. The one is, when the soul forgeth of her
self, that which she speaks to Almighty God, as saying unto him interiorly.
My God, thou have done unto me such infinite good, etc. I wretch that I am, I am
not worthy, etc. Give me me grace etc.

The other fashion is, to pass in spirit, some vocal Prayer, as the Pa Pater
noster, etc. or any other that one has by heart, from one end to another,
presenting unto God the demandes and things contained in the words of the
same Prayer.

In prayer, that is to say, in speaking to God, one does, and ought to do,
three things ordinarily; Thank, Demand, and Offer. Demand consists in
two things in general, either to demand pardon, or some other grace, good,
virtue, or other thing which we desire. To do all which, we will a little show
the practice.

CHAP. V. How we must render Thanks unto God.
TO render Thanks to Almighty God a man must have, and know without book,
two Rolls of Benefits. The one of generail Benefits, which may be these
Seven. Creation, Conservation, Redemption, Faith (or the being a Christian)
Justification (to have expected my repentance, and pa^doned my sins) The
Communion of his most sacred body. And Vocation to his service.

The other, of particular, which every one himself may make, as to be borne
of honest father and mother.

To have a good complexion and health. To have been delivered from some
sickness, danger, or other like; and considering a little every Benefit, there
is matter enough to render Thanks and to stay himself in Prayer.

And more in general, a man may render thanks in this fashion, for the goods
of Nature, of Grace, and for those acquired; Of the soul, of the Body, and
for Exterior.

CHAP. VI. Of Petition, or Demand.
IN a demand there are four points, to wit; what things we ought to
demand; For whom; Of whom; And how. And we must do all things well, to the end
we may obtain that which we demand.

That which we ought to demand, is contained in our Lords Prayer. But besides
these general demands of the Pater noster, which we ought daily to make in
the first place: every one ought also every day to demand of Almighty God,
some particular things, which are needful unto him, having a roll or list of
them, and knowing the^ by heart, to serve himself thereof in Mental prayer:
as for example. A Roll or List of particular Demands.

1. To demand grace, well and duly to perform his office.

2. To employ the time well.

3. To obtain the perfection of his estate and profession.

4. To vnquish some vice, and to extirpate some imperfection.

5. To Dema^d some virtue whereof on has most necessity especialy Charity and
humility, or the gift of Prayer, or of greater Faith, saying with the Apostles
(Luc. 11.) Lord teach us to pray. And Luc. 17. Lord increase faith in us.

CHAP. VII. Whereof we must Demand pardon
ONe may demand in general, pardon of all his offenses; or divide them into
three parts, asking pardon of all the evil that one has done: and of all the
good, which he has left undone. And of all the time one has employed ill.
Another general fashion is; to ask forgiveness of our evil Thoughts,
Words, and works. And of the Omission of good Thoughts, Words, and works.

In particular, to fix his mi^de upon these four points.

1. The Commandments of Almighty God and his Church.

2. The seven Capital sins.

3. The three faculties of the soul; Understanding, Memory, and Will.

4. The five Senses of the Body, Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, and
Touching.

For in these four subjects are conprehended all the sins which a man may
commit in his whole life: and discoursing upon each of these points, on after
another, to demannde pardon in particular, for sins committed, against such
or such a Commandment; and in such a sort of sin, and with such a Faculty
or Sense.

And beside this, every one may add the sins proper to his estate and office.

A Roll or list, of thosefor whom we ought to Pray.

In general we ought to pray for all, as our Lord has very well showed us in
the Prayer which he has taught us: and for some more in particular. This
example may serve euetie one.

1. For all the Holy Church, and namely for our Holy Father the Pope,
Prelates, and all Ecclesiastical persons.

2. For the reduction of Heretics, and Conversion of Infidels.

3. For all the whole Kingdom, and namely for the King, and our Princes.

4. For all Lords and Christian Princes.

5. For our Superiors, Governors, and Magistrates.

6. For our Benefactors living and departed.

7. For the souls in in purgatory.

8. For all those which are in our charge.

9. For our enemies, and adversaries.

10. Then in particular, for such and such living or departed, and for them
also who have recommended them selves unto our Prayers.

This Prayer which is made for others, is very agreeable unto almighty God, as
S. Chrysostom says: and we both ought, and are bound thereunto, and therefore
must every day, duly discharge our selves of the same.

It may likewise be noted, that as we pray and demand for others; so may we
render thanks and offer for others: For example.

To render thanks unto Almighty God, for all the benefits which he has done
to all the Angels, and to all men, and especialie, to his B. Mother.

Also, to all Christians.

To all Religious persons; unto this realm: to this Person, and to that,
considering the the persons, and the Benefits some what in particular, and
rendering thanks to Almighty God for every benefit, in the selfsame
fashion that we render thanks for our own selves.

A Roll or List of Patrons, which we ought to Pray unto.
Every one ought to have a Roll or List of Patrons, and to pray devoutly
unto them every day: This for example, may seem proper.

1. Our Lady.

2. After our Lady, our Angel Gardien.

3. The Saint of whom every one bears the name.

4. Afterward, the Saints to whom one has most devotion.

5. The Saint or Patron of the place or country whereof one is: As also the
Angel who has the charge of the said place or country.

6. The Saint of the present day.

7. The Religious persons, may put in the fifth or fourth place, the Saint or
Founder of their order.

The manner How we ought to demand.
To obtain that which we demand, three things there are which greatly help.

The first is, that in demanding any thing of Almighty God, we must actually
exercise Faith, considering that he can do all things. Hope, considering his
great bounty, and having a desire and confidence to obtain our demand. And
Charity, demanding such a thing, for the desire we have of the honor of God,
of ouraowne salvation, and of our neighbors.

2. The second is, in demanding, to use Obsecrations, as we see in the
Litanies, and supplications of the Church.

3. The third is, to ad immediately thereunto, the Intercession of the Saints,
who can much better then we, obtain that for us, which we do not merit.

That which we ought to offer and how.
We must offer up unto Almighty God, all the which he has given us, and does
daily give us, our Being, our Life, our Soul, our Body, our exterior goods,
our thoughts our words; and our works.

Item, to offer unto his Son, his precious Blood, his death and passion, his
Merits, and his wounderfull works.

Ite^ all the good works of his sacred Mother, of al his Saints, and of al
devout and Godly people, and of all the Church, since the very beginning of
the world.

And the^ to offer all this, as well for our selves, as for all others in general
and in particular, in the selfsame fashion, as we have said before, speaking
of Thanksgiving, and of Demand.

We must then do al these things Mentallie; Thank, Demand, and Offer for our
selves, and also for others, for of this sort of Prayer, we speak at this
present; And it is an excellent means to remain and continue long time in
Prayer.

It is further to be noted, that these things are to be done in certain times
every day: as in the Morninng after Meditation, or in hearing Mass, or after
Mass and to keep herein good order, to the end we fail not: for otherwise
we do easily forget them, but being a little accustomed thereto, there is no
difficulty.

Tha^ which rests of Mental Prayer, shall be touched hereafter, where we
will treat of Colloquies.

CHAP. VIII. Of Mixed Prayer.
Mixed Prayer, is properly so called (as we before have explicated) when one
prays a little Mentally and a little Vocallie; as if after I have prayed in
spirit, for the souls in Purgatory, I should recite by mouth the prayer
Fidelium Deus omnium Conditor. And ^his sort of Prayer, is much more easy,
then Meditation and Mental Prayer, and in particular, a man may serve himself
thereof, at such time as one finds not himself disposed in Soul, or Body, to
Meditate and to Pray Menlie.

1. First, one may pray in this fashion, upon the Commandments of Almighty
God, and of the Church: as for example: To take the first Commandment of the
Decalogue, and to consider how euilly we have observed the same for the time
past, reducing a little, to memory, the sins that one has committed against
this Commandment, and to ask forgiveness in heart Mentallie; and after, to
recite our Lords Prayer and to do the same, on each Commandment.

2. To make the same discourse upon the seven capital sins. And first, to
reduce to memory, the sins of Pride and the sundry ways that one has
offended in this sort of sin, and to ask forgiveness for the same in
spirit: and then to add the Pater noster vocallie.

3. Upon the three Faculties of the soul, the Memory, the understanding, and
the will, using the same fashion to Pray Mentallie, and Vocallie, after we have
a little considered, as for example. Wherefore almighty God, has given me
Memory, and the sins which I have committed in this faculty, not employing
it as God has willed me, but doing the contrary: And in the same sort, of
the understanding and the will.

4. The like is to be done upon the five Se^ces of the body, the Sight, the
Hearing, the Smelling, the Tasting, and the Touching.

5. The same sort of Prayer, a Religious person may use upon the Rules of his
Order and Office. And every person, may easily and profitablie apply the same
to his Estate and Office.

CHAP. IX. Of Vocal Prayer.
Vocal Prayer is two-fould; The on Public, to wit, the Canonical hours and
Psalms: The other Private, as the Office of our Lady, the Bedes, and and the
like. The first, is of Obligation: The second is often made of devotion, and
sometimes also of Obligation, as when it is enjoined for Penannce by the
Confessar, or else by Statute or Vow. Both to the one, and the other, we are
to bring due preparation and attention, observing three things.

1. At the beginning, or before he begin Vocal Prayer, to retire himself a
part, or to enter into himself, and lifting up his heart to Almighty God, to
offer unto him this work, to his honor and glory, beseeching him to assist
us. etc. And to this end may say; Actiones nostras, etc.

2. In the progress of this Prayer, he must do two things; The one, to
promou^^e the words distinctly, without making overmuch haste; Theother,
sometimes (as at the Gloria Patri of the Psalms, and at the end of every ten
of the Beads) to renew his attention, that is to say, to rectify himself, if
he has been distracted, and to go forward with a new devotion.

3. Having finished, to render thanks, and crave pardon for the faults which
one has committed in praying.

An excellent form of Vocal Prayer, is this: To recite our Lords Prayer,
(and the same is to be understood, of all other prayer) fair and softly, word
by word, and pronou^cing each word, to pause or employ so much time, as the
natural breath of a man can last, in such sort or wise, that the words do
follow or march together, with the several breathings: provided, that whilst
on pronounces the words outwardly, he must inwardly conceive the
signification of the word, or the excellency of the perso^age, to who^ on
speaks or our own vilitie, one may stay himself, praying after this
fashion, as long as one will, reciting sundry other Prayers, or repeating the
same.

This sort of Prayer is very good, easy, full of devotion, and not subject
to distraction; and ought every day to be put in practice, not in saying the
Breuiarie, or the Beads (for it would take up too much time) and saying at the
least a Pater and Aue, and that especialie at the end of Meditation, after we
have made the Mental Colloquie.

When one is in journey, and every time that one cannot conveniently Meditate,
then may one serve himself of this sort of Prayer, the which is very easy,
and may be made even in going.

The Supplications of Holy Church, which we call the Litanies, is a kind of
vocal Prayer, very ancient, and very proper, which comprehends the
suffrages of Saints, Obsecrations, and all sorts of requests, for our selves,
and for our neighbors, quick, and dead, and for all estates: and therefore all
Christians ought oftentimes recite them.

The Prayers also which we call Collects, are very good, devout, and holy,
whereof one must serve himself, especially when one will demand some
particular grace, or pray for some necessity, which presents it self, as,
for Peace, for the Sick, for those that are in voyage, and the like: and are
to be found, at the end of the Missal, and in the Office of our Lady.

Likewise it is good in prayinge unto some Saint, to present unto Almighty
God, and to recite the proper Prayer or Collect of the same Saint: and, if he
have not a proper Collect, to take the Common.

CHAP. X. Of the Beads.
AMongst all other Prayers, as well Vocal, as others; the first and principal
is, the Pater noster, and after this, the Aue Marie. For this cause (besides
sundry others) the Beads, or Crown of our Lady, is an excellent form of
Prayer, as being composed of these two Prayers.

Now to recite devoutly and fruitfullie the Beads: First one must observe the
three precepts before mentioned, touching Vocal Prayer.

Besides this one must (whilst one recites the Aue Mary's) have his thoughts
fixed upon some good and wholesome thing, as upon Death, upon Hell, upon
Heaven, his sins, and principally upon the mysteries of our Redemption,
which are contained in the life of our B. Lord, and of our Lady.

For this cause or reason, B. Saint Dominike chose fifteen Mysteries of the
Rosarie, persuading the whole world, to contemplate and consider them in
saying the Beads. We must the^ have them and know the^ by heart, the which is
very easy.

The Mysteries of the Rosarie.
Five are called Joyful.
1. The Annu^ciation of the Angel. 2. The Visitation of our Lady. 3. The
Nativity of our Lord. 4. The Presentation in the Temple. 5. How he was found
disputinge amongst the Doctors.

Five are called Doleful.
1. The Prayer in the Garden. 2. The whippinge at the Pillar. 3. The crowninge
with Thorns. 4. The carrying of the Cross. 5. The Crucifying.

Five are called glorious.
1. The Resurrection of our Lord. 2. His Ascension. 3. The coming of the holy
Ghost. 4. The Assump^ion of our Lady. 5. Her Coronation.

The practice and fashion to say the Beads upon these fifteen Mysteries, is
double, or two fould. The one is, upon one Pater noster, and ten Aue Mary's, to
consider one mystery, that is to say, whilst one says one Pater noster, and
ten Aue Mary's, always to have our thought upon that mystery; As, at the
Mystery of the Incarnation, to think upon the Angel, upon our Lady, and
upon their discourse etc.

The other is, upon each mystery, to say only one Aue Marie, that is to say,
recite one Aue Marie, considering the Annuntiation, another considering the
Visitation, and so consequently, and to make the round of these fifteen, so
many times, as till all the Beads be finished.

One may also collect fifty or sixty mysteries, and principal works of the
life of our Lord, from the Annuntiation, unto the Ascension; and upon each
one, to say an Aue Marie: allwaies remembering to say a Pater noster, at the
beginning of every ten.

A form of Meditating, in saying the Beads.
There are sundry other manners of saying the Beads, we will content our
selves here to set down one other only, the which consists in consideringe
our sins; and the four last things of Man, and is this.

One must imagine, that the Beads which one has in his hand, are colored,
and that these colors represent unto us, the matter which we desire to
consider, in recitinge the Beads.

To imagine the first te^ grains, which are on the Beads, as if they were of
diverse colors, white, black, red, green, yellow, tawny, etc. The second, of a
pale color. The third of a red color. The fourth, of a blak color. And the
fifth, of the color of gould.

That is to say in saying the first ten, which are of diverse color, to reduce
into memory, the multitude and diversity of thy sins, which thou have
committed in thy whole life, crauinge pardon of Almighty God, by the
intercession of our B. Lady.

In saying the second ten, which are of Pale color, to represe^t unto thy
self the memory of Death.

In saying the third ten, to think of the terrible day of Judgment.

In saying the fourth te^, of the pains of Hell.

And in the fifth of the glory of Heaven.

And who so would say in this sort, the Beads of sixty three Aue Mary's, let
him add to the sixth ten, of the color of Silver, representing to his thought,
the purity of our B. Lady.

Thus to say the Beads, is Vocal Prayer, to the which one may profirablie
adioyne Mental Prayer and Meditation, at the beginning and ending of every te^,
resting himself sometime; to meditate some mystery, and to pray Mentally.

CHAP. XI. Of Iaculatorie Prayers.
SAint Augustine (in his Epist. 121. ad Probum) calls Iauclatorie Prayers,
certain brief Prayers and Eleuations, or dartinges of the spirit, into
Almighty God; as for example in saying: Deus in adiutorium meum intend. All
such Prayers may be both Mental and Vocal. Me^tall, inuoking inwardly
Almighty God, unto our succor, and pondering in spirit, the meaning and
contents of the same sentence; Incline to mine aid, o God. Vocal,
pronouncinge with the mouth the same words, either in Latin, or in the vulgar
tongue.

These Iaculatorie Prayers are very profitable, as well to entertainevs in
continual devotion, and in the presence of Almighty God, as to accomplish that
which our Lord has said: Pray always. Wherefore we must not marvel when we
hear say that S. Bartholomew prayed a hundred times a day, and a hundred times
in the night; Also S. Martha, and S. Apollinus Abbot, and sundry other Saints,
who wholly gave themselves to Prayer; for this is most easy (so far off is
it from being impossible) by the means of these Iaculatory, Mental, or Vocal
prayers, especially, since Prayer is nothing else, then an elevation of the
mind unto Almighty God, which may be done an hundred times an hour; and our
Lords Prayer, was expressly given unto us so brief, to the end, that every
Christian might present it to God a hundred times a day, if so he will.

Every spiritual man then, ought to take the pains to accustom him self to
these Iaculatorie Prayers. And to remember him self, a good means it is,
every time that one hears the clock, from the Morning, until the Evening,
to make a Iaculatory Prayer, both by heart and mouth, being all alone.
Whereunto, also would greatly serve, that every one do select some sentences,
most pleasinge unto them, taking them principally, out of the sacred Psalms,
and to take each day, one for practice.

And for as much as the Pater noster is truly our daily bread; it shall be
very good to take for Iaculatorie Prayers, the seven Petitions contained in the
same, every day one; As one Sundaye, to repeat many times, both by heart and
mouth, Santificetur nomen tuum. One Monday, Adueniat regnum tuum: and so of
others.

The Excellency of our Lords Prayer.

And note I beseech you, the perfection and excellency of this divine Prayer,
how the same fitteth all sorts of Prayers, to wit, Mental, Vocal, Mixed,
Iaculatorie, and Meditation.

1. The Parer noster may serve for Mental Prayer, saying it in spirit, and
presenting to God, all that which is contained in the same, from one e^d to the
other,

2. For Vocal Prayer, recitinge the same with the mouth.

For mixed Prayer, saying it first with the heart, and after with the mouth.

4. For Iaculatorie prayers, as we have lately said.

5. Fiftlie, for Meditation, for one may meditate the same: yea, it is a most
excellent matter of meditation, as shall be feene hereafter.

Of all these manner of Prayers, the one are more proper for some persons, the
other more proper for others; yea, one and the same person, at one time shall
be more apt to use one manner of Prayer, and at another time another,
according to the disposition of the soul or the body. As when any one is
weary, or else is not well at ease, and shall be indisposed to make long
Meditations, then may he most help him self by Vocal, or by Mixed Prayer.

In voyage, a foot, or a horseback, vocal or Mixed prayers; are most proper
and most easy.

CHAP. XII. Of Spiritual Reading.
LEt us presuppose that which is true, the readinge of holy books, to be a
thing exceedinge profitable, and a companion of Prayer: whence we see, that
all those who have loved, and do love Prayer, have embraced with like
affection spiritual reading; we will here therefore only show that which is
to be observed, to read with profit.

The first advertisement is, what books we ought to read. First of all, the
Holy Scripture (for such as shall by their Spiritual Father be judged fit to
read it) especially the holy Gospel; the Epistles of S. Paul; the Epistles of
S. James; and the first Epistle of S. John.

Of the Old Testament, the books of Job; the three books of Solomon; the
Proverbs; Ecclesiasticus, and Ecclesiastes.

After the holy Scripture, to read other spiritual books, but the best and
most profitablest, whereof we will make a roll or Catalogue.

2. Each one ought to read those books, which are most to his gust, and which
he has experimented to have brought him most profit. And therefore he ought
to prove diverse, and then to houlde him self to that which he finds fittest
for him.

3. Not to deceive him self in the election of such books, let him ask
advise of his ghostly Father.

4. He must not be inconstant, and now read one book, and now another, but
continue forth one book, from one end to the other. True it is, that
sometimes one may change to take away distaste, or that a man does sometime
find himself more disposed to read one book, then another; and then to
continue to read the other which he had begun.

5. It is very meet to conform his reading, unto his Meditation, that is to
say, to read the same matter, that one does Meditate as much as is possible.

The second, how one must read. 1. He must have a right intention, and not to
read upon curiosity, or for desire of knowledge, or for the elegancy of the
style; but to stir up him self to devotion, and to profit in spirit.

2. He must not read in poste-haste, but softly and devoutly, chewing the
words which one reads.

3. Meeting with any notable and profitable thing, not to pass farther, but
to stay himself, and to ponder it, adding moreover some little prayer.

4. The most worthy sentences, and things most profitable, to learn them by
heart, to be able to recount them, and to serve him self of them.

The third, touching the time when one must read.

1. First, when the soul has appetite to read, and enclineth thereto.

2. When a man finds himself arride and dry in devotion.

3. On holy days more then on other days.

4. Before, or after Communion, or celebration of the sacred Mass.

5. Sometimes it is good to read before. Prayer and Meditation, to excite
himself to devotion, and to find matter, whereon to Meditate.

CHAP. XIII. Such Spiritual Books as are most profitable for all persons.
A Little book entitled, Gerson, or Thomas a Kempis, of the followinge of
Christ.

The life of Christ, by S. Bonauenture.

The works of F. Jews of Granade; namely, his Spiritual Doctrine or
Abridgement. His Memorial of a Christian life. His Meditations. His Treatise
of the love of God, and of his Benefits.

The contempt of the world.

The Lives of Saints.

The Meditations of Father Loart, upon the Mysteries of the Rosary. His
Christian Exercise. And his Meditations upon the Passion.

Comfort in T^ribulation, by Sir Thomas Moore:

The Epistle of Comfort, by Father Southwell. And his Rules of good life.

The Paradise of the soul by Albertus Magnus.

The miracles of our Lady of Loretto, of Sichim, and of other places.

Father Fuluius Androtius, of the frequenting the B. Sacrament. And his
Meditations upon the Passion.

Father Brunoes Meditatio^s. And his Abridgement.

The Society of the Rosarie.

The Introduction to a devout life, by Francis Sales, bishop of Geneua.

Father Points Meditations.

Father Parsons Christian Directorie.

A brief Collection, concerning the Love of God toward man, found amongst
his works, who composed the Jesus Psalter.

Wholesome and Catholic Doctrine, concerning the 7. Sacraments, by the
Reverend F. in God, Thomas, Bishop of Lincoln.

The book entitled, Six spiritual books, full of marvelous piety and
devotion.

The sacred Mystery of the Flagellation of our Lord and Savior.

Others, particularly for Religious persons, besides the aforesaid.
The Epistle of Jesus Christ, to the faithful soul.

A brief Method, how to serve God in a perfect manner, by F. Alphonso.

The Spiritual Conflict.

A Treatise of Mental Prayer, by F. Molina, Carthusian Monk.

The Mirror of Perfection, by F. Lucas Pinelli: And him upon the life of our B.
Lady.

A Spiritual Exercise, written by F. William Perin, Prior, and Friar Preacher,
of great S. Bartholomes in Smithfield.

With sundry others (all of them to be found in our English tongue) which the
Ghostly Father shall judge to be most convenient and proper for every person.

CHAP. XIV. Of Meditation.
WE have said at the beginning, that two things are necessary to make us to
Meditate, to wit, the Matter, and the Manner: whereof we must now treat in
particular, to the end to aid every one, both in the one and the other.

The matter of Meditation, that is to say, what things one must Meditate and
consider.

Death, Judgment, the pains of Hell, and the glory of Heaven. The vanitye of
the world, and the miseries of this present life. The sins we have committed
in our whole life. The life death, and Passion of our Lord, and upon the holy
Eucharist. The Benefits of God. The life of our Lady, and of the Saints. The
virtues. The book of the Creatures. The Perfectio^s of God which we call
Atributes. All the holy Scripture, especially, the holy Gospel, and the
Psalms. Our Lords Prayer, as also the Creed of the Apostles, is very good
and profitable to Meditate.
Al which is contained in the Christian Doctrine, of Catechism, may likewise
serve for matter of Meditation.

One must meditate often, upon the end for which man was created in this
world, for it is the foundation of our salvation and perfection.

It is good to conform ones self to Holy Church, and to follow her traces:
as, One solemn days, to consider the Mysteries, which the^ are proposed unto
us.

One the Feasts of Saints, to consider their life, death, virtues, and most
remarkable acts, and the glory which they have acquired.

In Aduent, to Meditate on the mystery of the Incarnation, or on the life of
our Lord.

In Le^t, one may take every day, the Gospel of the day for Meditation.

The matters most proper to Meditate upon the Sundaies, are the resurrection of
our Lord. Our Resurrection and beatitude, figured by the Sunday. The Benefits
of God. And the Gospel of the day. And as there are four Sundaies in the
month, one may Meditate every Su^day, one of the four matters afore^aid.

On the days of Communion, to Meditate upon the holy Eucharist, or upon the
Passion of our Lord.

On Fridaie, upon the Passion of our Lord.

And on Saterdaye, something of our Lady.

When one has heard some Sermon, or Exhortation, the same day, or on the
morrow to repeat the same, and to make his Meditation thereupon.

Besides this, the Religious person, the Priest, and every one, ought often to
Meditate upon his vocation, vow, rules, estate and office.

Every one also ought often to Meditate upon the virtue, whereof he has
greatest necessity: and upon the imperfection, whereof he most desires to
amend him self.

And even as the body does addict it self most willinglie^, and would
oftenest eat of those meats, which best do like it: so likewise the soul
ought oftnest to chew and Meditate those matters, wherein she finds most
taste and spiritual profit; For it is true in things spiritual, as
incorporall, as the Physicians say. Quod sapit nutrit. That which relisheth,
nourishes.

Finally, as touching the matter of Meditation, thou must observe three other
points. The first, that at the beginning of every Month, and of every week,
thou ought to be diligent, to foresee, and prepare the matter, that thou
entendest on the month or week ensuing.

The second, that when one has begun to Meditate some matter, each day, if
some just occasion present it self to Meditate some other thing, as a Sermon,
Solemnity, etc. For that day to interrupt it, and to leave the matter one has
in hand; and on the morrow to return and go forward, as before.

The third, that allthough it be good, from month to month, and from week to
week, to take some matter, to meditate one so many days as it shall last,
nevertheless, one may also every day meditate diverse matters. And because
that the most necessary, are these four; the last Endings of man, Death,
Judgment, Hell, and Heaven, the Passion of our Lord, our sins, and the
Benefits of Almighty God, one may oftimes, and within one week Meditate them
all, according to the same order, and in this sort.

Monday, of Death.

Tuesday, of Judgment.

Wensday, of the pains of Hell.

Thursday, of the glory of Heaven.

Fridaie, of the Passion of our Lord.

Saturdaie, of our Sins.

Sundaie, of the Benefits of Almighty God.

CHAP. XV. Diverse manners of Mediting diverse things. Manners of Meditatinge the
four last ends of a Man.
ONe may every day Meditate one of these four things, Death, Judgment, the
pains of Hell, and the glory of Heaven.

One may also upon each of these four ends, make sundry Meditatio^s.

Upon Death, one may consider principally these points.
1. That one must needs die.

2. When, where, and how, no man knows.

3. That in Death, one leaves all behind him.

Another manner.

1. To consider the things which go before Death, as sickness, physic,
dolors and Extreme Unction.

2. The things that accompany it, as are the grievous pains of the body,
the loss of the senses, the waxing cold, the pains of the soul, the
temptations, the visions, etc.

3. Those which follow it, as Burial, and particular Judgment.

Another Manner.

1. That death is very dreadful.

2. That one must fear it, despise, and desire it.

3. That one must prepare himself to die well.

Upon the latter judgment, these things principally are to be considered.
1. The dreadful signs that shall go before it.

2. The Renouation of the world.

3. The Resurrection of all the children of Adam, at the sound of the Trumpet.

4. The majesty of the Judge, assisted with all his Court.

5. The rendering of account, and the opening of the books of al men's
consciences.

6. The double sentence: and each one ought to know the words, and to consider
them.

7. The executions of them.

Diverse manners of Meditating, upon the Glory of the blessed.

1. One is to consider, 1. the place. 2. the persons, 3. the actions of the
Blessed.

2. Another, to consider, 1. The goods of the soul. 2. The goods of the body.
3. The Exterior.

2. Another to consider three douaries and Perfections of the soul, which are,
vision, possession, and everlasting Enjoying.

4. Another to consider the four douaries and perfections of the Body,
Impassibilitie, Claritie, Agilitie, Subtilitie.

5. Another, to consider the Joy, which every one of the five Se^ses shall
have.

Another fashion is, to consider the seven points following, in one or more
Meditations.

1. Point, to consider the excellency of the Place, to wit, the Greatness, the
Beauty, and the Riches of heaven.

2. The Beatitude of the Body, how it shall be endued with four excellent
qualities to wit, that it shall be altogether Impassible, most bright-shininge,
most Agile or nimble, and (as the Apostle speaks) spiritual, that is to say,
which can pass quite through other bodies (as through a stone wall) without
let or impediment.

3. The Beatitude of the Soul, as, the great wisdom, seeing Almighty God
face to face, and all things in him. The most ardent love of God, and his
neighbor. The Joy and Contentment, almost infinite.

4. The Company of the Blessed, to wit, of all the Angels, of all the Saints,
and of the glorious Mother of Almighty God.

5. To confider the Actions and Exercises of the Blessed; which are, perpetual
Contemplation, Joy, Love, Feasting, Passetime, and Lauding of Almighty God;
Magdalene alone, and no Martha, no external business, or office of the world.

6. No evil, and all that is good, considering the good things, and the evils
of this world, to ascend to the consideration of those above.

7. How long all the same shall endure: for all eternity without end.

8. Another fashion is, to consider, that on every side, they shall enjoy most
unspeakable contentment.

1. The Joy that the Blessed shall have in behoulding on high, the most sacred
mother of Almighty God, our Lord and Redeemer, and all the holy Trinity. 2.
Round about him, the aforesaid company, and the excellence of the place. 3.
In him self, the beatitude both of soul and body.

4. Beneath him, the world, Limbo and Hell.

Another, to consider that in that place there is no manner of evil, and is
all manner of good; making two discourses, one upon the evils, another upon
the good things.

Touching the pains of the damned, there are as many manners to Meditate
them, as the glory of the Blessed: there needs no more, but to change the good
things into evil.

CHAP. XVI. Manners of Meditating, whereby to attain the knowledge of ones
self.
1. THe first is, to consider the time past, present, and to come, as S.
Bernard teaches in sundry places, saying. O man think, first, what thou
have been: second, what thou art; third, what thou shall be.

Or thus; First, from whence come I? Second, Where am I? Third, whether go I?

Or thus; what is the entry of man into the world. Second, what his abode.
Third, what his departure.

2. To consider (as the same Doctor says, lib. 2. De consid.) 1. Thy self,
who and what thou art. 2. The things that are underneath thee, Limbo,
Purgatory, and Hell. 3. The things that are round about thee, the world, the
Creatures, the devils. 4. The things that are above thee, the glory of Paradise.

3. To consider four other things, according to the counsel of the same
Saint Bernard (De inferiore capite 65. 1.) What thou art by nature. What thou
have bin by sin. 3. what thou may be by the grace of Almighty God.

4. To consider the words of Moses (Deuteronomy. 32.) O that men would consider the
things that are Past (the evil committed, the time lost, and Jesus Christ
cruci^ied.) The Present (the benefits of God, the vanity of the world, the
brevity of this life, and the difficulty to be saved.) And foresee things to
come (Death particular, general Judgment, Hell, and the glory of heaven.)

5. To consider the four causes of man. 1. The cause Efficie^t, who made him,
to wit God, 2. The material cause; the body made of earth, 3. The formal
cause, the soul, the image of God. 4. The final cause, wherefore man was
made, to wit, for eternal beatitude.

6. To consider himself, according to sundry estates. 1. In as much as man.
2. In as much as a Christian. 3. In as much as Religious, a Priest, or of any
other estate or condition.

CHAP. XVII. The manner how to Meditate sins.
THe first is, to Meditate his proper sins, to know them, and to have true
sorrow and contrition for them: dividing them into certain points and
considerations, as, to Meditate. 1. Their multitude. 2. Their grieuousnesse. 3.
The damages they bring with them. For the multitude, one may observe some
order: as, to consider the years of our life, in such, or such a place; and in
such company etc.

Item, the sins committed by thoughts, by words, by works, and by omission.

Item, the sins I have committed against God, against my neighbor, and
against my self; And note, that in considering his sins, he must not stay
himself upon the sin of the flesh, and of choler, but very little.

Note also, that it is very fit and profitable for a spiritual man, to
refresh in him self, the memory of his life past, and sometimes to make one
whole Meditation upon the same, and oftentimes to pass it over in praying and
Meditating, in a quarter, or half an hour, diuidinge it into as many parts,
as the places are, wherein he has dwelt; in the same fashion that we shall by
and by, speak of the life of our Lord.

The other fashion is, to consider the Sin in it self, to conceive a hatred
and horror of the same, meditatinge. 1. How much sin is displeasinge to God,
and wholly contrary unto him.

2. How much hurt it brings to the man who commits it, and sometimes to
his neighbor also: to soul, to body, to honor, and to his goods, or
substance.

3. How many domages it brings to the whole world, and how exceedinge
grieuous^ie Almighty God has always chastised it: recalling to mind some
examples, as of the Angels them selves, and of mankind.

Another manner is, to take the seven capital Sins, which some call Mortal,
and every day to meditate one in form following.

Upon Sunday, Pride. Mu^day, Covetousness. Tuesday, Luxury. Wensday, Envy.
Thursday, Gluttony. Fridaie, Anger. Saturday, Slout^^
Upon every one of which, one must consider these three points. 1. How much
such a sin displeases God. 2. How much it hurts man. 3. How many times I
have offended God by such a sin, and his branches: and each of these points
may be made double, as for example.

1. How much this vice displeases God, and how does please him the contrary
virtue. 2. How much this vice hurts man, and how profitable is the
contrary virtue. 3. How much I have offended by this vice, and how far off I
have been, and am from the opposite virtue.

CHAP. XVIII. Manners how to Meditate the whole life of our Lord Jesus Christ,
comprising also his Passion.
THe first manner is, to Medi^ate the principal mysteries, every day one,
from the Annuntiation, unto the Ascension, as S. Bonauenture, F. Jews of
Granade. and F. Vincent Bruno have done.

2. One may divide the whole life of our Lord into seven parts, and finish
them in one week, as Saint Bonauenture does.

3. One may divide the whole life of our Lord, into ten parts, according to the
ten places where he has dwelte in this world, considering what he has done,
and endured for thee in every place.

1. In his Mothers womb, nine Months.

2. In the Ma^ger, or in Bethelem, forty days.

3. In Egypt, about seven years.

4. In Nazareth, more then two and twenty years.

5. In the Desert, forty days, and forty nights.

6. Preaching in Jury, and in Galilee, about three years and a half.

7. In grievous pain and torment, one whole day.

8. Upon the Cross, three hours.

9. In the Sepulcher, and in Limbo, forty hours.

10. Here in earth, after his Resurrection, forty days.

In this manner, within one hour, yea half an hour, one may meditate the
whole life of our Lord Jesus, pausing a little upon every one of these te^
parts, or points: the which is very easy, and very profitable. One may
likewise make upon these ten parts, ten Meditations, or more, or less, as one
will himself.

4. One may likewise divide the whole life of our Lord, into three parts, to
wit, his entry into this world, his abiding here, and his issue or departing.
How he entered, what he did whilst he dwelt here. And in what manner he went
out of it: as S. Thomas has divided it; And upon each of these parts to make
one, or more Meditations.

5. One may also co^prehende it in three other general parts or members, as
S. Bernard says (in his Sum:) considering, what he has said, what he has
done, and what he has endured. Dixit multa, fecit mira, pertulit dura. He
spoke many things, did marvelous things, endured painful things: and upon
each of these points, to make one, or more meditations.

We will stay no longer upon the explication of these points, not to be
ouer-lo^g: for if he be a little exercised in these affairs, he may form of
him self, that which here is said: or if he have need, let him ask advise of
his ghostly Father.

6. One may likewise do in this manner, to wit, to meditate the fifteen
mysteries of the Rosarie, making upon every one, one or more Meditations.

7. One may take one of the four Gospels, and meditate the same, from one end
to another. Or of the whole four, to make one Monotessaron, those who can
perform it.

8. In the little Catechism of Canisius, there are seven very excellent
Meditations, each one containinge five points, drawn forth of the Infancy,
Life, and Passion of our Lord.

CHAP. XIX. Manners of Meditating the Passion of our Lord.
1. THe first manner is, to begin from the last Supper, and every day to
meditate one Mystery, until his death and burial, followinge the text of one
Evangelist, or of all the four together: as S. Bonauenture Loartus, and
Costerus have done.

2. To divide the Passion of our Lord into seven parts, and to meditate it in
one week, as S. Bonauenture, and Lewis of Granado has done.

3. One may make as many Meditations, as there are places wherein he suffered,
making each day, as a Station in one place. 1. In the place of the last
supper, where he washed his Disciples feet, and instituted the B. Sacrament.
2. In the Garden, where he contristated himself, and sweat abundantly a
bloody sweat. 3. Before Annas, where he received a grievous blow on the face.
4. Before Cayphas where he was spit on, and blinde-foulded. 5. In the house of
Pilate, where being falsely accused, he used wounderfull modesty, patience
and silence. 6. In the house of Herod, where he was despised, clothed in a
white garment, and reputed for a fool. 7. Again, before Pilate, where he was
nakedly scourged, and condemned to die. 8. In the way toward Caluarie,
bearinge his heavy Cross. 9. His death and Passion, upon the same mountain.

4. One may meditate in one week, the seven words which our B. Lord and
Savior spoke, hanging three hours alive upon the Cross: which each good
Christian ought to have by heart.

1. Father forgive them, they know not what they do.

2. To the Thief; Verily I say unto thee, this day thou shall be with me in
Paradise.

3. To his sorrowful Mother; woman, behold thy son: and to Saint John,
behold thy mother.

4. My God my God, why have thou forsaken me.

5. I thirst.

6. All is co^summate.

7. Father into thy hands I commend my spirit.

8. One may choose out of the whole Passion, about a dozen mysteries, whereon
to Meditate, as F. Fuluiu^ Androtius has done.

9. Another manner is, to meditate three things, or three several sorts of
pains, to wit; that which our Savior suffered in foul in body, and in his
honor: and upon each of these three points, to make one, or more Meditations:
and all this may be drawn forth of the holy Gospel, or forth of some book
that treats of this subject.

10. One may likewise Meditate four things. Who he is that suffers. What
things he suffers. For whom. And how he suffers, making upon every of
these points, one or more considerations; The which four considerations, ought
also to be made in all the Meditations, which one makes upon the Passion. And
albeit that some of these manners seem to be points of Meditation, yet are they
diverse ways and fashions of Meditating.

11. One may Meditate the Passion of our Lord, by diverse ways, to draw from
thence diverse affections, as Saint Bonauenture has taught in his book, of the
darte of divine love, and after him, Denis the Charter House Monk, Granado,
Loartus, and others.

1. By way of Compassion, considering the grieuousnesse of his pains.

2. By way of Contrition, considering that he is dead for our sins.

3. By way of Imitation, to imitate and follow his example.

4. By way of Tha^ksgiuing, considering the greatness of the benefit.

5. By way of Love, considering the Love, which he has showed unto us.

6. By way of Hope, since that he is dead to save us.

7. By way of Admiration, astonishing him self, at so great a love and bounty.

And this may be done, in one only week, Meditating the Passion of our Lord,
every day by one of these ways.

Item, at each point or Meditation of the Passion, one must excite in him self
some one, or more of the said Affections.

CHAP. XX. Manners of meditating upon the holy Eucharist.
ONe may meditate a great number of things upon the holy Eucharist.

The History.
How he eat the Paschall Lamb with his Apostles.

How he washed their feet.

How he instituted the B. Sacrament, and did communicate them.

The names.
Eucharistie, Sacrament, absoluement, Communion, Sacrifice, Bread, Viaticum.

The figures.
The bread and wine of Melchisedeck, the Paschal Lamb, Manna, and the bread of
Elias.

The Causes wherefore it was instituted.
For a memory of his Passion.

To show us his love.

For food of our soul.

To serve us for Sacrifice.

For pledge of Beatitude.

The effects or fruits of the Sacrament.
1. It works in the soul, all that which the bread does in the body; it
nourishes it, it gives it life, it fortifies it against her enemies,
co^tenteth it, and replenisheth it with joy etc.

2. illuminateth the understanding, and enflames the heart.

3. It unites and incorporateth man with God.

4. It augmenteth all the virtues, Faith, Hope, and so of others.

5. It changes a man, and makes him another by amendment of his life and
manners.

6. It renders a man as it were assured of his salvation.

7. It gives in this world the grace of almighty God, and in the other,
glory.

One may also meditate upon the Antiphone, O sacrum conuiuium, the which
contains six parts or branches.

O sacred banquet.

In which Christ is received.

The memory of his passion is called to mind.

The soul is replenished with grace.

And a pledge of future glory is given unto us.

Moreover, one may Meditate upon these four circumstances. Who he is that
comes. To whom he comes. How he comes. And wherefore he comes.

Likewise one may Meditate upon the preparation and endeavor, of him which is
to receive it.

How one must Receive it.
Two things are necessary before we receive it; Purity, and desire.

Two in receiving it; Humility, and Chastity.

Two after receiving; Thanksgiving, and amendment of life.

One may likewise meditate upon the Hymns of the B. Sacrament, and upon the
Prayer, Deus qui nobis sub Sacramento mirabili etc. And upon some sentence of
the same, as, Caro mea vere est cibus. Panem Angelorum manducauit homo: my
flesh is meare indeed. Man has eaten the bread of Angels, and the like.

One may take for matter to meditate upon the 6. Chapter of Saint John. The 4.
book of Gerson. The Catechism. The Meditations of Lucas Pinellus, Lewis of
Granado, and Fuluius Androtius, upon the Treatises which they have made of the
holy Communion.

CHAP. XXI. Manners to Meditate the Benefits of Almighty God.
ONe may consider in one Meditation, all the benefits of Almighty God; the
which, because they are innumerable, he must make two several Rolls.

One, of the General, and most principal Benefitesl these are: Creation,
Conservation, Redemption, Faith, or to be a Christian, Justification,
Communion, and Vocation to his holy service.

Another of the particular Benefits, as, To be borne of a good father and a
good mother. To have a good complexion, and his health. To have been delivered
from some sickness, or danger. Every one may repeat his own, and he must
know the^ by heart, and pause a little upon every Benefit.

2. One may divide the benefits of Almighty God into sundry fashions. 1. The
Benefits of Nature, of Grace, and Acquired.

2. Of the Soul, of the Body, and Exterior* 3. Past, present, and to come. 4.
Common to all men, to many, to few, to me only: and upon each rank or kind
of benefits, one may make, one, or more Meditations.

3. One may take the seven Benefits aforsaid, and pause upon them so long, as
he may, considering diverse and sundry things. Upon one Benefit, one may make
all these considerations.

Who has done me this Benefit? God.

What has moved him to do it? his only Bounty.

Wherefore he has given it me? For his own honor, and for my salvation.

How great is this Benefit?

How much I am oobliged unto him for the same?

How ungrateful I have been unto him, and how euillie I have served my self
of this Benefit?

What I ought to do for the time to come.

CHAP. XXII. Manners of Meditating the life of our Lady.
ONe may Meditat^ the life of our Lady, even as the life of our Lord,
beginning from her Conception, until her Assumption, as Costerus has done in
his book of the fifty Meditations, upon the life of our Lady.

2. To meditate the principal mysteries of her life, which are those that
holy Church does solemnise: to wit, her Conception, Nativity, Annunciation,
Visitation, Purification, and Assumption.

3. To consider the Aue Maria, after the self same manner, as the Pater noster.

4. Her virtues; See Arrias, of the Imitation of our Lady.

5. Her Privileges.

6. Some Hymn of our Lady, or some sentence of holy Scripture, appertaining
unto her.

7. One may also meditate the figures and prophecies of our B. Lady.

CHAP. XXIII. The manner of Meditating the Feasts of the Saints.
Taken out of S. Bernard upon the Sermon of the Vigill of S. Peter and S. Paul.
ONe must consider three things; The asistance of the Saint. His example. And
our confusion.

His Help.
In what place he now finds him self.

With what glory he is crowned.

That by his merits and prayers, he can assist me.

His examples.
How he is arrived to this glory.

By what works, pains, and virtues.

Our confusion.
What do I? I will come where he is, and will not do what he has done.

CHAP. XXIV. The manner of meditating the virtues.
FIrst one must have a Roll of virtues: whereof these are the principal.
Faith, Hope, Love of God, Fear of God, Prudence, Justice, Humility, Patience,
Obedience, Meekness, Chastity, Poverty, Sobriety, Mercy, Taciturnitie,
Simplicity, Modesty, Magnanimity, Perseverance.

1. One may meditate many virtues in one Meditation, as the three
Theological, the four Cardinal, or the three Evangelical Counsels,
Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience: making of each virtue, one point of
Meditation.

2. One may take the seven greater or more eminent virtues, as the three
Theological, and the four Cardinal. Or those which are opposite to the seven
capital vices, and to meditate then within one week, every day one.

3. One may meditate all the aforesaid virtues, every day one, and others also
if one will; as the Contempt of the world, the Contempt of him self, Zeal of
souls, Devotion, Diligence toward the divine service, Concord, Verity,
Fidelity, Liberality, Prudence, Gratitude or knowledging of Benefits, and
Penance.

4. One may take one only virtue, and stay him self thereon, so long as he
can, considering diverse things upon the same, as;

What such a virtue is (for example of humility:) wherein it consists: and
what it means to be humble.

How fair, excellent, profitable, and necessary this virtue is, consideringe
in particular, the profit that it brings.

How much it pleases almighty God, and makes a man acceptable unto him.

What example and doctrine our Lord has given us of such a virtue.

How detestable, damageable, and displeasing the contrary vice is unto
Almighty God.

How far off I have hitherto been from this virtue, and what ^e cause thereof
has been.

What I ought to do for the time to come, considering the means to acquire
the same, and the impedime^ts to keep me from them.

5. The fifth means is, to Meditate some virtue in the person of our B.
Bauiour, considering three points.

1. What example the Son of Almighty God has given us of this virtue (for
example of humility.)

2. What he has said and taught touching such a virtue, remembering him self
of some one sentence.

3. Wherefore he has done and said all this? Assuredly for me.

In this manner one may meditate in one week, seven principal virtues of our
Lord and and Savior; as, Sunday Charity. Monday. Monday, Humility. Tuesday,
Patience. Wensday, Obedience. Thursday Meekenes. Friday, Poverty. Saturday,
Chastity.

4. To meditate the Beatitudes, which are eight most goodly virtues,
considering three things upon each Beatitude.

1. The sentence it self, which has two points, to wit, the virtue, and the
recompense.

2. How much this virtue has shined in our B. Savior.

3. How far I am from this virtue, and what profit it would bring me, if I
were owner thereof.

CHAP. XXV. The manner how to meditate, upon the Creatures.
BY the consideration of the creatures, one comes unto a great knowledge and
understanding of the Creator: for there is not any creature, how little soever
he be, which shows not the power, wisdom, and great bounty of him that
made him. Wherefore, who so desires well and truly to profit in the spiritual
life, let him give him self to the reading of this great and goodly book of
the world, which is always o^en unto all; and that therein he make many good
and frequent meditations; the which may be done in two sorts or manners, to wit;

Either meditating them altogether, considering all this whole world, in one
Medication, or in particular, making one Meditation upon each creature, as, the
heaven, the earth, and observing always therein, the power, wisdom, and
bounty of almighty God.

Furthermore that he accustom him self howerly, or at every occasion, seeing
any creature, a beast, a flower, etc. to eleuate his spirit, and to consider
who has made it, and forthwith he shall find the three aforesaid virtues and
divine perfections.

Upon the Creatures in general.
1. The Creatures of the world, evidently show the greatness of God, Creator
thereof.

2. The multitude and variety of the things created, the infinite perfections
which are in God.

3. The good disposition and Order of the world, the wisdom of God.

4. The profit which the creatures do bring unto us, the Bounty of God.

5. The Beauty of the world, the beauty of God.

6. The roundnes thereof (which *has neither beginning nor ending) the
eternity of God.

7. The unity of the world, demonstrateth that God is only one.

8. The abundance of good things, which we receive of the creatures, shows
the liberallitie of God.

9. The stabilitie and Constancy of the world (continuing always the same)
shows that God is immutable, and changes not.

Upon each Creature in particular.
1. To consider its beginning, which is God.

2. The end wherefore such a creature has been made, to wit, for the honor of
God, and service of man.

3. Whereof, and how it ha^h been made.

4. The qualities, and effects of the same creature.

CHAP. XXVI. The manner how to meditate the perfections of Almighty God.
FIrst one must have a Roll; these are: Infinite Essence, Power, Wisdom,
Bounty, Love, Mercy, Justice, Providence, Liberallity, Patience, and
Meekness.

Then one must know and consider the works and effects which he has showed,
of such and such a virtue; The examples and sentences of holy Scripture will
greatly serve thereto. As, to know his divine Essence, to consider the sentence
of the Prophet Jeremy, cap. 2. saying, I do fill both heaven and earth. And
Acts 3. In him we live, move, and have our being. For the Power of almighty
God. He spoke and they were made: he commanded, and they were created. Psalm.
32. And so of others. Wherefore this meditation, agrees especially to those
that are most perfect, and most practiced, as well in Holy Scripture, as in
spiritual matters: and therefore may be called, the most excellent of all
Meditations.

CHAP. XXVII. The manner how to Meditate the Pater noster, and the holy
Scripture.
IT is an excellent good manner, and exceeding profitable, to meditate upon the
words of Holy Scripture, which are the words of Almighty God, and
marueilously replenished with divine mysteries.

The manner how to meditate them, is, to take the first word of a sentence (as
if it were this;) So God loved the World, that he gave his only begetten
Son. Ioh. 3. The first word whereof is So, and to stay him self, and to
pause upon the consideration thereof, so long as our soul can find diversity
of conceits and instructions, gust, and utility therein: and then to pass to
the next word after, and to do the like.

After this manner, one may meditate the Collects and Hymns of holy Church, and
above all, our Lords Prayer, the which for that it was composed immediately by
God himself, contains in it very wounderfull mysteries, and ought to be
often Meditated and considered, for the great fruits which such Meditation
brings.

After this divine Prayer, to Meditate the Aue Maria, Salve Regina, Anima
Christi, Veni Creator, Veni sancte Spiritus, Te Deum laudamus etc. And Priests
the Holy Canon of the Mass.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Examen of Conscience.
BEcause examen of Conscience, consists principally in knowinge our faults
(which is an act of the understanding) one may very well place it, amongst the
species of Meditation.

Now, there are two sorts of examen of Conscience; the one is called General,
when one examineth and searches forth all the faults which he has committed,
by Thoughts, Words, Works, and Omission, to the end to amend himself of al;
and ordinarily is made in the Evening, and contains six points.

1. To render thanks to Almighty God for his Benefits.

2. To ask him grace to know our sins, and to amend them.

3. To ask an account of our own soul, of the sins committed that present
day: considering all the hours of the day from the Morning, wherein we have
failed, by Thoughts, Words Works, and Omission.

4. To demand pardon, for that wherein we have offended.

5. To purpose firmly to amend us, by the help and grace of Almighty God:
and to say at the ending, the Pater noster.

The other, is called Particular, and is, when one examineth one only
imperfection, whereof one desires to correct him self; the practice is this.

In the morning being risen, one must incontinently make a steadfast purpose, to
keep him self diligently in that day, from such a fault and imperfection,
with the help and assistance of Almighty God.

After dinner to examine him self upon the fame, sequestringe him self a
part, and doing three particular things.

1. To demand an account of his own soul, consideringe all the hours from
the morning, how often he has fallen into the same.

2. To make so many marks, or streekes with his pen.

3. To purpose a new, to countergard him self for the rest of that day.

After supper, to do the very same; And to see from day to day, and from one
week to another, the profit and amendment which one has made; always
craving the assistance of almighty God, to enable him to amend himself, and
excitinge him self, to greater amendment.

CHAP. XXIX. That Which he must do before Prayer.
FOr final accomplishment of the form or manner of Prayer, and of all that
which has been hitherto said, we drawinge and approachinge now to an end,
we will show the practice, dividing the same into three parts, to the e^d to
observe order, and that one may the better bear it in memory. And let every
one persuade him self, that by how much the better he shall observe these
instructions and documents, ordinarily, by so much better will prayer succeed
with him; as contrariwise, if he use not the diligence well to observe them, so
much less progress will he make.

The thing then which is most necessary before Prayer, is, to make a diligent
preparation, a doctrine and precept given by almighty God himself; and in the
ancient Testament also by the Wiseman. (Eccles. 8.) saying, to whomsoever will
present himself before his divine Majesty, to speak unto him; Before Prayer
prepare thy heart, and be not as one that tempts God. As if he said; It is too
much presumption, it is a heinous offense, to come before my Majesty, without
first putting thy self in order. And by his Son in the new (Mat. 6. Where
he says.) When thou will pray, enter into thy chamber, that is to say, enter
within thy self, prepare thee well etc.

This diligence and preparation, consists in the doing of sundry things.

1. One must exactly know the history, mystery, or subject which we mean to
meditate, and the circumstances of the same, as the place, the persons, and
other particularities; for the knowledge of the fact, is the ground of the
Meditation: and therefore, one must either read the Text, or a little refresh
the memory thereof.

2. One must divide the aforesaid subject or matter of meditation, into sundry
parcells or parts, which we call points or considerations, to the end, to
consider them one after another. And then also, one must prepare the preludiums
and colloquies, conform to the subject of the meditation: whereof shall be
spoken, in the ensuing Article.

3. It is not so good in meditatinge, to take some meditation made by another
all at length, as of S. Bonauenture, Granado, or others: for better it is, that
the soul of her self do find her own pasture.

4. One must not be weary, either in body or mind, when one goes to prayer,
as to have read or written overmuch: but for some time before, to leave al, to
find him self fresh and well, disposed, at the time of Prayer.

5. About one quarter before the hour (if the prayer be made by day, and the
Evening before he go to bed, for that of the morning) one must diligently
foresee and learn by heart, the points of the meditation, and the rest which
one has prepared for this purpose, yea ^and if need so require (at the time
of prayer, to hold the paper or book in his hand, the better to remember and
meditate one thing after another.

6. Being laid in his bed, he must briefly reduce them to memory; and
arising in the morning, give and present the first of his thoughts unto
almighty God, and then make him self ready, thanking him, and praying unto
him, both with heart and mouth, and thinking upon the subject of the Meditation
that he means to make, excite in him self a fervent desire to do it well.

7. About a quarter of an hour before, one must do that which onr Savior
says (in S. Mat. cap. 6.) Enter into thy chamber etc. Enter into thy self,
and close the gate against al other affairs and cogitations, consideringe,
whether one goes, and where about: and houlding him self so recollected, to
attend and expect the hour of Prayer.

8. It is also good to go to prayer, with a good appetite, that is to say,
with inclination and desire to pray. And even as those who want an appetite,
labor to get one, either by doing some exercise, or by sawces, and the like,
which procure an appetite: even so must one seek for devotion (not having the
same) either by reading, or by examen of conscience, or lookinge fixedly upon
some sweet and devout Picture, or doing some Penance, as a discipline, or
other mortification; Moreover, the more to stir up himself, he must, going
to Prayer, think that he goes to a mine of gould or silver, from whence he may
bring, most exceeding treasure.

8. Then, having heard the clockes, or the time being arrived, thou shall take
holy water, according to thine ordinary, to drive away the Devil. Next,
thou shall go fair and softly toward the place where thou ought to
pray; and standing one or two steps off, before thou fallest on thy knees,
pause a little, and raise up thy spirit on high, consideringe on the one side,
the greatness of Almighty God, and his presence, how he looks upon thee: on
the otherside, thy smalnes, and thy sins, and that he attends thee, to give
beninge and courteous audience.

10. After this, thou shall make him an humble and devout reverence, setting
thy knees upon the ground, saying wi^h heart and mouth, sometimes the words of
the Patriarch Abraham, I will speak to my Lord, I that am but dust and others:
sometimes those of S. Francis, Lord who art thou, and who am I?

11. Going to prayer, it will greatly help thee (as in all other things) to
recommend thy self to thy Angel guardian, and to beseech him that he will
accompany thee, and bring thee before thy Lord, and to assist thee at that
instant, and that he would put back and hinder all distractio^s, and both pray
for thee, and likewise present thy prayers to Almighty God.

12. Thou must be diligent to put in execution these instructions, allwaies
notwithstanding without scruple or anxietie, never to forget any thing: for
sometimes it chances (especially to the most perfect and most habituated)
that without so much preparation, one finds him self prepared, and one
presen^ly en^ereth into the wine celler of our B. Lord: it suffices that we
allwaies do on our behalf, our endeavor and diligence.

CHAP. XXX. That which is to be done, during Prayer.
DVring the hour, or time of Prayer, there are four things to be performed,
to wit; The Preparatorie Prayer, the PreIudiums, the Points, and the
Colloquies. Order is good in every thing, and the holy Scripture (Deuteronomie
31.) that the things of God are well disposed. Now to understand those words,
and manner of speaking.

Preparatorie prayer is called, a brief prayer, which is made in the mind at
the beginning of prayer and meditation, offering up to God, all our faculties
and operations, to his honor and glory, demanding his assistance to make our
prayer, of whom all our sufficiency is (1. Cor. 3.) And one may add thereto
the vocal Prayer, Actiones nostras. etc. or some other.

Preludium, is as a Preamble which aideth the soul and understanding, to enter
the more easily into Meditation. And ordinarily one makes two Preludiums,
after the Preparatorie Prayer. Now, to understand how one must make these
Prea^bles, note that the matter of Meditation may be of two sorts, Corporal,
as the Nativity of our Lord; or Spiritual, as Sin.

The first Preludium, when the matter, is Corporal, and visible, is, to
imagine the persons, even as if we saw them before our eyes. As for example,
if we will meditate the Nativity of our Lord, the first Preludium shall be to
represent before our eyes the Stable, the Manger, the little Infant, our Lady,
and S. Joseph. And even as the Painters represent them to us in their Pictures:
the same are we to do in our imagination; provided without too excessive
inforcement, for they which have not a good imagination, should break their
heads in vain; and others make great pro^ite thereof.

When the matter is Spiritual, one must use some other like represe^tation; as
for example, to imagine to see our soul enclosed within this body, as within
a prison; or man banished into this vale of tears, amongst the brute and
savage beasts; or to see him self environed with devils; or to be amidst the
Angels; or to imagine to hear a voice from heaven; or from the mouth of our
Lord, or other Prophet or Apostle* speaking or pronouncinge the words which
one will Meditate.

The second Preludium is, to crave of Almighty God, the grace which one
desires to draw from such Meditation, as sorrow for sins, love of God,
knowledge of him self, etc. conform to the subject of the Meditation.

Colloquie and Prayer, (taking the word prayer, properly) is al one, that is
to say, to speak with God, as has before been explicated and considered.
After then that one has contemplated and considered; one must next pray, that
is to say, speak with almighty God, thanking him, craving pardon of him, or
the like. Briefly, doing that which has been said in its place. Now we will
adioyne three things, to wit; how one must make these Colloquies; how many, and
when.

1. As touching the first (besides that which has been said in his place
touching the manner how to Thank, Ask, and Offer, in which three do
ordinarily consist the Colloquie) Note first that all this ought to be done
mentallie and in spirit; albeit after the same, one may adioyne some Vocal
prayer, such as one will, and according to the subject of the Meditation; and
ordinarily, at the end of the prayer, one o^ght to recite that divine prayer,
by the which one craves of almighty God, all that which may be demanded and
desired, to wit, our Lords Prayer; But it must be said, softly or leasurelie,
word by word.

2. To make this Colloquie well, one thing there is which does greatly aid,
which is, to speak unto Almighty God, one while, as a little infant speaks
to his father, another while as the servant speaks to his master, the
vassal to his king: Now as the spouse speaks to her betrothed: and sometimes
as a poor beggar to the rich; as a guilty person to his Judge, as one sick
to his Physician: and imagining him self like to the Prodigal child, lame,
leprous, a traitor, rebel, etc.

3. It is also good to make some mental dialogue, which is, to introduce our
Lord, or God the Father so speaking to the soul, and saying unto him, such or
such like things: and the soul answering him. Or contrariwise, the soul
speakinge, and God answering her.

As touching the second, one may make one Colloquie only, as to God the
Father, or to our Lord Jesus: and one may likewise make sundry if one will.

Take an example of three Colloquies, First, to address us to the blessed
Virgin, beseeching her to obtain for us the thing which we desire, or which is
necessary for us: and having prayed Mentally, to make another Colloquie with
our Lord, as he is man, and our Mediator, beseeching him mentally, to obtain
for us the same grace, and immediately to recite some prayer which is directed
to him, as, Anima Christi; or some other. The third Colloquie, with God the
Father, that it would please his Majesty, by the Merits and intercession of
the Mother and the Son, to grant us that which we demand; and at the end,
to recite the Pater noster.

As touching the third, albeit the proper place and time of the Colloquies, be
at the end of an hour, and never to omit to depart from Prayer, without
making some kind of Colloquy; nevertheless one may also make them in the
midst, and at every point and consideration, when the soul does find her
self moved and stirred up to say or speak something. Or the better, to
continue attention, and countergard himself from distractions, by the means
of these little Colloquies. I say little, because if the Colloquie at the
beginning or midst of the meditation should be long, it would hinder the
Meditation: notwithstanding, that which comes from the Holy Ghost, cannot be
but good; whence we see, that there are certain persons, who spend the time of
Prayer and meditation, by manner of Colloquie.

CHAP. XXXI. That which is to be considered upon the points of Meditation.
Having showed how many things there are to be done in the time and hour
of prayer or meditation; next we will note that which is to be considered upon
each point, wherein many do find them selves troubled, not knowinge what to
think or meditate. To help therefore all the world, and to give unto all
sufficient matter and means to entertain them selves in meditation, and to
profit therein, we will set before them sundry Meditations, which one may make
upon all things whatsoever they be.

Note then, that the matter which one meditateth is, either Corporal, or
Spiritual. If the subject be Corporal (as are all the mysteries of our Lord)
one must upon each point consider these circumstances, to wit, 1. The persons
who are found in this mystery, as our Lord, our Lady, the Angel Gabriell,
the Apostles, etc. And their qualities, virtues, excellence, and office, 2. The
words which each of the^ speaks: and when there are no words written, to
think what probably they might say in such a case. 3. That which every one
does. 4. The end and cause wherefore the same was done. 5. The effects and
vtilities which have proceeded thereof. 6. One may also consider, the thoughts
and affections, which those persons had in that instant.

If the matter be spiritual, there are diverse things to be considered. 1. What
such a thing or matter is. 2. What his first beginning, and cause efficient is.
3. Wherefore, and to what end, it has been done. 4. The vtilities or
detriments, that it does produce. 5. What our Lord has done or said of such a
thing. 6. How I have comported my self in times past, concerning the same.
7. What I ought to do for the time to come. 8. It is very good to consider
the name, or the diverse names of such a thing. 9. And some sentence of Holy
Scripture upon the same subject. Behold then, if there be abundant matter to
stay ones self in meditation or not. But one must know these points by heart,
a little also accustom himself, or hold this book, or this paper in his
hand.

And note, that it is not necessary every day to make these considerations,
but only some: nor yet exactly to follow the same order, as, to consider
always, all the persons in the first place, in the second the words, and so
forth, but according as the soul shall fasten her self, rather to one
thing, then to another.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Composition of the Body.
THere is yet another thing to be known, and to be explicated, which is, the
composition of the body; wherein sundry things are to be noted.

1. That it imports not how one place, or settle him self in meditating, or
praying, provided that the meditation and Prayer it self succeed well, be it
kneeling or standing, or sitting, or lying, orleaning, or lying prostrate on
the ground, or houldinge the arms in form of a Cross. Walking, is not proper
to Meditate, but rather to prepare one before, and to examine after prayer.

2. That in what manner soever it be, one must observe great respect and
reverence, always remembering, that one is in the sight and presence of
Almighty God, and to be very wary, not to do the least indecent thing that
may be. And albeit that greater reverence is required in the acts of the Will,
then in the acts of the Understanding, that is to say, that one must
comporte himself more reverently and more humbly, when one prays, and
makes Colloquies, then when one considers only, notwithstanding in
meditating one must not forget the reverence due to his majesty; and therefore
albeit one sit, he must be bare-headed, if that his health permit the same.

3. That ordinarily one must begin upon his knees, or prostrate; and after
that one has begun in such fashion, he must not stir, but hold him self
so, so long as the body does feel no pain, and that his prayer succeeds
well. Then when it shall be need, to accommodate him self fair and softly in
some other manner.

4. As touching the eyes, for the most part, he must hold them shut, to pray
and meditate well. One may also sometimes open them, but fixed on some certain
place, without moving them this way and that way.

All this being presupposed, the practice is this. That being placed upon his
knees, or prostrate upon the ground, after he has blessed him with the sign of
the Cross, immediately he must make the preparatorie prayer with great
diffidence in him self, and confidence in God.

After that the Preludiums; Which done, he must take the first point of the
Meditation, and consideringe the same, stay him self, or pause so long time
thereon, as the soul does find to think and to profit thereon; and then to
pass to the other, and to do the same. At the end of the hour, or after one
has meditated enough, to make the Colloquie, or Colloquies, and making an
end, to recite devoutly the Pater noster.

And because the greatest difficulty in this affair lies in the meditation
and consideration of the points, to the end that every one be well instructed,
we will adioine some other aduertisements, that must be used in this behalf.

CHAP. XXXIII. Other aduertisements touching Meditation.
1. THe first is, that if it chance (as sometimes it does) that in meditatinge
the first point, or the second, the meditation succeeds well, and that the
soul finds therein many things to consider and profit her self, he must
stay him there, not caring to pass to the other point, albeit the whole hour
should be spent therein: only he must remember to make the Colloquy at the e^d.

2. The second, that he must not content himself with the only
consideration, and knowledge of things, but to pass further, and to move the
will, and to do as the Prophet says: ps. 8. In my Meditation, fire is
kindled. Now the most ordinary affections which one ought to excite in time of
Meditating, are, Love, Fear, Sorrow, Joy, Desire, Hope, Admiration, and
Confusion of him self.

It is meet then, that the meditation be not ^drie, and only pure
speculation, but affectuous, and full of interior taste. Moreover, of every
point which one considers, one must endeavor to draw some fruit, making
reflection upon him self, and resoluingto execute that which the Holy Ghost
has taught us in our Prayer.

3. The third, that the sentences of the holy Scriptures, do greatly help to
meditate well: and for this respect it is good, to find out and prepare some
one upon the same subject, whereon he will Meditate; As to Meditate upon the
knowledge of himself, and of the miseries of man in this world, to consider
this sentence of Job. ^cap. 14, A man borne of a woman etc. And making a
meditation of the love of God toward man, to take this sentence of our Lord.
(Ioh. 3.) So God loved the world. etc. and so of other matters.

4. The fourth, that similitudes also do maruellouslie aid to meditate well,
for the things of this world, do lead us to the knowledge of invisible and
spiritual things; as for example: will thou consider and comprehend^
something of the glory of heaven? Take some similitudes of Ba^quets,
Marriages, Riches, Honors, and Pleasures of this present life. In like manner,
to contemplate the pains of hell, propose unto thy self the most grievous
torments, and the greatest evils of this world: and the very same thou must do
in other matters.

Application of the Senses.

5. The fifth is, touching the application of the Senses, which is a thing that
does aid and further meditation, and are placed only in those Meditatio^s,
whose matter is Corporal. To apply the Senses in meditating, is as much to say,
as to imagine to see, hear, smell, taste, and touch spirituallie and by
devotion, the perpersons contained in the meditation, their garments, steps,
and all things else appertaining unto them: but this is to be done with all
humility and reuerence^ And this application o^ the Senses, is made ordinarily
a part, and separate from the meditation, and in another hour or even then
also, bu^ after meditation, after and the discourse of the understanding is
ended.

There is another for of application of the Senses, or rather meditation upon
the Senses which is, to consider for example, that which our Lord sufferedin
e^ch of his Senses, or the joy, and contentment that our Lady received of our
Lord, by her Se^ses, beholding him, hearing him speakinge to him, touching him
etc. Also to consider the joys, that the blessedshal have and the pains which
the damned shall suffer in the five Senses.

CHAP. XXXIV. Remedies against distractions.
THe sixth is, touching the distractions which chance in praying and meditating,
and like unto dead flies, spil the sweetness of the ointment. (Eccles. 10.)
one must therefore know the remedies. And first, to make a diligent preparation,
as has been said, to ask aid of almighty God, and our Angel Guardian for
this effect. 2. Because meditation is more subject to distraction then prayer;
one remedy is, not to continue over long the consideration, which is the act
of understanding, but to each consideration, to add some prayer, or a little
Colloquie.

There are other means to drive away the distraction, which is allreadie
entered. First one must be diligent, presently to take notice of it, and
speedely to reject it. 2. Humbly to crave pardon of almighty God, to have
turned our back toward him. 3. If the distraction do return, or will not
away, one must not impatient or trouble him self, since coming against our
will, it is no sin, but matter of merit. 4. To humble and confound him self,
considering his poverty and feebleness, not able to do any good thing of
himself, and to esteem himself unworthy to speak unto God, and to stand in
his divine presence. 5. To recommende him self to our B. Lady, to his good
Angel, and other Patrons. 6. To make this vocal Prayer devoutly, word by
word, and to content himself therewith, eue^ as he who having bread made of
wheat, contents* himself with bread of Rye or Barley. 7. Sometimes not to
loose too much time in this combat of importunat cogitations, one may take some
good spiritual book, especially Gerson and make mixed prayer, and meditation
together, reading one period or sentence, and considering it a little, and then
to make some me^tall prayer, or Vocal, or the one or other, and so to pass
from period to period. 8. For all distraction, difficulty, and pain which may
present it self, he must never for all this abandon prayer, nor shorten the
time which he has accustomed, or otherwise decreed to employ therein, which the
devil does especially pretend and labor to persuade: but in such case, he
must rather a little pass beyond the hour, to the end to vanquishe him self,
and the enemy together* Doing this, that which the wise man promises will come
to pass (Eccles. 7.) to wit. That the end of Prayer, shall be better then the
beginning, that is to say, that one shall not depart from thence without
consolation, or at the least, one shall merit very much, mortifying him self
for the love of God.

The seventh, appertains to Repetition, that is to say, that it is
expedient, and sometimes necessary, once, twice, and thrice, to make again
the same meditation: the which is done for two reasons; Either for that the
first time one has found therein exceeding sweetness and profit, and
rechewing the same, he shall both taste and profit more; Or, for that the first
time he could not enter therein, and returning thereto, it will come to pass,
that at the second, third, or fourth time, the gate shall be set open unto us,
according to that which our Lord teaches in S. Mark. cap. 7. saying: Knock
and it shall be opened unto you. Add, that by these Repetitions, the like
mysteries are better imprinted in our soul, and also the understanding does
habituate and make it self more prompt to meditate.

Lastly, one may Repeat, in three manners: either all the meditation, or some
one point thereof, whereof one could not taste before: or to Repeat two or three
Meditations together, pausing, especially upon those points wherein at the
first one has found least taste or relish, or which one could not meditate.

CHAP. XXXV. What one must do when he is disgusted, and in spiritual aridity
or dryness.
THe eight is, how one ought to govern him self, and what he ought to do,
in the time of ariditie, or dryness. Where it is to be noted, that the
spiritual life, albeit for the most part it be full of sweetness and
contentment of spirit, for the virtuous people sake, who enforce themselves
truly to serve our Lord, notwithstanding it is sometimes subject to desolation
and distaste, so that a man having lost this sensible devotion, does find
himself dry, not able to bide at prayer and meditation. Now, finding him
self in such estate, what must he do? 1. He must never loose courage, but
expect with firm hope and confidence, that God after this storm will send
fair weather, as Tobie said, cap. 3. Who after tempest; sends fair weather.
2. To have patience, and to say with Job (cap. 1.) If we have received good
things from the hands of our Lord, is it not just that we receau^ also evil?

3. To humble himself, lauding almighty God, for at that time we see, and
touch with the finger, that we are nothing worth without the aid of
almighty God^ Also, we ought to believe, that this comes not but through
our faul^es and offenses; for the which God does presently punish us, and
humbly to ask him pardon. Besides this, he must likewise use other means, to
recover the devotion which one has lost for the former would not suffice.

4. The fourth then is, to do some Penance, or Penances to this end.

5. To examine more diligently his conscience, to take away the cause of evil.

6. To recommend himself more instantly unto our Lord, to our Lady, to his
good Angel etc. And he must be advertised, that in such time of distastfulnes,
he must not omit any good work which he was accustomed or deliberated before
to do, nor yet to seek himself, nor his proper gust, but the honor and good
pleasure of Almighty God.

CHAP. XXXVI. That which is to be done after Prayer.
AFter that Prayer is finished, one must make a particular examen upon the same
prayer, in this manner. Either sittinge or walking fair and softly, to consider
the space of a quarter of an hour, or there about, how thy prayer has
succeeded with thee, well or ill; If thou have had good success, render
thanks to the divine bou^ty, humbling thy self, and acknowledging that this
good proceeds not of thy self; If thy affairs went ill, humbly ask him
pardon.

2. Examine and search out the cause whence this proceeded, considering from
point to point, how, and with what diligence, thou have performed that which
was to be observed, and wherein thou have failed: and make a firm purpose to
be more diligent, and to do better for the time to come.

3. Retain in memory some fruit of the Prayer, which almighty God has
communicated unto thee, to make thy profit thereof.

4. After this, give a glance of the eye to all the day ensuing, wisely
disposing thine affairs, and purposing this and that, as God shall inspire
thee.

5. If some one after prayer and Meditation, will commit to writting some
profitable point, which he has received, or felt in meditating, to the end
to serve himself thereof for his own profit, or his neighbors, it is both
lawful, and of great utility; but always provided, let the same be done very
briefly.

6. Sometimes before dinner and supper, he must remember himself of the
meditation in the morning, both in general, and particularly of that point
which he had retained, chewing the same a little, renewing his devotion, and
accomplishing that which the Prophet s^ieth. Reliquiae cogitationis diem festum
agent tibi. Psalm. 75.

7. He must put in execution, the good purposes, which he made in the morning,
taking heed of the occasions which offer themselves, much less procuring them:
for it is the principal end and fruit of Prayer.

8. In the day time, he must keep himself closely recollected, and as in
continual devotion, and to beware of distraction, as much as possible may be,
not letting our Lord go out of our sight, and saying in every place with the
Prophet: I had always our Lord before my sight. Psalm. 10.

9. Finally, to accomplish all that has hitherto been said, and to profit
better in this holy exercise of prayer and meditation, the servant of Almighty
God, ought twice a week to make an examen here upon particularly, since the
thing is of such importance: that he examen, I say, how prayer goes with him,
how he aduanceth himself herein, to wit, if there be some impediment, and the
like: comparing one week with another, and one month with another. And to
make this examen, he must set down the days, and the hours, to the end to
remember him, as on Tuesdaie, and Saterdaie; in the morning after Prayer, and
in the evening, after supper.

FINIS.
Instructio haee ad been orandun, a R. P. Ignatio Balsamo; composita and
Anglice reddita vtiliter imprimi poterit 12. Aug. 1617. Audomaropoli.

I. Redman S. T. Doctor and librorum Censor.
Huius iudicio subscripsi Duaci, 37. Augusti, 1617. Georgius Coluenerius S.
Theol. Doctor and Professor, and librorum in Academia Duacena Censor.

THE FLOWERS OF DEVOTION.

Where with every pious soul, may easily practice how to discourse
spirituallie, with Jesus Christ his beloved Spouse.

Containinge 24. holy Aspirations, to be recited in each of the 24. hours,
as well of the night, as of the day.



For JOHN HEIGHAM.

THE PREFACE to the Reader.
IT is upon Jesus Christ, your best beloved Spouse (deuou^ and dear affected
soul) on whom your heart ought always to muse and meditate. in all your
thoughts, wordes^ deeds wills, desires, and aspirations, yea even in all the
hours, and moments of your life; It is he, I say, Who ought to be embraced and
lodged therein, both night and day, the Idea of your soul, the desire of your
heart, and the only object of all your motions.

To the end therefore, never so divide or sequester your self from his blessed
company, behold here certain amourous discourses wherewith to entertain
you, and where upon to employ your spirit in every moment, in manner of
Petitions or brief Meditations, so sweet, so fruitful, so spiritual, yea s^
devout and aggreable to your dearly beloved Savior Jesus Christ, as that the
same is a true and assured means, and most perfect method, to conserve you
perpetually in his holy grace, and to dwell with him, and in him, and he
likewise with you, and within you in all occasions. Perform then, I beseech
you, that which is here perscribed unto you, not for the love of me (allbeie I
instantly require you) but for the most tender love which you bear to his
divine majesty.

You shall begin this Angelical office at five a clock in the Evening, to
meditate the first Aspiration and sweet discourse, and so from hour to hour
you shall continue, until the four and twentieth hour, which will bring you to
finish this exercise, at four a clock, the next day after in the Evening; And
then you shall begin again at your first, and so shall continue every day
(Gods grace assistinge you) until the day and hour, that he shall determine
to place you with him self in perpetual repose.

Now, as touching the hours ordained for rest, you shall observe this easy
rule. Before you fall a sleep, be i^ethor in your bed, or he ^ort you go to
take your rest, you shall meditat^ four of the ^foresaid Meditations. An^ if it
happen also that you awake in the night time, you shall meditate one or two
more. If you awaken not all the night, in the morning you shall accomplish
althose hours which you have omitted: and in this sort you shall always
continue.

This holy Exercise, you have means to perform in working, talking, walking
and in all manner of affairs which you shall do, for it is nether the body,
nor yet the tongue which is burdened by this Exercise, but it is the spirit
and the hare which speaks, and testifies to Jesus Christ, the fidelity and
care which it has to please him. This also may be done, without hindringe you
any thing at all from your other prayers, either Mental, or Vocal, yea or so
much as to withhould you from attendinge, to any other godly work, or
laudable Exercise whatsoever; Practice then, and persevere.

Your servant in Christ Jesus. John Heigham.

The 1. Meditation, at five clock at night.
O Most meek Jesus, the pattern and example of perfect humility. In this
hour, entering into the lodging of a frinde, thou vouchsafedst to wash the
feet of thy disciples, in sign of the great and singular Humility Grant dear
Jesus, that I may obtain the virtue of mo^ perfect Humility, even t^ the
abiecting of my self under all men's feet; An^ let it please thee so to wash^
my sinful soul, that I man long thee therein, for eue^ and ever. Amen.

The 2. Meditation, a^ six a clock at night.
O Good Jesus. In this hour, even then whilst thine enemies conspired thy
death, and sought to tear thy flesh in pieces with their teeth, and to drink
thy blood for rage and madness, in the same hour, thou vowchsafedst to
institute that most divine Sacrament of thy body and blood, for our food and
sustenance. Dear Jesus, by the virtue of this thy sweet and ineffable love,
preserve and keep me from the sin of Ingratitude; And never suffer me to
depart this life. till first I be fed with thy Body and Blood in the blessed
Sacrament, Amen.

The 3. Meditation, at seven a clock at night.
O Good Jesus, in this hour, thou wentest with thy Disciples into the garden
of Gethsmany, where prostrate on the ground, and praying to thy Father, thou
felst into such excessive sadness, that thou did sweat, a sweat of blood, for
pain and anguish. Dear Jesus, asist me with thy grace, in all ^ribulations,
to have my present recourse unto thee by holy prayer, and make me in this
life, willingly to sweat with thee, that in the life to come, I may for ever
ioifully repose with thee. Amen.

The 4. Meditation, at eight a clock at night.
O Good Jesus, in this hour, thou wast sold and betrai^d to thine enemies, by
thine own Disciple, with the sign of a kiss, and this for the love of a
little lucre. Dear Jesus let no filthy lucre, ever cause me to sell or betray
thee: or unjustly to wrong or oppress my neighbor. And refuse not (I
beseech thee) the kiss of him that ^epenteth to have offended thee, since thou
refusedst not the kiss of him that did unkindly betray thee, Amen.

The 5. Meditation, at nine a clock at night.
O Good Jesus, in this hour, thou wast bound and fast tied by most barbarous
soldiers, and haled by them hither and thither like a very beast, without once
opening thy mouth in thine own defense. Grant me dear Jesus, in virtue of
these thy sacred bonds, to bind and captiuate, all my senses, both of soul
and body, in obedience unto thee. And never to hale thee to any beastly
sin, or voluptuous pleasures, whereby I may trespass or offend thee, Amen.

The 6. Meditation, at ten a clock at night.
O Good Jesus, in this hour thou wast forsaken of thy Disciples, and
remainedst alone in the hands of thine enemies, who led thee away, as their
prisoner, and captive. Dear Jesus, receive me, I beseech thee, thy fugitive
servant, who many times (for fear and other respects) have fled from thee;
And keep me safely under thy protection, that mine infernal enemies, do not
carry me away as their condemned and perpetual captive, Amen.

The 7. Meditation, ar eleven a clock at night.
O good Jesus, in this hour thou wast presented before Annas, who demanded
questions of thee, concerning both thy doctrine and thy disciples: and
receiving a violent blow of one of his servants, yet rendredst unto that wicked
and insolent wretch, a most mild answer, Dear Jesus, stre^ghten me to confess
thy faith and truth, upon all occasions, when I shall be called or urged
thereunto. Never to punish any in the heat of my passion: and such as any way
shall injury me, to mollify their wrathful hearts with words of sweetness
and benignity, Amen.

The 8. Me^itation, at twelve a clock at night.
O Good Jesus, in this hour thou wast sent from Annas to Cayphas, where the
chief of the Priests were assembled together* secking false witness against
thee to put thee to death: but found not any. Dea^e Jesus, grant me to accuse
no man falselie, and being falstlie accused, to suppore it patiently. To
despise, yea and utterly to detest, all lies and falsitie, since by lies and
falsitie, thou wast unjustly adjudged and condemned to die, Amen.

The 9. Meditation, at one ^ a clock in the morning.
O Good Jesus, In this hour, thou was thrice denied of Peeter, who forswore
himself to be thy Disciple, but thou graciously looking back upon him, he
presently went forth of that wicked company, and bitterly bewailed his
offense. Dea^e Jesus, have mercy on me, who both by words and deeds, have so
often denied my self to be thy Disciple. Look upon me with the eyes of thy
clemency, for that wherein I have offended thee: and make me to fly all
wicked company, since the same is such an occasion of falling from thee, Amen.

The 10. Meditation, at two a clock in the morning.
O Good Jesus, In this hour, thou wast sent from Cayphas, to Pontius Pilat,
where the wicked Jews began a fresh to accuse thee falsely, alleging that
thou peruertedst their people, and forbadst them to pay tribut to Cesars
Majesty; Dear Jesus, let this thy false accusation, excuse me (faulty that I
am) before the Majesty of thy Father; And make me so to give unto the world
that which is the worlds, that I never omit to give unto God that which is
Gods, which is, all honor and glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

The 11. Meditation, at three a clock in the morning.
O good Jesus, in this hour, thou wast sent by Pilat to Herod, who of vain
curiosity, had long time desired to see thee: where thou (king of heaven)
clothed in a white coat (the habit of fools) wast contemned of him and of
his whole court. Dear Jesus, grant unto me, a most fervent desire to see thee,
and to have thee continually present before mine eyes; And utterly to detest
all pride of apparel, since thou in a colored and disfigured coat, wast
mocked and accounted for a fool. Amen.

The 12. Meditation, at four a clock in the morning.
O good Jesus, in this hour, thou wast sent back again by Herod, to Pilat,
where thou wast stripped naked, bound to a Pilar, and so inhumanlie beaten with
rods and scourges, that the blood ran down on every side of thy B. body.
Dear Jesus, grant me thy grace, nakedlie to discover my sins to my ghostly
Father; Willingly to receive the rod of thy fatherly correction; and never to
scourge thee again by my former offenses, Amen.

The 13. Meditation, at five a clock in the morning.
O Good Jesus, in this hour, thy sacred eyes being hid and blindfoulded, those
sacrilegious wretches gave unto thee sundry blows and buffets, saying.
Prophecy unto us o Christ, who he was that smote thee, Dear Jesus, hide not
from me the eyes of thy mercy: nor let me hide mine own, by thinkinge when I
sin, that thou do not see me. And prophecy unto me, o Christ, what, and
who I am, that so often, with the hand of my wicked works, have so daringly,
and so audaciouslie smitten thee, Amen.

The 14. Meditation, at six a clock in the morning
O Good Jesus, in this hour, thou (king of all glory (wast clothed in a
purple garment, crowned with a crown of Thorns, and a hollow Reed was given
into thy hands insteede of a Sceptie. Dear Jesus, grant me never to put upon
thee by mockery, a kingly garment, by doing good works for any vain
glorious end: to remember by this hollow Reed, the hollownes and instabillitie
of all temporal things: and willingly to wear the crown of thorns, and of
all contempt, in this world, so that I may wear the crown of glory in the
world to come, Amen.

The 15. Meditation, at 7. a clock in the morning.
O Good Jesus, in this hour. Pontius Pilate brought thee forth, and showed
thee unto the people in this pitiful plight, saying. Behold the man,
profferring them Barrabas, to deliver thee: but they incessantly cried out
aloud to have thee crucified: Dear Jesus, grant me, that being at any time
afflicted with temptations, I may present this figure unto thy heavenly
Father, saying. Behold the man. And to bear it most patiently, though wicked
or inferior parsons be preferred before me, since a thief and murdrer was
preferred before thee, Amen.

The 16. Meditation, at 8. a clock in the morning.
O good Jesus. In this hour, Pilat overcome with the importunat clamors of the
Jews, pronounced the sentence of death against thee: and Judas casting down
the money, despairing, hung him self upon a tree. Dear Jesus, pardon me, who
many times in favor of the world, and mine own flesh, have pronounced the
sentence of death against thee; And grant me perfect Contrition for all my
sins, so that I never, finally despair of thy grace and mercy. Amen

The 17. Meditation, at 9 a clock in the morning.
O Good Jesus, In this hour the Jews pullinge off the clothes of mockery,
which Herod and Pilates soldiers had put upon thee, and reuestinge thee with
thine own apparel, that thou mighst the better be known, thou carriedst thy
heavy C^osse toward the mount of Caluarie, even till thou felst down in the
way for excessive wearines: Dear Jesus, grant me hereby to remember, that at
the last, death will despoile me, of whatsoever the world has lent me. And
make me never to be weary, of bearing thy Cross, that being partaker of thy
pain, I may be partaker of thy glory, Amen.

The 18. Meditation, at 10. a clock in the morning.
O Good Jesus, in this hour, thou wast crucified on the Cross betwixt two
thieves, thy B body being so violently extended thereon, that one might number
all thy bones: mean while thou praiedst for thine enemies, and promisedst
Paradise unto the penitent thief. Dear Jesus, cause me to crucify all my
disordered appetites, and to extend all my members, with all the powers both of
soul and body, in the service of thee; And at the hour of my death,
vouch-safe to do me the self same grace, that thon did unto the penitent
thief, and to those that crucified thee, Amen.

The 19. Meditation, at 11. a clock in the morning.
O Good Jesus, in this hour, thine enemies most spitefully vpbraidinge thee,
that if thou were the Son of God, thou should come down from the Cross
and save thy self; mean while, thou sorrowfully criedst out to thy Father,
saying. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Dear Jesus, grant unto me.
that by no suggestion of the world, the flesh, or the devil, I ever come down
from the Cross of thy service. Nor ever to despair in mine adversities,
though it seem unto me to be quite forsaken, since the like desolation did
happen to thee having on the Cross, in such extremity, Amen.

The 20 Meditation, at 12. a clock at noone.
O Good Jesus, In this hour, craving a little drink to quench thy thirst,
they gave thee most bitter gaul and vinegre to increase thy torment, which
having tasted, cryinge with a loud voice; All is finished thou rendredst up thy
spirit into the hands of thy Father. Dear Jesus, make me never to abuse the
good crea^ures of mea^e or drink, si^h gaul and vinegre was given to thee.
Constantly to persevere in ver^u, even to the end, that I may truly say with
thee, All is finished which thou have commanded me: and so may recommend my
soul into thos^ holy hands, extended;, pierced, and with thy precious blood,
all besprinkled for me, Amen.

The 21. Meditation, at one a clock in the afternoon.
O Good Jesus, In this hour, the sun was darkened, the earth trembled, the
rocks rent a sundre; the graves opened, and many that slept arose, went forth,
and appeared to diverse in the city. Dear Jesus, wound my heart with such
compassion, that like to the sun it may quite loose the light of all wordlie
joy. Like to the earth, to tremble with fear. Like to the rocks, to rent with
sorrow. Like to the graves to open by confession. Like to the dead, to arise
and go forth of the sepulcher of sin. And like unto those Saints, enter
into the city of paradise and everlasting pleasure, Amen.

The 22. Meditation, at 2. a clock in the morning.
O Good Jesus, in this hour, thy most holy soul, descended into the prison of
Limbo, to deliver from thence thy faithful frindes, mean while, the sacred
side of thy dead body, was opened with the stroke of a soldiers spear. Dear
Jesus, make me willingly for the love of thee, to visit prisoners, the souls
in Purgatory, or any poor that are in necessity. Wound my heart perfectly
with the love of thee, and let this most sacred wound, stand always open unto
me in my necessity, Amen.

The 23. Meditation, at 3. a clock in the afternone.
O Good Jesus, In this hour, Joseph entering boldly to Pilat, and begging thy
body, with the help of Nicodemus, vnnailed, and took down the same from the
tree of the Cross: and coming toward the earth, was received of thy blessed
mother betwixt her arms. Dear Jesus, grant me to desire with love, and to beg
with faith, thy blessed body in the holy Eucharist; And to reciue thee often
within the arms of my soul, with such burning tears of love and devotion, as
did thy sad and afflicted mother, Amen.

The 24. Meditation, at 4. a clock in the afternone.
O Good Jesus, In this hour thy well-beloved frinds anointed thy dead body
with most precious ointments: wrapped the same in a clean sindon, and
finally, enclosed the same within a new sepulcher, wherein never any was laid,
or buried before. Dear Jesus, vouchsafe to anoint my soul, when it shall be
dead by sin, with the precious liquor of thy preuenient grace. And grant (I
beseech thee) that my heart may be unto thee a new sepulcher (truly renewed in
newnes of life) wherein thou only and thy celestial love, may be lodged and
enclosed, for ever and ever. Amen.

Saluations to all the parts of Christ and recommandation of himself unto him.
AL I hail o head of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, dreadful to all powers,
crowned for us with thorns, and smitten with a reed. All hail o most
beautiful face of our Savior Jesus Christ, spit at and buffeted for us. All
hail o most benign eyes of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, bedewed for us
with tears. All hail o honny-flowinge mouth, and throat most sweet of our Lord
Jesus Christ, made for us to drink gall and vinegar. All hail o most noble ears
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, vexed with contumelies and vpbraidings for
us. All hail o humble neck of Jesus Christ buffeted for us, and most holy back
whipped for us. All hail o most venerable hands and arms of our Lord Jesus
Christ, stretched upon the Cross for us. All hail o most meek breast of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, much troubled for us in thy passion. All hail o
most glorious side of our Lord Jesus Christ pierced through with the spear of a
soldier for us. All hail o sacred knees of mercy of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ bowed for us in thy prayers. All hail (o feet to be adored) of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, fastened with nails for us. All hail o holy body of
Jesus Christ, hanged on the Cross, wounded;, dead and buried for us. All hail o
most precious blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, powered out for us. All
hail o most holy soul of our Lord Jesus Christ, recommended upon the Cross for
us into the hands of thy Father. In the same recommandation, I recommend to
thee this day, and daily, my soul, my life, my heart, and body, all my senses
and acts, all my friends and benefactours, my sons and kinsfolks, the soul
of my parents, brethren, sisters, and of all my friends and enemies: that thou
voutsafe to protect, deliver and defend us from all the assaults of our
enemies visible, and invisible, now and for ever more. Amen.

FINIS.
APPROBATIO.
LIbellum hunc piaru^^ Meditationum pro 24. diei horis, legi attente: and nihil
inuenio quod sit contra fidem aut bonos mores; sed dignum iudico qui pro
solatio deuotorum imprimatur. 4. Ianuarij. 1618.

F. Leander de S. Martin Benedictoru^ Anglorum Vicarius generalis, S. Theol.
Doct. and Regius Professor linguae Sa^ctae in Academia Duacena.


