THE FIRST AND SECOND parts of King Edward the fourth.
Containing his merry pastime with the Tanner of Tamwoorth, as also his love
to fair Mistress Shore, her great promotion, fall and misery, and lastly
the lamentable death of both her and her husband.

Enter King Edward, the Duchess of York, the Queen, the Lord Howard, and sir
Thomas Sellinger. Duchess. Son, I tell ye you have done you know not what:

King. I have married a woman, else I am decesue^ mot^er.


Dutch. Married a woman? married indeed,
Here is a marriage that befits a King:
It is no matudile it was done in haste,
Here is a B^dall and with hell to boot,
You have mad^ work?

King. Faith mother some we have indeed, but ere long you shall see us make
work for an heir apparent I doubt not, nay, nay, come-come, Gods will what
chid^g stille


Dutch. O God that ^re I ^de to see this day.

King. B^ my faith mother, I hope you ^al see the night too, and in the morning
I will be bold to ^ld you to the Christ^ing Gr^ndmother, and Godmother to a
Prince of Wales, tut mother, it is a st^ing world.


Dutch. Have you sent Warwick into France for this?

King. No by my faith mother I sent Warwick into France for ^n other, but this
by chance being nearer hand, and coming in the way I cannot tell how, we
concluded, and now (as you see) are going about to get a young King.


Dutch. But tell me son how will you answer this?
Is It possible ^our rash unlawful act,
Should not breed mortail hate betwixt the Kealme^
What may the French King think when he shall hear
That whilst you send to entreat about his daughter,
Basely to take a subject of your own?
What may the Princess Bona think of this?
Our noble Cousin Warwick that great Lord,
That Center-shaking (...) of war,
That like a Colum propt the house of York:
And boar our white Rose brau^ly in his top,
When he shall hear his embassage abusor,
In this but made an instrument by you,
I know his soul will blush within his bosom,
And shame will sit i^ Scarl^t on his Brew,
To have his hon^r touched with this foul ble^h
Son, son I tell ^ou that is done by you,
Which yet the child that is unborn shall rue.

King. ^sh mother you are dece^ude, all true subjects shall have (...) use to
thank God, to have their King borne of a true Engl^ woman, I tell you it was
never u^ll since we imatched wi^h strangers, so our children have been still
l^ke Chickens of the half kind but where the rock and the hen be both of one
^reede, there is like to be birds of the game: h^re you mother, hear you, had
I gone to it by fortune, I ^d made your sons George and Dicke to have stood
gaping after the crown: this wench mother is a widow, and has made proof of
her valor, and for any thing I know, I am as like to do the deed as John Gray
her husband was, I had rather the people prayed to bless mine heir, then
selide me an heir: hold your peace, if you can see, there was never mother had
a to warder son, why Cousin Howard and Tom Sellinger heard you ever such a
coil about a wife?


How. My sovereign Lord with patience bear her spl^
Your princely mothers zeal is like a river,
That from the free abundance of the waters,
Breaks out into this inundation,
From her abundant care this rage proceeds,
Over swollen with the extremity of love.

Sell. My Lord, my Lord, avoid a woman's humor,
If you resist this tumor of her will,
Here you shall have her dwell upon this passion,
Until she lade and dull our ears again:
Seem you but sorry for what you have done,
And straight she will put the finger in the e^e,
With comfort now, since it cannot be helped:
But make you show to justify the act
If ever other language in her lips,
Then out upon it, it is abominable, I dare be hangde,
Say any thing it makes no matter what,
Then thus be wearied with a woman's chat.

Dutch. I, I, you are the spamels of the Court,
And thus you sawn and sooth your want^n king,
But Edward had thou prizde thy maic^ie,
Thou never would have staind thy princely state,
with the base leauings of a subjects bed:
Nor borne the blemish of her Bigamie.
A widow, is it not a goodly thing?
Grayes children come ask blessing of the King.

Qu. Nay I beseech your Grace my Lady York,
Even as you are a Princess and a widow,
Think not so meanly of my widowhood,
A spotless virgin came I first to Gray,
With him I ^ude a true and faithful wife:
And since his hie imperial majesty,
Has pleas^e to bless my poor del^ed state
With the high Sovereign title of his Queen,
I here protest before the host of heaven,
I came as chasse a widow to his bed,
As when a virgin (...) to Gray was wed.

King. Come, come have done, n^w have you ch^d enough, G^ds ^ote, we were as
merry ere she came, as any people in Chrstendome, I with the mist^s, and these
with the ma^es: only we have no fiddlers at our feast, but mother you have
m^de a sit of mirth: welcome to Grafton mother, by my troth you are even ^ust
come as I wished you here, let us go to supper, and in Charity give us your
blessing ere we go to Bed.


Du^c. O Edward, Edward, stic and leave this place,
Wherein poor Gllie King thou art enchanted,
This is her d^m of Bedtords work her mother,
That has be w^tcht thee Edwa^d my poor child,
D^honour not the Princes of thy land,
To make the (...) kneel with reverence at her feet,
That ere thou dl^st e^pale with soueraintie,
The^ would have scorned to have looked upon,
T^eres no such differen^e twixt the greatest Peer,
And the poor sill^st kitching maid that lives,
A^ls bet wirt thy worthiness and hers.

Q^ee. I do confess it, yet my Lady York,
M^ mother is a duchess as you are,
A Princess borne, the Duke of Bedfords wi^e,
And as you ^no, a daughter and a sister,
Unto the royal blood of Burgundy.
But you cannot so basely think on me,
As I do think of these vain worldly titles,
God from soul my sin as far dcuide.
As I am far from boasting in this pride,

Selling. Madam, she is the mirror of her kind,
H^d she but so much spleen as has a gnatte,,
Her spirits would startle to abide your taunts,
She is a Saint, and Madam you blaspheme,
^o wrong so sweet a Lady.

Duch. Thou art a ^nion and a slatterer.

Sellin. Madam but that you are my sovereigns mother,
I would let you know you wrong a Gentleman,

Howard. Good Cousin Sellinger have patience,
Her Graces rage by too much violence,
Has spent it self already into ^re:
Dear Madam I beseeth you on my knee,
Tender that loving kindness to the Queen,
That I dare swear she does in soul to you.

Edw. Well said good Cose, I pray thee make them friends, why how now Besse,
what weep? nay then i will chide y^u: what sudden news comes by this messenger?


Enter a Messenger. Mes. My sovereign Lord, the bastard Falconbridge,
Of late has stird rebellion in the South,
Encouraging his forces to deliver,
King Henry late deposde out of the Tower,
To him the malcontented commons flock,
From every part of Sussex, Kent, and Esier,
His armic waxed twenty thousand strong.
And as it is supposde by circumstance,
Mean to take London, if not well defended.

Ed. Well let this Phaeton that is mountel thus,
Look he sit surely, or by Englands George,
I Will break his neck, this is no new evasion,
I surely thought that one day I should see,
That bastard Falcon take his wings to mount,
Into our Eagle airie, me thought I saw,
Black ^iscontent sit ever on his brow,
And now I see I calculated well,
Good Cousin Howard, and Tom Sellinger,
This night we will spend in fe^st and ^llitie,
With our new Queen, and our beloved mother,
To morrow you shall hau^ commission,
To raise up power against this haughty rebel:
Sir depart not till you know our pleas^re,
You shall convey us letters back to London,
Unto the Mayor, Recorder, and our friends,
Is supper ready? come by my bonnie Besse,
Welcome mother, we are all your guests.

Exeunt. Enter Falconbridge with his troops marching, Spicing, Smoke, Chub,
and others. Fall. Hold drum,

1. Spi. Hold drum and be hangde,

2. Smoke. Hold drum hold, peace then ho, silence to the 3 proclamation.


1. Spi. You lie you rogue, it is to the Oration,

Chub. Nay then you all lie, it is to the coblication,

Fall. True hearted English and our valiant friends,

all. Do brave general isaith.

Spi. Peace there you rogues, or I will split your chaps:

Fall. De are countrymen, I publicly proclaim,
If any wronged discontented English,
Touched with true faeling of King Hens wrongs,
Henry the ^rt the lawful King of England,
Who by that tyrant Edward the usurper,
Is held a wretched prisoner in the Lowre,
If any man that feign would be enfranchisde,
From the sad yoke of ^orkrsh servitude,
Under which w^ toil like naked Gallislaues,
Know he that Thomas Neuill the Lord Falconbridridge:

all. I and, a Falconbridge a falconbridge:

Spi. P^ace ye clamorous rogues, on General on with poor
Oration, peace there,

Fall. Pit^ing King Henry's poor destressed case,
Armde with his title, and a subjects zeal,
Takes up just arm^s against the house of Yorks:
And do proclaim our ancient liberty:

all. Liberty, liberty, liberty, general liberty.

Fall. We do not rise like Tiler, Cade, and Straw,
Blewbeard, and other of that rascal route,
Bascly like Linkers, or such mnddle ^anes,
For mending measures, or the price of corn,
Or for some common in the wild of Kent,
That's by some greedy Cormorant inclosde:
But in the true and ancient lawful right,
Of the redoubted bouse of Lancaster.
Our blood is noble, by our birth a Neuill,
And by our lawful line Lord Falconbridge,
Whose here that's of so dull a leaden temper,
That is not fired with a Neuils name?

All. A Neuill, a Neuill, a Neuill.

Fa. Our quarrel like our self is honorable,
The law our warrant.

Smoke. I, I, the law is on our side.

Chub. I, the law is in our own hands,

Spi. Peace you rogues.

Fall. And more, a blessing by the word proposoe,
To those that aid a true anointed King,
Courage brave spirits and cry a Falconbridge,

All. A Falconbridge, a Falconbridge.

Fall. We will be masters of the mint our selves,
And set our own stamp on the golden coin:
We Will shoe our neighing coursers with no worse
Then the purest s^iuer that is sold in Cheap.
At Leaden hall we will sell pearls by the pecke,
As now the mealemen use to sell their meal:
In Westminster we will keep a solemn court,
And build it bigger to receive our men,
Cry Falconbridge my hearts liberty,

All. Falconbridge and liberty, etc.

Smoke. Peace ye slaves, or I will smoke ye else,

Chub. Peace ye slaves, or I will chub your chappes, but indeed thou may
well smoke them, because thy name is Smoke.


Smoke. Why sir, I hope Smoke the Smith of Chepsted, is as good a man as Chub
the Chandler of Sandwich.


Spicing. Peace ye rogues, what are you quarrelling? and now list to Captain
Spicing.
You know Cheapeside there are the Mercers shops,
Where we will measure velvet by the pikes:
And Silks and Sattens by the streets whole breadth:
We Will take the Tankards from the Conduit cocks,
To fill with Ip^ras and drink carowse.
Where chains of gold and plate shall be as plenty,
As wodden dishes in the wild of Kent:

Smoke. Oh bravely said Ned Spicing, the honestest Lad that ever punde spice
in a mortar, now speaks Captain Smoke.


Look Lads for from this hill ye may discern,
The lovely town which we are ma^hing to,
That same is London Lads yelook^ upon,
Raunge all arow my hearts and stand at gaze,
As do the herds of Dear at some strange sight:
Or as a troop of hungry trauel^s,
That fire their eyes upon a fur^d feast,
Look how the Tower does tice us to come on,
To take out Henry the sixth there prisoner,
See how S. Katherines smokes, wipe slaves vour eyes
And whet your stomachs for the good malt pies.

Chub. Why then belike I am no body: room and auoydance, for now speaks
Captain Chub:
No sooner in London will we be,
But the Bakers for you, the Brewers for me,
Bir^hin lane shall suit us, the Costermongers fruit us:
The Poulters send us in soul,
And Butchers meat without control:
And ever when we sup or dine,
The Vintners freely bring us in wine:
If any body ask who shall pay,
Cut off his head and send him away.
This is Captain Chubs law whosoever say nay.

Fall. Bravely resolude, so m^rch we forward all,
And boldly say, good luck shall us be^all.

Exeunt. Enter the Lord Mayor, M. Shore. M. Iosseline, in their velvet coats,
and gorgets, and leading staves. Ma. This is well done, thus should good
Citizens,
F^hion themselves as well for war as peace:
Have ye command^d that in every streese,
They h^g forth ligh^s as soon as ^ght comes one
Say Colin Sn^are that was referd to you.
^hoare (...) have my Lord, besides from every hall
T^ere is at least two hund^ed men in arms.

Ma. (...) cheares my heart to hear this readiness,
Let never r^bels put true Subjects down,
Come when they will, the welcome shall be such,
As they had better kept them further off.
But where is M. Recorder? his advise,
Must not be wanting in these high affairs.

Sho. About an hour ago, and somewhat more,
I left him fortifying the bridge my Lord,
Which done he purposed to meet you here:

Ma. A discreet paineful Gentleman he is,
And we must all of us be so inclinde:
If we entend to have the City safe,
Or look for thanks, and credit with the King,
I tell ye masters, aged though I be,
I (for my part) will to no bed this night.

Ioss. Why is it thought the Bastard is so near?

Ma. How ^cane ye M. Iosseline by near?
He neither comes from Italy nor Spain:
But out of Kent, and Esser which you know,
Are both so near, as nearer cannot be.

Ioss. Nay, by your patience good my Lord a word,
Simple though I am, yet I must confess,
A mischief further off, would, and so forth,
You know my meaning, things not seen before,
Are, and so forth, yet in good sadness,
I would that all were well, and perchance,
It may be so, what, were it not for hope,
The heart, and so forth, but to the matter,
You mean and purpose, I, I, am sure ye do?

Ma. Well M. Iosseline, we are sure ye mean well
Although somewhat defective in your utterance.

Ios. I, I, my Lord Mayor, I am you know,
Willing ready, and so forth, tut, tut, for me, ha, ha,
My Manston is at Ham, and thence you know,
I come to help you in this needful time:
When rebels are so busy, and so forth,
What masters, age must never be despisde,
You shall find me my Lord, still, and so forth.

Enter Vrswicke the Recorder. Sho. My Lord, now here comes M. Recorder.

Re. Good even my good Lord Mayor, the streets are chainde,
The bridge well manned and every place preparde,
Shall we now go together and consult.
What else there is to be determinde of?

Ma. Your coming M. Recorder was the thing
We all desired, therefore let us consult,
And now what say ye, if with half our power,
We issue forth, and give the rebels fight?

Recor. Before they do provoke us nearer hand
There were no way to that, if all be pleased,
What Is your opinion M. Iosseline?

Ios. Good soo^h my L. Mayor, and M. Recorder,
You may take your choice, but in my conceit,
Issue if you will, or else stay if you will,
A man can never be too wary and so forth,
Yet as to issue will not be the worst,
Even so to tarry, well, you may think more on it,
But all is one, we shall be sure to fight,
And you are wise enough, to see your time, I, I, a Gods name.

Rec. My Lord accept his meaning better then his counsel.

Ma. I, so we do, or else we were to blame,
What if we stop the passage of the Thames,
With such provision as we have of ships?

Recor. Its doubtful yet my Lord, whether the rebels,
Purpose that way to seek our detriment,
Rather me seems they will come by land,
And either make assault at London bridge,
Or else at Algate, both which enterances,
Were good they should be strongly lortified.

Ios. Well said master Recorder, you do, I I, Iye warrant

Recor. As for the other, the whole companies
Of Mercers, Grocers, Drapers, and the rest,
Are drawn together for their best defense,
Beside the Tower, a neighbor to that place,
As on the one side it will clear the river,
So on the other with their ordenance,
It may repulse and beat them from the gate,

Ma. What noise is this? provide ye suddenly:
A noise within. And every man betake him to his charge.

Enter a Messenger. Sho. Soft who is this, how now my friend what news?

Mes. My master the Lieutenant of the Tower, gives ye to understand, he has
descride the army of the rebels.


Recor. Which may come they?

Mes. From Essexward, and therefore it is his mind,
You guarde both Algate well, and Bishopsgate.

Ma. Saint George away, and let us all resolve,
Either to vanquish this rebellious rout,
Preserve our goods, our children and our wives,
Or seal our resolution with our lives.

Exeu^t. Enter Falconbridge, Spicing, with his troops. Fall. Summon the City,
and command our entrance,
Which if we shall be stubbornly denide,
Our power shall rush like thunder through the walls,

Spi. Open your gates slaves when I command ye,
Spicing beats on the gates, and then enters the Lord Mayor and his associates
with prentises.

Ma What Is he that beats thus at the City gates,
Commaun^ing entrance as ^e were a King?

Fa. He that will have releasement for a King:
I (...) Neuell the Lord Falconbridge.

Spi H^ sir, you, clapp^n, ^che, ^olt,
Or ^e bolt you if I get in, stand you preaching with a pore?

Ma. We have no warrant I ho. Falconbridge,
To let your armed troops into our City,
Considering you have taken up these arms,
Against our sovereign and our c^untries peace.

Fall. I tell thee Mawr, and know he tells thee so,
That comes armed in a Kings defense,
That I crave entrance in Kings He^es name,
In right of the true line of Lancaster,
Me thinks that word spoke from a Ne^ls mouth
Should like an earthquake rend your chained gates,
And tear in pieces your port^ullcises,
I thunder it again into you ears,
You stout and brave courageous London^rs,
In Henry's name I crave my entrance in.

^R. Should Henry's name command thee entrance here
We should deny allrageance unt^ Edward,
Whose true and f^thfull subjects we are ^uorne,
And in whose presence is our sw^ up bo^ne.

Fall. I tell thee traitor then thou bearst thy (...)
Against thy true undoubted King.

Sho. Nay then I tell thee bastard Falconbridge,
My Lord Ma^or bears his sword in his defense,
That put the sword into the arms of London,
Made the Lord Malors for ever after Knights,
Richard, d^osde... Henry Bollingbrooke,
From whom the house of York does claim their right.

Fall. What Is he that answers us thus saucil^

Smo. Sir your name, that we may know ye hereafter,

Sho. My name is Shore, a Goldsmith by my trade,

Fall. What not that Shore that has the da^e wife,
Shoares wife, the flower of London for her beauty.

Sho. Yes rebel even the very same.

Spi. Run rascal and fetch thy wife to our General presently, or else all
the Gold in Cheapside cannot ransom her: will thou not stir when I bid thee.


Fall. Shore listen me, thy wise is mine that's flat,
This night in thine own house she sleeps with me,
Now Crosebie Lord Mayor shall we enter in?

Ma. Crosebie the Lord Mayor tells thee proud rebel no.

Fall. No Croseby shall I not: then doting Lord,
I cra^e the name of rebel down thy throat,
There Is not the poorest rascal of my camp,
But if he chance to meet thee in Cheapside
Upon thy footcloath, he shall make thee light,
And hold his stirrup while he mount thy horse,
Then lackie him which way he please to go,
Crosebie ^le make the Citizens be glad,
To send thee and the Aldermen thy brethren,
All m^nicled, and chainde like Gally slanes,
To ransom them, and to redeem the City.

M. Nay then proud ^bel, pause and hear me speak,
There Is not the poorest and meanest Citizen,
That is a faithful subject to the King.
But in despite of thy rebellious route,
Shall walk to Bow, a small wand in his ^d
Although thou lie encamped at M^leend Green,
And not the proudest rebel of you all,
Shall dare to touch him for his damned soul.
Come, we will pull up our port^ses,
And let me see thee enter if thou dare.

Fall. Spoken like a man, and true Velvet ^acket,
And we will enter or strike by the way.

Exeunt. Enter Lord Mai^r, Recorder, and losseline. Ma. Where Is master Recorder,
and master Iosseline?

Recor. Here my Lord Mayor, we now have mande the walls, and fortified such
places as were need^ll,


Ma. Why it is well, brothers and Citizens,
Stick to your City as good men should do,
Think that in Richards time even such a rebel,
Was then by Walworth the L. Mayor of London,
Stabd dead in Smithfield:
Then show your selves as it be fits the time.
And let this find a hundredth Walworth, now,
Dare stabbe a rebel were he made of brass,
And Prentises stick to your officers,
For you may come to be as we are now,
God and our King against an arrant rebel,
Brothers away, let us defend our walls:

1. Pren My Lord your words are able to in^use,
A double courage in a cowards breast,
Then fear not us although our chinnes be bare,
Our hearts are good, the trial shall be seen,
Against these rebels on this champion green.

2. Pre. We have no tricks nor pollices of war,
But by the ancient custom of our Fathers,
We Will soundly lay it on, takte off that will.
And London Prentises be ruled by me,
Die ere ye loose fair Londons liberty.

S. How now my flatcaps, are you grown so brave?
It Is but your words, when matters come to proose
You Will scudde as twere a company of sheep,
My counsel therefore is to keep your shops,
What lack you, better will bes^em your mouths,
Then terms of war, in sooth you are too young:

Pr. Sir go too, you shall not find it so,
Flatcaps thou calst us, we scorn not the name,
And shortly by the virtue of our swords,
We Will make your cap so sit unto your crown,
As sconce and cap and all kiss the ground.

2. Pr. You are those desperate idle swaggering mates,
That haunt the suburbs in the time of peace,
And raise up a^-house braules in the street,
And when the rumor of the war begins,
You hide your heads, and are not to be found,
Thou termest it better that we keep our shops,
It Is good indeed we should have such a care,
But yet for all our keeping now and then,
Your Pelfring fingers break into our locks,
Until at Tyborne you acquit the fault:
Go to, albeit by custom we are mild,
As those that do profess civility,
Yet being moude, a nest of angry hornets
Shall not be more offensi^ then we will,
We Will fly about your ears and sting your hearts.

Ioss. He tells you truth my friends, and so forth.

Fa. Who can endure to be so vrauce by boys?

1. Pr. Nay scorn us not that we are Prentises,
The Chronicles of England can report,
What memorable actions we have done,
To which this days atchieuement shall be knit,
To make the volume larger then it is.

Ma. Now of mine honor, ye do cheer my heart
Brave English ofsprings, valiantly resolude.

2. Pre. My Lord return you back, let us alone,
You are our Masters, give us leave to work,
And if we do not banquish them in fight,
Let us go supperles to bed at night.

Exeunt all but Spicing, Smoke, and their crew. Spi. Sm. Get thee up on the top
of S. Buttolphs steeple, and make a proclamation.


Smoke. What a plague should I proclaim there?

Spi. That the hels be rung backward,
And cutting of throats be cride havoc,
No more calling of lantern and candlelight,
That maidenheads be valued at just nothing:
And Sack be sold by the Sallet.
That no pidling slave stand to pick a lock, but slash me off the hinges, as
one would slit up a Cowes paunch.

Spicing. Let no man have less then a warehouse to his wardrope: cry a fig
for a Sergeant, and walk by the Counter like a Lord, pluck out the clapper of
Bow bell, and hang up all the Sextons in the City.


Smoke. Rantam Scantam, Rogues follow your leader, Caualero Spicing the maddest
slave that ere pund spice in a mortar.


Spi. Take me an Usurer by the gr^asie pouch, and shake out his Crowns, as a
hungry dog would shake a Haggas, Bar foul play Rogues, and live by honest
silching and stealing, he that has a true finger, let him ^aite his face to
the fryingpan.


Follow your Leader Rogues, follow your Leader.


Smoke. Assault, Assault, and cry a Falconbridge.

Iosseline on the walls cries to them. Ios. Sir Spicing, if Spicing be thy
name, we are here for matters and causes as it might ^me for the King,
therefore it were good, and so forth.


Spi. Open the gates, or if we be the picklocks, ye Rogues we will play the
Mastiffe dogs amongst you: If I woorie not a thousand of you with my teeth, let
me be hangde in a packethreed, and so forth.


Ios. Fond fellow, justice is to be used, I marie is it, and law in some sort
as it were is to be followed, oh God forbid else, this our Magistrate has
power as might seem, and soforth, for duty is to be observed, and Officers
must be obeyed, in sort and calling, and so forth.


Spi. We Will talk more anon, good M. and so forth.


Here is a very fierce assault on all sides, wherein the Prentises do great
service. Enter Falconbridge angry with his men. Fall. Why this it is to trust
to these base Rogues.
This durtie scun^ of rascal ^esanirie:
This hartles rout of base rascalitie;
A plague upon you all, you cowardly Rogues;
You crauand curres, you s^y muddy clownes,
Whose courage but consistes in multitude,
Like sheep and ^eat that follow one another,
Which if one run away, all follow after:
This hedge-bred rascal, this filthy fry of ditches,
A vengeance take you all, this it is to lead you,
Now do you cry and shrike at every shocke,
A hot consuming mischief follow you.

Spi. Swounds scale rogues, scale, a Falconbridge, a Falconbridge.


Enter Lord Mayor and histraine. Ma. Set open the gates, nay then weel sally
out,
It never shall be said when I was Mayor,
The Londoners were shut up in the City,
Then cry King Edward, and lets us issue out.

Fall. Now if ye be true hearted Englishmen,
The gat'es set open and the portcullise up:
Lets Pel Mel in, to stop their passage out,
He that first enters, be possessed of Cheap,
I give him it freely, and the chiefest wench.

Spi. That he can find, let that lie in the bargain.

Exeunt. The Lord Mayor and the Citizens having valiantly repulsed the Rebels
from the City: Enters Falconbridge and Spicing and the^ train wounded and
dismayed. Spi. Hear'st thou General, there is hot drinking at the mouth of
Bishopsgate, for our soldiers are all Mouth, they lie like Rascals with their
brains beaten out, therefore since we are all like to feed h^gs in Houndsditch,
let us retire our troops, and save our maimed men, or if we issue further, we
are put to the sword every mothers son of us.


Fall. Art thou that villain in whose damned mouth,
Was never heard of any word but wounds?
Whose r^rcant limbs are nocht with gaping scarres,
Thicker then any carking craft-mans score,
Whose very skalpe is scracht and crasde and broken,
Like an old mazzer beaten on the stones,
And stand thou now to save our maimed men?
A plague upon thee coward.

Spi. Why how now base Thomas? Swounds, were thou a base Vial, thou art but a
rascal and a rebel as I am, hear thou, if I do not turn true Su^ed and
leave thee, let me be wooried with dogs, Swounds do thou impeach my manhood?
Tom Neuill thou had as good to have ^nnde thy self as uttered such a word,
flatly I forsake thee, and all that love Ned Spicing follow me.


Here the rest offer to follow. Fall. Come come ye testic s^le, thou see me
greende,
Yet can not bear with mine infirmity,
Thou know I hold thee for as tall a man
As any lines or breathes our English ay^e,
I know there lives not a more fiery spirit,
A more resolved daliant, a plague upon it,
Thou know I love thee, yet if a word escape
^y lips in anger, how teastie then thou art?
I had rather all men left me then thy self,
Thou art my soul, thou art my Genius:
I cannot live without thee not an hour,
Thus must I still be forced against my will,
aside, To sooth this durtic slave, this cowardly rascal.
Come, come be friends, ye teastie firebrand,
We must retire there is no remedy.

Spi. Nay Tom, if thou will have me mount on the walls,
And cast my self down headlong on their pikes,
He do it, but to impeach my valor,
Had any man but thou spoke half so much,
I would have sp^t his heart, still be ware
My valor, such words go hardly down,
Well, I am friends, thou thoughtest not as thou spakest.

Fall. No on my soul, thou think not that I did,
Sound a retreat there I command ye strait,
But whither shall we retire

Spi. To Mileend Green, there is no fitter place.

Fall. Then let us back retire to Mil^nd Green,
And there expect fresh succor from our friends,
With such supply as shall ere long assure
The Citic is our own, march on, away.

Exeunt. Enter the L. Mayor with his train and Prentises. Mayor. Ye have
best^d ye like good Citizens,
And she wne your selves true subjects to your king,
You worthily p^entise bestirde your selves,
That it did th^re my heart to see your valor,
The rebels are retirde to M^eerd Green,

Re. Where so we may not suffer them to rest.
But issue forth upon them with fresh force.

los. My L. Mayor, d^gence does well, and so forth. Matters must be looked into
as they ought, indeed should they, when things are well done, they are, and so
forth, for causes and things must indeed be look^ into.


Ma. Well sir, we ver^e well conceive your meaning,
And you have ^wne your self a worthy gentleman:
See that our walls be kept with courts of guard,
And well defended against the enemy,
For we will now withdraw us to Guild hall,
To take advise what further must be don.

Exeunt. Enter Master Shore and Ianc his wife. Shore. Be not afraid (sweet
heart) the worst is past,
God have the praise, the victory is ours,
We have preuailde, the rebels are repulsoe,
And every str^te of London sounds joy,
Can thou then (gentle Ianc) be sad alone?

Ianc. I am not sad now you are here with me,
My toy, my hope, my comfort, and my love,
My dear, dear husband, kindest Matthew shore,
But when these arms the circles of my soul,
Were in the fight so forward as I heard,
How could I choose, sweet heart, but be afraid?

Sho. Why do thou tremble now, when perilspast^

Ia. I think upon the horror of the tune,
But tell me why you fought so desperately?

Sho. First to maintain King Edwards royalty,
Next to defend the Cities libertic,
But chiefly ^anc to keep thee from the foil,
Of him that to my face did how thy spoil,
Had he prcua^de, where then had been our lives,
Dishonored our daughters, ravished our fair wives,
Possessed our goods, and set our servants free,
Yet all this nothing to the loss of thee.

Ia. Of me sweet heart? why how should I be lost?
Were I by thousand storms of fortune tossed?
And should endure the poorest wretched life,
Yet Jane will be thy honest loyal wife,
The greatest Prince the sun did ever see,
Shall never make me prove vntruc to thee:

Sh. I fear not fair means, but a rebels force,

Ia. These hands shall make this body a dead corse,
^re force or flattery shall mine honor stain,

Sh. True fame sur^iues, when death the ^sh has slain.

Enter an Officer from the Lord Mayor. Of. God save ye master Shore, and
mistress by your leave,
Sir my L. Mayor sends for ye by Maio^,
And prates your speedy presence at Guild hall,
There Is news the rebels have made head again,
And have ensco^de themselves upon Mileeud,
And prescutly our armed men must out,
You being Captain of two companies
In honor of your v^lour and your skill,
Must lead the vaward, God and right stand with ye.

Sh. Friend tell my Lord i will wait upon him strait.

Ia. Friend tell my Lord he does my husband wrong,
To set him foremost in the danger still,
Ye shall not go if I may have my will,

S. Peace wife, no more, friend I will follow ye,

Exit. Ia. I faith ye shall not, prithee do not go.

Sh. Not go sweet heart? that were a cowards trick,
A traitors part to shrink when others fight,
Envy shall never say that Matthew Shore
The Goldsmith said, when other men went out,
To meet his Kings and countries enemy,
No Jane against all the rebels on Mileend,
I dare alone K. Edwards right defend.

Ia. If you be slain, what shall become of me?

Sh. Kight well my w^ch, ^nowe will marry thee,
I leave thee worth at least five thousand pound.

Ia. Marry again. that word my heart does wound,
I Will never marry, nor I will not live,
She weeps. If thou be killed, let me go with thee Mat.

Sh. ^is idle talk good Jane, no more of that,
Go to my Lady Maioresse and the rest,
As you are still companion with the best,
With them be merry, and pray for our good speed,

Ia. To part from thee my very heart does bleed.

Exeunt. Enter Falconbridge with his troops marching, as being at Mileend. Fa.
Yet stand we in the sight of v^card Troy,
And suck the air she draws: our ^erie breath
Flies from our nostrils warm unto the walls,
We beard her bristling spires, her battled towers,
And proudly stand and g^e her in the sace,
Look on me, and I doubt not ye imagine,
My worth as great as any one of yours,
My fortunes, would I basely fawn on Edward,
To be as fair as any man's in England,
But he that keeps your sovereign in the Tower,
Has sea^de my land, and robbed me of my right:
I am a Gentleman as well as he,
What he has got, he bolds by tyranny,
Now if you faint, or cowardly should fly,
There is no hope for any one to live,
We hear the Londoners will leave the City,
And bid us battle here on ^ilcend Green,
Whom if we vanquish, then we take the town,
And ride in triumph through Cheap to Paul's,
The Mint is ours, Cheap, Lumbard street our own
The meanest soldier wealthier then a king.

Spi. March fair ye rogues, all kings or capknitters: do thou hear Tom
Falconbridge? I pre thee grant me one boon I shall ask thee.


Fa. What is it Ned: its hard I should deny thee.

Spi. Why that when we have woune the Cry, as we cannot choose but win it,
that I may have the knighting of all these rogues and rascalles.


Fall. What then?

Spi. What then? Zonnds I scorn your scuruie way mouthed, what then? now a
pore take me it I fight a blow.


Fall. Why this is fine, go to, knight whom thou will:

Spi. Who, I knight any of them? I Will see them hangde first for a company of
tattred ragged rascailes, if I were a king, I would not knight one of them?


Chub. What not me Caualero Chub?

Spi. Yes, I care not if I knight thee: and yet i will see thee hanged ere i will
honor thee so much: I care not so much for the matter, but I would not be
denide my humor.


Fall. Why what a perverse fellow art thou Ned?

Spi. Ho my sine Tom, my brave Falconbridge, my mad Greek, my lusty Neuill:
thou art a king, a Caesar, a plague (...) thee, I love thee not, and yet i will die
with thee.


Enter the Lord Mayor, Recorder, Iosseline, Shore, and their Soldiers
marching. Mayor. See how rebellion can exalt it self,
^ing the feathers of sick discipline.

Recer. They think they can outlooke our tr^r looks,

Sho. Mark but the scornful eye of Falconbridge.

Ma. I rather think it is fear upon his cheek,
Decyphers pale disturbance in his heart.

Ios. Our coming forth has, well, I say no more,
But shall we take occasion, and so forth,
Rebellion should have no respite, oh my Lord,
The time has ^ene, but all is one for that.

Spi. How like a troop of rank oreridden iades,
You hu^se bearded Citizens appear?

Chub. Nay, rather so many men in the Moon,
And every one a forzen bush in his mouth.

Spi. The so^ and (...) wards? now fair befall them,
Would any one have thought before this hour,
There had been such increase of muddie slaves?

Spi. Peace soldsours, they are resolute you see,
And not to sta^ us, nor favor them,
Such haughty sto^hs seldom have been seen,
Imbodied in the breasts of Citizens,
How sternly in their own peculiar strength,
Without the assistance of their lingering king,
Did they of late repulse us from their walls?
And now again how expeditiously,
And unexpected they have met us here?
Were we more deadly incensed then we are,
I would not but commend their chivalry.

Spi. Captain, shall we go challenge them to fight?
God's Blood we burn daylight, they will think anon,
We are afraid to see their glittering swords.

Chapter Tell them they come in steed of pudding pies,
And Stratford cakes to makes a banquet here.

Fall. Soft give me leave, I will devise with words,
To weaken and abash their fortitude,

Re. The bastard offers to come forth my Lord.

Ma. I am the man intend to answer him.

Fa. Crosbie.

Ma. Traitor.

all Traitor? zounds down with him.

Fa. Be patient, give me leave I say to speak,
I doubt not but the traitors name shall rest
With those that keeps their lawful K. in bonds:
Mean time ye men of London once again,
Behold my warlike colors are displaide,
Which I have vowed shall never be wrapped up,
Until your lofty buildings kiss our feet,
Unles you grant me passagethrough your streets.

Re. Passage, say thou? that must be ore our breasts,
If any passage thou art like to have.

Fa. Why then upon your bodies will I tread,
And wade through standing pooles of your lost blood.

Sh. We know thy threats, and reckon them as wind,
Not of suffecient power to shake a reed.

Spi. But we shook your gates not long ago,
And made your walls to shake like yrish bogges.

Chub. I, and so terrified ye, that not one of ye ^rst come to fetch a pint of
sack at the mouth at Bishopsgate, no not for your lines.


Ios. I but you know what followed, and so forth.

Spi. Etretera? are you there? me thinks the sight of the dun Bull, the Neuels
honored crest, should make you leave your broken sentences, and quite forget
ever to speak at all.


Sho. Nay then look thou upon our Cities arms.
Wherein is a bloody dagger, that is it,
Where with a rebel like to Falconbridge,
Had his desert, meet for his treachery,
Can you behold that, and not quake for fear?

Re. Since when, it is successfuely decreed,
Traitors with us shall never better speed.

Spi. Captain and fellow soldiers talk no more,
But draw your meaning forth in down right blows.

Falcon. Sound then alarm.

Mayor. Do the like for us, and where the right is, there attend success.


Ios. Stay and be better aduisde, why countr^,
What is this Falconbridge you follow so?
I could instruct you, but you know my mind.
And Falconbridge what are these rusticalles,
Thou should repose such confidense in glass,
Shall I inform thee? no, thou art wise enough,
Edward of York delays the time you say,
Therefore he will not come, imagine so,
The Cities weak, hold that opinion still,
And your pretense King Henry's liberty.
True, but as how? shall I declare you? no.
What the^? you will fight, a gods name take your choice,
I canno more but give you mine advise.

Fall. Away with this parentheses of words,
Crosbie courage thy men, and on this green,
Whose cause is right, let it be quickly seen.

Mayor. I am as readic as thou can desire,
On then a Gods name.

They fight, the rebels drive them back: then Enter Falconbridge and Spicing.
Fall. This was well fought, now Spicing list to me.
The Citizens thus having given us ground,
And therefore somewhat daunted, take a band
Of Essex soldiers, and with all the speed
Thou possibly can make, withdraw thy self,
And get between the City gates and them.

Spi. Oh brave Tom Neuill, gallant Falconbridge,
Aim at thy intended policy,
This is thy meaning, while thou art imploide,
And holdst them battle here on Mileend Green,
I must provide as harbenger before,
There be not only clear and open passage,
But the best merchants houses to receive
Us and our retinew, I am proud of that,
And will not sleep upon thy just command.

Fall. Away then I will follow as I may,
And doubt not but that ours will be the day.

After some excursions, enter Lord Mayor and Master Shore. Ma. We have
recovered what before we lost,
And heaven stands with the justice of our cause,
But this I noted in the fight even now,
That part of this rebellious crew is sent,
By what direction, or for what intent,
I cannot guess, but may suspect the worst,
And as it seems, they compass it about,
To hemme us in, or get the gate of us,
And therefore Cousin Shore, as I repose
Trust in thy valor and thy loyalty,
Draw forth three hundred ^wmen, and some pikes,
And presently encounter their assault.

Sho. I have your meaning, and effect my Lord,
I trust shall disappoint them of their hope.

After an alarm, Enter Spicing with a drum and certain Soldiers. Spi. Come
on my hearts, we will be kings to night,
Carouse in Gold, and sleep with merchants wives,
While their poor husbands loose their lives abroad,
We are now quite behind our enemies backs,
And there is no let or hindrance in the way,
But we may take possession of the town,
Ah you mad rogues, this is the wished hour,
Follow your leader, and be resolute.

As he marches, thinking to enter, Shore and his soldiers issue forth and
repulse him, after excursions, wherein the rebels are dispersed. Enter Mayor,
Reco. Shoa. Iosseline, and a Messenger talking with the Mayor. Ma. I, my good
friend, so certify his grace,
The Rebels are dispersed all and fled,
And now his Highness meets with victory.
Exit. Mess. Marshall your sclues, and keep in good array:
To add more glory to this victory:
The King in person comes to this place,
How great an honor have you gainde to day?
And how much is this City famde for ever,
That twice without the help, either of King,
Or any, but of God, and our own selves,
We have preuailde against our countries foes?
Thanks to his majesty assisted us,
Who always helps true subjects in their need.

The Trumpets sound, then enters king Edward, L. How. Sellenger and the train.
King. Where is my Lord Mayor?

Ma. Here dread Sovereign.
I hold no Lordship nor no dignity,
In presence of my gracious Lord the King,
But all I humble at your highness feet,
With the most happy conquest of proud rebels,
Dispearst and fled, that now remains no doubt,
Of ever making head to vex us more.

King. You have not ^ane the bastard Falconbridge:
Or is he slain?

Ma. Neither my gracious Lord.
Although we labourd to our uttermost,
Yet all our care came over short,
For apprehending him or Spicing either
But some are taken, others on proffered grace
Yielded themselves, and at your mercy stand.

K. Thanks good L. Mayor, you may condemn us
Of too much slacknes in such urgent need:
But we assure you on our royal word,
So soon as we had gathered us a power,
We dallied not, but mane all have we could,
What order have ye taken for Falconbridge,
And his confederates in this rebellion?

Ma. Under your leave my Liege, we have proclaimd
Who brings Falconbridge alive or dead,
Shall be requited with a thousand marks,
As much for Spicing, others of less worth
At easier rates are set.

K. Well have ye done,
And we will see it paid from our Erchequer.
Now leave we this and come to you,
That have so well veserude in these affairs,
Affairs, I mean of so maine consequence.
Kneel down and all of you receive in field,
The honor you have merited in field.
There he draws his sword and knights them. Arise Sir John Crosbie, L. Mayor
of London and Knight.
Arise up Sir Ralph Iosseline knight.
Arise Sir Thomas Vrswicke our Recorder of London, and Knight.
Now tell me which is M. Shore.

Ma. This same my Lord,
And hand to hand he fought with Falconbridge.

King. Shore kneel thou down.
What call ye else his name?

Recor. His name is Matthew Shore my Lord.

K. Shore, why kneelest thou not, and at thy Souetaignes hand receive thy
right?


Shore. Pardon me gracious Lord,
I do not stand contemptuous or des^ising
Such royal favor of my Sovereign,
But to acknowledge mine unworthiness:
Far be it from the thought of Matthew Shore,
That he should be aduanc'de with Aldermen,
With our L. Mayor, and our right grane Recorder.
If any thing has been performde by me,
That may deserve your Highness mean respect,
I have enough, and I desire no more.
Then let me crave that I may have no more.

King. Well, be it as thou will, some other way
We will devise to quittance thy deserts,
And not to fail therein upon my word.
Now let me tell ye all my friends at once,
Your King is married, since you saw him last,
And haste to help you in this needful time,
Made me on sudden to forsake my bride.
But seeing all things are fallen out so well,
And there remains no further doubt of ill,
Let me ^ntreate you would go boot your selves,
And bring your King a little on his way.
How say you my Lord, shall it be so?

Ma. Now God forbid but that my Lord the King
Should always have his Subjects at command.

Ios. Forbid quotha? I in good sadness, your majesty shall find us always
ready, and so forth.


King. Why then set forward Gentlemen,
And come L. Mayor, I must confer with you.

Exeunt. Enter Falconbridge and spicing with their weapons in their hands. Spi.
Art thou the man whose victories drawn at sea,
Filled cuerie heart with terror of thy name?
Art thou that Neuill whom we took thee for?
Thou art a lowse, thou bastard Falconbridge?
Thou baser then a bastard, in whose birth
The very dregs of servitude appears,
Why tell me, liver of some rotten sheep,
After by thy allurements we are brought,
To undertake this course, after thy promises
Of many golden mountains to eusue,
Is this the greatest comfort thou can glu^?
Have thou insnarde our heedles feet with death,
And brought us to the Jebbet of defame,
And now do bid us shift and save our selves?
No crauen were I sure I should be taken,
I would not stir my feet, until this hand
Had venged me on thee for misguiding us.

Fall. Opprobrious villain, stable excrement,
That never dreamst of other manhood yet,
But how to ierke a horse, until my words
Insusde into thee resolutions sire.
Controlst thou me for that wherein thy self,
Art only the occasion of mishap?
Had thou and they stood to it as well as I,
The day had been our own, and London now,
That laughes in triumph, should have wept in tears,
But being backed by such faint hearted slaves
No marualle if the Lion go to wrack,
As though it were not incident to Kings,
Sometime to take repulse, mine is no more:
Nor is not for that muddie brain of thine
To tutor me how to digest my loss,
Then fly with those that are already fled,
Or stay behind, and hang all but the head.

Spi. Oh prejudice to Spicings conquering name,
Whose valor even the hacks this sword has made
Upon the flint, and iron bars at Aldgate:
Like mouths will publish whiles the City stands
That I shrunk backe^ that I was never seen
To show my manly spleen, but with a whipe.
I tell thee Falconbridge the least of these,
Do challenge blood before they be appeasde,

Fall. Away ye scoundrell, tempt not my resolve,
The courage that sur^es in Falconbridge,
Scorns the encounter of so base a drudge.

Spi. By the pure temper of this sword of mine,
By this true flesh and blood that gripes the same,
And by the honor I did win of late,
Against those frostie bearded Citizens,
It shall be tried before we do depart,
Whether accuses other wrongfully,
Or which of us two is the better man.

Fall. I shall but quit the Hangman of a labor,
Yet rather then to be ^pbraided thus,
The Eagle once will stoop to feed on tarrion.

They fight, Enter Chub. Chapter Hold if ye be men, if not, hold as ye are: rebels
and (...) thieves: I bring you news of a proclamation, the King has promised
that whosoever can bring the head of Falconbridge, or Spicing, shall have for
his labor a thousand crowns, what mean you then to swagger? save your selves.


Spi. This proclamation comes in happy time,
I Will banquish Falconbridge, and with this sword
Cut off his head, and bear it to the King,
So not alone shall I be pardoned,
But have the thousand crowns is promised.

Fall. This rascal was ordainde to save my life,
For now when I have overthrown the wretch,
Even with his head ^le yield me to the King,
His princely word is past to pardon me,
And though I were the chief in this rebellion,
Yet this will be a means to make my peace.

Chapter Oh that I knew how to betray them both.

Fall. How say thou Spi. will thou yield thy self?
For I have vowde either alive or dead
To bring thee to King Edward?

Spi. And I have vowde the like by thee.
How will these two bad contarie^s agree?

Chub. And I the same by both of you.

Fall. Come sir, i will quickly c^d you of that care.

Spi. And what thou lottest me, shall be thy share.

Chub. Here comes a miller, help to part the fray,
These are the rebels Falconbridge and Spicing,
The worst of them is worth a thousand crowns.

Mill. Marry and such a bootic should I have,
Submit, submit, it is in vain to strive,

Exit Fall. Spi. Why what art thou:

Mill. One that will hamper yon,
But what is the other that is fled away?

Chub. Oh miller, that was Falconbridge,
And this is Spicing his companion.

Spi. I tell thee miller thou have been the means,
To hinder the most charitable deed,
What ever honest Christian undertook.

Chub. Thou can bear nie witness I had fane
That most notorious rebel but for him.

M. But I have taken thee, and the world knows,
That Spicing is as bad as who is best.

Spi. Why thou mistakst, I am a true subsect.

Chub. Miller he lies, be sure to hold him fast.

Spi. Do thou accuse me? apprehend him too,
For he is as guilty as any of us.

Mill. Come you shall both together answer it,
Before my Lord Mayor, and here he comes.

Enter Lord Mayor, Iosseline, and other attendants. Ma. Sir Ralph Iosseline,
have you ever seen a Prince more a^sable then Edward is? what merry talk he
had upon the way.


Ios. Doubtless my Lord heeie prove a royal King.
But how now what are these?

Mill. God save your honor,
Here I present unto you my Lord Mayor,
A pair of rebels, whom I did epsy
As I was busy grinding at my mill,
And taking them for vagrant idle k^ucs,
That had beset some trueman from his house,
I came to keep the peace, but afterward,
Found that it was the bastard Falconbridge,
And this his mate together by the ears,
The one, for all that I could do, escapte,
The other stands at your mercy here.

Ma. It is the rebel Spicing.

Spi. It is indeed?
I see you are not blind, you know me then.

Ma. Well miller, thou have done a subic^s part,
And worthily deserust that recompense
Is publicly proclaimed by the King,
But what is this other? I have seen his face,
And as I take it, he is one of them.

Mill. I must confess, I took them both together,
^ee aided me to apprehend the rest.

Chub. A tells you true my Lord, I am Chub the Chaundler, and I curse the time
that ever I saw their faces, for if they had not been, I had liude an honest
man in mine own country, and never come to this,


Spi. Out rogue, do thou recant for fear of death?
I Ma^or, I am he that sought to cut your thrpate,
And since I have miscarried in the fact,
I Will near deny it, do the worst you can.

Ma. Bring him a way, he shall have martial law, and at the next tree we do
come unto,

Be hangde to rid the world of such a wretch.

Miller thy duty is a thousand marks,

Which must be sharde bet wixt thee and this poor fellow, that did reveal
him. And sir, your life is saude on this condition, that you hang up Spicing,
how say thou, will thou do it?


Chub. Will I do it? what a question is that?
I would hang him if he were my father to save mine own life.

Ma. Then when ye have done it, come home to my house, and there ve truly
shall have your reward.


Spi. Well sir, then thou must be my hangman?

Chub. I by my troth sir, for fault of a better.

Spi. Well, commend me to little Pim, and pray her to red^me my pande hose,
they lie at the blew Bore for eleven pence, and if my hostess will have the
other odd penie, tell her she is a damned bawd, and there is no truth in her
score.


Chub. Take no thought sir for your pande hose, they are lousy, and not worth
the redeeming.


Spi. There is a Constable sticks in my mind, he got my sword from me, that
night I should have killed black Ralph, if I had ^ude, I would have been
meet with him.


Chub. I sir, but here is a thing shall take an order for that.

Spi. Cemmend me to black Luce, bouncing Besse, and lusty ^ate, and the other
pretty morsels of man's flesh. Farewell Pinke and Pinnesse, ^libote, and
Caruell, Turnbuil, and Spittle, I die like a man.


Chub. Oh Captain Spicing, thy vain enticing, brought me from my trade,
From good candles making, to this pains taking, a rebel to be made,
Therefore Ned Spicicing, to quit thy enticing, this must be the hope,
By one of thy fellows, to be led to the Gallows, to end in a rope.

Exeunt. Enter Hobs the Tanner of Tamworth: Hobs. Dudgeon, do thou he are,
look well to Brocke my mare, drive Dunne and her fair and softly down the
hill, and take heed the thorns tear not the horns of my Cow hides, as thou
go near the hedges: ha what say thou knave? is the Bulls hide down? why
lay it up again, what rare I? He meet thee at the style, and help to set all
straight. And yet God help, its a crooked world, and an unthrifty, for some
that have nere a shoe, had rather go barefoote, then buy clo^-leather to mend
the old, when they can buy no new, for they have time enough to mend all, they
sit so long between the cup and the wall, well God amend them, God amend
them. Let me see by my executor here, my leather pouch, what I have taken,
what I have spent, what I have gained. what I have lost, and what I have laid
cut: my taking is more the^ my spending, for here is store left. I have spent but
a groat, a penie for my two iades, a penie to the poor, a penie pot of ale,
and a penie cake for my man and me, a dicker of Cowehides cost me.

Here enter the Queen and Duchess with their riding rods, vnpinning their
masks, Hobs goes forward. Snailes who comes here? mistress Ferries, or mistress
what call ye her? Put up John Hobs, money tempts beauty.


Du. Well met good fellow, saw thou not the heart?

Ho. My heart? God bless me from seeing my heart.

Du. Thy heart? the deereman, we demand the decre.

Hobs. Do you demand what is dear? mary corn and cow hides, Mass a good sni^g
less, well like my daughter Nell, I had rather then a bend of leather she and
I might smutch together.


Duchess. Camst thou not down the wood?

Hobs. Yes mistress that I did.

Dutch. And sawst thou not the dear imbost?

Hobs. By my hood ye make me laugh, what the dickens is it love that makes ye
prate to me so fondly, by my fathers soul I would I had iobd faces with you.


Huntsm. Why how now Hobs, so saucie with the Duchess and the Queen?


Hobs. Much Queen I trow, these be but women, and one of them is like my
wench, I would she had her rags, I would give a load of hair and horns, and a
fat of leather, to match her to some justice, by the meghollie.


2. Huntsm. Be silent Tanner, and ask pardon of the Queen.

Hobs. And ye be the Queen, I cry ye mercy good mistress Queen.


Queen. No fault my friend, Madam lets take our bows,
And in the standing seek to get a shoot.

Dutch. Come bend our bows, and bring the herd of d^re.


Exeunt. Hobs. God send yee-good standing, and good striking, and fat flesh,
see if all Gentle women be not alike when their black facce be on, I took the
Queen, as I am true Tanner, for mistress Ferris.


Enter Sellenger and Howard in Green. Hobs. Soft, who comes here, more knaves
yet?

Sell. Ho good fellow, saw^ thou not the King?

Hobs. No good fellow, I saw no King, which King do thou ask for.


How. Why King Edward, what King is there else?

Hob. There Is another King and ye could hit on him, one Harrie, one Harrie, and
by our Lady they say, he is the honester man of the two.


Sell. Sir beware you speak not treason.

Hob. What if I do?

Sell. Then thoult be hangde.

Hob. A dogs death, ^le not meddle with it, for by my troth I know not when I
speak treason, when I do not, there is such halting betwirt two Kings, that a
man cannot go upright, but he shall offend tone of them, I would God had them
both for me.


How. Well, thou sawst not the King?

Hob. No, is he in the country?

How. ^es hunting here at Drayton Basset.

Hob. The devil he is, God bless his Mastership: I saw a woman here that they
said was the Queen, she is as like my daughter, but my daughter is the fairer,
as ever I see.


Sell. Fare well fellow, speak well of the King,

Exeunt. Hob. God make him an honest man, I hope that's well spoken, for byth
mouse foot, some give him hard words, whether be ^rues vm or not, let him look
to that, i will meddle of my cow hide, and let the world slide.

Enter the king disguised. The devil in a dung cart, how these roysters swarm
in the ^trie now the King is so near? God liver me from this, for this (...)
like a ^heese, but a man cannot tell amongst these Courtnoles whose true.


K. Ed. ^olla my friend, good fellow pre thee stay.

Hob. No such matter, I have more haste of my way.

K. Ed. If thou be a good fellow, let me borrow a word.

Hob. My purse thou meanest, I am no good fellow, and I pray God thou be not
one.


K. Ed. Why? do thou not love a good fellow?

Hobs. No, good fellows be thieves.

K. Ed. Do thou think I am one?

Hob. Thought is free, and thou art not my ghostly father.

K. Ed. I mean thee no harm.

Hob. Who knows that but thy self? I pray God he spy not my purse.


K. Ed. On my troth I mean she none.

Hob. Upon thy oath i will stay: now, what say thou to me? Speak quickly, for my
company stays for me beneath at the next style.


K. Ed. The King is hunting hereabouts, did thou see his Majesty?


Hob. His majesty, what is that? his horse, or his mare?

K. Ed. Tush, I mean his Grace.

Hob. Grace quotha? pray God he have any: which King do thou quire for?


K. Ed. Why for King Edward, know thou any more Kings then one?


Hob. I know not so many, for I tell thee I know none, marry I hear of King
Edward.


K. Ed. Did thou see his Highness?

Hob. By my hollida^e, that's the best term thou gaust him yet, he is high
enough, but he has put poor King Harrie low enough.


K. Ed. How low has he put him?

Hob. Nay, I cannot tell, but he has put him down, for he has got the crown,
much good doot him with it.


K. Ed. Amen, I like thy talk so well, I would I knew thy name.

Hob. Do thou not know me?

K. Ed. No.

Hobs. Then thou know no body: did never hear of John Hobs the Tanner of
^am worth?


K. Ed. Not till now I promise thee, but now I like thee well.

Hobs. So do not I thee, I fear thou art some out-rider, that lives by taking
of purses here on Basse^s heath, but I fear thee not, for I have wared all my
money in Cowhides, at Colesill market, and my man and my mare are hard by at
the hill foot.


K. Ed. ^s that thy gray mare that's tide at the style with the h^es on her
backe':


Hobs. That's Brocke my mare, and there is Dunne my nag, and Dadgeon my man.


K. Ed. There Is neither man nor horse, but only one mare.

Hob. Gods bl^w budkin, has the knave serud me so? farewell, (...) may loose
h^s, horns, and mare and all, by prating with thee.


K. Ed. ^arry man, tarry, th^le sooner take my gelding then thy grav mare, for
I ^ue tide mine by her.


Hobs. That will I see before i will take your word.

K. Ed. Il^ bear thee company.

Hob. I had as lieue go alone:

Exeunt. Enter the two huntsmen again with the Bows. 1 Hunts. ^ow on my troth
the Queen shoots passing well.

2. Hunts. So did the Duchess when she was as young.

1. Hunts. Age s^s the hand, and shoots both wide and short:

2. Hunts. What have they given us?

1. Hunts. S^re rose nobles lust:

2. Hunts. The Queen gave four.

1. Hunts. True, and the Duchess twain.

2. Hunts. O were we ever so paid for our pain.

1. Hunts. ^ut, had the King come, as they said he would, he (...) have ra^de
upon us showers of gold.


2 Hunts. Why he is hunting some where here about, lets first go drink, and
then go seek him out.


Exeunt. Enter King Edward again, and Hobs. K. Ed How ^st thou Tanner, will thou take my cour^ s^t for thy mare?


Ho. Courser callst thou him? so ill might I fare, thy skittish jade will
never abide, to carry my lether, my horns nor hide. But if I were so mad to
scorce, what boot would thou give nice?


K. Ed. May boot, that's boot worthy, I look for boot of thee.

Hob. Ha, ha, a merry Iigge, why man, Brocke my mare knows ha and ree, and
will stand when I cry ho, and let me get up and down, and make water when I
do.


Ed. I Will give thee a Noble if I like her pace, lay thy Cowbides in my saddle,
and lets iog toward Drayton.


Hob. It Is out of my way, but I begin to like thee well.

Ed. Thou will like me better before we do part,
I pray thee tell ^ee, what say they of the King?

Hob. Of the kings thou mean, art thou no blab if I tell thee.

Ed. If the King know it not now, he shall never know it for me.


Hob. Mass they say King Harrie's a very aduowtrie man.

King. A ^uout man, and what is King Edward?

Hob. He Is a frank franion, a merr^ companion, and loves a wench well, they
say he has married a poor widow because shecs fair.


King. Dol^ thou like him the worse for that?

Hob. No by my feckens, but the better, for though I be a pla^ Tanner, I love
a fair less my self.


King. Pree thee tell me, how love they King Edward?

Hob. Faith as poor folks love hollidaies, glad to have them now and then, but
to have them come too often, will vnd^ them, so to see the king now and then
it is comfort, but euerse day would beggar us, and I may to thee, we fear we
shall be troubled to lend him no money, for we doubt he is but needy.


King. Would thou lend him no money if he should need?

Hob. By my hallidome yes, he shall have half my st^, and i will ^ell sole
leather to help him to more.


King. Faith whether love thou better Harry or Edward.

Hob. Nay, that's counsel, and two may keep it, if one be a way.

Kin. Shall I say my conscience? I think Harry is the true king.

Hob. Art ad^isde of that? Harrie's of the old house of Lancasber, and that
progenitie do I love.


K. And thou do not hate the house of York?

H. Why no, for I am ^ust a kin to Sutton Windmill, I can grind which way so
ere the wind blow, if it be Harrie I can say well fare Lancaster, if it be
Edward I can sing, York, York for my monse.


Kin. Thou art of my mind, but I say Harrie ^s the lawful King, Edward is but
an usurper, and a fool and a coward.


H. Nay there thou lie, he has wit enough, and courage enough, do^ thou not
speak treason?


King. I, but I know to whom I speak it.

Hob. Do thou? well if I were Constable, I should be forsworn if I set the^
not in the stocks for it.


King. Well let it go no further, for I did serve King Harrie and I love him
best, though now I serve King Edward.


Hob. Thou art the arranter knave to speak ill of thy ma^ster, but sir what is
thy name, what office have thou? and what will the King do for thee?


King. My name is Ned, I am the Kings Butler, and he will do more for me, then
for any Noble man in the Court.


Hob. The d^uel he will, he is the more fool, and so i will tell him, if ere I see
him, and I wouid I might see him in my poor house at Tamworth.


K. Go with me to the Court and i will bring thee to the king, and what suit so
ere thou have to him, the warrant thee to speed


H. I ha nothing to do at Court, i will home with my cowhids, and if the King will
come to me he shall be welcome.


K. Have thou no suit touching thy trade, to transport hides or sell leather
only in a certain circuit, or about Bark, or such like, to have letters
pattents?


H. By the Mass and the Mattens I like not those Pattents, sir they that
have them, do as the Priests did in old ^ne, buy and sell the sins of the
people, so they make the King belee^ they mend what is amiss, and for money they
make the thing worse then it is, there is another thing in (...), the mor is the
pity?


K. What pity John Hobs? I pree thee say all.

Hobs. Faith it is pity that one subica should have in his hand that might do
good to many through the land.


K. Satcst thou me so ^anner well lets cast lots whether thou shall go with me
to Drayton, or I go home with th^e to Tamworth.


H. Lot me no lotting, i will not go with thee, if thou will go with me, cause
thart my Lciges man (and yet I think be has many honester) thou shall be
welcome to John Hobs, thou shall be welcome to ^ese and bacon, and perhaps a
bagpudding, and my daughter Nell shall pop a possell upon thee when thou ghost
to bed.


K. Here Is my hand, i will but go and see the King seru'de, and ^le be at home as
soon as thy self.


H. Do thou hear me Ned? if I shall be thy host,
Make haste thou art best, for fear thou kiss the ^ost.

Exit, Hobs. K. Farewell John Hobs, the honest true Tanner
I see plain men by observation,
Of things that alter in the change of times,
Doghter knowledge, and the meanest life,
Proporrioned with content sufficiency,
Is mericr then the mighty state of Kings.
Enters How, an Sellinger. Now now? what news bring ye sirs,
Where Is the Quoene?

Sell. Her Highness and your mother my dread Lord,
Are both invited by Sir Humphrey Bows,
Where they entend to feast and lodge this night,
And do expect your Graces presence there.

K. Tom Sellinger I have other business;
Astray from you and all my other train,
I met a Tanner, such a merry mate,
So frolic, and so full of good conceit,
That I have given my word to be his guest,
Because he knows me not to be the King:
Good Cosen Howard grudge not at the lest,
But greet my mother and my wife from me,
Bid them be merry, I must have my humor,
Let them both sup and sleep when they see time,
Commend me kindly to Sir Humphrey Bows,
Tell him at breakefast I will visit him.
This night Tom Sellinger and I must feast
With Hobs the Tanner, there plain Ned and Tom.
No King nor Sellinger for a thousand pound.

Enter a Messenger booted with letters, and kneeling gives them to the King.
How. The Queen and Duchess will be discontent,
Because his ^ighnes comes not to the feast.

Sell. Sir Humphrey Bows may take the most conceit,
But what is the end, the King will have his pleasure?

King. Good news my boys, Harrie the sixth is dead, peruse that letter: sir,
drink you that, gives his purse, and stay not but post back again for life,
and thank my brother Gloucester for his news, commend me to him, i will see him to
morrow night. How like ye it sirs?


Exit Messenger. Sell. O passing well my Liege, you may be merry for these
happy news.


King. The merrier with our host the Tanner Tom,
My Lord take you that letter to the Ladies,
Bid them be merry with that second course,
And if we see them not before we go,
Pray them to journey easily after us,
We Will post to London, so good night my Lord.

Exeunt. Enter Hobs and his daughter Nell. Hobs. Come Nell, come daughter, is
your hands and your face washed?


Nell. I forsooth Father.

Hob. Ye must be cleanely I tell ye, for there comes a Courtnole hither to
night, the kings master ships Butler, Ned, a spruce youth, but beware ye be not
in love nor overtaken by him, for Courtiers be slipperie lads.


Nell. No forsooth father.

Hobs. Gods blessing on thee, that half years schooling at Liechfield, was
better to thee then house and land, it has put such manners into thee, I
forsooth and no forsooth at every word, ye have a clean smock on. I like
your apparel well, is supper ready?


Nell. I forsooth father.

Hobs. Have we a good barley bagpudding, a piece of fat Bacon, a good cow
heel, a hard cheese, and a brown loaf.


Nell. All this forsooth, and more, ye shall have a posset, but indeed the
rats have spoiled your hard cheese.


Hobs. Now the dtuell choke them, so they have eat me a farthing candle the
other night.


Dudgeon within. What master master.

Hobs. How now knave, what faist thou Dudgeon?

Dud. Here Is guests come, where is Hellen?

Hobs. What guests be they?

Dud. A courtnole, one Ned the kings Butcher he sapes, and his friends too.


Hobs. Ned the kings butcher? ha, ha, the kings butler, take their horses, and
walk them, and bid them come near house, Nell lay the cloth, and clap supper
oath b^rd.

Exit Nell. Enter King Edward and Sellenger. Mas here is Ned indeed and another
misproud ^uffian,

Welcome Ned, I like thy honesty, thou keep promise.


K. Ed. I faith honest Tanner, i will ever keep promise with thee, pre thee bid my
friend welcome.


Hobs. By my troth ye are both welcome to Tamwoorth: friend I know not your
name.


Sell. My name is Tom Twist?

Hobs. Believe ye that list: but ye are welcome both, and I like you both well
but for one thing.


Sell. What Is that?

Hobs. Nay that I keep to my self, for I sigh to see and think, that pride
brings many one to er^ion.


King. Pre thee tell v^ thy meaning.

Hobs. Troth I doubt ye nere came truly by all these gay rags. It Is not your
bare wages and thin f^s ye have of the King, can keep ye thus fine, but
either ye must rob the King privily, or his subjects openly, to maintain
your probicallitie.


Sell. Think thou so Tanner:

Hobs. It Is no matter what I think, come lets go to supper,
What Nell, what Dudgeon, where be these folks?
Enter Nell and Dudgeon, with a Table covered. Daughter bid my friends welcome.

Nell. Ye are welcome Gentlemen as I may say.

Sell. I thank ye fair maid.

kiss her both. King. A pretty wench be my faye.

Hobs. How likest her Ned?

King. I like her so well, I would ye would make me your son in law.


Hobs. And I like thee so well Ned, that had thou an occupation, for service
is no heritage, a young courtier, an old beggar, I could sinde in my heart to
cast her away upon thee, and if thou will forsake the court and turn La^ner,
or vind thy self to a shoemaker in Liechfield, ^le give thee twenty nobles
ready money, with my Nell, and trust thee with a dicker of leather, to set up
thy trade.


Sell. Ned he offers ye saire, if ye have the grace to take it.

King. He does indeed, Tom, and hereafter i will tell him more.

Hob. Come sit down to supper: go to Nell, no more sheeps eyes, ye may be
caught I tell ye, these be licorish lads.


Nell. I warrant ye father, yet in truth Ned is a very proper man, and the other
may serve, but Neds a pearl in mine eye.


Hob. Daughter, call Dudgeon and his fellows, we will have a three men song, to
make our guests merry.

Exit Nell. Nails what courtnoles are ye? yeele neither talk nor cate, What
news at the court? do somewhat for your meat.


King. Heavy news there, King Henry is dead.

H. That's light news and merry for your master king Edward.

King. But how will the commons take it?

Hob. Well, God be with good King Henry, faith the commons will take it as a
common thing, deaths an bonest man, for he spares not the King: for as one
comes, another taue away, and seldom comes the better, that's all we say.


Sellin. Shrewdly spoken Tanner by my faye.

Hob. Come fill me a cup of mother Whetstones ale, I may drink to my friends,
and drive down my tale.

Here Ned and Tom I drink to ye: and yet if I come to the court, I doubt you will
not know me.


Kin. Yes, Tom shall be thy surety Tanner I will know thee.

Sell. If thou do not Ned, by my troth I beshrew thee.

King. I drink to my wife that may be.

Sell. Faith Ned thou may live to make her a Lady.

King. Tush, her father offers nothing, having no more children but her.


Hob. I would I had not, condition she had all. But I have a knave to my son, I
remember him by you, even such an ^thrist as one of you two, that spends all on
gay clothes and new fashions, and no work will down with him, that I fear
heel be hanged, God bless you from a better fortune, yet you wear such
filthy breeks, Lord, were not this a good fashion? yes, and would save many a
fair penie.


King. Let that pass, and let us hear your song.

Hob. Agreed, agreed, come, sol, sol, sol, fa, fa, fa, say Dudgeon.
Here they sing the threemans Song.
Agencourt, Agencourt, know ye not Agencourt.
Where the English slew and hurt,
all the French foemen:
With our Gunnes and bills brown,
O the French were beaten down,
Morrys pikes and bowmen, etc.

Sell. Well sung good fellows, I would the King heard ye.

Hob. So should I faith, I should strain a noate for him: Come take away, and
lets to bed, ye shall have clean sheets Ned, but they be course, good strong
hemp, of my baughters own spinning and I tell thee, your Chamber pot, must be
a fair horn, a badge of our occupation, for we buy no bending peauter, nor
bending earth.


King. No matter Hobs, we will not go to bed.

Hobs. What then?

King. Even what thou will, for it is near day.
Tanner, Gramercies for our hearty cheer,
If ere it be thy chance to come to court,
Enquire for me Ned the Kings butler,
Or Tom of the Kings chamber my companion,
And see what welcome we will give thee there.

Hobs. I have heard of courtiers have said as much as you, and when they have
been tried, would not bid their friends ^rinke.


Sell. We are none such, let our horses be brought out,
For we must a way, and so with thanks farewell.

Hob. Farewell to ye both, commend me to the king, and tell him I would have been
glad to have seen his worship here.


Exit. King. Come Tom for London, horse, and hence away.

Enter the Vice Admiral and the Captain of the I Will of Wight, with
Falconbridge bound, the headsman bearing the axe before him. Mor. Thomas Neuil,
yet have thou grarious time
Of deer repentance, now discharge thy conscience,
Lay open thine offenses to the world,
That we may witness thou do die a Christian.

Fall. Why sir Harry Moorton have you arraignde,
Condcnmde, and brought me to this place,
Of bloody execution, and now ask,
If I be guilty, therein does appear,
What justice you have used, call you this law?

Ca. (...) do mistake our meaning Falconbridge,
We do not ask as being ignorant,
Of thy transgression, but as urging thee,
To hearty sorrow for thy vile misdeeds,
That heaven may take compassion on thy soul.

Fall. How charitable you would seem to (...):
I fear anon you will say it is for love,
You bind me thus, and bring me to the block,
And that of mere affcaion you are moude
To cut my head off, cunning policy:
Such butchers as your selves never want,
A color to excuse your slaughterous minds.

Mor. We butcher thee? can thou deny thy self,
But thou have been a pyrate on the sea?
Can thou deny but with the communaltie
Of Kent and Essex, thou did rise in arms,
And twice assault the City London, where
Thou twice did take repulse, and since that time,
Can thou deny, that being fled from hence,
Thou ioynedst in con federarie with France,
And came with them to burn Southampton here,
Are these no faults, thou shuldst so much presume,
To clear thy self, and lay thy blood on us?

Fall. Hear me sir Harrie, since we must dispute.

Cap. Dispute bnciuil wretch, what needs dispute,
Did not the Viceadmirall here, and I
Incountring with the Navy of the French,
Attach thee in a ship of Normandy,
And will thou stand upon thine innocence?
Dispatch, thou art as rightfully condemnde
As ever rebel was. And thou shall die.

Fall. I make no question of it, I must die,
But let me tell you how I scorn your threats,
So little do I reckon of the name
Of ougly death, as were he bisible,
I'lde wrestle with him for the victory,
And tugge the slave, and tear him with my teeth,
But I would make him stoop to Falconbridge,
And for this life, this paltrie brittle life,
This blast of wind which you have labourde fo,
By iuries, sessions, and I know not what,
To rob me off, is of so vile repute:
That to attain that I might live mine age,
I would not give the value of a point,
You cannot be so cruel to afflict,
But I will be as forward to endure.

Mor. Go to, leave of these ^ole braues of thine:
And think upon thy souls health Falconbridge.

Cap. Submit and ask forgiveness of thy King.

Fall. What King?

Mor. Why Edward of the house of York.

Fall. He is no King of mine, he does usurp,
And if the destinies had given me leave,
I would have told him so before this time,
And pulled the Diadem from off his head.

Mo. Thou art a traitor, stop thy traitors mouth.

Fall. I am no traitor, Lancaster is King,
If that be treason to defend his right,
What is it for them that do imprison him?
If insurrection to advance his scepter,
What fault is theirs that step into his throane?
Oh God, thou pour'dst the balm upon his head,
Can that pure unction be wipte off again?
Thou once did crown him in his insancie,
Shall wicked men now in his age depose him?
Oh pardon me, if I expostulate,
More then becomes a sinful man to do,
England I fear thou will thy folly rue.

Cap. Thou triflest time, and do but weary us
With dilatorie questions, make an end,

Fall. Indeed the end of all kingdoms must end,
Honor and riches, all must have an end.
And he that thinks he does the most preu^le,
His head once laid, there rests but a tale:
Come fellow, do thy office, what me thinks,
Thou look as if thy heart were in thy hose,
Pull up thy spirits, it will be quickly done,
A blow or two at most will serve the turn.

Head. Forgive me sir your death.

Fall. Forgive thee? I and give thoe too,
Hold, there is some few crowns for thee to drink,
Tush weep not man, give loosers leave to plain,
And yet ^faith my loss I count a gain,
First let me see, is thy are sharp enough,
I am indifferent, well a Gods name to this gear,

Hea. Come and yield your head gently to the block,

Fall. Gently say thou: thou will not use me so:
But all is one for that, what strength have thou,
Throughout the whole proportion of thy limbs,
Keuoke it all into thy manly arms,
And spare me not, I am a Gentleman,
A Neuill and a Falconbridge beside,
Then do thy work, thou may get credit by it,
For if thou do not, I must tell thee plain,
I shall be passing angry when it is done.

Head. I warrant you sir, none in the land shall do it better.


Fall. Why now thou please me, England farewell

And old Plantagenet, if thou survive,
Think on my love, although it did not thrive.

He is led forth. Mor. As for his head, it shall be sent with speed
To London, and the promised reward,
Allotted for the apprehending him,
Be given unto the poor of Southhampton here:
How say you Captain are you so content?

Cap. With all my heart, but I do marvel much
We hear not of the messenger we sent,
To give the King intelligence of this?

M. Take truce with your surmises, here he comes.
Enter a Messenger. Follow it seems that thou art slow of gate,
Or very negligent in our affairs,
What says King Edward to our service done?

Mes. To answer you directly and as briefly,
I spoke with him, for when I was come
To Drayton Basset, where they said he was,
T was told me there, that even the night before,
His highness in all have, was rid toward London:
The occasion, Henry's death within the Tower,
Of which the people are in sundry tales,
Some thinking he was murdered, some again
Supposing that he died a natural death.

Mor. Well how so ere, that concerns not ^s,
We have to do with no man's death, but his,
That for his treason here has lost his head.
Come let us give direction as before,
And afterward make back unto the shore.

Exeunt. Enter the Lord Mayor in his scarlet gown, with a gilded rapier by
his side. Ma. I marie Crosbie this befits thee well,
But some will marua^le that with a scarlet gown,
I wear a gilded rapier by my side:
Why le^ them know, I was knighted in the field
For my good service to my Lord the king,
And therefore I may wear it lawfully,
In Court, in City, or at any royal banquet.
But soft John Crosbie, thou forgetst thy self,
And do not mind thy birth and parentage,
Where thou wast born, and whence thou art derived,
I do not shame to say, the Hospital
Of London was my chiefest fostering place,
There did I learn, that near unto a Cross,
Commonly called Cow Cross near Islington,
An honest Citizen did chance to find me,
A poor Shooemaker by trade he was,
And doubting of my Chrystendome or no,
Calde me according to the place he found me,
John Crosbie, finding me so by a Cross.
The Masters of the Hospital at further years,
Bound me apprentise to the Grocers trade,
Wherein God pleased to bless my poor endeavors
That by his blessings I am come to this.
The man that found me I have well requited,
And to the Hospital my fostering place,
An hundred pound a year I give for ever,
Likewise in memory of me John Crosbie
In Bishopgate street a poor house have I built,
And as my name have called it Crosbie house,
And when as God shall take me from this life,
In little S. Hellens will I be buried:
All this declares, I boast not of my birth,
But found on earth, I must return to earth.
But God for his pity I forget my self,
The King my Sovereign Lord will come anon,
And nothing is as yet in readiness.
Where are ye cousin Shore? nay where is Mistress Shore?
Oh I am sorry that she stays so long,
See what it is to be a widower,
And lack a Lady Maioresse in such need.
Enter M. Shore and Mistress Shore. Oh are ye come? welcome good Cousin
Shore,
But you indeed are welcome gentle Niece.
Needs must you be our Lady Maioresse now,
And help us, or else we are shamde for ever,
Good Cousin still thus am I bold with you.

Sh. With all my heart my Lord, and thank ye too,
That you do please to use our homely help.

Ma. Why see how neatly she bestirs her self,
And in good sooth makes huswifery to shine?
Ah had my Lady Maioresse liu'de to see
Fair Mistress Shore thus beautify her house,
She would have been not little proud thereof.

Jane. Well my Lord Mayor I thank you for that flout,
But let his Highness now come when he please,
All things are in a perfect readiness.

They bring forth a Table, and serve in the banquet. Maio. The more am I
beholding Niece to you,
That take such pains to save our credit now:
My servants are so slack, his Majesty,
Might have been here before we were preparde,
But peace here comes his Highness.

The Trumpets sound, and enters king Edward, How. Sellinger, and the train. K.
Now my Lord Mayor, have we not kept our word?
Because we could not stay to dine with you:
At our departure hence, we promised,
First food we tasted at our back return,
Should be with you, still yielding hearty thanks,
To you and all our London Citizens,
For the great service which you did perform
Against that bold ^de rebel Falconbridge.

M. My gracious Lord what then we did,
We did account no more then was our duty,
Thereto obliged by true subic as zeal,
And may he never live that not defends,
The honor of his king and country:
Next thank I God, it likes your Majesty,
To bless my poor roof, with your royal presence,
To me could come no greater happiness.

K. Thanks good Lord Mayor, but where is my Lady Maioresse, I hope that she will
bid us welcome too.


M. She would my Liege, and with no little joy,
Had she but liu^d to see this blessed day,
But in her sreed this Gentle woman here,
My Cosins wife, that office will supply:
How say you m^resse Shore?

K. How? mistress Shore? what not his wife
That did refuse his knighthood at our hand?

Ma. The very same my Lord and here he is.

K. What M. Shore, we are your debtor still,
But by Gods grace entend not so to die:
And Gentlewoman, now before your face,
I must condemn him of discourtesie,
Yea, and of great wrong that he has offered you,
For you had been a Lady but for him.
He was in fault, trust me he was to blame,
To hinder virtue of her due by right.

Ia. My gracious L. my poor and humble thoughts,
Nere had an eye to such unworthiness,
And though some hold it as a maxim,
That women's minds by nature do aspire,
Yet how both God and M. Shore I thank
For my continuance in this humble state,
And likewise how I love your Majesty:
For gracious sufferance that it may be so:
Heaven bear true record of my inward soul:
Now it remains, on my Lord Majors behalf,
I do such duty as becomes me,
To bid your Highness welcome to his house,
Were welcomes virtue powerful in my word,
The King of England should not doubt thereof.

K. Nor do I mistress Shore, now my Lo. Mayor
Edward dare boldly swear that he is welcome,
You spoke the word well, very well in faith,
But mistress Shore her tougue has gilded it,
Tell me Cousin Howard and Tom Sellinger,
Had ever Citizen so fair a wife?

How. Of flesh and blood I never did behold,
A woman eueric way so absolute.

Sell. Nor I my Liege, were Sellinger a King,
He could afford Shoares wife to be a Queen.

K. Why how now Tom? Nay rather how now Ned?
What change is this? proud, saucie roauing eye,
What whisperst in my brain, that she is fair?
I know it, I see it, fayrer then my Queen?
^oulost thou maintain it? what and thou traitor heart,
Would thou shake hands in this conspiracy?
Down rebel, back base treacherous conceit,
I will not credit thee, my Besse is fair,
And Shoares wife but a blouze, comparde to her,
Come let us sit, here will I take my place.
And my Lord Mayor, fill me a bowl of wine,
That I may drink to your elected Maioresse,
And M. Shore tell me how like you this,
My L. Mayor makes your wife his L. Maioresse?

Sho. So well my Lord as better cannot be,
All in the honor of your Majesty.

The Lord Mayor brings a bowl of wine, and humbly on his knees offers it to
the king. Kin. Nay drink to us L. Mayor, we will have it so,
Go to I say, you are our Taster now,
Drink then, and we will pledge ye.

M. Al health and happiness to my soueraign.

he drinks. K. Fill (...) our cup, and Lady Maioresse,
This ^ll carowse we mean to drink to you,
And you must pledge us, but yet no more,
Th^n you shall please to answer us withal.
He drinks, and the Trumpets sound, then wine is brought to her, and she offers
to drink. Nay you must drink to some body, yea Tom to thee?
Well sir, see you do her right:
For Edward would, oh would to God he might.
Yet idle eye, will thou be gadding still?
Keep home, keep home, for fear of further ill.
Enter a Messenger with letters. How now? letters to us, from whom?

Mess. My Liege, this from the D. of Burgundy.
And this is from the Constable of France.

K. What news from them?
He opens the letter and reads. To claim our right in France?
And they will aid us, yea, will ye so?
But other aid must aid us ere we go.
He seems to read the letters but glaunces on Mistress Shore in his reading.
A woman's aid, that has more power then France
To crown us, or to kill us with mischance.
If chaste resolve be to such beauty tied,
Sue how thou can, thou will be still denied,
Her husband has deserved well of thee,
Tut, love makes no respect where ^re it be,
Thou wrongst thy Queen: every enforced ill,
Must be endur'de, where beauty seeks to kill:
Thou seemst to read, only to blind their eyes,
Who knowing it, thy folly would despise.
He starts from the Table. Thanks for my cheer L. Mayor, I am not well,
I know not how to take these news. This fit I (...),
That has berest me of all reason eleane.

M. God shield my Sovereign.

K. Nay nothing I shall be well anon.

Ian. May it please your Highness sit.

K. I, feign with thee, nay we must needs be gone,
Cousin Howard convey these letters to our counsel,
And bid them give us their advise of them,
Thanks for my cheer L. Mayor, farewell to you
And farewell Mistress Shore, La. Maioresse I should say,
It Is you have causde our parting at this time.
Farewell M. Shore, farewell to all,
We Will meet once more to make amends for this.

Exeunt King. How. and Sell. M. Oh God here to be ill?
My house to cause my Sovereigns discontent?
Cousin Shore I had rather spent.

Sho. Content your self my L. kings have their humor^
The letters did contain somewhat no doubt,
That did displease him.

Jane. So my Lord think I,
But by Gods help he will be well again.

M. I hope so too, well Cousin for your pains,
I can but thank ye, chiefly you fair Niece,
At night I pray ye both come sup with me.
How say ye? will ye?

Sh. Yes my Lord we will.
So for this time we humbly take our leave.

Exeunt Shore and his wife. M. Oh now the sudden sickness of my Liege,
Afflictes my soul with many passions?
His Highness did entend to be right merry,
And God he knows how it would glad my soul,
If I had seen his Highness satisfied
With the poor entertainment of his Mayor,
His humble vassaile, whose lands, whose life and all
Are, and in duty must be always his.
Well, God I trust will bless his Graces health,
And quickly ease him of his sudden fit.
Take away there ho, rid this place,
And God of heaven bless my Sovereigns Grace.

Exit. Enter two prentizes preparing the Goldsmiths Shop with plate. 1. Pren.
Sir Jack, come set out.

2. Pren. You are the elder Prentise, I pray you do it, least my mistcis talk
with you when she comes down, what is it a clock?


1. Pren. Sir by Alhallowes.

2. Pren. Lying and stealing will bring ye to the Gallows.
Is here all the plate?

1. Pren. I that must serve to day,
Where is the weights and balance?

2. Pr. All ready, hark my mistress comes.

Exit 1. Pren. Enter Mistress Shore with her work in her hand. Jane. Sir boy,
while I attend the shop my self,
See if the workman have dispatched the Cup,
How many ounces weighes it:

2. Pren. Twenty ^orsooth.

Jane. What said the Gentleman to the fashiou?

2. Pren. He told my master I was not within.

Jane. Go sir make have, your M. is in Cheapeside:
Take h^d ye were best your loytring be not spide.

The boy departs, and she sits sowing in her shop. Enter the king disguised. K.
Well fare a case to put a King in yet,
Good mistress Shore this does your love procure,
This shape is secret, and I hope it is sure,
The Wlatermen that daily use the Court,
And see me often, knew me not in this,
At Lion key I landed in their view,
Yet none of them took knowledge of the King,
If any gallant strive to have the wall,
I Will yield it gently: Soft here must I turn,
Heeres Lumbard street, and here is the Pelican,
And there is the Phoenix in the Pellicans nest,
O rare perfection of rich natures work,
Bright twinkling spark of precious Diamond,
Of greater value then all India,
Were there no Sun, by whose kind lovely heat
The earth brings forth those stones we hold of prize,
Her radiant eyes dejected to the ground,
Would turn each peble to a Diamond.
Gaze greedy eyes and be not satisfied,
Till you find rest, where hearts desire does bide.

Ia. What would you buy sir that you look on here?

K. Your fairest jewel, be it not too dear.
First how this Saphyre mistress that you wear?

Jane. Sir it is right that will I warrant ye,
No Ieweller in London shows a better.

K. No, nor the like, you praise it passing well.

Jane. Do ^no, if some Lapidary had the ^ne, more would not buy it then I can
demand. It Is as well set I think as ere ye saw.


K. Ed. It Is set indeed upon the fairest hand, that ere I saw.

Jane. You are disposde to jest, but for value, his Maiestis might wear it.


K. Ed. Might he in faith?

Jane. Sir it is the ring I mean.

K. Ed. I meant the hand.

Jane. You are a merry man,
I see you come to cheap, and not to buy.

K. Ed. Yet he that offers fairer then i will do, shall hardly find a partner in
his bargain.


Jane. Perhaps in buying things of so small value?

King. Rather because no wealth can purchase it.

Ian. He were too fond, that would so highly prize,
The thing which once was given away for love.

Kin. His hap was good that came so easily by it.

Jane. The gift so small, that askte, who could deny it?

King. Oh she gave more, that such a gift then gave,
Then earth ere had, or world shall ever have.

Jane. His hap is ill, should it be as you say,
That having given him what you rate so high,
And yet is still the poorer by the match.

King. That easily proves he does not know the worth.

Jane. Yet having had the use of it so long,
It rather proves you over rate the thing,
He being a chapman, as it seems you are.

King. Indeed none should adventure on the thing,
That's to be purchased only by a King.

Jane. If Kings love that, which no man else respects,
It may be so, else do I see small reason,
A King should take delight in such course stuff.

King. Lives there a King, that would not give his crown,
To purchase such a kingdom of content?

Jane. In (...) conceit, right well you ask that question.
The world I think contains not such fond king.

King. Why mistress Shore, I am the man will do it.

Jane. Its proudly spoke, although I not believe it,
Were he King Edward that should offer it.

King. But shall I have it?

Jane. Upon what acquaintance?

King. Why since I saw thee last.

Jane, Where was that?

K. At the L. Majors, in the presence of the King.

Jane. I have forgotten that I saw you there,
For there were many that I took small note of.

King. Of me you did, and we had some discourse.

Jane. You are deceived Sir, I had then no time,
For my attendance on his majesty.

King. I Will gage my hand unto your hand of that,
Look well upon me.

He discouers himself. Jane. Now I beseech you let this strange disguise
she kneels. Excuse my boldness to your majesty.
What ever we possess is all your highness,
Only mine honor, which I cannot grant,

K. Only thy love (bright angel) Edward craves,
For which I thus adventured to see thee.

Enter Master Shore. Ia. But here comes one, to whom I only gave it.
And he I doubt will say you shall not have it.

King. Am I so soon cut off? oh spite.
How say ye mistress, will ye take my offer?

Ia. Indeed I cannot sir afford it so.

King. You Will not be offered fairlier I believe.

Jane. Indeed you offer like a Gentleman,
But yet the jewel will not so be left.

Sho. Sir, if you bid not too much underfoot,
I Will drive the bargain twixt you and my wife.

K. Alas good Shore, my self dare answer no.
King aside. Nothing can make thee such a jewel forgo.
She faith you shall be too much looser by it.

Sho. See in the row then, if you can speed better.

King. See many worlds arow, affords not like.

As he goes forth, Shore looks earnestly, and perceiues it is the king,
whereat he seems greatly discontented. I. Why lookst thou Mat? know thou
the (...)?
Alas what ailes thee that thou lookst so pale?
What theere sweet heart? alas, where have thou been?

Sho. Nay nothing Jane, know you the Gentleman?

Jane. Not I sweet heart, alas why do you ask?
Is he thine enemy?

Sho. (...) cannot tell,
What came he here to cheapen at our shop?

Jane. This Jewel love.

Sho. Well I pray God he came for nothing else.

Jane. Why who is it? I do suspect him Shore.
That you demand thus doubtedly of me.

Sho. Ah Jane, it is the King.

Ia. The king? what then? is it for that thou sighst?
Were he a thousand kings thou have no cause
To fear his presence, or suspect my lout.

Sho. I know I have not, see he comes again.

The king enters again, mussled in his cloak. King. Still is my hindzer
there? be patient heart,
Some fitter season must assuage the smart.
What will ye take that mistress which I offered ye?
I come again sir, as one willing to buy.

Jane. Indeed I cannot sir, I pray ye
Deal with my husband, hear what he will say.

Sho. I Will sell it worth your money, if you please,
I pray you come near sir.

King. I am too near already, thou so near.
Nay, nay, she knows what I did offer her,
And in good sadness, I can give no more,
So fare ye well sir, I will not deal with you.

Exit. Ia. You are deceiude (sweet heart) it is not the king,
Think you he would adventure thus alone?

Sho. I do assure thee Jane it is the King.
Oh God, twixt the extremes of love and fear,
In what a shiuering ague sits my soul?
Keep we our treasure secret, yet so fond,
As set so rich a beauty as this is,
In the wide view of every gazers eye.
Oh traitor beauty, oh deceitful good,
That do conspire against thy self and love,
No sooner got, but wished again of others,
In thine own self, injurious to thy self,
Oh rich poor portion, thou good evil thing?
How many joyful woes still do thou bring?

Ia. I pray thee come, sweet love, and sit by me,
No king that's under heaven I love like thee.

Exit. Enter sir Humphrey Bows, and master Aston, being two Justices, Harrie
Grudgen, Robert Godfellow, and John Hobs the Tannet. Bow. Neighbors and
friends, the cause that you are called,
Concerns the Kings most excellent majesty,
Whose right you know by his progenitors,
Unto the Crown and soueraintie of France,
Is wrongfully detained by the French,
Which to revenge and royally regaine.
His Highness means to put himself in Arms.
And in his princely person to conduct
His warlike troops against the enemy.
But for his Coffers are unfurnished,
Through civil discord and intestine war,
(Whose bleeding scarres our eyes may yet behold)
He prays his faithful loving subjects help,
To further this his just great enterprise.

Hobs. So the fecke and meaning, whereby as it were of all your long purgation
Sir Humphrey is no more in some respect, but the king wants money and would have
some of his Comentie.


Bo. Tanner you rightly understand the matter.

Ast. Note this withal, where his dread Majesty,
(Our lawful Soucraigne, and most royal King)
Might have exacted or imposde a Tax
Or borrowed greater sums then we can spare,
(For all we have is at his dread command,)
He does not so, but mildly does entreat
Our kind ben^uolence, what we will give,
With willing minds to wards this mightycharge.
Enter Lord Howard. Which to receive, his n^ble Counselor
And kinsman the Lord Howard here is come.

H. Now good sir Humphrey Bows, and M. As^,
Have ye declared y^ kings most gracious pleasure?

Bo. We have my Lord.

How. His highness will not force,
As loan or tribute, but will take your gift,
In grateful part and recompense your love.

B. To show my love, though money now be scarce
A hundredth pound i will give his Majesty.

Ho. It Is well sir Humphrey.

Aston. I a hundred marks.

Ho. Thanks M. Aston, you both show your love,
Now as^c your neighbors what they will bestow?

Bow. Come master Hadland your benevolence.

Had. O good sir Humphrey do not rack my purse,
You know my state, I lately sold my land.

Aston. Then you have money, let the king have part.

Hob. I, do master Hadland do, they say ye sold a foul deal of durtie land
for fair gold and silver, let the king have some now while you have it, for if
ye be forborne a while, all will be spent, for he that cannot keep land that
lies fast, will have much a do to hold money, its slipperic ware, it is melting
ware, it is melting ware.


How. Gramercy Tanner.

Bows. Say, what shall we have?

Hadland. My forty shillings.

Aston. Robert Goodfellowe.
I know you will be liberal to the King.

Good. O M. Aston be content I pray ye,
You know my charge, my household very great,
And my housekeeping holds me very hare:
Threescore vprising, and down lying Sir,
Spends no sinall store of vittailes in a year,
Two brace of Greyhounds, tt. couple of hounds,
And then my iades devour a deal of Corn,
My Christmas cost, and then my friends that come
Amounts to charge, I am Robin Goodfellow,
That welcomes all and keeps a frolic house,
I have no money pray ye pardon me.

How. Heeres a plain Tanner can teach you how to thrive,
Keep fewer dogs, and then ye may feed men:
Yet feed no idle men, it is needles charge,
You that on hounds and hunting mates will spend,
No doubt but something to your King you will lend.

Good. My brace of Angels, by my troth that's all.

Hob. Mass and it is well thy Curres have left so much, I thought they would
have eaten up thy house and landere this.


Bows. Now Harrie Grudgen.

Grudgen. What would you have of me? Money I have none, and i will sell no
stock, here is old polling, subsidy, fifteen, soldiers, and to the poor, and
you may have your will, you will soon shut me out a door.


Hob. Hear ye worships, will ye let me answer my neighbor Grudgen? By my
hallidome Harry Grudgen, tha'rt but a grumbling, grudging Churl, thou have two
ploughes going, and near a Cradle rocking, tha'st a pecke of money, go to,
turn thee loose, thou wilt go to law with the Micat for a tyth goose, and wilt
not spare the King four or five pound.


Grudgen. Gep goodman Tanner, are ye so round? your prolicatenes has brought
your son to the gallows almost, you can be frank of an other man's cost.


Hob. Thart no honest man to twit me with my son, he may out live thee yet
for ought that he has done, my sons ith gayle, is he the first has been
there, and thou ^rt a man, as thart a beast, I would have thee by the ears.


How. Friend thou wantste nurture, to vpbrasd a Father Weeping.
With a suns fault, we sit not here for this;
What Is thy benevolence toward his majesty?

Hob. His benegligence? hang him heel not give a pennis willingly.


Gr. I care not much to cast away forty pence.

Ho. Out grudging pesant, base ill nurturd groom,
Is the the love thou bear unto the King?
Gentlemen take notice of the slave,
And if he fault let him be soundly plagude?
Now frolic Ianner, what will thou afforde?

Hob. Twenty old Angels and a score of hides, if that be too little, take
twenty Nobles more, while I have it my king shall spend of my stor^.


How. The King shall know thy loving liberal heart.

Hob. Shall he in faith, I thank ye heartely, but hear ye Gentleman, you come
from the Court?


How. I do.

Hob. Lord how does the King, and how does Ned the Kings Butler, and Tom of his
Chamber, I am sure ye know them?


How. They do very well.

Hob. For want of better guests they were at my house one night.


How. I know they were.

Hob. They promised me a good turn for kissing my daughter Nell, and now I ha
cagion to try them, my sons in Die hell here in Caperdochie, itha Gayle for
peeping into another man's purse, and outstep the King be miserable, he is like
to totter, can that same Ned the Butler do any thing with the King?


How. More then my self, or any other Lord.

Hob. A halter he can, by my troth ye reiounce my heart to hear it.


How. Come to the Court I warrant thy sons life,
Ned will save that, and do thee greater good.

Hob. I Will weane Brocke my maressole, and come up to the King, and it shall go
hard but two fat hens for your pains I will bring.


Bows. My Lord this fellow gladly now will give,
five pounds so you will pardon his rude speech.

How. For five and five I cannot brook the beast.

Grud. What gives the Tanner, I am as able as he

Aston. He gives ten pound.

Grud. Take twenty then of me.
I pray ye my Lord forgive my rough heaud speech
I wis I meant no hurt unto my Liege.

Bows. Let us entreat your Lordships patience.

How. I do at your request remit the offense,
So lets depart, here is all we have to do.

Ast. It Is for this time and place my Lord, sir bring your money.


Hob. What have you sau'de now goodman Grudgen, by your hinching and your
pinching, not the worth of a black pudding.


Exeunt. Enter mistress Shore, and mistress Blage. M. Bla. Now mistress Shore,
what urgent cause is that, Which made ye send for me in such great haste? I
(...) it made me half afraid, you were not well.


Jane. Trust me, nor sick, nor well, but troubled still with the disease I
told ye: here is another le^er from the King, was never poor soul so
importuned.


M. Bla. But will no answer serve?

Jane. No mistress Blage, no answer will sustize,
He, he it is, that with a violent siedge
Labors to break into my plighted faith,
Oh what am I, he should so much forget
His royal State, and his high majesty?
Still does he come disguised to my house,
And in most humble terms be wraies his love,
My husband greeues, alas how can he choose,
Fearing the dispossessement of his Jane?
And when he cannot come (for him) he writes,
Offering beside incomparable gifts,
And all to win me to his princely will.

M. Bla. Believe me M. Shore, a dangerous case,
And every way repeat with doubtful fear,
If you should yield, your virtuous name were foild
And your beloved husband made a scorn,
And if not yield, its likely that his love,
Which now admires ye, will convert to hate,
And who knows not a princes hate is death?
Yet I will not be she shall counsel ye,
Good mistress Shore do what ye will for me.

Jane. Then counsel me what I were best to do.

M. B. You know his greatness ra^ dispense with il,
Making the sin seem lesser by his worth,
And you your self, your children and your friends,
Be all adn^nced to worldly dignity,
And this worlds pomp you know is a goodly thing,
Yet I will not be she shall connsaile ye,
Good mistress Shore do what ye will for me.

Jane. Alas I know that I was bound by oath,
To keep the promise that I made at first,
And virtue lives, when pomp consumes to dust.

M, Blague. So we do say, dishonor is no shame,
When slander does not touch th'offenders name,
You shall be folded in a princes arms,
Whose beck disperseth even the greatest harms,
Many that sit themselves in high degree,
Will then be glad to stoop, and bend the knee,
And who is it, having plenty in the hand,
Never commanded, but does still command,
That cannot work in such excess of things,
To quit the guilt one small transgression brings?
Yet I will not be she shall counsel ye,
Good mistress Shore do what ye will for me.

Jane. Here do I live, although in mean estate,
Yet with a conscience free from all debate,
Where higher footing may in time procure,
A sudden fall, and mix my sweet with sour.

Mi. Blague. True, I confess a private life is good,
Nor would I otherwise be understood,
To be a Goldsmiths wife is some content,
But da^es in court more pleasantly are spent,
A households government deserves renown,
But what is a companion to a crown?
The name of mistress is a pretty thing,
But Madam at each word does glory bring.
Yet I will not be she shall counsel ye,
Good mistress Shore do what ye will for nice.

Ia. Oh that I knew which were the best of twain,
Which for I do not, I am sick^ with pain.
Enter her Boy. How now sir boy, what is the news with you?

Boy. The Gentleman forsooth the other day,
That would have bought the jewel at our stall,
Is here to speak with ye.

Jane. Oh God it is the King.
Good mistress Blague withdraw ye from this place,
Oh come anon, so soon as he is gone,
And sir get you to the shop again.

Exit Boy. M. Bla. Now mistress Shore bethink ye what to do.
Such suitors come not every day to woo.

Mistress Blague departs, and the king enters in his former disguise. K. Thou
may conuid me (beauties pride) of boldness,
That I intrude like an unbidden guest,
But love being guide, my fault will seem the less.

Ia. Most welcome to your subjects homely roof,
The foot my Sovereign, seldom does offend,
Unless the heart some other hurt intend.

King. The most thou see is hurt unto my self
How for thy sake, is majesty disroabde?
Riches made poor, and dignity brought low,
Only that thou might our affection know.

Jane. The more the pity, that within the sky,
The sun that should all other vapors dry,
And guide the world with his most glorious light
Is muffled up himself in ^full night.

K. The want of thee, fair Cinthia is the cause,
Spread thou thy siluer-brightnesse in the air,
And strait the gladsome morning will appear.

Jane. I may not wander, he that guides my carre,
Is an im^nooued, constant, fixed star,

Ki. But I will give that star a comets name,
And shie^d both thee and him from further blame.

Jane. How if the host of heaven at this abuse
Kepine? who can the prodig^e excuse?

K. It lies within the compass of my power,
To dim their enu^ous eyes, dare seem to lowre,
But leaving this our Enigmatike talk,
Thou must sweet Jane repair unto the Court,
His tongue entreats, controls the greatest peer,
His hand plights love, a royal scepter holds,
And in his heart be has confirmde thy good,
Which may not, must not, shall not be withstood.

Jane. If you enforce me, I have naught to say,
But wish I had not liude to see this day.

K. Blame not the time, thou shall have cause to soy.
Jane in the eueniug I will send for thee,
And thou and thine shall be aduancde by me.
In sign whereof receive this true-loue kiss,
Nothing il meant, there can be no amiss.

Exit. Jane. Well I will in, and ere the time begin,
Learn how to be repentant for my sin.

Exit. Enter Lord Mayor, master Shoa^e and Fraunces Emersley. Mayor. But Cousin
Shore, are ye assurde it was the King you saw in such disguise?


Sho. Do I know you the uncle to my wife? know I Frank Emersley her brother
here? so surely do I know that counterseit to be King.


Fran. Well, admit all this. And that his Majesty in such disguise, please to
survey the manner of our City, or what occasion else may like himself. Me
thinks you have small reason brother Shore, to be displeasde thereat.


Ma. Oh I have sound him now.
Because my Niece his wife is beautiful,
And well reputed for her virtuous parts:
He in his fond conceit misdoubts the King,
Does doat on her in his affection.
I know not Cousin how she way be changde,
By any cause in you procuring it,
From the fair carriage of her wonted course:
But well I wot, I have often heard you say,
She merited no scruple of mislike.
If now some gyddie fancy in your brain,
Make you conceive sinisterly of her,
And with a person of such difference.
I tell you Cousin, more for her respect,
Then to sooth you in such sottishnes,
I would reucale ye open to the world,
And let your folly justly plague your self.

Sho. Uncle you are too forward in your rage,
And much mistake me in this suddennes,
Your Nieces reputation have I prizde,
And shrined as devoutly in my soul
As you, or any that it can concern.
Nor when I tell you that it is the King,
Comes muffled like a common Seruingman,
Do I infer thereby my wife is false?
Or swerues one jot from wonted modesty.
Though in my shop she sit, more to respect,
Her servants duty, then for any skill,
She does, or can pretend in what we trade,
Is it not strange, that ever when he comes,
It is to her, and will not deal with me?
Ah Uncle Frank, nay, would all her kin,
Were here to censure of my cause aright:
Though I misoeeme not her, yet give me leave,
To doubt what his sly walking may entend.
And let me tell ye, he that is possessed,
Of such a beauty, fears undermining guests:
Especially a mighty one, like him,
Whose greatness may guilde over ugly sin.
But say his coming is not to my wife,
Then has he some sly aiming at my life,
By false compounded metals, or light gold,
Or else some other trifle to be sold.
When kings themselves so narrowly do pry
Into the world, men fear, and why not I?

Fran. Believe my brother in this doubtful case
I know not well how I should answer ye,
I wonder in this serious busy time,
Of this great gathered benevolence,
For his regaining of his right in France,
The day and nightly turmoile of his Lords,
Yea of the whole estate in general,
He can be spared from these great affairs,
And wander here disguised in this sort.
But is not this your boy?

Enter the Boy. Sho. Yes marie is it: how now, what news with thee?

Boy. Master, my mistress by a Nobleman,
Is sent for to the King in a close Coach,
She Is gone with him, these are the news I bring.

Ma. How? my (...) sent for to the King?
By a Nobleman, and she is gone with him?
Nay, then I like it not?

Fran. How, gone say thon?

S. Be patient Uncle, storm not gentle Frank:
The wrong is (...), by whom? a king,
To talk of such it is no common thing.
She is gone thou say?

Boy. Yes truly sir, it is so.

Sho. I cannot help it, a Gods name let her go,
You cannot help it Uncle, no, nor you,
Where kings are medlers, meaner men must rue.
I storm against it? no, farewell lane Shore.
Once thou wast mine, but must be so no more.

Mayor. Gone to the Court?

Exit Mayor. Sho. Yet uncle will ye rage?
Let mine example your high heat assuage.
To note offenses in a mighty man,
It is enough, amend it he that can,
Frank Emersley, my wife thy sister was,
Lands, goods and all I have, to thee I pass,
Save that poor portion must along with me,
To bear me from this badge of obloquie,
It never shall be said that Matthew Shore,
A Kings dishonor in his bonnet wore.

Fran. Good brother.

Sh. Strive not to change me, for I am resolud,
And will not tarry. England fare thou well,
And Edward, for requiting me so well,
But dare I speak of him? forbear, forbear,
Come Frank I will surrender all to thee,
And then abroad, where ere my fortune be

Exeunt. Enter king Edward, Howard, Sellinger, etc. K. And have our country
subjects been so frank
And bountiful in their benevolence,
Toward our present expedition?
Thanks Cousin Howard for thy pains herein:
We will have letters sent to every Shire
Of thankful gratitude, that they may know,
How highly we respect their gentleness.

How. One thing my L. I had well near forgot,
Your pleasant host the Tanner of Tamworth.

King. What of him Cousin?

How. He was right liberal,
I wentie old Angels did he send your Grace,
And others seeing him so bountiful,
Stretched further then otherwise they had done.

K. Trust me I must requite that honest Tanner.
Oh had he kept his word, and come to Court,
Then in good sadness we had had good sport.

How. That is not long my L. which comes at last
He Is come to London, on an earnest cause,
His son lies prisoner in Safford Iayle,
And is condemned for a robbery.
Your Highness pardoning his sons ^ffence,
May yield the Tanner no mean recompense.

K. But who has seen him since he came to rowne?

Sell. My Lord in Holborne it was my hap to see him
Gazing about, I sent away my men,
And clapping on one of their liuerie cloak^,
Came to him, and the Tanner knew we strait,
How do thou Tom? and how does Ned quoth he
That honest merry hangman, how does he?
I knowing that your Majesty intended
This day in person to come to the Tower,
There bad him meet me, where Ned and I,
Would bring him to the presence of the King,
And there procure a pardon for his son.

King. Have then a care we be not seen of him,
Until we be provided for the purpose,
Because once more we will have a little sport,
Tom Sellinger, let that care be yours.

Sell. I warrant ye my Lord let me alone.

Enter the Lord Mayor. K. Welcome L. Mayor, what have you signified
Our thankfulness unto our Citizens,
For their ^ate gathered benevolence?

Ma. Before the Citizens in our Guildhall,
Master Recorder made a good Oration,
Of thankful gentitude unto them all,
Which they received with so kind respect,
And love unto your royal majesty,
As it appearde to us they sorrowed,
Their bounty to your highness was no more,

King. Lord Mayor, thanks to your self and them,
And go ye with us now into the Tower,
To see the order that we shall observe,
In this so needful preparation,
The better may you signify to them,
What need there was of their benevolence.

Ma. I Will wait upon your gracious majesty,
Yet there is one thing that much grieueth me. aside.

Exeunt. Enter Shore, and two watermen bearing his trunks. Sho. Go honest
fellow, bear my trunks aboard,
And tell the master i will come presently.

Enter mistress Shore Lady-like attired, with diverse supplications in her hand,
she vnpinning her mask, and attended on by many suitors. 1. Wa. We will sir, but
what Lady have we here?
Belike she is of no mean countenance,
That has so many suitors waiting on her.

Sho. Go one of you I pray ye, enquire her name,

1. Wa. My honest friend, what Lady call ye this?

Air. Her name is mistress Shore, the kings belou^d,
A special friend to suitors at the court.

S. Her name is mistress Shore the kings beloved,
Where shall I hide my head, or stop mine ears.
But like an owl I shall be wondered at?
When she with me was wont to walk the streets,
The people then as she did pass along,
would say, there goes fair modest mistress Shore,
When she attended like a City Dame,
Was praised of matrons. So that Citizens,
When they would speak of ought unto their wives
Fetched their example still from mistress Shore,
But now she goes decked in her courtly robes,
This is not she, that once in seemly black,
Was the chaste sober wife of Matthew Shore,
For now she is King Edwards Concubine,
Oh great ill title, honorable shame,
Her good I had, but King her ill is thine,
Once Shoares true wife, now Edwards Concubine,
Amongst the rest i will note her new behavior.

All this while she stands conferring privately with her suitors, and looking on
their bills. Air. Good mistress Shore remember my sons life.

Jane. What is thy name?

Air. My name is Thomas Air.

Jane. There is his pardon signed by the King.

Air. In sign of humble hearty thankfulness,
Take this in Angels twenty pound.

Jane. What think ye, that I buy and sell for bribes,
His highness favor, or his subjects blood?
No, without gifts God grant I may do good,
For all my good cannot redeem my ill,
Yet to do good I willendeauour still.

Sho. Yet all this good does but guild ore thy ill.

aside. Palmer. Mistress the restitution of my lands,
Taken perforce by his highness officers.

Jane. The King is content your goods shall be restorde,
But the officers will hardly yield thereto,
Yet be content, i will see ye have no wrong.

Sho. Thou can not say to me so, I have wrong.

Iockie. Mistress good faith gin yeele help me till my laund, whilke the faulse
loune Billie Grime of Glendale hauds wranfully frea me: ise white your gudenes
with a bonnie uag, sall swum away so deftly as the wind.


Jane. Your suit my friend, requires a longer time,
Yet since you dwell so far off, to ease your charge,
Your diet with my ser^ants you may take,
And some relief i will get thee of the King.

Sho. Its cold relief thou getst me from the King.

Iockie. Now Gods blessing light on that gudely fair face, ise be your true
beadsman mistress, I indead, sal I.


Pal. God bless the care you have of doing good.

Air. Pity she should miscarrie in her life,
That bears so sweet a mind in doing good.

Sho. So say I too, ah Jane this kills my heart,
That thou recks others, and not ru'st my smart.

Rufford. Mistress I fear you have forgot my suit?

Jane. Oh, it is for a license to transport corn from this land. and lead to
foreign Realms, I had your bil, but I have torn your bill, and tware no shame
I think, to tear your ears, that care not how you wound the commonwealth.
The poor must sterue for food to fill your purse. And the enemy bandie
bullets of our lead. No master Rufford, i will not speak for you, except it be
to have you punished.


Iockie. By the mess a dest less, Christ benison light on her.

She espies her husband walking aloof off, and not knowing him, takes him for
another Suitor. Jane. Is that another suitor? I have no bill of his,
Go one of you, and know what he would have.

Sho. Yes Jane, the bill of my ^bliged faith,
And I had thine, but thou have canceld^.

Here she knows him, and lamenting, comes to him. Jane. Oh God it is my
husband, kind Matthew Shore.

Shore. Ah Jane, what is he dare say he is thy husband?
Thou wast a wife, but now thou art not so,
Thou wast a maid, a maid when thou wast wife,
Thou wast a wife even when thou wast a maid,
So good, so modest, and so chaste thou wast,
But now thou art diuorcde, whiles yet he lives,
That was thy husband, while thou wast his wife.
Thy wisehood stainde, by thy dishonored life,
For now thou art nor widow, maid, nor wife.

Jane. I must confess I yielded up the Forte,
Wherein lay all the riches of my ^y,
But yet sweet Shore, before I yielded it,
(...) did endure the longst and greatest siege,
That ever battred on poor chastity,
And but to him that did a^ault the same,
For ever it had been invincible,
But I will yield it back again to thee.
He cannot blame me, though it be so done,
To loose by me, what first by me was won.

Sho. No Jane, there is no place allowde for m^e,
Where once a King has taken possession,
Mean men brook not a Rival in their love,
Much less so high vnriualde Majesty,
^oncubine to one so great as Edward.
Is tar too great to be the wife of Shore,

Jane. I will refuse the pleasures ^f the Court,
Let me go with thee Shore, though not as a wife,
Yet as thy slave, since I have lost that name,
I will redeem the wrong that I have done thee,
With my true service, if thou will accept it.

Sho. Thou go with me Jane, oh God forbid,
That I should be a traitor to my King,
Shall I become a fellon to his pleasures,
And fly away as guilty of the theft?
No my dear Jane, I say it may not be,
Oh what have subjects that is not their kings,
He not examine his prerogative.

Ia. Why then sweet Mat. let me entreat thee stay,
What is it with Edward that I cannot do?
I Will make thee wealthier then ere Richard was,
That entertaind the three greatst kings in Europe,
And feasted them in London on a day
Ask what thou will, were it a million,
That may content thee, thou shall have it Shore.

Sho. Indeed this were some comfort to a man,
That tasted want or worldly misery,
But I have lost what wealth cannot return,
All worldly losses are but toys to mine,
Oh, all my wealth, the loss of thee was more,
Then ever time or Fortune can restore.
Therefore sweet Jane farewell, once thou wast mine,
Too rich for me, and that King Edward knew,
Adieu, oh world, he shall deceived be,
That puts his trust in women or in thee.

Ia. Ah Shore farewell, poor heart in death i will tell,
I ever loud thee Shore, farewell, farewell.

Exit. Enter king Edward, Lord Mayor, Howard, Sellinger, and the train. King.
Having awakte forth of their sleepis dens,
Our drourie Cannons, which ere long shall charm
The watchful French, with deaths eternal sleep,
And all things else in readiness for France,
A while we will give truce unto our care,
There is a merry Tanner near at hand,
With whom we mean to be a little merry.
Therefore Lord Mayor, and you my other friends,
I must entreat you not, to knowledge me,
No man stand bare, all as companions,
Give me a Cloak, that I may be disguisd^,
Tom Sellinger, go thou and take another,
So Tanner, now come when ye please, we are provided,
And in good time, see he is come already.
Enter the Tanner. Tom Sellenger, go thou and meet him.

Sell. What John Hobs? welcome in faith to court,

Hob. Gramercies honest Tom, where is the hangman
Ned? where is that mad rascal, shall I not see him?

Sell. See where he stands, that same is he.

Hob. What Ned? a plague found thee, how do thou for a villain? how do
thou mad Kogue, and how, and how?


King. In health John Hobs, and very glad to see thee,
But say, what wind drove thee to London.

Hobs. Ah Ned, I was brought hither with a whirlewinde man, my son, my son,
did I not tell thee I had a knave to my son?


King. Yes Tanner, what of him?

Hob. Faith he is in Caperdoche Ned, in Stafford Goal, for a robbery, and is
like to be hangde, except thou get the King to be more miserable to him.


King. If that be all Tanner, i will warrant him,
I will procure his pardon of the King.

Hobs. Will thou Ned? for those good words, see what my Daughter Nell has sent
thee, a handkercher wrought with as good Couentrie silk blew thread as ever
thou saw.


King. And I perhaps may wear it for her sake,
In better presence then thou art aware off,

Hobs. How Ned, a better present? that can thou not have for silk, cloth,
and workmanship, why Nell made it man. But Ned? is not the King in this
company, wshat he in the long beard and the red petticoate? before God I
misooubt Ned that is the King, I know it by my Lord what ye calls players.


King. How by them Tanner?

Hob. Ever when they play an Enterloute or a Commodity at Tamworth, the King
always is in a long beard, and a red gown like him, therefore I spekt him to
be the King


King. No trust me Tanner, this is not the King, but thou shall see the King
before thou go, and have a pardon for thy son too with thee.

This man is the Lord Mayor, Lord Mayor of London, here was the Recorder too,
but he is gone.


Hobs. What Nicnames these courtnoles have? Mare and Corder quotha? we have no
such at Liechfield, there is the honest Bayliffe and his brethren, such words
gree best with us.


King. My Lord Mayor, I pray ye for my sake, to bid this honest Tanner
welcome.


Mayor. You are welcome my honest friend,
In sign whereof I pray you see my house,
And suppe with me this night.

Hobs. I thank ye good goodman Masor, but I care not for no meat, my
stomach is like to a sick swines, that will neither eat nor drink, till
she know what shall become of her pigge. Ned and Tom, you promisde me a good
turn when I came to Court, either do it now, or go hang your selves.


King. No sooner comes the King, but I will do it.

Sell. I warrant thee Tanner, fear not thy sons life.

Hobs. Nay, I fear not his life, I fear his death.

Enter Master of Saint Katherines, and Widow Norton. Maiste. All health and
happiness to my Sovereign.

King. The Master of Saint Katherines has marde all:

Hobs. Out alas that ever I was borne.

The Tanner falls in a swound, they labor to revive him, mean while the king
puts on his roy all robes. King. Look to the Tanner there, he takes no harm,
I would not have him (for my crown) miscarrie.

Wid. Let me come to him by my kings good leave,
Here Is ginger honest man, bite it.

Hobs. Bite ginger, bite ginger, bite a dogs date, I am but a dead man, ah my
Liege, that you should deal so with a poor well meaniug man, but it makes no
matter, I can but die.


King. But when Tanner can thou tell?

Hobs. Nay even when you please, for I have so defended ye, by calling ye
plain Ned, mad rogue and rascal, that I know you will have me hangde. Theref^re
make no more ado, but send me down to Stafford, and there a Gods name hang me
with my son. And here is another as honest as your self, you made me call him
plain Tom, I warrant his name is Thomas, and some man of worship too, therefore
lets to it, even when and where ye will.


King. Tanner attend, not only do we pardon thee,
But in all princely kindness welcome thee,
And thy sons trespass do we pardon too,
Ore go and see that forthwith it be drawn,
Under our seal of England, as it ought,
And forty pounds we give thee to defray
Thy charges in thy coming up to London.
Now Tanner, what say thou to us?

Hobs. Marry you speak like an honest man, if you mean as you say.


King. We mean it Tanner, on our royal word.

Now master of S. Katherines, what would you?

M. My gracious Lord, the great benevolence,
(Though small to that your subjects could afford,
Of poor S. Katherines do I bring your grace,)
Five hundred pounds here have they sent by me.
For the easier portage, all in Angel gold,
What this good widow mistress Norton will,
She comes her self, and brings her gift with her.

Wid. Pardon me gracious Lord, presumption,
Nor over w^ning in mine own conceit,
Makes me thus bold to come before your Grace,
But love and duty to your majesty:
And great desire to see my Lord the King,
Our master here spoke of benevolence,
And said my twenty Nobles was enough,
I thought not so, but at your Highness feet,
A widows mite, a token of her zeal,
In humble duty gives you twenty pound.

Ki. Now by my crown, a gallant Iustie Girl,
Of all the exhibition yet bestowed,
This woman's liberality likes me best.
Is thy name Norton?

Wid. I my gracious Liege.

King. How long have thou been a Widow?

Wid. It is my Lord,
Since I did bury Wilkin my goodman,
At Shrouetide next even just a dozen years.

K. In all which space, could thou not find a man.
On whom thou might bestow thy self again?

Wid. Not any like my Wilkin whose dear love,
I know is matchless, in respect of whom,
I think not any worthy of a kiss.

K. No widow? that i will try, how like you this?

He kisseth her. Wid. Beshrew my heart, it was a honnie kiss,
Able to make an aged woman young:
And for the same most sweet and lovely Prince,
See what the widow gives you from her store,
Forty old Angels but for one kiss more.

K. Marie Widow and thou shall have it,
John Hobs thou art a widower,
Lackst thou such a wife?

Hobs. Snailes, twenty pound a kiss? had she as many twenty pound bags as I
have knobs of bark in my tansat she might kiss them away in a quarter of a
year. ^e no Saint Katherines widows, if kisses be so dear.


Widow. Clubs and clouted shoes, there is none enamourd here.


King. Lord Mayor, we thank you and entreat withal,
To recommend us to our Citizens:
We must for France, we bid you all farewell,
Come Tanner thou shall with us to Court,
To marrow you shall dine with my Lord Mayor,
And after ward set homeward when ye please:
God and our right that only fights for us,
Adieu, pray that our toil prove prosperous.

Exeunt. FINIS.
THE SECOND PART of King Edward the Fourth.
Containing his journey into France, for obtaining of his right there: The
treacherous falsehood of the Duke of Burgundy, and the Constable of France used
against him, and his return home again. Likewise the prosecution of the
history of M. Shore and his fair wife: Concluding with the lamentable death
of them both.

Enter king Edward, Howard, Sellinger, and Soldiers marching. Edward. IS this
the aid our Cousin Burgundy,
And the great Constable of France assured us?
Have we marched thus farte through the heart of France?
And with the terror of our English Drums:
kourde the poor trembling French, which leave their towns
That now the Wolves affrighted from the fields,
Do get their pray, and kennell in their streets?
Our thundering Canons, now this fortnight space,
Like common Bell-men in some market town,
Have cried the Constable and Burgundy:
But yet I see they come not to our aid,
We Will bring them in, or by the blessed light,
We Will search the Ground-stilles of their Cittis walls,
Since you have brought me hither: I will make,
The proudest Tower that stands in France to quake,
I marvel Scales returns not, for by him
I do respect to hear their resolutions.

Enter the Lord Scales. How. My Sovereign he is happily returnde.

Ed. Welcome my Lord, welcome good Cousin Scales,
What news from Burgundy, what is his answer?
What comes he to our succor as he promised?

Scal. Not by his good will, for ought that I can see
He lingers still in his long fiedge at Nuse.
I vrgde his promise and your expectation,
Even to the force and compass of my spirit,
I cheerde my firm persuasions, with your hopes.
And gylded them with my best Oratorie,
I framde my speech still fitly as I ^ound
The temper of his humor, to be wrought upon,
But still I found him earthly, vnresolude,
Muddie, and me thought ever through his eyes,
I saw his wavering and unsettled spirit,
And to be short, subtle and treacherous,
And one that does entend no good to you,
And he will come, and yet he wants power,
He would fai^e come, but may not leave the siege,
He hopes he shall, but yet he knows not when,
He purposed, but some unpediments,
Have hindered his determined intent,
Briefly, I think he will not come at all.

Ed. But is he like to take the town of Nuse?

Sca. My Lord the town is liker to take him,
That if he chance to come to you at all,
Ti^s but for succor.

Ed. But what says Count Saint Paul?

Scales. My Lord he lies, and reuelles at S. Quintins,
And laughs at Edwards coming into France,
There Dominering with his drunken crew,
Make Jigges of us, and in their slau^ring i^sts,
Tell how like rogues we lie here in the field,
Then comes a slave one of those drunken sots,
In with a Tavern reckoning for a supplication,
Disguised with a cushion on his head,
A Drawers Apron for a Heralds Coat.
And tells the Count, the King of England craves
One of his worthy honors Dog-kennels,
To be his lodging for a day or two.
With some such other Tavern foolerie:
With that this filthy rascal greasy rout,
Brast out in laughter at this worthy jest,
Neighing like horses: thus the Count Saint Paul
Regardes his promise to your majesty.

Ed. Will no man thrust the slave into a sackbut?

Scl. Now by this light were I but near the slave with a black Jacke I would
beat out his brains.


Ho. If it please your highness but to say the word,
We Will pluck him out of Quintins by the cares.

Ed. No cousin Howard, we will reserve our valor,
For better purpose, since they both refuse us,
Our selves will be vnriualde in our honor.
Now our first cast my Lord is at maine France,
Whilst yet our Army is in health and strong,
And have we once but broke unto that war,
I will not leave S. Paul, nor Burgundy,
Not a bare Pigscoate to shroud them in.
Heraulde.

He. My Sovereign.

Ed. Go Derauld, (...) to Jews the French King,
Denounce stern war, and tell him I am come,
To take possession of my Realm of France.
Defy him boldly from us, be thy voice
As fierce as thunder, to affright his soul:
Derauld be gone I say, and be thy breath,
Percing as lightning, and thy words as death

Her. I go my Liege resolude to your hie will.

Exit. Ed. Sound Drum I say, set forward with our power,
And France ere long expect a dreadful hour,
I will not take the English standard down,
Till thou empale my temples with thy Crown.

Enter Jews the French king, Burbon, and S. Pier, with the Heraulde of
England. K. Jews. Heraulde of England, we are pleased to hear,
What message thou have brought us from thy King,
Prepare thy self, and be aduisde in speech.
English Heraulde, Right gracious and most Christian king of France,
I come not to thy presence vnpreparde
To do the message of my Royal Liege.
Edward the Fourth, of England and of France,
The lawful King, and Lord of Ireland,
Whose puissant magnanimious breast incensde,
Through manifest notorious injuries,
Offered by thee King Jews and thy French,
Against his title to the crown of France,
And right in all these Dukedomes following,
Aquitaine, Aniow, Guyen, A guilesme,
Breathes forth by me the Organe of his speech,
Hostile defiance to thy realm and thee:
And trampling now upon the face of France,
With barbed horse, and valiant armed foot:
Himself the leader of those martial troops,
Bids thee to battle, where and when thou dare,
Except thou make such restitution
And yearly tribute on good hostages,
As may content his just conceived wrath,
And to this message answer I expect.

Lew. Right peremptory is this embassage,
And were my royal Brother of England pleased,
To entertain those kind affections,
Where with we d^e ^brace his amity:
N^olesse were all these thunder-threatning words,
Let heaven (where all our thoughts are registered)
Bear record, with what deep desire of peace,
We shall subscribe to such conditions,
As equity for England shall propound,
If Edward have sustained wrong in France,
Jews was never author of that wrong,
Yet faultles we will make due recompense,
We are assurde that his (...) thoughts
In his mild spirit ^o never mean these wars,
Till Charles Burgundy once our fawning friend,
But now our open foe, and Count S. Paul,
Our subject once and Constable of France,
But now a traitor to our Realm and us,
Were motives to incite him unto Arms,
Which having done will leave him on my life.

Her. The King my master reckes not Burgundy,
And scorns S. Paul that treacherous Constable,
His puissance is sufficient in it self,
To conquer France like his progenitors.

K. L. He shall not need to waste by force of war,
Where peace shall yield him more then he can win:
We covet peace, and we will purchase it
At any rate that reason can demand,
And it is better England join in league
With us his strong, old, open enemy,
Than with those weak and new dissenibling friends,
We do secure us from our open foes,
But trust in friends (though faithles) we repose,
My Lord S. Piere and cousin Burbon speak,
What censure you of Burgundy, and S. Paul?

S. Pi. Dread Lord, it is well known that Burgundy
Made show of tender service to your majesty,
Till by the engine of his flatteries,
He made a breach into your Highness love,
Where entered once and thereof full posse^,
He so abusde that royal excellence,
By getting footing into many towns,
Castles and forts belonging to your Crown,
That now he holds them against your realm and you.

Burb. And Count S. Paul the Constable of France,
Ambitious in that high authority,
^surps the lands and Seigneuries of those
That are true subjects, noble (...) of France,
Your boundless favors did him first suborne,
And now to be your Liegeman he thinks scorn.

Lew. By this conjecture, the unsteady course,
Thy royal master undertakes in France,
And Herald intimate what seruent ^eale,
We have to league with Edward and his English,
Three hundred crowns we give thee for reward,
And of rich Crimson velvet thirty yardes,
In hope thou will unto thy Sovereign tell,
We show thee not one discontented look,
Nor render him one misbeholden word:
But his defiance and his dare to war,
We swallow with the s^pple oil of peace:
Which gentle Herald if thou can procure,
A thousand crown shall justly guerdon thee.

Her. So please it your most sacred Majesty,
To send unto my gra^ious Sovereign,
Equal conditions for the bonds of peace,
And restitution of his injuries,
His temper is not of obdurate malice,
But sweet relenting princely clemency,
Perform your promise of a thousand crowns,
And second me with some fit messenger,
And I will undertake to work your peace.

Lew. By the true honor of a Christian King,
Effect our peace and thou shall have our crowns,
And we will post a Herald after thee,
That shall confirm thy speech, and our designs:
Go Mugeroune, see to this Herald given
The velvet, and three hundred crowns pre^osde,
Farewell good friend, remember our request,
And kindly recommend us to King Edward.
Exeunt English Herald and Mugero^ne. How think you Lords, st^ not more
requisite
To make our peace, then war with Englands power.

Burb. Yes gracious Lord, the wounds are bleeding yet,
That Talbot, Bedford, and King Henry made,
Which peace must cure, or France shall languish still.

S. Piere. Besides (my Liege) by these intestine foes,
The Constable and treacherous Burgundy,
The States in danger if the English stir.

Enter Mugeroune. K. Lew. It Is perilous, and full of doubt my Lords,
We must have peace with England every way,
Who shall be Herald in these high affairs?

Bur. No better man then Monsieur Mugeroune,
Whose wit is sharp, whose eloquence is sound,
His presence gracious, and his courage good,
A gentleman, a scholar, and a soldier,
A complete man for such an Embassage:
Art thou content to be employde Mugeroune,
In this negotiation to King Edward?

Mug. If your most sacred Majesty command,
Your humble vassal Mugeroune shall go.

K. Lew. Gramercies Mugeroune, but thou must assume,
A Heralds habit, and his office both,
To plead our love, and to procure us peace
With English Edward, for the good of France.

Mug. I know the matter and the form my Lord,
Give me my Heralds coat, and I am gone.

K. Lew. Thou art a man composoe for business,
Attend on us for thy instructions.
And other fit supplies for these affairs,
And for thy diligence expect reward.

Exeunt. Enter several ways Burgundy and the Constable of France. Con.
Whither away so fast goes Burgundy?

Bur. Nay rather whither goes the Constable?

Con. Why to King Edward (man) is he not come?
Meanst thou not like wise to go visit him?

Bur. Oh excellent, I know that in thy soul,
Thou know that I do purpose nothing less,
Nay I do know for all thy outward show,
Thou have no meaning once to look on him.
Brother dissembler, leave this coloring,
With him that means as falsely as thy self.

Con. I, but thou know y^ Edward on our letters,
And hoping our assistance when he came,
Did make this purposde voyage into France,
And with his forces is he here arriude,
Trusting that we will keep our word with him.
Now, though we mean it not, yet set a face
Upon the matter, as though we intended
To keep our word with him effectnally.

Bur. And for my better countenance in this case,
My lingering siege at Nuse will serve the turn,
There will I spend the time to disappoynt,
King Edwards hope of my consoyning with him.

Con. And I will keep me still here in S. Quintins,
Pretending mighty matters for his aid,
But not performing any on my word,
The rather Burgundy, because I aim,
At matters which perhaps may cost your head,
All this aside If all hit right to expectation,
In the mean space like a good crafty knave,
That hugs the man, he wishes hanged in heart,
Keep I fair weather still with Burgundy.
Till matters fall out for my purpose fit.
Ici sont mon secrets, beau temps pour moy.

Bur. Ici sont mon secrets, beau temps pour moy.
Are ye so crafty Constable? proceed, proceed,
You quick sharp sighted man, imagine me
Blind, witless, and a fillie Idiot,
That pries not into all your policies,
Who I? no, God does know my simple wit,
Can never sound a judgment of such reach,
As is our cunning Constable of France:
Persuade thy self so still, and when time serves,
And that thou art in most extremity,
Needing my help, then take thou heed of me,
In mean while Sir, you are the only man
That has my heart, has? I, and great reason too,
Thus it befits men of deep reach to do.
Well Constable, you will back again to Nuse,
And not aid English Edward?

Con. What else man?
And keep thee in S. Quintins, so shall we
Smile at King Edwards weak capacity.

Exeunt. Enter King Edward, with Burgundy, Howard, Sellenger, and Scales. K.
Ed. Tell not me Burgundy, it is I am wronged,
And you have dealt like a disloyal Knight.

B. Edward of England, these are unkingly words,

King. He that will do (my Lord) what he should not,
Must and shall hear of me what he would not,
I say again you have deluded me.

Bur. Am I not come according to my word?

K. No Charles of Burgundy, thy word was given
To meet with me in April, now it is August,
The place appointed Calice, not Lorraine,
And thy approach to be with martial troops:
But thou art come, not having in thy train,
So much as Page or Lackie to attend thee,
As who should say thy presence were munition,
And strength enough to answer our expect:
Summer is almost spent, yet nothing done,
And all by dalliance with uncertain hope.

Burg. My forces lay before the city Nuse,
From which I could not rise, but with dishonor,
Unless upon some composition had.

K. Ed. There was no such exception in your letters.
Why smiles Lord Scales?

Scales. My man reports my Lord,
The composition that the Duke there made,
Was mere compulsion: for the citizens
Drove him from thence perforce.

K. Ed. I thought so much:
We should not yet have seen your excellence,
But that your heels were better then your hands.

B. Lord Scales, thou do me wrong to slander me.

K. Ed. Letting that pass, it shall be seen my Lord,
That we are able of our self to claim
Our right in France, without or your assistance,
Or any others, but the help of heaven.

Bur. I make no question of it, yet the Constable
Pressed with no such occasion as I was,
Might have excusde us both if he had pleased.

K. Ed. Accuse him not, your cities as we came,
Were even as much to be condemnde as his,
They gave us leave to lie within the field,
And scarcely would afford us meat for money.
This was small friendship in respect of that,
You had ingagde your honor to perform.
But march we forward as we were determined,
This is S. Quintins, where you say my Lord,
The Constable is ready to receive us.

Bur. So much he signified to me by letter.

K. Ed. Well we shall see his entertainment: forward.
As they march upon the stage, the Lord Scales is struck down, and two
soldiers slain outright, with great shot from the town. Fly to our maine
battle, bid them stand,
There Is treason plotted: speak to me Lord Scales,
Or if there be no power of life remaining,
To utter thy hearts gr^euance, make a sign,
Two of our common soldiers slain beside,
This is hard welcome: but it was not you,
At whom the tatall enginer did aim,
My breast the level was, though you the mark,
In which conspiracy answer me Duke,
Is not thy soul as guilty as the Earls?

Bur. Perish my soul, King Edward, if I knew
Of any such intention: yet I did, and grieve that it
has sped no otherwise.

K. Ed. Howard and Sellinger?
Burgundy steals away. What is there hope of life in none of them?

Ho. The soldiers are both slain outright my Lord,
But the Lord Scales a little is recovered.

K. Ed. Convey his body to our Pauillion,
And let our Surgeons use all diligence
They can devise for safeguard of his life,
Whilst we with all extremity of war,
Go plague S. Quintins: Howard fetch on our powers,
We will not stir a foot, till we have she wne
Just vengeance on the Constable of France.
Oh God, to woo us first to pass the sea,
And at our coming thus to halt with us,
I think the like thereof was never seen.
But where is the Duke?

Scl. Gone as it seems my Lord,
Stepped secretly away, as one that knew
His conscience would accuse him if he staide.

K. Ed. A pair of most dissembling hypocrites,
Is he and this base Earl, on whom I vow,
Leaving King Lewis vnpreiudizde in peace,
To spend the whole measure of my kindled rage,
Their streets shall sweat with their effused blood,
And this bright Sun be darkened with the smoke,
Of smouldring cinders, when their city lies
Buried in ashes of reuengefull fire,
On whose pale superstcies in the stead
Of parchme^t, with my lance I Will draw these lines,
Edward of England left this memory,
In just revenge of hateful treachery.
Enter Howard again. Lord Howard have ye done as I commanded?

How. Our battles are disposde, and on the brow
Of every inferior seruiter my Lord,
You might behold destruction figured,
Greedily thrusting to begin the fight:
But when no longer they might be restrainde,
And that the drum and trumpet both began
To sound wars cheerful harmony: behold,
A flagge of truce upon the walls was hanged,
And forth the gates did issue meekly pac't,
Three men, whereof the Constable is one,
The other two the Gunner and his mate,
By whose gross ouer-sight (as they report)
This sudden chance unwittingly befell.

K. Ed. Bring forth the Constable: the other two,
See them safe guarded, till you know our pleasure.
Enter the Constable and Howard. Now my Lord Howard, how (...) with Scales?

Ho. Well my dread Sovereign, now his wound is dressed,
And by the opinion of the Surgeons,
Its thought he shall not perish by this hurt.

K. Ed. I am the gladder, but unfaithful Earl,
I do not see how yet I can dispense
With thy submission, this was not the welcome,
Your letters sent to England, promisde me.

Con. Right high and mighty Prince cond^mne me not,
That am as innocent in this offense,
As any soldier in the English army,
The fault was in our gunners ignorance,
Who taking you for Lewis King of France,
That likewise is within the cities kenne,
Made that unlucky shot to beat him back,
And not of malice to your majesty,
To knowledge which, I brought the^ with my self,
And thirty thousand crowns within this purse,
Sent by the Burgers to redeem your lack.

K. Ed. Constable of France, we will not sell a drop
Of English blood, for all the gold in France:
But in so much two of our men are slain,
To quit their deaths, those two that came with thee
Shall both be cramde into a Cannons mouth,
And so he shot into the town again:
It is not like but that they knew our Colors,
And of set purpose did this villainy:
Nor can I be persuaded thoroughly,
But that our person was the mark they aimed at;
Yet are we well content to hold you excusde,
Mary our soldiers must be satisfied,
And therefore first shall be distributed,
These crowns amongst the^, then you shall return,
And of your best provision send to us,
Thirty waine load, beside twelve t^ne of wine.
This if the Burgers will subscribe unto,
Their peace is made, otherwise I will proclaim,
Free liberty for all to take the spoil.

Con. Your highness shall be answered presently,
And I will see these articles performed.

K. Ed. Yet one thing more, I will that you my Lord,
Together with the Duke of Burgundy,
Do ere to morrow noone bring all your force,
And toyne with ours, or else we do recant,
And these conditions shall be frustrate.

C. Mine are at hand my Lord, and I will write,
The Duke may like wise be in readiness.

K. Ed. Let him have safe conduct through our army,
And against the morning every leader see,
His troops be furnished, for no longer time,
God willing shall the trial be deferred,
Twixt Lewis and us. What echoing sound is this?

Sell. A gentleman from the K. of France my Lord,
Craves parlance with your excellence.

K. Ed. A gentleman, bring him in.
What news a Gods name from our brother Lewis?

Enter Mugeroune. Mu. Most puissant and most honorable King,
My royal master, Lewis the King of France,
Does greet your Highness with unfeigned love,
Wishing your health, prosperity, and rule,
And thus he says by me. When was it seen,
That ever Lewis pretended hurt to England,
Either by close conspirators sent over,
To undermine your state; or openly,
By taking arms, with purpose to invade?
Nay when was it, that Lewis was ever heard,
So much as to detract from Edwards name?
But still has done him all his due of speech,
By blazing to the world his high deserts,
Of wisdom, valor, and his heroicke birth:
Whence is it then that Edward is incensoe,
To render hate for love, for amity stern war?
Not of himself we know: but by the means
Of some infectious counsel, that like mud,
Would spoil the pure temper of his noble mind,
It is the Duke, and that pernicious rebel,
Earl of S. Paul, have set abroach these wars,
Who of themselves, unable to proceed,
Would make your Grace the instrument of wrong,
And when you have done what you can for them,
You shall be sure of nothing but of this,
Still to be doubled and dissembled with.
But if it might seem gracious in your eye,
To cast off these despisde consederates,
Unfit companions for so great a Prince,
And join in league with Lewis my royal master,
Him shall you find as willing as of power,
To do your Grace all offices of love:
And what commodity may spring thereby,
To both the Realms, your Grace is wise enough,
Without my rude suggestions to imagine,
Besides, much bloodshed for this present time,
Will be prevented when two such personages,
Shall meet together to shake hands in peace,
And not with shock of Lance and Curtelaxe,
That Lewis is willing, I am his substitute,
And he himself in person if you please,
Not far from hence will signify as much.

K. Ed. Sir, withdra^ and give us leave a while,
To take aduisement of our Counselors,
What say ye Lords unto this proffered truce?

Ho. In my conceit let it not be slipped my Lord.

Sell. Wilt not be dishonor having landed
So great an army in these parts of France,
And not to fight before we do return:

Ho. How can it when the enemy submits,
And of himself makes tender of allegiance?

Sell. I that's the question whether he will yield,
And do King Edward fealty or no.

Ed. What talk ye Lords? he shall subscribe to that,
Or no conditions I Will accept at all.

Ho. Let him be bound my Lord to pay your Grace,
Toward your expenses, since your coming over,
Seauentie fine thousand crowns of the Sun,
And yearly after fifty thousand more,
During your life, with homage there withal,
That he does hold his royalty from you,
And take his offer, twill not beamisse.

Ed. It shall be so, draw you the articles,
And Sellinger call forth the messenger,
Bring with thee too a cup of massy gold,
And bid the bearer of our privy purse,
J^lose therein a hundred English Kyals,
Friend we do accept thy masters League,
With no less firm affection then he craves,
If he will meet us here betwixt our tents,
It shall on both sides be confirmde by oath,
On this condition that he will subscribe,
To certain Articles shall be proposde,
And so thou have thy answer, to requite
Thy pains herein, we give to thee this cup.

Her. Health and ^crease of honor wait on Edward.

Ed. Lord Howard bring the Frenchman on his way.

Ed. King Lewis is one that never was precise:
But now Lord Howard and Tom Sellinger,
There is a task remains for you to do,
And that is this, you two shall be disguisde,
And one of you ^yre to Burgundy,
The other to the Constable of France,
Where you shall learn in secret if you can,
If they intend to meet us here to morrow,
Or how they take this our accord with France,
Somewhat it gives me you will bring from thence
Worthy the noting, will you undertake it?

Sell. With all my heart my L. I am for Burgun^e.

How. And I am for the Constable of France.

Exeunt. Ed. Make speed again, what news?

Mest. The king of France my L. attended royally,
Is marching hitherward to meet your Grace.

Ed. He shall be welcome, have thou drawn the articles?

Mess. Yes my dread Sovereign.

Ed. Go, call forth our train,
We may receive him with like majesty.

Enter certain Noblemen and Soldiers with a Drum, they march about the
stage, then enter king Lewis, and his train, and meet with King Edward, the
Kings embrace. K. Lewis. My princely brother, we are grieved much,
To think you have been at so great a charge,
And toyld your royal self so far from home,
Upon the unconstant promise of those men,
That both bissemble with your Grace and me.

K. Ed. Brother of France, you might condenme us rightly,
Not only of great wrong and toil sustaind,
But of exceeding solly, if incited,
We had presumde to enter these Dominions,
Upon no other reason then the word,
And weak assistance of the Earl S. Paul,
Or Burgundies persuasion: it is our right,
That wings the body of composed war,
And though we listened to their ^atteries,
Yet so we shapte the course of our affairs,
As of our self we might be able found,
Without the trusting to a broken staff.

Lew. I know your majesty had more discretion,
But this is not the occasion of our meeting,
If you be pleased to entertain a peace,
My kingly brother in the sight of these,
And of the al-discouering eye of beauen,
Let us embrace, for as my life I swear,
I tender England and your happiness.

K. Ed. The like do I by you and warlike France:
But princely brother ere this knot be knit,
There are some few conditions to be signde,
That done, I am as ready as your self.

K. Lew. Fair brother, let us hear them what they be.

K. Ed. Herald repeat the articles.

Her. First it is couenanted that Lewis King of France, according to the
custom of his predecessors, shall do homage to King Edward, King of England,
as his Sovereign and true heir to all the Dominions of France.


Burb. How as his Sovereign? that were to depose
And quite bereave him of his Diadem,
Will kingly Lewis stoop to such vassallage?

K. Ed. Burbon and if he will not let him choose.

K. Lew. Brother have patience, Burbon seal your lips,
And interrupt not these high consequents.
Forward Herald, what is else demanded?

Her. Secondly it is couenanted that Lewis King of France, shall pay unto
Edward King of England, immediately upon the agreement betwixt their Majesty's,
seauentie five thousand crowns of the sun, toward the charge King Edward
has been at since his arrival in these parts of France.


Burb. Mort dieu, heel neither leave him Crown nor coin.

K. Lew. Burbon I say be silent, Herald read on.

Her. Thirdly and lastly, it is couenanted, that over and beside those
seauentie five thousand crowns of the sun, now presently to be paid, Lewis
King of France shall yearly hereafter, during the life of Edward King of
England, pay fifty thousand crowns more without fraud or guile, to be
tendered at his Majesty's Castle, commonly called the Tower of London.


Burb. Nay bind him that he bring his Lordship a couple of
Capons too every year beside.
Here is a peace indeed far worse then war.

K. Ed. Brother of France are you resolude to do,
According as you hear the covenants drawn?

K. Lew. Brother of England, mount your royal throne,
For subjects weal, and glory of my God,
And to deal justly with the world beside,
Knowing your title to be lineall,
From the great Edward of that name the third,
Your predecessor, thus I do resign,
Giving my Crown and Scepter to your hand,
As an obedient Liegeman to your Grace.

K Ed. The same do I deliver back again,
With as large interest as you had before.
Now for the other covenants.

K. Lew. Those my Lord,
Shall likewise be performde with expedition,
And ever after, as you have prescribde,
The yearly pension shall be truly paid.

Her. Swear on this book King Lewis so help you God,
You mean no otherwise then you have said.

K. Lew. So help me God as I dissemble not.

K. Ed. And so help he me as I entend to keep,
Unfeigned league and truce with noble France:
And kingly brother now to consummate,
This happy day feast in our royal tent,
English and French are one, so it is meant.

Exeunt. Enter at one door, Burgundy chafing, with him Sellinger disguised
like a soldier; at another the Constable of France, with him Howard in the
like disguise. Bur. A peace concluded, say thou? is it not so?

Sell. My Lord I do assure you it is so.

Con. And thou affirmst the like? say, do thou not?

How. I do my Lord, and that for certainty.

Bur. I have found it now, the villain Constable
Has secretly with Edward thus compact,
To join our King and him in amity,
And thereby doubtless got into his hands,
Such lands and Dukedomes as I aimed at,
And leaves me disappointed in my hope,
A plague upon such crastie cosening,
aside. Now shall I be a mark for them to aim at,
And that bile ^ane to triumph in my toil.

Con. (...) so, for it can be no otherwise,
Burgundy has been privy to this plot,
Conspiros with Lewis and the English King,
To save (...) ^ne stake, and assure himself,
Of all those Seigneuries I hoped for,
And thereupon this close peace is contriude,
Now must the Constable be as a butte,
(...) all their bullets to be leueld at,
Hell and hot vengeance light on Burgundle,
For this his subtle secret villainy.

Bur. Well fellow for thy pains take that,
Leave me alone, for I am much displeasoe.

to Sell. Con. And get thee gone my friend, there is for thy pains, to Howard.
So leave me to my self.

Sell. Fare ye well Sir, I hope I have pepperd ye.

How. And so I think have I my Constable.

Exeunt Sellin. and How. Bur. Now Constable, this peace, this peace,
What think ye of it man?

Con. Nay rather what thinks Burgundy?

Bur. I think he that did contriue the same,
Was little less then a dissembling villain.

Con. Dog bite thy self, come on, come on,
Have not you played John for the King,
To save your self Sir?

Bur. I, art thou good at that?
Adieu Sir, I may chance to hit you pat.

Exit. Con. You may Sir, I perhaps may be before ye,
And for this cunning through the nose to bore ye.

Exeunt. Enter King Edward, King Lewis, Howard, Sellinger, and their train. K.
Ed. So Sellinger, we then perceive by thee
The Duke is passing angry at our league?

Sell. I, my dread Lord beyond comparison,
Like a mad dog snatching at every one
That passes by: shall I but show you how,
And act the manner of his tragic fury?

K. No stay a while, me thought I heard thee say,
They meant to greet us by their messengers.

Sell. They did my Lord.

King. What and the Constable too?

How. My Sovereign yes.

King. But how t^ke he the news?

How. Faith even as discontented as might be,
But being a more deep melancholiste,
And sullenner of temper then the Duke,
He chawes his malice, fumes and frothes at mouth,
Uttering but little more then what we gather
By his disturbed looks and riueld front,
Saving that now and then his boiling passion,
Damnd up as in a surnace, finding vent
Breaks through his seuerd lips into short pusses,
And then he mumbles forth a word or two,
As does a toothles Monk when he is at mattens.

K. Oh it was sport alone to note their carriage,

Se. Sport my Lord? will you but hear me speak,
And if I do not weary you with laughter,
Nere trust Tom Sellinger more upon his word.

Sound a Trumpet. K. I pray thee peace, by this it should appear
One of their messengers is come, go see,
Upon my life we shall have some devise,
Of new dissimulation how now Tom?

Sell. It Is as your highness did suppose my Lord,
^ere is a messenger from Burgundy.

King. Excellent good, admit him presently,
And brother of France, let me entreat your grace
To stand aside a little in my tent,
Least finding us together, he refrain,
To tell the message he is sent about,
So sure I am persuaded we shall find
Some notable piece of knauerie set a foot.

K. L. With all my heart, urge him speak loud enough,
That I my Lord may understand him too.

Exit. Enter the Lord of Conte. K. Ed. Fear not, I have the method in my mind:
What it is you my Lord of Conte^ welcome.
How does the valiant Duke, in health I hope?

Co. In health (my Lord) of body, though in mind
Somewhat distemperd, that your Grace has ioind
In league with his professed enemy.

K. E. How say you y^ my Lord? pray you speak out,
For I of late, by reason of a cold,
Am somewhat thick of hearing.

Con. Thus my Lord,
Your Grace demanded if the Duke were well,
I answer you, he is in health of body,
Though inwardly in mind somewhat perplexed,
That you without his knowledge have taken truce
With childish Jews that hartlesse King of France.

K. Ed. With whom I pray y^ a little louder sir.

C. With childish Jews that hartlesse K. of France.

K. Ed. I now do understand you, is it that
He takes unkindly? why if he had come
With his expected forces as he promised,
I had been still incapable of peace,
But he deceiving me, the fault was his.

Con. No my good Lord, the fault was not in him,
But in that lewd pernicious counterfeit,
That crafty Fore the Constable of France,
Who counseld him to keep him at his siege,
Saying it would be more dishonorable
To rise from thence, then any way profitable,
To meet your Majesty, beside my Lord,
It has bin proved since, how much the Constable
Hates your proceedings, by that wilful shot,
Was made against you from S. Quintins walls,
Which though he seemde to color with fair speech,
The truth is, they did level at your self,
And grieved when they heard you were not slain.

K. Ed. May I be bold to credit your report?

Con. The Duke upon his honor bad me say,
That it was true, and there withal quoth he,
Tell noble Edward if he will recant,
And fall from Jews again, knowing it is
More for his dignity to be sole King,
And conquer France as did his ancestors,
Then take a fee, and so be satisfied,
That I am ready with twelve thousand soldiers
All well appointed, and not only will,
Deliver him the Constable of France,
That he may punish him as he sees good,
But seat him in the threne imperial,
Which now another basely does usurp,

K. E. Speak that again, I heard not your last words

Con. But seat you in the throne imperial,
Which now another basely does usurp.

King. I thank his honor for his good regard,
Pleases you stay till we have pausde upon it,
And you shall have our answer to the Duke,
Tom Sellinger receive him to your tent,
And let him taste a cup of Drleance wine,
Now my kingly brother, have you heard this news?

K. L. So plainly my Lord, that I scarce held my self,
From stepping forth, hearing my royal name,
So much prophande and slubberd as it was,
But I do weigh the person like himself
From whence it came, a sly dissembler,
And spite my anger I was forced sometime,
To smile to think the Duke does hang his friend,
Behind his back, whom to his face he smothes.

K. E. But we shall have far better sport anon:
Howard tells me that another messenger,
is come in Post-bast from the Constable,
As you have begun with patience hear the re^.

K. Le. No more ado, i will to my place again,
Remember that you still be deaf my Lord,

K. E. I warrant you, Howard, call in the messenger.

Enter the messenger from the Constable. Mes. Health to the victorious King of
England:

K. E. Tell him he must strain out his voice alowd,
For I am somewhat deaf, and cannot hear.

How. His Majesty requests you to speak out,
Because his hearing is of late decade.

Mes. The worthy Earl S. Paul.

King. Ed. Come near me.

Mes. The worthy Earl S. Paul greets noble Edwa.
And gives your grace to understand by me,
That whereas Charles that painted sepulcher,
And most disloyal Duke of Burgundy,
Has but usurped the habit of a friend,
Being in heart your deadly enemy,
As well appears in his false breach of promise,
And that whereas he never meant himself,
To send you aid, but likewise was the means,
To binder my Lords well affected duty,
Alleging you desirde his company
But that you might betray him to his King,
Beside whereas it will be proud my Lord,
That he did hire the Gunner of S. Quintins,
For a large sum of money, to discharge
Three several pieces of great Ordenance,
Upon your coming to that cursed town,
To slay your Majesty: in which regard
If it will please you to revoke from France.
And think of Burgundy as he deserves,
The Duke with expedition bad me say,
That he would put the Earl into your hands.
Whereby you might revenge his treacherous purpose
And aid you too with twice flue thousand men,
And seat you like a conqueror in France,

K. Ed. Can it seem possible that two such friends,
So firmly knit together as they were,
Should on a sudden now be such great soes^

M. The Earl my Lord could never abide ye Duke
Since his last treason against your sacred person,
Before Saint Quintins came to open light.

K. Was that the cause of their dissension the^

Mes. It was my lord.

K. Ed. Well I will think vpont,
And you shall have our answer by and by,
Cousin Howard take him aside,
But let him be kept from the others sight.

Ho. Sir will you walk in, my Lord will take advise,
And so dispatch you back again unto the Earl,

K. Le. Here Is bying of billanie who shall have all,
Fraud with deceit, deceit with fraud outfacde,
I would the devil were there to cry swoope-stake,
But how intends your Grace to deal with them?

K. Ed. Faith in their kind, I am the steel you see,
Against the which their envy being struck,
The Sparkles of hypocriste fly forth,
T were not amiss to quench them in their blood.

Enter another messenger to the king of France with letters. Mes. My Lord here is
letters to your Majesty, One from the Duke of Burgundy, the other from the
Constable,


K. L. More villainy, a thousand crowns to nothing:

K. p. Can there be more then is already broacht,
We thinks they have already done so well,
As this may scrue to bring them both to hell.

K. L. No, no, they are indifferently well laden,
But yet their fraughte, not full, see other ware,
Other provision to prepare their way,
The very same (my Lord) which they pretend,
In love to you against my life and crown,
The same they undertake to do for me
Against your safety, urging if I please,
That they will join their forces both with mine,
And in your back return to Calice, cut the throats
Of you and all your soldiers.

K. Ed. Oh damnable.
But that I see it figurde in these lines,
I would have sworn there had bin nothing left,
For their pernicious brain to work upon.

K. L. A traitor is like, a boldfacde hypocrite,
That never will be brought unto a nonplus,
So long as he has liberty to speak.

K. Ed. The way to cure them, is to cut them off,
Call forth their messengers once more to us,

How. Both of them my Lord?

K. Ed. Yes, both together.
We Will see if they have grace to blush or no,
At that their masters shame now to attempt.

Enter both the Messengers. Con. What is his Majesty of France so near?
And Mounsier Rosse the Earls secretary?
I fear some hurt depends upon his presence,

M. How comes it that I see the french King here?
I and the Lord of County too me thinks,
Pray God our message be not made a scorn.

K. E. You told me that you came from earl S. Paul.

Mes. I did my Lord, and therein fabled not.

K. Ed. You told me too of many kind indeyour^
Which he intended for our benefit?

Mes. No more then he is willing to perform.

K. Ed. Know you his handwriting if you seete?

Mes. I do my Lord.

K. Ed. Is this his hand or no^:

Mes. I cannot say but that it is his hand.

K. Ed. How comes it then that underneath his hand
My death is sought, when you that are his mouth,
Tune to our ears a quite contrary tale?
The like read you decyphred in this paper,
Concerning treacherous wavering Burgundy,
Unless you grant they can divide themselves,
And of two shapes become four substances,
How is it I should have their knightly aid,
And yet by them be utterly destroide?

K. L. And I to be protected by their means,
And yet they shall conspire against my life.

K. Ed. What call you this, but vile hypocrisy?

K. L. Nay pesant-like unheard of treachery

Con. My Lord vpbraid not me with this offense:
I do protest I knew of no such letters.
Nor any other intention of the Duke,
More then before was vttred in my message.

Sell. Will you be halting too before a creeple?
Do you not remember what they were,
That first did certify the Duke of truce,
Betwixt the renowned Edward and the French?

Co. Yes they were two soldiers, what of that?

Sell. Those soldiers were this Gentleman and I,
Where we did hear ye foul mouthde Duke exclaim
Against our noble Sovereign and this Prince,
And rorde and bellowed like a parish bull,
And that in hearing both of you and him,
His words so please my Lord I can repeat,
As he did speak them at that very time.

K. Ed. Well they are messengers, and for that cause
We are content to bear with their amiss,
But keep them safe, and let them not return,
To carry tales unto those counterfeits,
Until you have them both as fast insnarde,
To compass which the better, brother of France,
Five thousand of our soldiers here we leave,
To be imployde in service to that end,
The rest with us to England shall return.

Exit. Enter Chorus. Chapter King Edward is returned home to England,
And Jews King of France soon afterward,
Surprised both his subtle enemies,
Rewarding them with traitorous recompense.
Now do we draw the curtain of our Scene,
To speak of Shore and his fair wife again,
With other matters thereupon depending,
You must imagine since you saw him last
Preparde for travail, he has bin abroad,
And seen the sundry fashions of the world,
Ulysses like, his countries love at length,
Hoping his wives death, and to see his friends,
Such as did sorrow for his great mishaps,
Come home is he, but so unluckily,
As he is like to loose his life thereby:
His and her fortunes shall we now pursue,
Gracde with your gentle sufferance and view.

Exeunt. Enter mistress Shore with Iockie her man, and some attendants more,
and is met by sir Robert Brackenburie. Jane Shore. Have ye bestowde our small
benevolence,
On the poor prisoners in the common Jail,
Of the white Lion and the Kings bench?

Iockie. Yes forsooth?

Jane. What prisons this?

Iockie. The Marshalsea for sooth.

Enter sir Robert Brackenburie. Bra. Well met fair Lady, in the happiest time,
And choyse^ place that my desire could wish,
Without offense, where have ye been this way?

Ia. To take the air here in Saint Georges field,
Sir Robert Brackenburie, and to visit some
Poor patients that cannot visit me^.

Bra. Are you a physician?

Jane. I a simple one.

Bra. What disease cure ye?

Jane. Faith none perfectly,
My physic does but mittigate the pain^
A little while, and then it comes again.

Bra. Sweet mistress Shore, I understand ye not.

Jane. Master lieutenant I believe you well.

Iockie. Good faith Sir Robert brobenbellie, may maistres speekes deftly and
truly, for she hes been till see thore that cannot come till see her: and
theyes peatients perforce. The prisoners man in the twea prisons. And she hes
gynne tham her siller and her geere till bay tham fude.


Bra. Gramercies Iockie thou resolust my doubt.
A comfort ministering kind physician,
That once a week in her own person visits,
The prisoners and the poor in Hospitalles,
In London or near London every way,
Whose purse is open to the hungry soul,
Whose pittious heart save many a tall man's life.

Jane. Peace good sir Robert, it is not worthy praise,
Nor yet worth thanks, that is of duty done,
For you know well, the world does know too well,
That all the coals of my poor charity,
Cannot consume the scandal of my name,
What remedy? well, tell me gentle knight,
What meant your kind salute and gentle speech,
At our first meetin^, when you seemde to bless
The time and place of our encounter here?

Bra. Lady there lies here prisonde in the Marshalsea,
A gentleman of good parents and good descent.
My dear near kinsman, Captain Harrie Stranguidge,
As tall a skillful Nauigator tried,
As ere set foot in any ship at sea,
Whose luck it was to take a prize of France,
As he from Rochell was for London bound:
For which (except his pardon be obtainde,
By some especial favorite of the King).
He and his crew, a company of proper men,
Are sure to die, because it was since the League.

Jane. Let me see him and all his company.

Bra. Keeper bring forth the Captain and his crew.

Enter Keeper, Stranguidge, Shore disguisde, and three more fettered. Iockie.
Now say oath diell, that sike bonnie men sud be hampert like plue Iades, weas me
for ye good Lads.


Bra. I Cousin Harrie, this is mistress Shore,
Pearelesse in Court, for beauty, bounty, pity.

Jane viewes them all. And if she can not save thee, thou must die.

Stran. Will she if she can?

Bra. I Cousin Stranguidge I.

Sho. O torment worse then death to see her face,
That causde her shame, and my unjust disgrace,
Sho. aside O that our mutual eyes were, Basilisks,
To kill each other at his enteruiew,

Bra. How like ye him Lady? you have viewd him well?

Jane. I pity him, and that same proper man,
That turns his back, ashamde of this distress.

Sho. Ashamde of thee, cause of my heaviness?

Ia. And all the rest, oh were the king returnde,
There might be hope, but ere his coming home,
They may be tried, condemnd, and iudgde, and dead.

Sho. I am condemnd by sentence of vefame,
aside. O were I dead I might not see my shame.

Bra. Your credit Lady may prolong their trial,
What Judge is he that will give you denial:

Ia. I Will rack my credit, and will lanch my crowns,
To save their lives, if they have done no murder.

aside. Sh. O thou have cracked thy credit with a crown.
And murdered me poor Matthew Shore alive.

Stran. Fair Lady, we did shed no drop of blood
Nor cast one Frenchman over board, and yet,
Because the league was made before the fact,
Which we poor sea men God knows never heard:
We doubt our lives, yea though we should restore
Treble the value that we took, and more.
It Was lawful prize when I put out to sea,
And warranted in my commission.
The kings are since combinde in amity,
(Long may it last) and I unwittingly
Have took a Frenchman since the truce was tanc
And if I die, via, one day I must.
And God will pardon all my sins I trust,
My grief will be for these poor harmless men,
Who thought my warrant might suborne the deed,
Chiefly that Gentleman that stands sadly there,
Who on (my soul) was but a passenger.

Jane. Well Captain Stranguidge, were the king at home,
I could say more.

Stran. Lady, he is come a shore.
Last night at Dover, my boy came from thence,
And saw his highness land.

Jane. Then courage sirs
I Will use my fairest means to save your lives,
In the mean season spend that for my sake.

casts her purse. Enter Lord Marquess Dorset, and claps her on the shoulder.
Mar. By your leave mistress Shore, I have taken pain^,
To find you out, come you must go with me.

Jane. Whither my Lord?

Mar. Unto the Queen my mother.

Jane. Good my Lord Marquess Dorset wrong me not.

Mar. I can not wrong thee as thou wrongst my mother,
I Will bring thee to her let her use her pleasure.

Jane. Against my will I wrong her good my Lord,
Yet am ashamde to see her majesty.
Sweet Lord excuse me, say ye saw me not.

Mar. Shall I delude my mother for a whore?
No mistress Shore ye must go to the Queen.

Jane. Must I my Lord? what will she do to me?
Use violence on me now the kings away?
Alas my Lord, behold this shower of tears,
Which kind King Edward would compassionate,
Bring me not to her, she will slit my nose.
Or mark my face, or spurn me unto death.
Look on me Lord, can ye find in your heart?
To have me spoild that never thought you harm?
O rather with your rapier run me through,
Then carry me to the displeased Queen.

Shore. O had thou never broke thy how to me
From fear and wrong had I defended thee.

Mar. I am inexorable, therefore arise,
And go with me, what rascal crew is this,
Mistress Shoares suitors, such slaves make her proud,
What sir Robert Brackenburie you a Shorist too?

Bra. No Shorist, but to save my Cosins life.

Mar. Then i will be hangde if he escape for this,
The rather for your means to mistress Shore.
My mother can do nothing, this whore all,
Come away minion you shall prate no more.

Ia. Pray for me friends and I will pray for you,
God send you better hap then I expect,
Go to my lodging you, and if I perish,
Take what is there in lieu of your true service.

Ioc. Na a may sale ayse nere forsake my good maistresse,
Till aye hea seen tha worst that spite can du her.

Exeunt Marquess, and Jane and theirs. Sho. For all the wrong that thou have
done to me,
They should not hurt thee yet if I were free.

Bra. See cousin Stranguidge how the case is changde,
She that should help thee can not help her self.

Stran. What remedy? the God of heaven helps all.
What say ye mates? our hope of life is dashed,
Now none but God, lets put our trust in him,
And cuerie man repent him of his sin,
And as together we have liu'de like men,
So like tall men together let us die:
The best is if we die for this offense,
Our ignorance shall plead our innocence,

Keep. Your meat is ready (Captain) you must in.

Stran. Must I? I will: Cousin what will you do?

Bra. Visit you soon, but now I will to Court
To see what shall become of mistress Shore.

Stran. God speed ye well.

Keep. Come sir will you go in?

Sho. I Will eat no meat, give me leave to walk here,
Am I now left alone? no millions
Of miseries attend me every where:
Ah Matthew Shore, how does all seeing heaven,
Punish some sin, from thy blind conscience hid?
Inflicting pame where all thy pleasure was,
And by my wife came all these woes to pass,
She falsde her faith, and brake her wedlocks band,
Her honor falue, how could my credit stand?
Yet will not I poor Jane on thee exclaim,
Though guilty thou, I guiltless suffer shame.
I left this land too little for my grief,
Returning, am accounted as a these,
Who in that ship came but a passenger,
To see my friends, hoping the death of her,
At fight of whom some sparks of former love,
(Hid in affections ashes) pity move,
Kindling compassion in my broken heart,
That bleeds to think on her ensuing smart.
O see weak women's imperfections,
That leave their husbands safe protections,
Hazarding all on strangers flatteries,
Whose (...) ala^d, leaves them to miseries,
See what dishonor breach of wedlock brings,
Which is not safe even in the arms of kings:
Thus do I Jane lament thy present state,
Wishing my tears thy torments might abate.

Exit. Enter the Queen, Marquess Dorset leading mistrls Shore, who falls
down on her knees before the Queen fearful and weeping. Qu. Now (as I am a
Queen) a goodly creature,
Son how was she attended where you found her?

Mar. Madame I found her at the Marshalsea,
Going to visit the poor prisoners,
As she came by, having been to take the air,
And there the keeper told me she ost deals
Such bounteous alms as seldom has been seen.

Qu. Now before God, she would make a gallant Queen,
But good son Dorset stand aside a while.
God save your maiestiomy my Lady Shore,
My Lady Shore said I? Oh blasphemy,
To wrong your title with a Ladies name,
Queen Shoore, nay rather Empress Shore,
God save your grace, your majesty, your highness
Lord I want titles, you must pardon me:
What? you kneel there, king Edwards bedfellow
And I your subject sit? sie, sie for shame.
Come take your place, and ^e kneel where you do,
I may take your place, you have taken mine,
Good Lord that you will so debase your self:
I am sure you are our sister Queen at least.
Nay that you are, then let us sit together.

Jane. Great Queen, yet hear me, if my sin committed,
Have not stopped up all passage to your mercy,
To tell y^ wrongs that I have done your highness,
Might make revenge exceed extremity,
Oh had I words or tongue to utter it,
To plead my woman's weakness, and his strength,
That was the only worker of my fall.
Even innocence her self would blush for shame,
Once to be namde or spoken of in this,
Let them expect for mercy whose offense,
May but be called sin, oh mine is more,
Prostrate as earth, before your highness feet,
Inflict what torments you shall think most meet.

Ma. Spurn the whore (mother) tear those enticing eyes,
That robbed you of King Edwards dearest love.
Mangle those locks, the baits to his desires,
Let me come to her, you but stand and talk,
As if revenge consisted but in words.

Qu. Son stand aloof, and do not trouble me,
Alas poor soul, as much ado have I,
aside. To for bear tears to keep her company.
Yet once more will I to my former humor.
Why as I am, think that thou were a Queen,
And I as thou should wrong thy princely bed,
And win the king thy husband, as thou mine:
Would it not sting thy soul? Or if that I
Being a Queen, while y^ did love thy husband:
Should but have done as thou have done to me,
Would it not grieve thee? yes I warrant thee.
There Is not the meanest woman that does live,
But if she like and love her husband well,
She had rather feel his warm l^mmes in her bed
Then see him in the arms of any Queen,
You are flesh and blood as we, and we as you,
And all alike in our affections,
Though maiestic makes us the more ambitious.
What it is to fall into so great a hand,
Knowledge might teach thee. There was once a king
Henry the second, who did keep his lemman,
Cag'de up at Woodstocke in a Labyrinth,
His Queen yet got a trick to find her out,
And how she used her, I am sure thou have heard,
Thou art not mewde up in some secret place,
But kept in Court here underneath my nose,
Now in the absence of my Lord the King,
Have I not time most fitting for revenge?
Fair Rosamond, she a pure virgin was,
Until the King seduc'de her to his will.
She wronged but one bed, only the angry Queens,
But thou have wronged two, mine and thy husbands,
Be thine own Judge, and now in justice see,
What due revenge I ought to take on thee.

Ia. Even what you will (great Queen) here do I lie,
Humble and prostrate at your Highness feet,
Inflict on me what may revenge your wrong,
Was never lamb abode more patiently,
Then I will do. Call all your griefs to mind,
And do even what you will, or how likes you,
I will not stir, I will not shrike or cry,
Be it torture poison, any punishment,
Was never Done, or Turtle more submisse,
Then I will be unto your chastisement.

M. Fetched I her for this? mother let me come to her,
And what compassion will not suffer you
To d^ to her, refer the same to me.

Qu. Touch her not son, upon thy life I charge thee,
But keep off still, if thou will have my love.
Exit. Ma. I am glad to hear ye are so well resolu'de,
To bear the burden of my just displeasure.
She draws forth a knife, and making as though she meant to spoil her face,
runs to her, and falling on her knees, embraces and kisses her, casting away
the knife. Thus then I Will do, alas poor soul,
Shall I weep with thee? in says poor heart I will,
Be of good comfort, thou shall have no harm,
But if that kisses have the power to kill thee,
Thus, thus, and thus, a thousand times i will stab thee.
Jane I forgive thee: what fort is so strong,
But with be sieging he will batter it?
Weep not (sweet Jane) alas I know thy sex,
Touched with the selfsame weakness that thou art,
And if my state had been as mean as thine,
And such a beauty to allure his eye,
(Though I may promise much to mine own strength)
What might have hapt to me, I cannot tell.
Nay fear not, for I speak it with my heart,
And in thy sorrow truly bear a part.

Ia. Most high and mighty Queen, may I believe
There can be found such mercy in a woman,
And in a Queen, more then in a wife,
So deeply wronged as I have wronged you?
In this bright crystal myrror of your mercy,
I see the greatness of my sin the more,
And makes my fault more odious in mine eyes,
Your princely pity now does wound me more,
Then all your threatenings ever did before.

Q. Rise my sweet Jane, I say thou shall not kneel,
Oh God for bid, that Edwards Queen should hate
Her, whom she knows he both so dearly love,
My love to her, may purchase me his love.
Jane, speak well unto the King of me and mine,
Remember not my sons ore-hastie speech,
Thou art my sister, and I love thee so.
I know thou may do much with my dear Lord,
Speak well of us to him in any case,
And I and mine will love and cherish thee.

Jane. All I can do is all too little too,
Tut to requite the least part of this grace,
The dearest thoughts that harbor in this breast,
Shall in your service only be expressed.

Enter King Edward angerly, his Lords following, and sir Robert Brackenburie.
King. What is my Jane with her^ it is too true,
See where she has her down upon her knees.
Why how now Besse? what, will ye wrong my Jane?
Come hither love, what has she done to thee?

Jane falls on her Knees to the King. Jane. Oh royal Edward, love, love, thy
beauteous Queen,
The only perfect myrrour of her kind,
For all the thoysest virtues can be nam'de.
Oh let not my bewitching looks withdraw
Your dear affections from yo^ deerer Queen,
But to requite the grace that she has shown,
To me the worthless creature on this earth,
To banish me the Court immediately,
Great King let me ^t beg one boon of thee,
That Shoares wife nere do her more injury.

As Jane kneeles on one side the king, so the Queen steps and kneeles on the
other. Qu. Nay then i will beg against her royal Edward,
Love thy Jane still, nay more if more may be,
kissing her. And this is all the harm that at my hands
She shall endure for it, Oh where my Edward loves,
It ill beseemes his Queen to grudge thereat.

King. Say thou me so Besse, on my kingly word,
Edward will honor thee in heart for this:
But trust me Besse, I greatly was asraid,
I should not find ye in so good a tune,
How now, what would our Constable of the Tower?

Bra. The Queen and ^strts Shore do know my suit.

Qu. It is for Stranguidge and his men at sea,
Edward needs must you pardon them.

King. Have I not vowed the contrary already?
Dishonor me when I have made a league?
My word is past, and they shall suffer death,
Or neuer^re let me see France again.

Jane. Why there is one was but a passenger.
Shall he die too?

King. Pass me no passage Jane, fuc^ he in company, he dies for company.


Qu. Good Jane entreat for them.

Jane. Come Edward, I must not take this answer.
Needs must I have some grace for Stranguidge.

King. Why Jane, have I not denide my Queens
Yet what is it Jane I would deny to thee?
I pretheel / Brackenkutie be not thou displeasde,
My word is past, not one of them shall live,
One go and see them forth with sent to death.

Exeunt. Enter Clarence, Gloucester, and Shaw. Glost. I cannot see this prophecy
you speak of,
Should any way so much displease the ^ing,
And yet I promise you good Brother Clarence,
It Is such a letter as concerns us both,
That G. should put away King Edwards children,
And sit upon his throne? that G. should? well.

Cla. God bless the king, and th^se two sweet young Princes.

Glo. Amen good brother Clarence:

Shaw. Amen.

Glo. And send them all to heaven shortly I beseech him.

Cla. The Kings much troubled in his sickness with it.

Glo. I promise you he is, and very much,
But Doctor Shaw, who prophested that G. should be so sadly
ominious to us?

Shaw. My Lord of Gloucester, I recefude the same
From old Friar Anselme of S. Bartholmewes.

Glo. A great learned man he was, and as I have heard,
Has prophested of very many things,
I promise you it troubles me,
I hope in me his propheste is true.

aside. Cla. And so it does me, I tell you brother Gloucester.

Glo. I am sure it does, for look you brother Clarence,
We know not how his Highness will apply it,
We are but two, your self my Lord and I,
Should the young Princes fail, which God defend.

Cla. Which God defend.

D. Shaw. Which God defend.

Glo. aside. But they should be cut off: Amen, Amen.
You brother first, and should your issue fail,
Poor I am next, the youngest of the three.
But how far I am from a thought of that,
Heaven witness with me, that I wish you dead.

aside. Cla. Brother I durst be sworn.

Glo. God bless you al, and take you to him if it be his will.
Now brother, this prophesse of G. troubling the King,
He may as well apply it unto Gloucester,
My Dukedomes name, if he be fealfous,
As unto George your ^ame, good brother Clarence,
God help, God help: ^faith it troubles me,
You would not think how: aside. that any of you live.

Cla. It cannot thuse: how innocent I am,
And how unspotted are my loyal thoughts
Unto his Highness, and those sweet young Princes,
God be my record.

Glo. Who you, I, I durst answer for you,
That I shall cut you off ere it be long.
aside. But reverend Doctor, you can only tell,
Being his Highness Confessor, how he takes it.
aside to Shaw. Shaw, you know my mind, a villain like my self.

Shaw. My Lord of Clarence, I must tell your Lord,
His Highness is much troubled in his sickness
With this same prophecy of G. Who is this G?
Often times he will demand, then will he sigh,
And name his brother George, your self my Lord,
And then he strikes his breast, I promise you,
This morning in the extremest of his fit,
He lay so still, we all thought he had slept,
When suddenly, George is the G. quoth he,
And gave a groan, and turnde his face away.

Cla. God be my witness, witness with my soul,
My just and upright thoughts to him and his,
I stand so guiltless and so innocent,
As I could wish my breast to be transparent,
And my thoughts written in great letters there,
The world might read the secrets of my soul.

Glo. Ah brother Clarence, when you are suspected,
Well, well, it is a wicked world the while:
But shall I tell you brother in plain terms,
I fear, your self and I have enemies,
About the King, God pardon them,
The world was never worser to be trusted:
Ah brother George, where is that love that was?
Ah it is banished brother from the world:
Ah Conscience, Conscience, and true brotherhood,
It Is gone, it is gone, brother I am your friend,
I am your loving brother, your own self,
And love you as my soul, use me in what you please,
And you shall see I Will do a brothers part,
Send you to heaven I hope, ere it be long,
aside. I am a true stamped villain as ever liude.

Cla. I know you will, then brother I beseech you,
Plead you mine innocence unto the King,
And in mean time to tell my loyalty,
I Will keep within my house at Bainards Castle,
Until I hear how my dread Sovereign takes it.

Glo. Do so good brother.

Cla. Farewell good brother Gloucester.

Glo. My tears will searcely let me take my leave,
I love you so: Farewell sweet George.
Exit Cla. So, is he gone: now Shaw it is in thy power,
To bind me to thee everlastingly,
And there is not one step that I shall rise,
But I will draw thee with me unto greatness,
Thou shall sit in my bosom as my soul,
Incense the king, now being as thou art,
So near about him, and his Confessor,
That this G. only is George Duke of Clarence,
Doctor thou needst not my instruction,
Thou have a searching brain, a nimble spirit,
Able to master any man's affections.
Effect it Shaw, and bring it to pass ^ce,
I Will make thee the greatest Shaw that ever was.

Sha. My Lord, I am going by commanndement,
Unto the Marshalsea, to Captain Stranguidge,
For Pyracie of late condemnde to die,
There to confess him and his company,
That done, ^e come with speed back to the king,
And make no doubt but ^e effect the thing.

Glo. Farewell gentle Doctor.

Sha. Farewell my Lord of Gloucester.

Exit. Glo. Let me awake my sleeping wits a while,
^a, the mark thou aimst at Richard is a crown,
And many stand betwixt thee and the same,
What of all that? Doctor play thou thy part,
I Will climb up by degrees, through many a heart.

Exit. Enter Brackenburie with Vaux the Keeper. Bra. Why master Vaux is there
no remedy?
But instantly they must be led to death?
Can it not be deferd till after noone,
Or but two hours, in hope to get reprie?

K. Master Lieutenant, it is in vain to speak,
The kings incensde, and will not pardon them,
The men are patient, and resolude to die,
The Captain and that other Gentleman,
Have cast the dice whether shall suffer first.

Bra. How fell the Lot, to Stranguidge or to him?

Kee. The guiltless passenger must first go toot,

Bra. They are all guiltless from intent of ill.

Kee. And yet must die for doing of the deed,
Besides the Duke of Exeter found dead,
And naked floating up and down the sea,
Twixt Calice and our coast, is laid to them,
That they should rob, and cast him ouerboord.

Bra. My soul be pauwne, they never knew of it.

Kee. Well bring them forth.

Bra. Stay them yet but an hour.

Kee. I dare not do it sir Robert Brackenburie,
You are Lieutenant of the Tower your self,
And know the peril of protracting time,
Moreover here is that pickthanke Doctor Shaw,
The Duke of Glosters spaniell shriuing them,
Come bring them forth.

Bra. Poor Stranguidge must thou die?

Enter one bearing a silver Oar before Stranguidge, Shore, and two or three
more pinionde, and two or three with bills, and a hangman. Bra. still. I dare not
say good morrow, but ill day,
That Harrie Stranguidge is thus cast away.
Strah. Good Cousin Brackenbury be as well content
To see me die, as I to suffer death,
Be witness that I die an honest man,
Because my fact proves ill through ignorance,
And for the Duke of Erceter his death,
So speed my soul as I am innocent,
Here goes my grief, this guiltless gentleman,
L^ke A^sops Storke, that dies for company,
And came (God knows) but as a passenger.
Ah master ^lud, a thousand floods of woe
Ore-slow my soul, that thou must perish so.

Sho. Good Captain set no perturbation,
^inder our passage to a better world,
This last breaths blast will wafte our weary souls,
Over deaths gulf, to heavens most happy port,
There is a little battle to be fought.
This while the hangman prepares, Shore at this speech mounts up the ladder.
Wherein by lot the leading must be mine,
Second me Captain, and this bitter breakfast,
Shall bring a sweeter supper with the Saints.

D. S. This Christian patiece at the point of death,
Does argue he has led no wicked life,
How ever heaven has laid this cross on him,
Well Matthew Flud. for so thou calst thy self,
Finish a good course as thou have begun,
And cl^re thy conscience by confession,
What know thou of the Duke of Exceters death?

Sho. So God respect the waygate of my soul, as I know nothing.


Do. S. Then concerning this for which thou diett, knew Stranguidge of the
league betwixt the Kings before he took that prize?


Sho. No in my conscience.

Do. S. Stranguidge what say you?
You see there is but a turn betwixt your lives,
You must be next, confess and save yeur soul,
Concerning that wherein I questionde him:
I am your ghostly father to absolve
You of your sins, if you confess the truth.

Stran. True D. Shaw, and as I hope for heaven,
In that great day when we shall all appear,
I neither knew how that good Duke came dead,
Nor of the league, till I had taken the prize.
Neither was Fludde, (that innocent dying man)
Ever with me but as a passenger.

D. S. More happy he, well Flud forgive the world,
As thou will have forgiveness from the heavens.

Sho. O so I do, and pray the world forgive,
What wrong I did whilst I therein did live,
And now I pray you turn your pains to them,
And leave me private for a little space,
To meditate upon my parting hence.

D. Sha. Do gentle Flud, and we will pray for thee.

Sho. Pray not for Flud, but pray for Matthew Shore,
For Shore covered with the cloak of Flud,
aside. If I have sinnde in changing of my name,
Forgive me God, it was done to hide my shame,
And I forgive the world, King Edward first,
That wrackt my state, by winning of my wife,
And though he would not pardon trespass small,
In these, in me God knows no fault at all,
I pardon him, though guilty of my fall.
Perhaps he would, if he had known it was I,
But twenty deaths I rather wish to die,
Than live beholding for one minutes breath
To him, that living, wounded me with death.
Death of my joy, and hell of my defame,
Which now shall die under this borrowed name.

Jane. God forgive thee, even as I forgive,
And pray thou may repent while thou do live,
I am as glad to leave this loathed light,
As to embrace thee on our marriage night.
To die unknown thus, is my greatest good,
That Matthew Shoares not hangde, but Matthew flood.
For floods of woe have washed away the shore
That never wife nor kin shall look on more:
Now when ye will, I am preparde to go.

Enter Iockie running and crying. Iockie. Hawd, hawd, say for speed, vntaye,
untruss, pull down, pull off, God seaue the King: off with the helters, hence
with the prisoners, a pardon a pardon.


Bra. Good news unlooked for, welcome gentle friend, who brings the pardon?


Iockie. Stay first lat ma blaw: my mastres, mastres Shore shoe brings tha
pardoune, tha kings pardoune: off with thore bands, bestow them o tha hangman,
may mastres made me runue the nearest way ore tha fields, she rayds a pace the
he way, she is at hand bay this: sir ye that preech, come down, lat Doctor
Shaw hea your place, he is tha better scholar, mastres Shore bring a new
lesson for you.


Shore. O I had read my latest lesson well.
Had he been ready to have said, Amen.
point to the hangman. Now shall I live to see my shame again.
Shore comes down. O had I did unwitting to my wife,
Rather then see her, though she bring me life.

Enter Jane in haste, in her riding cloak and sauegard, with a pardon in her
hand. Jane. Alas I see that even my smallest stay,
Had lost my labor, and cast them away,
God knows I basted all that ere I might,
Here master Vaux, King Edward greets ye well,
His gracious pardon frees this Gentleman,
And all his company from shameful death.

All. God save the king, and God bless mistress Shore.

Ioc. Amen, and keep these frea coming here any mar.

Jane. You must discharge them paying of their fees,
Which for I fear their store is very small,
I will defray, hold, here, take purse and all,
Nay master Vaux it is gold, if not enough,
Send to me, I will pay you royally.

Stran. Lady, in the behalf of all the rest,
With humble thanks I yield my self your slave,
Command their service, and command my life.

Ia. No Captain Stranguidge, let the king command
Your lives and service, who has given you life,
These and such offices conscience bids me do.

D. Sh. Pity that ere awry she trod her shoe.

Sh. O had that conscience pricked when love prouokt.

Bra. Lady the last but not the least in debt,
To your devotion for my Cofins life,
I render thanks, yet thanks is but a breath,
Command (Madame) during life,
Old Brackenburie bows for you to stand,
Whilst I have limbs or any foot of land.

Sho. Thus is her glory builded on the sand.

Jane. Thanks good M. Lieutenant of the Tower.
Sir prepare my borse, why stay you here?
to Iockie Pray ye commend me to my noble friend
The Duke of Clarence now your prisoner,
Bid him not doubt the kings displeasures past
I hope to gain him favor and release.

Br. God grant ye may, he is a noble Gentleman.

D. Sh. My patron Gloucester will cross it if he can.

Enter a Messenger. Nuntio. Where Is mistress Shore? Lady I come in post,
The King has had a very dangerous fit
Since you came from him, twice his majesty,
Has swounded, and with much a do reuiu'de,
And still as breath will give him leave to speak,
He calls for you: the Queen and all the Lords
Have sent to seek ye, have unto his Grace,
Or else I fear you will never see his face.

Ia. O God desend, good friends pray for the king,
More bitter are the news which he does bring,
Then those were sweet I brought to you but late:
If Edward die, confounded is my state,
I Will have unto him and will spend my blood,
To save his life or do him any good.

Exeunt she and the Messenger. Sh. And so would I for thee had thou been true:
But if I die, hid all thy pomp adieu.

Bra. Bra. Belee^ but I do not like these news,
Of the Kings dangerous sickness.

Keeper. No nor I,
Captain, and master Fludde, and all the rest,
I dorcioice your pardon was obtainde,
Before these news, these inauspicious news,
If the king die, the state will soon be changde,

M. Lieutenant, you will go to the Tower:
I Will take my lean, gallants God buoye all.

Exeunt Vaux and his train. St. God buoy M. Vaux, I was ye ha lost good guests.

Bra. You shall be my guest for a night or two,
Cousin, till your own lodging be preparde,
But tell me sir what means has M. Fludde.

Stran. I cannot tell, i will ask him if ye will.

Bra. Do so, and if his fortunes be debasde,
I Will entertain him if heel dwell with me,
On good condition.

Stran. M. Matthew Fludde,
He are ye my Cousin Brackenburies mind?
He has concetude such liking of your parts,
That if your means surmount not his suppose,
Heel entertain ye gladly at the Tower,
To wait on him, and put ye in great trust.

Sho. In what I undertake I will be just,
And hold me happy, if my diligence
May please so worthy a Gentleman as he,
What ere my fortunes have been, they are now,
Such as to service make their master bow.

Bra. No Fludde more like a frieud and fellow mate,
I mean to use thee, then a seruitor,
And place thee in some credit in the Tower,
And give thee means to live in some good sort.

Sh. I thank ye sir, God grant I may deserve it.

Bra. Cousin and all your crew come home with me,
Where after sorrow we may merry be.

Sho. The Tower will be a place of secret rest,
Where I may hear good news and bad, and use the best,
God bless the king, a worse may wear the crown
And then Jane Shore thy credit will come down,
For though i will never bed nor board with thee,
Yet thy destruction with I not to see,
Because I lou'de thee when thou wast my wise,
Not for now saving my disdained life,
Which lasts too long. God graut us both to mend,
Well I must in my service to attend.

Exit. The Lord Louell and Doctor Shaw meet on the stage. Sha. Well met my good
Lord Louell.

Lo. Whither away so fast goes Doctor Shaw?

Sha. Why to the Tower, to shriue the Duke of Clarence,
Who as I hear is salne so grievous sick,
As it is thought be can by no means escape.

Lo. He neither can nor shall I warrant thee:

Sh. I hope my Lord he is not dead already?

Lo. But I hope sir he is, I am sure I saw him dead,
Of a Flies death, drowned in a butte of Malmesey.

Sha. Dround in a butte of Malmesey? that is strange,
Doubtless he never wonid misdoe himself?

Lo. No, that thou know right well, he had some helpers,
Thy hand was in it with the Duke of Glosters,
As smothly as thou seekst to cover it.

Sha. Oh foul words my Lord, no more of that,
The world knows nothing, then what should I fear?
Does not your honor seek promotion?
Oh give the Doctor then a little leave,
So that he gain preferment with a King,
Cares not who goes to wrack, whose heart does wring.

Lo. A King? what King?

Sh. Wy Richard man? who else? good Lord I see,
Wise men sometimes have weak capacity.

Lo. Why is not Edward living? and if he were not,
Has be not children? what shall become of them?

Sh. Why man, lining for beds, a knife, or so,
What make a boy a King, and a man by,
Richard, a man for us? fie that were a shame.
Nay then I see if Edward were deceast,
Which way the game would go.

Sha. What else my Lord?
That way the current of our fortune runs,
By noble Richard gallant royal Richard,
He is the man must only do us good,
So I have honor, let me swim through blood.
My Lord, be but at Paul's cross on Sunday next,
I hope I have it here shall soundly prove,
King Edwards chtldren not legitimate.
Nay, and that for Edward ruling now,
And George the Duke of Clarence so late dead:
Their mother hapt to tread the shoe awry,
Why what is Richard then?

Sha. Tut, lawful man, he says it so himself.
And what he says i will be so hold to swear,
Though in my soul I know it otherwise,
Beware promotion while you live my Lord.

Enter Catesbie. Ca. A staff, a staff, a thousand crowns for a staff.

Lo. What staff sir William Catesbie?

Ca. Why man a white staff for my lord Protector.

Lo. Why is King Edward dead?

Ca. Dead Louel, dead, and Richard our good Lord
Is made Protector of the sweet young Prince.
Oh for a staff, where might I have a staff,
That I might first present it to his hand?

Sh. Now do I smell two Bishoprics at least,
My sermon shall be pepperd sound for this.

Enter mistress Shore weeping, Iockie following. Ca. Why how now mistress
Shore? what, put finger in the ese,
Nay then I see you have some cause to erie.

Lo. I blame her not, her chiefest stay is gene,
The only staff, she had to lean upon,
I see by her these tidings are too true.

Ia. I my Lord Louell, they are too true indeed,
Royal King Edward now has breathed his last,
The Queen turned out, and every friend put by,
None now admitted, but whom Richard please.

Lo. Why doubtless Richard will be kind to you.

Jane. Ah my Lord Louell, God bless me from his kindness:
No sooner was the white staff in his hand,
But finding me and the right woeful Queen,
Sadly bemoning such a mighty loss:
Here is no place quoth he, you must be gone,
We have other matters now to think upon.
For you, (quoth he to me) ant bit his lip,
And stroke me with his staff, but said no more.
Whereby I know he means me no good.

Cat. Well mistress Shore, its like to be a busy time,
Shift for your self, come lads let us be gone,
Royal King Richard must be wait upon.

Sh. Well mistress Shore, if you have need of me,
You shall command me to the uttermost.

Exeunt. Ia. First let me die ere I do put my trust,
In any fliering Spaniel of you all.
Go Iockie, take down all my hangings,
And quickly see my trunks be conuayde forth,
To mistress Blages, an Inn in Lombardstreete,
The Flower de Luce, good Iockie make some speed,
She, she must be my refuge in this need.
See it done quickly Iockie.

Exit. Iockie. Whickly quoth a? marry here is a whicke change indeed, sike
whicke change did I nere see before. Now dream I, that ise be a very pure
fellow, and hardly ha any siller to drink with a good fellow. But what stand I
tatling here. I must go do my maistres bidding, carry all her stuff and
geere to mistres Blages, at the Flower de luce in Lombardstreet, whicke then
dispatch.


Exit. Enter Brackenburie, and Flood, to them the two young princes, Edward and
Richard, Gloucester, Cates. Louell and Tirill. Bra. Come hither Flood let me hear
thy opinion,
Thou know I build upon thy confidence,
And henest dealing in thy greatst affairs:
I have received letters from the Duke,
Gloucester I mean, Protector of the land,
Who gives in charge the Tower be preparde,
This night to entertain the two young princes,
It is my ^utie to obey I know,
But manifold suspicion troubles me.

Flo. He is their uncle Sir, and in that sense,
Nature should warrant their security,
Next his deceased brother at his death,
To Richards care communitted both the realm,
And their protection: where humanity
Stands as an Orator to plead against
All wrong suggestion of uncivil thoughts:
Beside you are Lieutenant of the Tower,
Say there should be any hurt prefended,
The privilege of your authority
Pries into every corner of this house,
And what can then be done without your knowledge?

Br. Thou say true Flood, though Richard be Protector,
When once they are within the Tower limits,
The charge of them (unless he derogate)
From this my office, which was never siene,
In any kings time; does belong to me:
And ere that Brackenburie will consent,
Or suffer wrong be done unto these babes,
His sword, and all the strength within the Tower
Shall be opposoe against the proudest commer,
Be it to my soul as I intend to them.

Fl. And faith in me unto this commonwealth,
And truth to men has hitherto been seen,
The Pylot that has guided my lives course,
Though it was my fortune to be wronged in both:
And therefore Sir neither the mighties frown,
Nor any bribes shall win me otherwise.

Bra. It Is well resolved: still me thinks they should
Be safe enough with us, and yet I fear,
But now no more, it seems they are at hand.

Pr. Ed. Uncle, what Gentleman is that?

Enter. Glost. It is (sweet Prince) Lieutenant of the Tower.

Pr. Ed. Sir we are come to be your guests to night:
I pray you tell me did you ever know,
Our father Edward lodgde within this place,

Bra. Never to lodge (my liege) but oftentunes,
On other occasions I have seen him here.

Ri. Brother last night when you did send for me
My mother told me, hearing we should lodge
Within the Tower, that it was a prison,
And therefore marueld that my uncle Gloucester,
Of all the houses for a Kings receipt,
Within this City, had appointed none,
Where you might keep your court but only here.

Gl. Vile brats, how they do descant on the Tower.
(...) gentle Nephew they were ill abuisde,
To tutor you with such unfitting terms,
(Who ere they were) against this royal mansion:
What if some part of it has been reserved,
To be a prison for Nobility?
Follows it therefore that it cannot serve,
To any other use? Caesar himself
That built the same, within it kept his Court,
And many kings since him, the rooms are large,
The building stately, and for strength beside,
It is the safest and the surest hold you have.

Pr. Ed. Uncle of Gloucester, if you think it so,
It Is not for me to contradict your will,
We must allow it, and are well content.

Glo. On then a Gods name.

Pr. Ed. Yet before we go,
One question more with you M. Lieutenant,
We like you well, and but we do perceive,
More comfort in your looks, then in these walls,
For all our uncle Glosters friendly speech,
Our hearts would be as heavy still as lead,
I pray you tell me, at which door or gate
Was it my uncle Clarence did go in,
When he was sent a prisoner to this place?

Bra. At this my ^iedge: why sighs your majesty?

Pr. Ed. He went in here that nere came back again,
But as God has decreede, so let it be,
Come brother shall we go?

Fish. Yes brother, any where with you.

Exeunt. Tirill pulls Catesbie by the sleeue. Tir. Sir were it best I did attend
the Duke,
Or stay his leisure till his back return?

Cat. I pray master Tirill stay without,
It is not good you should be seen by day
Within the Tower, especially at this time,
I Will tell his honor of your being here,
And you shall know his pleasure presently.

Tir. Even so fir^men would be glad by any means.
To raise themselves, that have been overthrown,
By fortunes scorn, and I am one of them.
Enter Duke of Gloucester. Here comes the Duke.

Glo. Catesbie, is this the man?

Cat. It is ift like your excellency.

Glo. Come near.
Thy name I hear is Tirill, is it not?

Tir. James Tirill is my name, my gracious Lord.

Glo. Welcome, it should appear that thou have bin
In better state then now it seems thou art.

Tir. I have bin by my fey my Lord, though now deprest,
And clouded over with adversity.

Glo. Be ruled by me, and then thou shall rise again,
And prove more happy then thou ever wast,
There is but only two degrees by which
It shall be needful for thee to ascend,
And that is faith and taciturnitie.

Tir. If ever I prove false unto your grace,
Convert your favor to afflictions.

Glo. But can thou too be secret?

Tiril. Try me my Lord:
This tongue was never known to be a blab.

Glo. Thy countenance has like a silver key,
Opend the closet of my heart, read there,
If scholar like thou can expound those lines,
Thou art the man ordainde to serve my turn.

Tir. So far as my capacity will reach,
The sense my Lord is this, this night you say,
The two young Princes both must suffer death.

Gl. Thou have my meaning, will thou do it, speak?

Tiril. It shall be done.

Glo. Enough, come follow me,
For thy direction, and for gold to fee,
Such as must aid thee in their Tragedy.

Enter mistress Blage and Iockie laden. Bla. Welcome good Iockie, what good
news bring you?

Iockie Marry mastres my good mastres greets ye mastres, and prays ye mastres
till dight up her Chamber, for she will lig we ye to night mastres. And here is
her catte skin till she come.


Enter Jane. Jane. Why how now loyterer? make ye no more haste?
When will my trunkes and all my stuff be brought,
If you thus loyter, go, make have withal.

Iockie. Marie sall aye, gynne yeele be bud petient a while.

Exit. Jane. Now gentle mistress Blage the only friend,
That fortune leaves me to rely upon,
My counsels Closet and my Tower of strength,
To whom for safety I retire my self,
To be secure in these tempestuous times,
O smile on me, and give me gentle looks,
If I be welcome, then with cheerful heart,
And willing hand show me true signs thereof.

Bla. Doubt ye of welcome Lady to your friend?
Nay to your servant, to your bradswoman,
To speak but truth, your bounties bond woman:
Use me, command me, call my house your own,
And all I have sweet Lady at your will.

Jane. A way with titles, lay by courtly terms,
The Case is altered now the King is dead,
And with his life my favoring friends are fled,
No Madam now, but as I was before,
Your faithful kind companion, poor Jane Shore.

Bla. I loud you then, and since, and ever shall,
You are the woman, though your fortunes fall,
You when my husbands lewd transgression
Of all our wealth had lost possession,
By forfaiture into his Highness hands,
Got restitution of our goods and lands,
He fled, and died in France, to heal that harm,
You helpte me to three manors in fee farm,
The worst of which cleers threescore pound a year,
Have I not reason then to hold ye dear?
Yes hap what will until my life do end,
You are and shall be my best beloved friend,

Jane. How if misfortune my folly do succeed.

Bla. Trust me true friends bide touch in time of need.

Jane. If want consume the wealth I had before.

Bla. My wealth is yours, and you shall spend my store.

Jane. But the Protector prosecutes his hate.

Bla. With me live secret from the worlds debates

Jane. You will be weary of so badde a guest.

Bla. Then let me never on the earth be blessed.

Jane. Ah mistress Blage, you tender me such love,
As all my sorrows from my soul remove,
And though my portion be not very large,
Yet come I not to you to be a charge,
Coin, plate, and fewels prizde at lowest rate,
I bring with me to maintain my estate,
Worth twenty thousand pound, and my array,
If you survive to see my dying day,
From you no penny will I give away.

Blage. And I thank you that so my wealth increast,
Am worth I trow, ten thousand pounds at least,
I think like two warm widows we may live,
Until good fortune two good husbands give,
For surely mistress Shore your husbands dead,
When heard ye of him?

Jane. Never since he fled.
O mistress Blage, now put you in my head
That kills my heart, why should I breath this air,
Whose lost good name no treasure can repair?
Oh were he here with me to lead his life,
Although he never used me as a wife,
But as a drudge to spurn me with his ^ecte,
Yet should I think with him that life were sweet,

Bla. How can ye once conceit so base a thing,
That have been kissed and cokerd by a king,
Weep not, you hurt your self by Gods blessed mother,
Your husbands dead woman, think upon another,
Let us in to supper, drink wine, cheer your heart,
And whilst I live, be sure i will take your part.

Exit. Enter Brakenburie, Shore, Dighton, Forest, Tirill. Tir. Sir I assure
ou it is my Lord Protectors warrant.

Bra. My friend, I have conferd it with his letters,
And it is his hand indeed, i will not deny,
But blame me not although I be precise,
In matters that so nearly do concern me.

Digh. My Lord Protector, sir I make no doubt,
Dare justify his warrant, though perhaps,
He does not now acquaint you why he does it.

Bra. I think sic there is no subject now in England,
Will urge his Grace, to show what he dare do,
Nor will I ask him why he does it,
I would I might, to rid me of my doubt.

aside. For. Why sir I think he needs no president,
For what he does, I think his power is absolute enough.

Bra. I have no power sir to examine it.
Nor will I do: obey your warrant,
Which I will keep for my security.

Tir. You shall do well in that sir.

Bra. Here Is the keys.

Sho. And yet I could wish my Lord Protector,
Had sent his warrant thither by some other, aside.
I do not like their looks I tell you true.

Bra. Nor I Flud I assure thee.

For. What does that slave mutter to his master?

Digh. I hear him say he does not like our looks?

Tir. Why not our looks sir?

For. Sir we hear you.

Sho. I am glad you do sir? all is one for that,
But if you did not hearken better now,
I never saw three faces in whose looks,
Did ever sit more terror: or more death,
God bless the Princes if it be his will,
I do not like these villains.

Digh. Zounds stab the villane, sir do you brane us?

Sh. I that's your coming, for you come to stab.

Forest. Stab him.

Shore. Nay then i will stabbe with thee.

Tirill. Zbloud cut his throat.

Braken. Hold Gentle men I pray you.

Shore. Sir I am hurt, stabd in the arm,

Braken. This is not to be justified my friends, I
To draw your weapons here within the Tower,
And by the law it is no less then death,
I cannot think the Duke will like of this,
I pray ye be content, too much is done.

Tir. He might have held his peace then, and been quiet Farewell, farewell.


Shore. Hell and damnation follow murderers.

Bra. Go Flud get thee some surgeon to look to thy wound.
Have no acquaintance with some skillful surgeon?
Keep thy wound close, and let it not take air.
And for my own part, I will not stay here.
Whither will thou go that I may send to thee.

Sho. To one mistress Blages, an Inn in Gracious stroete,
There you shall find me, or shall hear of me.

Bra. Sweet Princely babes, farewell I fear you sore,
I doubt these eyes shall never see you more.

Enter the two young Princes, Edward and Richard in their gowns and cappes
vubuttond, and untrust. Richard. How does your Lordshippe?

Edward. Well good brother Richard, how does your selfe's
You told me your headaked.

Richard. Indeed it does, my Lord feel with your hands how hot it is.


He lays his hand on his brothers head. Edward. Indeed you have caught cold,
With sitting yester night to hear me read,
I pray thee go to bed, sweet Dick, poor little heart.

Richard. Doule give me leave to wait upon your Lordship.

Edward. I had more need brother to wait on you:
For you are sick, and so am not I.

Richard. O Lord, me thinks this going to our bed,
How like it is to going to our grave:

Edward. I pray thee do not speak of graves sweet heart,
Indeed thou frightest me.

Ri. Why my Lord Brother, did not our Tutor teach us,
That when at night we want unto our bed,
We still should think we sent unto our grave.

Ed. Yes that's true, ye we should do as every christian ought.
To be preparde to die at every hour, but I am heavy.

Richard. Indeed and so am I.

Edward. Then let us say our prayers and go to bed.

They kneel, and solemn music the while within, the music cease, and
they rise. Richard. What, bleedes your Grace?

Edward. I two drops and no more.

Richard. God bless us both, and I desire no more,

Edward. Brother see here what David says, and so say (...)
Lord in thee will I trust although I die.

As the young Princes go out, enter Tirill. Tirill. Go lay ye down, but never
more to rise,
I have put my hand into the foulest murder,
That ever was committed since the world,
The very senseless stones here in the walls,
Break out in tears but to behold the fact,
Me thinks the bodies lying dead in graves,
Should rise and cry against ^s O hark, hark,
A noise within. The Mandrakes shreeks are music to their cries,
The very night is frighted, and the stars,
Do drop like torches, to behold this deed:
The very Center of the earth does shake,
Me thinks the Tower should rent down from the top,
To let the heaven look on this monstrous deed.

Enter at the one door Dighton, with Edward under his arm, at the other
door, Forest with Richard. Digh. Stand further damned rogue, and come not
near me.

Fo. Nay stand thou further villain, stand aside.

Digh. Are we not both damned for this cur^cd deed?

Fo. Thou art the witness that thou bearst the King

Digh. And what hearst thou?

Fo. It is too true, oh I am damnde indeed,

Helookes down on the boy under his arm. Ti. I am as deep as you, although
my hand
Did not the deed.

Digh. O villain, art thou there?

Fo. A plague light on thee.

Ti. Curse not, a thousand plagues will light upon us all.
They lay them down. The priest here in the Tower will bury them,
Let us away.

Enter mistress Blage and her two men, bringing in Shore alias Flood, in a
chair, his arm bleeding apace Bla. So, set him here a while, where is more
air,
How cheer you sir, alack he does begin
To change his color, where is mistress Shore?
Gone to her Closet for a precious Balm,
The same (she said) King Edward used himself.
Alack I fear heel die before st^ee come.
Ran quickly for some Rosa-solis, faint not sir,
Be of good comfort, come good mistress Shore,
What have you there?

Jane. Stand by and give me leave.

Bla. Unhappie me to lodge him in my house.

Jane. I warrant you woman, be not so afraid,
If not this bloud-stone hangdc about his neck,
This balm will stanch it by the help of God:
Lift up his arm whilst I do bath his wound,
The sign belike was here when he was hurt,
Or else some principal and chief vein is pierst.

Bla. How ever sure the surgeon was a knave,
That looked no better to him at the first.

Ia. Blame him not mistress Blage, the best of them
In such a case as this, may be to seek.

Bla. Now God be blessed, see the crimson blood,
That was precipitate, and falling down
Into his arm, retires into his face,
How fare you sir? how do you feel your self?

Sh. Oh wherefore have you wakt me from my sleep?
And broke the quiet slumber I was in,
Me thought I sat in such a pleasant place,
So full of all delight as never eye
Beheld, nor heart of man could comprehend,
If you had let me go I felt no pain,
But being now reuok't my grief renewes.

Jane. Give him some Rosa-solis mistress Blage,
And that will like wise animate the sprites,
And send alacrity unto the heart,
That has bin struggling with the pangs of death.

Bla. Here sir drink this, you need not fear it sir,
It is no hurt, see I will be your taster,
Then drink I pray you.

Ia. Now fellows raise hi^ body from the chair^
And gently let him walk a turn or two.

Bla. Good sooth mistress Shore, I did not think till now
You had been such a cunning skilde Physician.

Sho. Oh mistress Blage, though I must needs confess,
It would have been more welcome to my soul,
If I had died and been remoude at last,
From the confused troubles of this world,
Whereof I have sustained no mean weight,
Then lingering here be made a packhorse still
Of torments, in comparison of which
Death is but as the pricking of a thorn,
Yet I do thank you for your taken pains,
And would to God I could requite your love.

Bla. Sir I did you little good, what was done
Ascribe the benefit and praise thereof
Unto this Gentlewoman, kind mistress Shore,
Who next to God preserude your feeble life.

Sho. How? Mistress Shore, good friends let go your hold,
My strength is now sufficient of it self.
Oh is it she that still prolongs my wo^?
Was it ordainde not only at the first,
She should be my destruction, but now twice,
When gracious destinies had brought about,
To end this weary pilgrimage of mine,
Must she and none but she prevent that good,
And stop my entrance to eternal bliss?
Oh lasting plague, oh endless corrasiue,
It now repents me double that I scap'te,
Since life's made death, and life's author hate.

Ia. Sir take my counsel and sit down again,
It is not good to be so bold of foot,
Upon the sudden till you have more strength.

Sho. Mistress I thank you, and I care not much
If I be ruled by you.
sits down. Oh God that she should pity me unknown,
That knowing me by her was overthrown,
Or ignorantly she should regard this smart,
That heretofore sparde not to stab my heart.

Enter Brackenburie. Bra. By your leave mistress Blague, I am somewhat bold,
Is there not a Gentleman within your house,
Called M. Flood, came hither hurt last night?

Bla. Is his name Flood, I knew it not till now,
But here he is, and well recovered,
Thanks to this Gentlewoman mistress Shore.

Bra. Pardon me mistress Shore, I saw you not,
And trust me I am sorry at the heart,
So good a creature as your self has been,
Should be so vilely dealt with as you are,
I momise you the world laments your case.

Ia. How mean^ you sir? I understand you not?
Lament my case, for what? for Edwards death?
I know that I have lost a gracious friend,
But that is not to be remedied now.

Bra. No mistress Shore, it is for Richards hate,
That too much enuies your prosperity.

Ia. I know he loves me not and for that cause,
I have withdrawn me wholly from the court.

Bra. You have not seen the Proclamation then?

Ia. The proclamation? no, what proclamation?

Bra Oh mistress Shore, the king in every street
Of London, and in every borough town,
Throughout this land has publicly proclaimd,
On pain of death that none shall harbor you,
Or give you food or clothes to keep you warm,
But having first done shameful penance here,
You shall be then thrust forth the City gates,
Into the naked cold forsaken field,
I fable not, I would to God I did,
See, here is the manner of it put in print,
It Is to be sold in every Stationers shop,
Besides a number of them clapped on poasts.
Where people crowding as they read your fall,
Some murmr, and some sigh, but most of them,
Have their relenting eyes even big with tears.

Ia. Gods will be done, I know my sin is great,
And he that is omnipotent and just,
Cannot but must reward me heavily.

Bra. It grieves me mistress Shore, it was my chance,
To be the first reporter of this news.

Ia. Let it not grieve, I must have heard of it,
And now as good, as at another time.

Bra. I pray ye mistress Blage have care of Flood,
And what his charge is I will see you paid,

Exit. Ia. Farewell to all that still shall be my song,
Let men impose upon me nere such wrong,
And this extremity shall seem the less,
In that I have a friend to lean unto,
Sweet mistress Blage, there were upon the earth,
No comfort left for miserable Jane,
But that I do presume upon your love,
I know though tyrant Richard had set down,
A greater penalty then is proclaimd,
Which cannot well be thought, yet in your house,
I should have succor and relief beside.

Bla What, and so I should be a traitor, should I?
Is that the care you have of me and mine?
I thank you truly, no there is no such matter,
I love you well, but love my self better:
As long as you were held a true subject,
I made account of you accordingly,
But being otherwise, I do reject you,
And will not cherish my kings enemy:
You know the danger of the Proclamation:
I would to God you would depart my house.

Ia. When was it ever even Jane Shore was false
Either unto her country, or her king?
And therefore it is not well good mistress Blage,
That you vpbraid me with a traitors name.

Bla. I, but you have been a wicked liver,
And now you see what it is to be unchaste,
You should have kept you^ your honest husband:
T was never other like but that such filthiness,
Would have a foul and detestable end.

Ia. Time was that you did tell me otherwise,
And studied how to set a gloss on that
Which now you say is ugly and deformde.

Bla. I told you then as then the time did serve,
And more indeed to try your disposition,
Then any way to encourage you to sin:
But when I say you were ambitious,
And saintly stood on terms of modesty,
I left you to your own arbiterment:
Can you deny it was not so? how say you?

Ia. We will not mistress Blage dispute of that,
But now in charity and womanhood,
Let me find favor if it be but this,
That in some barn or stable I may shrowde.
Till otherwise I be provided for.

Bla. I pray you do not urge me mistress Shore.
I will not have my house endangered so.

Ia. Oh you did promise I should never want,
And that your house was mine, and swore the same,
To keep your oath be then compassionate.

Bla, So you did swear you would be true to Shore,
But you were not so good as your word,
My oaths disherit which by the kings command.

Jane. Yet let me have those jewels and that money,
Which is within my trunkes.

Bla. I know of none:
If there be any, i will be so bold,
As keep it for your diet and your man's,
It is no little charge I have been at,
To ^de your dainty tooth, since you came hither,
Beside houseroome, I am sure is somewhat worth.

Sho. Ah Jane I cannot choose but pity thee,
Here Is the first step to thy deep misery.

Ia. Oh that my grave had the^ bin made my house,
When either first I went unto the Court,
Or from the court returned unto this place.

Enter two Apparators. Ser. How now, what are you? it had been manners
You should have knocked before you had come in.

1. Ap. We are the Bishops Parators my friend,
And mistress Shore our errand is to you.
This day it is commanded by the King,
You must be stripped out of your rich attire,
And in a white sheet go from Temple bar,
Until you come to Algate, bare footed,
Your hair about your ears, and in your hand,
A burning taper, therefore go with us.

Jane. Even when and whither you will, and would to God,
The King as soon could rid my soul of sin,
As he may stripped my body of these rags.

2. Ap. That would be soon enough, but come away,
And mistress Blage you will hardly answer it,
When it is known we found her in your house.

1. Ap. It seems you do not fear to harbor her.

Bla. I harbor her? out on her strumpet queen,
She pressed upon me where I would or no:
I Will see her hangde ere I will harbor her.
So now her jewels and her gold is mine,
And I am made at least four thousand pound,
Wealthier by this match then I was before:
And what can be objected for the same,
That once I lou'de her: well perhaps I did,
And women all are gouernd by the Moon,
But now I am of another humor,
Which is you know a planet that will change.

Cat. Now M. Sheriff of London do your office,
Attach this rebel to his Majesty,
And having stripped her to her petticoate,
Turn her out a doors, with this condition,
That no man harbor her, that durst presume
To harbor that lewd curtizan Shoares wife,
Against the strait commandment of the King.

Bla. I beseech you sir.

Cat. Away with her I say.
The while ^le seize upon her house and goods,
Which wholly are confiscate to the King.

Exit. Sho. Oh what have I beheld, were I as young,
As when I came to London to be prentice,
This pageant were sufficient to instruct,
And teach me ever after to be wise.
First have I seen desert of wantonness,
And breach of wedlock: then of flattery,
Next of dissembilng love, and last of all,
The ruin of base catching avarice:
But poor Jane Shore in that I lou'de thee once,
And was thy husband I must pity, thee,
The sparks of old affection long ago,
(...) up in ashes of displeasure kindle,
And in this furnace of adversity,
The world shall see a husbands loyalty.

Exit. Enter Doctor Shaw pensiuely reading on his book, after him follows the
Ghost of Friar Anselme, with a lighted torch. Sha. Spuria vitulamina non agent
radices altas.
Bastardly slips have always slender grouth.
Ah Shaw, this was the cursed theme,
That at Paul's cross thou made thy sermon of,
To prove the lawful issue of thy King,
Got out of wedlock, illegittimate.
Ah Duke of Gloucester this did thou procure.
Did Richard (villain) no it was thy fault,
Thou would be won to such a damned deed,
Which now to think on makes my soul to bleed.
Ah Friar Anselme, sleep among the blessed,
Thy propheste thus falsely did I wrest.

Enter Anselme. An. Thou did, and be thou damnde therefore,
Nere come thy soul where blessedness abides,
Did thou not know the letter G. was Gloucester?

Sh. Anselme I did.

An. Why then did thou affirm,
That it was meant by George the duke of Clare^ce
That honorable harmless Gentleman,
Whose thoughts all innocent as any child,
Yet came through thee to such a lucklesse death.

Sa. I was enforced by the Duke of Gloucester.

An. Enforst say thou? would you then be enforst,
Being a man of thy profession,
To sin so vilely, and with thine own mouth,
To damn thy soul? No thou wast not enforced,
But gain and hope of high promotion
Hyrde thee thereto, say was it so or no?

Sha. It did, it did.

An. Why then record in thy black hellish thoughts,
How many mischiefs have ensude hereon?
First wronged Clarence drowned in the Tower,
Next, Edwards children murdered in the Tower:
This day at Pomfret noble Gentlemen,
Three the Queens kindred, lose their harmless heads.
Think thou that here this flood of mischief (...)
No villain, many are marked to the block,
And they the nearest, think them furthest off,
Even Buckingham, creator of that king,
Shall he to woe and wretched ending bring.
All this (accursed man) has come by thee,
And thy false wresting of my prophecy,
For Englands good disclosed to thy trust,
And so it had been, had thou proved just.
But thou and every one that had a hand,
In that most woeful murder of the Princes,
To satall ends you are appointed all.
Here in thy study shall thou sterue thy self,
And from this hour not taste one bit of food,
The rest shall after follow on a row,
To all their deaths, vengeance will not be slow.

Enter a Messenger to Shaw. Mes. Where is M. Doctor Shaw?

Sha. Here friend, what is thy will with me?

Mes. K. Richard prays ye to come to him strait.
For he would be consest.

Sha. I cannot come, I pray thee take that Friar,
For he can do it better far then I.

Mes. A Friar M. Doctor I see none.

Sha. Do thou not? no, thy untainted soul
Cannot discern the horrors that I do.

An. Shaw go with him, and tell that tyrant Richard,
He has but three years limited for life,
And then a shameful death takes hold on him,
That done, return, and in thy study end
Thy loathed life that did us all offend,

Sha. With all my heart, would it were ended now,
So it were done, I care not where nor how.

Exeunt. Enter the two Parators, with mistress Shore in a white sheet,
barefooted, with her hair about her ears, and in her hand a wax taper. 1.
Par. Now mistress Shore, here our commissionends,
Put off your roabe of shame, for this is Algate,
Whither it was appointed we should bring you,

Ia. My roabe of shame? Oh that so soul a name
Should be applied unto so fair a garment,
Which is no more to be condemnde of shame,
Then snow of putrefaction is deserude,
To cover an infectious heap of dung,
My roabe of shame, but not my shame put off,
For that sits branded on my forehead still,
And therefore in derision was I wrapped,
In this white Sheet: and in derision bore
This burning taper, to express my folly,
That having light of reason to direct me,
Delighted yet in by-waies of dark error.

2. P. Well mistress Shore, I hope you grudge not us,
We she wde you all the favor poor men could.

Jane. Oh God forbid: I know the Kings Edia
Set you a work, and not your own desires.

1. Par. I truly mistress, and for our parts,
We could be well content twere otherwise,
But that the laws severe, and so we leave you.

Exit. Jane. Farewell unto you both: and London too,
Farewell to thee, where first I was inticde,
That scandalizde thy dignity with shame,
But now thou have returnde me treble blame,
My tongue that gave consent inioynde to beg.
Mine eyes adiudgde to hourly laments,
Mine arms for their imbracings, catch the air,
And these quick nimble feet that were so ready
To step into a kings for bidden bed,
London thy ^ints have punished for their pride,
And thou have drunk their blood for thy revenge,
What now auailes to think what I have been,
Then welcome nakedness and poverty,
Welcome contempt, welcome you barren fields,
Welcome the lack of meat, and lack of friends,
And wretched Jane, according to thy state,
Sit here, sit here, and lower if might be:
All things that breath in their extremity,
Have some recourse of succor, thou have none,
The child offended flies unto the mother,
The Soldiour struck, retires unto his Captain,
The fish distressed, slides into the river,
Birds of the air do fly unto their dammes,
And underneath their wings are quickly shrouded
Nay, beat the spanniel, and his master mones him,
But I have neither where to shroud my self,
Nor any one to make my moan unto,
Come patience then, and though my body pine,
Make then a banquet to refresh my soul,
Let hearts deep throbbing sighs be all my bread,
My drink salt tears, my guests repenta^t thoughts
That who so knew me, and does see me now,
May shun by me the breach of wedlockes vow.

Enter Brackenburie with a prayer book, and some relief in a cloth for
mistress shore. Bra. Oh God how full of dangers grows these til
And no assurance seen in any state,
No man can say that he is master now,
Of any thing is his, such is the tide
Of sharp disturbance running through the land,
I have given over my office in the Tower,
Because I cannot brook their vile complots,
Nor smoother such outrageous villainies:
But mistress Shore, to be so basely wrongde,
And vildly used, that has so well deserude,
It does afflict me in the very soul,
She sau'de my kinsman, Harrie Stranguidge life,
Therefore in duty am I bound to her,
To do what good I way, though law forbid,
See where she sits, God comfort thee good soul,
First take that to relieve thy body with,
And next receive this book, wherein is food,
Manna of heaven to refresh thy soul:
These holy meditations mistress Shore,
Will yield much comfort in this misery,
Whereon contemplate still, and never linne,
That God may be unmindful of thy sin.

Ia. Master Lieutenant, in my heart I thank ye,
For this kind comfort to a wretched soul:
Welcome ^weet prayer-booke, food of my life,
The sovereign balm for my sick conscience:
Thou shall be my souls pleasure and delight,
To wipe my sins out of Ichouacs sight.
B. Do so good mistress Shore, now I must leave ye,
Because some other business calls me hence,
And God I pray regard your penitence.

Exit. Ia. Farewell sir Robert, and for this good to me,
The God of heaven be mindful still of thee.

As she sits weeping and praying, enters at one door young M. Air, and old
Rufford at another. Air. This way she went, and cannot be far off,
For but even now I met the officers,
That were attendant on her in her penance,
Yonder she sits, now then Air show thy self,
Thankful to her, that sometime sau'de thy life,
When Law had made thee subject to base death,
Give her thy purse, for here comes some Lady,
Stand by a while, for fear thou be discovered.

Ruff. What mistress Shore, King Edwards concubin^,
Set on a molehill, oh disparagement.
A throne were ^tter for your Ladyship,
Fie will you ^ubber these fair cheeks with fears?
Or sit so solitary, where is all your servants?
Where is your gown of silk, your periwigs,
Your fine reba^oes, and your costly jewels,
What not so much as a shoe upon your foot,
Nay then I see the world goes hard with whoores.

Air. The villain slave gibes at her misery.

Ruf. Now whether is it better to be in court,
And there to beg a license of the King,
For transportation of commodities,
Then here to sit forsaken as thou do,
I think upon condition Edward liude,
And thou were still in favor as before,
Thou woulds not say that Rufford had deserude,
To have his ears rent for a worser suite,
Then license to ship over corn and lead,
What not a word, faith wench i will tell thee what,
If thou do think thy old trade out of date,
Go learn to play the bawd another while.

Ai. Jnbum^e wretch, why do thou scorn her so,
And vere her grieved soul with bitter taunts,

Ruf. Because I will, she is a curtisan,
And one abhorred of the world for lust.

Air. If all thy faults were in thy forehead writ,
Perhaps thou would thy self appear no less,
But much more horrible then she does now.

Ruff. You are no judge of mine sir.

Air. Why nor thou of her.

Ruf. The world has iudgde, and found her guilty,
And it is the Kings command she be held odious.

Air. The King of heaven commands otherwise,
And if thou b^ not willing to relieve her,
Let it suffize thou see her miserable,
And study not to amplify her grief.
Enter mistress Blage very poorly a begging, with her basket and clap-dish.
What other woeful spectacle comes here?
Mistress take that and spend it for my sake.

When Rufford looks away, Air throws his purse to mistress Shore. Bla. Oh I
am pincht with more the^ common want,
Where shall I find relief? Good Gentleman,
Pity a wretched woman like to starve,
And I will pray for ye. One halfepennie
For Christ's sake, to comfort me withal.

Ruf. What mistress Blage, is it you? no marvel sure,
But you should be relieude, a halfepenie quotha?
I marie sir, and so be hangde my self,
Not I, this Gentleman may if he please,
Get you to your companion mistress Shore,
And then there is a pair of queanes wellmet,
Now I bethink me, i will go to the King,
And tell him that some will relieve Shoares wife,
Except some officer there be appointed,
That carefully regards it be not so.
Thereof my self will I make offer to him,
Which questionless he cannot but accept,
So shall I still pursue Shoares wife with hate,
That scornd me in her high whoores estate.

Exit. Bla. Good Gentleman bestow your charity,
One single halfepennie to help my need.

Air. Not one, were I the master of a mint,
What? succor thee that did betray thy friend?
See where she sits, whom thou did scorn indeed,
And therefore rightly art thou scornde again:
Thou thoughtst to been riched with her goods,
But thou have now lost both thy own and hers,
And for my part, knew It would save thy life,
Thou should not get so much as a crum of bread
Pack counterfeit, pack a way dissembling drab.

Bla. Oh misery, but shall I stay to look
Her in her face, whom I so much have wrongde?

Ia. Yes mistress Blage, I freely pardon you,
You have done me no wrong, come sit by me:
It Was so in wealth, w^y not in poverty?

Bla. Oh willingly if yo u can brook her presence,
Whom you have great er reason to despise.

Ia. Why woman, Ric hard that has banished me,
And seeks my ruin (c^uselesse though it be)
Do I in heart pray for, and will do still,
Come thou and share wit h me what God has sent,
A stranger gave it me, and part thereof
I do as freely now bestow on you.

Bla. I thank you mistress Shore, this courtesy
Renewes the grief of my inconstancy.

Enter master Shore with relief for his wife. Sho. Yonder she sits how like
a withered tree,
That is in winter leauelesse and bereft
Of lively sap, sits she poor abic^ soul,
How much unlike the woman is she now,
She was but yesterday: so short and brittle
Is this worlds happiness: but who is that.
False mistress Blage? how can thou brook her Jane?
I thou wast always mild and pitiful,
Oh had thon been as chaste, we had been blessed,
But now no more of that: she shall not starve,
So long as this, and such as this may serve,
Here mistress Shore, feed on these homely Cates,
And there is wine to drink them down withal.

Ia. Good sir your name, that pities poor Ia. Shore
That in my prayers I may remember you.

Sho. No matter for my name, I am a friend,
That loves you well, so farewell mistiris Shore,
When that is spent, I vow to bring you more.

Ia. Gods blessing be your guide where ere you go,
Thus mistress Blage you see ^idst our woe,
For all the world can do, God sends relief,
And will not yet we peris^ in our grief,
Come let us step into some secret place.

Bla. It Is not amiss, if you be so content,
For here the fields too open and frequent.
Exeunt. Where vndisturbde we may partake this grace.

Master Shore enters again. Sho. What is she gone so soon? alack poor Jane,
How I compassionate thy woeful case?
Whereas we liude together man and wife,
Often on an humble stool by the fire side,
Sat she contented, when as my high heat,
Would chid her for it. But what would she say
Husband we both must lower sit one day,
When I dare swear thee never dreamd of this,
But see good God what prophesying is.

Enter Rufford and Fogge, with the counterfeit letters Pattents, Shore stands
aside. Ruff. This is King Richards hand, I know it well,
And this of thine is justly counterfeit,
As he himself would swear it were (...) ou n^.

Sho. The kings hand (...) more of that.

Ruff. Why cu^e letter, every little ^ash,
In all respects alike, how may I use,
My transportation of my cozne and hides,
Without the danger of forbidding law,
And so I would have done in Edwards days,
But that good ^ris Shore did please to cross me,
But mark how now I will requite her for it.
I moude my suit, and plainly told the King,
Some would relie^e her, if no man had charge,
To see seucrcly to the contrary.
Forth with his Grace appointed me the man,
And gave me officers to wait upon me,
Which will so countenance thy cunning work,
As I shall no way be suspected in it: how say thou Fogge?

Fogge. It will do well indeed:
But good sir have a care in any case,
For else you know what barme may come thereon.

Ruff. A care say thou? why man, I will not trust
My house, my strongest locks, nor any place,
But mine own bosom, there will I keep it still,
If I miscarrie, so does it with me.

Shore. Are ye so cunning sir, I say no more,
Jane Shore or I may quittance you for this.

Exit. Ruff. Well Fogge I have contented thee,
Thou may be gone, I must about my charge,
To see that none relieve Shoares wife with ought.
Exit. Fog. Enter the Officers with bills. Come on good fellows, you that must
atcend,
King Richards service under my command,
Your charge is to be very vigilant,
Over that strumpet whom they call Shoares wife:
If any traitor give her but a mite,
A draught of water, or a crust of bread,
Or any other food what ere it be,
Lay hold on him, for it is present death,
By good King Richards proclamation,
This is her haunt, here stand I Sentincll,
Keep you unseen, and aid me when I call.

Enter Iockie and Ieffrey, with a bottle of Ale, Cheese, and halfepennie
loaves, to play at bowls, mistres Shore enters and sits where she was wont.
Iock. Now must I under color of playing at bowls, help till relieve my good
maistres, maistres Shore. Come, Ieffrey, we will play five up for this bottle
of Ale, and yonder good pure woman shall keep the stakes, and this cheese
shall be the measter.


They play still toward her, and Iockie often breaks bread and cheese, and
gives her, till Ieffrey being called away then he gives her all, and is
apprehended. Ruf. Here is a villain, that will not relieve her,
But yet heel loose he bowls, that way to help her,
Apprehend him fellows when I bid ye:
Although his mate be gone, he shall pay for it.
Take him, and let the Beadles whip him well.

Iock. Hear ye sir, shall they be whipped and hanged that gfu^ to the pure, then
they shall be damn that take fro the pure.


They lead him away. Enter young Air again, and Shore stands aloof off.
Air. Oh yonder sits the sweet forsaken soul,
To whom for ever I stand deeply bound:
She sau'de my life, then Air help to save hers.

Ruf. Whither go ye sir?
You come to give this strumpet some relief.

Air. She did more good then ever thou can do,
And if thou will not pity her thy self,
Give others leave, by duty bound thereto:
Here mistress Shore, take this, and would to God
It were so much as my poor heart could wish.

He gives his purse. Sho. Who is it that thus pitties my poor wife?
Ti^ M. Air, Gods blessing on him for it.

Ruf. Dare thou do so Air?

Air. Rufford I dare do more:
Here is my ring, it ways an ounce of Gold,
And take my cloak to keep ye from the cold.

Ruf. Thou art a traitor Air.

Air. Rufford, thou art a villain so to call me.

Ruf. Lay hold on him, attach him officers.

Air. Rufford, ^e answer thine arrest with this.

He draws his rapler, but is apprehended. Ruff. All this contending sir will
not avail,
This treason will be rated at thy life.

Air. Life is too little for her sake that sau'de it.

Sho. Is he a traitor sir, for doing good?
God save the King, a true heart means no ill.
I trust he has reclaimde his ^arpe edict,
And will not that his poorest subject perish,
And so persuaded I my self will do,
That which both love and nature binds me to.
I c^nnot give her as she well deserves.
For she has lost a greater benefit.
(...) take that purse.

Ruff. (...) ^kte away.

Sho. You shall not sir, for I will answer it,
Before the King if you enforce it so.

Ruff. It must be so, you shall unto the King.

Sho. You will be he will first repent the thing:
Come M. Air, i will bear ye company,
Which wise men does say ease calamity,

Exeunt. Jane. If grie^e to speech free passage could afford,
Or (...) w^e I had a fitting word,
I might complain, or if my floods of tears,
Could move remorse of minds, or pearce dull ears,
Or wash away my cares, or cleanse my crime:
With words and tears I would be wail the time.
But it is bootlesse, why live I to see,
All those despised that do pity me.
Despisde? alas, destroyed, and led to death,
That gave me alms here to prolong my breath.
Fair Dames behold, let my example prove,
There is no love like to a husbands love.

Exit. Enter King Richard, Louell, Catesbie, Rufford, Sho^ar, and Air
pinioned, and led betwixt two Officers. Glo. Now tell us Rufford which of these
it is,
That in the heat of his vpheaued spleen,
Contemnes our crown, disdaines our dignity,
And arms himself against authority.

Ruff. Both have offended my dread sovereign,
Though not alike, yet both faults capital,
These l^es declare what, when, and where it was.

Glo. Which is that Air?

Ruff. This young man my Liege.

Glo. I thought it was some hot distempred blood,
That fierd his gyddie brain with business:
Is thy name Air?

Air. It is.

Glo. This paper says so.

Air. Perish may he that made that paper speak.

Glo. Ha? Do thou wish confusion unto us?
This paper is the Organe of our power,
And shall pronounce thy condemnation,
We make it speak thy treasons to thy face,
And thy malicious tongue speaks treas^n still.
Relieu'st thou Shoares wife in contempt of us?

Air. No, but her just desert,
She sau'de my life, which I had forfeited,
Whereby my goods and life she me^ited.

Glo. And thou shall pay it in the self same place,
Where thou this man our Officer, did out face,
And scorndst us saying if we stood by,
Thou would relieve her.

Air. I do not deny,
For want of food her breath was near expirde,
I gave her means to buy it vndesirde,
And rather choose to die for charity,
Then live condemned of ingratitude.

Gl. Your good d^tion brings you to y^ gall^ws,
He has his sentence, Rufford see him ^gd.
They lead out Air. Now sir your name?

Sho. Is it not written there?

Glo. Here Is Matthew Flood.

Ruf. That is his name my Lord.

Glo. Is thy name Flood?

Sho. So M. Rufford sates.

Glo. Flood and Air? the elements conspire,
In air and water to confound our power:
Did thou relieve that hateful wretch Shoares wife?

Sho. I did relieve that woeful wretch Shoares wife.

Gl. Thou seemst a man well staid and temperate,
Durst thou infringe our proclamation?

Sho. I did not break it.

Ruf. Yes, and added more,
That you would answer it before the King.

Sho. And added more, you would repent the thing.

Ru. Who, I? his Highness knows my innocence,
And ready service with my goods and life,
Answer thy treasons to his majesty.

Glo. What can thou say Flood why thou should not die?

Sho. Nothing, for I am mortal and must die,
When my time comes, but that I thinks not yet,
Although (God knows) each hour I wish it were,
So full of dolor is my wearje life:
Now say I this, that I do know the man,
Which does abette that traitorous libeller,
Who did compose and spread that slauderous rhyme,
Which scandals you, and does abuse the time.

Glo. What libeller? another Collingborne?
That wrote: The Cat, the Rat, and Louell our Dog,
Do rule all England under a Hog.
Can thou repeat it Flood?

Sho. I think I can if you command me so.

Glo. We do command thee.

Sho. In this sort it goes.
The crook bakt Boar the way has found,
To root our Roses from our ground,
Both flower and bud will he confound,
Till King of beasts the swine be crownde:
And then the Dog, the Cat, and Rat,
Shall in his trough feed and be fat.

Finis quoth M. Fogge, chief secretary and counselor to M. Rufford.


Glo. How say thou Flood, does Rufford (...) this?

Sho. He is a traitor if he do my Lord.

Ruf. I (...) it? dread Lord I ask no grace,
If I be guilty of this libelling,
Vouchsafe me justice as you are my Prince,
Against this traitor that accuses me.

Sh. What justice crau'st thou? I will combat thee,
In sign whereof I do vnbutton me,
And in my shirt my challenge will maintain,
Thou cal'st me traitor, I will prove thee one,
Open thy bosom like me if thou dare?

Ruff. I will not be so rude before his grace.

Sh. Thou will not open the pack of thy disgrace.
Because thy doublets stuffed with traitorous libels.

Glo. Catesbie tear off the buttons from his breast.
What findst thou there?

Cat. Your highness hand and seal,
For transportation of Hides, Corn and Lead.

Glo. Traitor, did I sign that commission?

Ruf. O pardon me most royal King.

Glo. Pardon? to counterfeit my hand and seal?
Have I bestowed such love, such countenance?
Such trust on thee, and such authority,
To have my hand and signet counterfeit?
To carry Corn the food of all the land,
And Lead, which after might annoy the land,
And Hides, whose leather must relieve the land,
To strangers enemies unto the land:
Did thou so nearly connterfet my hand?

Ruf. Not I my liege, but Fogge the Attorney.

Glo. Away with him Louell and Catesbie, go,
(...) the Sheriffs of London presently,
To see him drawn, and hango, and quartered,
Let them not drink before they see him dead.
Have you again.

Louell and Catesbie lead out Rufford. Ruff. Well Flood thou art my death,
I might have liudet' have seen thee lose thy head.

Sho. Thou have but justice for thy cruelty,
Against the guiltless souls in misery,
I ask no fau^ur if I merit death.

Glo. Cra^st thou no favor? then I tell thee Flood,
Thou art a traitor ^reaking our edict,
By succouring that traitrous queen Shoares wife.
And thou shall die.

Sho. If I have broke the law.

Glo. If (...)? did thou not give her thy purse?
And d^st thou not maintain the deed?

Enter Louell and Catesbie again. Sho. I do, if it be death to the relenting
heart,
Of a kind husband, wronged by a King,
To (...) his (...) seduced wife,
Whom all the world must suffer by command,
To pine and perish for the want of food:
If it be treason for her husband then,
In the dear bowels of his former love,
To bury his own wrong and her misdeed,
And give her meat whom he was wont to feed,
Then Shore must die, for Flood is not my name,
Though once I took it to conceal my shame,
Pittic permits not injured Shore pass by,
And see his once loud wife with famine die.

Glo. Louell and Catesbie, this is Shore indeed,

Shore, We confess that thou have p^ledge,
And art excepted in our Proclamation,
Because thou art her husband whom it concerns,
And thou may lawfully relieve thy wife,
Upon condition thou forgive her fault,
Take her again, and use her as before,
Hazard new horns, how sasist thou, will thou Shore?

Sho. If any but your Grace should so vpbraid,
Such rude reproach should roughly be repaid.
Suppose for treason that she lay condemnde,
Might I not seed her till her hour of death,
And yet my self no traitor for it?

Glo. Thou mightste.

Sh. And why not now (O pardon me dread lord)
When she has had both punishment and shame
Sufficient, since a King did cause her blame,
May I not give her food to save her life,
Yet never take and use her as my wife?

Glo. Except thou take her home again to thee,
Thou art a stranger, and it shall not be,
For if thou do, expect what does belong.

Sho. I never can forget so great a wrong.

Glo. Then never feed her whom thou can not love.

Sho. My charity does that compassion move.

Gl. Move us no more, Louell let Air be hangde,
Just in the place where he relicud Shoares wife:
Shore has his pardon for this first offense.
The name of husband pleads his innocence,
Away with them: Catesbie come you with v^?

Exeunt. Iockie is led to whipping oner the stage, speaking some words, but of
no importance. Then is young Air brought forth to execution, with the
Sheriff and Officers, Mistress Shore weeping, and M. Shore standing by. Air.
Good mistress Shore, (...) not with your tears,
But let me go in quiet to mine end.

Jane. Alas poor soul,
Was never innocent thus put to death.

Air. The mores my joy, that I am innocent,
My death is the less grievous, I am so.

Ia. Ah M. Air the time has been ere now,
When I have kn^eld to Edward on my knees,
And begd for him, that now does make me beg.
I have given him, when he has begd of me,
Though he forbids to give me when I beg,
I have ere now relieved him and his,
Though he and his deny relief to me:
Had I been envious then, as Richard now,
I had not starved, nor Edwards sons bin murdered,
Nor Richard liu'de to put you now to death.

Air. The more Jane is thy virtue and his sin.

Sher. Come sir dispatch.

Air. Dispatch say you? dispatch you may it call,
He cannot stay when death dispatcheth all.

Ia. Lord, is my sin so horrible and grievous,
That I should now become a murderer?
I have sau'de the life of many a man condemnd,
But never was the death of man before.
That any man thus for my sake should die,
Afflicts me more then all my misery.

Air. Jane be content,
I am as much indebted unto thee,
As unto nature, I owed thee a life,
When it was forfeit unto death by law,
Thou b^gdst it of the king and gave it me:
This house of flesh wherein this soul does dwell,
Is thine, and thou art Landladie of it,
And this poor life a Tenant but at pleasure,
It never came to pay the rent till now,
But has run in arerage all this while,
And now for very shame comes to discharge it,
When death distraines for what is but thy due,
I had not ought thee so much as I do,
But by thy only mercy to preserve it,
Until I loose it for my charity.
Thou give me more then ever I can pay,
Then do thy pleasure executioner,
And now farewell kind virtuous mistress Shore,
In heaven we will meet again, in earth no more.

Here he is executed. Ia. Farewell, farewell, thou for thy alms do die.
And I must end here starude in misery,
In life my friend, in death i will not forsake thee,
Thou go to heaven, I hope to overtake thee.

Sho. O world what art thou? man, even from his birth
Finds nothing else but misery on earth,
Thou never (world) scorn'dst me so much before,
But I (vain world) do hate thee ten times more.
I am glad I feel approaching death so nie,
World thou hate me, I thee vain world defy.
I pray ye yet good master officers,
Do but this kindness to poor wretched souls,
As let us have the burial of our friend,
It is but so much labor saude for you.

She. There take his body, bury it where you will,
So it be quickly done out of the way.

Exit Sheriff and Officers. Ia. What Is he that begs the burial of my friend,
And has so oftentimes relieved me?
Ah gentle sir, to comfort my sad woe,
Let me that good kind man of mercy know.

Sho. Ah Jane, now there is none but thou and I
Look on me well, know thou thy Ma. Shore?

Ia. My Husband? then break and live no more.

She swounds, and he supports her in his arms. Sho. Ah my dear Jane, comfort
thy heavy soul,
Go not away so soon, a little stay,
A little, little while, that thou and I,
Like man and wife may here together die,

Jane. How can I look upon my husbands face,
That shamde my self, and wrought his deep disgrace^

Sho. Jane be content, our woes are now alike,
With one self rod thou see God d^ us strike,
If for thy (...), i will pray to heaven for thee,
And if for mine, do thou as much for me.

Jane. Ah Shore, is it possible thou can forgine me?

Shore. Yes Jane, I doc.

Jane. I cannot hope thou will:
My faults so great that I cannot expect it.

Sho. I faith I do, as freely from my soul,
As at Gods hands I hope to be forgiven.

Ia. Then God reward thee, for we now must part,
I feel cold death does seize upon my heart.

Sho. And he is come to me, here he lies,
I feel him ready to close up mine eyes,
Lend me thy hand to bury this our friend,
And then we both will hasten to our end.

Here they put the body of young Air into a Coffin, and then he fits down on
the one side of it, and she on the other. Jane sit thou there, here I my place
will have,
Give me thy hand, thus we embrace our grave,
Ah Jane, he that the depth of woe will see,
Let him but now behold our misery:
But be content, this is the best of al,
Lower then now we are, we cannot fall.

Jane. Ah, I am faint, how happy Airc art thou,
Not feeling that which does afflict us now?

Sho. Oh happy grave, to us this comfort giving,
Here lics two living dead, here one dead living,
Here for his sake, lo this we do for thee,
Thou lookste for one, and art poss^st of three.

Ia. Oh dying marriage, o^, sweet married death
Thou grave which only should part faithful friends,
Bringst us together, and dast i^yne our h^nds,
Oh ^ing death, even in this d^ing life,
Yet ere I go, once Matthew kiss thy wife.

He kisseth her, and she dies. S. Ah my sweet Jane, farewell, farewell poor
soul,
Now tyrant Richard do the worst thou can,
She does defy thee, oh unconstant world,
Here lies a true Anatom^e of thee,
A King had all my joy, that her inioyde,
And by a King again (...) was destroyde:
All ages of my kingly w^es shall tell,
Once more inconstant world farewell, farewell.

he dies. Enter sir Robert Brackenburie, with two or three of his servants.
Bra. Sirs if the King, or else the Duke of Buckingham
Do send for me, I will attend them straight,
But what are these here openly lie dead,
Oh God, the one is mistress Shore, and this is Flood,
That was my man: the third is master Air,
Who suffered death for his releeuing her,
They shall not thus lie in the open way,
Lend me your hands, and heavy hearts withal,
At mine own charge lie give them burial.

They bear them thence. Enter King Richard crowned, Buckingham, Air of
Warwick, Louell, Cafesbie, Fogge, and attendants. Richard. Most noble Lords,
since it has pleased you,
Beyend our expectation on yeut bounties,
T'^ mpale my temples with the Diadem.
How far my quiet thoughts have ever been,
From this great (...),
Heaven best can ^nesse: I am your King,
Long may I be so, to deserve your love,
But I will be a servant to you all,
Pray God my broken sleeps may give you rest.
But only that my blood does challenge it,
Being your lawful Prince by true succession,
I could have wished, with all my heart I could,
This majesty had sitten on the browe
Of any other: so much do I affect a private life,
To spend my dates in contemplation.
But since that heaven and you will have it so,
I take the crowue as meekely at your hands,
As free and pure from an ambitious thought,
As any newborn babe. Thus must thou Richard
Seem as a saint to men in outward show, aside.
Being a very devil in thy heart:
Thus must thou cover all thy villainies,
And keep them close from ouerlookers eyes.

Buck. My Sovereign by the general consent
Of all the Lords and commons of the land,
I tender to your royal majesty,
This princely Lady, the Lady Anne of Warwick
Judged the only worthiest of your love,
To be your highness bride, fair Englands Queen

Rich. My royal Princely Cousin Buckingham,
I see you strive to bless me more and more,
Your bounty is so large and ample to me,
You ouerflow my spirits with your great love,
I willingly accept this virtuous Princess,
And crown her Angel beauty with my love.

Lo. Then as the hand of your high parliament,
I give her here unto your majesty.

Rich. Lord Louell I as heartily receive her,
Welcome fair Queen.

C. And from the Lords and commons of your land
I give the free and voluntary oath,
Of their allegiance to your majesty.
As to their sovereign and liege Lord and Lady,
Richard the third, and beauteous Anne his Queen,
The true and lawful King and Queen of England.

Rich. I do accept it Catesbie, and return,
Exchange of mutual and party love.
Now Fogge too, that in your traitorous Libels,
Besides the counterfeiting of our hand and seal
For Rufford, though so great a fault deserud^
To suffer death, as he already has,
Going about to siubber our renowue,
And wound us with reproach and infamy,
Yet Fogge that thou thy self may plainly see,
How far I am from seeking sharp revenge,
Fogge I forgive thee, and withal we do,
Repeal our heavy sentence against Shoares wi^e,
Restoring all her goods, for we intend,
With all the world now to be perfect friends.

Cat. Why my good Lord, you kn^w she is dead already.

R. True Catesbie, else I nere had spoke such words,
aside. Alas I see our kindness comes too late,
For Catesbie tells me she is dead already.

Cat. I my good Lord, so is her husband too.

Rich. Would they had liude, to see our friendly change,
But Catesbie say, where did Shore and his wife?

Cat. Where Air was hangde for giving her relief,
There both of them round circkling his cold grave,
And arm in arm departed from this life:
The people for the love they bear to her,
And her kind husband, pitying his wrongs,
For ever after mean to call the ditch,
Shoares Ditch, as in the memory of them,
Their bodies in the Friars minorites,
Are in one grave enterred all together,
But mistress Blage for ingratitude,
To mistress Shore, lies dead unburied,
And no one will afford her burial.

Ric. But mistress Blage she shall have burial too,
What now we must be friends, indeed we must,
And now my Lords, I give you all to know,
In memory of our eternal love,
I do ordame an order of the Bathe,
Twelve knights in number of that royal sort,
Which order with all princely ceremonies,
Shall be observed in all royal pomp,
As Edwards our forefather of the Barter,
Which feast our self, and our beloved Queen,
Will presently solemnize in our person.

Buc. Now am I bold to put your grace in mind
Of my long suite, and partly your own promise,
The Earl of Herefords lands.

Rich. Cousin we will better think on that here after.

Buc. M^ pains my Lord has not deserude delay.

Ric. W^l you appoint our time: then you shall stay,
For this hot hastiness sir you shall stay,
Moo^ (...) no more you were best.

Buc. I Richard, is it come to this?
In my first suite of all, do thou dense me?
Break thine o^ word, and turn me off so slieghtly,
Richard thoud had as good have damnde thy soul,
As basely thus to beale with Buckingham:
Richard i will sit upon thy cru^ped shoulder:
I faith I will, if heaven will give me leave,
And Harrie Richmond, this hand alone,
Shall fetch thee home, and seat thee in his throne.

Exit. Rich. What is he gone in heat, why farewell be,
He is displeasde, let him be pleased again,
We have no time to think on angry men:
Come my sweet Queen, let us go solemnize,
Our Knighthoods order in most royal wise.

Exeunt. FINIS.

