THE FAIR MAID OF THE WEST. OR, A Girl worth gold. The first part. As it was
lately acted before the King and Queen, with approved liking. By the Queens
Majesty's Comedians.

Written by T. H.



LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, and are to be sold at his Shop in Ivy
Lane. 1631.

To the much worthy, and my most respected, JOHN OTHOVV, Esquire, Counselor
at Law, in the noble Society of Graies Inn.
SIR,
EXcuse this my boldness, (I entreat you) and let it pass under the title of
my love and respect, long devoted unto you; of which, if I endeavor to present
the world with a due acknowledgement without the sordid expectation of reward,
or servile imputation of flattery, I hope it will be the rather accepted. I
must ingenuously acknowledge, a weightier argument would have better suited
with your grave employment; but there are retireme^ts necessarily belonging to
all the labors of the body and brain: If in any such cessation, you will
daigne to cast an eye upon this weak and unpollish't Poem, I shall receive it
as a courtesy from you, much exceeding any merit in me, (my good meaning
only accepted.) Thus wishing you healthful ab^ in body, ^ubled con^nt in ^de:
with the happi^ fruition of both the temporal felicities of the world present,
and the eternal blessedness of the life future; I still remain as ever,

Yours, most affectionately devoted, THOMAS HEYWOOD.

To the READER.
CVrteous Reader, my Plays have not been exposed to the public view of the
world in numerous sheets, and a large volume; but singly (as thou see) with
great modesty, and small noise. These Comedies, bearing the title of, The fair
Maid of the West: if they prove but as gracious in thy private reading, as they
were plausible in the public acting, I shall not much doubt of their success.
Nor need they (I hope) much fear a rugged and censorious brow from thee, on
whom the greatest and best in the kingdom, have vouc^safed to smile. I hold it
no necessity to trouble thee with the Argument of the story, the matter it self
lying so plainly before thee in Acts and Scenes, without any deviations, or
winding indents.

Peruse it through, and thou may find in it,
Some mirth, some matter, and, perhaps, some wit.
He that would study thy content, T. H.

Dramatis personae.
TWo Sea Captains. Mr. Caroll, a G^ntlema^. Mr. Spencer. By Mr. Michael Bowyer.
Captain Goodlack, Spencers friend; by Mr. Rich. Perkins. Two Vintners boys.
Besse Bridges, The fair Maid of the west; by Hugh Clark. Mr. Forset, a
Gentleman; by Christoph. Goad. Mr. Ruffman, a swaggering Gentleman; by William
Shearlock. Clem, a drawer of wine under Besse Bridges; by Mr. William Robinson.
Three Sailors* A Surgeon. A kitching Maid; by Mr. Anthony Furner. The Mayor of
Foy, an Alderman, and a servant. A Spanish Cap. by. C. Goad An English
Merchant; by Rob. Axell. Mullisheg, K. of Fesse, by Mr. Will. Allen. Bashaw
Alcade; by Mr. Wilbraham. Bashaw Ioffer. Two Spanish Captains. A French
Merchant. An Italian Merchant. A Chorus. The Earl of Essex going to Cales: the
Mayor of Plimoth, with Petitioners, Mutes, personated.
Prologue.
AMongst the Grecians there were annual feasts,
To which none were invited as chief guests,
Save Princes and their Wives. Amongst the men,
There was no argument disputed then,
But who best governed: And (as't did appear)
He was esteemed sole Sovereign for that year.
The Queens and Ladies argued at that time,
For Virtue and for beauty which was prime,
And she had the high honor. Two here be,
For Beauty one, the other Majesty,
Most worthy (did that custom still persever)
Not for one year, but to be Sovereigns ever.
THE FAIR MAID of the West: OR, A Girl worth Gold.
Enter two Captains, and Mr. Carrol. 1. Capt. WHen puts my Lord to Sea?


2. Capt. When the winde's fair.


Car. R^olve me I entreat, can you not guess
The purpose of this voyage?

1. Capt. Most men think
The Fleet's bound for the Islands.

Carr. Nay, it is like.
The great success at Cales under the conduct
Of such a Noble General, has put heart
Into the English: They are all on fire
To purchase from the Spaniard. If their Carracks
Come deeply laden, we shall tugge with them
For golden spoil.

2. Capt. O, were it come to that!


1 Capt. How Plymouth swells with Gallants* how the streets
Glister with gold! You cannot meet a man
But trickt in skarffe and feather, that it seems
As if the pride of Englands Gallantry
Were harbourd here. It does appear (me thinks)
A very Court of Soldiers.

Carr. It does so.
Where shall we dine to day?

2. Capt. At the next Tavern by; there is the best wine,


1 Cap. And the best wench, Besse Bridges, she is the flower
Of Plymouth held: the Castle needs no bush,
Her beauty draws to them more gallant Customers
Then all the signs in the town else.

2. Capt. A sweet Less,
If I have any judgment.

1. Capt. Now in troth
I think she is honest.

Carr. Honest, and live there?
What, in a public Tavern, where is such confluence
Of lusty and brave Gallants? Honest said you?

2. Capt. I vow she is for me.


1. Capt. For all, I think. I Am sure she is wondrous modest.


Carr. But withal
Exceeding affable.

2 Capt. An argument that she is not proud.


Carr. No, were she proud, she would fall.


1 Capt. Well, she is a most attractive Adamant,
Her very beauty has upheld that house,
And gained her master much.

Carr. That Adamant
Shall for this time draw me to, we will dine there.

2. Capt. No better motion: Come to the Castle then.

Enter M. Spencer, and Capt. Goodlack.
Goodl. What, to the old house still?


Spenc. Can blame me, Captain,
Believe me, I was never surprisde till now,
Or catch^ upon the sudden.

Goodl. Pray resolve me,
Why being a Gentleman of fortunes, means,
And well revenude, will you adventure thus
A doubtful voyage, when only such as I
Borne to no other fortunes then my sword
Should seek abroad for pillage.

Spenc. Pillage, Captain?
No, it is for honor; And the brave society
Of all these shining Gallants that attend
The great L. General, drew me hither first:
No hope of gain or spoil.

Goodl. I, but what draws you to this house so often?


Spenc. As if thou knewst it not.


Goodl. What, Besse?


Spenc. Even she.


Goodl. Come, I must tell you, you forget your self,
One of your birth and breeding, thus to dote
Upon a Tanners daughter: why, her father
Sold hydes in Somersetshire, and being trade-falne,
Sent her to service.

Spenc. Prithee speak no more,
Thou telst me that which I would feign forget,
Or wish I had not known. If thou will humor me
Tell me she is fair and honest.

Goodl. Yes, and loves you.


Spenc. To forget that, were to exclude the rest:
All saving that, were nothing. Come let us enter.
Enter 2. Drawers.
1. Draw. You are welcome Gentlemen. Show them into the next room there.


2. Draw. Look out a Towell, and some Rolls, a Salt and Trenchers.


Spenc. No sir, we will not din^.


2. Draw. I am sure ye would if ye had my stomach.
What wine drink ye, Sack or Claret?

Spenc. Where Is Besse?


2. Draw. Marry above with three or four Gentlemen.


Spenc. Go call her.


2. D. I Will draw you a cup of the neatest wine in Plymouth


Spen. I Will taste none of your drawing. Go call Besse.


2 Draw. There Is nothing in the mouths of these Gallants, but Besse, Besse.


Spenc. What sa'y Sir?


2. Draw. Nothing sir, but I Will go call her presently.


Spenc. Tell her who is here.


2. Draw. The devil rid her out of the house for me.


Spenc. Sa'y sir?


2 Draw. Nothing but anon anon sir.

Enter Besse Bridges.
Spenc. See she is come.


Bess. Sweet Mr Spencer, you are a stranger grown,
Where have you been these three days?

Spenc. The last night
If ate up late, at game: here take this bag,
And lay't up till I call for it.

Bess. Sir I shall.


Spenc. Bring me some wine.


Bess. I know your taste,
And I shall please your palate.

Goodl. Troth it is a pretty soul.


Spenc. To thee I will unbosome all my thoughts,
Were her low birth but equal with her beauty
Here would I fix my thoughts.

Goodl. You are not mad sir?
You say you love her.

Spenc. Never question that.


Goodl. Then put her to it, win Opportunity,
She Is the best bawd: If (as you say) she loves you,
She can deny you nothing.

Spenc. I have proved her
Unto the utmost test. Examined her.
Even to a modest force: but all in vain:
She Will laugh, confer, keep company, discourse,
And something more, kiss: but bey^nd that compass
She no way can be drawn.

Goodl. It Is a virtue,
But seldom found in tavernes.
Enter Besse with wine.
Besse. It Is of the best Graves wine sir.


Spenc. Gramarcie Girl, come sit.


Besse. Pray pardon sir, I dare not.


Spenc. I Will ha'it so.


Besse. My fellows love me not, and will complain
Of such a saucy boldness.

Spenc. Pox on your fellows,
I Will try whether their pottle pots or heads
Be harder, if I do but hear them grumble.
Sit: now Besse drink to me.

Besse. To your good voyage.

Enter the second Drawer.
2 Draw. Did you call sir?


Sp. Yes sir, to have your absence. Captain, this health.


Goodl. Let it come sir.


2 Draw. Must you be set, and we wait, with a --


Spenc. What say you sir?


2 Draw. Anon, anon, I come there.

Exit.
Spenc. What will you venture Besse to sea with me?


Besse. What I love best, my heart: for I could wish
I had been borne to equal you in fortune,
Or you so low, to have been rankt with me,
I could have then presumed boldly to say,
I love none but my Spencer.

Spenc. Besse I thank thee.
Keep^ still that hundred pound till my return
From th'Islands with my Lord: if never, wench
Take it, it is thine own.

Besse. You bind me to you.

Enter the first Drawer.
1 Draw. Besse, you mu^t fill some wine into the Portcullis, the Gentlemen
there will drink none but of your drawing.


Spenc. She shall not rise sir, go, let your Master snick-up.


1 D. And that should be cousin-german to the hick-up.

Enter the second Drawer.
2 Draw. Besse, you must needs come, the gentlemen fling pots, pottles,
drawers, and all down^ stairs. The whole house is in an uprore.


Besse. Pray pardon sir, I needs must be gone.


2 D. The Gentlemen swear if she come not up to the^
They will come down to her.

Spenc. If they come in peace,
Like civil Gentlemen, they may be welcome:
If otherwise, let them usurp their pleasures.
We stand prepared for both.
Enter Caroll and two Captains.
Car. Save you gallants, we are somewhat bold to press
Into your company. It may be held scarce manners,
Therefore fit that we should crave your pardon.

Spenc. Sir, you are welcome, so are your friends.


1 Capt. Some wine.


Besse. Pray give me leave to fill it.


Sp. You shall not stir. So please you we will join company. Drawer, more
stools.


Car. I take it that is a she drawer. Are you of the house?


Besse. I am sir.


Caroll. In what place?


Besse. I draw.


Caroll. Beer, do you not? You are some tapstresse.


Spenc. Sir, the worst character you can bestow
Upon the maid is to draw wine.

Caroll. She wo^ draw none to us,
Perhaps she keeps a Rundlet for your taste,
Which none but you must pierce.

2 Capt. I pray ^e civil.


Spenc. I know no^, Gentlemen, what your intents be,
Nor do I fear or care. This is my (...),
And if you bear you, as you seem in show,
Like Gentlemen, sit and be sociable.

Car. We will. Min^, by your leave: Remove I say.


Spenc. She shall not stir.


Car. How sir?


Spen. No sir: could you outface the devil,
We do not fear your roaring.

Car. Though you may be companion with a drudge,
It is not fit she should have place by us.
About your business, huswife.

Spenc. She is worthy
The place as the best here, and she shall keep^.

Car. You lie.

They bustle. Caroll s^aine.
Goodl. The Gentleman's slain, away.


Besse. Oh heaven, what have you done?


Goodl. Undone thy self and m^ too. Come away*


Besse. Oh sad misfortune, I shall lose him ever.
What, are you men or milk sops? Stand you still
Senseless as stones, and see your friend in danger
To expire his last?

1 Capt. Tush, all our help's in vain.


2 Capt. This is the fruit of whoores.
This mischief came through thee*

Besse. It grew first from your incivilitie.


1 Cap. Lend me a hand to lift his body hence.
It was a fatal business.
Exeunt Captains. Enter the two Drawers.
1 Dr. One call my Master, another fetch the constable,
Here Is a man killed in the room.

2 Dr. How, a man killed say thou. Is all paid?


1 Dr. How fell they out, can thou tell?


2 Dr. Sure about this bold Betrice: it is not so much for the death of the man,
but how shall we come by our reckoning?

Exeunt Drawers.
Besse. What shall become of me! Of all lost creatures
The most unfortunate. My innocence
Has been the cause of blood, and I am now
Purpled with murder, though not within compass
Of the Laws severe censure: but which most
Adds unto my affliction, I by this
Have lost so worthy and approved a friend,
Whom to redeem from exile, I would give
All that is without and in me.
Enter Forset.
Fors. Your name's Besse Bridges?


Besse. An unfortunate Maid.
Known by that name too well in Plymouth here.
Your business, sir, with me?

Fors. Know you this Ring?


Besse. I do: it is my Spencers.
I know withal you are his trusty friend,
To whom he would commit it. Speak, how fares he?
Is he in freedom, know ye?

Fors. He Is in health
Of body, though in mind somewhat perplexed
For this late mischief happened.

Besse. Is he fled, and freed from danger?


Fors. Neither. By this token
He lovingly commends him to you Besse,
And prays you when it is dark meet him o'th Hoe
Near to the new-made Fort, where he will attend you,
Before he flies, to take a kind farewell.
There Is only Goodlack in his company,
He entreats you not to fail him.

Bes. Tell him from me, I Will ^ome, I Will run, I Will fly,
Stand Death before me: were I sure to die.
Exit. Enter Spencer and Goodlacke.
Goodl. You are too full of passion.


Spenc. Can thou blame me,
To have the guilt of murder burden me,
And next, my life in haz^td to a death
So ignominious: last, to lose a Love
So sweet, so fair, so amorous, and so chaste,
And all these at an instant? Art thou sure
Carol is dead?

Goodl. I can believe no less.
You hit him in the very speeding place.

Spenc. Oh but the last of these sits neer'st my heart.


Goodl. Sir be advised by me.
Try her before you trust her. She perchance
May take the advantage of your hopeful fortunes:
But when she finds you subject to distress
And casualty, her flattering love may die:
Your deceased hopes.

Spenc. Thou counselst well.
I Will put her to the test and utmost trial
Before I trust her further. Here she comes.
Enter Forset, and Besse with a bag.
Fors. I have done my message sir.


Bes. Fear not sweet Spencer, we are now alone,
And thou art sanctuar'd in these mine arms.

Goodl. While these confer we will sentinel their safety.
This place I Will guard.

Fors. I this.


Bes. Are you not hurt?
Or your skin rac'd with his offensive steel?
How is it with you?

Spenc. Besse, all my afflictions
Are that I must leave thee: thou know withal
My extreme necessity, and that the fear
Of a most scandalous death does force me hence.
I am not near my Country, and to stay
From new supply from thence, might deeply engage me^
To desperate hazard.

Besse. Is it coin you want?
Here is the hundred pound you gave me late,
Use that, beside what I have stored and sav'de
Which makes it fifty more: were it ten thousand
Nay, a whole million, Spencer, all were thine.

Spenc. No, what thou have keep still, it is all thine own.
Here be my keys, my trunkes take to thy charge:
Such gold fit for transportage as I have,
I Will bear along: the rest are freely thine,
Money, apparel, and what else thou findst,
Perhaps worth my bequest and thy receiving,
I make thee mistress of.

Besse. Before I doted,
But now you strive to have me extaside.
What would you have me do, in which to express
My zeal to you?

Spenc. Which in my chamber hangs,
My picture, I injoyne thee to keep ever,
For when thou partst with that, thou (...) me.

Besse. My soul may from my body be divorced,
But never that from me.

Spenc. I have a house in Foy, a tavern called
The Winde-mill, that I freely give thee too,
And thither if I live I Will ^end to thee.

Besse. So soon as I have cast my reckonings up,
And made even with my Master, I Will not fail
To visit Foy in Cornwall. Is there else
Ought that you will injoyne me?

Spenc. Thou art fair,
Join to thy beauty virtue. Many suitors
I know will tempt thee: beauty's a shrewd bait,
But unto that if thou add'st chastity,
Thou shall ore-come all scandal. Time calls hence,
We now must part.

Besse. Oh that I had the power to make Time lame,
To stay the stars, or make the Moon stand still,
That future day might never haste thy flight.
I could dwell here for ever in thine arms.
And wish it always night.

Spenc. We trifle hours. Farewell.


Besse. First take this Ring:
It Was the first token of my constant love
That past betwixt us. When I see this next,
And not my Spencer, I shall think thee dead:
For till death part thy body from thy soul
I know thou will not part with it.

Spenc. Swear for me Besse: for thou may safely do^.
Once more sarewell: at Foy thou shall hear from me.

Besse. There Is not a word that has a parting sound
Which through mine ears shrills not immediate death.
I shall not live to lose thee.

Fors. Best be gone, for hark I hear some tread.


Spenc. A thousand farewels are in one contracted. Captain away.

Exit Spencer, and Goodlacke.
Besse. Oh, I shall dye.


Fors. What mean you Besse, will you betray your friend,
Or call my name in question? Sweet, look up.

Besse. Hah, is my Spencer gone?


Fors. With speed toward Foy,
There to take ship for Fiall.

Besse. Let me recollect my self,
And what he left in charge. Virtue and Chastity.
Next, with all sudden expedition
Prepare for Foy: all these will I conserve,
And keep them strictly, as I would my life.
Plymouth farewell: in ^ornwall I will prove
A second fortune, and for ever mourn,
Until I see my Spencers safe return.
Hoboys. A dumb Show. Enter General, Captains, the Mayor: Petitioners the
other way with papers: amongst these the Drawers. The General gives them
bags of money. All go off saving the two Drawers.
1 Draw. It Is well yet w^ have gotten all the money due to my Master. It is the
commonest thing that can be for these Captains to score and to score: but
when the scores are to be paid, Non est inventus.


2 Draw. It Is ordinary amongst Gallants now a days, who had rather swear forty
oaths, then only this one oath, God let me never be trusted.


1 Draw. But if the Captains would follow the noble mind of the General,
before night there would not be one score owing in Plymouth.


2 Draw. Little knows Bess^ that my Master has got in these desperate debts:
but she has c^st up her account* and is gone.


1 Draw. Whither can thou tell?


2 Draw. They say to keep a Tavern in Foy, and that M. Spencer has given her
a stock to set up for her self. Well, howsoever, I am glad, though he killed
the man we have got our money.


Explicit Actus primus.
Actus secundus, Scena prima.
Enter Forset and Roughman. Forset. IN your time have you seen a sw^ter
creature?


Roughm. Some week or thereabouts.


Fors. And in that small time she has almost undone all the other Taverns.
The Gallants make no rendezvous now but at the Windmill.


Roughm. Spite of them I Will have her. It shall cost me the setting on but I Will
have her.


Fors. Why, do you think she is so easily won?


Roughm. Easily or not, I Will bid as fair and far as any man within twenty
miles of my head, but I will put her to the squeake.


Fors. They say there are Knights sons already come as suitors to her.


Roughm. It Is like enough, some younger brothers, and so I intend to make them.


F^s. If these doings hold, she will grow rich in short time.


Roughm. There shall be doings that shall make this Windmill my grand seat,
my mansion, my palace, and my Constantinople.

Enter Besse Bridges like a Mistress, and Clem.
Fors. Here she comes: observe how modestly she bears her self.


Roughm. I must know of what burden this vessel is, I shall not bear with her
till she bear with me, and till then, I cannot report her for a woman of
good carriage.


Besse. Your old Master that dwelt here before my coming, has turned over
your years to me.


Clem. Right forsooth: before he was a Vintner, he was a shoo-maker, and left
two or three turne-overs more besides my self.


Besse. How long have thou to serve.


Clem. But eleven years next grass, and then I am in hope of my freedom. For
by that time I shall be at full age.


Besse. How old art thou now?


Clem. Forsooth newly come into my Teenes. I have scraped trenchers this two
years, and the next Vintage I hope to be Barre-boy.


Besse. What Is thy name?


Clem. My name is Clem, my father was a Baker, and by the report of his
neighbors, as honest a man as ever lived by bread.


Bes. And where dwelt he?


Clem. Below here in the next crooked street, at the sign of the Leg. He was
nothing so tall as I, but a little wee-man, and somewhat huckt-backt.


Besse. He was once Constable?


Clem. He was indeed, and in that one year of his reign, I have heard them
say, he bolted and sifted out more business, then others in that office in
many years before him.


Besse. How long is it since he dyed?


Clem. Marry the last dear year. For when corn grew to be at an high rate,
my father never dowed after.


Besse. I think I have heard of him.


Clem. Then I am sure you have heard he was an honest neighbor, and one that
never loved to be mealy-mouthed.


Besse. Well sirrah, prove an honest servant, and you shall find me your good
Mistress. What company is in the Marmaid?


Clem. There be four Sea captains. I bele^ve they be little better then
spirats, they are so flush of their rudocks.


Bess. No matter, we^ will take no note of them.
Here they vent many brave commodities,
By which some gain accrews. They Are my good customers,
And still return me profit.

Clem. Wot you what Mistress, how the two Sailors would have served me, that
called for the pound and half of Cheese?


Bess. How was it Clem?


Clem. When I brought them a reckoning, they would have had me to have scor'd
it up. They took me for a simple gull indeed, that would have had me to have
taken Chalk for Cheese:


Besse. Well, go wait upon the Captains, see them want no wine.


Clem. Nor reckoning neither, take my word Mistress.


Roughm. She Is now at leisure, I Will to her.
Lady, what Gentlemen are those above?

Besse. Sir they are such as please to be my guests,
And they are kindly welcome.

Roughm. Give me their names.


Besse. You may go search the Church-booke where they were christened.
There you perhaps may learn them.

Roughm. Minion, how?


Fors. Fie, fie, you are too rude with this fair creature,
That no way seeks to offend you.

Bess. Pray hands off.


Roughm. I tell thee maid, wife, or what ever thou be,
No man shall enter here but by my leave.
Come, let us be more familiar.

Bess. Alas good man.


R. Why know thou who^ thou sleightft. I am Roughman,
The only approved gallant of these parts,
A man of whom the Roarers stand in awe,
And must not be put off.

Bess. I never yet heard man so praise himself,
But proved in'th end a coward.

Roughm. Coward, Bess?
You will offend me, raise in me that fury
Your beauty cannot calm. Go to, no more,
Your language is too harsh and peremptory.
Pray let me hear no more on'^. I tell thee
That quiet day scarce past me these seven years
I have not cracked a weapon in some fray,
And will you move my spleen?

Fors. What, threat a woman?


Bes. Sir, if you thus persist to wrong my house,
Disturb my guests, and nightly domineire,
To put my friends from patience, I Will complain,
And right my self before the Magi^trate.
Can we not live in compass of the Law,
But must be swaggerd out on it?

Roughm. Go too, wench,
I wish thee well, think on it, there is good for thee
Stored in my breast, and when I come in place
I must have no man to offend mine eye:
My love can brook no rivals. For this time
I am content your Captains shall have peace,
But must not be used to it.

Bes. Sir if you come like other free and civil Gentlemen
You Are welcome, otherwise my doors are barred you.

Roughm. That Is my good Girl,
I have fortunes laid up for thee: what I have
Command it as thine own. Go too, be wise.

Bes. Well, I shall study for it.


Roughm. Consider on it. Farewell.

Exit.
Bes. My mind suggests me that this prating fellow
Is some notorious Coward. If he persist
I have a trick, to try what metall's in him.
Enter Clem. What news with you?


Cle. I am now going to carry the Captains a reckning.


Besse. And what is the ^umme?


Clem. Let me see, eight shillings and six pence.


Bes. How can you make that good? write them a bill.


Clem. I Will watch them for that, it is no time of night to use our bills, the
Gentlemen are no dwarfes, and with one word of my mouth, I can tell them what
is to be-tall.


Besse. How comes it to so much?


Clem. Imprimis, six quarts of wine at seven pence the quart, seven sixpences.


Besse. Why do thoureckon it so?


Clem. Because as they came in by hab nab, so I will bring them in a reckning
at six and at sevens.


Bes. Well, wine -- 3 s, 6 d.


Clem. And what wants that often groats?


Besse. It Is two pence over.


Clem. Then put six pence more to it, and make it 4 s, wine, though you bate it
them in their meat.


Besse. Why so I prithee?


Clem. Because of the old proverb, What they want in meat, let them take out
in drink. Then for twelve penyworth of Anchoves, 18 d.


Besse. How can that be?


Clem. Marry very well Mistress, 12 d. Anchoves, and 6 d. oil and vinegar.
Nay they shall have a saucy reckoning


Bes. And what for the other half crown?


Clem. Bread, beer, salt, napkins, trenchers, one thing with another, so the
summa totalis is -- 8 s, 6 d.


Bes. Well, take the reckoning from the bar.


Clem. What needs that forsooth? The Gentlemen seem to be high flowne already,
send them in but another pottle of Sack, and they will cast up the reckoning
of themselves. Yes, I Will about it.


Bes. Were I not with so my suitors pesterd,
And might I enjoy my Spencer, what a sweet
Contented life were this? For money flows
And my gaine's great. But to my* Roughman next:
I have a trick to try what spirit's in him,
It shall be my next business: in this passion
For my dear Spencer, I propose me this,
Among many sorrows some mirth's not amiss,
Exit. Enter Spencer, and Goodlac^e.
Goodl. What were you thinking sir?


Spen. Troth of the world, what any man should see in it
To be in love with it.

Goodl. The reason of your meditation.


Spenc. To imagine that in the same in^nt that one forfets all his estate,
another enters upon a rich possession: as one goes to the Church to be married,
another is hurried to the gallows to be hanged, the last having no feeling of
the first man's joy, nor the first of the last man's misery. At the same time
that one lies tortured upon the Rack, another lies tumbling with his Mistress
over head and ears in down and feathers. This when I truly consider, I cannot
but wonder why any fortune should make a man extasy'd.


Goodl. You give your self too much to melancholy.


Spenc. These are my Maxims, and were they as faithfully practiced by others,
as truly apprehended by me, we should have less oppression, and more charity.

^nter the two Captains that were before.
1 Capt. Make good thy words.


2 Capt. I say thou have injured me.


1 Capt. Tell me wherein.


2 Capt. When we a^aulted Fiall,
And I had by the Generals command
The onset, and with danger of my person
Enforced the Spaniard to a swift retreat,
And beat them from their Fort, thou when thou sawst
All fear and danger past, made up with me
To share that honor which was sole mine own,
And never ventured shot for it, or ere came
Where bullet grazed.

Spenc. See Captain a fray toward,
Let Us if we can atone this difference.

Goodl. Content.


1 Capt. I Will prove it with my sword,
That though thou had the foremost place in field,
And I the second, yet my Company
Was equal in the entry of the Fort.
My sword was that day drawn as soon as thine,
And that poor honor which I won that day
Was but my merit.

2 Capt. Wrong me palpably
And justify the same?

Spenc. You shall not fight.


1 Capt. Why sir, who made you first a Iusticer,
And taught you that word shall? you are no General,
Or if you be, pray show us your Commission.

Spenc. Sir you have no commission but my counsel,
And that I Will show you freely.

2 Capt. It Is some Chaplain,


1 Capt. I do not like his text.


Goodl. Let Us beat their weapons down.


1 Cap. I Will aim at him that offers to divide us!


2 Cap. Pox of these part-frayes, see I am wounded
By beating down my weapon.

Goodl. How fares my friend?


Sp. You sought for blood, and Gentlemen you have it,
Let mine appease you, I am hurt to death.

1 Capt. My rage converts to pity, that this Gentleman
Shall suffer for his goodness.

Goodl. Noble friend,
I will revenge thy death.

Spen. He is no friend
That murmurs such a thought. Oh Gentlemen.
I killed a man in Plymouth, and by you
Am^ine in Fiall, Caroll fell by me,
And I fall by a Spencer. Heaven is just,
And will not suffer murder unrevenged,
Heaven pardon me, as I forgive you both,
Shift for your selves: away.

2 Capt. We saw him die,
But grieve you should so perish.

Spen. Note Heavens justice,
And henceforth make that use on^. I shall faint.

1 Capt. Short Farewels now must serve. If thou surviv'st
Live to thine honor: but if thou expi^st
Heaven take thy soul to mercy. Exeunt.

Spenc. I bleed much,
I must go seek a Surgeon.

Goodl. Sir how cheer you?


Spenc. Like one that's bound upon a new adventure
To the other world: yet thus much worthy friend
Let me entreat you, since I understand
The Fleet is bound for England, take your occasion
To ship your self, and when you come to Foy
Kindly commend me to my dearest Besse,
Thou shall receive a Will, i^ which I have
Possessed her of five hundred pounds a year.

Goodl. A noble Legacy.


Spenc. The rest I have bestowed amongst my friends,
Only reserving a bare h^ndred pounds
To see me honestly and well intert'd.

Goodl. I shall perform your trust as carefully
As to my father, breathed he.

Spenc. M^rke me Captain:
Her Legacy I give with this proviso,
If at thy arrival where my Besse remains,
Thou findst her well reported, free from scandal,
My Will stands firm: but if thou hear'st her branded
For loose behavior, or immodest life,
What she should have, I here bestow on thee,
It is thine own: but as thou love thy soul
Deal faithfully betwixt my Besse and me.

Goodl. Else let me dye a prodigy.


Spenc. This Ring was hers, that, be she loose or chaste,
Being her own, restore her, she will know it,
And doubtless she deserves it. Oh my memory,
What had I quite forgot? She has my picture,

Goodl. And what of that?


Sp. If she be ranckt amongst the loose and lewd,
Take it away, I hold it much undecent,
A whore should have it in keeping: but if constant
Let her enjoy it: this my Will perform
As thou art just and honest.

Goodl. Sense else forsake me.


Spenc. Now lead me to my Chamber, all is mads even,
My peace with earth, and my atone with heaven.
Enter Besse Bridges like a Page with a sword, and Clem.
Bess. But that I know my mother to be chaste,
I Would swear some Soldier got me.

Clem. It may be many a Soldiers Buffe Ierkin came out of your fathers
Tanne-fat.


Besse. Me thinks I have a manly spirit in me
In this man's habit.

Clem. Now am not I of many men's minds, for if you should do me wrong, I
should not kill you, though I took you pissing against a wall.


Bess. Me thinks I could be valiant on the sudden:
And meet a man ^h field.
I could do all that I have heard discourst
Of Mary Ambree or Westminsters Long-Meg.

Clem. What Mary Ambree was I cannot tell, but unless you were taller you
will come short of Long Meg*


Bess. Of all thy fellows thee I ouely trust,
And charge thee to be secret.

Clem. I am bound in my Indentures to keep my Masters secrets, and should I
find a man in bed with you, I would not tell.


Bes. Be gone sir, but no words as you esteem my favor.


Clem. But Mistress, I could wish you to look to your long seames, fights are
dangerous. But am not I in a sweet taking think you?


Besse. I prithee why?


Clem. Why, if you should swagger and kill any body, I being a Vintner should
be called to the Bar.


Besse. Let none condemn me of ^odesty,
Because I ^rie the courage of a man
Who on my soul's a Coward: beats my servants,
Cuffes them, and as they pass by him kickes my maids,
Nay domineirs over me, making himself
Lord ore my house and household. Yesternight
I heard him make appointment on some business
To pass alone this way. I Will venture fair,
But I will try what is in him.
Enter Roughman and Forset.
Fors. Sir, I can now no further, weighty business
Calls me away.

Rough. Why at your pleasure then,
Yet I could wish that ere I past this field,
That I could meet some Hector, so your eyes
Might witness what my self have often repeated,
Namely that I am valiant.

Fors. Sir no doubt. But now I am in haste. Farewell,


Roug. How many times brave words bear out a man?
For if he can but make a noise, he is feared.
To talk of fraies, although he never had heart
To face a man in field, that is a brave fellow,
I have been valiant I must needs confess,
In street and Tavern, where there have been men
Ready to part the fray: but for the fields
They are too cold to fight in.

Besse. You are a villain, a Coward, and you lie.


R. You wrong me I protest. Sweet courteous Gentleman
I never did you wrong.

Besse. Wilt tell me that?
Draw forth thy coward sword, and suddenly,
Or as I am a man I Will run thee through,
And leave thee dead ith field.

Roug. Hold as you are a Gentleman. I have taken an oath
I will not fight to day.

Besse. Thou Have took a blow already and the lie,
Will not both these inrage thee?

Rough. No, would you give the bastinado too,
I will not break mine oath.

Besse. Oh, your name's Roughman.
No day does pass you but you hurt or kill.
Is this out of your calender?

Rough. I, you are deceived,
I never drew sword in anger I protest,
Unless it were upon some poor weak fellow
That never wore steel about him.

Besse. Throw your Sword.


Roug. Here sweet young sir, but as you are a gentleman,
Do not impair mine honor.

Besse. Tie that shoe.


Rough. I shall sir.


Besse. Untruss that point.


Rough. Any thing this day to save mine oath.


Besse. Enough: yet not enough, lie down
Till I stride ore thee.

Rough. Sweet sir any thing.


Besse. Rise, thou have leave. Now Roughman thou art blessed
This day thy life is saved, look to the rest.
Take back thy sword.

Roughm. Oh you are g^rous: honor me so much
As let me know to whom Iowe'my life.

Besse. I am Besse Bridges. brother,


Roug. Still me thought that you were something like her.


Besse. And I have heard,
You domineir and revell in her house,
Control her servants, and abuse her guests,
Which if I ever shall hereafter hear,
Thou art but a dead man.

Roughm. She never told me of a brother living,
But you have power to sway me.

Bess. But for I see you are a Gentleman,
I am content this on^o let you pass,
But if I find you fall into relapse,
The second's far more dangerous.

Roughm. I shall fear it. Sir will you take the wine?


Bess. I am for London.
And for these two terms cannot make return*
But if you see my sister, you may say
I was in health.

Roughm. Too well, the devil take you.


Bess. Pray use her well, and at my coming back
I Will ask for your acquaintance. Now farewell.

Rough. None saw'^hee's gone for London: I am unhurt,
Then who shall publish this disgrace abroad?
One man's no slander, should he speak his worst,
My tongue's as loud as his, but in this coun^y
Both of more fame and credit. Should we contest
I can outface the proudest. This is then
My comfort: Roughman, thou (...) still the same,
For a disgrace not seent, is held no shame.
Enter two Sailons.
^ Sa^ Aboard, aboard, the wind stands fair for England,
The ships have all weighed anchor.

2 Sail. A stiff gale blows from the shore.

Enter Captain Goodlacke.
Goodl. The Sailers call aboard, and I am forced
To leave my friend now at the point of death,
And cannot close his eyes. Here is the Will,
Now may I find yon Tann^rs daughter turned
Unchaste or wanton, I shall gain by it
Five hundred pounds a year: here is good evidence.

1 Sailor. Sir will you take the long boat and aboard?

Enter a third Sailor.
Goodl. With all my heart.


3 Sail. What are you ready Mates?


1 Sail. We staid for you. Thou can not tell who is dead?
The great bell rung out now.

3 Sailor. They say it was for one Spencer, who this night
Did of a mortal wound.

Goodl. My worthy friend.
Unhappy man that cannot stay behind^
To do him his last rights. Was his name Spencer?

3 Sail. Yes sir, a Gentleman of good account
And well known in the navy.

Goodl. This is the end of all mortality:
It will be news unpleasing to his Besse.
I cannot fair amiss, but long to see
Whether these Lands belong to her or me.
Enter Spencer, and his Surgeon.
Surg. Nay fear not sir, now you have escaped this dressing
My life for yours.

Spen^. I thank thee honest Friend.


Surg. Sir I can tell you news.


Spenc. What is it I prithee?


Surg. There is a Gentleman one of your name,
That did within this hour.

Spenc. My name? what was he, of what sickness did he?


Surg. No sickness, but a slight hurt in the body,
Which showed at first no danger, but being searched,
He did at the third dressing.

Spenc. At my third search I am in hope of life.
The heavens are merciful.

Surg. Sir doubt not your recovery.


Spenc. That hundred pound I had prepared t'expend
Upon mine own expected Funeral
I for name sake will now bestow on his.

Surg. A noble resolution.


Spenc. What ships are bound for England, I would gladly
Venture to sea, though weak.

Surg. All bound that way are under sail already.


Spenc. Here Is no security,
For when the beaten Spaniards shall return,
They Will spoil whom they can find.

Surg. We have a ship,
Of which I am Surgeon, that belongs unto
A London merchant, now bound for Mamorah
A town in Barbary, please you to use that,
You shall command free passage: ten months hence
We hope to visit England.

Spenc. Friend I thank thee.


Surg. I Will bring you to the Master, who I know
Will entertain you gladly.

Spen. When I have seen the funeral rights performed
To the dead body of my Country man
And kinsman, I will take your courteous offer.
England no doubt will hear news of my death,
How Besse will take it is to me unknown:
On her behavior I will build my fa^e,
There raise my love, or thence erect my hate.

Explicit Actus secundus.
Actus tertius. Scena prima.
Enter Roughman and Forset. Forset. OH you are well met, j^st as I propheside
So it fell out.

Fors. As how I pray?


Rough. Had you but staid the crossing of one field,
You had beheld a Hector, the bold^st (...)
That ever Roughman met with.

Fors. Pray what was he?


Rough. You talk of Little Davy, Cutting Dick,
And diverse such, but tush, this has no fellow.

Fors. Of what stature and years was he?


Rough. Indeed I must confess he was no giant,
Nor above fifty, but he did bestirre him,
Was here and there, and every where at once,
That I was never so put to it since the Midwife
First wrapped my head in linen. Let Us to Besse.
I Will tell her the whole project.

Fors. Here Is the house, we will enter if you please.


Roug. Where be these Drawers, Rascals I should say?
That will give no attendance.
Enter Clem.
Clem. Anon, ^non sir, please you see a room. What you here again? Now we
shall have such roaring.


Rough. You sirrah call your Mistress.


Clem. Yes sir, I know it is my duty to call her Mistress.


Rough. See and the slave will stir.


Clem. Yes I do stir.


Rough. Shall we have humors, sauce box, you have ^ares
I Will teach you prick-song.

Clem. But you have now a wrong Sow by the ear. I will call her,


Roughm. Do sir, you had best.


Clem. If you were twenty Roughmans, if you lug me by the ears again, I Will
draw.


Roughm. Ha, what will you draw?


Clem. The best wine in the house for your worship: and I would call her, but I
can assure you she is either not stirring, or else not in cafe.


Roughm. How not in case?


Clem. I think she has not her smock on, for I think I saw it lie at her
beds head.


Rough. What, Drawers grow capritious?


Clem. Help, help.

Enter Besse Bridges.
Besse. What uprore's this? shall we be never rid
From these disturbances?

Rough. Why how now Besse? Is this your huswifry?
When you are mine I Will have you rise as early as the La^ke,
Look to the Bar your self: these lazy rascals
Will bring your sta^e behind hand.

Clem. You lie sir?


Roughm. How? lie?


Clem. Yes sir at the Raven in the high street, I was at your lodging ^his
morning for a pottle pot.


Roughm. You will about your business, must you hear
Stand gaping and idle?

Bess. You wrong me sir,
And tyrannize too much over my servants.
I will have no man touch them but my self.

Clem. If I do not put Rats-bane into his wine in stead of Sugar, say I am no
true Baker.


Roughm. What, rise at noone?
A man may fight a tall fray in a morning,
And one of your best friends too be hackt and mangled,
And almost cut to pieces, and you fast
Close in your bed, never dream on it.

Besse. Fought you this day?


Roughm. And never was better put to it in my days.


Besse. I pray, how was it?


Roughm. Thus: as I past yon fields:

Enter the Kitchin-maid.
Maid. I pray forsooth, what shall I reckon for the Iolle of Ling in the
Port-cullis.


Roughm. A pox upon your Iolles, you kitchin-stuffe,
Go scowre your skillets, pots, and dripping-pans,
And interrupt not us.

Maid. The Devil take your Oxe-heeles, you foul
Cods-head, must you be kicking?

Roughm. Minion dare you scould?


Maid. Yes sir, and lay my ladle over your coxcombe.


Besse. I do not think that thou dare strike a man,
That swaggerst thus ore women.

Rough. How now Besse?


Besse. Shall we be never quiet?


Fors. You are too rude.


Roughm. Now I profess all patience.


Bess. Then proceed.


Roughm. Rising up early, Minion whilst you slept,
To cross you field, I had but newly parted
With this my friend, but that I soon espide
A gallant fellow, and most strongly armed.
In the mid-field we met, and both being resolute,
We justled for the wall.

Besse Why, did there stand a wall in the mid-field?


Roughm. I meant strove for the way.
Two such brave spirits meeting, straight both drew.
Enter Clem.
Clem. The Maid forsooth sent me to know whether you would have the shoulder of
mutton roasted or sod.


Roughm. A mischiese on your shoulders.


Cl. That Is the way to make me never prove good porter


Besse. You still heap wrongs on wrongs.


Rough. I was in fury
To think upon the violence of that fight,
And could not stay my rage.

Fors. Once more proceed.


Rough^. Oh had you seen two tilting meteors justle
In the mid Region, with like fear and fury
We two encountered. Not Briarius
Could with his hundred hands have struck more thick.
Blows came about my head, I took them still.
Thrusts by my sides twixt body and my arms,
Yet still I put them by.

Besse. When they were past he put them by. Go on.
But in this fury what became of him?

To. I think I paid him home, he is soundly mauled,
I bosomed him at every second thrust.

Be^ ^cap'd he with life?


Ro^ (...), that's my fear: if he recover this,
I^e never trust my sword more.

Besse. Why fly you not if he be in such danger?


Rough. Because a witch once told me
I n^r should dye ^or murder.

Besse. I believe thee,
But tell me pray, was not this gallant fellow,
A pretty fair young youth about my years?

Rough. Even thereabout.


Clem. He was not fifty then.


Besse. Much of my stature?


Rough. Much about your pitch.


Clem. He was no giant then.


Besse. And wore a suit like this?


Rough. I half suspect.


Besse. That gallant ^ellow,
So wounded and so mangled, was my self,
You base white-lyver'd slave, it was this shoe
That thou stoopt to untie: untrust those points:
And like a beastly coward lay along,
Till I stridd over thee. Speak, was it not so?

Rough. It cannot be denied.


Besse. Hare hearted fellow, Milk-sop, do not blush?
Give me that Rapier: I will make thee swear,
Thou shall redeem thi^ scorn thou have incurred,
Or in this woman shape I Will cudgel thee,
And bea^e thee through the streets. As I am Besse, I Will do it.

Rough. Hold, hold; I swear.


Bes. Dare not to enter at my door till then.


Rough. Shame confounds me quite.


Bess. That shame redeem: perhaps we^ do thee gra^
I love the valiant, but despise the base.
Exit.
Clem. Will you be (...) sir?


Rough. She has wakend me,
And kindled that dead fire of courage in me,
Which all this while has slept: To spare my flesh
And wound my fame, what is it? I will not rest
Till by some valiant deed I have made good
All my disgraces past. I Will cross the st^eete,
And strike the next brave fellow that I meet.

Fors. I am bound to see the end on it.


Rough. Are you sir?

Boats off Forset. Enter Mayor of Foy, an Alderman; and Servant.
Mayor. Believe me sir, she bears her self so well,
No man can justly blame her: and I wonder
Being a single woman as she is,
And living in an house of such resort,
She is no more dist^ted.

Alder. The best Gentlemen
The Country yields, become her daily guests.
Sure sir I think she is rich.

Mayor. Thus much I know, would I could buy her state
VVere't for a brace of thousands.
A shot.
Ald. ^ was said a ship is now put into harbor,
Know whence she is.

Serve. I Will bring news from the key.


Mayor. To tell you true sir, I could wish a match
Betwixt her and mine own and only son,
And stretch my purse too upon that condition.

Ald. Please you I Will motion it.


Enter the Servant. Serve. One of the ships is new come from the Islands,
The greatest man of note's one Captain Goodlack.
It is but a small Vessel.
Enter Goodlack and Sailors.
Goodl. I Will meet you straight at the VVind-mill.
Not one word of my name.

^ Sail. We understand you.


Mayor. Sir it is told us you came late from th'Islands*


Goodl. I did so:


Mayor. Pray sir the n^wes from thence.


Goodl. The best is, that the General is in health,
And Fiall won from the Spaniards: but the Fl^ct
By reason of so many dangerous tempests
Extremely wether-beaten. You sir I take it,
Are Mayor o'th town.

Mayor. I am the Kings Lief^nant.


Goodl. I have some Letters of import from one
A Gentleman of very good account,
That did late in the Islands, to a Maid
That keeps a Tavern here.

Mayor. Her name Besse Bridges?


Goodl. The same. I was desired to make inquiry
What fame she bears, and what report she is of.
Now you sir being here ^hiefe Magistr^,
Can best resolve me.

Mayor. To our understanding,
She Is without stain or blemish well reputed,
And by her modesty and fair demeanor,
Has won the love of all.

Goodl. The worse for me.


Alder. I can assure you many narrow eyes
Have looked on her and her condition,
But those that with most envy have endevour'd
TO entrap her, have returned won by her virtues.

Goodl. So all that I inquire of make report.
I am glad to heare't. Sir I have now some business,
And I of force must leave you.

Mayor. I entreat you to sup with me to night.


Goodl. Sir I may trouble you.
Five hundred pound a year out of my way.
Is there no flaw that I can tax her with,
To forfeit this revenew? Is she such a Saint,
None can missay her? why then I my self
Will undertake it. If in her demeanor
I can but find one blemish, stain or spot,
It is five hundred pound a year well got.
Exit. Enter Cle^ and the Sailors on the one side, at the other Roughman, who
draws upon them, and beats the^ off. Enter Besse, Clem, and the Sailors.
Bes. But did he fight it bravely?


Clem. I assure you mistress most dissolutely: he has run this Sailer
three times through the body, and yet never touched his skin.


Besse. How can that be?


Clem. Through the body of his doublet I meant.


Besse, How shame, base imputation, and disgrace
Can make a coward valiant: Sirrah you
Look to the bar.

Clem. I Will hold up my hand there presently.


Bes. I understand, you came now from the Islands,


1 Sail. We did so.


Bes. If you can tell me tidings of one Gentleman
I shall requite you largely.

1 Sailor. Of what name?


Bess. One Spencer.


1 Sailor. We both saw and knew the man.


Besse. Only for that call for what wine you please.
Pray tell me where you left him.

2 Sailor. In Fiall.


Bes. Was he in health? how did he fare?


2 Sail. Why well.


Bess. For that good news, spend, revell, and carouse,
Your reckning's paid beforehand. I Am extaside,
And my delights unbounded.

1 Sail. Did you love him?


Bess. Next to my hopes in heaven.


1 Sail. Then change your mirth.


Besse. Why, as I take it, you told me he was well,
And shall I not rejoice?

1 Sail. He Is well in heaven, For Mistrisse, he is dead,


Bess. Hah, dead! was it so you said? Thou Have give^ me, friend
But one wound yet, speak but that word again,
And kill me outright.

2 Sail. He lives not.


Bess. And shall I? VVilt thou not break heart?
Are these my ribs wrought out of brass or steel,
Thou can not craze their bars?

1 Sail. Mistress use patience, which conquers all despair.


Besse. You advise well:
I did but jest with sorrow: you may see
I am now in gentle temper.

2 Sail. True, we see it.


Bes. Pray take the best room in the liouse, and there
Call for what wine best tastes you: at my leisure
I Will visit you my self.

1 Sail. I Will use your kindness.

Exeu^.
Besse. That it should be my fate. Poor poor sweet-ha^
I do but think how thou becomst thy grave,
In which would I lay by thee: what is my wealth
To injoy't without my Spencer. I will now
Study to die, that I may live with him.
Enter Goodlack.
Goodl. The further I inquire, the more I hear
To my discomfort. If my discontinuance
And change at Sea disgusse me from her knowledge
I shall have scope enough to prove her fully.
This sadness argues she has heard some news
Of my Friends death.

Besse. It cannot sure be true
That he is dead, Death could not be so envious
To snatch him in his prime. I study to forget
That ere was such a man.

Goodl. If not impeach her,
My purpose is to seek to marry her.
If she deny me, I Will conceal the Will,
Or at the least make her compound for half.
Save you fair Gentlewoman.

Bess. You are welcome sir.


Goodl. I hear say there is a whore here that draws wine,
I am sharp se^, and newly come from sea,
And I would see the ^rash.

Bess. Sure you mistake sir.
If you desire attendance and some wine
I can command you both. Where be these boys?

Goodl. Are you the Mistress?


Besse. I command the house.


Goodl. Of what birth are you, pra'y?


B^ss. A Tanners daughter.


Goodl. Where borne?


Besse. In Somersetshire.


Goodl. A trade-falne Tanners daughter go so brave:
Oh you have tricks to compass these gay clothes.

Besse. None sir, but what are honest.


Goodl. What Is your name?


Besse. Besse Bridges most men call me.


Goodl. Y^are a whore.


Besse. Sir, I will fetch you wine to wash your mouth,
It is so foul, I feare't may fester else.
There may be danger in it.

Goodl. Not all this move her patience.


Besse. Good sir, at this time I am scarce my self
By reason of a great and weighty loss
That troubles me: but I should know that Ring.

Goodl. How, this, you baggage? It was never made
To grace a strumpets finger.

Besse. Pardon sir, I both must and will leave you.

Exit.
Goodl. Did not this well* This will stick in my stomach
I could repent my wrongs done to this maid:
But I Will not leave her thus: if she still love him.
I Will break her heart strings with some false report
Of his unkindnesse.
Enter Clem.
Clem. You are welcome Gentleman: what wine will you drink? Claret, Metheglin,
or Muskadine, Cider or Pyrrey, to make you merry, Arag^, or Peter-see-mee*
Canary or Charnico? But by your nose sir you should love a cup of Malmsey: you
shall have a cup of the best in Cornwaile.


Goodl. Here Is a brave draw ^r will quarrel with his wine.


Clem. But if you prefer the Frenchman before the Spaniard, you shall have
either here of the deep red grape or the pallid white. You are a pretty tall
Gentleman, you should love High-Country wine: none bu^ Clerks and Sextons love
Graves wine. Or are you a ^ied man, I Will furnish you with bastard, white or
brown, according to the complexion of your bedfellow.


Goodl. You rogue, how many years of your prentiship
Have you spent in studying this set sp^h?

Clem. The first line of my part was, Anon anon, sir: and the first question I
answered to, was logger-head, or blockhead, I know not whether.


Goodl. Speak, where is your Mistress?


Clem. Gone up to her chamber.


Goodl. Set a pottle of Sack in th'fire, and carry it into the next room.

Exit.
Clem. Score a pottle of Sack in the Crown, and see at the bar for some
rotten eggs to burn it: we must have one trick or other to vent away our bad
commodities.

Exit. Enter Besse with Spencers Picture.
Besse. To dye, and not vouchsafe some few commends
Before his death, was most unkindly done.
This Picture is more courteous: 'twill not shrink
For twenty thousand kisses: no nor blush:
Then thou shall be my husband, and I vow
Never to marry other.
Enter Goodlacke.
Goodl. Where Is this harlot?


Besse. You are immodest sir to press thus rudely
Into my private chamber.

Goodl. Pox of modesty
When punks must have it mincing in their mouths.
And have I found thee? then shall hence with me.

Besse. Rob me not of the chiefest wealth I have:
Search all my trunks, take the best Jewels there:
Deprive me not that treasure, I Will redeem it
With plate, and all the little coin I have,
So I make keep that still.

Goodl. Think thou that bribes
Can make me leave my friends Will unperform'd?

Besse. What was that Friend?


Goodl. One Spencer, dead ^h Islands,
Whose very last words uttered athis death
Were these, If ever thou shall come to Foy,
Take thence my picture, and deface it quite:
For let it not be said, my pourtrature
Shall grace a strumpets chamber.

Bess. It Was not so:
You lie, you are a villain: it was not so.
It Is more then sin thus to belly the dead:
He knew if ever I would have transgrest,
'Thad been with him: he du^st have sworn me chaste,
And did in that belief.

Good. Are you so brief?
Nay, ^e not trouble you: God b'oy you.

Besse. Yet leave me still that Picture, and I Will swear
You are a Gentleman, and cannot lie.

Goodl. I am inexorable.


Besse. Are you a Christian, have you any name
That ever good man gave you?
'Twas no Saint you were called after. What Is thy name?

Goodl. My name is Captain T^as Good --


Bess. I can see no good in thee* Race that syllable
Out of thy name.

Goodl. Goodlacke's my name.


Besse. I cry you mercy sir: I now remember you,
You were my Spencers friend, and I am sorry,
Because he loved you, I have been so ha^h:
For whose sake, I entreat ere you take it hence,
I may but take my leave on it.

Goodl. You Will return it?


Besse. As I am chaste I'will.


Goodl. For once I Will trust you.


Besse. Oh thou the perfect semblance of my Love,
And all that is left of him, take one sweet kiss,
As my la^ farewell. Thou resemblest him
For whose sweet safety I was every morning
Down on my knees, and with the Larkes sweet tunes
I did begin my prayers: and when sad sleep
Had charmed all eyes, when none save the bright stars*
Were up and waking, I remembered thee,
But all, all to no purpose.

Goodl. Sure, most sure, this cannot be dissembled.


Besse. To thee I have been constant in thine absence,
And when I looked upon this painted piece
Remembered thy last rules and principles:
For thee I have given alms, visited prisons,
To Gentlemen and passengers lent coin,
That if they ever had ability
They might repay't to Spencer: yet for this,
All this, and more, I cannot have so much
As this poor table.

G. I should question truth, if I should wrong this creature.


Besse. I am resolved.
See sir, this Picture I restore you back,
Which since it was his will you should take hence,
I will not wrong the dead.

Goodl. God be w'you.


Besse. One word more.
Spencer you say was so unkind in death:

Goodl. I tell you true.


Besse. I do entreat you even for goodness sake
Since you were one that he entirely loved,
If you some few days hence here me expired,
You will among other good men, and poor people
That happily may miss Besse, grace me so much
As follow me to the grave. This if you promise,
You shall not be the least of all my friends
Remembered in my will. Now fare you well.

Goodl. Had I a heart of flint or adamant
It would relent at this. My Mistress Besse,
I have better tidings for you.

Besse. You will restore my Picture? will you?


Goodl. Yes, and more then that,
This Ring from my friends finger sent to you,
With infinite commends.

Besse. You change my blood.


Goodl. These writings are the evidence of Lands*
Five hundred pound ay eare's bequeathed to you,
Of which I here possess you: all is yours.

Besse. This surplussage of love, has made my loss^
That was but great before: now infinite.
It may be compast: there is in this my purpose
No impossibility.

Goodl. What study you?


Besse. Four thousand pound besides this Legacy,
In ^ewels, gold, and silver I can make,
And every man discharged. I am resolved
To be a pattern to all Maids hereafter
Of constancy in love.

G. Sweet Mistress Besse, will you command my service,
If to succeed your Spencer in his Love,
I would expose me wholly to your wishes.

Besse. Alas my love sleeps with him in his grave,
And cannot thence be wakend: yet for his sake
I will impart a secret to your trust,
Which, saving you, no mortal should partake.

Goodl. Both for his love and yours, command my service*


Besse. There Is a prise
Brought into Famouth Road, a good tight Vessel,
The Bottom will but cost eight hundred pound,
You shall have money: buy it.

Goodl. To what end?


Besse. That you shall know hereafter. Furnish her
With all provision needful: spare no cost:
And join with you a ginge of lusty ladds,
Such as will bravely man her: all the charge
I will commit to you: and when she ^d,
Captain she is thine own.

Goodl. I sound it not.


Besse. Spare me the rest. This voyage I intend,
Though some may blame, all Lovers will* commend.
Exeunt.
Explicit Actus tertius.
Actus quartus. Scena prima.
After an Alarmne, Enter a Spanish Captain, with Saylors, bringing in a
Merchant, Spencer, and the Surgion prisoners. Spaniard. FOr Fialls loss, and
spoil by The English done,
We are in part revenged. There Is not a Vessel
That bears upon her top S. Georges Cross,
But for that act shall suffer.

Merchant. Insult not Spaniard,
Nor be too proud, that thou by odds of ship^,
Provision, m^, and powder made us yield.
Had you come one to one, or mad^ (...)
With reasonable advantage; w^e by (...)
Had made the carcass of your ship your graves,
Low suncke to the Seas bottom.

Span. Englishman, thy ship shall yield us pillage,
The prisoners we wi^ keep in ^gest Hold,
To pay no other ^ome then ^ir lives*

Spenc. Degenerate Spaniard, there is no noblesse in thee
To threaten men unarmed and miserable,
Thou might as well ^ad ^e a field o^ ^aughter,
And kill them ore, that are already sla^e,
And brag thy manhood.

Span. Sirrah, what are you?


Spen. Thy equal as I am a prisoner,
But once to stay a better man then thou,
A Gentleman in my Country.

Span. Were thou not so, we h^ve st^appadoe, bolts,
And engines to the Maine-mast-^tened,
Can m^ke you gentle.

Spenc. Spa^iard do thy worst, thou ^nst not act
More tor^ures then my courage is able to endure.

Span. These Englishmen
Nothing can daunt them: Even in misery
They Will not regard their masters.

Sperc. Masters! Insulting bragging Thrasoes.


Span. His sauciness wee'^ punish 'bove the rest.
About their censures we will next devise,
Flourish And now toward Spain with our brave English prise.

Exe^nt. Enter Besse, Mayor, Alderman, Cl^. A tableseto^t out, and stools.
Besse. A Table and some stools.


Cl. I shall give you occasion ^o case your tails presently.


Bes. Will'^ please you sit?


Mayor. Wi^ all our hearts, and thank you.


Besse. Fetch me that parchment in my Closet window.


Cl. The three (...) (...) with the wrong side outward


Besse. That with the (...).


Clem. I hope it is my Indenture, and now she (...) to give me my time.


Alder. And now you are alo^, fair Mistress Elz^beth
I think it good to ^ste you with a motion.
That no way can displease you.

Besse. Pray speak on.


Alder. 'T has pleased here Master Mayor ^o far to look
Into your fair (...) that he thinks you
A fit match for his Son.
Enter Clem with the (...).
Clem. Here Is the parchment, but if it be the lease of your house, I can
assure you it is out.


Besse. The years are not expired.


Clem. No, but it is out of your Closet.


Besse. About your business.


Cl. Here Is even Susanna bewixt the two wicked elders.


Ald. What think you Mistress Elzabeth?


Besse. Sir I thank you.
And how much I esteem this goodness from you
The trust I shall commit unto your charge
Will truly witness. Marry, gentle Sir!
Alas I have sadder business now in hand,
Then sprightly marriage, witness these my tears.
Pray read there.

Mayor. The last Will and Testament of Elzabeth Bridges to be committed to the
trust of the Mayor and Aldermen of Foy, and their Succe^ors for ever.

To set up young beginners in their trade, a thousand pound
To relieve such as have had loss by Se^, 500 pound.
To every Maid that is married o^t of Foy,
Whose name's Elzabeth ten pound.
To relieve maimed Soldiers, by the year ten pound.
To Captain Goodlacke, if he shall perform
The business he is employed in, five hundred pound.
The Legacies for Spencer thus to stand,
To number all the poorest of his kin,
And to bestow on them. Item to --

Besse. Enough: you see sir I am now too poor
To bring a dow^y with me fit for your son.

Mayor. You want a president, you so abound
In charity and goodne^e.

Besse. All my servants
I leave at your disc^ons to dispose
Not one but I have left some Leg^cie.
What shall become of me, or what I purpose
Spare further to enquire.

May^r. We Will take our leaves.
And move to you (...) (...).
In this bequest.

Alder. Let never such despair,
As dying rich, shall make the poor their h^yre.
Exit.
Besse. Why what is all the wealth the world contains.
Without my Spencer?

Enter Roughm^ and Forset. Roughm. Wl^res my sweet Besse^?
Shall I become a welcome suitor now?
That I have changed my Copy?

Besse. I joy to hear it.
I Will find employment for you.
Enter Goodlacke, Sailors, and Clem.
Goodl. A gallant ship, and wondrous proudly trimmed,
Well calk^, well tackled, every way prepared.

Besse. Here (...) our ^rning for a ^son end.


Rough. Besse, shall I strike that Captain? say the word,
I Will have him by the ear^s.

Besse. Not for the world.


Goodl. What says that fellow?


Besse. He (...) your lov^, good, (...) ^et him ha^t.


Goodl. Then change a hand.


Besse. Resolve me all. I am bound upon a voyage,
Will you in this adventure take such part,
As I my (...) shall do?

Rough. With my (...) Besse, to the worlds end.


Besse. Then Captain and (...) both, join^ hands,
Such are your places now.

Goodl. We two are friends.


Bess. I next must swear^ you ^wo, (...) (...) your ginge
True to some articles you must observe,
Reserving to my (...) a prime co^ ^d,
Whilst I injoyne nothing unreason^.

Goodl. All this is gran^ed.


Bes. Then first, you (...) your ^ip (...) (...) (...)
I Will have her pitched all ore, no spot of white,
No color to be ^eene, no Sail but black,
No Flag but sable.

Goodl. T will be ominous, and bode disaster fortune.


Besse. I Will ha'it so.


Goodl. Why then she shall be pitched black as the devil,


Besse. She shall be called The Negro, when you know
M^ conc^, Captain, you will thank for'^.

Roug. But (...) are we bound?


Besse. Pardon me that.
When we are out at sea I Will t^ll you all.
For mine own wearing I have rich apparel,
For man or woman as occasion serves.

Clem. But M^strisse, if you be going to sea, what shall become of me a land.


Besse. I Will give thee thy full time.


Clem. And shall I (...) time, when time is, and let my Mistress slip away.
No, it shall be seen that my teeth are as strong to grind biscuit as the best
sail or of them all, and my stomac^ as able to digest po^derd b^ese and
Poorejohn. Shall I st^y here to see ^re a pudding in the Hal^moone, and ^ee my
(...) esse at the (...) yard with her sails up, and spread. No it shall be
seen that I who have been brought up to draw wine, will see what wa^r the
ship draws, or I Will beray the Voyage.


Besse. If thou ha^ so much co^rage, the Captain shall accept the.


Clem. If I have so much courage? When did you see a bla^ke beard with a white
lyvor, or a little fellow without a tall stomach. I doubt not but to prove an
honor to-all the Drawers in Cornwall.


Goodl. What now (...)?


Fors. To make my (...) (...) in this bold enterpr^.


Goodl. (...) gladly sir.
And now our number's full, what is to be done.

Besse. First, at my charge I Will fea^ the (...) (...) ^oy,
Then set the Cellers open, that these my Mates
May quaffe unto the health of our boon voyage,
Our needful things being ^ce convay'd aboard,
The casting up our caps in sign of joy.
Our purpose is to bid farewell to Foy.
Hoboyes long. Enter Mullisheg Bas^ Alcad^, and Ioffer: with other Attendants.
Mullish. Out of these bloody and intestine broiles
We have at length attained ^ ^ort name peace,
And now at last established in the Throne
Of our great Ancestors, and reign King
Of Fesse and great Morocco.

Alcade. Mighty Mullisheg,
Pride of our age, and glory of the Moors,
By whose victorious hand all Barbary
Is conquered, awed, and swai'd: behold thy vassalls
With loud applauses greet thy victory.
she flourish.
M^ll. Upon the slaughtered bodies of our foes,
We mount our high Tribunal, and being sole
Without competitor, we now have leisure
To stablish laws first (...) our Kingdoms safety,
The enriching of our public Treasury,
And last our state and pleasure: then give order
That all such Christian Merchants as have traffic
And freedom in our Country, that conceal
The least part of our Custom me due to us,
Shall forfeit ship and goods.

Ioff. There are appointed
Unto that purpose careful officers.

Mull. Those forfeitures must help to furnish up
Th'exhausted treasure that our wars consumed,
Part of such profits as (...) that way
We have already tast^d.

Al^. It Is most fit,
Those Christians that reap profit* by our Land
Should con^ribute unto so great a loss.

Mull. Alcad^, They shall. But what is the style of King,
Without his pleasure? Find us concubines,
The fairest Christian Damsells you can hire,
O^ buy for gold: the loueliest of the Moors
We can command, and Negroes every where*
Italians, French, and Dutch, choice Turkish Girls
M^st fill our Alkedavy, the great Palace,
Where Mullisheg now daines to keep his Court.

Ioffer. Who else are worthy to be Libertines,
Butsuch as bear the Sword?

Mull. Ioffer, Thou please us.
If Kings on earth be termed Demigods.
Why should we not make here terrestrial heaven?
We can, we will, ou^ God shall be our pleasure,
For so our Mecan Prophes warrants as.
And now the music of the Drums surcease,
We Will learn to dance to the soft tunes of peace.
Hoboyes. Ent^r Besse like a Sea-captaine, Goodlack^, Roughman, For^t, and
Cle^.
Bess. Good morrow Captain. Oh this last Sea-sight
Was gallantly performed. It did me good
To see the Spanish Carveile veil her top
Unto my Maiden Flag. Where ride we now?

Goodl. Among the Islands.


Boss. What coast is this we now desc^y from (...).


Goodl. Yon Fort's called Fiall.


Bess. Is that the place where Spenc^rs body lies?


Goodl. Yes, in yon Church he is buried.


Besse. Then know, to this placo was my voyage bound
To fetch the body of my Spenc^r thence.
In his own Count^y to erect a tomb*
And lasting monum^t, where when I die
In the same bed of (...) my (...) may (...)
Then all that love me* arm and make for shore,
Yours be the spoil, he mine, I ^rave no more.

Rough. May (...) man dye derided and accursed
That will not follow (...) a woman leads.

Goodl. Roughwan, you are too rash, and counsel ill,
Have not the (...) ^ortifide the town?
In all our Ginge we are but sixty five.

Rough^. Come, I Will make one.


Goodl. Attend me good Lieutenant.
And sweet Besse, liften what I have devised,
With ten tall Fellows I have manned our Boat,
To see what straggling (...) they c^n take.
And see where (...) (...) (...) prisoners.
^.
Fors. These Spania^ds we by (...) of day surprised,
As they were ready to take (...) for (...).

Goodl. Spaniards, upon your lives resolve us truly
How strong's the Town and Fort.

Span. Since English Rawleigh wan and spoiled it first,
The Towne's (...) and (...) new (...),
And four Field-peeces in the (...) house lie
To keep the Harbors mouth.

Goodl. And what is one ship to these*


Besse. Was there not in the time of their (...)
A Gentleman called Sponcer buried there
Within the Church, whom some report was (...),
Or perished by a wound?

Sp^n. (...) (...) was,
And ore him raised a goodly (...),
But when the English Navy were failed thence,
And that the Spaniands did possess the Town.
Because they held him for (...) Heretic,
They straight removed his body from the Church.

Bes. And would the tyrants be so uneharitable
To wrong the dead? where did they then bestow him?

Span. They buried him ith fields.


Besse. Oh still more cruel.


Span. The man that ought the field, doubtful his corn
Would never prosper whilst an heretics body
Lay there, he made petition to the Church
To ha'it digd up and burnt, and so it was.

Besse. What Is he that loves me would persuade me live.
Not rather leap ore hatches into th'Sea:
Yet ere I die I hope to be revenged
Upon some Spaniards for my Spencers wrong.

Rough. Let Us first begin with these.


Bess. Alas these poor slaves! besides their pardond lives
One give them money. And Spaniards where you come,
Pray for Besse Bridges, and speak well o'th English.

Span. We shall.


Bess. Our mourning we will turn into revenge,
And since the Church has censured so my Spencer,
Bestow upon the Church some few cast Pieces,
Command the Gunner do it.

Goodl. And if he can to batter it to the earth.

A Piece. Enter Clem falling for haste.
Clem. A Sail, a Sail.


Besse. From whence?


Clem. A pox upon yon Gunner, could he not give warning before he had shot?


Rough. Why I prithee?


Clem. Why? I was sent to the topmast to watch, and there I fell fast asleep.
Bounce quoth the guns, down tumbles Clem, and if by chance my feet had not
hung in the tackles, you must have sent to England for a bonesetter, for my
neck had been in a pitiful taking,


Rough. Thou toldst us of a Sail.


Enter Sailer above. Sailor. Arm Gentlemen, a gallant ship of war
Makes with her full sails this way: who it seems
Has took a Ba^ke ^f England.

Besse. Which we will r^cue.
Or perish in th'adventure. You have sworn
That howsoere we conquer or miscary
Not to reveal my sex.

All. We have.


Bess. Then for your Countries honor, my revenge,
For your own fame, and hope of golden spoil,
Stand bravely to'^. The manage of the fight
We leave to you.

Go. Then now up with your fights, and let your ensigns
Blessed with S. Georges Cross, play with the winds.
Fair Besse, keep you your cabin.

Besse. Captain you wrong me, I will face the ^ght,
And where the bullets sing loudst 'bout mine ears,
There shall you find me chearing up my men.

Rough. This wench would of a coward make an Hercules.


Besse. Trumpets a charge, and with your whistles shrill
Sound boatswaynes an alarm to your mates.
With music cheer up their aston^ souls,
The whilst the thundering Ordnance bear the Base.

Goodl. To fight against the Spaniards we desire*
Alarm Trumpets.
Alarm.
Rough. Gunners straight give fire.

Shot. Enter Goodlacke hurt. Besse, Roughman, Forset, Clem.
Goodl. I am shot and can no longer man the Deck,
Yet let not my wound daunt your courage mat^.

Besse. For every drop of blood that thou have shed,
I Will have a Spaniards life. Advance your Targets,
And now cry all, Board, board, amain for England.
Alarm. Enter with victory Besse, Roughman, Forset, Clem. etc. The Spaniards
Prisoners.
Besse. How is it with the Captain?


Rough. Nothing dangerous,
But being shot ith'thigh he keeps his Cabin*
And cannot rise to greet your victory.

Besse. He stood it brav^ly out whilst he could stand.


Clem. But ^or these Spaniards, now you Don Diegoes,
You that made Pa^les to stink.

Roughm. Before we further censure them, let us know
What English prisoners they have here aboard.

Span. You may command them all. We that were now
Lords over them, Fortune has made your slaves,
Release our prisoners.

Besse. Had my captain did
Not one proud Spaniard had escaped with life,
Your ship is forfeit to us, and your goods.
So live. Give him his long Boat: him and his
Set safe ashore; and pray for English Besse.

Sp. I know not whom you mean, but be^ your Queen
Famous Elizabeth, I shall report
She and her subjects both are merciful.
Exeunt* Enter Roughman, with the Merchant and Spencer.
Bess. Whence are you sir? and whither were you bound?


Merc^. I am a London bound for Barbary,
But by this Spanish Man-of-warre surprised,
Pillaged and captived.

Besse. We much pity you,
What love you have sustained, this Spanish prey
Shall make good to you to the utmost farthing*

Merc. Our lives, and all our fortunes whatsoever
Are wholly at your service.

Besse. These Gentlemen have been dejected long,
Let me peruse them all, and give them mon^y
To drink our health, and pray forget not Sirs,
To pray for -- Hold, support me, or I faint*

Roughm. What sudden unexpected ecstasy
Disturbs your conquest.

Besse. Interrupt me not,
But give me way for Heavens sake.

Spencer. I have seen a face ere now like that young Gentleman,
But not remember where.

Besse. But he was slain,
Lay buried in yon Church, and thence removed,
Denyde all Christian rights, and like an Infidel
Confinde unto the fields, and thence digd up,
His body after death had mar^yrdome:
All these assure me it is his shadow dogs me,
For some most just revenge*thus far to Sea.
Is it because the Spaniards escaped with life,
That were to thee so cruel after death
Thou hauntst me thus? Sweet ghost thy rage forbear,
I will revenge thee on the next we se^ze.
I am amazed, this sight I Will not endure.
Sleep, sleep, fair ghost, for thy revenge is sure.

Roug. Forset, convey the owner to his cabin.


Spencer. I pray sir what young Gentleman is that?


Rough. He Is both the owner of the ship and goods,
That for some reasons has his name concealed.

Spencer. Me think he looks like Besse, for in his eyes
Lives the first*love that did my heart surprise.

Roughm. Come Gentlemen, first make your losses good
Out of this Spanish prize. Let Us then divide
Both several ways, and heavens be our guide.

Merc. We toward Mamorrah.


Roughm. We where the Fates do^ please,
Till we have tract a wilderness of Seas.
Flourish. Enter Chorus. Our Stage so lamely can express a Sea,
That we are forced by Chorus to discourse
What should have been in action. Now imagine
Her passion ore, and Goodlacke well recoverd,
Who had he not been wounded and seen Spencer,
Had sure descride him. Much prise they have taken,
The French and Dutch she spares, only makes spoil
Of the rich Spaniard, and the barbarous Turk.
And now her fame grows great in all these seas.
Suppose her rich, and forced for want of water
To put into Mamorrah in Barba^y,
Where wearied with the habit of a man,
She was discoverd by the Moors aboard,
Which told it to the amorous King of Fesse,
That never before had English Lady seen.
He sends for her on shore, how he receives her,
How she and Spencer meet, must next succeed.
Sit patient then, when these are fully told,
Some may hap say, I, there is a Girl worth gold.
Exeunt. Act long.
Explicit Actus quartus.
Actus quintus. Scena prima.
Enter Mullisheg, Alcade, Ioffer, and Attendants, etc. Mullisheg. But was she
of such presence?


Alc. To decribe her were to make eloquence dumb


Mull. Well habited?


Alc. I never beheld a beauty more complete.


Mull. Thou have inflamed our spirits. In England borne?


Alc. The Captain so reported.


Mull. How her ship?


Alc. I never saw a braver Vess^ll sail,
And she is called The Negro.

Mull. Ominous
Perhaps to our good fate, She in a Negro
Has sailed thus far to bosom with a Moore.
But for the motion made to come ashore,
How dis she relish that?

Alc. I promised to the Captain large reward
To win him to it, and this day he'hath promised
To bring me her free answer.

Mull. When he comes
Give him the entertainment of a Prince.
Enter a Moore. The news with thee?


Moore. The Captain of The Negro craves admittance
Unto your Highness presence.

Mul. A Guard attend him, and our noblest Bashawes
Conduct him safe where we will parley him.
Flowrish. Enter Goodlacke, and Roughman.
Goodl. Long live the high and mighty King of Fesse.


Mull. If thou bringst her then do thou bring me life.
Say, will she come?

Goodl. She will my Lord, but yet conditionally
She may be fr^ from violence.

Mull. Now by the mighty Prophet we adore,
She shall live Lady of her free desires,
It Is love, not force, must quench our amorous fires.

Rough. We will conduct her to your presence straight.


Mul. We will have banquets, revels* and what not
To entertain this stranger.
Hoboyes. Enter Besse Bridges veiled, Goodlack, Roughman, Forset, and Moors. A
goodly presence! why's that beauty veiled?


Besse. Long live the King of Fesse.


Mull. I am amazed,
This is no mortal creature I behold,
But some bright Angel that is dropped from heaven,
Sent by our prophet. Captain, let me thus
Embrace thee in my arms. Load him with gold
For this great favor.

Bess. Captain, touch it not.
Know King of Fesse my followers want no gold,
I only came to see thee for my pleasure,
And show thee, what these say thou never saw,
A woman borne in England.

Mull. That English earth may well be termed a heaven,
That breeds such divine beauties. Make me sure
That thou art mortal, by one friendly touch.

Besse. Keep off: for till thou swearst to my demands
I will have no commerce with Mullisheg,
But leave thee as I came.

Mull. Were It half my Kingdom,
That, beauteous English Virgin, thou shall have.

Besse. Captain read.


Goodl. First, liberty for her and hers to leave the Land at her pleasure.
Next, safe conduct to and from her ship at her own discretion.
Thirdly, to be free from all violence, either by the King or any of his people.
Fourthly, to allow her mariners fresh victuals aboard.
Fifthly, to offer no further violence to her person, then what he seeks by
kingly usage, and free entreaty.

Mull. To these I vow and seal.


Besse. These being assured
Your courtship's free, and henceforth we secured.

Mull. Say Gentlemen of England, what is your fashion
And garb of entertainment?

Goodl. Our first greeting
B^gins still on the lips.

Mul. Fair creature, shall I be immortalized
With that high favor?

Besse. It Is no immodest thing
You ask, nor shame, for Besse to ki^e a King.

Mul. This kiss has all my vitalls extaside.


Rou. Captain this king is mightily in love. Well let her
Do as she list, I Will make use of his bounty.

Goodl. We should be mad men else.


Mullish. Grace me so much as take your seat by me.


Besse. I Will be so far commanded.


Mull. Sweet, your age?


Besse. Not fully yet seaventeene.


Mu. But how your birth? how came you to this wealth,
To have such Gentlemen at your command?
And what your cause of travel?

Besse. Mighty Prince,
If you desire to see me beat my breast,
Pour forth a river of increasing tears,
Then you may urge me to that sad discourse.

Mull. Not for Mamo^ahs wealth, nor all the gold
Coined in rich Barbary. Nay sweet arise,
And ask of me be'it half this kingdoms treasure,
And thou art Lady on it.

Besse. If I shall ask, 'tmust be, you will not give.
Our country breeds no beggars, for our hearts
Are of more noble temper.

Mull. Sweet, your name?


Besse. Elizabeth.


Mull. There Is virtue in that name.
The Virgin Queen so famous through the world,
The mighty Empress of the maiden-Ile,
Whose predecessors have ore-runne great France,
Whose powerful hand does still support the Dutch,
And keeps the potent King of Spain in awe,
Is not she titled so?

Besse. She is.


Mull. Has she her self a face so fair as yours
When she appears for wonder.

Besse. Mighty Fess^,
You cast a blush upon my maiden cheek,
To pattern me with her. Why Englands Queen
She is the only Phoenix of her age,
The pride and glory of the Western Isles:
Had I a thousand tongues they all would tire
And fail me in her true description.

Mull. Grant me this,
To morrow we supply our Iudgement-seate,
And sentence causes, sit with us in state,
And let your presence beautify our Throne.

Bess. In that I am your servant.


Mul. And we thine.
Set on in state, attendants, and full train:
But find to ask, we vow thou shall obtain.
Enter Clem, manet Goodlacke.
Clem. It is not now as when Andrea lived,
Or rather Andrew our elder Iourneyman: what, Drawers
become Courtiers? Now may I speak with the old ghost
in Ieronimo;
When this eternal substance of my soul
Did live imprisoned in this wanton flesh,
I was a Courtier in the Court of Fesse.

Goodl. Oh well done Clem. It is your Mistress pleasure
None come a shore that is not well habited.

Clem. Nay for mine own part, I hold my self as good a Christian in these
clothes, as the proudest Infidel of them all.

Enter Alcade and Ioffer.
Alcade. Sir, by your leave, you are of the English train?


Clem. I am so thou great Monarch of the Mauritanians.


Ioff. The^ it is the Kings command we give you al attendance


Clem. Great Seignior of the Sarazens I thank thee.


Alc. Will you walk in to banquet?


Clem. I will make bold to march in toward your banquet, and there comfit my
self, and cast all carawayes down my throat, the best way I have to conserve
my self in health: and for your countries sake which is called Barbery, I will
love all Barbers and Barberies the better: And for you Moors, thus much I
mean to say, I Will see if Moore I eat the Moore I may.

Enter two Merchants.
1. Merch. I pray sir are you of the English train?


Clem. Why what art thou my friend?


1 Mer. Sir, a French merchant run into relapse,
And forfeit of the Law: here is for you sir
Forty good Barbery pieces to deliver
Your Lady this petition, who I hear
Can all things with the King.

Clem. Your gold does bind me to you: you may see what it is to be a sudden
Courtier. I no sooner put my nose into the Court, but my hand itches for a
bribe already. What Is your business my friend?


2 Mer. Some me of my men for a little outrage done
Are sentenced to the Gallyes.

Clem. To the Gallows?


2 Mer. No, to the Galleys: now could your Lady purchase
Their pardon from the King, here is twenty angels?

Clem. What are you sir?


2 Merc. A Florentine Merchant.


Clem. Then you are, as they say, a Christian?


2 Mer. Heaven forbid else.


Clem. I should not have the faith to take your gold else.
Attend on me, I Will speak in your behalf.
Where be my Bashawes? usher us in state, Flourish.
And when we fit to banquet see you wait.
Exit. Enter Spencer solus.
Spenc. This day the king ascends his royal throne,
The honest Merchant in whose ship I came,
Has by a cunning quiddit in the Law
Both ship and goods made forfeit to the king,
To whom I will petition. But no more,
He Is now upon his entrance.
Hoboyes. Enter the King, Besse, Goodlacke, Roughman, Alcade, Ioffer, with all
the other Train.
Mull. Here seat thee Maid of England like a Queen,
The style we will give thee, will thou daigne us love.

Besse. Bless me you holy Angels.


Mull. What is it offends you Sweet?


Spenc. I am amazed, and know not what to think on it.


Besse. Captain, do not see? Is not that Spencers ghost?


Goodl. I see, and like you I am extaside.


Spenc. If mine eyes mistake nor,
That should be Captain Goodlacke, and that Besse.
But oh, I cannot be so happy.

Goodl. It Is he, and I Will salute him.


Besse. Captain stay,
You shall be swaide by me.

Spenc. Him I well know, but how should she come hither


Mull. What is it that troubles you?


Besse. Most mighty king,
Spare me no longer time, but to bestow
My Captain on a message.

Mull. Thou shall command my silence, and his ear.


Besse. Go wind about, and when you see least eyes
Are fixed on you, single him out and see
If we mistake not. If he be the man,
Give me some private note.

Goodl. This.


Bess. Enough. What said you highness?


Mull. Hark what I profer thee, Continue here,
And grant me full fruition of thy love.

Bes. Good.


Mull. Thou shall have all my Peers to honor thee
Next our great prophet.

Besse. Well.


Mull. And when thou art weary of our Sunburned clime,
Thy Negro shall be ballast home with gold.

Bess. I am eternized ever.
Now all you sad disasters dare your worst,
I neither care nor fear: my Spencer lives.

Mull. You mind me not sweet Virgin.


Besse. You talk of love.
My Lord, I Will tell you more of that hereafter.
But now to your State-businesse: bid him do^ thus
No more, and not be seen till then.

Goodl. Enough: come sir, you must along with me.


Bess. Now stood a thousand deaths before my face,
I would not change my cheer, since Spencer's safe.
Enter Clem and the Merchants.
Clem. By your leave my Masters: room for Generosity.


1 Merch. Pray sir remember me.


2 Merch. Good sir, my suit.


Cl. I am perfect in both your parts without prompting. Mistress, here are two
christen friends of mine have forseiter ships and men to the black a Morrian
king. Now one sweet word from your lips might get their release. I have had a
feeling of the business already.


Mul. For dealing in commodities forbid
You Are fined a thousand ducats.

Besse. Cast off the burden of your heavy doom,
A follower of my train petitions for him.

Mull. One of thy train, sweet Besse?


Clem. And no worse man then my self sir.


Mull. Well sirrah, for your Ladies sake,
His ship and goods shall be restored again.

1 Mer. Long live the King of Fess^.


Clem. May thou never want sweet water to wash thy black face in, most
mighty Monarke of Morocco. Mistress, another friend, I, and paid before hand.


Mull. Sirrah, your men for outrage and contempt
Are doomed unto the Galleys.

Bess. A censure too severe for Christians.
Great King, I Will pay their ransom.

Mul. Thou my Besse?
Thy word shall be their ransom, they are discharged.
What grave old man is that?

Ioff. A Christian Preacher, one that would convert
Your Moors, and turn them to a new belief.

Mull. Then he shall die, as we are king of Fesse.


Bes. For these I only spoke, for him I kneel,
If I have any grace with mighty Fesse.

Mul. We can deny thee nothing beauteous maid,
A kiss shall be his pardon.

Bes. Thus I pay't.


Clem. Must your black face be smooching my Mistresses white lips with a
moorian. I would you had kissed her a --


Alc. Ha, how is that sir?


Clem. I know what I say sir, I would he had kissed her a --


Alcade. A- what?


Clem. A thousand times to have done him a pleasure.

Enter Spencer and Goodlacke.
Mull. That kiss was worth the ransom of a King.
What Is he of that brave presence?

Besse. A Gentleman of England, and my friend,
Do^ him some grace for my sake.

Mull. For thy sake what would not I perform?
He shall have grace and honor. Ioffer, go
And see him gelded to attend on us,
He shall be our chief Eunuch.

Besse. Not for ten worlds. Behold great king I stand
Betwixt him and all danger. Have I found thee?
Ceaze what I have, take both my ship and goods,
Leave naught that is mine unrifled: spare me him.
And have I found my Spencer!

Clem. Please your Majesty, I see all men are not capable of honor, what he
he refuses, may it please you to bestow on me.


Mull. With all my heart. Go bear him hence Alcade,
Into our Alkedavy, honor him,
And let him taste the razor.

Clem. There Is honor for me.


Alc. Come follow.


Clem. No sir, I Will go before you for mine honor.

Exit.
Spenc. Oh show your self renowned king the same
Fame blazons you: bestow this Maid on me,
It Is such a gift as kingdoms cannot buy:
She is a president of all true love,
And shall be registered to after times,
That never shall pattern her.

Goodl. Heard you the story of their constant love.
'Twould move in you compassion.

Rough. Let not intemperate love sway you bove pity,
That foreign nation that never heard your name,
May chronicle your virtues.

Mull. You have wakend in me an heroic spirit:
Lust shall not conquer virtue. Till this h^wer
We graced thee for thy beauty English woman,
But now we wonder at thy constancy.

Bes. Oh were you of our faith, I Would swear great Mullisheg
To be a god on earth. And lives my Spencer?
In troath I thought thee dead.

Spenc. In hope of thee
I lived to gain both life and liberty.
Enter Clem running.
Clem. No more of your honor if you love me. Is this your Moorish preferment
to rob a man of his best jewels?


Mul. Have thou seen our Alkedavy?


Clem. Davy do you call him? he may be called shavee
I am sure he has tickled my current commodity,
No more your cutting honor if you love me.

Mul. All your strange fortunes we will hear discourst
And after that your fair espousals grace,
If you can find a man of your belief
To do that grateful office.

Spenc. None more fit
Then this religious and grave Gentleman
Late rescewed from deaths sentence.

Preacher. None more proud
To do you that poor service.

Mul. Noble Englishman,
I cannot fasten bounty to my will,
Worthy thy merit, move some suite to us.

Spencer. To make you more renowned great king, and us
The more indebted, there is an Englishman
Has forfeited his ship for goods uncustom'd.

Mul. Thy suite is granted ere it be half begged,
Dispose them at thy pleasure.

Spenc. Mighty king
We are your Highness servants,

Mul. Come beauteous Maid, we will see thee crowned a bride,
At all our pompous banquets these shall wait.
Thy followers and thy servants press with gold,
And not the mean that to thy train belongs,
But shall approve our bounty. Lead in state,
And wheresoe'er thy fame shall be enrolled,
The world report thou art a Girl worth gold.

Explicit Actus quintus.
FINIS.
THE FAIR MAID OF THE WEST. OR, A Girl worth gold. The second part. As it was
lately acted before the King and Queen, with approved liking. By the Queens
Majesty's Comedians.

Written by T. H.



LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, and are to be sold at his Shop in Ivy
Lane. 1631.

To the true favourer of the Muses, and all good Arts, Thomas Hammon, Esquire,
of Graies Inn, etc.
THe first part of this work I bestowed upon your friend Mr. John Othow, the
second I have conferred upon you, both being incorporated into one House, and
noble Society. The proximitie in your Chambers, and much familiar conference,
having bred a mutual correspondencie betwixt you. The prime motive inviting me
to this Dedication; the much love, and many courtesies reflecting upon me from
you both: Being the rather encouraged thereunto, that though the subject it
self carry no great countenance in the Title, yet it has not only past the
censure of the Plebe and Gentry; but of the Patricians and Praetextatae: as
also of our royal Augustus and Livia. The reason why I have selected you my
Patrons, was to exclude my self from the number of those of whom Iuvenal
speaks, Satyr 7.

Scire volunt omnes, mercedem solvere nemo. Please you at any of your more
leasur'd hours, to vouchsafe the perusal of these slight papers, your
acceptance shall be my recompense. Receive my wishes for your earths happiness
in millions, for your heavens bliss in myriads. Taking my leave of you with
that in Adelph.

Nunquam ita magnifice quicquam dicam,
Id virtus quin superet tua.
Yours plenally devoted THOMAS HEYWOOD.

To the READER.
CVrteous Reader, if thou be tired in the first part, I would not wish thee
to be traveled in the second; but I hope much better, and that thou did leave
in the last, as one that came late to his Inn to rest himself for that night,
only with purpose to go on with the second, as he that rises early the next
morning (having refresh't himself) to proceed on his journey. By this time you
cannot choose but be acquainted with the most of our Acts, bu^ not with all;
and more particularly for Spencer, and his western Besse. With these
Countrymen of ours in their fellowship, you have heard the beginning of their
troubles, but are not yet come to the end of their travells; in which you may
accompany them on land, without the prejudice of deep ways, or robbers; and by
Sea, free from the danger of rocks or Pirates; as neither using horse or ship,
more then this book in thine hand, and thy chair in thy chamber. More
complement I purpose not, and (I hope) thou expectest not* Farewell.

One studious to be thine T. H.

Dramatis Personae.
TOota, Queen of Fesse, and wife of Mullisheg. By heophilus Bourne Bashaw I
offer. Ruffman. Clem, the Clown. Mullisheg, King of Fesse. Bashaw Alcade. By
Mr. Anonie Turner. Mr. Spencer. Capt. Goodlacke. Forset. Besse Bridges. A
P^rter of the kings gate. A Lieutenant of the Moors. A Guard. A Negro. A
Chorus. A Captain of the Bandetti. The D. of Florence, with followers. By Mr.
Ioh. Somner. The Duke of (...). By Rob. Axall. The D. of Farara. By Christoph.
Goad. An English Merchant. Two Florentine lords. Pedro Venturo, General at Sea
for the D. of Florence.
THE FAIR MAID of the West: OR, A Girl worth Gold.
The second part.
Enter Tota Mullishegs wife. Tota. IT must not, may not, shall not be endured:
Left we for this our Country? to be made
A mere neglected Lady here in Fesse,
A slave to others, but a scorn to all?
Can womanish ambition, heat of blood,
Or height of birth brook this, and not revenge?
Revenge? on whom? on mighty Mullisheg?
We are not safe then; On the English stranger?
And why on her, when there is no apprehension
That can in thought pollute her innocence?
Yet something I must do. What? nothing yet?
Nor must we live neglected; I should doubt
I were a perfect woman, but degenerate
From mine own sex if I should suffer this:
I have a thousand projects in my brain,
But can bring none to purpose.

Enter Bashaw Ioffer. Ioff. Called your Majesty?


Tota. No, yet I think I did, be gone, yet stay.
Will not this mishapt Embrion grow to form?
Not yet? nor yet?

Ioff. I attend your highness pleasure.


Tota. It Is perfect, and Iha'te,
I am ambitious but to think upon it,
And if it prove as I have fashiond it,
I shall be trophide ever.

Ioff. I wait still.


Tota. The King no way in peril, she secure,
None harmed, all pleased, I sweetly satisfied,
And yet revenged at full. Brain, I for this
Will wreathe thee in a glorious arch of gold,
stuck full of Indian gemmes. But Tota, whom
Will thou employ in this? the Moors are treacherous,
And them we dare not trust.

Ioff. You need not me.


Tot. Say, where is the King?


Ioff. In The Presence.


Tot. How?


Ioff. Distempered late, and strangely humerous,
The cause none can conjecture.

Tot. Send in his sweet heart,
And were his own heart double rib'd with brass,
Yet she would search the inmost of his thoughts.
No, it is not her on whom I build my project.
Is the King upon his entrance?

Ioff. It Is thought he is,
If so, this sudden strange distemperature
Has not his purpose altered.

Tot. You have now leave
To leave us and attend the King,

Ioff. I shall.


Tot. If any of the English Ladies train
Come in your way, you may request them hither,
Say, we would question some things of their country.

Ioff. Madam, I shall.


Tot. Then on to your attendance, what we must,
We Will work by The English, these we dare not trust.

Enter Clem meeting Ioffer. Ioff. It Is the Queens pleasure you attend her.


Clem. The Queen speak with me? Can you tell the business? A murren of these
barbers of Barberie, they have given me a receipt, that escape the collicke as
well as I can, I shall be sure never to be troubled with the stone.


Ioff. Yonder she walks. I leave ye.


Tot. Now sir, you are of England?


Clem. And I think you are a witch.


Tot. How sirrah?


Clem. A foolish proverb we use in our country, which to give you in other
words, is as much as to say, You have hit the nail on the head.


Tot. And servant to the English Elizabeth,
So great in Court by mighty Mullisheg,
You follow her?

Clem. I must confess I am not her Gentleman usher to go before her, for that
way as the case stands with me now, I can do her but small pleasure, I do
follow her.


Tot. You have seen both nations, England and our Fesse, how do our people
differ?


Clem. Our countrymen eat and drink as yours do for all the world, open
their eyes when they would see, and shut them again when they would sleep:
when they go they set one leg before another, and gape when their mouths
open, as yours eat when they have stomachs, scratch when it itcheth: only I
hold our nation to be the cleanlier.


Tot. Cleanlier, wherein?


Clem. Because they never sit down to meat with such foul hands and faces.


Tot. But how your Ladies and choice Gentlewomen?


Clem. You shall meet some of them sometimes as fresh as flowers in May, and
as fair as my Mistrisse, and within an hour the same Gentlewoman as black as
your self, or any of your Morians.


Tot. Can they change faces so? not possible: show me some reason for it.


Clem. When they put on their maskes.


Tot. Miskes, what are they?


Clem. Please you to put off yours, and I Will tell you.


Tot. We wear none but that which nature has be^owed on us, and o^r
births-give us freely.


Clem. And our Ladies wear none but what the shops yield, and they buy for
their money.


Tot. Can thou be secret to me Englishman?


Clem. Yes, and chaste too, I have taken a medioine for it.


Tot. Be fixed to me in what I shall employ thee,
Constant and private unto my designs,
More grace and honor I will do to thee,
Then ere thou did receive from Mullisheg.

Clem. Grace and honor? his grace and honor was to take away some part, and
she would honor me to take away all: I Will see you damned as deep as the black
father of your generation the devil first.


Tot. Mistake me no^.


Clem. Nay if you were with child with a young princely devil, and had a
mind to any thing that is here, I Would make you love your longing.


Tot. Sure this fellow is some sot.


Clem. Grace and honor, quotha.

Enter
Enter Ruffman. Ruff. How now Clem, whither in such post have?


Clem. There, if you will have any grace and honor, you may pay fort as dear
as I have done; 'sfoot I have little enough left, I would feign carry home
something into my own country.


Ruff. Why, what is the matter? I prithee stay.


Clem. No, Lieutenant you shall pardon me, not I, the room is too hot for me:
I Will be gone, do you stay at your own peril: I Will be no longer a prodigal, I Will
keep what I have.

Exit Clem.
Tot. This should have better sense, I Will next prove him.


Ruff. Excuse me mighty Princess, that my boldness
Has pressed thus far into your privacies.

Tot. You no way have offended; nay, come near,
We love to grace a stranger.

Ruff. 'T was my ignorance,
And no pretended boldness.

Tot. I have observed you
To be of some command amongst the English,
Nor make I question but that you may be
Of fair revennues.

Ruff. A poor Gentleman.


^ot. Weel make thee rich; spend that.


Ruff. Your graces bounty
Exceeds what merit can make good in me:
I am your highness servant.

Tot. Let that jewel be worn as our high favor.


Ruff. 'Sfoot I think
This Queen's in love with me. Madam, I shall.

Tot. If any favor I can do in Court
Can make you further gracious, speak it freely;
What power we have is yours.

Ruff. Doubtless it is so, and I am made for ever.


Tot. Nay we shall ^ake it ill
To give our selves so amply to your knowledge,
And you not use us.

Ruff. Use us, now upon my life she is caught:
What, courted by a Queen? a royal Princess;
Where were your eyes Besse, that you could not see
These hidden parts and mysteries, which this Queen
Has in my shape observed? it is but a fortune
That I was borne to, and I thank heaven fort.

Tot. May I trust you?


Ruff. With your life, with your honor.
I Will be as private to you as your heart
Within your bosom, close as your own thoughts.
I Will brag of this in England, that I once
Was ^avourite to a Queen, my royall-mistris.

Tot. If what you have already promised you will made good,
I Will prove so.

Ruff. Madam, let this,


Tot. What?


Ruff. This kiss.


Tot. This fool, this ass, this insolent gull.


Ruff. Why, did not your grace mean plainly?


Tot. In what, sir?


Ruff. Did you not court me?


Tot. How, that face?
Think thou I could love a Monkey, a Babone?
Know, were I mounted in the height of lust,
And a mere prostitute, rather then thee
I Would embrace, one, name but that creature
That the do think most odious.

Ruff. Pardon me Lady,
I humbly take my leave.

Tot. Have I given you your description I pray, sir,
Be secret in'^.

Ruff. I shall be loath to tell it,
Or publish it to any.

Tot. Yet you are not gone:
Know then you have incurred
The Kings wrath first, our high displeasure next,
The least of which is death; yet will you grow
More near to us, and prove loyal unto my present purposes.
I will not only pardon you what is past.
But multiply my bounties.

Ruff. I am your prisoner.


Tot. Be free, th^s nothing can be called offense,
But that in thee we pardon.

Ruff. I am fast.


Tot. And yet a free man: I am injured highly,
And thou must aid me in my just revenge.

Ruff. Were it to combat the most valiantst Moore,
That ever Fesse, Morocko, or Argiers bred,
I for your sake would do it.

Tot We seek nor blood,
Nor to expose thee to the least of danger:
I am modest, and what I dare not trust my own tongue with,
Or thoughts, I Will bouldly give unto thine ears,
List: Do you shake your head, say, Is It done already?

Ruff. Wrong my friend?


Tot. Do you cast doubts or dangers? Is not our l^fe.
Our honor all in your hand, and will you lavish us.
Or scant that bounty should crown you with excess.

Ruff. I Will pause upon it.


Tot. Is not your life ours by your insolence? have not we power to take it?


Ruff. Say no more, I Will do it.


Tot. But may I hope,


Ruff. I have cast all doubts, and know how it may be compa^.


Tot. There Is more gold, your secrecy that is all I crave.


Ruff. To prove my self in this just cause I have,
An honest man, or a pernicious knave.

Tot. Take the advantage of this night.


Ruff. I shall expect fair end,
All doubts are cast.

Tot. So make a Queen thy friend.

Recorders. Enter Mullisheg, Ioffer, and Alcade, Spencer, Goodlack, Besse, and
the rest.
Mul. All musick's harsh, command these discords cease,
For we have war within us.

Besse Mighty King,
What is it offends your highness?

Mul. Nothing Besse:
Yet all things do: Oh, what did I bestow,
When I gave her away.

Besse. The Queen attends you.


Mull. Let her attend.


Tot. I, King, neglected still,
My just revenge shall wound, although not kill.

Mull. I was a traitor to my own desires,
To part with her so slightly: what, no means
To alter these proceedings?

Spenc. Strange disturbances.


Goodl. What might the project be?


Alc. May it please your Highness, shall the Mask go forward,
That was intended to grace this joviall night?

Mull. We Will have none,
Let it be treason held
To any man that shall but name our pleasure,
Or that vain word, delight: The more I gaze,
The more I surfeit; and the more I strive
To free me from these fires, I am deeper wrapped:
In flames I burn.

Spenc. Your discontent, great Prince, takes from us all
The edge of mirth: these nuptial joys that should
Have sweld our souls with all the sweet varieties
Of apprehensive wishes, with your sadness
Grows dull and leaden: they have lost their taste
In this your discontent all pleasures lose their sweetness.

Bess. Mighty Fesse,
Has any ignorant neglect in us
Bred these disturbances?

Mull. Offense and you
Are like the warring elements, opposed.
And Fesse, why a king, and not command thy pleasure?
Is she not within our kingdom? nay, within our palace,
And therefore in our power: is she alone
That happiness that I desire on earth?
Which since the heavens have given up to mine hands,
Shall I despise their bounty? and not rather
Run through a thousand dangers, to enjoy
Their prodigal favors? dangers? tush, there is none:
We are here amidst our people, walled with subjects round,
And danger is our slave: besides, our war
Is with weak woman. Oh, but I have sworn
And sealed to her safe conduct; What of that?
Can a king swear against his own desires,
Whose welfare is the sinews of his Realm?
I should commit high treason against my self,
Not to do that might give my soul content,
And satisfy my appetite with fullness. Alcade.

Alcad. My lord.


Mull. Rides the English Negro still within the harbor?


Alcad. Some league from land.


Mull. Lest that these English should attempt escape,
Now they are laden fully with our bounties,
Cast thou a watchful eye upon these two.

Alcad. I shall.


Mul. I know their loves so fervent and entire,
They will not part asunder, she leave him,
Or he without her make escape to sea.
Then while the one's in sight our hopes are safe.
Be that thy charge.

Alcad. I Will be an Argus over them.


Goodl. Unless the King be still in love with Besse,
Repenting him of their late marriage,
It Is beyond wonder to calculate these storms.

Mull. How goes the hour?


Alcad. About some four.us


Mul. We rose too soon Besse from your nuptial feasts,
Something we tasted made us stomach sick,
But now we find a more contentfull change.

Bess. Your sunshine is our day.


Mul. Dispose your selves
All to your free d^sires; to dancing some,
Others to mount our stately Barberie horse,
So famous through the world for swift carere,
Stomach, and fiery pace.
Those that love arms,
Mount for the tilt: this day is yours, to you it is consecrate.
He commits treason in the highest degree,
Whose cloudy brow dares the least tempest show
To cross what we intend: pleasure shall spring
From us to flow on you.

All. Long live the King:

Exeunt. Manet Goodlack.
Mull. To your free pastimes; leave us.
Captain, stay Captain, I read a fortune in thy brow,
More then the slight presage of a^guire,
Which tells me thou, and only thou art marked
To make me earthly blessed.

Goodl. That I can do it?


Mull. It lies in thee to raise thy ruined fortunes
As high as is a Viceroy's, wreathe thy front
Within a eircled piramis of gold,
And to command in all our territories,
Next to our person.

Goodl. Golden promises.


Mull. Our words are acts, our promises are deeds,
We do not feed with air: it lies in thee,
We two may grapple souls, be friends and brothers.

Goodl. Teach me how.


Mull. I do not find thee coming: in thy looks
I cannot spy that fresh alacrity,
Which with a glad and sprightfull forwardness,
Should meet our love half way.

Goodl. You wonder me.


Mull. No, thou art dull, or fearful, fare thee well,
Thou had a fate lade up to make thee chronicled
In thy own Country, but thou will basely lose it,
Even by thine own neglect.

Goodl. Forespeak me not,
The Sun nere met the summer with more joy
Then I Would embrace my fortunes; but to you,
Great king, to whom I am so greatly bound,
I Would purchas't with a danger should fright earth,
Astonish heaven, and make all hell to tremble;
I am of no shrinking temper.

Mull. Prove but as wise as thou art bold and valiant,
And gain me wholly to thee, half thou have already
Purchased by this bold answer; but perform
The rest, and we are all and only thine.

Goodl. Show me the way to gain this royal purchase,
If I do it not, divide me from your presence,
From your grace, and all those glorious hopes you have proposed
Turn into scorns and scandalls.

Mull. I am dull,
And drowsy on the sudden: whilst I sleep,
Captain, read there.
He counterfets sleep, and gives him a letter.
Goodl. To make Besse mine some secret means devise,
To thy own height and heart I Will make thee rise.
Is not this ink the blood of Basilisks,
That kills me in the eyes, and blindes me so,
That I can read no further: 'twas composed
Of Dragons poison, and the gall of Aspes,
Of Serpents venom, or of Vipers stings,
It could not read so harsh else: Oh my fate;
Nothing but this? this? Had a parliament
Of fiends and furies in a synod sat,
And devised, plotted, parlied, and contrived,
They scarce could second this; This? it is unparalled:
To strumpet a chaste Lady, injure him
That rates her honor dearer then his life.
T'imploy a friend in treasons against his friend,
And put that friend to do it: t'impose on me
The hateful style and blot of pandarisme,
That am a Gentleman: nay, worse then this,
Make me in this a traitor to my country,
In giving up their h^nours: Who but a Moor,
Of all that bears man's shape, likest a devil,
Could have devised this horror? Possible
That he should mark out me? What does my face
Prognosticate, that he should find writ there
An index of such treasons? But beware,
'Twas his own plot, I, and his cunning too:
I Will add that to his project: but a Viceroy,
And a kings Minion, titles that will shadow
Ills the most base and branded. Not to do it
May purchase his displeasure, which can be
No less then death or bondage: here is proposed
Honor and peril. But what writes he further;
We are impatient of delays, this night
Let it be done.
I am doubtful of my purpose,
And can resolve of nothing.
Mullisheg starts out of his chair as from a dream.
Mull. If he fail,
I Will have his flesh cut small as winters snow
O^ summers attoms.

Goodl. Ha, was that by us?


Mull Where was I? Oh, I dreamed upon the sudden,
How fast was I.

Goodl. A fair warning 'twas, have you the cunning
To speak your thoughts in dreams?

Mull. Who Is in the next room?


Goodl. My lord.


Mull. My Captain, was it thou?
Sleep did surprise my senses, worthy friend,
And in my dreams I did remember thee.

Goodl. How, me my lord?


Mull. Me thought I had emploid thee in a business,
In which thou were or fearful, or else false,
At which I was so overcome with rage,
That from my dreams I started.

Goodl. Seamen say,
When Halcions sing, look for a storm that day
There Is death in my denial.

Mull. Did you read,
That scrowl we gave you Captain there is wrapped up
A thousand honors for thee, and more gold
Then should thou live a double Nestors age,
Thou could find ways to lavish.

Goodl. Add to your work a business of more danger,
That I may think me worthy, otherwise
This slight employment will but prize me low
And of desertlesse merit.

Mull. Think thou Captain
It may be easily compast?

Goodl. Dare you trust me?


Mull. I dare.


Goodl. Then know, besides to dare and can,
I will, though work beyond the power of man,
I Will set my brains in action.

Mull. Noble friend,
Above thy thoughts our honors shall extend.

Goodl. I am not to be shaken.


Mull. Where be our Eunuchs?
We Will crown our hopes and wishes with more pomp
And sumptuous cost, then Priam did his sons,
That night he bosomed Hellen; she is as fair,
And we will command our pomp to be as rare.
We will have torches shall exceed the stars
In number and in brightness: we will have
Rare change of music shrill and high,
That shall exceed the spheres in harmony.
The jewels of her habit shall reflect,
To daze all eyes that shall behold her state.
Our treasure shall like to a torrent rush
Streams of rewards, richer then Tagus sands,
To make these English strangers swim in gold.
In wild Moriskoes we will lead the bride:
And when with full satieties of pleasures
We are dull and satiate, at her radiant eyes
Kindle fresh appetite, since they aspire,
T'exceed in brightness the high orbs of fire.
Make this Night mine, as we are King of Fesse,
Thou Art Viceroy, Captain.
Exit Mullisheg.
Goodl. Make my estate much less,
And my attempts more honorable: honor and virtue,
To me seem things in opposition:
Nor can we with small danger catch at one,
But we must lose the other. Oh my brain,
In what a labyrinth art thou? Say I could
Be false, as he would make me; what device?
What plot? what train have I to compass it?
Or with what face can I solicit her,
In treason toward my friend?
Enter Ruffman.
Ruff. I am to solicit Spencer
To lie with the Moors Queen; a business, Besse
Will hardly thank me for: but howsoever
I have undertane it.

Goodl. Impossibilities all; the more I wade,
The more I drown in weakness.

Ruff. Captain.


Goodl. Oh Lieutenant,
Never was man perplexed thus.

Ruff. What, as you?
Had you but my disturbance in your brain,
'Twould tax a Stoics wit, or Oedipus.
Why Captain, a whole school of Sophisters
Could not unriddle me.

Goodl. I would we might change business.


Ruff. I would give boot so to be rid of mine.


Goodl. Shall we be free and open breasted?


Ruff. How?


Goodl. As thus;
Tell me thy grievances, and unto thee
I will unvail my bosom: both disclosed
I Will beg in mine thy counsel and assistance,
Thy cause shall mine command.

Ruff. A heart, a hand.


Goodl. I am to woo fair Besse to lie with Mullisheg.


Ruff. And I woo Spencer to embrace the Queen.


Goodl. Is It possible?


Ruff. It Is more then possible, it is absolutely past.


Goodl. There Is not a hair to chose, can counsel me?


Ruff. Can you advise me?


Goodl. I am past my wits.


Ruff. And I beyond all sense.


Goodl. Would thou do it, here lay the way plain before thee.


Ruff. What, for gold
Betray my friend and country, would you Captain?

Goodl. What and wear a sword
To guard my honor and a Christians faith,
I Would flesh it here first.

Ruff. Nobly resolved.


Goodl. We are not safe Lieutenant, Moors are treacherous.
Nay come, thy counsel,
Fesse has proferd me
The honor of a Viceroy; and withal,
If I should fail performance, cunningly
Has threatened me with death.

Ruff. You still propose
The danger, but you show no way to clear them.

Goodl. Brain, let me waken thee, 'sfoot have thou no project? do thou
partake my dullness?


Ruff. The more I strive, the more I am entangled.


Goodl. And I too. Not yet?


Ruff. Nor yet, nor ever.


Goodl. 'Twas coming here, and now again it is vanished.


Ruff. Cal't back again for heavens sake.


Goodl. Again.


Ruff. Thanks heaven.


Goodl. And now again it is gone.


Ruff. Can you not catch fast hold on it?


Goodl. Give me way,
Let Us walk Lieutenant: Could a man propose
A stratagem to gull this lustful Moor,
To supply him, and then to satiate her?

Ruff. Good.


Goodl. Next, out of all these dangers secure us,
And keep our treasure safe.

Ruff. 'Twere excellent.


Goodl. But how shall this be done?


Ruff. Why Captain, know not you?


Goodl. Think thou it in the power of man to work it?
Yet come, I Will try, I owe my fate a death,
Be swaid by me in all things.

Ruff. Noble Captain, I do not wish to outlive thee.


Explicit Actus primus.
Actus secundus. Scena prima.
Enter Spencer, Besse, and cl^m. Spencer. THe King was wondrous pleasant: Oh my
Besse,
How much am I indebted to his highness,
Only for gracing thee.

Besse. Could my Spencer
Think that a barbarous Moor could be so trained
In humain virtues?

Clem. Fie upon it: I am so tired with dancing with these same black
shee-chimney-sweepers, that I can scarce set the best leg forward, they have so
tired me with their Morisc^es, and I have so tickled them with our Country
dances, Sellengers round, and Tom Tiler: we have so fidled it.


Spenc. Sirrah, what news will you tell to your friends when you return into
England.


Clem. Brave news, which though I can neither write nor read, yet I have
committed them to my tables and the rest of my memory.


Spenc. Let Us hear some of your novelties.


Clem. First and foremost I have observed the wisdom of these Moors, for some
two days since being invited to one of the chief Bashaws to dinner, after
meat, sitting by a huge fire, and feeling his shins to burn, I requested him to
pull back his chair, but he very understandingly sent for three or four Masons
and removed the chimney: the same Mo^ian entreated me to lie with him, and I
according to the state of my travells, willing to have a candle burning by, but
he by no means would grant it; I ask't him why? No, says he, we will put out
the light that the fleas may not know where to find us.

Enter Goodlack and Ruffman.
Spenc. No storm at sea could be so tyranous,
Nor half th'^right bear in his forehead bare,
As I spy in that look.

Bess^. Let not your looks pre^ge more terrors then*
Your tongues can speak; out with it at once Lieutenant.

Spenc. Captain speak.


Goodl. We Are all lost.


Ruff. All shipwrak't.


Clem. Are we ashore, and shall we be cast away?


Spenc. Great Mullisheg is royal.


Goodl. False to you.


Besse Gracious and kind.


Ruff. Disloy all to us all.


Spenc. Wrap me not in these wonders worthy friend,
The very doubt of what the danger is,
Is more then danger can be.

Bess. Be it death,
So we may dye together: here is a heart
Fear never could affright.

Goodl. The king still loves your Besse.


Spenc. Ha?


Ruff. The Queen your Spencer.


Bess. How?


Goodl. This night he must enjoy her.


Ruff. And she him.


Spenc. A thousand deaths are in that word contrived.
I Will make my passage through the blood of kings,
Rather then suffer this.

Bess. I through hell,
Or were there place more dangerous.

Goodl. Else all die.


Clem. Die, 'sfoot this is worse then being made an Eunuch as I was.


Spenc. We have yet life, and therefore cherish hope.


Goodl. All hopes are banished in the deep abyss
Of our perplexed thoughts.

Ruff. All things run retrograde.


Bess. Why Captain? why Lieutenant? had you the skill
To bring my ship thus far, to wrack her here?
Past you the Ocean, to perish in the harbor?
Thou, Tom Goodlack
Were ever true and just to my designs,
And can thou fail me now?

Goodl. I study for you.


Bess. Have thou brought me but to see my Spencers shadow,
And not enjoy the substance: for what more
Have I yet had from him, then from his picture,
That once hung in my Chamber. Gentlemen, amongst you all
Rescue an innocent maid from violence:
Or do but say it cannot be prevented:
I begin, he that best loves me follow.

Spenc. What means Besse?


Goodl. If it could be fashioned to my thoughts,
And have success, 'twere brave.

Spenc. What, noble friend?


Goodl. To thrive but as we purpose.


Spenc. Have you way?


Goodl. It Is bu^ a desperate course; and if it fail
The worst can be but death: and I, even I,
That laid the plot, will teach them how to dye.
I Will lead them on.

Spenc. If thou have any project.


Bess. Joy or comfort.


Ruff. And if not comfort, counsel.


Goodl. Say it thrive?


Spenc. What Captain? what?


Goodl. You Will rip it from the womb
Ere it be fully hatched now:
If it prosper but to my desire
And wishes, 'twere admirable.

Spenc. No longer hold us in suspense, good Captain.
But free us from these fears.

Goodl. You noble friend,
This night cast gracious eyes upon the Queen:

Bess. And prove to me disloyal?


Goodl. Still you cross me,
And make the birth abortive. You fair Besse,
With amourous favors entertain the King.

Spenc. And yield her self to his intemperate lust?


Goodl. You still prevent me; either give me way
To show you light unto your liberties,
Or still remain in darkness.

Ruff. Hear him out.


Goodl. You sooth the Queen,
I Will flatter with the King,
Let Us promise fair on both sides: say, it is done
All to their own desires.

Spenc. The event of this?


Goodl. A happy freedom, with a safe escape
Unto our ship this night.

Bess. Oh, could this be.


Goodl. Fortune assists the valiant and the bold,
We Will bid fare for it. I had forgot my self,
Where Is Clem?

Clem. Noble C^ptain.


Goodl. Post to the ship, bid Forset man the long Bo^
With ten good Musketeers, and at a watchword,
If we can free our passage, take us in.
Nay make haste, one minutes stay is death.

Clem. I am gone in a twinkling.


Goodl. To compass the Kings signet; then to command
Our passage, escape the gates and watches too:
For that I have brain. The King's upon his entrance;
Hours wast, revells come on, a thousand projects
Of death, hopes, and fears, are warring
In my bosom, and at once.
Eye you the Queen, and humor you the King;
Let no distaft nor discontented brow
Appear in you: their lust I Will make the ground,
To set all free, or keep your honor sound.
Disperse, the King's on coming.
Flourish. Enter Mullisheg, Tota, Ioffer, and Alcade.
Mull. We consecrate this evening, beauteous Bride,
To'ch honor of your nuptials. -- Is all done?

Goodl. Done.


Tot. Is he ours?


Ruff. Yours.


Tot. And we ever thine.


Goodl. I, and so cast, that she shall grasp you freely;
And think she hugs her Spencer.

Ruff. And when he bosoms you, thinks he infolds
His lovely Besse.

Tot. Thou make a Queen thy servant.


Goodl. Your highness Signet to command our passage from chamber to chamber.


Mull. It Is there.


Goodl. The word.


Mull. It Is Mullisheg.


Goodl. This must bring us safe aboard.


Mull. We keep the Bride
Too long from rest now, she is free for bed.

Tot. Please her to accept it,
In honor of her beauty, this night I Will do her any service.

Besse Mighty princess,
Excuse my breeding from such arrogance,
And overbold presumption, you nor yours
Can owe me any duty: '^is besides
The fashion of our country, not to trust
The secrets of a nuptial night like this,
To the eyes of any stranger.

Tot. At your pleasure,


Bess. With our first nights unlacing, mighty Queen,
We dare not trust our husbands, it is a modesty
Our English maids profess.

Mull. Keep your own customs as you shall think best,
So for this night we leave you to your rest.

Tot. Remember.


Ruff. It Is writ here.


Mull. Captain,

Exeunt. Manet Goodlack.
Goodl. I am fast,
Now is my task in labor, and is plunged
In thousand throes of childebirth, dangerous it is
To deal where kings affairs are questiond,
Or may be parled. But what is he so base,
That would not all his utmost powers extend,
For freedom of his country and his friend.
When all the Court is silent, sunk in dreams,
Then must my spirits awake. By this the King
H'as taken his leave of bride and bridegroom too:
And th'^morous Queen longs for some happy news
From Ruffman, as great Fesse expects from us.
My friend and Besse wrapped in a thousand fears,
To find my plot in action: and it now
Must take new life: auspitious fate thy aid,
To guard the honor of this English maid.
Exit. Enter Ruffman ushuring the Queen.
Ruff. Tread soft, good Madam.


Tot. Is this the Chamber.


Ruff. I Will bring him instantly.
He thinks this bed provided for his Besse,
And that she lodges here, while she poor soul
Embraces naught but air.

Tot. Thou make a Queen thy servant.


Ruff. Beware, be not too loud lest that your tongue
Betraies you.

Tot. Mute as night,
As silent and as secret. Wrongs should be
Paid with wrongs, for so indeed it is meet,
My just revenge, though secret yet it is sweet.
Haste time, and have our bounty.

Ruff. Queen I shall.
So now were we all safe and in our Negro shipped,
Might thou lie there till dooms day, lustful Queen.
Exit. Enter Goodlack and the King.
Goodl. My lord the custom is in England still
For maids to go to bed before their husbands,
It saves their cheek from many a modest blush.

King And in the dark.


Goodl. We use it for the most part.


King Soft may their bones lie in their beds of ashes
That brought this custom into England first.

Goodl. This the place where Besse expects her Spencer*


King Thou Viceroy of Argiers, for Captain, that
Is now thy title: thou have won a King,
To be thy breast companion.

Goodl. Not too loud.
Why enters not your highness? you are safe.

King With as much joy as to our prophets rest.
But what thinks Spencer of this?

Goodl. I have shifted in her place
A certain Moor, whom I have hired for money,
Which (poor soul) he entertains for Besse.

King My excellent friend.


Goodl. Beware of conference, lest your tongue reveals
What this safe darkness hides.

King I am all silent.
Oh, thou contentfull night, into thy arms,
Of all that ere I tasted, sweetest and best,
I throw me, more for pleasure then for rest.
Exit King.
Goodl. One fury claspe another, and there beget
Young devils between you: so fair Besse be safe.
I have here the kings signet, this will yield us
Way through the court and city, Besse being mask't,
How can she be discride, when none suspect,
Our flight this day not dreamed on: now to execute
What was before purposed, which if it speed,
I Will say the heavens have in our fates agreed.
Exit. Enter Besse, Spencer, and Ruffman.
Spenc. How goes the night?


Ruff. It Is some two hours from day.


Besse Yet no news from the Captain.


Ruff. I have done a Midwives part, I have brought the Queen to bed, I could do
no more.

Enter Goodlack.
Spenc. The Captain is come.


Besse Thy news.


Goodl. All safe, faith wench, I have put them to it for a single combat, I
have left them at it.


Besse King and Queen.


Goodl. The same.


Ruff. Now for us.


Goodl. I, there is all the danger, there is one Bashaw
Whose eyes is fixed on Spencer, and he now
Walks e'ne before our lodging.

Besse Then what is past,
Is all yet to no purpose.

Goodl. He and I
May freely pass the Court: and you fair Besse,
I would disguise: but ^hen for Spencer?

Besse Why that is the main of all* all without his freedom
That we can aim at's, nothing.

Spenc. It shall be thus, which alter none that loves me.
With this signet you three shall pass to'^h ship
Whilst I Am in sight she will not be suspected:
My escape, leave to my own fair fortunes.

Besse How that?


Spenc. Through twenty Bashaws I will hew my way,
But I will see thee e're morning.

Besse Think thou Spencer
That I will leave thee? think thou that I can?
Thou may as well part body from the soul,
As part us now: It is our wedding night,
Would now divide us?

Spenc. Yield to times necessities, and to our strict disasters.


Goodl. Words are vain,
We now must cleave to action: our stay's death,
And if we be not quick in expedition,
We all perish.

Spenc. Besse, be swaid.


Besse To go to sea without thee,
And leave thee subject unto a tyrants cruelty?
I Will dye a thousand deaths first.

Spenc. First save one,
And by degrees the rest. When thou have past
The perils of this night, I am half safe,
But whilst thou art still invirond, more then better
Half of my part's endangered.

Goodl. Talk your selves
To your deaths, do: will you venture forth?
Leave me to the Bashaw.

Ruff. Or me. I Will buffet with him for my passage.


Spenc. Neither, in what I purpose I am constant.
Conduct her safe; the advantage of the night
I Will take for my escape: and my sweet Beffe,
If in the morning I behold thee not
Safe within my Negro, be assured
I am dead. Nay, now delays are vain.

Besse Sir, did you love
Me, you would not stay behind me.

Spenc. I Will have it so.
Gentlemen, be charie of this jewel
That throws her self into the arms of night,
Under your conduct. If I live, my Besse,
To morrow I Will not fail thee.

Besse And if thou die to morrow, be assured
To morrow I Will be with thee.

Spenc. Shall thy love
Betray us all to death.

Besse Well, I will go,
But if thou do miscary, think the Ocean
To be my Bride-bed.

Spenc. Heaven for us,
That power that has preserved us hitherto,
Will not let us sink now. And, brave gentlemen,
Of the Moors bounty bear not any thing
Unto our ship, lest they report of us,
We fled by night and robbed them.

Goodl. Nobly resolved.


Spenc. Now embrace and part; and my sweet Besse,
This be thy comfort against all future fears,
To meet in mirth that now divide in tears:
Farewell Besse, I Will back into my chamber.

Besse Can I part with life
In more distracted horror?

Goodl. You spoil all
That we before have plotted.
Will you mask your self, and to the Porter first.
Ho, Porter.
Enter Porter.
Porter Who calls?


Goodl. One from the King.


Porter How shall I know that?


Goodl. This token be your warrnt, behold his signet.
That Is not enough, the Word.

Goodl. Mullisheg.


Port. Pass freely: some weighty buisinesse is in hand
That the kings signet is abroad so late;
But no matter, this is my discharge, I Will to my rest*
Exit Porter. Enter Alcade.
Alcad. I much suspect,

These English amongst themselves are treacherous:

I have observed, the king had conference with the Captain: many whisperings
and passages I have observed, but that which makes me most suspect is, because
the king has removed his lodging, and it may be to prostitude the English
Maid: Ha, suspect said I; nay, examine things exactly, and 'tmust needs be so,
the king is wondrous bountiful, and what is it gold cannot. Troth I could even
pity the poor ^orlorn Englishman, who this night must be forced lie alone,
and have the king taste to him.

Enter Spencer.
Spenc. Sure this Moore has been made private to the Kings intents, which if I
find, I Will make him the instrument for me to pass the Court gates. This man,
whose office was to keep me, shall be the only means to free me.


Alcad. On his marriage night, and up at this hour? nay, if I once suspect,
it is as firm as if it were confirmed by Alkaron, or (...) himself had sworn
it: I Will sport my self with his distaste and sorrow.


Spenc. Thus abused.


Alcad. What up so late and on your bridal night
When you should lie lul'd in the fast embrace
Of your fair Mistrisse. I hope I have given't him soundly.

Spenc. s'possible,
To lodge my brid^ in one place, and dispose me
To a wrong chamber: she not once send to me,
That I might know to find her.

Alcad. Excell^.
Nay, if I once suspect, it never fails.

Spenc. I Will not tak'^
At th'hands of an Empress, much less at hers.

Alcad. Why, what is the business, Sir? Oh, I guess the cause of your grief.


Spenc. And Sir, you may, but I Will be revenged.


Alcad. Troth and I would.


Spenc. I Will bosom some body,
Be it the common'st Cur^zan in Fesse,
If not for love, to vex her.

Alcad. Can you do less?


Spenc. To leave me the first night.


Alcad. Oh, 'twas a sign she never dearly loved you.


Spenc. I perceive B^shaw Alcade you understand my wrongs.


Alcad. In part, though not in whole.


Spenc. Your word is warrant, pass me the court gate,
I Will to some loose Burdello, and tell her when I have done.

Alcad. Were it my cause, I Would do this, and more.


Spenc. Make me wait thus!


Alcad. Oh Sir, 'cis insufferable.


Spenc. Troth I dally my revenge too long, what ho, Porter.


Port. How now, who calls?


Alcad. Here Is Bashaw Alcade, turn the key.


Port. His name commands my gate, pass freely.


Spenc. Sir, I am bound to you,
To take this wrong I should be held no man.
Now to the watch, escape there as I can.
Exit.
Alcad. Ha, ha, so long as she sleeps in the arms of Fesse, let him pack where
he pleases: Porter, now he is without, let him command his entrance no more,
neither for reward nor entreaty, till day breaks.


Port. Sir, he shall not.


Alcad. It Is well we are so rid of him: Mulli^ will give me great thanks for
this.
I Will to his chamber, there attend without,
Till he shall waken from his drowsy rest,
And then acquaint him with this fortunate jest.
Alarm. Enter Ioffer, Lieutenant, Spencer prisoner and wounded.
Ioff. Sir, though we wonder at your noble deeds,
Yet I must do the office of a subject,
And take you prisoner? by that noble blood
That runs in these my veins, when I behold
The slaughter you have made, which wonders me,
I wish you had escapt, and not been made captive
To him, who though he may admire and love you,
Yet cannot help you.

Spenc. Your style is like your birth, for you are Ioffer,
Chief Bashaw to the king, and him I know
Lord of most noble thoughts. Speak, what is my danger?

Ioff. Know Sir, a double forfeit of your life:
Your outrage first is death, being in the night,
And against the watch; but those that you have slain
In this fierce conflict, brings'^ without all bounds
Of pardon.

Spen^. I was born too^, and I embrace my fortune.


Ioff. Sir, now I know you
To be that brave and worthy Englishman,
So highly graced in court, which more amazeth me
That you should thus requite him with the slaughter
Of his loved subjects.

Spenc. I entreat you Sir,
As you are noble question me no further,
I have many private thoughts that trouble me,
And not the fear of death.

Ioff. We know your name, and now have proved your courage,
Both these moves us to give you as easy bondage as our loyalty
To the king can suffer, you are free
From irons.

Spenc. When this news shall come to her,


Ioff. Lieutenant, lead the watch some distance of,
Bid them remove these bodies lately slain,
I must have private conference with this prisoner,
Leave him to my charge.
Sir think me though a Moore,
A nation strange unto you Christians,
Yet that I can be noble: but in you
I have observed strange contrarieties,
Which I would b^ resolved in.

Spenc. Speak your thoughts.


Ioff. When I con^'d the nobleness of your blood,
With this your present passion, I much m^,
Why either such a small effuse of blood,
These your sl^ght wounds, or the pale fear of death,
Should have the power to force a tea^ from such
A noble eye.

Spenc. Why think thou Bashaw
That wounds, blood, or death
Could force a tear from me, thou noblest of thy nation,
Do not so far mis^se me: I tell the^ Bashaw,
The rack, strapado, or the scalding oil,
The burning pincers, or the boiling l^d,
The stakes, the pikes, the caldron, or the wheel,
Were all these to^ to befelt an once,
Could not draw w^r hence.

Ioff. Whence ^es it then?


Spenc. From that whose pains as far surmount^ all those
As whips of furies do the Ladies fans,
Made of the plumes o'th Estridge: this like the Sun,
Extracts the de^ ^om my declining soul,
And swi^s mine eyes in moist eff^ie.
O Bess^, Bess^, Bess^, Bess^.

Ioff. Dead pity you have wakened in my bosom,
And made me with you like compassionate.
Freely relate your sorrows.

Spenc. Sir, I shall:
If you have ever loved, or such a maid,
So fair, so constant, and so chaste as mine,
And should fortune to lamentable fortune,
Betray her to a black abortive fate,
How would it wring you? Or if you had a heart,
Made of that metal that we white men have,
How would it melt in you?

Ioff. Sir, you confound me.


Spenc: I will be brief; the travells of my Besse,
To find me out, you have pertook at full,
In presence of the King, these I omit.
Now when we came to sum up all our joy,
And this night were entering to our hoped bliss,
The king, Oh most unworthy of that name,
He quite fell off from goodness.

Ioff. Who Mullish^g?


Spenc. His lust out-waid his honor: and as if his soul
Were blacker then his face, he laid plots
To take this sweet night from me: but prevented,
I have convai'd my beauteous bride aboard,
My Captain and Lieutenant.

Ioff. Are they escapt?


Spenc. Safe to my Negro. Thus far fortune led me
Through many dangers till I past this bridge,
The last of all your watches. And muse not
Bashaw, that I thus single durst oppose my self,
I wore my Mistress here, and she, not I,
Made me midway a conqueror.

Ioff. She being at sea,
And safe, why should your own fates trouble you?

Spenc. Renowned Moor, there is your greatest error;
When we parted, I swore by the honor of a Gentleman,
And as I ever was her constant friend,
If I survived, to visit her aboard
By such an hour: but if I fail, that she
Should think me dead: now, if I break one minute,
She leaps into the sea: it is this, great Bashaw,
That from a soul^ers eyes draws pear^y tears:
For my own (...) ^ de^pise all ^ars.

Ioff. You have deep^y touch (...)* and to let you know
All morra^ (...) (...) not ^olely grounded
In th'hearts (...) (...), go and (...);
Keep your appointed hour, preserve her life:
I will conduct you past all danger: but withal
Rememb^ my (...) (...) to answer it.

Spen^. Is ho^our (...) from Ch^ians unto Moors,
That I may say in Birbarie ^ound
This rare black Swan.

Ioff. And when you are a^ sea,
The wind no (...) (...) (...); your (...)
They are soon waid, and you (...) ^ea ^oome ^ree
To pass unto your country: it is but my life,
And I shall think it nobly spent to ^ave you,
Her, and your train from many ^ad di^ters.

Spenc. Sir, ^ thank you,
Appoint me a (...) ^ower, if ^ ^turn not,
May I be held a scorn to Chri^tendome,
And recreant to my country.

Ioff. By three ^o morrow.


Spenc. Bin^ me by (...) (...).


Ioff. Only your hand and word.


Spenc. Which if I break.
What my heart thinks, my tongue forbears to speak.

Ioff. I Will bear you pa^ (...) (...),

Ex^unt.
Explic^ Act us ^ecundus.
A^tus tertius. (...) prima.
Enter (...). Mull. THrough satia^ with the pleasures of this night.
The morning (...) (...) from the sweet embraces*
Of the fair English Damsel.

Tot. The English stranger
Is ^toln from forth mine arms. I am at full revenged:
Were I again to match, I de marry one
Of this brave nation, if a Gentleman,
Before the greatest Monarch of the world,
They are such sweet and loving bedfellows.
Now to my chamber, darkness guide my way,
Lest what none yet suspect, the night betray.
Let all like me wronged in their nuptial bed,
Not aim at the heart, but rather strike at the head.

Mul. Venetian Ladies, nor the Persian Girls,
The French, the Spanish, nor the Turkish Dames,
Ethiope nor Greece can kiss with half that art
These English can, nor entertain their friends
With 'tenth part of that ample willingness
Within their arms.

Alcad. Your highness called?


Mul. To tell thee that none shall partake but thou.
Oh, I have had the sweetest nights content
That ever king enjoyed.

Alcad. With the fair English bride.


Mull. Nor envy if I raise the Captain for it,
For he shall mount.

Alcad. And he deserves it: but to me you owe
Part of that honor, I had a hand in it too,
Although perhaps you thought me ignorant
In what is past.

Mul. Had thou no more
Then half a finger in this nights content,
It shall not be forgot, but thou as he
Shall be raised one step higher.

Ale. Observing what had past, I spide the bridegr^
As still mine eyes were fixed on him, up and late,
Then by a trick, a pretty slight, a fine fetch of mine own,
I past him forth the gates, and gave command,
He should not have his entr^ce back again,
Neither for reward nor entreaties, till day broke.

Mull. Your ^im in t^t?


Alc. For fear lest he by some suspicious jealous^
Should have disturbed your rest.

Mull. Thy providence
Shall not die unrewarded: (...) him hence,
And with his will toe, this ^akes thee
Of our counsel.

Alcad. It Is an honor
My wisdom haih long aimed at, and I hope
Now shall receive his ^rit.
Enter a Negro.
Negr. Pardon great king that I thus rudely press
Into your private bedchamber.

Mull. Speak, thy n^ws.


Negr. The English Captain, with the lovely Bride,
With her Lieutenant has ^ecretly this night,
With your highness signet and the word past the Courtgates, past all the
watches, and got aboard their Negro, and I was sent to know your highness
pleasure.

Mull. Ha, this night? Alo^de, seek, search,
I left her sleeping in our royal bed.

Alcad. I shall my lord, I half suspect.


Mull. But was not Spencer with them?


Negr. Only they three: and we, by virtue of your highness signet, past them
the court-gates without trouble.

Enter Alcad.
Mull. We are amazed:
Alcade, whom find'st thou there?

Alcad. Nothing, my lord, but empty sheets,
A bed new tossed; but neither English Lady, nor any Lady else.

Mul. We stand astonished,
Not knowing what to answer.
Enter a second messenger.
Mess. Pardon great king if I relate the news
That will offend you highly.

Mull. That the English Captain, Lady, and Lieutenant are escapt.


Mess. But that is not all.


Mull. Can there be worse behind?


Mess. Yes, if the loss of your dear subjects lives
Be worse then their escape: Spencer, without
The signet or the word, being left behind.

Mull. You called the porter up
And let him after.

Alcad. Pardon great King.


Mull. Was this your trick, your slight, your stratagem?
As we are king of Fesse, thy life shall pay
The forfet, thine own tongue shall sentence thee.
But to the rest.

Mess. Then past he to the bridge,
Where stood armed men, in number forty:
Maugre all their strength, with his good sword
He would have made through all:
And in this fierce conflict, six, to the maze
Of all the rest, were slain: nor would he yield,
Till suddenly we raised a loud alarm,
At which the Captain of the watch came down,
And so there surpised him.

M^l. Is he prisoner then?


Mess. In custody of the great Bashaw Ioffer,
With whom we left him.

Mull. Comm^nd our Bashaw
To bring him clogged in irons. These English Pirates
Have robbed us of much treasure: and for that
His traitorous life shall answer. But for thee, traitor,
That had a hand in his escape,
Thou shall be sure to pay for it.

Alcad. Alas, my lord,
What I did was merely ignorance.

Mull. Nay bribes,
And I shall find it so: bear him to guard.
What dissolute strumpet did that traitrous Captain
Send to our sheets; but all our injuries,
Upon that English prisoner we will revenge,
As we in state and fortune hope to rise,
A never heard of death that traitor dies.
Enter Captain, Besse, Ruffman, Clem.
Besse No news from Forset yet that waits for Spencer,
The long boat's not returned?

Goodl. Not yet?


Besse Clem. to the main top Clem, and give ^s notice if thou see any (like
them) make from the shore; the day is broke already.


Clem. With all my heart, so you will give me warning before the Gunner shoots,
left I tumble down again, and put my neck a second time in danger.


Besse Prithee be gone, let us have no jesting now.


Clem. Then I Will to the main top in earnest.


Goodl. How fares it with you Besse?


Besse Like a hartlesse creature, a body without motion.
How can I chose when I am come to sea,
And left my heart ashore? What, no news yet?

Goodl. None.


Bess. I prithee Ruffman step into my Cabin, and bring me here my hour glass.


Ruff. That I shall.


Goodl. To what end would you use it?


Bess. Shall I tell thee Captain,
I would know how long I have to live:
That glass once turned, the sandy hour quite run,
I know my Spencer's dead, and my life's done.
Enter Ruffman with the glass.
Ruff. Your glass.


Besse Gramercy good Lieutenant:
It Is better then a gaudy looking glass,
To deck our faces in; that shows our pride,
But this our ends those glasses seek to hide.
Have you been all at prayers?

Both We have.


Besse I thank you
Gentlemen, never more need: and you would say
As I do, did you but know how near our ends some are.
Do thou not think, Captain, my Spencer's slain?

Goodl. Yet hope the best.


Besse This is the hour he promised: Captain, look,
For I have not the heart, and truly tell me
How far it is spent
Some fifteen minutes.

Besse Alas, no more; I prithee take it away,
Even just so many have I left to pray,
And then to break my heart strings: None that loves me
Speak one word to me of him, or any thing:
If in your secret cabbins you will bestow
Of him and me some tears and hearty prayers,
We, if we live shall thank you. Good Gentlemen
Engage me so far to you.
Enter Clem.
Clem. News, news, news.


Besse Ha, good or bad.


Clem. Excellent, most excellent, nay, super excellent, Forset and all his
companions are rowing hither like mad men; and there is one that sits in the
stern and does not row at all, and that is, let me see who is it? I am sure
it is he, noble Spencer.


Besse Spencer?
Heart, let me keep thee; thou wast up to heaven
Half way in rapture. Art thou sure?

Clem. I think you will make a man swear his heart out.


Besse Teach me but how
I shall receive him when he comes aboard;
How shall I bear me, Captain, that my joy
Do not transcend my ^out out of this earth,
Into the air with passionate ex^:
Enter Spencer.
Goodl. Now farewell Barbary, king M^llisheg,
We have sea room, and wind at will, not ten
Of thy best Galleys armed with Moors,
Can fetch us back.

Ruff. For England Gentlemen.


Bess. Oh, where is the Gunner:
See all the ordnance be straight discharged
For joy my Spencer lives; let us mist our selves
In a thick cloud of smoke, and speak our joys
Unto the highest heavens in fire* and thunder.

Ruff. To make the Queen vex and torment* her self.


Besse To make the King tear his contorted locks,
Curled like the knots of furies: Oh this music
Does please me better then th'^minate strings,
Tuned to their wild Moriskoes: dance my ^oul,
And caper in my bosom, joyful heart,
That I have here my Spencer.

Goodl. Come, weigh Anchor,
Hoist sail, we have a fair and gentle gale
To bear us to our country.

Spenc. Captain, stay.


Besse. I did not hear my Spencer speak till now,
Nor would my sudden joy give me that judgment
To spy that sadness in thee I now see;
Good, what is the cause, can thou conceal't from me?
What, from thy Besse? Whence came that sigh?
You will not tell me; no, do not:
I am not worthy to partake your thoughts.
Do you repent you that you see us safe
Imbar'kt for England to enjoy me there:
Is there some other whom you better love?
Let me but know her, and for your sweet sake
I Will serve her too: come, I will know the cause.

Spenc. Know all in one:
Now I have seen you, I must leave you Besse.

Besse Leave me? Oh, fatal.


Spenc. Speak, my Besse, it is thy Spencer tells thee.


Besse That he will leave me: if the same tongue
That wounded me, gives me no present cure,
It will again intrance me.

Spenc. Arm your self,
It must be spoke again, for I must leave you.
My honor, faith, and coun^y are engaged,
The reputation of a Christian's pawned;
And all that wear that sacred livery,
Shall in my breach be scandal'd. Moors will say,
We boast of faith, none does good works but they.

Besse I am nor sleep nor waking, but my senses
All in a confused slumber.

Goodl. Sir, resolve us;
You wrap us in a Labyrinth of doubts,
From which I pray unloose us.

Spenc. I shall;
I made my way through slaughter; but at length
The watch came down and took me prisoner
Unto a noble Bashaw: for my valor,
It pleased him to admire me: but when sorrow
To disappoint my Besse, strok me in passion,
He urged me freely to relate my griefs,
Which took in him such deep impression,
That on my word and promise to return
By such an hour, he left himself in hostage,
To give me my desires.

Goodl. 'Twas nobly done.
But what is the lives of twenty thousand Moors,
To one that is a Christian?

Ruff. We have liberty, and free way to our country,
Shall not we take the advantage that the heavens
Have lent us: but now, as if we scorned
Their gracious bounty, give up our selves
To voluntary bondage.

Bess. Prize you my love no better, then to rate i^
Beneath the friendship of a barbarous Moor?
Can you, to save him, leave me to my death? Is this
The just reward of all my travells?

Spenc. I prize my honor, and a Christians faith,
Above what earth can yield: shall Fesse report,
Unto our countries shame, and to the scandal
Of our religion, that a barbarous Moor
Can exceed us in nobleness? no, I Will die
A hundred thousand deaths first.

Besse Oh, my fate, was ever maid thus crossed,
That have so often been brought to see my bliss,
And never taste it? to meet my Spencer living after death,
To join with him in marriage, not enjoy him?
To have him here free from the barbarous Moors,
And now to lose him? being so o^'d
Unto the height of all felicity
To make my ruin greater. If you needs
Will hazard your own person, make me partner
In this thy present danger; take me with thee.

Spenc. Not for the world, no living soul shall bleed
One drop for me.

Besse Can thou be so unkind? then false man know,
That thou have taught me harshnesse. I without
Thee came to Momarah, and to my country back,
I will return without thee: I am here
In mine own vessel, mine own train about me:
And since thou w^t forsake me, to embrace
The Queen of Moors: though coining strange excuse.
E'ne at*thy pleasure be i^, my wa^e's into my coun^rey*
Farewell, I Will not shed one tear more.

Spenc. My partings death,
But honor wakens me, the hour draws nigh,
And if I fail one minut, he must die.
The long boat now. Farewell Besse.
Exit.
Besse Why, farewell
Spencer, I always loved thee but too well,
Captain, thine ^are,
This I have vowed, and this you all shall swear.
Exeunt. Enter M^llisheg, Queen, Ioffer, Headsman.
Mull. Produce your prisoner, Bashaw.


Ioff. Mighty King,
Had you beheld his prowess, and withal,
But seen his passions, you would then like me,
Have pitied his diasters.

Mull. We know no pity for an injury
Of that high nature, more then our revenge,
We have vowed his death, and he shall therefore di^*
Go, bring him forth.

Ioff. Spare me, my lord, but some few hours, I shall.


Mull. The least delay is death.


Ioff. Then know, my lord, he was my prisoner.


Mull. How, was? and is not?


Ioff. By promise.


Mull. Not in gyves.


Ioff. He Is gyv'd to me by faith, but else at liberty.


Mull. I pray unriddle us, and teach us that
Which we desire to know, where is the English prisoner?

Ioff. I presumed, my lord,
Such noble valor could not be log'd alone,
Without some other virtues, faith and honor,
Therefore I gave him freedom to his ship,
Only upon his promise to return;
Now if there be such nobleness in a Christian,
Which being a Moor, I have expressed to him,
He will not see me perish.

Mull. Foolish Bashaw
To jest away ^hy ^ad: you (...) (...) (...) ours
Against our person: and you all shall (...).
Why? can^ thou think a (...) so re^ote,
Both in country and religion, being ^'t
At sea, and under sail, ^ee ^om o^ bands
In the arms of his fair bride,
His Captain and his sayl^ all abo^,
Sea room and wind at will, and will return
To expose all the^ t^ volun^ary da^,
For a bare verbal pro^?

Ioff. If he comes no^,
Be this mine honor, King, the ^ough I bl^d,
A Moor a Christ ^hus (...) (...) (...).

Mull. The hour is past,
The Christian has br^e faith.
Off with his head.
Enter Spen^*
Spenc. Yet come at last.


Mull. ^t possible?
Can England so far di^ant harbor such noble ver^s?

Ioff. I beshrow yo^, Sir,
You come unto your death, and you (...) (...)
Much honor from me, and ingrost it all
To your own fame; 'twould have li^ ^g by ^e,
Then any monument (...) (...), to ha^ lo^
My life for such a nob^ (...),
Whose virtue even in this la^ a^ ^rs,
I wish this blood, which now a^ ^ndly ^s.
You are come unto your death.

Spenc. Why, 'twas my purpose;
And by that death, to make my h^nour shine.
Great Mullisheg, cheri^ this noble Moor,
Whom all thy co^nes cannot para^ell
For virtue and true nobleness. ^e my ship
Should with such black dishonor bear me sa^
Into my country by thy Bashaws death,
I would have bent my ordnance gain^ her kee^,
And sunk her in the harbor.

Mull. Thou have slain
Six of our subjects.

Ioff. Oh, had you seen
But with what eminent valor.

Mull. Naught that is ill
Can be well done: then Bashaw, speak no more,
His life is merely forf^it, and h^ shall pay it.

Spenc. I am proud, Fesse, that I now owe thee nothing*
But have in me ability to pay.
If it be forfeit, take it, lay all on me,
I Will pay the debt, then set the Bashaw free*

Mull. Besides, misprising all our gracious favors,
To violate our laws, infringe our peace,
Distu^be our watch by night, and now perhaps
Having robbed us of much treasure, *stolen to sea.

Spenc. In that thou art not royal, Mullisheg.
Of all thy gold and jewels lately given us,
There Is not a doit imbark't,
For finding ^ee dishonourably unkind,
Scorning thy gold, we left it all behind.

Tot. If private men be ^ords of such brave spirits,
How royal should their ^inces be!

Mull. Englishman,
There Is but one way for thee to save thy life,
From eminent death.

Spenc. Well, propose it.


Mull. Instantly
Send to thy Negro, and surrend^r up
Thy Captain and thy fair Bride; otherwise,
By all the holy rights of our great Prophet,
Thou shall not live an hour.

Spenc. Alas, good King,
I pity and despise thy tyranny:
Not live an hour? And when my head is off,
What can thou do then? Calls't thou that revenge,
To ease me of a thousand turbulent griefs,
And throw my soul in glory for my honor.
Why, thou striv'st to make me happy but for her;
Were thou the King of all the kings on earth,
Could thou lay all their scepters, roabs, and crowns,
Here at my feet, and had power to install me
Emperor of the universal Emperie,
Rather then yield my basest ship-boy up,
To become thy stave; much less betray my Bride
To thee and to thy brutish lust, know king
Of Fesse, I Would die a hundred thousand deaths first.

Mull. I Will try your patience: Off with his head.

Enter Besse, Goodlack, Ruffman.
Besse Here Is more work, stay.


Spenc. What make you here?
You wrong me above injury.

Besse If you love blood,
That river spare, and for him take a flood,
Be but so gracious as save him alone,
And great King see I bring thee three for one:
Spare him, thou shall have more,
The lives of all my train, what say thou to it?
And with their lives my ship and all to boot.

Spenc. I could be angry with you above measure,
In your four deaths I die, that had before
Tasted but one.

Mull. Captain, art thou there? how e're these fare,
Thou shall be sure to pay for it.

Goodl. It Is my least care,
What Is done is mine, I here confes't,
Then seize my life in ransom of the rest.

Tot. Lieutenant, you are a base villane,
What groom betrayed you to our sheets?

Ruff. Please keep your tongue, I did you no dishonor.


Tot. Whom did you bring to our free ^mbraces?


Ruff. 'Twas the King, conceal what is past.


Tot. How e're my mind, then yet my body's chaste.


Ruff. Make use on it.


Spenc. Dismiss, great King, these to their ship again,
My life is solely forfeit, take but that,
I shall report thee merciful.

Besse It were no justice, King, to forfeit his,
And to spare mine, I am as deep as he,
Since what my Spencer did was all for me.

Goodl. Great King, if any faulted, then 'twas I,
I led them on, and therefore first should die.

Ruff. I am as deep as any.


Ioff. Oh, had my head
Excused all these, I had been nobly dead.

Bess. Why pause you king? Is It by our noble v^rtes,
That you have lost the use of speech? or can you think
That Spencer dead, you might inherit me.
No, first with Roman Portia I Would eat fire,
Or with Lucretia character thy lust
'Twixt these two breasts. Stood I engaged to death.
I Would scorn for life to bend a servile knee:
But it is for thee, my Spencer, what was his fault?
'Twas but to save his own, rescue his dear Bride
From adulterate sheets, and must he die for this?

Mull. Shall lust in me have chief predominance?
And virtuous deeds, for which in Fesse
I have been long renowned, be quite exilde?
Shall Christians have the honor
To be sole heirs of goodness, and we Moors,
Barbarous and bloody. Captain, resolve me,
What common Curtezan did thou convey
Into our royal bed.

Tot. I can excuse him, pardon me great King,
I having private notice of your plots,
Wrought him unto my purpose, and 'twas I lodged in your arms that night.

Mull. These English are in all things honorable,
Nor can we tax their ways in any thing,
Unless we blame their virtues. English maid,
We give thee once more back unto thy husband,
Whom likewise freely we receive to grace:
And as amends for our pretended wrongs,
With her we will tender such an ample dower,
As shall renown our bounty: but we fear
We cannot recompense the injurious loss,
Of your last nights expectations.

Besse It Is full amends,
Where but the least part of your grace extends.

Mull. Captain, we prize thy virtues to thy friends,
Thy faith to us, and zeal unto our Queen.
And Bashaw, for thy nobleness to a Gentleman
Of such approved valor and renown,
We here create thee Viceroy of Argiers,
And do esteem thee next our Queen in grace.
You Have quenched in me all lust, by which shall grow,
Virtues which Fesse, and all the world shall know.

Spenc. We shall report your bounties, and your royalties
Shall fly through all the parts of Christendom.

Bess. Whilst Besse has gold, which is the meed of baies,
She Will make our English Poets tune thy praise.
And now my Spencer, after all our troubles,
Crosses and threatenings of the seas rough brow,
Ine're could say thou were mine own till now.

Mull. Call this your harbor, and your haven of joy,
For so we will strive to make it, noble strangers,
Those virtues you have taught us by your deeds,
We futurely will strive to imitate.
And for the wrongs done to the hoped delights
Of your last nights divorce, double the magazine
With which our larges should have sweld your ship.
A golden Girl the art called,
And wench, be bold,
Thy lading back shall be with pearl and gold.
Exe^nt. Enter Chorus.
Chor. I Magine Besse and Spencer under sail:
But the intelligence of their great wealth,
Being bruited amongst the Merchants, comes to the ears
Of a French Pirate, who with two ships wellrig'd,
Way lays them in their voyage: long they fought,
And many slain on both sides; but the Fr^chmen,
Proud of their hopeful conquest, boarding twice,
Are twice blown up, which add^s courage to the English;
But to the Frenchmen fear: just as they buckeld,
Spencer and Goodlack, with two proof Targets armed,
Into the French ship leap, and on the ^atches,
There make a bloody slaughter: but at that instant,
The billows swelled, the winds grew high, and loud,
And as the soul and body use to part,
With no less force these lovers are divided,
He wafts to her, and she makes signs to him:
He calls, and she replies: -- they both grow hoarse,
With shriking out their last farewell. -- now she swounds
And sinks beneath the arms of Ruffman. Spencer,
Upon a Chest gets hold and safe arives
In The Marquis of Farara's country: the like adventure
Chanced Goodlack, upon a Mast he pierces Italy,
Where these two Dukes were then at ods. Spencer is chosen
Farara's Champion: Mantua makes Goodlack his.
What happened them if you desire to know,
To cut off words, we will act it in dumb show.
Dumb Show. The Dukes by them atton'd, they graced and preferred,
Take their next way toward Florence. What of Besse,
Ruffman, and Clem becomes, must next succeed.
The seas to them like cruel proves, and wracks
Their Negro on the coast of Florence, where
They wander up and down amongst the Bandetties,
More of their fortunes we will next pursue,
In which we mean to be as brief as true.
Exit.
Explicit Actus tertius.
Actus quartus. Scena prima.
Enter Besse, Ruffman, and Clem. Besse. ALl is lost.


Ruff. Save these our selves.


Clem. For my part I have not so much left as a ^lean Shirt.


Besse And Spencer too, had the seas left me him,
I should have thought them kind, but in his fate,
All wishes, fortunes, hopes of better days
Expire.

Ruff. Speneer may live.


Clem. I, that he may, if it be but in a seawater green suit, as I was, among
the haddocks.


Besse How many bitter plunges have I past.
Ere I could win my Spencer? who no sooner
Married, but quite divorst, possessed for some few days,
Then rent asunder, as soon a widow as I was a Bride:
This day the mistress of many thousands,
And a beggar now, not worth the clothes I wear.

Ruff. At the lowest ebb
The tides still flow, besides, b^ing on the ground,
Lower we cannot fall.

Besse Yes, into the ground, the grave.
Ruffman, would I were there; till then I never
Shall have true rest: I fain would know
What greater misery heaven can inflict, I have not yet
Endured: if there be such, I dare it, let it come.
Enter Captain Bandetties, and others.
Band. Cease, and surprise the prisoners: thou art mine.


Ruff. Villain, hands off, know thou whom thou offendest?


Band. Bind her fast, and after captive him.


Ruff. I will rather die
Then suffer her sustein least injury.
Ruffman is beaten off.
Besse What Is thy purpose?


Band. In all my travells, and my quest of blood,
I never encountered such a beauteous prize:
Heavens, if I thought you would accept his thanks
That trades in deeds of hell, I would acknowledge
My self in debt to you.

Besse What Is thy intent,
Bold villein, that thou make this preparation?

Band. I intend to ravish thee.


Besse All goodness pardon me, and you blessed heavens,
Whom I too boldly challenged for a misery
Beyond my Spencers loss. What, rape intended?
I had not thought there had been such a mischief,
Devised for wretched woman: ravish me?
It Is beyond shipwreck, poverty, or death:
It is a word invented first in hell,
And by the devils first spewed upon earth:
Man could not have invented to have given
Such letters sound.

Band. I trifle hours too long,
And now to my black purpose. Envious day,
Gaze with thy open eyes on this nights work,
For thus the Prologue to my lust begins.

Besse Help, murder, rape, murder.


Band. I Will stop yo^ mo^h from bawling.

Enter Duke of Fl^rence, and a train, and Merchant.
Flor. This way the cry came: resoue for the Lady,
Hold thy desperate fury, and arm thy (...)
For my encounter.

Band. Hell prevented.


Flor. Unbind that beautio^s Lady, and pursue
The Ruffin; he that can bring his head shall have
A thousand crowns propo^'d for his reward:
He should be Captain of those bloody thieves,
That haunts our mountains, and of our dear subjects
Has often made outrage. Go, (...) this proclaimed.

Besse E're I, the happy wish^ of my soul,
My orizons to heaven, or make free under
Of a most bounden duty, grace my mi^ry,
To let me know, unto what worthy person,
Of what degree or state, I owe the service
Of a most wretched life, lest i^ my ignorance,
I prove an heretic to all good manners,
And harshly so off^nd.

Flor. Fairest of thy sex, I need not question thine,
Because I read a (...) in thy (...),
But to resolve thee, know, I am (...), The Duke
Of Florenco, and of this countr^y Prince.

Besse Then from my (...) I (...) ^at on my face,
In bound obeisance.

Flor. Rise,
That earth's too base for s^eh pure lips to ki^.
They should rather join with a Princes, as at first
Made for such use: nay, we will have it so.

Merch. That Lady; if my memory be faithful
Unto my judgment, I should have seen e're now,
But where, what place, or in what (...), now
I cannot call to mind.

Flor. Where were you bred?


Besse. In England, royal Sir.


Merch. In England?


Flor. By what strange adventure then
Happened you on these coasts?

Besse By shipwreck.


Flor. Then churlish were the waves t'expose you (...)
Such danger. Whence disimbark't you last?

Besse From Barberie.


Flor. From Barberie? our Merchant, you came lately thence.


Merch. It Is she, I now remember her,
She did me a great courtesy, and I am proud,
Fortune, how ever enemy to her,
Has given me opportunity to make
A just requital.

Flor. What occasion
Fair Lady, being of such state and beauty,
Drew you from your own country, to expose you
To so long travel.

Merch. Mighty Sovereign,
Pardon my interuption, if I make bold
To put your grace in mind of an English Virgin,
So highly graced by mighty Mullisheg.

Flor. A legend, worthy to be writ in gold,
Whose strangeness seemed at first to exceed belief;
And had not thy approved honesty
Commanded our attention, we should have doubted
That thou therein had much hyperboliz'd.

Merch. What would your grace give,
To see that miracle of constancy,
She who relieved so many Christian captives,
Redeemed so many of the M^rchants goods,
^eg'd of the king so many for^tures,
Kept from the Galleys some, and some from slaughter,
She whom the king of Fesse never denied,
But she denied him love; whose chastity
Conquered his lust, and maugre his incontinence,
Made him admire her virtues.

Flor. The report
Strikes us with wonder and amazement too:
But to behold the creature were a project,
Worthy a theater of Emperors;
Nay, gods themselves to be spectatours.

March. Behold that wonder. Lady, know you* me?


Besse Not I, I can assure you, Sir.


March. I Will give you instance then;
I was that Florentine:
Who being in Fesse; for a strange outrage there,
Six of my men were to the Galleys doomed:
But at your intercession to the king,
Freely releast: for which, in this dejection,
I pray accept these thousand crowns, to raise
Your ruined fortunes.

Besse You are grateful, Sir, beyond my merit


Flor. I cannot blame great Fesse
To become enamored on so fair a creature.
You had a friend much graced by that same Moor,
Whom, as our Merchant told us, you were espoused to
In the Court of Fesse, when he?

Besse I cannot speak it without ^ears.


Flor. Why, is he dead?


Besse I cannot say he lives.


Flor. How were you severed?


Besse It asks a sad relation.


Flor. We Will find a fitter time to hear't. But now,
Augment your griefs no further: on what coast
Pray, were you shipwrack't?

Bess. Upon these neighboring (...); where all the wealth
I had from B^rbarie is perish't in the sea.
I that this morn commanded half a million,
Have nothing now but this good merchants bounty.

Flor. You are richer
In our high favor, then all the royalty,
Fesse could have crowned your pearlesse beauty with:
He gave you gold; but we your almost forfeit chastity.

Bess^ A gift above the wealth of Barbary.


Flor. Conduct this Lady to the City straight,
And bear this our signet to our treasurer,
Command for her ten thousand crowns immediately.
Next to our wardrobe, and what choife of habit
Best likes her, it is her own;
Only for all this grace, daign beauteous Lady;
That I may call you servant.

Besse Pardon me, Sir,
You are a Prince, and I am here your vassal.

Flor. Merchant,
As you respect our favor see this done.

Besse What must my next fall be? I that this morning
Was rich in wealth and servants, and e're noon
Commanded neither: and next doomed to death;
Not death alone, but death with infamy.
But what is all this unto my Spencers loss?

Flor. You to the City, we will pursue the chase.
Madam, be comforted, we will send, or see you;
All your fortunes are not extinct in shipwreck,
The land affords you better if you will be swai'd by us.
As first you find us, we will be still the same:
Often have I chac't nere found so fair a game.
Exeunt. Enter Clem solus.
Clem. Where are my Bashaw's now? Let me see, what shall I do? I have left my
Mistrisse, where shall I have my wages? she is peper'd by this: but if the
Captain of the Bandetties had had but that grace and honor that I had when I
was in Barbary, he would not have been so lusty. She escaped drowning, which is
the way of all fish, and by this is gone the way of all flesh. My Lieutenant
he is sure ^ut to pieces among the Bandetties, and so had I been, had not my
Bakers legs stepped a little aside. My noble Captain and Sp^ncer, they are either
drowned in the tempest, or murdered by the Pirates, and none is left alive but I
Clem, poor Clem: but poor Clem, how will thou do now? what trick have you to
sati^ Colon, here in a strange Country? It is not now with me as when Andrea
lived. Now I bethink me, I have a trade, and that, they say, will stick by a
man when his friends fail ^m: the City is hard by, and I Will see and I can be
entertained to my old trade of drawing ^ne: if it be but an under skinker, I
care not, better do so then like a prodigal feed upon husks and acorns.

Well, if I chance to lead my life under some happy ^gne*
To my Countrymen still I Will fill the best wine.
Exit. Enter Ru^ bleeding.
Ruff. Wounded, but escaped with life: but Besses loss, that is it that gri^ me
in^d: rav^, perhaps, and murdered. Oh, if Spencer and Goodlack sur^, how would
they blame my cow^? a thread (...), may be untwined, but things in nature done,
undone can never be. She Is lost, they are perish't, they are happy in their
deaths, and I surviving (...) to ^he ^arth mo^ miserable. No means to raise my
self? I (...) a P^ even now, proclaiming to the man could bring the head of the
Bandetties Captain, for his reward a thousand crowns: If not for gain of gold,
yet for he injured Besse, that shall be my next task: What though I die?

Be this my comfort, that it chanc*t me well,
To perish by his hand by whom she ^ll.
Exit. Enter Duke of ^ence. Merchant.
Flor. Our Merchant, have you (...) ^h English Lady
As we commanded, did she take the gold?

Merc. After many complements, circumstances,
Modest re^alls, sometimes with repu^,
I forced on her your bounty: Had you seen
What a bewitching art she strived to use,
Betwixt denial, and disdain; contempt and thankfulness,
You would have said, that out of a mere scorn
T'accept your gift, she expressed such gratitude,
As would demand a double donative.

Flor. And it has don't, it shall be doubled straight,
Arising thence unto an infinite,
If she will but grant us love. How for her habit?

March. With an inforst will, wilful constraint,
And a mere kind of glad necessity,
She put it on but to lament the death
Of her lost husband.

Flor. Why, is he lost?


Mer^h. By all conjectures never to be found.


Flor. The les^e her hope is to recover him,
The more our hopes remains to conquer her:
Bear her from us this jewel, and withal
Provide a banquet, bid her leave all mourning,
This night in person we will visit her.

Merch. I shall.


Flor. Withal more gold.
And if thou can by way of conference,
Get from her how she stands affected toward us:
It shall not be the furthest way about
To thy preferment and our special favor.
Enter a messenger.
Mess. The two bold Dukes of Mantua and (...), after many bloody garboils have
entered league: and within these two days mean to visit Florence, to make your
Court a witness of their late concluded amity.


Flor. We Will receive them,
As Princes that in this would honor us.

Mess.* These letters will speak further.


Flor. Bear them straight
Unto our Secretary, and withal, give order,
That all our Court may shine in gold and pearl,
They never could have come in a happier season,
Then when the great and high magnificence,
Without suspect we would have shown to her,
Will be accounted honor done to them.
In fates despite,
we will not lose the honor of this night.
Exit. Enter Spencer, Goodlack.
Spenc. Farara was exceeding bountiful.


Goodl. So was the Duke of Mantua. Had we staid
Within their confines, we might even till death
Have lived in their high favor.

Spenc. Oh, but Captain,
What would their Dukedomes gain me without Besse,
Or all the world t'injoy it without her:
Each passage of content or pleasing fortune,
When I record she has no part in it,
Seems rather as an augmentation
Of a more great disease.

Goodl. This be your comfort, that by this
She Is best part of her way for England, whither
She is richly bound, then where she is most hopeless
Of this your safety,
With your survivall to receive us gladly
With an abundant treasure.

Spenc. But for that,
I had sunk e're this beneath the weight of war.
And chus'd an obscure death, before the glory
Of a renowned soldier. But we are now
As far as Florence onward of our way,
Were it best that we made tender of our service
To the grand Duke?

Goodl. It Is the greatest benefits of all our travells, to see foreign
Courts, and to discourse their fashions: let us by no means neglect that duty.


Spenc. Where were we best to lodge?


Goodl. Hard by is a Tavern, let us first drink there, and after make inquir^e
who is the best host for strangers.


Spenc. Come ho, where be these Drawers?

Enter a Drawer.
Draw. Gentlemen, I draw none my self, but I Will send some.

Enter Clem with wine.
Clem. Welcome Gentlemen. Score a quart.


Spenc. Ha?


Goodl. How?


Clem. No, no, I am an ass, a very animal, it cannot be.


Spenc. Why do thou bear the wine back, the slave thinks belike we have no
money?


Goodl. What do thou think us to be such casher'd soldiers that we have no
cash. Tush, it cannot be he.


Spenc. How should he come here, set down the wine.


Clem. I will, I will, sir. Score a quart of -- Tricks, mere fantasmes. Shall I
draw wine to shadows? so I might run o'th score, and find no substance to
pay for it.


Spenc. Left we not him a shipboard on his voyage toward England with my


Goodl. With Besse, true, Sir, set down the wine.


Clem. Some Italian Mountebanks, upon my life, mee^ juggling.


Goodl. Upon my life it is Cl^m.


Clem. Ca, Ca, Cap. Captain? Master Spencer?


Spenc. Clem?


Clem. I am Clem.


Spenc. And I am Spencer.


Goodl. And I Goodlack, but cannot think thee Clem.


Clem. Yes, I am Clem of Foy, the Bashaw of Barbary, who from a Courtier of
Fesse, am turned a Drawer in Florence: but let me clear my eyes better; now I
know you to be the same whose throats the Pirates would have cut, and have
spoiled your drinkings.


Spenc. Oh, tell us, and be brief in thy relation,
What hapened you, after the sudden tempest
Severed our ships? or what is become of Besse?

Goodl. Where did our Negro touch?


Clem. I Will give you a touch, take it as you will: The Negro and all that was in
her was wrack't on the coast of of Florence, her, and all the wealth that was
in her, all drowned in the bottom of the sea.


Spenc. No matter for the riches, where is she, worth More then ship or goods?


Goodl. Where Is Ruffman? for thou we see art safe.


Spenc. Nay speak, where is Besse?
How my heart quails within me?

Clem. She, Ruffman, and I were all cast ashore safe, like so many drowned
Rats, where we were no sooner landed, but we were set upon by the Bandetties;
where she was bound to a tree, and ready to be ravished by the Captain of the
Outlaws.


Spenc. Oh, worse then shipwreck could be.


Clem. I see Ruffman half cut in pieces with rescuing her, but whether the
other half be alive or no, I cannot tell. For my one part, I made shift for
one, my heels doing me better service then my hands: and coming to the City,
having no other means to live by, got me to my old trade to draw wine, where I
have the best wine in Florence for you Gentlemen.


Spenc. Ra^h't.


Goodl. And Ruffman slain.


Spenc. Oh, hard news:
It frets all my blood, and strikes me stiff with
Horror and amazement.

Goodl. It strikes me
Into a marble statue, for with such
I have like sense and feeling.

Spenc. Tell me Captain,
Will thou give me leave at length to despair
And kill my self: I will disclaim all further
Friendship with thee, if thou perswad'st me live.
Ravished!

Goodl. Perhaps attempted but prevented,
Will you before you know the utmost certainty,
Destroy your self?

Spenc. What is this world? what is man? are we created
Out of flint or iron, that we are made to bear this?

Goodl. Comfort, Sir.


Clem. Your only way is to drink wine if you be in grief, for that is the only
way, the old proverb says, to comfort the heart.


Goodl. Hark where we lie, and I prithee Clem lets hear from thee, but now
leave us.


Clem. I will make bold inquire you out, and if you want money (as many
travelers may) as long as I have either credit, wages, or any coin in the
world, you shall not want, as I am a true Eunuch.

Exit Clem. Enter Florence ushuring Besse, Train.
Goodl. Let Us stand aside and suffer these Gallants pass, that with their
state take a whole street before them.


Flor. Our Coach, stay, we will back some half hour hence,
Only conduct this Lady to her lodging.
Ha, started you, Sweet, whence fetched
You that sigh. Our train lead on,
We Have other business now to think upon.
Exeunt. Besse casts a jewel.
Goodl. Sure this was some great Lady.


Spenc. But observed you not this jewel that she cast me? it is a rich one.


Goodl. Believe me, worthy your wearing.


Spenc. What might she be to whom I am thus bound?
I Am here a stranger, never till this day
Beheld I Florence, nor acquaintance, friend
Especially of Ladies.

Goodl. By their train,
The man that did support her by the arm
Was of some special note; and she a Lady
Nobly de^cended. Why should she throw you this,
Being a mere stranger?

Spenc. The^'s some mystery in'^,
If we could find the depth on'^, sure there is.

Goodl. Perhaps some newly fallen in love*with you,
Now at first sight, and hurled that as a favor.

Spencer. Yet neither of us had or the wit or sense to enquire her name:
I Will wear it openly and see if any
Will challenge it: the way to know her best.

Goodl. And I would so.


Spenc. I Will truce a while with sorrow for my Besse,
Till I find the event.

Goodl. And at best leisure
Tender our service to the Duke,
Whom fame reports to be a bounteous prince,
And liberal to all strangers.

Spenc. It Is decreed-
But howso^'re his favors he impart,
My Besses loss will still sit near my heart.
Exeunt. Flourish. Enter Florence, Mantua, Farara.
Flo. This honor you have done me, worthy Princes,
In leaving of your Courts to visit me,
We reckon as a trophe of your loves,
And shall remain a future monument,
Of a more firm and perfect amity.

Mant. To you, as to the greatest, most honored,
And most esteemed Prince of Italy*
After a tedious opposition,
And much effuse of blood, this Prince and I,
Late reconciled* make a most happy tender*
Of our united league.

Farar. Selecting you
A royal witness of this union,
Which to express, we come to feast with you,
To sport and revell, and in full largess,
To spread our royal bounty through your Court.

Flor. What neither letters nor Ambassadors,
Soliciting by factions, or by friends,
Heavens hand has done by your more calmer temper.

Mant. All resistalls,
Quarells, and ripping up of injuries,
Are smothered in the ashes of our wrath,
Whose fire is now extinct.

Ferar. Which who so kindles,
Let him be held a new H^rostratus,
Who was so hated throughout Ephesus,
They held it death to name him.

Flor. Nobly spoke.
And now confederate Princes, you shall find,
By our rich entertainment, how w'esteem
Your friendship. Speak, have we no Ladies here
To entertain these princes?
Enter Besse.
Mant. Me thinks I spy one beauty in this place*
Worth all the sights that I have seen before.
I think, survay the spa^ious world abroad,
You scarce can find her equal.

Farar. Had not wonder,
And deep amazement curbed my speech in,
I had forestalled this Prince in approbation
Of her comparelesse beauty.

Flor. Taste her Princes.
This surfets me, and ads unto my love,
That they should thus admire her.

Matua. Beauteous Lady,
I^ is not my least honor to be first
In this most wished solicit*

Besse I stand a statue,
And cannot move but by another will,
And as I am commanded.

Farar. I should have wrastled for priority,
But that I hold it as a ble^ing,
To take off that kiss which he so late laid on.

Flor. Now tell me Princes,
How do you like my judgment in the choice Of a fair mistrisse?

Mant. You shall choose for me.


Farar. More happy in this beauty, I account you,
Then in your rech^ treasure.

Flor. W^'t not cloud^d over
With such a melancholy sadness, I Would
Not change it for the wealth of Italy.
Sweet, cheer this brow whereon no frown can sit,
But it will ill become you.

Besse Sir, I bleed.


Flor. Ha, bleed?
I would not have a sad and ominous fate
Hang over thee for a million:
Perhaps it is custom with you.

Besse I have observed
Even from my childehood, never fell from h^nce
One crimson drop, but either my greatest enemy,
Or my dearest friend was near.

Flor. Why, we are here,
Fixed to thy side thy dearest friend on earth.
If that be all, fear nothing.

Besse. Pardon, Sir,
Both modesty and manners pleads for me
And I must needs retire.

Flor. Our train attend her,
Let her have all observance. By my royalty,
I would not have her taste the least disaster
For more then we can promise.
Exit*
Ferar. You have only showed us a rich Jewel, Sir,
And put it in a casket.

Mant. Of what country,
Fortune, or birth does she proclaim her self?
For by her garb and language we may guess^*
She was not bred in Florence.

Flor. Seat you Princes, I Will tell you a strange project.

Enter Spencer and Goodlack.
Spenc. I have walked the streets, but find not any that will make challenge
of this jewel. Captain, now we will try the Court.


Goodl. Beware of these Italians,
They are by nature jealous and revengefull,
Not sparing the most basest opportunity,
That may procure your danger.

Spencer. Innocence
Is bold and cannot fear. But see the Duke*
We Will tender him the solemnst reverence
Of travelers and strangers. Peace, prosperity,
And all good fates attend your royalty.

Goodl. Behold, we are two poor English Gentlem^,
Whom travel has enforc'^ through your Dukedom,
As next way to our country, prostrate you
Our lives and service: *it is not for reward,
Or hope of gain we make this tender to you,
But our free loves.

Flor. That which so freely comes,
How can we scorn? what are you Gentlemen?

Mant. I Will speak for this.


Farar. And I for him,
Well met renowned Englishman
Here in the Court of Florence: this was he,
Great Duke, whom fame has for his valor bla^on'd;
Not only through Mantua*
But through the spacious bounds of Italy,
Where 'twas shown.

Ferar* Has fame been so injurious to thy merit,
That this great Court is not already filled
With rumor of their matchless chevalrie.

Flor. If these be they, as by their outward semblance,
They promise not much less: same has been harbinger
To speak their praise before hand. Noble Gentlemen,
You have much graced our Court; we thank you for it:
And though no way according to your merits,
Yet will we strive to cherish such brave spirits.

Spenc. Th'acceptance of our smallest service, Sir,
Is bounty above gold: we are poor Gentlemen,
And though we cannot, gladly would deserve.

Goodl. 'Tas pleased these princes to bestow on us
Too great a character: and gild our praises
Far above our deserts.

Flor. That Is but your modesty.
English Gentlemen, let fame speak for you.

Farar. Gentlemen of England, we pardon you all duty,
We accept you as our friends and our companions:
Such you are, and such we do esteem you.

Spencer. Mighty Prince,
Such boldness wants excuse.

Flor. Come we will ha'^ so.
Amazement, can it be? Sure it is the self same jewel
I gave the English Lady: more I view it,
More it confirms my knowledge: now is no time
To question it, once more renowned Englishmen,
Welcome to us and to these Princes.
Enter Ruffman.
Ruff. Can any man show me the great Duke of Florence?


Mar^h. Behold the Prince.


Ruff. Daigne, thou renowned Duke, to cast thy *eyes
Upon a poor dejected Gentleman,
Whom fortune has dejected even to nothing.
I have nor meat nor money; these rags are all my riches;
Only necessity compells me claim
A debt owing by you.

Flor. By us?
Let Us know the sum, and how the debt acrues.

Ruff. You have proclaimed to him could bring the head
Of the Bandetties Captain, for his reward,
A thousand crowns. Now I being a Gentleman,
A traveller, and in want, made this my way
To raise my ruined hope: I singled him,
Fought with him hand to hand, and from his bloody shoulders
Lopt this head.

Flor. Boldly and bravely done: what e're thou be
Thou shall receive it from our treasury.

Ruff. You show your self as fame reports you,
A bounteous Prince, and liberal to all strangers.

Flor. From what country
Do you claim your birth?

Ruff. From England, royal Sir*


Flor. These bold Englishmen,
I think are all composed of spirit and fire,
The element of earth has no part in them.

Mant. If, as you say, from England, we retein
Some of your Countrymen; know you these Gentlemen?

Ruff. Let me no longer live in ecstasy,
This wonder will confound me: Noble friends,
Bootlesse it were to ask you why, because
I find you here. Illustrious Duke, you owe
Me nothing now, to show me these, is reward
Beyond what you proclaimed: the rest I pardon.

Flor. What these are we know,
And what thou art we need not question much,
That head though mute can speak it.
Princes, once more receive our royal welcome.
Oh, but the jewel: but of that at leisure
Now we cannot stay. Our train, lead on.
Flourish. Exeunt Dukes.
Spenc. Oh, that we three so happily should meet,
And want the fourth.

Ruff. I left her in the hands of rape and murder,
Whence, except some deity,
'Twas not in the power of man to rescue her;
How ever, a good office I have done her,
Which even in death her soul will thank me for,
Revenged her on that villain.

Goodl. It has expressed the nobleness of thy Spirit.
For it we still shall owe thee.

Ruff. But what adventure has preferred you
And brought you thus in grace?

Goodl. You shall hereafter
(...) of that at large. But leaving this discourse,
With our joint persuasions let us strive to comfort him,
That Is nothing but discomfort.

Ruff. Would I had brought him news of that rare verrue.
Yet you have never heard of our late shipwreck.

Goodl. Clem reported it.


Ruff. How Clem, where is he?


Goodl. He has got a service hard by, and draws wine.


Ruff. His master may well trust him with his maids,
For since the Beshaws gelded him, he has learned
To run exceeding nimbly.
Enter Merchant.
Merch. Sir, it is to you, I take it,
My message is directed.
The Duke would, have some conference with you, but it must be in private.

Spenc. I am his servant, still at his command.
Where shall's meet anon.

Goodl. At Clems.


Spencer. Content.


Goodl. Where we will make a due relation of all our desperate fortunes.


Ruff. It Is concluded.

Exeunt
Explicit Actus quartus.
Actus quintus. Scena prima.
Enter Duke of Florence and Spencer. Flor. I Cannot rest till I am fully
resolved
About this jewel. Sir, we sent to stay you,
And wean you some small season from your friends:
And you above the rest, because your presence
Does promise good discourse.

Spenc. Sir, I am all yours.


Flor. How long has been your sojourn here in Florence?


Spencer Two days, no more.


Flor. Have you since your arivall
Retained no beauteous Mistrisse? Pardon me,
Sir, that I am come thus near you.

Spencer. On my soul
Not any, royal Sir.

Flor. Think it my love that I presume thus far
To question you. Have you observed no Lady
Of special note, courted or discourst with any
Within these two days.

Spenc. Upon my honor, none.


Flor. You are a soldier and a Gentleman,
And should speak all truth.

Spenc. If otherwise, I should disclaim my gentry.


Flor. I beleev you, Sir. You have a rich jewel here,
Worthy a Princes wearing: twere not modesty
To ask how you came by it, or from whom.

Spenc. Nor can I, Sir, resolve you, if you did:
But it was cast me by a Lady, of whom
As then I took small notice of, my mind
Being troubled.

Flor. It Is even so.


Spenc. Perhaps your grace by knowing of this jewel,
May know the beauteous ^inger, and so
You might engage me deeply to acquaint me with her,
To prove her grateful debtor.

Flor. No such thing,
You know none in this City?

Spenc. Worse then scorn,
Or foul disgrace befall me if I know
Any you can call woman.

Flor. Be not moved,
I spoke but this in sport. Sure this strange Lady,
Casting her eye upon this Gentleman,
Grew straight ^f him enamored, which makes her
Keep off from my embraces: but I Will sound all,
Yet my own wrongs prevent. Sir, I staid you,
But to another purpose, to commit
A weighty secret to you.

Spenc. Were of millions,
I Would prove your faithful steward.

Flor. I have a Mistrisse that Ptender dearer
Then mine own eyes. Observe me, dearer Sir,
Whom neither courtship moves, favors can work,
Nor no preferment tempt.

Spenc. How rich were he
Could call himself lord of such a jewel.

Flor. My entreaties, friends, persuasions, importunities
Of my chaste Ladies cannot prevail at all.
Now would I chose a stranger, selecting thee,
To bear to her these few lines which contein
The substance of my mind.

Spencer And Sir, I shall.


Flor. In thy aspect
I read a fortune that should destine me
To strange felicities. Will thou be faithful?

Spenc. As to my ^oul*


Flor. But thou shall swear before thou undertak'stie,
(Though I suspect not falsehood in thy visage)
Not once to cast on her an amourous look,
Speak to her no familiar sylla^,
Not to embrace her, nor to kiss her hand,
Nor her free lip by no means.

Spenc. Well, I swear.


Flor. But that is not all,
Swear by thy faith and thy religion*
Not to taste the least small favor for thy self,
Touch or come near her bosom; for, fair stranger,
I love her above measure, and that love
Makes me thus jealous.

Spenc. By my honesty,
Faith, and religion, without free release
From your own lips, all this will I perform.

Flor. And so return the richest Englishman,
That ever pierst our Dukedom. Instantly
Thou shall about thy task.
Exeunt. Enter Besse, Merchant.
Besse You have tired our ears with your long disco^
Leave us to rest.

Merch. Dream on your best desires.


Besse If at some half hour hence you visit us,
We shall be free for language.

Merch. Soft rest with you.


Besse If my soft sleeps presents me any shadov
Oh, let it be my Spencers, him whom waking
I cannot see, I may in dreams perhaps
Converse with, my sudden bleeding and my drowsinesse,
Should not presage me good: pray heaven the Duke
Prove loyal to mine honor: howsoever
Death will end all: and I presume on this
It Is way to Spencer, and my haven of bliss.
She lies to sleep. Enter Spencer.
Spenc. What beauty should this be, on whom the Duke
Is grown so jealous: sure it is some rare piece;
He told me she was fairer the I could either
Judge, Or yet imagine.
Would Besse were here to wager beauties with her,
For all my hopes in England. This is the Chamber:
Ha, thus far off she seems to promise well,
I Will take a nearer and more free survay,
This taper shall assist me: fail my eyes?
Or meet I nothing else but prodigies?
Oh heavens, it is my Besse; Oh, sudden rapture!
Let me retire to more considerate thoughts.
What should I think, but presently to wake her?
And being mine, to seize her where I find her.
Oh, but mine oath, that I should never, never
Lie with her being my wife, nor kiss her, touch her,
Speak to her one familiar syllable.
Can oaths bind thus? My honesty, faith, and
Religion are all engaged, there is no dispense for them.
And yet in all this con^ict to remember
How the Duke praised her virtue, chastity,
And constancy, whom nothing could corrupt,
Ads to my joys. But on the neck of this,
It lays a double (...) on my life.
First to forswear, then leave so fair a wife.
She starts.
Besse. I am all distraction. In my sleep^
I saw him, could I but behold him waking.
That were a heaven. Ha, do I dream still?
Or was I born to ^ee
Nothing but strange illusions. Spencer: Love.

Spencer I am neither.


Besse Thou have his shape, his gate, his face, his language:
Only these words of thine and strange behavior,
Never came from him. Let me embrace thee.

Spenc. No.


Besse Then kiss me.


Spenc. No.


Besse Yet speak me fair.


Spenc. I cannot.


Bess. Look on me.


Spenc. I must not, I will not, fare thee well:
Yet first read that.

Besse I have read too much already within thy chang^ of looks.


Spenc. Oh me my oath;
I Would chop off this right hand to cancel it.

Besse But if not now, when then?


Spenc. Never.


Besse Not kiss me?


Spenc. No.


Besse Not fold me in thine arms?


Spenc. Not.


Besse Nor cast a gracious look upon thy Besse?


Spenc. I dare not.


Besse Never.


Spenc. No never.


Besse Oh, I shall die.

She swounds.
Spenc. She faints, and yet I dare not for my oath
Once to support her. Dies before mi^ies.
And yet I must not call her back to life.
Where is the Duke? some help, no Ladies nigh?
Are you all, all asleep or dead,
There Is no more noise in Court?
Enter Duke and his train.
Flor. Ha, what is the buisinesse, noble (...), what (...)?
How speed you with my Mistrisse?

Spenc. You may see there on the ground, half
In the grave already. So (...) you well,
What grief mine is, those that love best can tell.

Flor. Support her. Speak love, look up divinest Mist^isse.


Bess. You said you would not speak, nor look, nor touch your Besse.


Flor. Who I?
By all my hopes I never had such a thought.

Besse Oh, I mistook.


Flor. Why do you look so ghastly about the room?
Whom does your eyes enquire for?

Besse Nothing, nay, no body.


Flor. Why do you we^p?


Besse Has some new love possessed him, and excluded
Me from his bosom? can it be possible?

Flor. All leave the chamber.


Besse But I Will be so revenged as never woman was:
I Will be a president to all wives hereafter,
How to pay home their proud neglectfull husbands;
It Is in my way, I Have power, and I Will do it.

Flor. What is it offends you?


Besse It Is you have don't.


Flor. We?


Besse If you be the Prince:
There Is but one man I hate above all the world.
And you have sent him to torment me h^.

Flor. What satisfaction shall I make thee for it?


Besse This, and this only; If you have any interest
In him, or power above him: if you be a Prince
In your own country, have command and rule
In your own do^ons, fre^ly resign his person
And his state solely to my disposure.

Flor. But whence grows
The ground of such inveterate hate?

Bess. All circumstance to omit,
He, and only he ravished me from my country,
He was the cause of all my afflictions,
Tempests, shipwreck, fears. I never had just cause
Of care and grief but he was author of it.
Speak, is he mine?

Flor. What interest I can claim, either by oath
Or promise, thou art Commandresse of.

Besse Then I am yours;
And to morrow in the public view of all
The stranger Princes, Courtiers, and Ladies,
I will express my self. This night I entreat
I may repo^e my self in my own lodging
For private meditations.

Flor. What we have promised,
Is in our purpose most irrevocable,
And so we hope is yours.

Besse You may presume, my lord.


Flor. Conduct this Lady to her chamber,
Let her have all observance: we will lay
Our strict command on him, lest he should leave
Our City before our summons, it is to morrow, then,
Shall happy thee, make us most blessed of men.
Exit Duke.
Besse Now shall I quite him home,
Th'ingrate shall know,
It Is above patience to be injured so.

Merch. Will you walk Lady, or take your coach?


Besse That we the streets more freely may survay,
We Will walk along.
Exeunt. Enter Clem with his pots.
Clem. Let me see, three quarts, two pottles, one gallon and a pin^e, one
pint, two quarts more, then I have my load: thus are we that are
under*journeymen put to it. Oh the fortune of the seas; never did any man that
marries a whore, so cast himself away, as I had been like in the last tempest:
yet nothing vexes me so much, that after all my travells, no man that meets me
but may say, and say very truly, I am now no better then a pot companion.

En^ Besse, Mer^.
Besse That should be Clem my man, give me some gold,
Here, Sir, drink this to the health
Of thy old Mistress. Usher on,
We have more serious things to think upon.

Clem. Mistress Besse, Mi^s Eli^, it is (...): (...), gold: hence pewter pots,
I Will be a (...) porter no longer: my Mistress turned Gallant, and shall I do
nothing but run up stares and down^ (...), (...), anon, Sir? (...), I have
gold, and anon will be as gall^ as the proudest of them. Shall I stand at the
Bar to bar any man's ca^ing that drinks hard? no, I Will send these pots home by
some porter or other, put my self into a better habit, and say* The case is
altered; then will I go home to the bush where I drew wine, and buy out my
time, and take up my Chamber, be served in pomp by my fellow (...):

I will presently thither,

Where I will flaunt it in my Cap and my ^her.

Enter Good^k, Sp^, Ru^.
Goodl. You tell us of the strangest (...) (...) ever'came within the compass
of my knowledge.


Spenc. I tell you but what is true*


Goodl. It cannot (...) example. Did you leave (...) those extremities of
passion?


Spenc. I think dying, or the next way to death.


Goodl. To cheer you,
The Dukes own witness of (...) ^ancy,
And virtue, armed against all ^tions,
Part of your griefs should le^.

Spenc. Rather friend,
Augment my passions, to be forced to lo^,
And quite (...) (...) sweet a (...).
Oh, it breeds more distraction.

Goodl. Were my cause,
I Would to the Duke and claim her, beg for justice,
And through the populous court clamor my wrongs,
If he detein her from you.

Spenc. But my oath
Ties me from that, I have quite abjured her,
I have renounced her freely, cast her off,
Disclaimed her quite: I can no more
Interest claim in her, then Goodlack
Thou, or Ruffman thou.

Goodl. It Is most strange, let us examine all our brains
How this may be avoided.

Ruff. How now Clem, you loyter here, the house is full of guests, and you are
extremely called for.


Clem. You are deceived my Lieutenant* I Will assure you, you speak to as good a
man as my self: Do you want any money?


Goodl. Can thou l^nd me any?


Clem. Look, I am the lord of these mines, of these Indies.


R^ff. How came thou by them?


Clem. A delicate sweet Lady, meeting me in the street, like an Ass groaning
under my heavy burden, and being enamored of my good parts, gave me this
gold: if you think I lie, examine all these pots, whose mouths, if they could
(...), would say as much in my behalf. But if you want any money, speak in
time, for if I once turn Courtier again, I will ^orn my poor friends, look
scurvily upon my acquaintance, borrow of all men, be beholding to any man, and
acknowledge no man: and my Motto shall be, (...) (...) the man (...) (...).


Ruff. But (...), how came thou by this gold?


Clem. News, news, though not the lost sheep, yet the lost shrew is found,
(...) Mistress, Mi^ Elizabeth, it is she, she meeting me 'ith street, seeing I
had a pot or two too much, gave me ten pounds in a purse to pay for it, Ecce
signum.

Enter a Lord.
Lord The Duke has summond your appearance, Gentlemen,
And lays his power of love, not o^ command,
To visit him in Court.

Clem. I am put into the number too, if he b^ a tall man, tell him we will
attend his high^.


Lord Fellow, my langu^ge was not aimed at you.


Clem. But Sir, I Will make bold to come at first bidding.


Lord Sir, your reward stays for you at Court,
For bringing of the ou^ law'd Cap^ head,
There Is order tan^ for from the treasuri^.

Ruff. The Duke is just and royal* VVee'll attend you.


Clem. And I Will go furnish my self with some be^r accoutriments, and ^le b^ with
you to bring pr^sently.

Enter Florence, Mantua, and Farara.
Mant. There is not in your looks renowned Flor^*
That summers calm, and sweet alac^ie
That was wont there to shine, a winters storm
Sits threatening on your discontented brow.
May we desire the cause.

Flor. Which you shall know.
Princes, the fierce and bloody moors, have late
Committed outrage on our seas, especially,
One mighty Bashaw, *against whom we have sent
Petro Deventuro, one of our best Sea Captains,
And, till we hear of his success, ^'are bard
Of much content.
Enter M^ent.
Merc. My lord, good new^, ^tro De^ is returned
With happy victory, and many noble prisoners,
And humbly lays his conquest at your feet.
E^ter Petro, Bashaw.
Flor. Petro, welcome.
This thy service shall not di^ unrewarded. Freely relate
The manner of thy Sea fight.

Petro. Then thus, great Duke.
This noble Bashaw: noble I must call him,
For he deserves that worthy attribute,
Did lord over these* our seas, appointed well;
Laden with many a rich and golden spoil,
Not weak to us in number; being in ken,
We had him and his Galleys straight in chase:
He never set sail or fled: afar our ordnan^ played;
Coming more near, our muskets and our small shot,
Like showers of hail begun the slaughter;
There this Bashaw then perceiving straight
That he must either yield or die: his Semiter
He pointed to his breast, thinking thereon
To perish, had not my coming staid him.

Ioffer. Nor think, bold Christian,
That I can commend, or thank thee for it,
For who that is noble will not prize brave death
Before a slavish bondage: had I died
By mine own hand, 'th^d been a s^ldiers pride.

Flor. Although a prisoner captive and a Moor,
Yet use him like the noblest of his nation.
And now withdraw with him, till we
Determine of his ransom.
Exit. Enter Merchant and Besse: also Spencer, Ruffman, Goodlack.
Merch. Way there for the Dukes Mistrisse.


Sp^. Ha, the Dukes Mistress, said he:


Goodl. It was harsh.


Besse Keep off, we would have no such rubs as these,
Trouble our way? but have them swept aside,
A company of base companions, to do no reverence
To a Princes Mistress.

Sp^. Hear you t^?


Merch. Give back, you trouble the pr^ce.


Goodl. This cannot ^e ^sse, but some Fury has stolen her shape.


Ruff. It seems strange.


Spenc. But unto me most horrid.


Besse. Great Duk, I come to keep my promise with you, if you keep your word
with me.


Flor. These kind regreets are unto me more welcome
Then my late victory (...) at Sea:
Will please you take your seat?

Merc. Is not yo^ Spencer, and that the Captain of the Negro?


Spenc* What shall w^ next behold?


Flor. Yet are you mine*


Besse. From all the world, great Fl^ence, witness this,
You never had yet a vo^ary kiss.

Spen^. 'Sfoot I could tear my hair off.


Flor. Second your kindness, l^ these Princes see
Your tempting lips solely ^longs to me.

Besse There Is one again, i^ (...) (...) 'bove measure,
To be a Princes dar^, and ^oice ^ure.

Spencer. Hold me Goodlack, or I shall break out,
Into some dangerous outrage.

Goodl. Show in this your wisdom, and quite suppress your fury.


Flor. Princes, I fear you have mistook your selves
In these two ^gers, for I have little hope
To find them wort^ your gr^ ^racter.

Mant. There must be great presumption that must force belief to tha^.


Farar. Nay mo^ the pre^ptions, proofs,
Or they will win small credit.

Flo^. You had from us Lady, a costly jewel,
It cost ten thousand crowns, speak, can you show it?

Bess^ I kept it chary
As mine own heart, because it came from you;
But hurrying through the street, some cheating fellow,
Snatched it from my arm, therefore my suit is
With whomsoe're the jewel may be found,
The slave may die.

Flor. His sentence thine, we never will revoke i^.
Our Merchant, search all our Courtiers and such
Strangers as are within our Court.

Merch. Here Is one of no mean luster that this Gentleman wears in his hat.


Flor. Reach it the Lady.


Goodl. This cannot be Besse Bridges, but some Medus^,
Changed into her lively portrature.

Besse. Princes, the thief is found: what e're he be
That Is guilty of this felony, I beg
That I may be his ^cer.

Fl^r. Thou shall.


Besse. If you have any intrest in his blood*
His oaths or vows, freely resign them, him,
And all at my dispose.

Flor. Have (...) not don't?


Farar. Who can with the least honor speak for him,
The theft being so app^

Clem. Now if she should challenge me with the purse she gave me, and hang m^
up for my labor, I should curse the time that ever I was a courtier.


Besse Let me descend, and ^'re I judge the Fello^,
Survay him first. It Is pity, for it seems
He has an honest face. T^ (...) was never.

Good^. What Bess^, forget your self?


Besse An indifferent pro^ m^, and take these courses. You said you would not
speak, nor look upon, nor touch your Besse.


Spenc. I could be a new Si^ and b^ray
A second Troy, rather then suffer this.

Besse Good outward parts, but in a foreign clime
Shame your own country. Never think of that.

Spencer I fear my heart will break,
It does so struggle for eruption forth.

Flor. When do you speak his sentence, Lady?


Bess. You Will confirm't what e're it be.


Flor. As! we are Prince we will.


Besse Set forth the prisoner.


Merch. Stand forward Englishman.


Besse Then hear thy doom, I give thee back thy life,
And in thy arms throw a most constant wife;
If Thou have rashly sworn, thy oaths are free,
Thou Art mine by gift, I give my self to thee.

Flor. Lady, we understand not this.


Bess. Shall I make it plain?
This is, great Duke, my husband,
Whose virtues even the barbarous Moors admired.
This the man for whom a thousand dangers l've endured,
Of whom the best approved Croniclers,
Might write a golden legend.

Merch. My lord, I know that Gentleman
For Spencer, and her husband, for mine eyes
Saw them espoused in Fesse; that Gentleman,
As I take it, was Captain of the Negro,
The Other his Lieutenant.

Clem. And do not you know me?


Merch. Not I, Sir.


Clem. I am Ba^haw of Barbary, by the same token I sold certain precious
stones to purchase the place.


Flo. Lady, you told us he ^as the author
Of all your troubles, cares, and fears.

Besse I told true, his love was cause of all,
It drew me from my Country in his quest,
When I despaired: and finding him in Fesse,
Oh do but think great Duke if e're you loved,
What might have bought him from you.
Had my Spencer been an Euridice,
I would have played the Orpheus,
And found him out in hell.

Flor. We now perceive,
The cause of all these errors his unkindnesse,
Grounded on his rash oath, which we release;
And all those virtues, honors, and renowns,
Which e'ne the barbarous Moors seemed to admire,
We Will dignifie and raise their suffrage higher,

All. Floren^e is honorable.

Enter Ioffer, Venturo.
Flor. Bring in the Bashaw, call Venturo forth.


Ioffer Duke, I am prisoner,
Put me to ransom or to death: But to death rather;
For me thinks, a Soldier should not outlive bondage.

Spenc. Bashaw Ioffer?
Leave my embraces, Besse, for I of force am cast
Into his arms. My noble friend?

Ioff. I know you not, and I could wish you did not know me, now I am a
prisoner, a wretch, a captive, and such a one as I would not have my friends to
know. I pray stand off.


Spenc. Because you are in durance,
Should I not know you? no:
For then the noblest minds should friends best know.
Have you forgot me, Sir?

Ioff. No; were I in freedom and my princely honors,
I should then be proud to call you Spencer,
And my friend, but now

Spenc. An English virtue thou shall try,
That for my life once did not fear to die.
That for his noble office done to me,
Embrace him Besse, dear Goodlack, and the rest,
Whilst to this Prince I kneel. This was the Bashaw,
King Mullisheg made him great Viceroy of Argiers,
I know not, Prince, how he is fallen so low,
But if my self, my friends, and all my fortunes
May redeem him home, unto my naked skin
I Will sell my self: and if my wealth
Will not amount so much, I Will leave my self in hostage.

Farar. It Is the part
Of a most noble friend.

Mant. And in these times worthy admiration


Flor. I wonder not the Moors so graced this nation,
If all the English equal their virtues.
For this brave Stranger so indear'd to thee,
Pass to thy country ransomlesse and free.

All Royal in all things is the duke of Florence.


Ioff. Such honor is not found in Barbary.
The virtue in these Christians has converted me,
Which to the world I can no longer smother,
Accept me then a Christian and a brother.

Flor. Princes,
These unexpected novelties,
Shall ad unto the high solemnity
Of your best welcome. Worthy Englishman,
And you, the mirror of your sex and nation,
Fair English Elizabeth, as well for virtue
As admired beauty, we will give you cause, ere
You depart our Court, to say great Fesse
Was either poor, or else not bountiful.
Bashaw, we will honor your conversion,
With all due rites. But for you beauteous Lady,
Thus much in your behalf we do proclaim,
The fairest Maid ner^ pattern'd in her life,
So fair a Virgin, and so chaste a wife.

Epilogue.
STill the more glorious that the Creatures be,
They in their native goodness are more free
To things below them: as the Sun we find,
Impartially to shine on all mankind,
Denying light to none. And you we may
(Great King) most justly call our Light, our Day:
Whose glorious course may never be quite run,
While earth has Sovereign, or the heaven a Sun.
FINIS.

