A contemplation of Mysteries: containing the rare effects and significations
of certain Comets, and a brief rehersall of sundry Hystoricall examples, as
well divine, as profane, very fruitful to be read in this our age: with
matter delectable both for the Sayler, and Husbandman, yea and all traueylers
by Sea and land, in knowing aforehande, how dangerous a tempest will
succeed, by the sight of the clowd coming over the head, and other matters
fruitful to be read as shall appear in the Table next after the Preface.

Gathered and englished, by Thomas Hill.



Imprinted at London by Henry Denham.

TH Aetatis svae 42
portrait of Thomas Hill

Virescit vulnere veritas. To his singular friend master Henry Fynche
Merchant, Thomas Hill wishes health and felicity.
IF among friends, there needs great and ample gifts, then will not my
poverty furnishe your expectation. Large gifts I have none, the greatest I am
able to show, is good will, the which is gift great enough, among right
friends. Therefore forasmuch as I have always counted you, as one of my
dearest friends, and you likewise have accepted me among your friendly
fraternity (I thank you therefore) I trust this my remembrance, shall be a
sufficient token and pledge of my good will. It is not long since I for want of
better furniture, offered you the like token, the which was of you so gently
received, as I am not able to tell well, whether I were more sorry I had no
better gift to gratify you withal, or wheather I more marueyled at your
courtesy (in so well esteeming) so small a thing, If I had had better at that
time, better would I have bestowed, as now I would also, but as you received
that simple and rude thing then in good part, at my hands, of I again, trust
you will do now no less, at this time, renewing that friendship, which
unequally of person, had almost separated and losed, in so doing, I can but
wish you well, the which prayer as I am bound I will always bestow upon you.
Thus in few words I end, committing you to God, who grant you long health,
and prosperity in this life.

Yours most bounden Thomas Hill.

The Preface to the gentle Reader.
Thought it good (gentle Reader) to admonish I thee in two or three lines,
what mine intent and meaning is, in renewing again of this little Treatise: for
although an indifferent reader may judge thereof, yet all men's natures not being
a like to avoid the cauils of busy heads, and the biting speeches of Zoylus
brood, I am advised to interpret mine own meaning: My purpose according to my
duty is to do good, nature binds, my country chalengeth, and every good
man according to his talent and power ought to fulfill the same. God thretneth:
the divine to such as will hear, cries repentance: to such as can not away
with that kind of speech, but desires sweeter and more delectable gear, the
Player with his stage matters, by an other kind of more pleasant means
admonishes, and by a plain demonstration puts every man in mind of his
vocation. I professing no divinity, nor yet acquainted with playing invention,
have by an other means (if it were possible) put thee in remembrance of thy
duty to Godward: we see Gods mercifulness, he seldom punishes but sends
before his messengers, tokens and wonders to forewarne us, if we were not
dulheades, we might perceive the same, but if we had grace, we would endeavor
our selves to amendment.

Before God destroyed his own City Jerusalem, he caused to appear in the
element wonderful and terrible visions. Before the imperial seat of
Constantine was translated, signs and tokens were seen in the air. God (as
we may read in Cronicles) seldom or never made alterations in kingdoms,
but he before sent in Embassage, his threatening Creatures. To seek for old
and foreign examples we need not, seeing we have enough of late days at
home, fresh in our memories, as first he by burning his own house, brought a
present terror into the minds of many, and forced them to call on his name,
and generally foreshewed, that as he spared not that place, wherein his name
was daily called on, no more would he spare the people, that despised his laws
and ordinances (and soon after) it came so to pass, for when the warnin^
woould not be taken, he punished more severely: he sent a gre^ mortality, and
sweeped or took away a great number.

God is just and merciful, for just he is in punishing, and merciful in
forgiving. The continual bearing of monsters, the troublesome Elements, these
last two Summers, the unseasonable weather: and last of all, the late strange
and wonderful inun^ations, do threaten Gods justice, in punishing the
offenders, and his clemency and mercy, by favoring us so gently. God
notwithstanding, that he threatened Niniuie, by the mouth of his Prophet, yet
did he mercifully forgive them, upon their repentance. God pour out his
spirit upon us, and give us his grace to acknowledge and bewail our offenses,
so shall we be spared with Niniuie, and the Lord will turn away all his
threatenings, into forgiveness. It is high time we repent: God threatens, we
are in danger, compassed on every side, all things are ready, nothing wants
but Gods permission.

I have been somewhat longer (gentle Reader) than at the beginning I promised
or purposed: yet take this (for brevity sake) but for an enteraunce, of a
great deal more, that might aptly be here uttered: the rest untouched, I
commit to thy judgment and understanding. Thus resting, I crave none other
than your friendly report, in furthering this Treatise.

Vale feliciter.
The Table.
THe sundry definitions, effects, and significations of Comets. Fol. 1 The
explication or plain declaration of the definition. 1 Of the continuance, and
motions of Comets. 2 The place where Cometes often ingendreth. 2 How some
interpret the motion of Comets. 3 The end, effect, and significations of
Comets. 3 Sundry examples of Comets. 5 Other prodigious tokens. 7 Of the
marvelous nature of Wells, Rivers, Lakes, and waters. etc. 15 Of certain
fiery impressions, and first of the same, named of most men the foolish fire.
21 The cause of Castor and Pollux, and where these engendered. 24 Of the flying
Dragon in the air, what the same is. 25 Of the fire cleaving and hanging on
the parts of men, and beasts. 26 What is to be thought of the flame or fire,
which cleaves to the hears of the head and to the hears of beasts. 27 Of
the fearful gaping, and deep opening of the Elements. The definitions. 28 A
difference between the gaping, and deep opening. 29 What the efficient cause
is. 29 What the matter and form is. 29 What the end of the gapings be. 30 How
many rainebowes may be seen together at one time. 31 Whereof many Rainebowes
proceed. 31 That three Rainebowes may appear at one time. 32 In what time of
the year, Rainebowes for the more part are caused. 32 Are not the Rainebowes
caused through the beams of the other stars. 33 Of the winds. 34 Certain
properties of the winds. 34 Certain observations of the winds. 37 Of the
impressions, named Parelia, and Paraeselinae. The definitions. 48 The
similitude. 42 The end and effect of these. 42 Certain examples of these. 43
Of thunder what the same is. 45 The kinds of thunder. 46 What the final cause
of the thunder. 48 What the colors of the clouds warn and foreshew in the
thunders. 48 Certain foreknowledges of thunder. 50 Of that lightning named
Fulgur, what the same is, and of the others. 52 Of the fearful and violent
lightning. 54 What the lightning Dart is. 60 The manner of the ingendring of
the Stone. 60 Of the marvelous force, nature, and miracles of the lightnings.
61 What an Earthquake is. 65 How many kinds of Earthquakes there are. 66 What
the ruin is. 66 What the Gaping is. 66 What the Pulsation is. 67 What the
fourth kind is. 67 What the material cause is. 68 What the formal cause is.
69 Which the object or place is of the Earthquake. 70 How the ingendring is, or
of the manner of the ingendring of Earthquakes. 71 What the final causes are.
72 What the effects are. 74 Which the signs be of an earthquake. 74
FINIS.
A brief Catologue of rare wonders, and fearful sightes, seen as well on
earth, as in the element.
The sundry definitions, effects, and significations of Comets.
A Comet, after the opinion of Albertus, is an earthlye gross vapor, whose
parts much gather to it, ascending from the lowest part of heat, unto the
upper part of the same: where, ye fire that touches the holownesse, there shed
forth and burning, so that it often shows long, and sheddeth out.

2. A Comet is a hot and dry matter, fat, discous, and earthly, whose
parts be thick, drawn up by virtue of the celestial bodies, unto the upper
regio^ of the air, where through the nearenesse of the fire, and might of the
substance set on fire, and carried circularely with the motion of the upper
region of the air, which drawn by that motion, is so carried about.

3. A Comet, after the opinion of Leopoldus, is an earthly vapor, having
gross parts mightily thickning together, ascending by virtue of stars, unto
the upper part of heat, where being kindled, and carried circularely with the
air: signifies the alteration of kingdoms, and other great matters in this
world.

4. A Comet is an earthly exhalation, hot and dry, fat and clammie, with
the parts thick gathered, by virtue of the stars, and drawn from the
bowels of the earth by little and little, and perticularlye unto the upper
region of the air, where, nighest the fire, through the disposition and
multitute of the matter is dilated, and being kindled burns, and with a long
tract shed forth, is circularly moved, after the condition and manner of a
star, under which, it is gathered, or under the circulare motion of the upper
region of the air.

The explication or plain declaration of the definition.
THis larger definition and description, contains the causes and manner of the
increasing of the Comet, and the same sufficient clearly: for it must needs
ensue, that the substance of a Comet, to be an earthly and viscous exhalatio^,
or otherwise it would soon be wasted, of the burning color: and the space of
time is most short, in which a Comet is seen, as not continuing above seven
days: yet a Comet appears, and is seen many times for. 40. days together,
or somewhat longer, until all the substance of it in the burning, be in the
end consumed, being also drawn with this circulare motion most swift. Although
Pliny witnesses, that Comets have been seen, which were as immooueable in
the place.

Of the continuance, and motions of Comets.
CArdanus writes, that the longest time of them (except by miracle) does
scarcely exceed six months, so that (for the most part) the substance of a
Comet, is spent by the thirty day, or sooner: but never ending before the
seventh day. The motion of a Comet, is three manner of ways: the one from the
Cast, into the West: the second from the West, into the East: and the third
diverse, as from the West into the South, or from the North into the West: the
exceeding greatness, and most speedy increase of them is marvelous, in that
appearing at the first, but a foot broad, do after a few days, occupy a
fourth part of the Zodiac.

The place where a Comet often ingendreth.
A Comet (after the mind of Cardanus) is oftener engendered in the North, and
especially (in that part of heaven) named the Milkie way, from the Tropickes
without: yet are they gathered and caused, sometimes under the Equinoctial, and
sometimes nighe the Winter Tropicke, and else where: but oftener (as I have
said) about the North, in which part I observed (says Cardanus) three Comets
in three several years. In the night, after the Evening, are Comets apparently
seen: yet not the like in the day, except by a mighty means and occasion. It
is manifest, that many Comets may be seen together: as in the age of Carolus
Martellus, in the month of January, were two Comets seen within fourteen
days together, of which the one went before the Sun, and the other followed
him, with the ^ayles looking and stretched toward the North: and this happened in
the year of man's redemption, seven hundred twenty and six. Two other Comets
appeared together, in the year of man's health, 1337. which not in a short
time, in that as companions they ended together after two months complete. And
to the learned it is well known, that if they happen with an Eclips, then
through the virtues doubled, they produce much more, and dangers long
continuing.

How some interpret the motion of Comets.
THere be some (says Cardanus) which thus write of Comets: that if they tend
toward the South, such signify rain to ensue: if unto the North, then drought
to follow, if unto the East, then the pestilence, and other mighty dangers:
if unto the West, then the best or a happy year, and temperate. And the like
Porphirius (that worthy Philosopher) wrote, but as I suppose deceived in this,
seeing a Comet proceeding against the order of the signs, does signify the
mutation of laws: for yt cause, the Comet which tends from the East into the
West, signifies the alteration of laws, in that it is carried against the
order of the signs: so that when it may signify the same alone, it happens
that a temperate year follows, yet does it not signify the temperament of
the year. The kinds and sundry forms of Comets, may you learn in my book
of the Myrrour of time, with other profitable matters.

The end, effect, and significations of Comets.
THe end of Cometes, is to prepare drought, the Pestilence, hunger, battles,
the alteration of kingdoms, and commonweals, and the traditions of men. Also
winds, earthquakes, dearth, land^louds, and great heat to follow. The said
Comets portende, both many other harms, and that mighty to men.

2 A Comet is the note of a great drougth in that a mean heat cannot resolve
such ^ matter out of the earth, and draine the same up.

3 The second effect of a Comet is barrenness of the earth, hunger, and the
dearth of vittayles, in that the earth is caused barren through much drougth,
and lack of moisture, for drougth is as the stepmother unto all fruits, and
corn of the earth^ but moisture is the apt mother unto all fruits, and
crescent things on the earth. So that such a mighty heat, does exceedinglye
dry up the earth, and consumes the moisture in plants, and trees, through
which, they decay, and hear no yield, no^store of fruit. Or thus.

A Comet does cause harrennesse of the earth, in that unto a Comet, a great and
much exhalation is required, by whose elevation from the earth, the fatness of
the earth is so drawn up, which thus elevated, the earth after becomes
harren of yield, and the moisture with which the earth ought to be battened, is
then through the overmuch drougth utterly deprived. For which cause, a Comet
is the fore note of hunger, and dearth in the same Realm: which it specially
beholds or stretches the tail toward, and from whence it gathered and
took his substance.

4 Comets do portend the murraine of beasts, in that the air ensuing is
infected and evil disposed, through the hot, gross, and clowdy exhalations:
which when beasts draw thereof, are then intoxicated and infected, and so die.
Also for that the time then is exceeding hot, and the radical moisture is on
such wise drawn up by the hot air, from the bodies of men and beasts, in
who^ the natural moisture is placed, as in the proper seat: of the same
beasts, and other living creatures die: for which cause, it is the mind and
council of the learned Physicians: to use in the same time, moist and cold
meats, whereby the radical moisture may so be increased and preserved.

5 Comets move battles and seditions, and alter Emperies, and kingdoms: for
that in the time of a Comet, are many exhalations in the air, hot and dry,
which do dry men, and kindle heat in them, by which they are lightly provoked
to ire: after which ire ensues variance, next of the same follows battle,
and after battle succeeds the translation or alteration of gouernements,
when as the Emperie ensues the conqueror.

6 Comets do portend the death of princes, kings, governors, and other
Magistrates of a common weal: in that these lead a more dainty life, and
feed on finer meats continuallye, through which they sooner be infected. The
death besides of princes, and head governors, through the difference of many,
is of worthier report and fame, and for yt cause more observed. To these I
add, that the Choloricke persons are then vehementer moved, through which,
the perturbations or troubles of mind ensue, that procure seditions and
battles, after which proceed oftentimes the slaughter of many, and death of
princes: for that these many times be present in battles, and are lightly
provoked to ire, by which the battle ensues the fiercer: and on such wise,
many come to their death. Macrobius left in writing, that the death of
Constantine, was indicated by a Bushie star, of an exceeding bigness, that
appeared in the year after Christ's birth. 304.

Sundry examples of Comets.
THat singular Philosopher Augustinus Niphus writes, that after the appearing
of a Comet, in the year 1506. there followed within two years, such a mighty
drougth in Lumbardie, that from January unto the month of November, there fell
no rain at all, in that Country.

In the year of our Lord. 1165. appeared a mighty Comet or blasing star in
Scotland, reaching and burning out with two most long beams or tails: after
which, (within.xiiij. days) Malcolmus the fourth king by name of the Scotts,
dyed a maiden, as the Chronicle reports.

In the year of our Lord. 1214. in the month of March, appeared two
fearful Comets in Scotland, the one going before the Sun, and the other
following him: after which (the same year) when as that most happy and good
king William had reigned. 49. years, he then dyed an old man.

In the year, 1268. there appeared a Comet of a marvelous bigness about the
noonesteede, which was seen for many days together in Scotland. And in the
year of our Lord. 1271. after: and in the ix. day of January, there arose
such a cruel wind, and mighty tempest withal, and hayle stones of such a
bigness, that through the same many houses in Scotland were thrown down, and
burned with fire, through the winds which kindled after the same, that they
there kept in their houses, for the use of fire: that the whole Country in a
manner, was wasted by the fire.

In the year of our Lord. 1538, and in the eighteen day of January: there
appeared a Comet after the setting of the Sun, which was placed in the sign
Pisces, and the tail looking or stretching toward the East, after which, died
immediately the Duke of Saronie.

In the year of our Lord. 1539. and the sixth day of the month of May,
appeared a Comet in the sign Taurus, not far from the head of the Dragon,
which endured burning, for three weeks in a manner: after which died Isabell of
Portugal, the wife of Charles the fifth Emperor, in the travail of child.

In that year died George Duke of Saronie, of an old and crude rupture:
before whose death, as some write, there appeared three Comets, after the
appearaunce of which, died the Duke of Cleave, the bishop of Trident, and
diverse other noble persons and Capitaines.

In the year. 1540. began a great conjunction of Saturn and Mars, which
happened in Cancer: after which followed a marvelous drougth, above many summers
before, so that hay, corn, and all kind of pulses, became very scarce.

And this drougth followed rather (as some write) after the apperaunce of a
Comet the same year, and great Eclips of the Sun which happened the seventh
day of April, whose beginning was before the Sun rising, and endured in this
Eclips two whole hours, after the Sun was risen: upon which followed at
Prage (a noble City in the kingdom of Boheme) that the Castle with the
Cathedral Church, were burned with fire: and many fearful fires happened
often, in sundry places, as the same had been by a divine punishment from
heaven. And a Commotion happened the same year, among the Citizens of Gaunt,
which Charles the fifth Emperor stayed by his wisdom.

Many examples more of Comets, might here be uttered, which for brevity in so
small a treatise omitted, and the rather, for that I have at large written of
them, and other weighty matters right necessary, in my book to come forth,
named the Myrrour of time.

Other prodigious tokens.
IN the year. 1542. were many strange children, and monstrous beasts seen:
and in that year it rayned blood at Sassen burge in Germany. And in
Phriseland that year, arose a certain Prophet, named George David, declaring
himself to be Gods nere kinsman, and one that could counterfaite the speech
of beasts, and birds, affirming also heaven to be empty, and many other
blasphemies he uttered besides.

In the year of our Lord. 1545. and in the seventh day of August, about.xi.
of the clock in the morning, happened such a fearful tempest at Machlin, as
the like was never heard of: for a mighty thunder came, which shook the
earth, in such manner, that the people of that City, thought Doomes day at
hand, or ruin of the City present: In that after the same was heard, a
horrible crack in the clouds, and a darcke lightning, very sore stinking of
Brimstone happened, which so feared them, that no^^e knew^^ what to think or
do, nor what succeeded of the same (save only such, which the tempest had
stricken) until the brute and noise ra^ in the City, that the lightning had
smitte^^ the Sandgate, in which lay above.viij. hundredth Barrelles of
Gunpowder, whose sudden bursting forth, caused such a mighty confusion in the
City, that no man ever saw the like destruction in that Country: for the
Sandgate was blown up, at the turning of a hand, into very small parts: and
not only the foundation of the same sorent, but the stones of the walls fast
by, likewise blown up, and scattered abroad: yea, the pittes, and wells with
water there about, through the mighty heat of the powder set on fire, were
suddenly dried up. And on the next morrow following, vewing the harms about the
City, there were found about the compass of the scattering of the Tower, of
dead bodies, unto the number of three hundred: and half a hundred grievously
wounded. Besides these, a woman minding at that instaunt, to that the leaf
wyndowes of her Hall or Parlour, for the great fear of the tempest, had her
head pitifully smitten off And in a certain Inn, were at that time, a
certain company playing at Cards, which altogether were found stricken in
pieces, and all the other parsons of the house pyttifully dead, except the good
wife, which went at that instaunt, to draw drink for them, in a deep seller,
who by that means was preserved. And many other grievous sightes happened in
that fearful tempest. To conclude, the City was maruellouslye spoiled through
out, and no Church in that City, but grievously shaken with this tempest, yea
whole streets subverted.

In the year of our Lord. 1547. at Heluetia in Germany, were seen in the
air, two hosts of men of war, and two mighty Lions grievously and terribly
fighting together so long, until it seemed that the one byt of the others head
quite. And in ye twelfe day of April, the Sun appeared at after noone, for
three days together, like a fyrie Globe, in such manner, that the Stars,
were then seen: after which, followed a grievous battle, between Charles the
fifth Emperor, and the Duke of Saxony, between Mulberge, and Wyteberge: at
the end of which battle, John Frederick Electour, became prisoner unto the
Emperor.

At that time also was seen in another place, in a clear day, a white Cross,
with a rod by it, in the sky.

In the year of our Lord. 1548. and in the tenth day of February, was seen
in Saxony (a country of Germany) a fire from heaven, that fell on certain
cities.

Also two Hosts of men of war, were seen in Saxony in the air, running
and skirmishing together, and diverse other strange sightes besides, were seen
in the air, in that year.

In the year of our Lord. 1551. and in the.xiij. day of January, arose a
mighty tempest in sundry places of Germany, with many showers of rain,
lightnings, and thunders, in so much that the men of that country, thought
Domes day at hand, yea to be present.

And in the.xxviij. day of January, at Lysebone, in the chief city of
Portugal, appeared a bloody rod, and sundry fearful fyres seen in the
air, and rayned there blood, after which followed such a fearful earthquake,
that about two hundred houses were grievously shaken and thrown down, through
the fall of which, about a thousand persons were lamentably slain.

And in the.xxi. day of March, at Magdeburge in Germany, about seven of the
clock in the morning, were seven Raynebowes, and three Suns seen: and in
the evening (the same day) three Moons, of which the first, and perfiter
Moon, was seen toward the city of Magdeburge: but the second as bloody,
toward Pago Desdorf: and the third shyned bloody, toward the new city
(so named) in Germany.

And in the.xxj. day of April, appeared again at Magdeburge, three Suns,
and three Rainebowes: after which, by the commandment of Charles the fifth
Emperor, was this city besieged, by the Duke of Saxony, and Albert of
Brandenburge, for fiftene Months: and at the length a peace concluded, by
wicked conditions. For after the peace stablished, certain of the governors
and Capitaines drew together a battle against Charles Emperor, upon that
title, for the defense of the Germayne liberty.

In the year of our Lord. 1553. was heard a woeful cry, saying woe, woe,
twice together: there was heard also the sound of Belles, and the noise of
Trumpets: and the same time there happened at Duringia, that the trees, and
herbs, sweat blood, and fearful noyses heard besides, sundry nights:
after which Mauricius Duke of Saxony, fought in battle with Albert of
Brandenburge, at which season Mauricius smitten with the pellet of a Gunne,
dyed the third day after the battle.

In the year of our Lord. 1554. and in the first day of February, in the City
of Cathalane in France, and after the great goodly show and muster of
soldiers, by the commandment of the French king: there appeered a
marvelous sight, about the Moon, like unto a great fire, arysing from the
East part, and stretching, or declyning toward the west: and the Moon showed
like to a most great fyrebrande: and this fire in the air, burned with a great
noise and often casting forth flames, and sparks of fire, in the like manner as
a hot burning yroi^barre, beaten on an handueale by a Smith.

The.xxvj. day of May, it rayned blood, not far from the town of
Dunckelspull in Germany.

And there were seen three fair Rainebowes, and so many Suns, and Moons,
and two bloody crosses.

In another place also were seen six, and the sun then appeering fearful
in the rising, as one day green of color, another day blackish or swart in
color, ye third morning red, and at the setting bloody: and in other places
apeered black round bodies, both reddish and fiery of color, as they were
beating the sun, and seemed fighting with him: and it rayned besides blood,
in many places.

In the.xj. day of June, five Miles from Noriberge in Germany, was seen in
the sun, a bloody rod, and many companies of horsemen dashing together in
the air: which so continued for two hours, that it caused men greatly to
fear, that Domes day was at hand: after which died the same year, Frederick
Duke of Saxony: and after the same, was a notable town in Germany pitifully
wasted by fire.

In the year of our Lord. 1555. were seen in the city of Duringia, three
suns, the tenth day of February, in the same Duringia, was a gaping open of
the earth, out of which came a mighty stinck, which very much molested the
lookers on, with the beating pains of the head: yet certain further examining
the place, observed and saw within that great clift, strange forms in the
night, and many great matters besides heard.

At Luneberge, was seen this strange sight in the air, a great company of
Souldiars: at the right hand of which company, stood by an Angel holding a
fyrie sword in his hand: and a child was there in presence among ye people
by a sudden means, who did earnestly exhort every one, to hearty repentance:
affirming Gods judgment at hand, and to be the day of ire, and the day of
calamity and misery, and that the same to be a very great and bitter day:
when he had thus exhorted the people, he vanished suddenly away, and out of
sight: so that no man after, could tell where he became.

In this year happened at Duringia, the hard and dangerous birth of a woman
who had a sore travail in the birth of her child: for after long trauayles,
the chyld^ brast forth with a great crack and noise and dead borne: after
which issued great plenty of fire, which so harmed the yongling in the nether
parts, that blisters arose on the skin, so big swollen, as an Egg in
sight, and her own face harmed with the fire: that fire besides issuing forth
of her body, infected the proper place, with a Brimstony stinck.

In the Dukedom of Brunswike, was a marvelous and strange sight, marked of
many there, which was on this wise. A certain husbandman, which accustomed
daily to go unto the wood (to fetch wood home) and drawing near to the
accustomed place of the wood (at a certain time) saw a far off, a great
company of horsemen, which seemed to come ryding in great haste toward the
village. This seeing, the husbandman returned for the great fear, hastily
backward again: and being come home so amassed, was demanded the cause of his
hasty returning, who answered, that there were certain companies of horsemen
near the town approached: but from whence they came, or whether they would, he
could not say: therefore greatly to be doubted (said he) that these new guestes
will set upon us in the night time. Which tale so amazed the elders of the
town, that for the great fear, they took council together, what was best to
do in the matter: after the well debating on the fearful news, they issued
altogether out of the town, to know and understand further the intent of
these new guestes, what they were, from whence they came, and whether they
purposed to go: and being thus come forth together out of the town, found and
saw a like company of horsemen (as the husband man had before reported)
drawing toward them, which seemed to their sight, to be in number four
hundred horsemen, ryding and coming toward them in due order: after which,
they saw the fore frunt turned, and ready pressed to fight, and the other
company coming ryding a far off, addressed in like order: which companies
thus preparing forward to come together, and standing yet in a readiness to
fight: two black men (to their sight) alighted from their horses, which seemed
to be Captains: and each appeered valyauntly to encourage his company to
fight: they thus boldened to fight, beheld one the other, as ready pressed, and
in a readiness: after which, the two Capitaynes again lept on horseback.
Whiles these two companies yet stood in a readiness, a marvelous darkness
hastily came in the place, that it seemed far in the night: by which these
husbandmen perceived, (y^ this sight of the horsemen) was none other, then a
deuillish illusion, or mere falsehood of spirits.

In the bownds of Polonia were seen a marvelous company of Dogs, barcking,
and fighting together, insomuch that many were torn in that broyle to pieces.
After which followed, great wars, and slaughter: between them of Polonia, and
the Muscouites.

In Duringia, being a bright day, there appeered in the air, a bright and
glittering sword, much like to a Fauchine or Turkey blade: directing the point
toward the South, and the edge toward the East.

And in Cleuelande, fell so great abundance of fire from heaven into the
Rhene, that the River began to swell, as though it had boiled.

In the year of our Lord. 1557. and in the ninth day of March: there were
seen three suns, and a very fair Rainebow.

In the.xvij. day of March, there fell fire from heaven: and in an other
place, a fyrie Globe was seen: it rayned also blood, and lumpes of blood, unto
the bigness of ones hand, dropped from heaven, unto the sight of many: and in
all the drops were seen, like to men's faces. And on saint Laurence day, the
Sun appeared wholly bloody: after which, ye French king fought a great
battle, with Philip king of Spain, and after that, S. Quintins taken by king
Philip.

In the year of our Lord. 1558. appeared a Comete very fearful, which
continued burning many weeks: after which, was seen a strange sight,
fearful to behold. For in the.xxj. day of August, the day being clear and
caulme weather, and sufficient temperate, two hours before noone, and a
quarter: the Sun very clear shyning, was then seen enclosed about, with a
great circle, which appeered of many colors, like to the Rainebow, and
continued in like condition, for four hours, and a half, unto the great
fear, and amazement of all such, which regarded the same sight: for it is
written, that such strange sightes, have in times past been seen, which
always were foreshewers of fearful dangers at hand: as appeered by the
same, which Plutarche writes, that such a fearful sight foreshewed the death
of the mighty Caesar, and the great scarcity and dearth of all fruits of the
earth, that insued the same year: and even the like happened, when Octauius abode
at Rome, that the Sun was compassed with such a cyrcle, after which often
commosions and tumults, and the lamentable harms of lyghtnings ensued.

Such a Rainebow also appeered timely in the morning about the Sun, in the
sixth Calendes of February, and in the year of our Lord. 1074. after which
followed the great conspiracy of Princes, against Henry the fourth of ye name,
Emperor of ye Germains.

In the year of our Lord. 1107. a like cyrcle about the Sun was seen:
after which insued, the great dissension among christian Princes.

In the year also of our Lord. 1157. on the third Calendes of June, about
noone, such a strange show was seen: after which, the euersion or destruction
of many cities, and the scarcity of fruits of the earth, through the great
distemperance of the air insued.

Many cities also were pitifully burned in Suetia, after the appearance of
such a sight, happening in the year of our Lord. 1322.

In the year of our Savior Christ. 1387. such a cyrcle about the Sun,
foreshewed battayles, hunger, fyres, and pitiful landfloodes.

A like cyrcle to Halo appeered, before the battle with the Turks, in the
year. 1532. by which is manifest, that such sightes are foreshewers of evils to
come.

In the year of our Lord. 1559. with the great tempest risen at Fryburge,
certain fyrie Globes fell out of the clouds not far from the City, and much
or often lightnings with thunder, which lamentably burnt the grass, hops,
herbs, and leaves of trees: the tempest increased, a hand was seen stretched
in the air, for an hour in a manner, which at length by drawing and folding
the fingers together (in grinding it self) was turned into powder, which
powder falling to the earth, vanished away.

In the year. 1560. waters brake in, and over ran much ground, in sundry
places, to the great hurt and losses of many men, in that their closes and
Meadows were much harmed, with the clamminesse of the waters bursting in. The
same year dyed that singular, learned, and godly man (worthy memory) Philip
Melanchtone, who left behind him these comfortable verses, that he made a
little before the agony of death, which he still repeated, until life left
him. Cur mortem metua^: mors non est, mortis imago est.
Sed merito vitor Christ benign tuo.
Vermis adhuc spiro moriturus forte sub horam
Mors etenim certa est, funeris hora later.
Ergo Gnate Dei iam me tibi porrigo totum,
Viuam seu moriar, sanguine viuo tuo.


In the year of man's redemption. 1561. many Gunnes through Germany were
seen in the air, shooting of pellets into the Sun.

In the.xvij. day of December, four suns were seen in the East, casting
forth green rods on every side, to the great fear and amazement of the
beholders.

Heaven seemed to burn, and a fyrie Globe shyned from the North part, with a
mighty light in heaven.

In the kingdom of Naples, were five Castles, and a Byshoprick suncke with an
Earthquake, and a water nauigable vanished the whole, in such manner, that no
monument or part at all is left to be seen: yea a whole city so sunck into
the earth, that no perseverance of it at all remaining at this day.

From the.xvj. unto the.xviij. day of November, the river Tyber cast up a
mighty number of dead fishes.

In the year of our Lord. 1562. Heaven seemed to burn, to the sight of much
people, in many places of Germany. And a celestial fyrehrande stretched from
the North into the South, shyned by night in heaven. A mighty company of armed
men or soldiers, were seen in the air, which as some affirm, seemed in the
air to shed down much blood from heaven. And the Sun in the Month of
April, seen marvelous bloody, as well at the rising, as at the setting, for
three days together. The image also of our Redeemer crucified, was seen
sprinkled all over with blood, in the Month of April.

Whilst the mighty Emperor Ferdinandus kept his royal Court at Prage, the
chief city in Bohemia, it happened that Peason were miraculously changed into
stones, after this manner. A certain husbandman, had brought certain sackes
of Peason to the city, to be sold: to whom a Citizen for the penury of
victuals came, and required him to sell better cheap, then he had accustomed
to do: who that was a cruel and covetous man, prayed to God, that his Peason
rather might be changed into stones, then he would sell them one mite better
cheap: incontinent after the Citizen departing from him, the Peason were al
miraculously changed into stones: a marvelous spectacle in deed of Gods
wrath and due punishment, for his canckred and wicked stomach.

To conclude, we may by these fearful, wondrous, and strange sightes, as
well on earth, as in the air, learn that God by them does marvelously
foreshewe, his blessed will, and condign punishment, for the sins of the
people: and that in such sort to declare, the calamities to come upon us: by
showing aforehande, such strange sightes, and fearful threatenings in the
air: unto the admonishment of us, for the correcting of sin, if by these and
such like, we will be warned at all.

Of the marvelous nature of Wells, Rivers, Lakes, and waters: to which the
Physicians deny, a reason to be assigned.
Diverse are the natures, and miracles of Wells, Ryuers, Lakes, and waters: the
cause of which, is either hid wholly from us, or in search very hard to be
understood: as by Examples here under, shall plainer appear.

1. First there is a sweet running river in the Country of Italy: which by
his property, causes the Oxen drinking thereof, to become through white of
hear, all the body over. Propert. lib. 3.

2. In Boetia, there is a river named Melas, being of such a property, that
sheep drinking of ye water of that river, change and bear after black woole.

3. Seneca writes of a Well, of such a property, that what person drinks
thereof, the hear of the head shall after become yealow of color.

4. In Libia there is a Well, which at the rising, and setting of the Sun, is
found hot: but at noone this Well, is tried most cold, and at midnight very
hot.

5. Seneca writes of certain Wells, being of strange properties: of which
the one and first, is a Well of such a property, that who drinks of the
same, does dye through the mighty poisoning thereof.

The other is a Well of such a property, that throwing pieces of wood into
the same Well, they after were turned into stones.

He writes of an other Well, being of such a property, that what persons
drink of the water of the same, shall after become stark mad.

An other Well there is, of such a property, that what parsons drink
thereof, it gives them memory.

He witnesses also of an other Well, of such a condition, that by drinking
thereof, it procures forgetfulness.

6. There is another Well of such a nature, that what persons drink thereof,
become soon after frantic.

7. An other Well there is, of a marvelous property, that what persons drink
of the water, it suddenly moves and stirs forward, the lust of the body:
of which condition, the Well of Salmacis in Caria, is misreported to be: the
causes of which are the Herbs, Stones, and Mines, by which these pass: in
which such a hid property procured, of so marvelous effects, consists.

8. In Egypt, there is a Well of such a property, that quenches light
fyrebrands in the same (as reports Augustus) they forthwith are put forth:
and those quenched, are by the water of the same well kindled.

9. With the black Moors (named Garamantes) is a Well of such condition,
which in the day time is known to be so cold, that no person can drink
thereof: and in the night time, it is found so hot, that no creature is able to
bear or abide the heat o^ the same.

10. In a certain learned work of Cos^mographye, is reported, that in the
Country of Sicilia, was in time past a Well of such a nature: of which when
Thieves o^ robbers had drunk, they immediately became blind.

11 In Idumea a region in Siria, ioy^ning to Egypt, was a Well in time past^ of
such a property, that would for three Months together appear troubled, other
three Months found bloody, other three Months seen green, and other three
Months known and tried clear.

10. There was a Well known, of such condition, that for six hours the same
was found full of water, and running over, and other six hours seen quite
empty and dry: the cause of which (as Seneca witnesses) is the proportion of
the vapor eleuating the waters: and the ebbing and flowing also of the Sea
near by.

11. In the hill named Anthracius, is a Well reported to be, which is noted of
such a property: that when ye same is found full of water to the brim, that
then it pronounces a fertile year to ensue: but when the same Well is seen
very low, and in a manner empty of water, then follows a dearth the same
year.

12 In Hungary, is a certain little river or brook affirmed to be, which is
noted of such a property, that who casts iron into the same, it will in
short time after be changed into Copper.

13. Seneca affirms, that such a property to be in certain ryuers, which
alter flocks of sheep by drinking thereof, within a short time, in causing
those which before bare a black woole, to possess a white, and that those
which came thither with a white woole, departed after with a black woole on
their backs.

14. Theophrastus reports, that in Macedonia to be a river of such condition,
unto which, those which be minded to have their sheep bear a white woole,
bring them to that river, which by that reason, the longer the sheep drink
thereof, none otherwise, than as they were infected, are they after changed.

15. Capadocia is a aryuer of such a property, that what beasts drink
sundry times of the water, the hears of their skirt, become wholly white.

16. In Archadia (as Vitruuius reports) is a water named Nonacris, which is
found on the hills, sweating or distilling most cold humors out of the
rock stone, this water gathered, is named also Stygis hydor, which (as by
experience the same is found) neither a Silver nor Copper, nor iron vessel
can retain the same, but that this leaketh and soketh through it, so that for
his strange quality it is found by trial, that none other vessel will
retain or keep the same water, saving the hoof of a Mule.

17. In the Country of Sclauonie, is a Well known to be of such a property,
that clothes spread over the Well (being as some report most cold) are burned.

18. In the Island named Andro, and in the temple of Liberi patris, is a Well of
such a property, that out of the same in the Nonis of January, runs water
like to Wine in taste.

19. In the hill named Berosus Taurorum, be three Wells of such condition,
which are without remedy, and without pain of deadly grief.

20. Isydore affirms in his.xiij. Book, that in Italy is the Well of
Cycero, being of such a property, that it heals the clefts and chaps, or
other hurts of the eyes.

21. In the Island named Chio, is there a Well of such condition, that the
persons drinking of the water of the same, become soon after, dull of memory.
And the Well of Circus, is noted to be of such a property, that such drinking
thereof, are after bereft of the desire, of the veneriall act, as certain
write.

22. In Aethiopia there is a Well red, the property of which, is, that who
drinks of the same, shall soon after become mad.

23. In Archadia there is a Well named Lechnus, the property of which is
known to be, that what person o^ woman with child shall drink of the same,
shall not after be delivered before her time.

24. In the Country of Sicilia, are two Wells, of which the one by property
does make fruitful, the barraine: and the other causes the fruitful
barraine: and these by sundry times drinking of either.

25. In the Island named Sardinia, are hot Wells of that property, which
perfitely help the eyes: yet do those try out Thieves, in that their faces
be bewrayed, through a blindness, caused by them.

26. It is manifest (says Seneca) in his book of the properties of things:
that common Wells there be, of such property, which change pieces of wood
into a ston^ substance: and of such stones (by report^ are the best whetstones
made.

27. In the river of the Country of Thrace, and in the Lake Velino, it is
reported, that wood thrown into either, is soon after covered with a stony
barck.

28. Plynie writes, that in the river of Silarus, being a river of Lucania,
not only the branches of trees, but the leaves also thrown into it, are
changed into stones: but otherwise, is the water wholesome to be drunk.

29. In the Island named Pontus, there is a river that waters the fertile
grounds; in which the sheep feeding, do yield and feed the people there,
with a black milk.

30. In Aethiopia is a Lake, in which bodies rubbed over with it, shine as they
were done with Oil.

31. Of Clitorio (being a Lake in Italy) is such a property known, that what
persons drink of the water of the Lake, abhor wine after, by report.

32. In Cappadocia (as reports Vitruuius) there is a Lake, into which, if
part of a reed shall be put, and the next day taken forth, shall be found so
hard as a stone, but the other part remaining without the water of the Lake,
contynuing in his proper estate and condition.

33. Seneca in his seventh book writes, that there be certain Lakes, of
such condition, which are able to bear up men, not skillful in swymming.

34. In Syria also is there a standing water, into which if Tyles be thrown,
they do not sink, but rather swim above, although they be heavier.

35. The Rhene Belgas, deuideth it self from the Germans, and marvelous is
the same, which is reported to be written of this river: for they affirm (of
the due proof made) that the Infants of the French women (named Celtoe)
dwelling fast by this river, thrown into it, if so be those yonglings were
unlawfully gotten, this river then would swalowe and let them sincke, as a due
reuengement, for the polluting of the chaste bed: but such Infantes in wedlock
gotten, and by lawful order, this bare to shore in safety, to the wonder of
the beholders: This is reported to be written, in a certain Epistle of
Politianus, unto Iacobe Cardynall.

36. There is a river in Seythia, running from a great Maryse: which brings
forth certain husks, greater than any common kernel, out of which do
birds with four feet issue or he hatched, which increasing and waxing
strong, do fly about until the after noone: for after the sun declyning
low into the West, these birds then Wax lean and feeble, and after the
Sun setting, are they all dead, so that these by due proof are known, not
to live above a day.

37. The river Matronas Celtas, deuydeth it self from that river Belgas: which
for the strange property, greatly to be wondered at, in that ye common sort
affirm, that this river to be as a destiny, or mighty hazard of life to
many, for so much this river daily purchases to it some pray, as has been
noted of a long time, by those dwelling fast by.

38. In the Mountains of Modena in Lumbardie, in a place named Mount Zibbius,
is there a Well, out of which runs a lively and singular water, in this do
men (at this day) gather a mighty quantity of Oil, which is known of many
to be of a miraculous virtue, in that the same works so maruailous effects on
man's body, as in healing al aches, the most griefs and diseases of the body:
and in the healing also of wounds and sores, not inferior to the artificial
Baulme: this of most men named the true Oil of Peter.

39. In the Country of Burgony, there is a certain burning Lake: in which if
a flaming or burning fyrebrande be quenched, the same immediately goes out, or
is quenched, through the moisture consisting in it: and a fyrebrand ready
quenched, dipped in this, does immediately kindle and burn, through the fiery
Brimstonie heat, consisting also in it, which is found hot, and dry, in the
fourth degree.

40. There be certain waters known at this day, which have the taste of Wine:
in that they run by some sweet juice in the earth. As by a like in
Paphlagonia, is reported to be a Well of a wynie taste: which causes the
persons drinking of the water, to become soon after drunk. The cause of which
drunkenness is, that the same contains much of the spirits, of the
Brimstonie passages, which on such wise fill the brain of the creatures with
sumes* And a like to this is reported, that the ryue^ Lincestius, to have
waters coming to it of such a property, that they make persons drunk, even
like Wine.

41. In the Country of Boemia, is a Well of sharp taste, near that City
which they name Bilen, the water of which (the inhabiters thereabout) use in
the morning, in the steed of burning Wine, or Aqua vitae.

42. Aristotle also writes, that in the Country of Sicilia, to be a soower
Well, which the poor people use, in the steed of Vinigar: as others witness,
of the same.

43. In Scythia also some report, that there to be a bitter Well, the water of
which running into the river, not far distaunte, causes it to taste bitter.

44. Certain Wells and rivers there be, exceeding hot, especially those
which issue and run out, by Brimstonie veins of the earth, and other hot
places: the waters of which, are much pierceing and drying, by reason of the
property: through which these profit, unto the drying up of corrupt and
rotten humors, in diseased bodies. And such hot or bathwaters, are at
certain times drunk: that they may supply euacuations and clensings of the
body, and reduce it unto a suit temperatnesse.

Of certain fyerie impressions, and first of the same, named of most men, the
foolish fire.
THe light going before, and following after men in the air, especially in the
night, do later writers report to be the foolish fire, in that the same often
appears to sailors, and men traueyling by land, as either going before, or
following them, and makes a man a fool, by seducing him. This light also is
named Helena, when it (as one Candle) is seen or appears alone: which besides
is reported to be the fyrebrand and pestilence of Sailors: For as Helena
brought destruction on Asia and Greece, even so has it been observed, that
when this light has been seen alone, to have caused great danger to sailors.
Yet such fyres oftentimes, are but fantastical sightes, and mere illusions of
spirits, as the Author proves, by sundry reasons.

The double light or fire, appearing like two burning Candels, named Castor and
Pollux: did the ancient persuade and believe, that these promised good luck
and a happy journey to the Sailors, when they appeered together. And these
appear after the kind of a fire, cleaving to the top of the Maste, or on the
ends of the Cross yard. And the people in ancient time thought and accounted
these for Gods, if two of them together, or one alone were seen, of which
like, mention is made in the last Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. The
foolish fire, or burning Candell, is an exhalation elevated unto the lowest
region of the air, and by the heat there kindled, which whilst it after
seeks to ascend upward, it is in the mean time depressed, through the cold
of the middle region, and appears as it were skipping or dancing, seeking
then to fall to lower places: so that of this, it appears following on waters.
In great tempests also, this either cleaves to the Sails, or goes before,
or follows the ship.

And this is not named the foolish fire, of the burning only, but for the
longer continuing, going before, and following any person in the air. For those
two Candels or lights, are often times seen to go before, or to follow men,
walking or ryding, especially in the night, and such trauayling on the Sea, not
without some terror or fear.

The foolish fire is engendered of a vapor conglutinated or compact together
in his parts, which then are kindled: so that not of the cloud meeting it,
but of ye vehement beating or smyting together of the parts in themselves. And
these two Castor and Pollux be engendered in the lowest region of the air, of a
fatter fume, unctuous and inflammable: which through the coldness of the night
air, is so driven together and thickened. The place where the foolish fire,
does appear: is known to be oftener (by the report of writers) in hot places,
and Countries. Yet some agree that this light, is oftener seen in moist places,
and regions. In that out of Marishe, and fumous places, or out of a clammy
ground, the thick and fat exhalation is elevated, being soon kindled: and
according to the proportion of the heat, does it ascend either more or less.

Or thus, out of a clammye earth, as in Churchyardes, Kitchines and low
valleys, the thick and fat substance is elevated, which may soon be
kindled: and according to the proportion of the heat, does this either more or
less ascend.

The substance is kindled, through the concourse of two contrary qualities,
which contend in themselves: for the vapor is hot, and the night air cold.

The reason why this light or fire, does often beguile men, is for that men
suppose the same to go before them ryding, or walking on foot: and that it
appears but a Mile or two distaunte from the walkers on foot: which when the
walkers seeing, the nighnesse of the light or fire, and directing their journey
toward it, not regarding their proper way, do many times, by going out of
their way, fall into dytches, waters, or deep pittes, to their great hazard of
life: do persuade and affirm themselves, to be seduced and led out of their
way, by the wily craft and subtlety of the Devil.

The reason also why this light, does both follow, and fly from men, is through
the motion of the air, which by the walking or running is forced. So that the
faster the man runs toward it, so much the faster both ye same impression
fly from him: but if he runs from it, then does it follow him: in that the
air moved, does force the same substance. An Hystoricall example of this
Meteoru^, may a man read in Plutarchus, which he affirms in the life of
Lysander.

The cause of Castor and Pollux, and where these engendered.
THese two Castor and Pollux, appeers like a double fire, in form of two
burning Candels, caused of the exhalation, or fatter vapor and unctuous,
raised unto the lowest region of the air in the night, which contending with
the night cold, is so kindled, that cleaves sometimes to the cross yardes of
shippe^s, and continuing so long burning, through the thickness and fatness
of it, until the substance shall be spent. And by a peculiar and vain
superstition, the people in ancient time, supposed and ascribed Castor and
Pollux, to be the brethren of Helena: in that when the Sailors and Maryners had
observed these sitting on both the cross yardes, they supposed and hoped that
a more happy course and fortunate success of the ship to ensue, through the
help (as they thought) of the two brethren, which they believed to deliver them
from peril, and hazard of perishing, and for the same accounted them among the
number of the Gods. So that these two appearing together, were evermore
foreshewers of a safe and prosperous course of the ship: in that by the coming
of them, they supposed that other threatening impression appeering alone (named
Helena) to be driven away. And for the same, they assigned that power to
Castor and Pollux: and named them, the Gods of the Sea.

For that impression appeering alone, is known to threaten evermore danger:
in that the exhalation as yet compact, can not immediately be scattered and
spent, whereof through the long tariance in sight, and thick substance of
burning, is the great hazard of perishing at hand.

But the two lights or candels appeering, do contrariwise signify, in that
these declare that the thick substance to be in a manner spent, and the
tempest which began to arise broken and quyeted, or brought caulme. So that
after the appeeraunce of them, no danger at all remains, but a quiet or
caulme Sea rather to ensue.

To conclude, the solitary lights do note matter to abound in the air, of
which the tempests are engendered. For when ye thick substance of the
exhalations, and cause of the vntemperatnesse is in a manner spent, then
caulmnesse of the Sea insueth. But where the exhalation is overmuch compact,
which immediately is not scattered, through the long continuance, and the gross
substance of burning, there does it declare a perilous tempest. Whereof Seneca
writes that when in a great tempest, Stars or lights appeared, as they were
cleaving to the Sail, the Maryners in ieopardie, thought and affirmed
themselves then to be helped, by the power of Castor and Pollux. But the cause
of a better hope is, it appears even then that the tempest to be broken, and
the winds to cease.

Of the flying Dragon in the air, what the same is.
THe flying Dragon, is when a fume kinled appears bended, and is in the
middle wrythed like the belly of a Dragon: but in the fore part for the
narrowness, it represents the figure of the neck, from whence the sparks
are breathed or forced forth with the same breathing.

Or thus, the vapor on such wise kindled expelled from a cold cloud, is in
the middle bended like the belly of a Dragon, but in the forepart, is the vapor
stretched narrow, and represents the figure of the neck, and from it do
sparks as it were by brething issue forth.

The flying Dragon is engendered of a vapor, not vehemently hot, drawn up,
mightily coagulated, and pressed together, and placed between a cold and hot
cloud: Or thus, this great impression of the air, is wrought and caused
beneath the middle region, when the exhalation drawn up, unequal, not
vehemently hot, and stronglye coniealed, the two contrary clouds place
between: the one a cold cloud expelling the vapor, as contrary to it, from
whence the belly of the Dragon begins, the other a hot cloud receiving it,
and through the smalenesse, this expresses the form of the neck, and the
uttermost or furthest part, nere the cold cloud, appears as a tail drawn
narrow together. For the property of cold, is to gather or bind hard and
narrow together. To conclude, the two clouds do here concur, as the hot
and cold cloud. For that cause, the exhalation placed in the middle, inclyneth
it self unto the hot cloud for the plenty of fire, and does in the middle
concur, and is there bended. For the beginning and end, are near matched or
joined to the cold cloud. So that it seems in ye beginning to breath smoke
forth, through the nighnesse of the moist cloud. The first part seems the
grosser or bigger, in that the same is new kindled, but the furthest part or
end appears the straighter or smaller, in that the same is nighe to the
quenching out, through which is this bended.

And the reason why, at the vanishing of the Dragon, a smoke is scattered
abroad: is for that the hot and burning cloud, contrary to the cold,
procures a smoke, as the like appears in green wood burning: or for that
the matter scattered, through the cold cloud smoketh. Of the Dragon invented
of the wicked, which they use in diverse manners, to purchase them unlawful
gain: Physic of the same, does here utter no reason, as that the same is
prepared and made of a vapor and exhalation. For well known it is, yt their
Dragon to be wrought by the policy of Devils, and enchantments of the wicked,
as sundry examples lamentable, do make manifest at this day. As the like, in
the year. 1532. in many Countries, were Dragons crowned, seen flying by
flocks or companies in the air, having Swines snowtes: and sometimes were
there seen, four hundred flying together in a company.

Of the fire cleaving and hanging on the parts of men, and beasts.
THis impression for troth is prodigious without any Physic cause expressing
the same, when as the flame or fire compasses about any persons head. And
this strange wonder and sight, does signify the royal assaults of mighty
Monarchies, and kings, the gouernmentes of the Emperie, and other matters
worthy memory, of which the Physic causes, sufficient can not be
demonstrated. Seeing then, such fyers or lights are, as they were counterfets
or figures of matters to come: it sufficiently appears, that those not
rashely to appear or show, but by Gods holy will and pleasure sent, that they
may signify some rare matter to men.

This light does Virgill write of in the second book of Aeneados, of
Ascanius: which had a like flame burning without harm, on his head. Also
Liuius in his first book, and Valerius Maxi. report, of Tullius Seruius a
child, who sleeping on bed, such a flame appeared on his head, and burned
round about the head without harm, to the wonder of the beholders: which
sight pronounced after his ripe age, the coming unto royal estate.

What is to be thought of the flame or fire, which cleaves to the hears of
the head, and to the hears of Beasts.
EXperience witnesses, that the fire to cleave many times to the heads and
ears of beasts, and often times also to the heads, and shoulders of men
ryding, and going on Foot. For the exhalations dispearsed by the air, cleave
to the hears of horses, and garments of men: which of the lightness do so
ascend, and by the heat kindled. Also this is often caused when men and other
beasts by a vehement and swift motion wax very hot, that the sweat fattie
and clammye, is sent forth, which kindled yeldeth this form. And the like
manner in all places (as before uttered) as either in moist and clammie places,
and marshes, in Churchyards, Cloisters, Kitchins, under Galosses, valleys, and
other places, where many dead bodies are laid, do such burnings lights
often appear. The reason is, in that these places, the earth continually
breaths forth fat flumes, gross and clammy, which come forth of dead
bodies: and when the fume does thus continually issue forth: then is the same
kindled by the laboring heat or by the smiting together: even as out of two
flint stones smitten together, fire is gotten.

Cardanus in his.14. book, and.69. Chapter of the variety of things
reports, that a certain friend of his, after his coming home, about an
hour past in the night, put of the cloak that he customably ware, from whose
back behind, sprang sparckes scatteringly, and whiles he removed, and laid
the cloak down again, such sparckles lept forth, as before. Who at the sight
of these, was stricken with a double fear: and by good reason, for within
fifteen days after, was he accused of enemies for the detestable practice of
poisoning, and for the same earnestly laid in wayght, to be slain.

To conclude, it appears that such fyres are seen in moist Kitchins,
Sinckes, or Guttours, and where the Orfall of beasts killed are thrown: or in
such places, most commonly are wont to be seen. Such fires cleaving, do
marvelously amase the f^arfull, Yet not all fires which are seen in the
night, are perfect fires: in that many have a kind without a substance and
heat, as those which are the delusions of the Devil, well known to be the
Prince of the world, and flies about in the air.

Of the fearful gaping, and deep opening of the Elements. The definitions.
THis gaping, or large opening of the air is: when heaven, by a sudden light
of the great exhalation kindeled under the Clouds, is as it were opened.

2 The gaping, is when any space of heaven descends, and by a sudden light
of the great exhalation kindeled under the Clouds, as if heaven were opened,
appears (or that heaven parted a sunder without crack or noise gapeth) and
the same part seems to throw or cast forth fire, which shows as it were
the mighty burning of some place, to the great terror and fear of the
beholders: this at the appearaunce, pronounces dry tempests to follow.

3 The gaping, is when fire, as out of heaven parted a sunder, seems to fall,
cast forth through a thick cloud.

4 The gaping or wide opening, is when fire out of heaven parted a sunder,
seems as it were to fall forth of a holow Cave.

A difference between the gaping, and deep opening.
MAny Philosophers do briefly distinguishe them, on this wise: when the
partyng a sunder in heaven is but small, then is the same named a deep
opening. But when the parting in heaven is large, and the deepenesse of the
Clouds great, then is the same named a gaping. So that this Cloud, coming in
the middle between, if it shall be small, then is the same named the opening:
if great, then the same named the large or wide gaping.

What the efficient cause is.
THe efficient cause of this gaping is, the only beams of the Sun, and the
other stars: for it has drawn to the air a light and rare fume, which
through his tenuitie or thinness, or for the heat forcing within the cloud,
or for the agitation of the Cloud near, is it kindled: even as the Gunpowder
made of brimstone and Nyter, that lighlye takes, and forciblie burns.

What the matter, and form is.
THe matter is an exhalation, thin and light: which as it is suddenly
kindled, even so does it suddenly burn. This fume does lightly take fire, and
is scattered.

The formal cause, is that agitation of the fume in the air, which kindles
it. Although this fume may heat, by the own accord: yet heateth it more
when the same flies up unto the upper region of the air, where lightly it is
kindled.

This form is diverse, according to the diversity of the matter and place. For
when the exhalatio^ falls through a thick cloud, the deepenesse in heaven
appears greater, and the greater truly, when the middle parts of the
exhalation are thick, and in the compass about thin. And lesser it appears,
when the thickness of the middle clouds is not so much.

Or thus the form, is an agitation of the exhalation kindeled, which if it
fall through a thick cloud, the deepenesse in heaven appears the greater.
Yea greater, when the middle parts of the exhalation, thick, and in the
compass about shall be thin: Or otherwise by a thick cloud, the color black,
the gaping shall appear purple or bloody. As the like purple color is seen,
when the black shall be mixed with a white cloud: Or as the sun sometimes at
his rising is seen, or the fire in a gross smoke. Otherwise, the cause of the
white color, is the clearenesse of the air, through which the light is seen:
for when through a clear, and not so black a cloud it is fallen, the light
then is named, as a flame shyning: Of these may you read more in Seneca.

What the end, of the gapings be.
PLynie writes, that the Gapings to be foreshewers of mighty perils, not that
as causes go before, but for the same go before, that these evils may invade
and come, that is, happen certain, and for the more part: as be battles,
seditions, and infinite like calamities. And such rare sights of the Gapings,
and others, often are showed to us, yea without Physic causes, that these may
move christian minds to repentance. Yet do many Physically denote at the
appearaunce, dry tempests to ensue: And this is worthy to be noted, that the
Astrologians pronounce battles to arise and come out of the same place, where
this gaping is seen. Certain examples of like effect, happened in our time: as
first in the year. 1529. and in the ninth day of January, between the hour of
nine, and ten of the night, a mighty Gaping was seen through Germany,
reaching from the East into the North, unto ye Summer setting in the West.
After which, in the same year, insued that violent breaking in of the Turks
into Germany.

And the Nystoriographers have noted the same, that in the time of Tiberius
Caesar, a mighty Gaping was seen: after which such a fire fell to the earth,
when Phili^ king of Macedonie brought Greece in subjection.

Virgill does account this large Gaping^ to be among the number of the
fearful, to^kens: in that the death of the valiant Tur^nus, slain by Aeneas,
was by the same foreshewed. The Commentatour upon the second book of Plynie
writes, that an other fearful Gaping was seen in the yer^ 1536. and in the
sixtene day of December between six and seven of the clock in the night,
stretching from the North into the Winter West setting: after which, within a
short time ensued but a small lightning, with thunder: so that little harm,
succeeded at that time. The Author saw a terrible Gaping in the East, in the
year.1565. and in the.26. day of November, after five of the clock in the
morning.

How many Rainebowes may be seen together at one time.
ARistotle, whom Plynie follows, supposes that three Rainebowes can hardlye
be caused, nor more then three at any time, because the one is evermore
darcker than the other, in such manner that the third reflection is caused
the weakest, that it cannot attain or reach unto the Sun. But experience
reproves both Aristotle and Plynie, in that three Rainebowes may well appear
or be seen together: yea more sometimes in this our age have been seen, but
such accounted for woonders, by which God shows to men matters to come, as
may rightly be gessed. And that the same may be, Vitellio also witnesses:
although he may deny any more Rainebowes than two (in speaking Physicallie)
that may be seen, differing in the standing of the colors. That is, although
three Rainebowes shall sometimes appear, yet more differ not in the standing
of the colors, than two, or two only have the extreme colors transposed, in
such manner that the uttermost of the inner Rainebow, and the innermost of the
outwarder Rainebow, is of a red color. And contrariwise, the innermost of the
inner, and the uttermost of the outwarder, is of a purple color, the green
color always possessing his proper place, that is, the middle.

Whereof many Rainebowes proceed.
THey are caused of the refraction or breaking again of the Sun beams, from
the cloud made bright and colored by the first, that is, the inner Rainebow
into the nearer cloud. And the beams conjoined with the beams, from the
Sun into the same place falling, do so imprint or form new colors of the
Rainebow, in the same manner as the colors are caused in the inner Rainebow. So
that this is the cause, why of the outwarder Rainebow, the innermost color is
red, in that the same is nighest to the sight: and for the same cause, that
light is sent or appears to our eye the clearer. The other colors are caused
by a light imprinted or formed in the deeper parts of the Cloud, and so much
the more is it mixed of the shadows, and waterie darkness. For which cause
these do a little decline unto a blackness.

That three Rainbowes may appear at one time.
THe first Rainebow is caused, through the refraction of the sun beams, and
^his is brightest of all the others.

2 The second Rainebow, is the image ^nely of the first, for which cause also
it is ^he weaker: in that the same is caused tho^ow the refraction of the
beams of the first Rainebow. So that the colors of this Rainebow appear in
the opposite, or order ^^ght against, unto the colors of the first ^ainebow.

3 The third Rainebow is the figure and ^mage of the second, and this can
scarcely be seen, in that the same is caused through the refraction of the
second Rainebow. So that the colors of this Rainebow do appear in the
opposite order unto the colors of the second Rainebow, and in the like order
by which the colors of the first Rainebow are seen, for the above said
reason.

Thus in brevity, three Rainebowes may appear at one time, in that the cloud
may be so thick, that the reflection of beams may the larger stretch forth it
self.

In what time of the year, Rainebow (...) for the more part are caused.
PLynie reports in his second book, an^ 59. Chapter, that in the Summer on
the South part they are not seen, after the Equinoctial harvest, at any
hour. I^ the harvest and Winter, are they especiall^ engendered under the East
and West part^ through the abounding or mighty substanc^ of the rain, which
the Sun from ou^ highest noonesteede descending, occupyin^ then the Sowtherly
half of the Zodiak^ runs lower, whereby it cannot consu^^ by the proper
heat. Contrariwise, in the Summer are the seldom seen, when as is of lesser
substance, then that which may be scattered by the heat of the Sun, and the
Sun also at that time ascends unto the highest over our heads: for which
cause the Rainebowe in the Southquarter cannot be seen, as above uttered.

Are not the Rainebowes caused through the beams of the other stars.
OF the Moon we have said, that through her beams, especially of the full, a
Rainebow may be caused. And even like in our remembrance or time, as in the
year of Christ.1523. a night Rainebowe was seen. After which incontinent
followed a conspiracy of the rusticall sort in Alsatia against the Magistrates.
In the year following, a commotion of the rusticall sort, in the Dukedom of the
noble Prince of Wirterbergensis: An other night Rainbow was seen in the
year.1524. (in which year) followed sone after, a most raging and ^ruell
sedition, which grievously afflicted and spoiled many parts of Germany: And
in the year.37. about the ninth hour, ^n Paulme Sunday at night, being the
^ext day before the full of the Moon, a like night Rainebowe was observed and
seen of many. That the Rainebowes are not engendered, through the beams of
the other stars: may apeare, in that such a distance there is of the stars
from the earth, that no impression of light can be brought to this dewie
vapor. Or thus, their beams through the greatest or furthest distaunce be
weaker, then that they may imprint his light with the small bodies of the
dewie vapor.

Here note, that by the beams of the Moon, especially at the full, a
Rainebow^ may and is wont to be caused, having like colors in a manner (as the
Suns) sauin^ that the night Rainebow draws neere^ unto a whiteness, as
with intensed colours^ because the darkness of the night increa^seth the
darkness of the cloud, through which the increased light appears the
wh^^ter, even as a fire or light that is furthe^ seen in the night time, than
in the da^ So that of this Moons Rainebow, is o^ only color, as the white,
not unlike (...) milk, when as the cloud of the nig^^ cold may be joined
together, heaped a^ thickened more, than that the Moons lig^^ can pierce: for
which cause, a whytenesse appears on the highest playnnesse of the same.

Of the winds.
THe wind is an exhalation hot and dry, moved thwartly or laterally about the
earth, which for the gravity of the exhalation can not be carried upwarde, it
therefore falls downewarde, and is ouerthwartly carried. Or the wind is an
agitation of a dry vapor, drawn up into the air, by the virtue of the Sun
beams. Or the wind is a thwart agitation of the air, through a hot and dry
exhalation, which drawn up by the virtue of the stars, is sent back and
downewarde, through the cold of the middle region, ordained by nature, that
through the same motion the air may be driven, and clean or pure purged ^n
the breathing: the corn also by it rype^ed, and the Art besides of sailing
exer^ised amongst men. The matter or sub^taunce of the winds, is a hot and
dry ex^alation, gross and earthly, forced downe^arde through the coldness of
the middle ^egion of the air, whose note is, in that the wind dries.

Certain properties of the winds.
THe cause why any beast, at the South wind blowing, lesser hungereth: is for
that the heat then opens the powers of the skin, that the inner hot
spirit may breath forth and be dissolved. Whereof digestion and natural
strength is caused the weaker, and by it bodies filled with a superfluous
earthly moisture. And ye cause why the Southwinde, is wont to be vehementer in
the night time, than in the day: is for that the exhalation of this wind is
so hot, that through the coldness of the night, it can not be depressed. So
that by the proper heat drawn up, it ryseth and rages the vehementer. But in
ye day time through the Suns heat thinned, and sometimes spent: whereof with
such a force, as in the night it can not blow. The Harvest and Spring, are the
aptest times of the year for the wyndes, seeing in those parts of the year,
many exhalations are drawn up, which when of the Sun beams they can not be
spent, through his absence, they then give matter to the winds. But in the
Summer and Winter, do the winds lesser blow: For in the Summer time, the
exhalations are burned by the Suns heat, and in the Winter time, the powers
of the earth, are shut so close or hard together, through the intensed cold,
that no matter can breath forth. And this worthy to be noted and marueyled at,
that at the blowing of the North wind, Wells and deep pittes of water, send
up more fumes, then at the blowing of the South wind. The cause why the
Northerly winds and Southerly do oftener blow, but the Easterly and Westerly
sildomer: is for that the exhalations drawn up by the Sun, and flying the
heat of the Sun, fall unto the sides. Or otherwise, that in these places
they find a space, and are not consumed or spent by the heat of the Sun,
which is caused in the East and Weast, which places the Sun occupyeth twice
in the day, and consumes there the vapors. After when the Sun departs
into the Northerly signs, he is then higher, than that he can let or hinder
the ascending of the exhalations. But when he departs into the Southerly
signs, through his neerenesse unto the earth, the beams then stretch thwarte,
and through this thwartnesse, they be so weak, that they can not waste or
spend the exhalations. The cause why the winds at the beginning arise softer,
and blow weaker, is for that (as we have before taught) of the causes of the
thwarte course of the winds. Aristotle utters the cause, of the circulare
motion of the air. For the air together with the swift motion of heaven, is
drawn about. So that it is manifest, that all things to be moved together,
which be in it. Seeing the exhalation is hot and dry, and through his
lightness drawn upward, and by the cold of the middle region (so letting)
depressed, it can not of this, discende down right. For this through his
lightness, always ascends. And carried by a thwart manner, that it can not of
the same, descend down right. For which cause, it must needs ensue, that the
winds are carried by a thwart course. The cause of the vehemency of the winds,
is that the breath or wind forced, through the fortitude of the cold, sends
forth the exhalation. For how mightier the same depresseth the exhalation
ascending, so much the stronger does the same move forewarde the air. The
winds also are caused the vehementer, through the multitude of the exhalation
ascending, which with the same descending, is matched or joined. For on such
wise, the strengthes are increased: and of the same, it must needs force the
air the mightier. The cause why in the great heat, and extreme cold, little
wind blows: is for that in the same Sea soon the exhalation (the food of
the winds) is then spent by the Sun: but in this the earth shut with the
cold, can not then breath forth fumes. Or playner to write, the intensed or
mighty heat of the Summer, burns and wastes the vapor or exhalation
drawn up, before it may give or yield, matter for the winds. And in the time
of the cold winter, through the contrary cause: the winds less blow. For the
extreme cold of the winter, shuts the poores of the earth, that nothing
can then breath forth: the cause that winds cease after showers of rain, is
for that before the rain, the powers of the earth are opened, out of which,
the matter of the winds issues, which of the rain, especially of the more
aboundaunt showers, are then shut together and stopped, that nothing may more
breath forth, whereof the wind must needs cease. The cause that after the
blowing of the North wind, the other winds cease: is for that the same wind
is cold and dry, which then shuts the powers of the earth, and lets the
breathing forth, except in the spring time. For in the same time, through the
order of nature, and the Sun coming then unto us, the earth opening it
self, subdueth the matter for the more part, with the Northerly winds. And why
the winds be oftener cold, is for that the winds, although they be engendered
and proceed of a hot and dry vapor: yet do they breath cold. The same
happens or is caused through the far motion of the air, by cold places:
even as by the mouth, the wind or hot breath, far of moved or extended,
cools. Why the West wind blowing, the Dogs then evil hunt: is for that it
especially confounds the air, and of all the winds it is the most
contynuall or longest lasting, and touches especially the earth.

Certain observations of the winds.
MOst marvelous is the highest God, which alone made all things, both in
heaven and earth, and in the use of the winds, he would in many manners that the
testimonies of his providence to be known to us. For when the earth needs
watering, it only not uses and needs rain; but the winds to help: so
that the wind arises, by which the clouds are gathered, that showers may
shed, and be sprinkled on the earth, and the earth sufficiently fed. Further
that the strengths of the earth quayle not through the raynie superfluousnesse,
it needs with the drying, the Sun beams, and wyndes agreeable, which
takes up the unprofitable moisture, that the same may be dried up, and that
like a sponge (the earth) may soke, drink in, and digest the rain.

2. It much avails the Physician to consider and foreknowe the approaching
tempests and winds, the natures and workings of them, agreeable unto each
places, that he may hereof foresee the sicknesses or disseases publicly
kylling in haste, how by Art he may either let and remove them, or if he can
not stay them by his skill, then may he ^eeke an apt way and order for the
curing of such sicknesses. Of which matter, may you read a like instruction,
uttered of Hypocrates, in the time of the pestilence.

3. A redness about the Sun and Moon, is a note of winds to ensue.

4. Where in the Summer time, lightnings and thunder happen, there a strong
wind shortly after blows.

5. In the Harvest and Winter, lightnings do cease winds: and how mightier the
lightnings and thunder are, so much the more do they cease the winds.

6. Any dreaming of birds, the next day wind to follow, as some report.

7. In the Winter, winds about the the morning blow^ but in the Summer, about
the Evening. In the winter, from the East part, but in the Summer, from the
West.

8. Those temporal North winds in the Summer, when they shall blow a long time
together, and the Harvest is windy, do declare a caulme Winter to ensue.

9. If the Harvest be caulme, the Winter following shall be windy.

10. The South wind blows, when Virgiliae arise, that is in the Month of
May.

11. The North wind blows, at the rising of Orion, which is, the day
following, after the Dog star risen.

12. The South west wind blows in the Month of February, when that named
Fidicula, begins to set, and it is confirmed by the rising of Cinguli
Orionis: for after this the earth opens, and begins to send up plants.

13. When the Moon is joined to Jupiter, as the Astrologians affirm, new
winds are caused: Even so the Moon running in Cancer, procures winds. When
the Moon comes unto Jupiter in Cancer, you shall see winds to arise without
doubt.

14. The Sun in Capricorno, the Moon in either Scorpio, Capricorno, Tauro or
Virgin, do cause most cold winds. The same does the Sun move in Aquarius,
when Saturn shall be right against, and that the Moon beholds either of
these. Saturn also retrograde in an earthly sign, seaseth winds. The self
same, causes Mars.

15. Winds are wont to blow for the more part, at the morning and evening:
But at noone, for the greater heat of the Sun, the winds then cease. And
like at midnight are extinguished, through the extreme coldness.

16. When the winds begin from the morning to blow, then do the winds longer
continue.

17. The South wind not beginning, but leaving or ceasing, brings a shower.
For when out of a hot place the wind blows, the self same air at the
wind beginning, is yet hot.

18. One and the self same wind may cause contrary effects, as both chief
and weak, and by it self one, and an other by accidence. Even the like, the
East wind from the beginning is dry, but the ending of it is waterie. The
North wind by it self cools: yet by accidence, may it heat*

19. All mighty winds cool and dry, and procure or cause fair weather: but
the weak winds heat and moystine, and engender rain.

20. The longer contynuing and stronger winds are caused, which begin from the
day, than those which begin in the night.

21. When the North wind blowing, moves many clouds, signifies a drought to
follow, or great heat.

22. The Easterly winds be dry, through the combustion of ye vapors wrought
by the sun: for which cause, they produce and cause a drougth.

23. The Westerly winds do moystine, through the gross vapors, left behind
of the Sun in the night time.

24. Rain hastily coming, is foreknowne by a great cloud, arysing from that
part of the world, from which the winds arise or come. And how much the
thicker and greater the cloud shall be, so much the sooner and certayner shall
it give the testimony of a boisterous rain soon after to follow.

25. The South wind when it blows fiercely or sturdilye, and the North wind
after begins to blow, is a note of a most great tempest, especially on the
Sea.

26. Lightnings with a Northerly wind, do signify rain to follow.

27. Thunder with an Easterly or Westerly wind, declare rain, or a mighty
tempest to follow.

28. A Northerly year (after the mind of the ancient obseruers) is far
better then a Southerly.

29. It is good and profitable, to take a purgation, at the blowing of the
South, and East wind. For then are the members soluble and lose, and give
place to medicine: but the North wind blowing, does then mightily stop, and
let the working of a purgation.

30. The ancient in times past, have observed the first night of January,
which i^ the same were clear without rain, and caulme without wind, promised
a fruitful and prosperous year to follow. If with an Easterly wind, then was
the year to come, dangerous to cattle. If with a Westerly wind, then was the
year following deadly to kings. If with a Southerlye wind, the people dyed that
year following. If with a Northerly wind, the year to come was known
barraine, with the scarcity of victuals.

Of the impressions, named Parelia, and Paraeselinae. The definitions.
PArelius is a thick impression in a cloud, caused at the one side of the
Sun, through the refraction of the Sun beams, which then represents the
suns image.

2. Parelius is a dewie clowdie, thick, whole, placed unto the one side of the
sun, and representing his similitude and figure. For the cloud nere to the
Sun, and turned into water, in which the Sun by the broken beam for the
dew thickness, and his wholenesse, frames then a similitude, even the like
in a clear air, as the same in a polished Glass: which image thus appearing
at the one side, named Parelius.

3. Parelius is an image and figure of the Sun, expressed in a dewie cloud
and bright, when the subtle moisture between our sight and the Sun
concurreth, into one body of a round equal cloud, and the like fashyoned,
standing right before the sun, from which the sun beams are broken open, as
from a Glass unto the eye: So that these then frame and cause a like figure to
the sun.

4. Parelius is an image of the sun, placed by the side in an equal cloud,
either of the East or West, which is ye cause, why many suns sometimes are
seen: which truly are caused when a thicker cloud shall be drawn unto ye one
side of the sun, in which the Sun beams broken open, do leave the kind
and form of a true light. So that the first figure is, a representation of the
perfect and true sun. But the second and third is, through the breaking
open of the sun beams, placed in ye cloud on the one side.

5. Parelius is (as affirmed Seneca) a round cloud and bright, and like to
the sun.

6. Parelia are named to be those, when many Suns are seen to shine in the
clouds, under ye East or West: and Parelius is then caused, when a cloud of y^
one side of the Sun, shall be placed either of the East, or West, especially
equal, and a like thick, which as a Glass receaueth and expresses the image
or figure of the sun. For we see both in the water, and in a thicker air,
and in other bodies, which consist with a light upper face, and equal, that
the matters placed by a just proportion, to be expressed unto them, as in a
Glass.

7. Paraselinae be images of the Moon, caused by ye refractio^ of the Moons
beams, in a moist cloud near to a light, and equally thick, in which the
body of the first or true Moon, is the like seen, as any other body ^n a
Glass.

8. Paraselinai are named many Moons, ^f which only one is true, the others
be ^ut figures and images of the Moon, cau^ed by the refraction of the Moons
beams ^n the cloud. For these reflections are one^y caused of the effectuous
beam, like as is (...) the Sun or Moon.

The efficient cause is the celestial virtue, and starrie property, that is,
the Suns and Moons beams, drawing up and pre^aring a matter, unto such a
figure, that re^^esented the form and image of the sun and Moon. The
material cause is a thick ^owde, equal and regulare, which is pla^^d by a
thwarte manner of the sun, so that ^yther above, nor beneath him, nor right
before him it stands, but placed at the one side. And this matter thick and
waterie, that the refraction may be caused the better, and this regulare also,
that it may the more give and show an uniform image of the sun. And
waterie, that the Sun may the commodiouser be represented, even as the like
is caused in water. So that ye cloud prudently is placed on the one side, and
not under the Sun, nor right against: for if right against, then would the
same be a Rainebow: if under the sun, then would Halo be caused. And this for
the more part is caused, in the East or West, through the disposition of the
cloud.

The formal cause, is the refraction of the sun beams in the cloud, being
at the one side, which altogyther as a Glass receives the suns beam, and
the color which then is in the sun, it causes even the like to appear, as
when of a light air, through his thickness, the sight is broken. For the
beams falling unto ye same cloud thus fashioned, and of the same broken unto
the sight, especially in that cloud not being over thick, thin or black,
do express the image of the sun.

To conclude, when a dewie cloud, or vapourous, is in any part pierced, then
are the Sun beams gathered in that hole, and by the refraction shed unto the
sight: so that such a brightness appears, as if the sun it self where
seen. For this Parelius is, as the image of the sun, appearing in a great
looking Glass. And hereof it is, that many suns sometimes are said to
appear together, as two or three. So that the first is the figure of the sun
it self; the second and third consists through the breaking of the sun
beams, in the cloud placed on the one side: by which, three suns or more,
are oftentimes seen. As the like by experience was observed, that the king of
Polelande saw together six suns, after which followed, that Fraunces the
French king was taken prisoner for the time.

The similitude.
AS the dry exhalation, and that vehemently hot, in pierting the upper region
of the kindled star, does represent a ^orme and sphericall figure, through
the farlesse: even so a strong and mighty vapor flying into the highest of
the middle air, gives the form of the sun, and causes a circle to appear.

The end and effect of these.
THe final cause Physic, or the material effect of Pareliorum, is the
foreshewing, signifying, and pronouncing of rain to come, abounding of a moist
matter. For they signify that the air to contain much matter or substance
of showers, especially if Parelia shall be placed in the South region of
heaven. For the greatest clouds hereof wax ouercharged, in that the South air
is better and sooner changed into water, than the North air.

But to the Divines or Theologically, these many times por^ende and foreshewe
fearful and strange matters, so that they be often in doubt, what will
follow, except any by hap would make a conjecture of them. For as all
celestial impressions in a manner, have a certain hid or secret signification
in nature, which is not material even so do Parelij always portende some
singular will and effect divine, to be looked for: so that many suns are
sildome seen but that either conspiracies be attempted, or the alteration of
kingdoms, or some new matters labored about the subversion, and dispos^ng in
religion.

To conclude, the cause of these is so secret and divine, that the great
conspiracies of Monarchies, the dissentions of Kings and Princes, and the
fearful vprores and commotions of other Empyries, civil battles, and other
lamentable matters to men, are wreshewed by such impressions.

Certain examples of these.
IN the year of our Lord. 1157. in the Month of September, were three suns
together seen, the sky then being very clear, and within a few days after
of the same month, three Moons were seen, and in that moon also possessing
ye middle place, a white cross was seen. After which a great discord followed
among the Cardynals, in the election of their high Bishop, and a like
controversy among the Princes electours, in the election of the Emperor of
Rome.

In the reign of Henry the second king of England, and in the Calends of
October, for three hours almost, were seen three circles about the Sun,
after which, vanished away, two suns seemed to appear. After this sight
insued a discord, between the king and the Archbishop of Caunterburie. And
Frederick Emperor besseged Mylayne, for seven years almost, and in the end
sacked and spoiled the City lamentably.

In the year. 1169. three suns were seen in the West, in the Nonis of
September, and after two hours, two of them vanished, the same which possessed
the middle, did set alone in the Weste, and in the like manner, ye next year
following, three Moons appeared.

In the year. 1314. before the civil battle of Lewys of Bauare, and Frederick
of Austrige, which contended and fought for the Empyrie, three ^unnes were
seen in heaven, and a discention also of the electours* and other attempts
followed.

In the year of our Lord. 1469. at Rome were three suns seen, after which an
uproar of the Citizens followed. And the sam^ year a battle fought in Italy,
Frannce^ Duke of Mylayne dyed, and for the segni^ritie many contended by great
conspiracies.

In the year. 1492. after the middle of December, in Polelande were three
suns seen at noone: after which Vladislaus king of Hungary, overcame
Maximilian: and Casimirus king of Polelande, left his life or dyed this year:
before whose death a Comete went, which appeered for two Months together after
the sun setting.

In the year. 1514. in the tenth day of Ianuarye, and seauenteene of March,
three suns were seen in heaven, of which the middle was greatest, and in the
eleventh of January and seventeenth of March, three Moons were like seen: in
the same year the Sweueland men stirred an uproar, against the Duke of
Wirtenbergensis, which much vexed him. And above. 40. thousand Moscouites,
were slain of the Polanes, by the river Boristhenes.

In the year of our Lord. 1523. at Tigurie in Helueria, in the sixth Nonas of
May, three suns were seen together, and sundry circles seen together in
heaven: after which in the same year, followed a reformation of Churches, with
the casting forth of Idols, instituted and stablyshed at Tigurie. In Holland
the same year, a great commotion attempted.

In the year. 1525. before the death of Jews king of Hungary, in Hungary
were seen three suns, which without doubt signified, y^ three kings should
contend for the Emperie, as Ferdinandus, Duke John of Saxony, and the great
Lurk.

In the year. 1527. in Sweueland, three suns, and sundry celestial circles
were seen.

In the year. 1528. and in the seauenteene day of June, at Tigurie many suns
were seen, and about them three circles: in the next year following, a cruel
battle fought within the Country of Heluetia.

In the year. 1532. and in the eleventh day of April, in the second hour of
the day, three perfect suns and bright, with two Rainebowes, were seen to
many.

In the year of our Lord. 1551. about the Calends of April, in the famous
University of Witebergensis, three Suns with sundry celestial circles were
seen. And in the same year, in the. 28. day of February three suns with
diverse circles were seen^ at Antwarpe.

In the year of our Lord. 1553. on the Saturday before Palm Sunday, in the
morning between seven and eight, three suns appeared, of which the middle
shyned the brighter, and the other two of either side, red and bloody. These
being set, and in the night time, three Moons were seen.

In the year. 1554. in Bauaria, and in the borders of the same Country, in
the Month of March, sundry manner Suns were seen, with certain celestial
circles. At Ingolstadie in Germany, in the sixth day of March, two Suns with a
Rainebow, between eight and nine in the forenoone. At Norenberge, in the 23.
day of March, about one at after noone, both Suns and Arckes appeared
together included with christalline circles, for three hours together, with a
beam into a just length extensed.

In the year. 1555. the tenth day of February, three Suns were seen, in the
year 1556. in the third Caldends of August, nere Basil, the firmament being
clear, three Suns were seen together. In the same year, in the sixth day
of December, the singular learned of the University of Witebergensis, observed
three suns in the Firmament.

In the year. 1567. on saint Steuens day, in the tenth hour before noone at
Francoforde were three suns very bright seen, for an hour and a half: of
which the one toward the East, the other toward the West placed, and a
celestial Bow in the top of heaven, that turned again the back to the three
suns. And in the same year were seen again three suns, in the fourth
day of May, about the seventh hour at evening.

Of thunder, what the ^ame is.
THunder is a fearful noise in a thick cloud, which is forced by an
exhalation hot and dry, included within a cloud, which with a rumbling
seeking issue forth, brasteth out b^ great violence, and on each side beats
and shakes the cloud. Plynie reports, that it is a noise caused through the
quarter of the compact fire breaking out of the cloud. Or it may thus be
defined, that the thunder is a noise caused in the clouds, through the dryuing
and smyting of the exhalation unto the sides of the cloud. Albertus writes,
that it is the crack and noise of a dry vapor, issuing forth of a moist
cloud. Seneca in his second book, of natural questions, thus defines
thunder: it is a spirit or breath (says he) running in the clouds that
causes the thunder: and after it has contended with the resistant matter
brasteth out, which in that running away kindles the fire. And the variety of
the noyses or rumbling of the thunder: is caused of the same: that the clouds
be unequal, and that they have as it were certain hollow places, and are no
where whole together.

The kinds of thunder.
THe thunder is, after two manner or ways: For the thunder is either vehement
or great: or else weak or small.

The thunder weak or small, is when an exhalation runs forth in the clowde^
and is driven from side to side without rupture and breaking of the cloud. And
this is, after three ways, as crashing, whistling, and blowing.

1. The same crashing, or making a noise like to the rubbing of a coarde, is
caused through the smyting of clouds, which even then are changed into water:
and it is like to the noise, which is heard, in the quenching of a hot burning
iron in cold water.

2. The same whistling is, when the exhalation is not yet kindled, nor forted
forth, and that the clouds in thickness are not a like equal: so that in
diverse parts of them, especially in the thinner, does the exhalation brast
forth. Of which, this whisteling thunder is the like noise, as is of the winds
blowing stronglye through narrow holes: where the vapor not yet forced
forward by diverse parts of the cloud, breaks in the end through the
thinner.

3. The blowing thunder is, when the cloud is so weak, that it can not keep
the exhalation kindled. So that before the vapor is kindled, the same issues
forth without any vehement noise, even like the noise that the Smithes
Bellows cause or make.

The vehement or great thunder is, when the exhalation strongly and vehemently
cutteth or breaks the cloud, through which a fearful noise is caused, even
like to the tearing of a broad cloth. And this is, four manner of ways: as
either it is rumbling, either breaking or tearing a sunder, either violent, or
cracking.

1. The same rumbling or making a hydeous noise is, when the vapor or
exhalation shakes the cloud with a certain rumbling, but medleth not
together. The thunder also is a sounding which makes a noise* like to the
humming of many men talking in a Cloister or such like vaulted place: as when
the vapor does so much smite the sides of the cloud, but not cleaves, and
that flame then appears, as it were through a clothe torn a sunder.

2. The thunder cutting is the same, which first smites it, but after cutteth
out the cloud, which noise immediately shows the thwart lightning brasting
forth. The violent thunder is the same, which by one inforcement cleaves the
cloud.

3. The thunder cracking or shaking is, when the exhalation kindled, deuydeth
the cloud, of which certain parts issue. This kind of thunder makes the
like noise, as the cracking of wet wood, burning in the fire. For it is a
vapor kindled and dry, which in the issuing breaks a sunder the cloud, even
like as air Egg laid on coals that brasteth.

The efficient cause of the thunder, is the sun working with the other hot
stars, as the Astrologians report. For when the Sun, Jupiter, Mars, and
Mercury, are placed in hot signs, and fete places, especially when Jupiter
is joined to Mars, by any condition of beams, are wont to cause thunder, and
to prepare the matter of them.

The matter of the thunder is a compounde vapor, or an exhalation very hot
and dry, conjoined with a moist vapor. This matter is drawn up by the heat
of the sun, unto the middle region of the air, where it changes into a
moist cloud, or is together elevated with a moist vapor, as affirms
Aristotle, by which compa^ed and thrust together, in the end brasteth forth. A
question might here be moved, how it happens, that thunder is sometimes heard
in the air, and no clouds appearing. The answer is, that the same hap^eth,
when the exhalation is beaten back^^ by the middle region of the air, and
kind^^d, for so much it cleaves then the air meeting it, and breaks open
the same, through which it causes a little or low noise of thunder: even like
the noise that are heard sometimes in the air, after the manner of armed
horsemen swift ryding.

What the final cause of the thunder.
THe final causes and effects of the thunder, are well wayed and known in
that the air first by the thunder is purged, and the evil vapors consumed,
yea the pestilence and other contagiousnesse often cleansed and put away.

In the second, for that the thunders do often bring showers with them,
through which the earth plentifully yields.

In the third, the almighty God thundereth in the clouds, to the end that
men may be procured unto a due reverence and fear toward him: and they
abashed, and warned of the divine ire, may heartily repent them, as it is
written in the.104. Psalm: at the voice of the thunder shall the people be
afraid.

In the fourth, that the wicked, obstinate, and impenitent, which even like
Gyaunts wage battle against heaven, may be destroyed either with lightning,
Thunder, Hayle, and such darts of God, as the History mencioneth of the people
in Egypt, unto the Mount Synay.

What the colors of the clouds warn and foreshew in the thunders.
THe cloud in the thunder being white, is little or nothing to be feared. For
it signifies the exhalation to be weak, and the great abundance of vapors.

2 The cloud in the thunder being very black, pressing the vapor strongly
together through his thickness, sends a noise lightly forth very fearful:
especially when the inner fume copious and thicker, can not be broken or
divided a sunder, without a great inforcement.

3. The cloud from black waxing red, or being red, procures a mightier crack
and noise, than the black cloud. For this is very thick, and has or
contains much of the fyrie vapor.

4. The cloud with a blackish redness waxing green, or appearing green, is
the most perilous of all, and very much to be feared, if the same consists
or abides directly over any Citte or house. This cloud for the redness, has
many fyrie vapors: For the blackness, an abundant vapor thickened together:
For the greenenesse, the mighty abundance of water. Of these, a mighty and
fearful rumbling, is to be looked for in the air.

5. The same cloud, often sheddeth and sends down mighty hayle, and
prodigious stories in the lightnings, not without most grievous loss and
destruction, both of men, beasts, Cities, and other matters.

The cause why before, and after the thunder, mighty or stormy winds arise,
is forhat the hotter and drier part of the exhala^^n pressed together of the
cold cloud compassing about, which through his dryness ^iercing the cloud,
and issuing forth, does ^ooue the air, and causes the wind. So that after
the cloud broken, and the vapor driven or sent forth in the air: expe^^ence
teaches, that the winds by a great ^^forcement to be moved or driven
for^arde.

The cause why the very often thunde^^gs, threaten the Pestilence most
grievous, and murrayne to beasts, and the corruption also to crescent things
which we feed upon: is for that the corrupt vapors, gross and clammy, drawn
up with the vapor and exhalation, corrupting the lowest region of the air,
are shed again, and infect the air.

Cardanus writes, that those thundrings be dangerous, which continue about an
hour, and they foreshew to that region in which they happen, battles, and
seditions for the more part, and a most great desolation to come.

The daily experience instructs us, that through the thunder vehemently
rumbling, and the lightning: both Wine, and Beer sellars are greatly harmed.
For ye Wines lose their color, and natural taste, through the fyrie heat, and
virtue pierceing, and burning. The Beer, or Ale, also through the mighty
noise, and violent motion, purchases an egernesse: by which it is caused less
apt to be drunk. And although the Summer heat be the especial cause, that
drinks, and liquors sour or be eager: ye the thunder and lightning, procure a
sudden alteration, yea in the Winter Months, when the heat by little and
little causes the same. The drinks and Wines laid in a deep seller vaulted,
receive lesser harm of the thunder, than those laid a high in a bourded
seller. The Vinters use plates of iron with salt, or with Flintstones, or with
the branches of the Bay or Walnut tree, and put them on the vessels: when the
beer or Ale has lost the natural taste, or waxes sour, you may help each
with Physic and sweet smelling things, and purchase the proper taste of
these, as with the root of the Flower de Luce, the Ginger, the Nutmegge, the
Cloves, the Bay berries, and the dry leaves of the same, the Calamus odoratus,
the Organy, the Beetes. etc. The Wines sowred, and having lost the natural
color, through the mighty noise of the thunder, may be recovered both of the
color and proper taste: if ^o be the Wines shifted into other vessels being
well washed, and this decoction, that is, of the Bay leaves, the Myrtill tree,
the Fennel, the Juniper berries, and Orminium, infused before for a time in
the vessels, and after the drying, the Wines ponred in.

Certain foreknowledges of thunder.
THe prognosticatings of tempests, are not only pleasant to be known, but
right profitable to be learned: as well of husbandmen, as of those traveling
by sea and land. Of which, only certain general of Thunders, shall here
briefly be uttered, that may rightly be applied.

1. The Sun in the morning, or at Evening in the Summer time, and unto these
(the harvest beginning, and the spring quite gone) with an accustomed heat
shyning: seen also in a hollow and big or very thick cloud, threatens
great thunder to follow.

2. The shootings in the night, out of the four quarters of the world (a black
cloud arysing out of the South) wastingly running, do either foreshew thunder
and lightnings to follow, or a mighty coming of winds very tempestious
blowing in that region, and these according to the season of the year.

3. If a boisterous whirle wind, vehemently blowing, happens either in the
Summer, the spring, or harvest, that shall lift or take up strawes, dust, and
other things by a sudden, and the element spread or covered with black clouds:
does portend thunder, and showers of rain to be at hand.

4. If the Summer and hot days, and those which went before them of the
spring, and the harvest days that follow, wax and be hot above the season of
the year: and a Rainebow shows it self at the Weste (in the going down of
the Sun) pronosticateth fearful thunder, and lightnings greatly to be
doubted.

5. The morning thunder, and in the Winter time, does pronounce wind and
showers of rain: but the noone time thunders, especially foreshew great
showers.

6. Thunderings moved and heard in the last hour of the day (as at Evening)
do either demonstrate a mighty tempest of the Sea, or the celestial ire.

7. In the Summer, if it less thundreth, than lightneth, signifies rain to
ensue.

8. The Summer thundrings, happening at noone, and at Evening, is a note of rain
to follow.

9. If mightily thundering, it then rayneth not, yet does it show rain coming
for the more part: and this happens according to the condition of the air, and
season of the year.

10. Plynie affirms, that if it shall thunder, when Hens do sit, that the
Eggs to perish: but this generally, do women (of experience) deny.

11. Hermes, an obseruer of celestial matters writes: that the thunders of
January, to promise mighty winds, and the abundance of corn. The
thundering in February, threatens the death of many, and especially of the
rich. The thundering in the Month of March, portendeth mighty winds,
firtylitie, and populare battles. The thunders of April, promise a good and
joyous year. The thundering in May, thretneth famine and scarcity. The
thunders of June, signify a fruitful yield, and the plenty of victuals. The
thunders of July, promise a plentiful increase of victuals, but the scarcity
of fruits. The thundering in August, portendeth a prosperous estate of the
commonwealth, but many diseases and sicknesses. The thunders of September,
signifies firtilitie, but the death of the Nobility. The thundering in
October, pronounces mighty winds, with the scarcity of fruits and
victuals. The thunders of November, promise the large increase of corn, and
joy to men. The thunders of December, declare the abundance of victuals, and
agreement of the people. The learned Beda writes, that if thunder be first
heard, coming out of the East quarter, the same foresheweth before the year go
about or be ended, the great effusion of blood.

That if thunder first heard out of the West quarter, then mortality, and a
grievous plague to ensue.

That if thunder be first heard out of the South quarter, threatens the death
of many by shipwreck.

That if thunder be first heard out of the North quarter, does then portend the
death of wicked persons, and the overthrow of many.

Other observations of the ancient, that may be used of any that will, without
superstition, as touching the thunder, may a man further read, in my book of
the Myrrour of time.

Of that lightning named Fulgur what the same is, and of the others.
IT is an exhalation kindled through the often agitation, like to towe, by
which the matter seeks issue, which yet to the earth falls not: or the same
is, when the only fire shows: So that the same is caused, when the cloud is
thin, and yields to the breaking forth of the fire without noise. The like
is that named Fulgetrum, saving that it shows weaker, and of lesser light:
although many name the Fulgetrum, to be the often repeatings together of the
fire, which the like are usual in Harvest. That flashing much like a glistring
light, is the same which out of the kindled exhalation aryseth, which by the
sides of the cloud is forced and driven forth. Or it is the sudden appearance
through time, of the subtle vapor and kindled, running along by the air,
which is discerned, before the thunder be heard: and no marueyle, in that the
light is far swifter than the noise, and the sight always goes before the
hearing, as by a like in the cutting of timber: yet after nature, is the light
the later. For the exhalation hot and dry, is carried into the middle region
of the air, and before it higher assendeth, of the vapor together elevated,
and forced into a thick cloud, is the same compassed and included: and when it
can delate it self no more, through the waterie and cold cloud, it then
wandreth about the whole cloud, and seeks issue forth, which when it finds
not, as disdayning breaks then the cloud, through which violent breaking
forth, is that noise caused, which we name the thunder: and together with that
motion, in which it wandered by the cloud, and claue the cloud, is the same
kindled: and when this sparseth the flame as it were abroad in the air, then
is it named Fulgur. The difference between the thunder and broad lightning
is, that the thunder is the self same noise in the air, which the vapor
causes running in the cloud, and seeking issue forth: But the broad
lightning is the self same fyerie brightness, which aryseth of the vapor
issued and kindled. For when it contended through the resistaunce, and brake
forth, that flying away kindled the fire. The flashing lightning properly is
none other, than a brightness of the exhalation kindled, and breaking forth of
the cloud, which shyneth abroad in the air. But that named Fulgetrum, is a
lesser lightning, and darcker flame in the air. So that the same is named
Fulmen or the perillousser lightning, when the whole exhalation kindled is sent
downewarde. But that weaker lightning named Fulgur, is when the brightness
only of that exhalation kindled, shyneth in the air. Thus Seneca reports,
in the first book of natural questions. That the clouds meanly smyting
together, cause the weak lightnings: but the clouds smyting together by a
greater force, cause the violent lightnings. The diversity of colors in the
lightning, proceeds of the diversity of matter, in that one whiles white and
clear, an other whiles yealow and dark, and other whiles red, and fumous or
dark it appears: even as the diverse colors, that are discerned in the
clouds. The white and clear lightning, proceeds of the subtle and thin
vapor: or of a thin exhalation, in a cloud over waterie, whereof it
sustaineth not a vehement heat and burning. Hereof the bodies, which this
touches, does it little or nothing burn, so that more by beam, than by the
fire, does it harm. This sometimes is profitable to fruits, and a little to
the leaves of Trees, if it happens in an apt place, and time. The darcke yealow
lightning, proceeds of a thin and somewhat clammye fume, in which the flame
is shyning, and portendeth a vehement heat and perilous fire, if the same
especially be sent downewarde. The red lightning is caused, through a thick
cloud, and the exhalation well fermented or mixed together, which brasteth
forth with a terrible noise in the swelling air. The grosser vapor of this
hardly kindled, procures a very dangerous flame, which even through the
middle of the rain forces and works his fearful properties. This
lightning many times, sets cities on fire, and burns even into the earth,
water not preuayling or able to resist it (such is the mighty force of this
celestial fire) that so violently and grievously destroys. The fumous and
somewhat black lightning, proceeds of a very earthly and obscure, yet a
matter mightily burning, whose cloud, in that it contains very much of the
viscous moisture, is wont to fabricate or form a black or yronnie stone,
which in ye shot sent forth, burns hastilye mighty bodies of trees, and
sundry other most solid matters, without show or sign left behind: yea,
these and other matters this cleaves, destroys, and utterly wastes. The
lightnings in the night, are playner and more apparent, then in the day time,
through the Suns presence, by whose beams and light above the earth, even
great lightnings are hidden in the air to be seen. Here note, that many
persons are often made blind, or ever after molested with a dimnesse of sight,
which do look but with winking eyes on the lightnings: much more dangerous
thought, to look on it with open eyes. The fishes, and any manner cattle,
smitten with the mightier lightning, is dangerous to eat, in that the flesh
and meat of such are infected with a venomous qualitye, as by trial has been
observed.

Of the fearful and violent lightning.
THis that the Physicians properly name lightning, is a common name, which is
referred and applied unto every exhalation, which burning brasteth forth of the
clouds. So that the lightning is referred unto the same exhalation, which
thickened and gathered round in the middle of the cloud, smyteth or beats
the cloud by a longer space, and through the motion kindled, it at the last
cleaves and breaks through the cloud, and is sent violently to the earth.
For the fire forced of the cloud, is cast to the earth: even as the motion
caused, in the burning of green wood. For that cause is this rightly named
lightning, when the fire sent forth of the clouds, is carried even unto the
earth, and either does it burn, either break, or hurt somewhat on the earth.
The flashing light, and the lightning, do not differ in the substance, but
rather in the form and manner: for the flashing light is a fire lightlier
kindled, which sparsed under the clouds, higher shyneth in the air. But the
lightning is that exhalation, which when the same is sent forth of the cloud,
falls to the earth. The engendring of the lightning, thus appears: that
when the vapor driven or moved in ye cloud is kindled and brasteth out of the
moist cloud, then moystened again and gathered together, as it were into a
certain Mass, which stirred and moved again is so hardened, even as clay
dried and hardened by the heat of fire. This Mass on this wise baked and
hardened, is named the lightning. So that the same is engendered of a thick
vapor, dry and viscouse, which is gathered round together of the cold
vapors, and breaking forth by great force and noise, and discending even to
the earth, cleaves, overthrows, windeth about, scatters into many parts,
yea destroys and consumes by diverse means, bodies there found hard and
solyde, through the motion, light, and blast. How many kinds of lightning
there are, can hardly be uttered, in that the nature of the lightning is so
diverse and marvelous, through which a sufficient reason of the same can
scarcely be given. Yet marvelous are the works of lightnings, if a man well
consider them: and nothing to be doubted at, but that a secret and divine power
consists in them. Also certain it is, that the lightnings not to proceed or
come by hap, nor only caused through the motion of the matter, in that these
sometimes are caused and sent down by the almighty God governing, nor such
can be applied unto natural causes, in that they often foreshew some evil, and
call men to repentance. Yet is their study to be commended, which (after the
possibility of man's nature) have diligently sought out, the causes of these
matters. To be brief, Aristotle, Plynie, Seneca, and others, do make three
differences of lightnings, and these, according to the diversity of the matter
and effect, unto which all the other kinds may be referred and reduced. For the
one kind is cutting a sunder, an other making swartishe, and the third
burning: or there is one astonishing or causing stiff, an other black burning
or fumous, and an other clear or flaming.

1. The lightnings cutting, are those: which do not burn, but do pierce and
part in sunder things resisting, through the quality of the matter, of which
consist, the great drowte and plenty of winds and spirits, which they
violently take with them. For these break and part into small pieces the
object matter, before that it can be burned of the lightning. In that the
vapor is swifter then the lightning. Otherwise is the same named astonishing,
not burning, but pierceing and parting into small pieces. For such is the
pureness and thinness of the flame, that it may pierce through most straight
places, and for the mighty sturdinesse of the matter, may especially part
into pieces. For the spirit or dry vapor is carted forth of the cloud, with
a most swift motion, and thus entered into bodies full of poores and penetrable,
it parts them in pieces. So that this kind of lyghtning, is named the
astonishing lightning, through the cold expelled by heat: for that it
consists of the mightiest virtues, and is of a marvelous nature, and by a
most swifte motion also does the spirit or dry vapor consume all things.
This burns man inward, and consumes the body to ashes, without harming the
garments, it slays the yongling in the womb, without harm to the mother, it
consumes money, the purses remaining whole, it melts the sword the sheath
being whole, it harmeth the hand the glove not perished, and the vessel
broken, it so astonisheth the wine, that for three days after, the wine
sheddeth or runs not forth. For the matter of this lightning, is very
subtle, and lightly pierceing the thing stricken: so that it burns those
matters which resist it, as stones, iron, and such like. Here note an example,
of one Martia an honorable woman of Rome, who being with child, had the
yongling stricken and killed of the lightning in her womb, and she abode
without harm: and if the hystories be true, she escaped after without harm.
Eutropius reports, that a marvelous kind of lightning, happened on the birth
day of Cicero, which was on this wise: a certain Maiden of Rome iourneying
into Apulia, was smitten by the way with the stroke of lightning, all the
garments shifted from her body without cutting a sunder, and both the Tire and
knittings on the breast, legs, and feet consumed, the Bracelets, Kings, and
other ornaments molten, so that she lay naked on the ground, the body not
harmed. And the horse with the same slain, lay bare, having neither bridle,
saddle, nor no furnyture on him. etc.

2. The lightning making swartishe, is the same which burns not, but for the
paucytie and thinness of matter only makes swartishe or dark brown the
resistaunt matters, even like the smoked parts colored of fire, that can not
burn. Otherwise is the same named blackishe to smoke: in that all things
which this smyteth both within and without, it makes blackishe, even like
soote of a small time made, and leaves behind a show and note of a fyrie
smoke, and for the overmuch subtilnesse and thynnesse, it flies out and
pierces, before that it can burn the resistaunt matter. As may evidently
appear by the vines, trees, corn, and herbs, blasted with this lightning.

3. The lightning burning, is the same which having much of the earthly matter,
when it is sent down, strikes and enters into the thinner bodies, and
smyting into solyde bodies forthwith dissolueth, destroys and wastes, whose
force for troth is to be marueyled at. Otherwise is the same reported to be
clear and flaming. This lightning is diversely caused: For the matter otherwise
of the lightning, has very much of the earthly and viscous matter. For which
cause it burns the resistaunt matters, especially if of the same substance,
which may be burned, they consist, and imprinteth or shows the notes of
burning: yet the matter sometimes of the lightning, consists of the vapors,
very subtle and impure. Hereof the bodies thin and having poores, this
enters without any note or show of hurt, and corrupts the inner members:
and the solyde bodies resisting, does it part into pieces, and consumes them.
So that this slays a man, or any living beast, without any wound appearing,
or note of hurt. And this also melts the gold or silver in men's purses, the
purses remaining unperished. Albertus magnus applies unto the lightnings of
this kind, the depriving of sight, and the swelling of the face. For so much
as we often see men beholding the lightnings become blind: yea and the face by
that means so swollen, that a man can hardly know after the person. The same
is caused through the thinness, and porositie of our skin and eyes, which
lightly receive the subtle vapor, so that this corrupts the radical
moisture of the face, and swells the face, and dries also the radical
moisture of the eyes, through which dried, blindness of necessity must ensue.

In what time of the year, the lightnings oftener happen, is here uttered: For
the sightnings in Winter sildome appear to us, and the reason (as Plynie
reports) is in that the material cause is not so copious, as in other times
the same is wont to be: for in the Winter time the exhalation is only moist
and cold, which gathered into the clouds, receives a very hot force, and
although the same shall not be perceived, yet is it suddenly extinguished
through the force of the cold. Further, every vapor of the earth, is stiff
and very cold: For which cause in Scythia, and in the Countries farther North
(it is to be supposed) that it sildome lightneth. And in Summer, in the hotter
Countries, few lightnings are cau^sed: for that in the Summer, the exhalatio^
is only hot and dry, which in no manner (o^ very hardly) can be gathered and
thickne^ into a cloud. Whereof in Aethiopia, ^^gypt, and in the Countries
under the Tr^^pick of Cancer, for the exceeding heat, ligh^^ning do sildome
happen. But with us i^ the Summer time, dwelling Northward^ lightnings are
oftener caused, in that the heat of summer is not so great, that it can consume
all the matter or substance of the clouds. Even so in the mean seasons of
the year, as in the spring time, and harvest, lightnings are oftener caused: in
that the constitution of these seasons, ministers to the air much matter, as
well dry, as moist.

The cause why man or beast is so slain, that no token of the hurt or wound
appears: is for that the force and subtilnesse of the kindled vapor, by
which at a (...) pierces through the skin, and penetrable flesh, through
out porouse, and blasteth the vital members with a pestilent poison, and with
the venymous quality and virtue (which all lightnings are named to have) it
slays. The same may very well be applied unto the foot hurt, and the shoe
not perished, and to the sap of trees corrupted, the tree remaining whole,
without any corruption of the wood.

The cause why money is so molten with the lightning, the purse or money bag
remaining whole, and the sword in like manner, the sheath abiding unperished:
is for that these bodies are porouse, which lightly yield to the mighty
spirit, and subtle lightning vapor, in which if such a mighty force of
striking be, through the great violence, it then parts into small pieces the
resistaunt and hard bodies: if such a force of burning, it then melts. Such
is the violence of this, that it throws down pinnacles of stone, yea Towers
most stronglye wrought, and other buyldings, mighty stones also it parts in
pieces, and such matters which have any resistaunce and hardness in them,
this overthrows.

The cause why lightnings often smite most high places, as steeples, towers,
and among trees, the high Oak in especial, and high Mountains: is for that
such which be the higher, are the more open to injuries of the clouds in the
air, and by the course running here and there, these bodies in the way
resisting, happen to be stricken and spoiled. And every agent mightier works
near hand, then that which by a great space is distaunt. The other cause
divine is, in that evil spirits dwelling in the air, do often stir up and
cause (through Gods suffraunce) cruel tempests, and spoil like places, by
Gods due vengeance.

The cause why nets lying in the water, may be burned of the lightning: is
for that the flame of the same, has much of the Brimstonie and viscous matter,
so that fallen into water it may burn, the same having attained the due
matter. And the same do our Artificers prove in Gunpowder, of which the whole
Art insueth the celestial lightnings. And the like in a manner, may a man see
in lyme, which through the pouring upon of water, waxes hot and is kindled.

The cause why the lightning cutteth or parts a vessel in pieces, or is
burnt with the lightning, the Wine remaining whole together for a certain
space, as if the same were coagulated: is through the lightning, which has
very much of the Brimstonie substance and viscositie in it, which by piercing
into the whole substance of the Wine is sparsed: hereof through the heat, what
soever is fast holding, is forced and sent into the furthest extending of the
Wine, and both dried and boiled again, through the fyrie spirit of the
lightning, that works a certain skin, which stays the Wine from running
forth, for a certain time, and the same as it were with a skin compassed
about retayneth. So that these miraculously are caused by one inforcement, and
as it were in a moment. The same judgment, may be uttered of the others like.

What the lightning Dart is.
THe same is the stone of the lightning, as the later writers report, which
sometimes in wedge forine, sometimes round, and sometimes in pillar form,
falls with a mighty force into the earth, and both cleaves, scattreth,
destroys, and burns the resistaunt bodies and matters.

The manner of the ingendring of the Stone.
THe vapor of the lightning is dry, and sometimes somewhat clammy, of a
certain Metallyne matter, earthly and thick, which through the much motion and
diverse agitation falling into a moist cloud, is conglutynated (even like meal
tempered with water, and baked) and in the end hardened into a solyde yronnie,
or stonnie Mass, even like potters clay, baked into a stone.

This exhalation as well flashing forth of the clouds, as the lightning,
consisting for the more part in a green or black cloud big swollen, with a
certain clammye matter, gathered round through the cold moisture shed about
of the cloud, and a most sharp heat following, procured of the Sun and
stars, also through the motion and cold expelled, is the same hardened into a
solyde and stony body, in the like order as the baked Tyles, which framed
before of moist and soft clay, are after through dried and baked hard as a
stone of the burning fire, in the proper Tyle furnace. And the same Darte of
the lightning is sharpened at the nether end, in that the moisture mixed with
the dries, searching to issue tends downewarde, and of the same is there
formed sharp, but the dry substance is in the upper part gathered and framed
round, as the thicker in form. And this darte oftentimes in the lightnings,
works heavy and lamentable haps on the earth. The things which sildome or
never, are stricken with lightning, be the Egle, the Bay tree, and Seal,
insomuch that a Garland of the Bay tree worn, defends the person from
lightning, as the ancient report. The Sellers, vaultes, or the very deep
places under the earth, are thought to avail against the lightning. In that
the ancient affirm, that the lightnings enter not above five foot into the
earth. Of this ( Augustus Caesar) as Hystories report, when a tempest of
thunder, and lightning happened, he then hasted into a deep vault under the
earth. Here note, that no lightning is with out fire. For fyrie it is named, in
that the same imprinteth and shows manifest signs of fire in the burning,
scorching, and making swart. Also a venymous beast stricken with the lightning,
they say to lose the poison, or to be purged of the poison: but the lightning
stryking a beast not venymous, poysoneth the same, and this happens, in that of
the same doing, diverse effects are sometimes caused, by reason of the matter
otherwise disposed. Even as it appears of a certain wind, putting out one
Candell, and kindling or lightning an other.

Of the marvelous force, nature, and miracles, of the lightnings.
THe lightning receaueth and has a diverse nature and effect, in that it
cutteth, cleaves, burns, and s^ayeth beasts with the touching, it sometimes
happening venymous, burns the hard, and pierces the think bodies, if it shall
be without burning, it ingendreth a violent and tempestious wind, in which
storm, trees are winded about, houses and other strong buyldings thrown
down, and the Sea mightilye tossed.

2. Certain is the same, by the report o^ writers, that every thing to be
shaken and blasted: before the lightning smite it, and that no person to be
touched, which either before shall see the lightning, or hear the thunder.

3. When a beast waking is stricken with the lightning, being dead has the eyes
fast shut, but stricken sleeping, has the eyes open: and lying on the ground,
is turned by it of the other side.

4. The lightning consumes the sword or meat knife in the sheath, without
harm of the sheath. It melts the money in the purse, as before vttred: it
perishes the foot, without harm of the shoe. In that it enters the same,
being full of poores, without resistaunce: but about solyde and resisting
bodies, it longer stays in consuming them. It sometimes like hurts the
bones, without spot appearing on the flesh, in that through the weak
resistaunce and speedy pierceing of the fire, the flesh is not harmed of it:
as may appear of the hand, speedily thrust in and handling the burning flame.

5. The lightning sometimes parts asunder trees, as if those were cloven with
a wedge, without burning, and sometimes staineth and blacketh by the touching,
without burning, and sometimes burns both houses and barnes: the cause of the
first, is the vehemency of the stroke: the cause of the second is the
thinness, and weakness of the exhalation: the cause of the third, is the
thickness of the matter of the exhalation, for that the fire in the substance
more thick, does stronger burn: even as it may appear in the iron red hot:
but in the matter lesser or not so thick, it lesser burns, as may appear in
the Towe.

6. The lightning poysoneth beasts stricken, even like the bit of a Serpent, and
mad Dog: in that the matter of ye same lightning, is Brimstonie and venomous.

7. The same is to be marueyled at, which Seneca reports, as that wine
vessels to be burned with the lightning (as before uttered) the wine remaining
whole, and not shedding: the wine the whiles, not contained in any body. Also
the lightning does so intoxicate the Wine stricken, that the drinkers of it
either die, or become frantic and mad.

The same is caused, through the infectiue nature of the lightning: and the
reason of the astonishing of the Wine, is the hasty alteration, by which the
whole clammynesse of the Wine, is drawn forth into the outward upper face,
where, like a thin skin about retayneth the Wine, that the same shed or run
not abroad, for three days.

8. The lightning striking a person sleeping, does open the eyes of the
sleeper: but of ye person then waking or awake, it shuts the eyes. The cause
of which is, in that the lightning causes the sleeper to awake, but the person
awake, it astonisheth in such manner, that he shall sooner dye, then that he can
open the eyes again for the time, as the ancient report.

9. The person stricken and touched with the lightning, does after turn the
head and face toward the stroke, from whence the lightning came. The cause of
this, does Albertus Magnus here show: in that the force of the stroke coming,
conuerteth or tourneth the stricken bodies toward the stroke, and natural is
the same to every creature, to turn it self toward the harm sodaynely
coming, in holding the face toward it.

10. The lightning sometimes harmeth the yongling in the mothers womb, the
mother remaining unharmed: the cause of which is the tenderness of the
yongling, and strength of the mother: as by a like example before uttered, of
the noble woman Martia of Rome.

11. A dead Serpent stricken with lightning becomes full of worms, which
otherwise happens not to it alive. The cause is, in that through the lightning
it is purged of the proper poison, which also is of an other nature, than the
lightning, so that the same then hinders not the procreation of worms.

12. The lightning sometimes burns and consumes the garments on the body,
yea the shoes on the feet, many times it only burns the hears on the
head, without harm of the body, which is caused through the weakness of the
exhalation: But this sometimes kills a man, without any hurt or mark
appearing, or any sign of burning. The same caused through the subtilnesse of
the exhalation, which if the same shall be gross, leaves a note of the
burning.

13. Such which long look up at the lightning, and hold their faces against
the lightning, are either caused blind, or swollen in the face, or procured
leprous. The same happens through the fire received by the poores of the
countenance and eyes, which like swells the face, and dries up the
christaline humor, that is cause of the blindness.

14. The places of such which are stricken and burnt with the lightnings, are
caused colder than the other parts of the body: either for that the greater
heat, draws away with it the lesser, or else in that by the great violence,
the vital heat is so extinguished quite in those places, by report.

15. Such bodies stricken with the lightning, have or possess after a
Brimstonie savor: in that the matter of the lightning is Brimstonie, as the
Philosopher Niphus reports.

16. This Niphus vttreth that the lightning speedier burns solyde and hard
bodies, than the soft: as the same of skill known, and many times observed.

17. The thunderbolt sent forth with the lightning, never deeper runs or
enters into the earth than five foot, after the opinion of sundry obseruers.

18. In the year. 1553. in the Month of July, in a town of Germany named
Smelunicensis, while the people before dinner were at divine service, a mighty
light sodaynedly shyned, and a lightning in the same killed two persons, and
about thirty other persons with his force and vehemency of the exhalation,
threw to the earth, which yet through the goodness of God, contrary to man's
judgment and estimation, were yet preserved alive: of which also certain had
their garments burnt, yet their bodies unharmed, by a miracle of God.

19. The Romans in times past, diuined and judged of the lightnings: which if
those came from the left part or side of heaven, and returned into the same
again, they pronounced those to be happy and prosperous. For on such wise
Anchyses (after the Romayne manner) prognosticated good luck, if the lightning
happened on the left side. And Cicero in his second book de Diuinatione,
reports the same to be good luck in all matters traueyled about, if the
lightning shall happen on the left side. But ye Greeks and Barbarians, judged
the lightninges prosperous, that came on the right side. The Baye tree is
sildome harmed with the lightning: which rather of practice, than by reason
allowed: for so much as it has this repulsiue virtue of the lightning through
the inner cause, or of heaven. Of which Tiberius Caesar was wont, in the
tempest of lightning, to wear on his head a Garla^d of Bays, supposing
himself to be defended thereby.

20. In the year. 1551. at Crutzburge a City in Germany, a certain honest
man, having his house stricken with lightning, sitting then at table eating,
perished with his Dog, lying flat at his feet: but an Infant sitting or
being near to the father, nothing at all harmed. The mother of Hieronymus
Fracastorius, going with child with him, dyed with the stroke of lightning the
Infant remaining unharmed: which wonderfully foreshewed by it, the singular
fame of that child to come.

What an Earthquake is.
AN Earthquake, is a passion or affection of the earth, a breaking forth or
trembling, a smyting or agitation, when an exhalation is included in the bowels
of the same, seeking a violent issuing forth: in the which, this so smyteth and
shakes the earth. And of the same smiting, is the Earthquake named. Or it is a
certain working, by which the earth is moved, caused especially of wind or
dry vapors, enclosed within the hollownesse of the earth, and through the
heat of the sun, and other stars heated and enforced, by which motion and
enforcement, this so shakes, that oftentimes houses, yea whole Cities, and
towns, are thrown down, and suncke with the same, that the sins of men may
be punished, and others called unto repentance.

How many kinds of Earthquakes there are.
OF the earthquake, whether the same may happen or no (I believe no man
doubts) seeing Hystories report so many examples: and experience of late
years, has made the same known sufficiently to us. The kinds (to come to
the matter) are known to be four principally, which are uttered of Plynie in
his second Book, and 82. Chapter. Some report more, and some utter fewer
kinds, which through the dyuersitie, the plenty or paucytie of the
exhalations, and force of the qualities arise and are caused. The first kind
is named the falling or shaking down, the second the gaping open, the third
the trembling, beating or shaking, the fourth the casting up.

What the ruin is.
THe ruin, falling, or shaking down, is when much and great store of dry
vapor or wind, applying and dryuing by great force into one place, forces it
self, and turns the same suddenly vpsydowne, except the motion speedily
runs on the other side, which fallen, no more harm insueth. With this was
Smyrna the most noble City of the lesser Asia shaken and thrown down, as
appears in the Apocalipse, in the first and second Chapter. And the son of
God commanded the Church of Smyrna to write this notable comfort: Retain
faith, and believe stedfastlye unto death, and I shall give to thee a crown of
life. Seneca names it an inclynation, in that the earth leans to one side,
like a ship. For as a ship leaning unto one side, is drowned through the
mighty weight in it, unless the same weight speedilye be turned unto the
other side, through which the ship is so restored, and recovered as it were.
Even so with ye great plenty of spirits or wind, it applies and drives unto
one side of the earth, does in a manner overthrow the same, unless the
contrary part restores the part inclyned. Read Liuius lib. 2. tertia Decadis.

What the Gaping is.
THe gaping, is when the earth rendeth with a large opening, and that a deep
hollownesse appears, and the breath or wind mighty and vehement, breaking
violently forth, does on such wise sink down, and swallowe up Towns, and
Cities. Or thus, this gaping, is a rending or cleaving of the earth, when the
earth sinketh down, and swaloweth up Cities, houses, towns, and Castles, yea,
great hills, and mighty rocks, with great ryuers, and mighty lakes of
water, in such manner, that these are never after seen. Where this swalloweth
up any buildings, fortresses, or towns, in the places appear none other, than
large and deep holes or goulfes.

What the Pulsation is.
THe Pulsation, is when the earth (as the same swelling up) aryseth by force of
the winds, that the buildings (in that time) lean from one side to the other
(as a Ship on the Sea) and sinketh soon after down again: which Aristotle
names a beating or dryuing up. Otherwise, is the same named an agitation,
shaking, or trembling. Or this otherwise, when with great violence the earth is
lifted up, in such manner that Castles and buyldings through their shaking,
appear ready to fall: and the same does immediately sink, and settle down
again. Which manner is procured, when the whole force of the spirits labors
and seeks an issue upwards: even as the kindled Gunpowder, that searches way
to brast forth: which at the last finding issue to pass causes the earth
swelled up, to fall and settle again in the proper place.

What the fourth kind is.
THe same is, when a mighty and huge substance of earth (like to a Mountain)
is thrown out of the earth: or when any part of the earth sincketh deep
down, through which either floodes, lakes, or rivers, or else fires brast
forth. This kind does Aristotle very well open, where he utters: that the
motion of the earth now caused in certain places, does not cease, before that
wind, which had moved forward, to cast up the earth on a great height above
ground, and like a storm of smoke and ashes issued forth: which like lately
happened by the Sea Heraclea, and before near the Island Hiera, which is one of
them, which at this day they name Aeolias. For in this, a part of the earth
swelled and rose up with a noise, into the kind of a light hill: which at the
last breaking a sunder, much wind issued, that sent up fire and ashes. This
also procures the ouerflowings of the Sea, when the bottom of the same is
raised and swollen up, through which, many Islands appear, that were never
seen before. The learned Aristotle reports, that the Country Egypt in time
past, was a great Goulfe of the Sea, which through an Earthquake (as it should
seem) procured to be dry land: and remaining in the same manner, unto this
day: a like reports Herodotus.

What the material cause is.
THe material or effectiue cause near to the Earthquake, is the exhalation
hot and dry, or the wind, engendered and included within the caves or dens
of the earth, which seeking a violent issue, at his natural places, breaks
forth of the earth, and causes in this manner, a violent shaking of the earth.
And that the earth of his proper nature is dry, and prepares vapors and
exhalations, the same in a manner at this day, seems a marvel to few of any
knowledge. For the same is sufficiently known, that it is caused by accidence.
Yet further, the true cause of the earthquake or trembling of the earth, is the
wind or dry vapor, gross and earthly, included of the earth, and otherwise
sent in, or there engendered: so that manifest it is that such spirits or wind
to be engendered in the earth. For well known is this, that the earth of it
self is dry, but the same moystened with daily showers of rain, and the
poores shut hard together, that the exhalation engendered or conceived brasteth
not forth: and salt or sea waters cause the like, in that these through the
saltness close or shut the poores of the earth, with which the same is on
every side compassed, and in a manner swimmeth or runs over it: and after
with the beams of the sun heating, does engender a great abundance of
exhalations, which not so much breaks up into the air, but that within it
self often retayneth dry spirits or vapors, both gross and earthly, which
cause the Earthquake. This sentence of Plynie of the material cause, do the
Philosophers affirm and prove, that the same through the gathering of the
spirits is engendered, and Aristotle in these conjectures, proves by a like
reason, that the Earthquake may so be caused.

The first reason is taken of man's body, in which windy spirits, when in it
they are included, are wont to cause a trembling or shaking, where the venting
forth could not be caused.

A second reason he gathers and takes of the condition of a quiet or caulme
air and season, when as the time is clear, and a great stillness in the
night, and at Noone. Here or at that time, the spirits included in the earth,
can not breath forth.

A third reason, through the plentye of matter, which caused greater in the
spring and harvest, than in the other quarters or parts of the year. Of which,
in those times for the more part, are Earthquakes caused.

A fourth reason he vttreth of experience, for so much as the same by use is
found, that the agitation not to cease, until the whole force of spirits
shall have breathed forth.

The fifth and last of the precedent sound: for the earth causes a roaring or
sound, through the windy spirit met: before the same be smytten and
resisted. The self same confirms the reason of the time, and places. For
these are caused a little before the Sun rising, at what time the winds are
wont for the more part to arise. In the Equinoctials also, when the greater
force of vapors consists, than in the Solstices, and through the straight or
narrow places, of the Sea, in which straight places, the wind is included: is
wont there to be violenter, and seeking the caves or hollow places, does so
smite and shake the earth.

What the formal cause is.
THe formal cause, is the agitation and smyting of the earth: for the dry
vapors and winds there included by his virtue, are lifted or forced up,
seeking issue forth, but when this is no where open, through the passages of
the earth stopped, are driven and sent back ward, with no mean force, through
which stryuing the earth in the end is smitten and shaked. For by the overmuch
heat or cold, is the issue of vapors procured, of which the smyting is
caused. A sure and an evident note of this, are the winds in man's body
included. For those shake even the whole body, when by force at the last they
break forth: and the like is caused in the belching and refting, and in all
other agitations of the body: of what condition soever they be. So that the
same, which procures the wind above the earth, and in the clouds thunder: the
same causes a trembling or shaking in the passages of the earth.

Which the object or place is of the Earthquake.
THe great Earthquakes are caused in the Sea coasts, where many exhalations
may be included. For the Sea enters into the earth as it were by certain
pypes, and holloweth the same, where after the spirits or winds are
engendered, which when they contend to issue forth, are repelled or driven back
of the Sea floodes, and are on such wise hid again in the bowels of the earth,
which after increased, nor with those seeks issue, do then smite against the
sides of the earth.

Aristotle reports, that the most mighty Earthquakes to be there caused,
where the Sea daily flows, or the Country is spungeous, or the same
abounds with hollow places, caves and deep dens. For which cause, he
affirms that such tremblings to happen oftener about Hellespontus, Achaia,
Sicilia, and Euboea, through the Sea running near by, which as by certain
pypes enters into these places, and through his coldenesse dryueth inward the
exhalations. The Country of Hollande, and other hollow places, through the
multitude of caves, and inward holes, rightlye named Holeland, which both the
same, and others like, are subject to this evil.

In places far from the Sea, are fewer Earthquakes caused: in that ye earth
there, is not so hollowed, and the Sea causes not clifts, nor beating or
shaking with the great floods of waters, yet the sounder and faster any ground
of the earth is, so much the more harmed at the shaking: for so much it
mightier shuts in the exhalations, and compels an inforcement in the
cause.

The Islands, and the valleys, are sildome molested with the Earthquake: for so
much as the parts of the earth in themself are pressed together, and are but
a little porouse, so that these cannot enter in.

An earthquake is sildome caused in moist places, for so much as the moisture
hinders or lets the exhalation to come unto strength, of which, the
Philosopher reports, that in the floodes of the Sea Pontus, a less
Earthquake to be caused: for so much as the huge sea about, cools the
exhalations and on such wise lets them.

In the sandy and grauily places, as are the places Northerly, far sildomer
is an Earthquake caused, yea scarcely any Earthquake at all caused in those
places: for so much as the same ground is a thinner earth, and lesser solyde,
nor so thick compact, and that the fumes ascend by little and little, without
force.

How the ingendring is, or of the manner of the ingendring of Earthquakes.
THe Earthquake is caused when the exhalations and vapors included in the
caves, and hollow places or passages of the earth contend together, and by
his nature seek on high to break forth: but through the earth close stopped,
not finding way by force shake the same, and cause it to tremble, and in the
end break forth: so that the earth oftentimes causes either a gaping, or
deep cave, or goulfe, or the same thrown up on height after the manner of a
hill or Mountain: of which great Mountayne^ happen to be suncke and swallowed
up in a Goulfe: as sundry like we read in the Hystories: yea great waters and
ryuers drunk up, and the course of waters changed, and land floodes caused
in the main land. Or thus, the earth contains in it self a much
exhalation, which it heating conceaueth, through the fiery efficacy and
virtue of the Sun, the Planets, and fixed stars. This spirit, for that the
same is subtle, is most apt to be enforced. So that when by it this dry
spirit runs, included within the earth, seeking issue, is so by his force
lifted up, and driven from one hollownesse into another. Of which this when for
the solyde nature of the earth, and stopped passages of the earth, can not
issue or pass forth, procures lightly and soon a trembling in it self
caused through the beating and driving back: so that retained, this strongly
moves and shakes the earth, or seeking his way, and the spirit driven by a
narrow body of the earth, laboreth with a most strong contention. For into the
proper and natural place this contendeth to fly, which through the mighty
stopping let of the compact earth, is the same driven back into the earth:
which at the length labors to issue, causing the same to tremble: and
casts up the earth* (in the breaking forth) like to a hill, until it be
issued: yea this sometimes cleaves the same, and opens it in the issuing
forth at two sides. Aristotle utters other notes, for after the earth beaten
up, he reports that great winds to breath and fly up, and that fire and
ashes to be cast forth. So that water not to be the special cause of the
earthquake: for the water should otherwise be still, if the same were not
blown and driven. Nor such a swiftness or hastiness of the trembling could
be caused, if so much could be procured in the waters swelling, and that the
earth could very often break. But it often breaks not in the tremblings and
shakings of the earth. Yet does this pronounce the great plenty of vapors
included in the caves of the earth, driven like winds by their force, and
agitation sparsed by certain places, which when the same is caused, it
instructs that those places to tremble, through the might of the vapors
forced. For it is manifest, that the earth to be full of vapors, and the
thundering or rumbling which is heard in the shaking of the earth, is a note of
the flying vapors. And for so much as the vapors open the passages of the
earth, a water sometimes is shed out of the earth: of which, no such plenty
consists, or is in the great Mountains, that might like smite them.

How so great a heap of earth, of so thin and light a body as the wind,
may be cast up, does the Philosopher Aristotle here utter by a similitude, as
in our bodies spirits included, are cause of the tremblings or shakings and
beating of the pulses: even so happens in the same earth, when a great force of
the vapors gathered, move and shake it with their force.

What the final causes are.
THe final cause of an Earthquake, is the signification very sad and heavy,
of matters and haps to come, as of battles, landfloodes, mutation of Emperies,
the dearth of victuals. etc. For the Earthquakes always pronounce great
calamities, as Plynie witnesses, where he reports, that the City of Rome
never trembled, but that the same was a foreshewe of some hap to come or
ensue: so that the Romans curiously observed the Earthquakes: as ye same is
manifest, in their Hystories. Of the earthquake Cardanus reports, that the
earth to be cleaued through a vapoure, and not to be doubted, but that the same
to prognosticate great sedicions. Yea the great earthquakes denounce either a
Battle, or the Plague, or a Tirannicall oppression: these also cause a dearth
of corn, and famine. Yet the earthquakes sometimes threaten no other evils,
than the ouerthow (of proper Cities and Towns) and destruction or mortality
of those persons, which dwell in them. These hitherto Cardanus.

The holy Scriptures utter the same, that in these motions the Lord God
exercises, and shows his most severe ire, punishing with these the peoples
sins, by a just judgment, unless they speedily repent. For it is written in
the second book of Kings, and xxij. Chapter, that the ire of God was moved,
and the earth trembled: for so much as the Lord God was angry with them. Even
so before the Turckes took Greece, for three, whole days together, the
Earthquake shook the borders near, bounding, and many buildings fell down.
Before the Peloponesian Battle, the country of Laconia was so fearfully
shaken with an Earthquake, that whole towns fell, and much people destroyed,
and overwhelmed in the fall of them. Eutropius writes, that in the next year
after the death of Paul the Apostle, Laodicoea and Colossa were suncke with an
Earthquake, in which example both a punishment of the wicked was seen, which
contemned Paul's doctrine, and a signyfication of calamities to come on Asia
bordering near by, and of the cruelty, which Domitianus exercysed in the same
part of the world, when he compelled. S. John the Apostle to live in exile.
The like happened an Earthquake before the death of Theodosius the second, which
endured for six months, and shook Constantinople, and many other places of
Asia. The earth gaping, many Towns were suncke. The Sca one where flying the
gaping suncke and running an other way on the earth, overwhelmed and drowned
many towns. These later years, were like examples seen in Germany, after
which lamentable alterations insued in the Roman Empire.

What the effects are.
THese are most lamentable, that through an Earthquake both the sincking and
overthrow of howses and Cities are caused, as in the time of Tiberius Coesare
happened, where in one night twelve Cities fell with an earthquake. Also
particular land floods. For in this agitation of the earth, does much water
sometimes break forth, when the exhalation being deep is driven forth by a
great force: for in that motion is the earth oftentimes dylated, and oftentimes
Islands Cities, and mighty mountains, by a mighty gaping suncke and swalowed:
and a Region (through the shaking of an Earthquake) be spoiled. Forsomuche as
Islands Countries, and Hills, are driven up, and caused to appear, through an
earthquake. Yea a grievous pestilence, many times ensues an Earthquake. For so
much as fumes, and venomous vapors, putrified in the bowels of the earth, do
infect the air with their rottenness. And this putrified exhalaion, they name
Memphitis, that is, a putried vapor.

Which the signs be of an earthquake.
THe first note, the learned utter of the Eclipsis, for the region or country,
unto which the shadow of the Eclips of the lights (as of the Sun and Moon)
is converted or extends, is woonte for the more part, to be subject to the
harm of the earthquake and the same the certayner, if the Eclipse happen in
the tail of the Dragon: which how much the greater, and generaller the same
shall be, so much the mightier shall the shaking of the earthquake be: but
how much the smaller, so much the weaker. etc.

2 The second note, does the Sun offer and show: when for certain days,
the Sun shines dim and darcke, without any cloud covering him: and a
meruellous calmness, with a couldenesse in the morning: and after the Sun
setting (the element being clear) a thin cloud is stretched narrow and a
long by the air: has been observed, that an earthquake often to follow.

3 The third, a fiery cloud, expressing the kind and form of a burning
pillar in the air, yeldeth a most true and sure note (as Calistines the
Philsopher reports) of an Earthquake to ensue.

4 In the fourth, the water in deep pits and wells, before an Earthquake, is
without a manifest cause troubled, and infected with a saltie savor, or with
some other ungrateful smell and taste not natural, and this through the
pestilent exhalations, which long within the earth, have been enclosed, and
begin somewhat to be sent abroad, as uttered first Pherecides, the instructor
of the wise Pythagoras, of whom the learned Pliny mentions in his second
book, and 79. Chapter. And the like Cicero, in his fifth book de Diuinatione.

5 In the fifth a marvelous quietness and stillness of the winds silent in
the region of of the earth, subject to the motion and earthquake, shut in and
enclosed for certain Months before, as the same observed by the ancient.

6 In the sixth, by the seas and waves surging, a note may be gathered and
learned, which the sailors perceive undoubted to ensue, when as the sea rages
and beats without mighty winds procuring the like swelling. And the parts
and things within ships like shake, as buildings on the earth and with a
noise hard under the earth, that foreshewe that motion or the earthquake.

7 In the seventh, a thin cloud after the manner of a struck or line, very
small toward the setting in the West, long and white, is seen (for the more
part) to go before an agitation or trembling of the earth, by which note
Anaximander confirmed sometimes to the Lacedaemonians for truth their
predictions of these matters.

8 In the eight, that Birds, with many four footed beasts leave or forsake
the apt places ready to ye shaking of the earth, seeking and abiding in new
places, by which these may so defend them, from the injury nere hand, and
this so well proved and known by observations, as witnessed in the books of
the ancient.

9 In the ninth, the earth never trembles or no earthquake is caused, but when
the sea is calm and still, and the air so marvelous still that the Fowls
flying have not breath nor air to bear them in their flight, nor never have,
but after winds breathed forth of hollow veins and Ca^es of the earth,
included before in the same.

10 In the tenth, a fearful roaring, thundering, and hideous sound like to the
cry of men, and a noise sometimes like to the clittring of harnest men heard
in the earth before the earthquake comes. But it sometimes happens, that this
great roaring or thundering is heard in the earth, and no earthquake at all
ensues, as when the wind without beating and trembling of the earth finds
issue to pass.

11 In the eleventh, that the Sun is seen of many, for certain days
before, very mistie and dim of light, as though he lost his light, or
appeered as he were bloody: which dymnes or like sight to our eyes is caused,
through lack of the wind to dissolve and purge this thick and gross air,
which at that time is enclosed within the bowels of the earth.

12 To these may be added a twelfth note, which is the appearing of a Comet or
blasing star, a time before. In these if many notes concur, the
signification is the more certain. For none of these notes alone is to be
considered and taken, that the same may be sufficient unto the signifying or
foreshewing of an earthquake.

Let this suffice (gentle reader) as touching the marvelous force, and
miracles of the lightnings, with the other wonderful apparitions in the air,
concluding that these are uttered, part for man's instruction and comfort, and
part as warnings, to all christians for the amendment of life, by the fearful
examples manifested in this treatise, not without the singular providence of
God, in the forewarning us in such manner, of the many dangers hanging over
our heads, in these perilous days. Thus my intent brought to an end, in
most brie^^ manner, I end this treatise.

FINIS.

