AN ANSWER TO MASTER WILLIAM PERKINS, CONCERning Christ's Descension into
Hell: By JOHN HIGINS.

AT OXFORD, By JOSEPH BARNES, Printer to the University. 1602.

TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader John Higins wishes perfect knowledge of the Creed in
Christ Jesus*
AT first (Christian Reader) I vvrote these things more at large, interposed
with the other which I took upon me to answer. But now I thought it far
better thus to set them at view after this manner, which I could not with out
the much abridging of that my first copy. And this I did for two causes; the
one to save my labor in writing them out: the other to ease thee in reading
the^ over. I have prefixed each of our names, and by the letters, A. B. C. D.
E. etc. applied the reasons and answers of the one to the other, that so thou
may the easier compare the places of both together, and better consider and
sentence of both. This I do because I think plain dealing a Jewel, and this
order is better. Now (if it please thee) I pray thee on kindness, with
conscience and charity to read the^: read, regard, and then judge; but beware
thou judge not amiss, least thy judgment endamage thy self. And so wishing
thee to believe all the Articles of the Creed, and withal wishing thy health
in Christ Jesus, Iende.

At Winsam the 22. of June. 1602. John Higins.

WILLIAM PERKINS. It seems very likely that these words (he descended into
hell) were not placed in the Creed at the first, Pet. Vire^ in Symbo^ Erasmus
(...) Colloquij^
or as some think they crept in by negligence.

Because above threescore Creedes

But if the Ancient learned Fathers

And an Ancient father says directly, (He descended into Ruffinus i^ exposit.
Symbol.
hell) are not found in the Creed of the Roman Church, nor used in the
churches of the East, and if they be, that then they signify the Burial of
Christ.


JOHN HIGINS. It seemed to some men that certain books of the New Testament
were not Canonical, but in that seming their thoughts were not worthy to be
made accoumpt of. Wherefore these words: some me^ (of yesterday) think they
crept in: ^rasmus in ^is paraphrase upon ^he Acts of ^he Apo^tles. ca. 2.
are no sufficient ground to build on in matters of such antiquity, weight and
authority as these are. I reckon not of Erasmus in the imitatio^ of Lucia^s
Dialogues, but I know he writes on the Acts of the Apostles, that Christ
descended into hell.

borne of the Virgin Mary, he was buried, he sits on the right hand of God,
the Catholic church; the Communion of Saints; the resurrection of the body;
and the life everlasting: did al these therefore creep in by negligence? I
think not.

The Ancient Fathers were persuaded of the descension, as they were of the
other Articles which they left out. But in that Counsel they chiefly handled
the herisie of Arrius concerning the two natures of Christ, applying al their
saying in that Creed unto the plague of that time.

The same Ancient father says there: Ruffinus i^ exposit. Symbol.
but that he descended into hell is evidently foretold in the Psalms,
alleging certain places, and a little after he says: 1. Pet. 3. 1*
Peter also has said: for Christ was mortified in the flesh, but quickened in
the spirit, in which he went and preached to the spirits also which were shut
up in prison in the days of Noah, in which text is declared what work he did
in hell. But the Lord himself says by the Prophet, Psalm. 16. 1^
as of the time to come: because thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither
vvilt thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption. Which again he shows
prophetically to be fulfilled Psalm. 30. ^
when he says: Lord thou have led forth my soul out of hell, Psalm. 30. 4.
thou have saved me from them which go down into the lake. Thus your Ruffinus
expounds this clause (he de scended into hell)


WILLIAM PERKINS.

^arietas ^ctionis. ^at. 27. 9. ^remie for ^acharie.
in them sundry varieties of readings and words otherwhiles, which from the
margin crept into the text.



Therefore that we may come to the meaning thereof; we must know that it

The first exposition, is that Christ's


JOHN HIGINS. It seems both strange and vnture. Testament, And in the Creed
1550* years since Christ; and in this process of above 1550 years these words
crept out of the Scriptures into the Creed*

The old and new Testaments in a 1000. pages, have a few diverse readings;
but the old and new scarce 60 pages of Creeds have no such sundry readings at
all. Mat. 27. 9.
But you note in your Margin Jeremy put for Zachary. Mat. 27. 9. Lo, thus is
the text. Then was fulfilled, that which was said by the Prophet Jeremy,
Ierem. 36.
saying,, etc. The holy Ghost in S. Matthew knew who said it, saying, and who
wrote it, writing. For Zachary livedafter Jeremy and might as Baruch etc. write
that which Jeremy spoke or prophesied before him.

It is neither to be put forth of our Creed, not to be expounded by sense,
because it is a matter of faith.

These four expositions as in order you place them, shall in order be
examined, and refuted, or answered: because as I take it they are handled
amiss.


The first exposition.
Christ descended into hell, that is, Christ in his humane Soul after his
death, did really and locally, actuallie, and effectually descend into hell
where the wicked are tormented. This is a true exposition.

WILLIAM PERKINS. The reasons why this first exposition

All the Evangelistes and among the Iuke. 1. 3.
have set down at large his Passion, death, burial, resurrection, and
ascension, and withal they make rehearsal of small circumstances; therefore no
doubt they would not have omitted Christ's Local descension to the place of
the damned, if there had bin any such thing. And the end why they penned this
history, Iam. 20. 31.
was that we might believe that Jesus is Christ the Son of God, and that in
believing we might have life everlasting.




JOHN HIGINS

Mat. 12, 40.
report that CHRIST who is the truth it self, Math. 16. 4.
prophetically spoke twice thereof in the sign of Jonas. And St. Luke says,
that the same truth told after his Resurrection, Luke 23. 43.
how all must be fulfilled which were prophesied of him. Acts. 2. 31.
St. Luke also reports how the holy Ghost expounds the prophecy of David,
Ephesians. 4. 9. 10.
and again St. Paul and St. Peter spoke thereof in their Epistles. 1. Pet. 3.
18. 19.
Assure your self then there was such a thing, as in places fit (God
willing) shall plainly appear ere we end with this our work.

We must not then confute, but believe Soul descended, the Devil and the
damned might have bragged of the force of that their kingdom. But as the 3.
Dan. 3. 21.
young men in the hoate Oven, Daniel in the den of the Lions, Dan. 14. 30.
and Jonas in the belly of the Whale, Ioh. 2. 1. 2. 3.
being the signs and figures of CHRIST'S Descension, came forth without hurt:
so Christ from that furnace, from that den of the Lion, from that belly of
hell, victoriously, as he descended, came forth with valor, with freedom, with
triumph.


WILLIAM PERKINS. Luke 23. 43.
Luke 23* 43. This day thou shall be with me in Paradise.

it they must be suitable.

Now the thief seeing that Christ Luke 23. 42. 43.
To which Christ's answer (as the very words importe) is thus much: I shall
enter into Paradise this day, and there shall thou be with me.

Now there is no entrance but in regard


JOHN HIGINS. Your second reason stands on this to day thou shall be with me
in Paradise. Luke 23. 43.
Christ spoke this as God, who only has power to give Paradise, Aug. lib. 11.
confess. ca. 13. in fine.
and whose to day as Augustine says is eternity: and he speaks it as man
to that happy man, who after that evening never since saw night nor darkness.
For they blessed departing hence, have their evening at their death, and being
dead presently see in soul the day spring visiring them from an high, Luk* 1.
78.
of that to day which after is nightlesse. Then he that looks for a sublimary
day of light and darcknesse, amongst the blessed souls in Paradise, is darkely
deceived. For if the theefes soul went that same night to Paradise, as we
believe it did, yet went it the same to day of Christ's eterne nature, and was
in Paradise the same to day of Christ's glorious humane natures asce^sio^, which
with the thief was yet the same to day and lasts nightlesse till now and for
ever.

must, nor did in custom suite every demand or petition with answer. For
sometimes he questioned again, and sometimes he did not answer at all. But
to this petition he answered as God and Man, and therefore your two musts,
assigning the same to the manhood, and cutting it of from the godheade, are
more then the scriptures allow.

This supposition with the fiction of Enters, interferres it self. For the
text is not so, but thus: Luke 23. 42* 43.
Lord remember me when thou come into they kingdom. And Jesus said unto
him: to day thou shall be with me in Paradise. He spoke (says Euthymius) as
God which fills al, Euthymius super hunc locum.
and was together every where; in the Sepulcher, in hell, in Paradise, and in
heaven. Also if the soul of Christ was in Paradise before his resurrection,
the^ it was not in the grave; if not in the grave, then that translation is
false, thou vvilte not leave my soul in grave.

Now your concluding no entrance with the fiction of two enters, interres
nothing. The text of S. Luke is true, yours is not so.


WILLIAM PERKINS. thou shall be with me to day in Paradise, Genesis 3. 7.
he does intimate a resemblaunce, which is between the first Adam, and the
second Adam. The first Adam sinned and was presently cast out of Paradise.





The end of the second reason.


JOHN HIGINS. In this matter there can be no resemblaunce Genesis 3. Genesis 3. 7.
the 7. verse, and the verses after (considering well the particulars there)
shall plainly perceive, that Adam was not presently cast out (as you say) for
that presently is not in the third of Genesis.

Neither must Christ immediately after immediately is not in all the new
Testament.



The end of the second Reason.


WILLIAM PERKINS.

down these words (he descended into hell) omittes the burial; Athana. lib^
de incarn* Chrysostom. hom* 2. in Symb.
putting the^ both for one, as he expounds himself else where.

Now let us see the reasons which 1: Mat. 12. 40. Mat. 12. 40*
The son of man must be three days and three nights in the heart of the
earth, that is, in hell.

Answer. 1. This exposition is directly

For the Pharisees desired to see a sign,


JOHN HIGINS. ^sal. 16. 10. ^ath. 12. 40 ^ct. 1. 31.
and the same sprit witnessed to be fulfilled. Now to say that (he descended
into hell) was sufficiently included in some of the former* this cannot be; for
the former (he was curcified, dead, and buried) are of passion; but these
latter (he descended into hell, he rose again the third day: he ascended into
heaven) are mere actions of Christ secluded from those, not included in them*

Athanas. in ^^mb. ^hersost. (...) ^^super ^^mb.
he descended into hell* He is not against it; Chrysostom says he descended
into hell; that there also he might not be void of a miracle. He is not
against it.

^at^h 12. (...)* 40.
The evil and adulterous generation requests a sign, but a sign shall not be
given unto it, unless the sign of the Prophet Jonas. Matthew. 16. 24.
For as Jonas was 3. dares and 3. nights in the whales belly; so shall the
son of man be 3. days and three nights in the heart of the earth, that is,
in hell.

These places of the Gospel are plain.

For the evil and adulterous generation, Mat. 16. 24.
but a sign in hell.


WILLIAM PERKINS. The second Answer. The heart of

Ezech. 27. 4. (...) c^rde ma^is. [Sunt ^ermini tu^]
is said to be in the heart of the seas.



thou will not leave my soul in hell; Act. 2. 27.
neither vvilt thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption.





Now there is no resurrection of the soul, but of the body only, as the soul


JOHN HIGINS. The heart of the earth may as well Jonas 2. 1. 2.
as it may signify the middle or center of the earth. Act. 2. 27.


For Tyrus being an Island four furlongs, Ezec 27. 4.
was therefore said of God to have her limits in the heart, or middle of the
seas Again the proud king thereof said, Ezec. 28. 2.
I am God, I sit in the throne of God, in the heart or middle of the seas.

These words of Christ: for as Jonas etc. Mat. 12. 40.
so shall the Son of man be 3. days and 3. nights in the heart of the earth:
give us to understand where hell is sited, they reveal the place in question.
But if hell and the grave, and the heart of the earth be alone, they which site
hell so shallow, and the grave so deep, confound the he^l of the Damned, and
the graves of the blessed together.

thou vvilt not leave my soul in hell, Psalm. 16. 10.
neither suffer thine holy one to see corruption: was one of al those things of
which Christ said, Luke 24. 44.
it behooved all things to be fulfilled which are written of me in the Law of
Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms.

it behooved all things to be fulfilled etc.

foreseing spoke of the resurrection of Christ, Act. 2. 31.
for why, his soul was not left in hell, neither saw his flesh corruption.

Act. 2. 27.
thou will not leave my soul in grave, then the person or the soul of Christ
is risen, or else Christ is not risen. And for your fall, I ask first, whether
it may be said, that christ's body fell into the grave secondly whether if it fell
not, but was buried therein, it may not yet be said to have risen; thirdly,
whether Christ rose without a soul, because it fell not into the grave. Mat.
27. 52.
For many bodies of Saints arose which fell not; neither did they arise
without souls, which souls yet fell not into the granes* So I say, if no^e
arise at the last day, but the bodies of them which fell, there will be a very
small resurrection in respect of the whole number of the departed.


WILLIAM PERKINS. It will be replied that the word (...)

And the word (...) (i) hell, cannot

Romans 13. 1. 1. Cor. 15. 45.
i, the soul: but also the whole person, or the man himself. Romans 13. 1. 1.
Cor. 15. 45.

Apoc. 20. 14
as for hell. Apoc. 20. 14. Death and ((...)) are cast into the lake of fire.
Now we cannot say that hell is cast into hell, but the grave into hell.






JOHN HIGINS (...) soul (...) hell.
The word ((...)) i. soul in these places alleged Act. 2. 27. 31. cannot
signify the body of Christ, as shall appear in this page.

And the word ((...)) i. hell, cannot

The word (...) i. soul, sometimes Act. 2. 41.
the man a live, as in these places: Romans 13. 1*
and there were added that day about three thousand souls: 1. Cor. 15. 45.
let every soul submit it self to the authority of the higher powers: the
first man Adam was made a living soul, Genes. 27.
these were not whole persons of dead men buried, but Christians newly
converted, and Roman subjects alive. So Adam was made a living soul, but he
was not so buried; the whole person so signified by (...), was not buried in
hell. Luke 23. 43.
If it were, then by these texts, (to day shall thou be with me in Paradise;
thou will not leave my person in hell; Act. 2. 27. 31.
and his soul was not left in grave) the whole person was in Paradise, in
hell, and in the grave the same day that he was buried.

The second word, (...), hell, is not taken death and hell were sent into the
lake of fire, Apoc. 20. 14
this is the second death* And whosoever was not found written in the book
of life, was sent into the lake of fire. That is, the Devil and his Angels and
the wicked were sent into everlasting fire, as in Mat. 25. 41. Mat. 25. 41
Christ does p^ainly show; but the prophet here speaks it more dar^kly. Also
if your speech here be true, that (...), is as well taken for the grave, as
for hell, then this translation is tolerable. Luk 16. 22. 23.
And the rich man died and was buried and in the grave, lifting up his eyes
being in torments, for (says he) I am tormented in this flame. ^er. 24.




Act. 2. 29. 31
risen, and the humane nature of Christ risen; affirming that David prophesied
thereof long before. And says, his soul was not left in hell, as you here
translate (...) hell, and not grave.


Will. Perkins. (...) the person. (...) the grave.
Again it will be said that in this text thou will not leave my soul in hell.
And the second of the body rising out of the grave, in the next words
following: Neither will thou suffer my flesh to see corruption. It is not so.

For the flesh in this place signifies Act. 2. 30. 31
as appears Act. 2. verse. 30. unless we shall say that one and the same
word in the same sentence is taken two ways, flesh (you mean) in the 30. and
in the 31. verses.

And the words rather carry this sense; thou will not suffer me to continue long
in the grane; nay which is more, in the time of my continuance there, thou will
not suffer me so much as to see corruption, because I am thy holy one.


JOHN HIGINS. (...) the soul (...) hell.
Here in the Psalm. 16. 10. Thou will not leave my soul in hell, Psalm. 16. 10.
neither vvilt thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption, the two parts and
places of Christ's humanity are plainly distinguished a sunder. So also Peter
interprets, Fulgen. lib. 3. ad Thrasimund.
Act. 2. 31. and so Fulgentius brings these places distinguished against the
Ar^ians, expounding them of the soul and flesh apart.

Act. 2. 30.
he then, that is, David, since he was a Prophet, and knew that God had sworn
unto him by an oath, of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, to
raise up the Christ, that he might place him on his seat. Psalm. 3. 32. 11.
Here the Apostle adds (according to the flesh,) to distinguish and to tell
us, that the soul is not ex traduce; but that the flesh and it be of different
natures, which immediately after (expounding the other prophecy) he clearly
explaines thus. 31. verse. David foreseeing spoke of the resurrection of Christ,
Act. 2. 31.
that his soul was not le^t in hell, neither did his flesh see corruption.
Psalm. 16. 10.
There in the 30. verse. Peter spoke of the flesh (not of the soul) generated:
and here in the 31. of the flesh and of the soul separated by death. In both
yet by flesh, meaning one and the same flesh of christ.

S. Peter's words are of credit enough: a rather carriage of sense, comes to
late.


WILL. PERKINS. 1. Pet. 3. 18. 19. Genesis 6. 3.
Object. 3. Christ was quickened in the spirit, 1. Pet. 3. 18. 19.
by the which spirit he went and preached unto the spirits which are in prison.



my spirit shall not always strive with man, because he is but flesh.




JOHN HIGINS. 1. Pet. 3. 18. Genes. 6. 3.
We must not allege, nor take the text lamely. It is thus: for Christ once
suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, 1.
Pet. 3. 18. 19.
he was mortified in the flesh, but was quickened in the spirit, in which
spirit he went and preached unto the spirits which are in prison. Here is
the suffering of Christ, his death, immortality of soul, with the descension
thereof, and (as Ruffinus says) what work it did in hell. Ruffinus in Symbol.


And therefore this place is pregnant Christ was quickened in the godhead, by
which godhead he went and preached to the spirits which are in prison, which
you said in Noe preached to the old world. But this cannot be; it was after
Christ's mortification in the flesh, not in the old world but in that which is
now.

That which is said in Genesis 6. 3. Genes. 6. 3.
my spirit shall not always contend with man, because he is but flesh, and
his days shall be an hundred and twenty years was fifty generations before
Christ, this in Peter was after Christ's death; that was in spirit divine, this
was in the soul humane; that was on earth with men in the flesh; this was in
hell with the spirits of the dead; Peter therefore in this place alludes not to
that in Genesis.




WILL. PERKINS. 1 Pet. 3. 19. 1. Pet. 4. 6.
For the first, it cannot be said, that Christ was quickened by his soul,
because it did not join it self unto the body; but the Godhead joined the^
both.



Again, it is to no end that Christ's

Considering it was never heard of,


JOHN HIGINS. 1. Pet. 3, 19. 1. Pet. 4. 6.
To say that Christ was quickened by

Christ was mortified in the flesh, but Psalm. 18. 5.
And therefore he said: Mat. 26. 38.
my soul is very sad eve^ to the death. But when that death was past, the
sorrow, anguish, and sadness were ended; and the joy, the comfort and solace
which his soul immediately after received, may very fitly be named, a
reviving or quickening. And of this reviving or quickening all the blessed souls
departed have presently after this life, a joyful and most happy feeling.



Luke 16. 25.
and told him his own, and besides how that his brethren had Moses and the
Prophets, etc. And the borne blind said: It was never heard of, Io. 9. 32.
that any man opened the eyes of one that was borne blind. But yet the cure
was to some end, and so was the descension of Christ also.


WILLIAM PERKINS. It will be answered that this preaching Pet. 3. 19.) is only
real or experimental, because Christ showed himself there to convince the
unbelief of his enemies.

But this is flat against reason. For

And it is flat against the text. For the (1. Pet. 3. 19.) is that which is
performed by men in the ministry of the word, as Peter expounds himself
elsewhere (1. Pet. 4. 6.) to this purpose also was the Gospel preached to the
dead, that they might be condemned according to men in the flesh; but that
they might line according to God in the spirit.


JOHN HIGINS. 1. Pet. 3. 19.
The preaching of Christ in hell, was real; that is, in re, indeed: not
experime^tal, as to prove an experiment, or conclusion. For all the prophesies
must needs be fulfilled, so as the Council of God decreed, and as the
Scriptures report. It was then a powerful passage, in his sin-lesse souls,
freedom and valor; for so he went to conquer the devil, and to confound the
damned in hell, from whence he returned with triumphant victory.

flattes of reason? ^sal. 135. 6.
for all things whatsoever the Lord would, that did be in heaven, and in
earth, and in the sea, and in all deep places. This prerogatiude Judge might
go where he would, and convict whom he list, he could be no more exempted
from hell, then he could be payned thereby, or detained therein.

These two texts are not flat of one nature* Math. 8. 22.
unto such as Christ meant when he said, let the dead bury their dead*


WILL. PERKINS. He descended into the grave.
Lastly there is no reason why Christ

And this is the first exposition The second follows.


JOHN HIGINS. He descended into hell.
If we shall run from faith to no reason, I will confer like reason with your
reason thus: Luke 16. 25.
there is no reason why Abraham should rather show himself to the rich glutton
in hell, then to the rest of the damned; this is as wise a reason as that. But
all things are possible to him that believes. The text is, he went in
spirit, Math. 9. 23.
and preached to the spirits which are in prison. And this the faithful
believe, because it is Scripture; and they believe the desce^sion, because they
are Christians.


And thus much touching the first exposition. The second follows.
WILLIAM PERKINS. The second usual exposition of this

This exposition is agreeable to the

If it be said, that, these words are an he was buried; he descended into hell:
the first is very plain and easy, but the latter very obscure and hard.



And thus ends the 2. exposition


JOHN HIGINS. Mat. 27. 50.
he yielded up the Ghost, and also they say, Mar. 15. 37.
he was taken down and was shrouded and buried in a new sepulcher by Joseph of
Arimathea, Luke 23. 46.
etc. his body could not descend except it were alive, and they would not have
buried it, ^o. 19* 30.
if he had not been dead.

because it is false. For it makes a vain and needless repetition of one
thing twice, etc. Wherefore it is not to be allowed nor liked of.

His burial was sensible, it was done


And thus much touching the second exposition, now follows the third.
WILL. PERKINS. upon the cross Christ dyinge felt and suffered the pangs of
hell and the full wrath of God.
Thirdly others there be who expound it thus, he descended into hell, that is,
Christ Jesus when he was dying upon the Cross felt and suffered the pangs of
hell, and the full wrath of God seazing upon his Ioule.



1. Sam. 2. 6.
the Lord kills and makes alive, and he brings down to hell and raises
up again. That is, he makes men feel woe and misery in their souls even the
pangs of hell, and after restores them. And David says: Psalm. 88. 5.
the sorrows of death compassed me, and the terrors of hell laid hold on me.
This is an usual exposition received in the Church, and they which expound
this Article thus, give this reason thereof. The former words, was crucified,
dead, and buried, do contain (say they) the outward sufferings of Christ. Now
because he suffered not only outwardly in body, but also inwardly in soul;
therefore these words, he descended into hell, do set forth unto us his inward
sufferings in soul, when he felt upon the cross the pangs of hell and the full
wrath of God seazing upon him.

This exposition is good and true, and was crucified, dead, and buried, must
not be understood of any ordinary death, but of a cursed death, in which Christ
suffered the full wrath of God, even the pangs of hell, both in soul and body.

Seeing then this exposition is contained in the former words; it cannot fitly
stand with the order of the short Creed, unless there should be a
distinct Article of things repeated before.

And thus ends the 3. exposition.


JOHN HIGINS. Luke 23. 46.
Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. By which we understand, that
he was then seized and did possess his own soul, and yielded the possession
and seazen thereof unto his father, and neither the devil, nor the pangs of
hell had any seazen, hold, interest, or possession therein.

This exposition, that Christ after his the Lord mortifieth and quickens;
he 1. Sam. 2. 6.
And this was a prophecy of the death, descension, resurrection, and ascension
of Christ. So the said Hanna in the 10. verse after prophesied of the kingdom
of Christ also thus: verse. 10.
Jehovah will judge the ends of the earth; and he will give fortitude to his
king, and he will exalt the horn of his Christ. And David says: Psalm. 18. 5.
the sorrows of death compassed me, and the land flowdes of ungodliness made me
afraid. These were the sorrows of the first death in the flesh, and not the
pangs of hell, which seize only upon the wicked, but not on the just.

He was crucified, dead, and buried* body mortal, and did not (but in his
death) concern the soul. For neither could the Jews hurt it, neither could
Joseph bury it: but these, he descended into hell; he rose again from the
dead, he ascended into heaven, are actions performed by Christ, the first in
his soul, and the other two in his whole humane triumphing nature.

The death of his holy ones, or of his merciful me^, Psalm. 116. 13
is precious in the sight of God: God then is not wroth with them, neither does
he inflict the pangs of hell upon them, much less upon his most holy, upon his
most just one. In these words of S. Peter. Act. 2. 23. 24. hunc interemistis,
there is the death, Act. 2. 23. 24.
quem Deus suscitavit solutis doloribus Inferni, there is the resurrection from
hell and from the sepulcher. These places plainly demonstrate that the Apostle
spoke of that which Christ suffered and did in his death, burial, descension,
etc. and that his descension was not before his death but after, Ergo Christus
non resurrexit ab inferno ante mortem suam: and also Peeter expounds it even
so in these words: Providens (David) locutus est de resurrectione Christi; quia
neque derelicta est anima eius in inferno, etc.


Thus much touching the 3. exposition. Now follows the 4. and last.
WILLIAM PERKINS. But let us come to the fourth exposition. He descended into
hell, that is, when he was dead and buried, he was held captive in the grave,
and lay in bondage under death for the space of three days. This exposition
also may be gathered forth of the scriptures. Act. 24.
So Peter says, God has raised him up (speaking of Christ) and loosed the
sorrows of death, because it was impossible that he should be holden of it.

Where we may see, that between the death and the resurrection of Christ,
there is placed a third matter, which is not mentioned in any clause of the
Apostles Creed save in this; and that is his bondage under death, which
comes in between his death and his rising again, and the words themselves
do most fitly bear this sense.

Genesis 37. 53. death or the grave.
I will go down into hell to my son mourning.

[he rose again the third day] answering to the first degree of his humiliation
[he died] the 2. degree of his exaltation; [hee ascended into heaven,]
answering to his going into the grave, or he was buried. And thirdly his
sitting at the right hand of God (which is the highest degree of his
exaltation) answering to the lowest degree of his humiliation, he descended
into hell.

These two last expositions are commonly

Thus ends the 4. exposition.


JOHN HIGINS Christ was buried and descended into all, and cannot at all be
contained. So we find that Christ was free among the dead* Asal. 88. 6.
whom God has raised up, loosing the sorrows of hell, Act. 2. 24.
because it was impossible he should be holden of it. Variae Lectiones
Grae^^^. Syra uer^^. Hieromi^^i translat.
Why was it impossible? because he is free, and because the gates of hell
cannot prevail against his church, much-lesse against himself which is the
head thereof.



Genesis 37. 53
and of Christ's descension into hell well weighed by the state of the Church in
Aegypte, Luke 16. 25.
and by the speech of his gransire Abraham in bliss, and by the nature of the
word (...) is not so full of question as men do make it.

Wherefore the best exposition agrees best with the order of the Creed thus:
first he was crucified by the Jews: secondly he died when he gave up the ghost;
thirdly he was buried by Joseph of Arymathea etc. fourthly he descended into
hell, that was in spirit, or soul: fifthly the third day he rose again from the
dead, and sixthly he ascended into heaven etc. but your secondly he was buried,
and thirdly laid in the grave, make two burials.

Thus have I briefly delivered, what I thought meet to be said, concerning
the descension of Christ into hell. In all which I refer my self to the
judgment of those who may and can best descerne of these matters, as by the
word of God, and her Majesty's Laws I am bound.


Faults escaped in the printing.
P. 3. lin. 10. for is declared read is also declared

P. 8. in the margin, for Jam. 20 read John 20.

P. 18. lin. 9. for curcified read crucified

P. 24. lin. vlt. for this page read this next page

P. 25. in the margin for Ge^. 27 read Genesis 2. 7.

FINIS.

