THE FIRST MOTIVE OF T. H. MASTER OF ARTS, AND LATELY MINISTER, TO SVSPECT THE
INTEGRITY OF HIS Religion:

Which was DETECTION OF FALSEHOOD in D. Humfrey, D. Field, and other learned
Protestants, touching the question of Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead.

With his PARTICVLAR CONSIDERATIONS persuading him to embrace the Catholic
doctrine in these, and other points. *

An Appendix entitled, TRY BEFORE YOU TRUST.

Wherein Some notable untruths of D. Field, and D. Morton are discovered.

Printed 1609.

S. AVGVSTIN. de vtilit. credendi, contra Manichaeos. cap. 14.
NVllis me video credidisse, nisi populorum, atque gentium confirmatae
opinioni, ac famae admodum celeberrimae; hos autem populos Ecclesiae CATHOLICAE
mysteria vsquequaque occupasse. Cur non igitur apud cos potissimum
diligentissime requiram, quid Christus praeceperit, quorum authoritate
commotus, Christum aliquid vtile praecepisse, iam credidi? Tune mihi melius
expositurus es, quid ille dixerit? Quem suisse, aut esse non putarem, si abs te
mihi hoc commendaretur esse credendum. Hoc ergo credidi, vt dixi, famae,
celebritate, consensione, vetustate roboratae. Vos autem and tam pauci, and tam
turbulenti, and tam noui, nemini dubium est, quam nihil dignum authoritate
praeferatis. Quae igitur ista tantae dementia est? Illis creed Christo esse
credendum; and a no bis disce, quid dixerit. Cur obsecrote? Nam si illi
[Catholici] deficerent, nec me quicquam docere possent: multo facilius mihi
persuaderem Christo non esse credendum, quam de illo cuiquam, nisi ab jis, per
quos ei credidissem, discendum.

TO THE PROTESTANT READER.
IT was my purpose to be silent, until I was enforced to speak; for the
public proceedinge against me, has drawn me unto this public defense; and
specially, because it was by those persons, whom I have reverenced from my
heart, and in that place, which must always challendge an interest in my
poor, unworthy self.

Wherefore, being invited, and compelled unto this coursey, I present unto thee
(loving contreyman) one MOTIVE of my chandge; the first in order, and (with me)
very effectual in weight.

Expect not any curious, or ample discourse; for I do here intend to deliver
only such peculiar things, as prevailed with me in the beginning, and rowsing
me out of my lethargy in schism, and heresy, provoked me unto a diligent
inuestigation of the truth. My other T^^.
motives shall remayn prisoners in my custody, unless the importunity of
friends, or malignity of adversaries may (perhapps) extort their enlardgement
from me, against the proper inclination of my will.

Mean while accept this little schedule (is it not a little one, and thy soul
shall live?) Genesis 19 20
with kind affection. And though I may require it as justice, yet I will desire
it as a favor; let not prejudice forestall thy judgment, nor passion supplant
thy reason. Peruse diligently, compare exactly, and give thy verdict uprightly,
in presence of the all-seing eye. Then I doubt not, but seeking thou shall
find, and finding wilt confess, God was here, Genesis 28.16.
and I knew it not.

Thy devoted contreyman Theophilus Hyggons.

THE GENERAL CONTENTS OF THIS TREATISE, DIVIDED INTO 2. BOOKS.
1. In the First book are expressed two Reasons, the one DOCTRINALL, the
other MORAL, which svvayed my understanding povverfully, to yeald firm
assent unto the Catholic faith, touching Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead.
2. In the Second book are laid forth certain egregious falsehoods of D.
Field, D. Humfrey, M. Rogers, and others, in their exceptions against the same.
THE PARTICVLAR CONTENTS IN EACH BOOK.
IN THE FIRST BOOK, AND FIRST PART, CONTAINING THE DOCTRINALL REASON.
CHAP. 1.. 1. Purgatory proved by the clear authority of Scripture. Matthew.
12.32., 2. The Fathers judgments touching the said parcel of holy Scripture..
3. Three reasons, which moved me to follow the doctrinall expositions of the
Fathers, rather then of Calvin. Luth. etc.
CHAP. 2.. 1. Of a trial by the Fathers, Protestants in England condescend
thereunto.. 2. Prayer for the dead is an Apostolical Tradition by the
testimony of the Fathers. The same appears by the rules assigned by
Protestants, to know, what is an Apostolical Tradition.. 3. Prayer for the
dead, and Purgatory do mutually prove each other.. 4. The ancient Catholic
Church (unto which the Protestants in England appeal) did intend in her
Prayers, and Oblations, to relieve some souls departed, and afflicted with
temporal pain.. 5. The collusion of D. Field, in delivering the purpose of the
ancient Catholic Church, in her Prayers, and Oblations for the dead.. 6.
Reasons persuading me rather to follow S. August. and the ancient Church, then
D. Field, and his reformed Congregations.

IN THE SECOND PART OF THE FIRST BOOK, CONTAINING THE MORAL REASON.
CHAP. 1.. 1. The PROVIDENCE of God, preserving a visible Church in all ages..
2. This visible Church is free from damnable error. The Protestants
looseness, and confusion in their delineation of the Church.. 3. Protestants
condemn Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead, as heretical, and blasphemous..
4. This doctrine was embraced by the universal Church, and consequently is
approved by the singular PROVIDENCE of almighty God.
CHAP. 2.. 1. The base, and impious condition of Aerius and Henricus, who first
impugned this doctrine.. 2. The WISDOM of God, appoynting fit messengers to
be Reformers of his Church, does excellently confirm this doctrine.
CHAP. 3.. 1. The nature, and use of Miracles, by which God does bear witness
unto some TRVTH. A triple consideration of Miracles, according to the triple
distinction of the Church.. 2. A miracle wrought by S. Bernard to the confusion
of Henricus, and his doctrines.. 3. There is no exception against the said
Miracle.. 4. The said Miracle does evidently convince the Protestants in this,
and other points.. 5 An exception of D. Field (pretending, that no particular,
defended by the Papists against Protestants, was ever confirmed by Miracle) is
refelled by our Conversion from Paganism to Popery (as it is termed) and by
the authority of Gerson, whom D. Field has magnified, as one that desired the
same Reformation long since, which Protestants have lately effected.
CHAP. 4.. 1. The grounds, which I followed in the precedents, are invincible..
2. The particulars therein are very clear. A direction for the Reader to judge
orderly, and substantially concerning the same. A conclusion of the first Part,
with a Protestation unto the Reader.

IN THE SECOND BOOK, AND FIRST PART, CONTAINING THE VNTRVTHS OF D. FIELD.
CHAP. 1.. 1. S. Gregory. the 4. glorious Doctors of the Latin Church, abused
by D. Field, in this doctrine of Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead.. 2. S.
Augustine. the 4. glorious Doctors of the Latin Church, abused by D. Field, in
this doctrine of Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead.. 3. S. Hierome. the 4.
glorious Doctors of the Latin Church, abused by D. Field, in this doctrine of
Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead.. 4. S. Ambrose. the 4. glorious Doctors of
the Latin Church, abused by D. Field, in this doctrine of Purgatory, and
Prayer for the dead.
CHAP. 2. D. Field does unjustly accuse CARD. BELLARMINE of trifling and
senseless foolery in this matter. Calvin does truly confess, that the
Protestats are opposite unto Antiquity therein. CHAP. 3.. 1. D. Field himself
does trifle, and (if it be justice to repay him with his own) he commits
senseless foolery in describing the heresy of Aerius; whereof all Protestants
are guilty, and consequently are not Catholics.. 2. The contradiction, vanity,
and falsehood of Protestants; some accusing, some defending Aerius in his
impugnation of Prayer, and Oblation for the dead.. 3. D. Field makes a
lamentable apology for the Protestants diversity in their censures, touching
the aforesaid heresy. The true, and proper reason of their diversity therein,
is assigned. Their strandge, and variable deportment toward the ancient
Fathers.
CHAP. 4. A notable untruth of D. Field in proposing the difference betwixt the
Protestants, and Papists in the question of Purgatory. By which dealing, he
has utterly overthrowen his highly respected book, and brought eternal
confusion unto his Church.
IN THE SECOND PART OF THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. 1.. 1. M. Rogers abuses Dionys. Carthusian.. 2. He brandeth S. Gregory
with the name of a Papist, and traduceth Eckius. Temporal punishment inflicted
after remission of the guilt of sin.
CHAP. 2. sect;. 1. D. Humfrey does singularly abuse a certain testimony of S.
Augustine. The detectio^ of which falsehood, ministered the first occasion of my
chandge.. 2. An other of his unfaithful practices, against the same Father.
etc.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER, TOUCHING THE ORDER, AND METHOD OF THIS
TREATISE.
COurteous Reader; though the beginning of my alienation from the Protestants,
did arise from the detection of some egregious falsehoods in D. Humfrey
(perverting S. Augustine) and in D. Field (traducing S. Ambrose) whence I was
excited to spend much time in searching out the doctrine of the ancient Church,
concerning PVRGATORY, and PRAYER FOR THE DEAD; yet I have not alvvayes
follovved that order (precisely) in this ensuing Treatise: but for thy better
direction, and instruction, I have thought it expedient, FIRST, to lay forth
the truth of this doctrine, and SECONDLY to acquaynt thee with their
falsehoods against the same.

THE FIRST BOOK Wherein THE CATHOLIC DOCTRINE OF PVRGATORY, AND PRAYER FOR
THE DEAD, IS CLEARLY proved.

THE FIRST PART OF THE FIRST BOOK, CONTAINING A DOCTRINALL REASON, which
persuaded me to intertayn the aforesaid doctrine.

CHAPTER I. The Reason taken from HOLY SCRIPTVRE to prove PVRGATORY.
. 1. The sense of the Evangelist S. Matthew; Chap. 12. v. 32.
1. AMONGST sundry testimonies of holy writ, this one seemed (in mine
opinion) to be of singular force; viz. Whosoever shall speak a word against
the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him in this world, nor in the world to
come. For as this Text does imply in the immediate sense thereof, that the
Sin against the holy Ghost shall never be forgiven, so it does imply farther
a distinction of sins, some whereof are remissible, and some irremissible:
some are pardoned in this world, and some in the world to come.

2. This interpretation is founded upon a special reason; because S. 3.2^.
Mark (entreating of the same matter) says, that blasphemy against the holy
Ghost shall never be forgiven [non in aeternum] and S. Matthew divides this
space of eternity into seculum praesens, and seculum futurum, the world
present, and the world to come, as being two several, and distinct parts
thereof; so that the same thing is noted by each Evangelist, but coniunctiuely
in the one, and distributiuely in the other.

3. The Protestants derive this text after an other manner, and say, that S.
Matthew is to be expounded by S. Mark, and so the intendment of this Scripture
is precisely, and merely to show, that the great sin (being irremissible in
an eminent degree) shall never be forgiven.

4. But this simple gloss could yeald me no satisfaction. For though it were
the purpose of our Lord to declare that one sin shall never be forgiven, yet
he expresses himself by such a distinction, as does manifestly enforce the
remission of some sins in the future life. And forasmuchas S. Matthew deals
more copiously herein then S. Mark, there is no reason why the first should be
contracted by the second, but rather it is necessary to enlardge the second by
the first.

5. Neither did it seem a probable conceit unto me (though it be intertayned
by many) that our Savior did not make a partition of sins (some to be
remitted in this world, and some in the next) but used an exaggeration to show
the irremissibillity of one sin, as if I should say, A barren woman shall not
bear a child neither in this world, nor in the world to come: For though the
WORD did speak, Io. 7.46.
as never man spoke (in respect of Majesty, gravity, and power) yet he does not
so decline the accustomed manner of speech, as that he would speak against the
rules of prudency, and moral understanding; as this speech is, if it be sensed
in this manner. And who would not esteem him to be a ridiculous, and absurd
Orator that should say, This woman shall not bear a child in this world,
neither in the world to come?

6. Wherefore seeing that the Protestants exposition is formed against
discretion, and that it is not warrantable by any other parcel of Scripture,
which is to be interpreted in this manner, I was fearful to be entangled by
their collusions: and because I would deal impartially in a matter of such
consequence, as this is, I held a very indifferent course, whereby I might not
attribute any thing unto mine own judgment, nor yet detract from their
estimation; and therefore I remitted this point unto the decision of the
blessed Fathers; knowing well, that it is a precept of the Highest, Deuteronomy. 32.7.
Ask the Fathers, and they shall tell thee; the Ancients, and they shall show
thee: and thus did D. Toby Matthew apply this Text, See D. Humfrey in resp. ad
5. rat. Edm. Campiani.
when he flourished in his concionall answer to remove that disgrace, which
Rat. 5.
Edm. Campian had fastened upon him; and not unjustly, as many men conceive.

7. Besides; since it is the monition of S. 1. Cor. 14.32.
Paul, that the Spiritts of Prophetts, are subject unto the Prophetts, the
rule of equity does prescribe, that in the interpretation of holy writ, the
fewest should yeald unto the most, and the later unto the former; they also
being more competent Judges to determine a strife, who never were Actours
(personally) in the contention.

. 2. The Fathers judgment of this Scripture.
1. I Was assured by D. Of the Church page 170.
Field that S. Augustine (I am bold to entreat his leave to honor Augustine
with the name of SAINT, howsoever he has not once vouchsafed in his four
books to grace him, or any Father with this glorious title) is the greatest of
all the Fathers, and worthiest Divine, that the Church of God ever had since
the Apostles times. Wherefore I was imboldned to rest securely in his excellent
resolution, which here ensues. De Ciuit, Dei l. 21. c. 24.
The prayer of the Church, or of godly persons is heard for some men deceased
out of this world; but yet for such only as (being regenerated in Christ) did
neither live so ill, that (...) they be made unworthy of mercy; nor yet so
well, (...) that they have no need thereof. At the resurrection of the dead
there shall be some found, to whom mercy shall be granted, that whereas their
souls have suffered Purgatory.
pains after death, they shall not be cast into everlasting fire. Neque enim
VERACITER diceretur etc. For it could not be said TRVLY of some men, that their
sins should not be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come, unless
there should be some men, who though they are not pardoned in this world, yet
they should be pardoned in the world to come. So he: in whose profound, and
judicious apprehension, there is a penal estate of souls temporally afflicted
after their dissolution from the body, if there be any truth in the holy
Scripture it self; which some Protestants have been more ready to abjure, then
to relinquish their own preiudicate opinions.

2. My second Author, was that worthy Pope S. Gregory, surnamed the Great; who
as he was dear unto me for many respects, so principally, because he was the
Apostle of our nation; for S. Bernard de co^siderat. lib. 3.
he destinated Augustine to deliver the faith of Christ unto the English: and
hence our Venerable country man Eccles. hist. l. 2. c. 1.
S. Beba fears not to say, though he be not an Apostle unto others, yet
doubtless he is so unto us, for we are the seal of his Apostleshipp in our
Lord. His sentence is this. Dialog. l. 4. c. 39.
We must believe that there is a Purgatory fire before the day of Judgment,
because the Truth does say, If any man shall utter blasphemy against the holy
Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to
come. In which saying we are given to understand, that some sins may be
released in this world, and some in the next. Quod enim de vno negatur,
consequens intellectus patet, quia de quibusdam conceditur. For that which is
denied of one, is consequently yealded of the other. So he; whose reason seemed
very powerable unto me in this behalf.

3. My third Author was S. Isidore (Bishopp of Civil) a reverend person,
wise, virtuous, learned, and always accepted as an eminent Doctor of the
Catholic Church. His judgment is this. De diuinis officijs l. 1. c. 18.
Whereas our Lord says, that, Whosoever sins against the holy Ghost, his
sin shall not be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come, he does
demonstrate, that sins shall be remitted unto some men in an other world, and
cleansed with the fire of S. August. in Psalm. 37. calls it the fire of
emendatio^.
Purgation.

4. My fourth Author was S. Beda, one of the principal ornaments of our
nation, and renowned in the Christian world for his many, and learned volumes,
which are extant at this day. His judgment is this. Comme^t. in Matthew. 12.
Whereas our Lord denies pardon [vnto him that despayreth] both in this life,
and in the life to come, without all question he does declare, that there is
remission of some sins after this life. Again. Comme^t in Marc. 3.
Whereas it is said in the Gospel, that he who blasphemeth the holy Ghost,
shall have no remission in this world, nor in the world to come, we are
informed, that some sins are remitted in this world, and some in the next.
For that which is denied unto one, is consequently granted unto an other.

5. My fifth Author, was S. Bernard, whom I did always affect by a secret, and
peculiar instinct. And though the common proverb goes thus, Bernardus non
vidit omnia, Bernard saw not all things, yet that was not otherwise intended of
him, then S. Augustine writes touching an honorable Martyr; Cyprian saw not
all things, that so some more excellent thing might be seen through him. And
thus they are not abased, but advanced rather; who though they were men of
admirable value, yet they were not exempted from the errors of infirmity,
attending upon the condition of mankind.

6. The sentence of S. Bernard is this. Sermon. 66. in Cantic.
These men [viz the Progenitors of the Walde^sian sect.
Henricians etc.] do not believe that there remains a Purgatory after death,
but that the soul being separated from the body, does pass immediately either
unto rest, or unto damnation. Let them ask therefore of him that said, there
is a sin which shall not be remitted neither in this world, nor in the world
to come, why he spoke thus, if there remayn no forgiveness, nor purgation of
sin in the world to come?

. 3. My reasons to follow the doctrinall expositions of the Fathers (and
chiefly where they consent) rather then of ZANCH. LVTH. ZVINGL. CALV. etc.
1. When I had premised these considerations, I could not approve the
censorious, and rash humor of Hierome Zanchy (an Author, unto whom I had
dedicated no small part of my affection) who De Natura Dei, l 4 c. 4.
discoursing lardgely of prayer for the dead, concludes thus: If the Fathers
did intend, that some sins are remitted in the next world, which were not
remitted in this, we may reject them all in this arcicle with a good conscience.

2. For I did conceive first, that Zanchius (in the multiplicity of his
reading) could not be ignorant of the Fathers resolution herein; and therefore
his supposition [ if the Fathers etc.] was very frivolous. Secondly I
considered, that in this dispute, or in the like, I could with greater reason,
and better conscience admit the interpretation of the Fathers, then of any
late Professor in the reformed Churches (as they are styled) and I was induced
hereunto for three necessary respects.

3. John Calvin (whom certain Pinczouiens.
Ministers in Polonia do gloriously entitle, the Doctor of Doctors, the
Divine of Divines, who alone is of more value, then an hundred Augustines; and
hence it is, that in the lardge Imprinted at the Black Friars.
Table of Gods faithful witnesses, he is extolled thus; No man could expound
the Scriptures more His cunning herein is declared by D. Hunnius (a Lutheran)
saying, that Calvin was an acute Instrument of the Devil.
cunningly then he) renouncing the judgment of all the Fathers (yea of the
first sacred Council of Nice it self) and concurring with the damned Arrians
in his exposition, says expressly, Comme^t. in Ioh. 10.30. Ego and Pater vnu^
sumus.
Scio veteros abusos suisse hoc loco etc. I know that the ancients abused this
place to prove homousia, that is to say, the consubstantiality of the Father,
and the Son. Wherefore (being so guided by his Spirit) he gives the
Arrianicall gloss upon that Text, and says, that the Unity whereof our
Savior speaks, is to be understood of Consent, and not of Essence. This rare
impiety in so great a Person (discovered unto me first of all by D. Calvin.
Iudaiz.
Hunnius, the Professor in Luthers own chair) did treat with me more then
two years ago (as some of my kindest friends in England can bear me witness)
to renounce my Allobrogian Apostle, and to be suspicious of new
interpretations; but specially, which concern matters of doctrine, and faith,
as this particular does. For, it may please you to consider with me, that
though the Fathers err sometimes in their expositions, secundum analogiam loci,
in respect of the analogy of the place, yet they are sincere, and respective to
preserve the analogy of faith. And where their interpretatio^s agree, we may
resolve infallibly, This is the doctrine of the Catholic Church.

4. SECONDLY, because I saw the strandge mutability Luther himself (whose
Gospel was cast in the mould of a See the Orthodox Confession of the
Tigarines, who complayn of his inconstant humors.
variable fancy) in his judgment of the Scripture. This is the man (nay the
Angel rather) who is the first moouer of all late Evangelical spheres. But
when he is divided into his three parts, it will appear, that he was not the
flying Angel mentioned in the 14.16.
Apocalypse (as M. de Antichristo; page 324.
Gabriel Powell fancieth) but a lying Devil, as captayn Tom. 2. contra L^theri
Co^fess.
Zuinglius does no less truly, then severely chastise him for his false
doctrines, and inte^perate deportment.

5. First; Martin Initiant, made an earnest protestation in his publik disputes
at Lipsia, and said See Eckius in Homil. Tom. 3. homil. 4. in die Animaerum;
circa med.
; I, who believe strongly that there is Purgatory, yea I am bold to affirm, I
know that there is Purgatory, am easily persuaded that there is me^tio^ of it
in Scripture.

6. Secondly; Martin Progredient, was some what chandged from his former self,
and now the Angels feathers began to appear by little, and little. Roffens.
contra Luth. artic. 37.
I do believe (says he) that there is Purgatory, and I do give me^ counsel to
believe it; but yet (o tender hearted man) I would have no man compelled to
believe it; for I find no mention thereof in the Scriptures.

7. Thirdly; Martin Consu^mated gave this incouradgeme^t unto a rebellious
faction; in epist. ad VValde^s
Whereas you deny Purgatory, and condemn Masses, Vigills, Monasteries,
Cloisters, and whatsoever was erected by this imposture, I approve you
altogether therein. Thus did M. Luther behave himself in this particular, and
thus violently he rejected, what soever was distastful unto his uncertain, and
misguided humor. Wherefore I perceived now, that though the censure of
Zuinglius was very sharp, yet it was grounded upon equity, whereas he says,
that Tom. 2. co^tra Luth. confess.
Luther is a false Prophet; an incorrigible Heretic; an Impostour; Antichrist;
a Devil; a fool; a brabler, and not a Divine; one, whose books contayn
nothing else in them, but a manifest oppression of the pure truth, and
evangelical light. etc. To which purpose he violated the holy Canon of sacred
Scripture, and dispundged the This point is fairly aimed at by D. Field page
252.
epistle of S. James with great contempt.

8. My last, and THIRD reason was taken from a consideration of Zuinglius, the
first Patriarch of our late English Gospel. For he De subsid. Sacrum.
acknowledges, [Hoc est Corpus meum] the verb est is put for significat; and
says; whether he were White, or Black, I remember not. But In pro^m.
Caluinist. Theolog. Many heretics have had contrary Devils; as Nestorius,
Enryches etc.
Conradus (a great superintendent in Luthers gospel) shows that it was a
black one; and no doubt but he was of the same color as those companions were,
by whom Luther was attended ( no vulgar Devils, in his opinion) and they
propounded unto me (says See Iustus Caluinus, annotat. in praescript. Tertull.
cap. 43.
Luther) the arguments of the Sacramentaries (to wittt of Zuinglius,
Oecolampad. etc.) but I overcame them all by the word of the Lord.

9. Now let any Christian heart uprightly, syncerely, and feelingly weigh,
whether finding this pride in some, this Diuelry in others (they being the
first, and principal masters in our gospel) and mutual oppugnation of their
own senses in holy Scripture, I had not reasonable, yea necessary, and
ponderous motives to fly unto the religious, learned, and reverend Fathers of
the Catholic Church, to understand the true sense, and purport of the
aforesaid Scripture. They favored no Arrian heresy, they hated society with
Devils; they were guided by the sanctifying Spirit, and therefore, as I
concluded then, so I conclude now; Let my soul rest with them in peace; these
are the men whose sense I will intertayn, rather then the new glosses of these
late Professors. Thus by the validity of this Text, I was led powerfully into
the approbation of this doctrine.

CHAP. II. The Reason taken from FATHERS, and APOSTOLICAL TRADITION, to prove
PVRGATORY.
. 1. Trial by the Fathers.
1. MAny learned Protestants conceive, that the controversies of these unhappy
times will be extended without any measure, unless Antiquity be made the
vmpire in this quarrel. For the holy Fathers are witnessing Judges, and
judging VVitnesses in this behalf. To this end, and purpose D. Lilly (a man of
excellent literature) did allege, In a sermon at Oxford within these few
years.
and applaud the wise, and necessary process of Theodosius (a most Christian
Emperor) against certain insolent, and supercilious heretics, whose pride in
Neque enim consimiliter singuli de veterum scriptis sentieba^t, etc. See Sozom.
l. 7. c. 12. and compare this with the Protestants case. Citant and ipsi
Patres: Deus bone, qua fide, ete Gregor. de Valent. in analys. Fidei; page 18.
Talis est phrenesis nostrorum Romanistarum, and eo mayor, etc.
rejecting the Fathers did seem a desperate disease; and to be cured rather by
sharp laws, then by farther dispute.

2. For mine own part; I protest freely from my heart, that I was secured to
make a trial of this present cause by the worthy Fathers; being warranted
thereunto, not only by my private sense, but much more by the testimony of
sundry Protestants, and specially of two, whose names were (sometimes) full of
reverence in my thoughts.

3. The first was D. HVMFREY; whose highly respected answer to Edm. Campian
draws to a conclusion with this sentence. Thrasilaus in his mad humor took
all the ships, which he beheld in the Attick haven, to be his own, though he
possessed not any vessel. Such is the phrensy of our Romanists, yea greater
also, because they see, and yet seeing they dissemble, that they are destitute
of all defense from the Fathers. Thus to clear himself from that folly, which
Rat. 5.
Edm. Campian obiecteth unto him, and unto M. Jewel (his dear Achates) he
stretched his style, until it brake into a vast, and notable untruth.

4. The second was D. FIELD, whose praise is in the gospel of England; a man,
upon whom the eyes of our Oxford.
University are cast, as a sans pareill of this age for subtle dispute, and
profound science. We reverence (says page 148.
he) and honor the Fathers much more then the Romanists do etc. Again. page
204. in marg.
Though Luther, and the rest in the beginning did seem to decline the trial
by the Fathers, because the corruption of their writings were so many, as could
not be discovered at the first; yet now having found out by the help of so
many learned men both of our adversaries, and amongst our selves (who have
trauailled in that kind) which are their undoubted works, and which are
doubtful, or vndoubtfully forged, Not^.
We willingly admit trial by the Fathers.

5. Though D. Field does untruly allege the cause why Luther, Zuinglius, etc.
declined trial by the Fathers, and mitigateth their folly with a fair
pretense, that (forsooth) they seemed to do so; yet it was not my purpose then,
nor now to employ my thoughts in dismaking the vanity of these suggestions. It
was, and is sufficient for me to consider; that as his assertion concerning a
trial by the Fathers is plain, so it is countenanced by the authority of him
who is the great Metropolitan of our English Church. It pleased your Grace
favorably to approve these my poor pains, etc. See the epist dedicat. to
the Archbish. of Ca^nt.
And therefore, such as profess themselves members of her society, cannot
renounce that position, which in the name of all, and in the authority of the
chiefest, is so freely recommended unto the world.

6. Finally; I concluded with that famous prescription of S. Contra Julian.
Pelag.
Augustine, saying; let us referr our selves unto the Ancients, who were
offended neither with us, nor you: but what they found in the Church, they
retained, and what they learned they taught, and what they received of their
Fathers, they delivered unto their children. Thus the question is translated a
Iure ad Factum, from the right unto the fact; for all wise, and ingenious men
will easily discern that (in this case, and many like unto it) the later which
is more clear, will lead us unto the former, which seems more obscure.

. 2. Prayer for the dead is derived from the blessed Apostles.
1. I Considered that one thing may have a double proof; to wit, by Scripture,
and by Tradition also. And hence it is that the most holy, and most blessed
Irenaeus (as he is truly Epiphan. here is. 34.
called) confuteth the Valentinians first by the evidence of Scripture, and
secondly by the tradition of the Apostles, but specially in the Roman Church;
unto which (as he Lib. 3. cap. 3.
says) all Christians must necessarily repayr, because she is of more
powerful principallity then the rest. A point very remarqueable by the way;
for (upon my knowledge) it drives the Protestants unto many dishonest, and
impertinent euasions.

2. I might give instance in sundry doctrines, which admit this double proof;
and therefore I was desirous to understand; why D. Page 240. 241.
Field (amongst other particulars) should esteem it a folly, and an
inconstancy in his Romanists to say, that Purgatory is holden by Tradition, and
yet it is proved by Scriptures also.

3. But forasmuch as I saw that his desire to contradict, does transport him
beyond his reason to conceive, I passed over this matter, and I came unto an
other sentence (fit for my purpose) which he affords with greater equity,
and moderation; viz. Page 232.
It is not the writing which gives things their authority, but the worth, and
creditt of him that delivers them, though but by word, and lively voice
alone. And; the Papists have good reason to equal their traditions unto the
written word, if they can prove any such unwritten verities. Wherefore it was
my desire (upon the security of such grounds) to find out the fountayn, and
origin (at least in the time of the Gospel) of prayer for the dead. And here
diverse testimonies presented themselves unto me, and specially two, which
rested my searching thoughts in good tranquillity, and peace.

4. The First was taken from S. Chrysostom (the principal Father of the
Greeks) who in a Homil. 75. ad Pop. Antioch.
sermon unto the people, delivered this proposition; It was not unadvisedly
decreed by the Apostles, that in the fearful mysteries [Sacrifice of the
Masse] there should be a commemoration of the dead: For they knew that the dead
receive great benefit, and vtility thereby.

5. The Second was taken from S. Augustine; In Instit.
who being the chieftayn of Divines (as Calvin does agnize) and the hammer of
heretics (as he is confessed by the public voice of the Catholic Church)
gave me this solid, clear, and ponderous information Sermon. 32. de verb. Apost.
; There is no doubt, but that by the prayers of holy Church, and by the
healthful Sacrifice, and by alms, the souls of the dead are relieved; that
God may deal more mercifully with them, then their sins have deserved. For
this (being delivered by our Fathers) is observed by the Universal Church.

6. Here I considered with my self, that whereas Traditions have a quadruple
distinction; first from their Authors, into Divine, Apostolical, and
Ecclesiastical; secondly from their Matter, into Doctrinall, Moral, and
Ceremonial; thirdly from their Place, into General, and Particular; fourthly
from their Time, into Perpetual, and Temporal: that S. Augustine does
entreat here of an APOSTOLICAL Tradition, doctrinall, general and perpetual.
And the reasons which persuaded me to conceive so, were many, but principally
these three, which here ensue. FIRST, because he does not say, inuentum, but
Tradere tradita (by a perpetual succession) is an infallible note of the
Catholic faith.
traditum; not invented, but delivered by our Fathers; according to the sweet,
and sure prescription of cap. 27.
Vincentius Lirinensis in his little, golden book against the innovation of
profane heresies; 1. Tim. 6.
Custodi depositum, etc. Keep that which is committed unto thee. And what is
this depositum? That which thou have received, and not devised; that which is
brought down unto thee, and not brought forth by thee; that, wherein thou art
a scholar, and not a master; a follower, and not a guide, etc.

7. SECONDLY; because the rule of S. Contra Donatist. de Baptism^ l. 4 c. 24.
Augustine (which D. page 242.
Field himself does accept) was so clear, and weighty, that I could not resist
the power thereof; viz. Whatsoever is frequented by the Universal Church, and
was not instituted by Counsels, but was always held, that is believed most
rightly to be an Apostolical Tradition. Such is the custom of Prayer for the
dead. For first; It was practiced in all ages, and in all places, as the most
venerable Authors do constantly, and uniformly teach. Supplications for the
souls of the dead, were powered forth by the Universal Church in de cura pr^
mort. cap. 1.
S. Augustines time; and the like testimonies were affoorded unto me by the
Fathers of the Primitive Church; namely, S. Epist. 1. It is mentioned by
Council. Vasens. 1. c. 6.
Clemens the Martyr, in the year of our Lord 110; de Coron. Milit.
Tertullian in year of our Lord 210; who de Monogam.
prescribes (according to the doctrine of the Catholic Church) unto the wife,
that she should pray for the soul of her husband, to procure his rest, and
ease. Secondly; I could not possibly design any Council, Oecumenicall,
National, or Provincial; any Bishop, Supreme, or Subordinate, by whom this
custom was brought into the Church. And here I considered, that heresy does
always spring from some certain Person, Time, and Place; Vince^t. Lir.
and so it is discouerable by these circumstances. But if the Author cannot be
specially named (which is a rare accident) yet this was sufficient unto me, to
conceive; that as Catholic Religion implies three things, viz. Antiquity,
Universality, and Consent; so Heresy (being opposite thereunto) implies
necessarily the three contraries, viz. Nouelty, Particularity, and Distraction.

8. My THIRD reason to believe that this is an Apostolical Tradition, was
derived from the liberallity of D. page 242.
Field himself. Whatsoever all, or the most famous, and renowned in all ages,
or, at the least, in diverse ages, have constantly delivered, as received from
them, that went before them (no man doubting, or contradicting it) may be
thought to be an Apostolical Tradition. This rule was very appliable unto my
purpose. For first; I had many pregnant demonstrations, and conformable
testimonies of the most famous, and renowned in all ages, constantly delivering
this thing, as received from them that went before. See the 2. Part; chap. 2.
And secondly; I found that no man did contradict, or doubt herein, but such
only, as were damned heretics, and are so recognized by the public voice of
the Church. Wherefore I concluded ineuitably (by D. Fields allowance) that
Prayer for the dead may be thought to be an Apostolical Tradition; and Decad.
4. sermon. 10.
Bullinger himself fears not to say, that this is the judgment of the
Fathers. Whence I was compelled to infer, that D. against D. Bishopp; part.
1. page 80.
Abbott does willingly deceive himself, saying; that Prayer for the dead is a
Tradition, and an ordinance of the Church; to which purpose he misinforceth the
testimony of Hares. 75.
Epiphanius, whereby he would exempt Aerius from the crime of heresy, justly
laid unto his chardge by S. Hares. 53.
Augustine, and many others. Lastly, I was compelled to disallow the
groundless opinion of de Natura Dei lib. 4. c. 4.
Zanchius, and some others, who referr the origin of prayer for the dead, unto
humane affection, and imitation of the Gentiles.

3. The mutual dependency of Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead.
1. When I had thus ascended unto the fountayn of Prayer for the dead, I
reflected upon my self, and demanded of mine own heart, saying; but what is
this unto PVRGATORY? For that was the issue, unto which my thoughts did finally
incline.

2. Wherefore, for better illustration of this matter, and information of the
Reader, I will here lay down a necessary point, derived out of the testimonies
which ensue in the next section of this chapter; and so you shall clearly
perceive the connection, and dependency of these things.

3. Though Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead, are things severally
distinguished in their nature, yet they are so inseparably tied in their bond,
that each does mutually prove the other. Prayer for the dead proves
Purgatory per modum signi, by the way of a sign, or declaration; for it does
presuppose a penal estate, wherein some souls are afflicted temporally after
this life. Purgatory proves the necessity of prayer for the dead per modum
causae, by the way of a cause; for we are obliged by the law of Charity to make
supplication unto God in behalf of our brethren of the Church Patient in
Purgatory, Qui securi estis de vobis, soliciti est^te de nobis. S. August.
meditat. cap. 24.
as they being translated into the Church Triumphant in Heaven, are led by the
abundance of their charity, to make intercession for us, of the Church Militant
in Earth. Which triple distinction of the Church I did embrace willingly,
forasmuch as it was confessed solemnly by Sir John Oldcastle himself; howbeit
M. Fox seeing that this was no small disreputation unto the faith of our
traiterous Martyr, mingleth a if any such place [as Purgatory] be found in the
Scripture.
few words to abate the force of his confession. This poor subtility of Fox
is dismasked in the Part. 2. chap. 9. number. 18.
three Conuersions of England.

4. Thus I considered that not the Name, but Thing, and that things, not
accidental, but essential were to be inquired by me in this dispute. I
observed farther, that men are not the Authors to make, but Expositours to
declare their faith. And as we do penetrate more excelle^tly into the knowledge
of any thing, so we are enabled accordingly to express the same in proper, and
significant words. For as the imposition of words arises from the freeness of
our will, so the aptness of their imposition flows from the clearness of
our understanding.

5. Finally; I called unto remembrance, that the Church of God has drawn many
lardge doctrines into compendious names; as Trinity, Sacrament, and the like,
Thus the doctrine of Homousia, or the co^substantiality of the Father, and the
Son, Io. 10.30.
is really contained in the holy Scripture [ I, and my Father are one: See
before; Chap. 1.. 3. number. 3.
a plain Text; howsoever it be Arrianically violated by Caluin] but the word it
self was established by the first sacred Council of Nice. Thus also I saw that
(in the opinion of the Papists) the doctrine of Metousia, or Transubstantiation
in the Sacrament, is implied in the Scripture [ This is my body: which little
sentence is distracted by us Protestants into 9. are noted by Bellarm. de
Euchar. l. 1. c. 8. You shall find 84. noted by Claud. de Saint. in lib. de
Euchar. Repetit. 1. cap. 10.
many interpretations] but the word it self was confirmed by a 3. Latera^.
general Council, not inuenting a new faith (for the whole Church past, and
present consented therein) by an audacious decree, but expressing the old by a
significant name. For it is iudiciously observed by Part. 1. Sermon. pro viago
Regis Romans secu^da part principali. direct. 3.
Gerson (against the innouatio^s of Wickliffe and Husse) that in the Church we
must keep a certain form of speech, and that it is an evil liberty to speak
erroneously, and amiss. Wherefore as the holy Council of Nice did wisely
restrayn all men to acknowledge the word Homousia, so the Catholics in the
Ariminian Council saw (too late) the great inconvenience in leaving men unto a
liberty of speech in this behalf; For the world did sigh (as S. contra Lucifer.
Hierome says) and wondered to see it self become an Arrian; not by any
heretical decree (as M. Cathol. doctrine of the Church of England page 114.
Roger's does untruly insinuate) but by permitting such a freedom, as we
Protestants affect; viz. to define [as we see cause] in matters of faith,
according unto the Scriptures; whence they, and we gayn aduantadge to erect our
own fancies.

. 4. The Ancient Catholic Church in her Prayers for the dead, in her Oblations
etc. did intend (precisely) to relieve souls, afflicted temporally in a penal
estate.
1. When I had thus derived prayer for the dead by a perpetual line from the
holy Apostles, I proceeded farther to examine the purpose, and inte^dme^t of
the Catholic Church in this religious act; for I could not content my self
with this simple gloss of Tom. 1. Epicher. de Canou^ Missa.
Zuinglius; viz: If it be so as Augustine, and Chrysostom affirm, that prayer
for the dead is referred unto the Apostles, I think that the Apostles did only
permit it unto the infirmity of some Christians, etc.

2. This seemed unto me an heathenish evasion, and injurious unto the syncerity
of the Apostles. Besides; was Aerius the only man, filled with the spirit, to
impugn this thing, which suffered no contradiction unto his time? Wherefore
having many reasons to amandate Zuinglius with his black admonitour, I repaired
unto them who were of more candid, and honorable disposition. And here I
singled forth two Fathers, the one of the Greek Church, the other of the
Latin; esteeming this a sure, and conuenable means to lead me into a solid
apprehension of the truth.

3. The FIRST was S. Cateches. mystagog. 5.
Cyrill Arch-bishopp of Jerusalem; who, in his instructions of the people
(whom he was careful to inform herein according to the simplicity of the
Catholic faith) has this ponderous, and effectual sentence: When we offer up
the Sacrifice [commonly known by the name of Mass; a thing which should not
be ingrate unto us Englishmen, See Beda in his Eccles. histor. lib. 1. c. 26.
forasmuch as it was a part of that Christian faith, which we received in our
first conuersion] we make mention of all them, who are fallen asleep before
us. First of the Patriarchs, Apostles, and Martyrs, that God by their
intercession may receive our prayers. Then we pray for our deceased Fathers,
and Bishops, and finally for all men departed amongst us (viz. in the Sea S.
August. de cura pro mort. c. 4.
Catholic communion) For we believe that this is a very great help for the
souls of them, in whose behalf we offer that holy, and fearful Sacrifice,
which is laid upon the Altar.

4. A powerable testimony. But he goes yet farther, and says; We offer up
Christ once slain for our sins, that so we may make him, who is most kind, to
be A propitiatory Sacrifice.
propitious, and merciful unto the quick and dead. This is one of those deadly
heresies (as M. de Antichristo, page 254.
Powell is pleased to affirm) which was devised by the Pope himself, and a
parcel of his Antichristian doctrine.

5. But as Vincentius Lirinensis testifies of himself, Contra haeres. in
praef^t.
that he came forth no^ tam Authoris praesumptione, quam Relatoris fide, rather
by the fidelity of a relatour, then by the presumption of an author, so this
Catholic Archbishopp (a professed, and zealous enemy of all heretics, as his
own Catech. 6. circa med. etc.
sayings may witness unto us) propounded this doctrine unto his own flock
(whose salvation was dear unto him) not by his peculiar authority, as being a
father of his children, but by the warrant of her, whose son he was, and
which is pia matter communis (as S. de cura^ pro mort. cap. 4.
Augustine speaks) the pious, common Mother of us all, and prays for all
the departed, by a general commemoration.

6. For this cause he says, WE offer; WE pray etc. intending hereby to
express the custom of the Universal Church, whose doctrine was famous, and
renowned in this behalf. And though we Protestants do often venditate the
private conceits of some, and veil them under the prete^se of a general
consent, viz. WE say thus; WE think thus; So D. Mor^on in Cathol. Apol. Part.
1. lib. 1. in quaest. ac descensu Christi ad inferos, pretends thus: WE
confess that Christ went [truly] into hell; viz. in soul, as Bellarmine
himself does teach etc. Many such false protestatio^s are used by him, by D.
Field, and others. As for the vanity of D. Morton herein, it is abundantly
refuted by that, which M. Rogers himself delivers in his Cathol. doct. pa. 16.
WE do thus etc. (which is a mere toy; for the very nature, and fundation of
our Religion is such, that, as every one conceiueth by his spirit, so he is in
travail to bring forth his own Church) yet S. Cyrill, and the religious
Fathers were more respective in their words; waighing them in the balance of a
good conscience, and a sober heart.

7. Wherefore addressing my thoughts unto a serious meditation of these things,
I began more sensibly to discover, how vainly, and foolishly I had been
terrified by the spectrical names of Popery, Papists and the like (the late
inuentio^s of an apostatical Friar) inasmuch as the best, the wisest, the most
learned Fathers, did speak, and write, and practice directly herein, as the
Papists [Catholicks; for popery, being translated out of S. Sainted by M.
Powell, de Antich. pa. 68.
Luthers language, signifies the Catholic religion] do speak, and write, and
practice at this day.

8. The SECOND Father, was S. Augustine (I was desirous to seek after no more,
because I was assured that I could find no better) unto whom I did appeal, as
unto the best, and most faithful witness of antiquity. For so he is approved
by John Calvin himself (and this opened the way unto the conversion of Apol. p.
5.
Iustus Caluinus, as he has testified unto the world) how beit, as Suet. ^o
Ner. c. 56.
Nero had little respect unto his Gods, save only unto his Goddess Syria, and
yet he defiled her idol with his urine; so Ioh. Calvin does frequently make
his repayr unto S. Augustine (with neglect of other Fathers) and yet Instit. l.
3. c. 5. 10. c. 11. 15. l. 2. c. 3.. 7. etc.
he asperseth his name also with no small disgrace. But resting my self upon
that commendation, which it pleases John Calvin in his liberallity to afford
unto S. Augustine, I referred the matter unto his exact decision; knowing well,
that his ability to conceive, and fidelity to relate the truth, were sufficient
to put an end unto my laborious disquisition thereof; and specially, because
that wise counsel, which he gave unto his seduced friend, seemed to appertayn
also unto me, viz. De vtilit, credendi, cap. 8.
If thou art now sufficiently tossed in thine own opinion, and would finish
this travail, follow the way of the Catholic doctrine, which even from Christ
by his Apostles is descended unto us, and from us shall descend unto our
posterity for ever. Which sentence did prepare my heart unto a serious
deliberation in this particular, forasmuch as I saw, that Prayer for the dead
has descended lineally unto the Papists, howsoever it is abandonned by our
Eua^gelicall Churches; whence it follows clearly, either that the Catholic
doctrine did not descend unto S. Augustines Church, or else, certainly our
Church is not Catholic, which has renounced that point of ancient faith, and
many more.

9. Amongst an Ocea^ of testimonies, which presented themselves unto me in S.
Augustines works, I selected two, which I will here tender unto your wise
considerations. The FIRST was in his Cap. 110.
manuel directed unto Laurentius (and it is repeated in his resolutions which
he makes unto the Quaest. 2.
questions of Dulcitius) where he randgeth the dead into three orders. Some
live so well as that they need not these helps [Sacrifice, Prayers, Almes]
Some live not so well, as that they need them not; neither yet so ill, as that
they can receive no benefit thereby. Some live so ill, as that they are made
incapable of any such relief.

10. Now, since there is this triple estate of men deceased, I was driven
perforce to conclude, that the First are in Heaven; the Second in Hell; the
Third in some temporal pain. For though S. Augustine does profess Hypognost.
l. 5. this place is cited by D. Abbot against D. Bishopp; p. 1. page 89. To the
same effect is a sentence in S. Aug. de peccat. merit. and remiss. lib. 1. c.
28. cited there also by D. Abbot.
elswere, that there is no third place besides heaven, and hell, yet I
conceived that there are 5. differences in this case. First; because the
Pelagian heretics (against whom S. Augustine does purposely dispute) assigned
a third place unto children dying without baptism; but as S. De Ciuit, Dei
lib. 21. c. 16.
Augustine teaches that baptized Infants suffer not the pains of Purgatory at
all, so he affirms likewise, that De Genes. ad lit. l. 10. c. 15.
Infants unbaptized, are excluded out of the heavenly kingdom etc. and so they
suffer the pain of loss for ever. Secondly; because the Pelagians place is
perpetual, but Purgatory is te^porall: for though the same space shall always
remayn in nature, yet not in the same use. Thirdly; because the Pelagians
supposed place is full of delights, but Purgatory is full of pain outwardly,
howsoever there may be great comfort inwardly, in the security of salvation.
Fourthly; because the Pelagians place is on earth, but Purgatory is
subterranean, according to the most common, and received opinion. Yet I rather
followed the judgment of Dialog. de particulari iudicio animae; cap. 30. See
Gerion, Part 4. sermon. 2. de defunct.
Dionysius the Carthusian saying, that by ordinary designation, there is one
general place of Purgatory; but by special dispensation of the Judge, there
are many places. And this may be testified by sundry examples in the dialogues
of S. Gregory, and other venerable authors. Fifthly; because the Pelagians
imagined place is to be after the general Judgment, and not before; but
Purgatory is before, and not after; as S. De Ciuit. Dei. l. 21. c. 13.
Augustine witnesses, saying; Some men suffer temporal punishments only in
this life; Some after death; Some both now, and then; but yet, before the last,
and most severe Judgment.

11. I proceed unto the rest of S. Augustines former discourse, which has been
interrupted, as you see, by a pertinent, and necessary digression. As the
Offices for the dead are three in number [ Sacrifice, Prayer, and Almes] so, in
reference unto the estate of men deceased, S. Augustine distinguishes them
into three kinds; Propitiations, Consolations and Thanskgiuings.

12. The application is this. First he says; for men very good, these things
are THANKSGIVINGS unto God; to wit, for their felicity, and joy. And here I
remembered the testimony of Haeres 75.
Epiphanius (whom S. Epist. ad Quod. vult D. praefix. Tract. de haeref.
Augustine reuerenceth as an holy man, and famous in the Catholic faith;
howsoever it seems good unto D. Against D. Bishopp. part. 1. page 86. D.
Abbot. page 8^ peruerteth the sense of Epiphan. as though the Church had prayer
for the Saints etc.
Abbott to justify Aerius, a damnable heretic, against him) reporting, that
when we make a memorial of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles etc. We separate
Christ from the order of men by the honor, and adoration which we perform
unto him; that is to say, we do not offer thanks for him (as we do for some
other men) but unto him, as being God of equal majesty with his Father. And
thus it is a great honor for the Martyrs (says S. Homil. 21. in Act.
Chrysostom) to be named in the presence of their Lord. For now [in the holy
Sacrifice] Angels stand before him, and tremble in his sight: Yea they adore
him there (like true Popish I dolaters) as S. De Sacerdot. l. 6. c. 4^.
Chrysostom does elsewhere very excellently declare. A point which convinced me
to the full; for I was compelled to renounce all my former Protestanticall
expositions As namely his hyperbolizing, etc.
of S. Chrysostom, when I was strongly pressed with this testimony [in
England] by a learned, and virtuous Priest.

13. Secondly he says, that for men very evil these things are not helps,
but yet they may be some CONSOLATION unto their suruiuing friends. This
particular I found exactly treatised by him in sundry places, and namely in his
incomparable work Lib. 21. cap. 24.
de Ciuitate Dei, where he makes this demand: If any men have an impenitent
heart even unto death, and be not converted from enemies into sons, does the
Church now pray for such men, that is to say, for the Souls of men thus
deceased? He resolves, Some private men were ledd into an error herein: but
(says S. Aug.) the Church was not.
no; that is not the intention of the Catholic Church. For S. Augustine does
there well observe, that in this life we pray for all men, and yet we have a
reference (precisely) unto such, as pertayn unto the secret election of God.
Likewise in prayer for the dead, the Church makes a S. August. de cura pro
mort. cap. 4.
general commemoration of all, that so they, who want friends, or kinsmen to
perform this duty on their behalf, may be partakers of this benefit, by the
means of her, who is the pious, and common mother of us all. and yet her
purpose in this general commemoration is restrained particularly unto such, as
are conceived to stand in exigence of her relief. For, of some men's good estate
she has a certain evidence; of some, a probable reason; of others, a
comfortable hope. But if she have singular, and plain inducements to persuade
her otherwise, she affords not this kind of piety unto incapable persons. And
here I remembered a domestical example (which I had lately read in our
venerable contreyman S. Eccles. histor, l. 5. c. 15.
Beda) of a certain Brother, who lived an ignoble life in a noble monastery,
and deceased without repentance: for which cause, no man durst presume to
celebrate Mass, nor to sing psalms, nor to pray for him after his decease.
Wherefore I considered, that though S. Enchirid. ad Laur. cap. 110.
Augustine pronounces thus; Whom these things do profitt, it is unto this
effect, either that there may be a full remission, or a more tolerable
damnation; yet he does not intend, that the souls of Reprobates have vtility
by these things (for then he should oppose the Catholic Church, whose
judgment he does often relate to be otherwise; yea he should here also
absurdly contradict himself within the compass of three lines: for he said
immediately before, that these things are not helps for me^ very evil) but
such only as suffer temporal DAMNATION; for, to want the joys of heaven, and
to endure the sharpness of Purgatory, it is poena Damni and poena Se^sus,
though each be for a little time. And thus it is true, that these things do
avail unto a full remission, or unto a more tolerable damnation; because the
temporal pain of some souls [in Purgatory] is thereby either shortened in
time, or lessened in degree.

14. Thirdly he says, that for me^ not very good, nor very evil, these
things are PROPITIATIONS; that is to say, certain means which we adhibit to
entreat mercy at the hands of the sovereign Judge. They are propitiations, not
by the payment of the price of sin (for that is 1. Ioh. 2, 2.
proper only unto that blood, which was of inestimable value) but through
application thereof, Matter mea desiderauit memoriam sui ad altar tuum fieri,
vnde sciret dispensari victimam sanctam etc. S. Augustine. Confess. lib. 9. cap.
13.
ministerially by the Priest, and effectually by our Lord; for the first uses
his petition, and the second brings his performance. This I knew to be the
doctrine of the Papists; for thus I found it expressed long since by D. Answ.
to M. Jewels challendge; Artic. 19.
Harding, our contreyman of great esteem.

15. Thus far I proceeded in the First testimony of S. Augustine. And though
it were clear, and ponderous (in mine opinion) yet it was inferior unto that,
which now ensues; for I must freely confess, that it sealed up my heart, and
left no place unto any farther doubt.

16. The SECOND testimony is this. Sermon. 17. de Verb. Apost. See also Tract.
84. in Ioh.
The faithful [because I desired to be in the number of the Faithful,
therefore I was moved powerfully with this consideration] do know, according
to the instruction of the Church [therefore it was not a new, nor a private
opinion; and this I considered diligently with my self] that when Martyrs are
recited at the altar of God, this is not done with intention to pray for them
(it being an injury to pray for a Martyr, unto whose prayers we ought to be
recomme^ded) but we pray for These [other] were not known to be in the same
acctual bliss with Martyrs: otherwise, the Church would have prayed for the^
no more, then she prayed for the Martyrs.
other deceased men, whose commemoration is there made. Oh how unlike a
Protestant does S. Augustine speak, and how much Popery (as the vulgar has
it) is contained in this little passadge? Where could I find any evasion
against so manifest a testimony as this is? Should I renounce the instruction
of the Church? It were intolerable pride. Should I say unto S. Augustine, thou
art a foolish Papist, and thou know not the instruction of the Church in
this behalf? It were a miserable conceit.

17. This was the secret dispute of mine own heart, which now (beloved
Contreyman) I present unto thy Christian view; that so either I may learn by
thee, what answer is to be framed unto this difficulty; or else thou may
learn with me to follow the way of that Catholic doctrine, which descended
unto S. Augustine, See before number. 8.
and unto the Church in that blessed time.

. 5. D. Fields collusion in delivering the sense, and purpose of the ancient
Church touching Prayer for the dead.
1. BEing now mightily convinced in mine understanding, I began to compare S.
Augustine with D. Page 98. D. Field makes the Ancients speak like Protestants.
Field, who had informed me much otherwise in this particular; deriuing it in
this manner. The ancients did name the names of the departed, at the holy
Table, in the time of the holy mysteries, and offering of The Sacrifice is
Eucharisticall in respect of our thankfulness performed therein unto God; but
it is Propitiatory also in respect of his help entreated thereby for us.
Eucharist (that is, the sacrifice of praise) for them etc. The ancients kept
(in this manner) a commemoration of the Patriarchs, Apostles, Prophets, yea of
the blessed Virgin, at the Lords table: to whom they did not wish deliverance
from Purgatory (since no man ever thought them to be there) but if they wished
any thing, it was their deliverance from death, which as yet tyrannizeth over
one part of them, to wit, the body etc. Here he quoteth the Liturgy of S.
Chrysostom in these words: We offer this reasonable service, that is, the
Eucharist of praise, and thanskgiuing to thee, o Lord, for all that are at rest
in the faith; even for the Patriarchs, Prophets, etc.

2. But having now attained unto some experience of M. Doctors unfaithful
dealing, I could not suffer my self to be deluded by such pitiful co^ceipts.
Wherefore I directed my thoughts vto these 4. considerations, which here ensue.
FIRST; that it is a vanity in us Protestants sometimes to So does D. Field
here; and Zanch. de Natura Dei l. 4. c. 4. and others.
accept this Liturgy, as composed by S. Chrysostom, and sometimes to So does
M. Jewel: and M. Powell de Antichr. p. 235.
reject it (for our own aduantadge) because we can not justly insist upon the
testimony of any Author (by way of proof) which we our selves deny to be
delivered by him. For though it has force against him that admits it, yet
it is of no efficacy for him that refuses it. SECONDLY; that S. Iuuetur
mortuus no^ lachrymis, sed pr^cibus etc. Hom. 41. in epist. 1. ad Cor.
Chrysostom did pray, and exhorted others to pray for the souls of the dead;
and therefore (in all probability) his Liturgy, and his doctrine do conspire
(substantially) in this issue. THIRDLY; I found, that when the Church offered
the Sacrifice of our Lords body for the Apostles, Martyrs etc. it was by way of
See Gabriel Biel, lect. 85. in Can. Missae.
thanskgiuing, not of petition; and this was confirmed unto me by the testimony
of S. Augustine; viz. The faithful do know by the instruction of the Church,
that we pray not for Martyrs, as we pray for other men; that is to say, the
Martyrs are recognized by us, as Citizens of the heavenly kingdom: but we pray
for others, as being yet in temporal pain, or, at least, conceived to be so by
us; and thus (to wit respectively unto this end) we make our supplications
unto God in their behalf. Farther; as it is not absurdly delivered (says
Part 1. lect. 2. super Marcum. See Biel. in the aforesaid place.
Gerson) by the learned Divines that there is an addition, or increase of
accidental felicity in the Saints, so it is not inconvenient, if, in this
respect also, we recommend them unto God in our devotions.

3. FOURTHLY; though D. Field, in his greater wisdom, then integrity, does
conceal it (and so the Tempter made his assault upon our Savior; cast thy
self down headlong, for it is written, Matthew. 4.
He shall give his Angels chardge over thee, that thou dash not thy foot
against a stone: but he omitted a principal point, viz. that they may keep
thee in all thy ways) yet S. Chrysostom in the same Liturgy, does plainly
refute his pretensed exposition of prayer for the dead. For thus he says: By
the supplication of these [Patriarchs, Apostles etc.] have respect unto us o
Lord; If D. Field will stand unto this Liturgy (to gather the sense of
Antiquity by it) he must admit also such an exaltation of the blessed Virgin,
as will hardly stand with his liking.
and he adds immediately; Remember all the faithful departed (who sleep in
the hope of resurrection) and make them to be at rest, where the light of thy
countenance is seen.

4. Thus S. Augustine, and S. Chrysostom (if their sayings be fully related,
and truly waighed) do hold a just correspondency herein; and each of them (in
the essential point) does follow the instruction of the same Church. Wherefore
though Contra Henric. 8.
Luther did basely esteem of a thousand Augustines, and Cyprians if they were
repugnant unto his judgment in the Scripture, yet I saw necessary reasons, why
I should prefer one Augustine before ten thousand Luthers, Fields, and all
such, as are exorbitantly carried against the stream, and course of the ancient
Catholic Church.

. 6. Reasons, which moved me rather to believe, and to follow S. Augustine
herein, and the Catholic Church in his time, then D. Field, and his reformed
Churches. A conclusion of the first Part; with an admonition to all Caluinian
Readers.
1. When I had brought my discourse unto this effect (as you have already
seen) I considered seriously in my private meditations, that whereas we
Protestants make a glorious show of Antiquity, D. Field. page 47. assumeth that
he will prove the Papists NOTES of Antiquity, etc. to be really the same with
ours.
Universality, Succession, etc. to justify our Religion thereby, it would
prove a most ridiculous suggestion, if in this particular it self, we hold not
conformity with the ancient, Catholic Church. Here also (by the way) I
remembered that S. here is. 53.
Augustine registring the heresies of Aerius (in the number whereof is his
derision of Prayer, and Oblation for the dead) concludes in the peroration of
his treatise, that, whosoever maintayneth any of the precedent opinions, he is
not a Catholic Christian.

2. How nerely this censure appertains unto us Protestants, the Sea; book 2.
Part. 1, chap. 2.
sequel will declare. Mean while, it may please you to observe with me, how
plausibly, and artificially D. Field demeaneth himself, to escape the pressure
of that difficulty, which is to heavy for him to bear. It is most certain
(says page 98.
he) that many particular men extended the meaning of these prayers [for the
dead] viz. then he has delivered before. See. 5. number. 1.
farther, and out of their private errors, and fancies, used such prayers for
the dead, as the Romanists themselves (I think) dare not justify. And so it is
true, that many of the Fathers were led into error in this matter of Prayer
for the dead, and not all; as if the whole Church had, FALLEN FROM THE TRVTH,
as Bellarmine See. book 2. Part. 1. chap. 3.
falfely imputes unto Calvin, who says no such thing.

3. Now forasmuch as M. Doctor does clearly insinuate, that such Fathers, as
extended this religious duty [prayer for the dead] beyond the narrow compass,
which is assigned by Insi. l. 3. c. 5.
Calvin, and page 98. and 139.
himself, did follow a private error, and fancy herein, and that they did fall
away from the truth, I was desirous to know (without Lies, Obscurity, and
Circuitions; the best Sanctuaries of our evil cause) either from D. Field, or
from any discreet Protestant in Christendom (howbeit I may contract my
speech, and say; in Europe; for our new faith has scarce peeped out of her
confines) whether S. Cyrill of Jerusalem, concurring absolutely with the
Papists in this point, See before;. 4.
and whether S. Augustine conspiring with him; and whether S. lib. 1. de divine.
offic. c. 18.
Isidore consenting with them both [Vnlesse the Catholic Church did believe
that sins are remitted unto the faithful after this life, she would not
offer the Sacrifice unto God, for their soules] and finally, whether all
others, joining with them herein, fell away from the truth, or not? And if they
did, I was desirous to see, what one man there was (besides Aerian heretics)
in whom the truth was visibly preserved?

4. Here I gave my self unto a long, and earnest meditation; remembering a
renowned sentence of S. epist. 118.
Augustine, who says; that, to call any thing in question which is frequented
by the universal Church, insolentissimae est insaniae, it is the part of most
insolent madness. Which sentence applying it self clearly unto my purpose,
enforced me to conclude, that either S. Augustine was a prodigious ass in his
cariadge of this matter, or else, that we Protestants are insolently mad, who
partly in the violent stream of passion renounce the instruction of the
universal Church herein, and partly by sinister interpretatio^s, derive it
against her known intention, expressed so abundantly by her chiefest Doctors,
Consuetudo est optima legis interpres.
and perpetuated so eminently by a continual succession.

5. Wherefore retiring my thoughts a little, and drawing them from their former
meditations, I began to speak thus feelingly unto my soul. Can thou
desire testimonies more grave then these in respect of the Authors, more
perspicuous in words, or more effectual in weight? Where does S. Augustine
contradict this relation, or who did ever contradict him therein? Is Doctor
Field a better witness, and more to be respected in this decision, then S.
AUGUSTINE, who being greatly experienced in the customs of the Universal
Church, has (in his maturity of judgment) left unto thee a fair, and evident
prescriptio^ in this behalf, never reuersed by himself, nor impugned by others,
having also the voice of all ages (both in doctrine, and practice) for its
corroboration, and strength? Truly if it were so, that in his ignorance, or
malice, or some other obliquity, and defect, he had exceeded the purpose of the
Catholic Church herein, it is very probable, that this error could not escape
him unespied in all his diligent Retractations. And if he were so unhappy, that
he had no friend to inform him for his amendment, yet he could not be so
happy, as that no enemy should note it for his disgrace.

6. Now therefore (dearly beloved contreyman) tell me, I pray thee, tell me in
the uprightness of thy conscience, and in the presence of him who searches
the heart, and reins; to whose direction, guydance, and instruction, could I
(in this case) committ a poor, afflicted soul (which I should endeavor to
save with care, since Christ died for it in love) and whom could I follow
herein, with more alacrity, and confidence; S. AUGUSTINE, or D. FIELD, with all
the troop of Lutherans, Caluinists, Protestants, Puritans, or others,
howsoever they are distinguished in name, or divided in opinion?

7. I saw antiquity in the first; nouelty in the second. I saw fidelity in the
first; See the second Book, Part. 1.
unfaithfulness in the second. I saw profound learning in the first; very
commendable also, but yet much inferior in the second. And though I perceived
that his own book does justly afford that censure against him, which is
delivered against Nestorius by a worthy Vincent. Lirinens. cap. 16.
Author; viz. Plusse^per admirationis in illo, quam vtilitatis, plus famae
quam experientia fuit; yet I will rather say, that the Bellarmine is no ways
matchable with Calvin, and others, in piety, or learning though he wear a
Cardinals heart.
co^pariso^, which page 149.
he is pleased to make betwixt C. Bellarm. and M. Calvin, has a more due
proportion betwixt S. August. and himself.

8. Finally, I considered, that none of the Fathers resisted the first herein;
but who does assist the second? The doctrine of the first is now confirmed by
the practice of that Church, which we phrase a Popish, Antichristian Synagogue
etc. but the reformed Congregation of D. Field has no resemblance of these
things. For though Contra Campian. page 262.
D. Humfrey in his rhetorical flourishes does pretend, that in our Colleges
we retayn the [ancient] commendation of the dead, yet I noted that the
differences are many, and chiefly these three. First; in respect of the PLACE;
for the ancient commendation of the dead was at the In precibus Sacerdotis,
quae Domino Deo ad eius ALTAR funduntur; locu^ suum habet commendatio
mortuorum S. Aug. de cura pro mort. cap. 1.
Altar; but we have none. Secondly; in respect of the ACTION; for it was in the
holy Sacrifice; but we contemn it. Thirdly; in respect of the INTENTION; for
it was to relieve the souls of the dead; but we disclayme this doctrine.
Besides; since our Zuinglian Communion is such a naked, and contemptible feast,
as See his Confess.
Luther himself abhorred, and his disciple Conradus did tremble to behold (for
they had a more religious estimation of our Lords Supper, then the
Sacramentaries; who deride the LVTHERANS, because they absurdly, and
superstitiously attribute a sanctifying virtue unto the Hoc est Corpus meum.
words of Christ; as it pleases Decad. 5. Sermon. 6.
H. Bullinger to speak) I was desirous to understand, how a piece of bread,
and a draught of wine, may have any power, and validity for these purposes,
unto which the holy See S. Au. de Ciuit. Dei l. 22. c. 8. how one of his
Priests, offering the sacrifice of our Lords Body in the house of a lay person,
delivered his family from the vexation of unclean Spirits.
Fathers did often referr the sacred Oblation (in the divine Sacrifice of the
MASS) or how our Zuinglian Communion can be a reverend, and dreadful mystery
(such, as wherein the holy Angels humble themselves unto our common Lord) by
the offering whereof, the mercy of God is entreated for the Souls of some men,
deceased in Charity, and in the Catholic faith? For I must profess, that a
serious consideration of these things wrought a deep impression in my heart.

9. This was the sum of my DOCTRINALL REASON, branched (as you have seen)
into two Parts; that is to say, derived partly from Scripture, and partly from
Tradition; in both which I followed the impeachable resolution of Antiquity,
and with it I must either stand, or fall. It is my comfort (though it were
sometimes my grief) to see, that as Dagon fell on his face before the Arc, 1.
Reg. 5.
so Protestancy suffers utter confusion, when it is presented before the
Tribunal of the ancient Church. I deliver this assertion faithfully, and
justly; I speak the truth in Christ, I ly not, my conscience bearing me
witness in the holy Ghost. I have tasted the wines of Calvin, and Augustine; I
have digested both; I have judged of both; and out of some experience, which I
have had of both, I am bold to assure you (loving contreymen) who spend your
precious time, and exercise your noble wits in many froathy volumes, that if
you will repayr discreetely, and conscionably unto the blessed Fathers, you
shall draw better wine at the latter end, then at the beginning. Then you will
clearly discern, See before; 1. number. 3.
whether Doctor Humfrey had any reason to impute Phrensy unto his Romanists,
or not; then you will ingenuously confess with the penitent Donatists, See S.
August. epist. 48.
and say; Nesciebamus hic esse veritatem, nec eam discere volebamus, etc. We
knew not that the truth was here, neither would we learn it. But thanks be
unto God, who has taken away our fear, and taught us by experience, how vayn,
and empty those suggestions are, which lying fame has cast out against his
Church. etc.

The end of the first Part.
THE SECOND PART OF THE FIRST BOOK, CONTAINING A MORAL REASON, which
persuaded me to intertayn the Catholic doctrine of Purgatory, and Prayer for
the dead.
CHAP. I. The PROVIDENCE of God in preserving a visible Church, free from any
damnable error, does confirm the doctrine of Purgatory, and Prayer for the
dead.
. 1. The FIRST Consideration; touching a visible Church.
I Considered First, that God has promised unto us a perpetuity of his Church,
both by his Son and Servants. For thus says his only begotten; Matthew.
2^.20.
I am with you always, unto the end of the world.

2. A comfortable saying o Savior Jesus. I [not in body, but in Spirit] AM
[yea I will be also; but Before Abraham I am. Ioh. 8.58.
thus I express my self, because I am eternal, and immutable] WITH YOU [not
in your persons only, but in your succession for ever: and not inuisibly by
grace alone, but visibly also in a sincere profession of the truth] ALWAYS,
UNTO THE END OF THE WORLD; my Church shall endure throughout all generations.
Thus the promise of God made unto David (historically) concerning his seed,
Psalm. 88. etc.
is referred (mystically) unto Christ; in whose seed (to wit his Church) it
is, and must be absolutely performed.

3. I had yet a farther assurance from God by his Servants. Ephesians, 4.11.
For thus says S. Paul. He [Christ] has given us Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists [men of extraordinary vocation in the beginning] Pastors, and
Doctors [men of ordinary vocation to the end] for the consummation of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ,
UNTIL we all meet in the unity of faith, and knowledge of the Son of God,
into a perfect man, into the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ.

4. This Text of holy Scripture I knew to be diversely, and preposterously
sensed, as well by the M. Cartwright against D. Whitgift.
Presbyterians against the Formalists, as by the D. Soteliffe against D.
Kelliso^.
Protestants against Cath. The first exclude Archbish. and the second (by the
same reason) exclude the Pope. But I secured my self in the true, and genuine
interpretation thereof, which did infallibly, and clearly demonstrate unto me
these two points. First; that the Church of Christ must perpetually subsist
without decay. Secondly; that it must be visibly extant without obscurity, and
concealment. For how can Pastors preach the gospel, and administer the holy
Sacraments, where people are not assembled to that purpose, and gathered into a
society of faith?

5. As for the example of Eliah, I always esteemed it a lamentable suggestion
in this case. For his complaint [ 3. Reg. 19.
I am left alone] extends only unto the kingdom of ISRAEL, wherein he then
conuersed, and wherein he (with many others) was persecuted by Iezabell, under
Ahab, her unfortunate husband. But at the same time, the law was read, the
Sacrifice was offered, pure Religion was professed, and protected in the
kingdom of IVDAH, under Iosaphat a blessed Prince, 3. Reg. 22.43.
walking in the good ways of Asa his father. This Iosaphat suruiued unto the
4. Reg. 3.2.
coronation of Ioram, the younger son of Ahab; and so the example of Eliah can
not be of any force to defend the opinion of many Protestants, concerning the
inuisibility of the Church.

6. Wherefore, seeing how D. Apolog. Cathol. part. 1. lib. 1. c. 14.
Morton does still reinforce this point (though cleared sufficiently by sundry
Catholics, even in the confession of a learned Protestant in England, from
whose mouth I received this instruction many years ago) as though the
aforesaid complaint of Eliah pertayned likewise unto the kingdom of Judah, I
did often, and greatly wonder that such a man, against his own conscience,
should deal so fraudulently in this behalf. For first he says that Lombard
does give this exposition; viz. When the daughter of Ahab was married unto The
son of Iosaphat.

The yo^ger son of Ahab was called lord likewise.


Ioram the king of Judah, then all the Jews seemed to be, Idolaters; so that
Eliah thought himself to be left alone: and upon this authority of Lombard, the
Doctor builds his exception against the former answer. Now, is this (I
beseech you) an ingenious, and honest deportment in the Doctor, thus to press
the authority of Lombard, whom he knew to be singularly mistaken herein, and to
err most plainly against the historical evidence of sacred Scripture?
Secondly; the Doctor is pleased to color, and cloak the said exposition of
Lombard with the name of S. Ambrose; and for this purpose he frames his
quotation in the margent thus; Lombard in Romans cap. 11. EX AMBROSIO. But I
found, that as S. Ambrose has not one syllable to justify this exposition in
the least degree, so Peter Lombard himself does not assume it from him, nor
once use his name therein; howbeit both before, and after, he gleaneth up some
sentences from that excellent Father. Is this a faithful course in a Minister
of simple truth?

7. Renouncing the opinion of our Inuisibilists, as an impious, and
contemptible fancy, I embraced a position of page 19. etc.
D. Field, which, though it be mingled with some corruptions, and untruths in
his discourse, yet, in it self it is very effectual, and sincere. The Church
can not be invisible in respect of Profession: and this Profession is known
even unto the profane, and wicked of the world. Again. It can not be, but that
they, Apply this rule to the Protestanticall Churches.
who are of the TRVE Church, must by profession of the TRVTH make themselves
known in such sort, that by their profession, and practice, they may be
discerned from other men.

8. For this cause S. Augustine says in a plain, and familiar kind of speech;
See the 3. Conuersio^s of England. Part. 2. chap. 1. throughout.
digito ostendimus Ecclesiam, we show forth the Church with our fingers, in
this place, and in that; here she is conspicuous, and thus she has descended
unto us by a fair, and spectable succession.

9. Non sic Protestants, non sic: as for the Protestants, it is not so with
them: their Church was hatched in corners, and enclosed long in Cymmerian
darcknesse. Wherefore, as the good sinful woman complained mournfully, saying;
Ioh. 20.13.
They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him: so I
was enforced to take up a just complaynt against all nouelizing heretics, and
say; They have taken away the Church of my Lord, and I know not where they have
placed her. They can not assign unto me any persons, time or place, wherein
their Synagogue had a resplendent face, and a laudable dilatation.

. 2. The SECOND Consideration; touching a visible Church free from any damnable
error. The Protestants looseness, and confusion in their description of the
Church.
1. I Considered Secondly, that this VISIBLE Church can never be taynted
universally with any error, and specially if it be such, as either expressly,
or implicitly indangereth the principles of salvation; for, in matters of the
necessity of says, she is freed from the possibility of error.

2. Hence it is that Part. 4. de Unit. Grac. Considerat. 6.
John Gerson (a man highly See afterward; c. 3. 3. number. 4. etc.
advanced by D. Field) prescribes this ensuing observation, as an infallible
rule. Whatsoever is determined by the Pope of Rome (together with his general
Council of the Church) in matters appertayning unto faith, that is undoubtedly
true, and to be received of all the world. For this consideration is founded in
the articles of our faith: We believe that there is an HOLY, CATHOLIQVE
CHVRCH, which is exempted from error in her faith, etc.

3. As this position was credible with me for the Authors sake, and he upon D.
Fields singular commendation, so I was induced farther, and more strongly
persuaded to intertayn it, by the certain warrant of him, who is TRVTH it self,
and promised his Spirit unto the holy Apostles, with assurance, Io. 16.13.
that he should lead them into all Truth.

4. In quality, it is Truth without error. In quantity, it is All truth,
necessary, and expedient for them, or us, in this peregrinant estate. For as
this promise belonged then particularly unto each Apostle, so it belongs now
generally unto the whole Church; which, being taken either in her latitude, as
she is diffused over the world, or in her representation, as she is collected
into a lawful Synod, is privileged from error in her doctrinall
determinations.

5. And this was clearly imported unto me in a sentence of S. 1. Timoth. 3.15.
Paull unto his beloved Timothy, whom he instructed how he should behave
himself in the house of God, which is the ground, and PILLAR OF TRVTH.

6. For howsoever it pleases D. Page 199. The church of Ephesus has erred
damnably in faith.
Field to elude the gravity, and power of this Scripture, by restrayning the
Apostles sense therein particularly unto the Church of Ephesus, which was
committed unto the Episcopal care of Timothy; yet, as many reasons did
prevail with me to reject his exposition, so I preferred the authority of S.
Comment^r. ibid
Ambrose, saying; that Whereas the whole world is Gods, the Church is said to
be his house; of which [vniuersall Church] Damasus [the Pope] is Rectour at
this day. This Universal Church is the Pillar of truth, sustayning the edifice
of faith.

7. Hereupon Prascripe. cap. 28.
Tertullian (deriding the heretics of his time) esteems it a base, and
gross conceit in any man to suppose, that the holy Ghost, who was asked of
the Father, and sent by the Son to be the Teacher of TRVTH, should neglect
that office, unto which he was designed, and that he should permit the Church
to understand the Scriptures otherwise, then he spoke by the mouth of the
Apostles. And farther. Is it probable (says he) that so many, and so great
Churches (if they did err) should err thus conformably into the same faith?
VARIASSE debuerat ERROR doctrinae Ecclesiarum. Caeterum, quod apud multos VNVM
inuenitur, non est erratum, sed TRADITVM. Error brings variety; but where
unity is, there is the truth. Thus the Churches are many in number, but one in
faith; divided in place, but joined in opinion.

8. Mine earnest meditation in this point taught me to lament the confusion of
our Protestants, admitting innumerable sectaries, into our vast, and
incongruous Church; Fox in Act. and Mon. See the 3. Conuers. of England.
which is a very Chimaera, thrust together, and fashioned in specificall
disproportions. But this was our necessity (hard necessity) and not our choice,
to make such a pitiful delineation of our Church. For whereas we had not any
certain succession, to derive her descent, and petigree from the Ancients, we
were compelled (in this respect) to deal liberally (like good fellows) and
take sundry heretics, with incompatible factions, into our society; least by
the same reason, for which we exclude others, we should exclude our selves also
from the communion of the Church.

page 137.
9. Hence it is that D. Field (laying the fundation of his Babell) fears not
to say, that the Churches of Russia, Armenia, Syria, AEthiopia, Greece etc.
are, and continue parts of the TRVE, CATHOLIC CHVRCH. A position manifestly
repugnant unto Reason, and Authority. Unto reason; for if truth of doctrine be
a Note of the Church (as we defend) how is that a true, Catholic Church, which
impugneth the truth, and how is that one Church, which is distracted into many
faiths? Unto authority; for S. de haeres. in perorat. See the 3. conuers. of
England; Part. 2. chap. 10. number. 10.15.16.17. etc.
Augustine does constantly affirm, that whosoever maintayneth any heresy
(registered, or omitted by him in his Treatise) he is not a CATHOLIQVE
Christian; and consequently, no member of that Church, wherein (alone) we have
the promise of salvation. For as our Fides in Christum;
faith in Christ must be TRVSTFVLL, lively, and active, by a special
application of his merits unto our selves, so our Fides de Christo.
faith of Christ must be TRVE, sincere, and absolute, by a just conformity unto
the will of God, revealed by him, and propounded by his Church. And therefore
D. Fields Part. 4. de unit. Graecorum; considerat. 4.
Gerson (entreating of peace, and UNITY in the Church) labors to draw all
men into a communion of faith; and judges it a great folly in any man to
conceive, that we may be saved in our particular sects, and errors.

10. When I had discovered (by an earnest prosecution of this point) how
naturally, and powerfully our Protesta^ticall The Church may err, Diverse
Churches (though erring grossly in faith) make up one Catholic Church; etc.
doctrines conuaigh men into Laodiceanisme, and a careless neglect of
undefiled Religion (whence Atheism must necessarily ensue) I resolved with
hearty affection, to unite my self unto that Church, which is pure, and single
in Religion, wheresoever I should deprehend the same. For though I saw that the
Protestants religion was false in some things, yet I had great hesitation, and
doubt, whether the Papists were true in all: as S. Confess. lib. 6. cap. 1.
Augustine spoke sometime unto his loving Mother; I am now no Manichee, nor yet
a Catholic Christian. And so mine estate (as well as his) might be resembled
unto the case of that patient, S. Mark. 8.24.
who saw men walking like trees, until he had a perfect restitution of his
sight.

11. Wherefore resting my self a while upon a profitable, and sound instruction
of Lib. imperfect. in Genesis cap. 1.
S. Augustine; viz. God has constituted a mother Church, and she is called
CATHOLIQVE, because she is universally perfect, and halteth in Therefore, not
in this particular of prayer for the dead.
nothing, I referred the success unto a future trial; having a constant, and
vnchandgeable purpose, never to decline, nor vary from this ground, which I
have here presented unto your Christian examination.

. 3. The THIRD Consideration; touching the Protestants zeal in condemning this
doctrine of Purgatory, and prayer for the dead, as heretical, blasphemous, etc.
1. I Considered Thirdly, that this doctrine of Purgatory, and Prayer for the
dead, as it is generally renounced by our Evangelical congregations, so it is
severely censured by many of our writers.

2. Hence it is that Page 79.
D. Field himself chardgeth Purgatory with the disgraceful imputation of
HERESY; and yet he graceth it so far, as to affirm, that Augustine gave
occasion unto this heresy in the beginning.

3. Hence it is that M. Rogers in the Page 121.122.
Catholic Faith of our English Church, spending his tempestuous phrases
against the doctrine of Purgatory, says, that hereby the Papists nourish most
cursed, and damnable errors; and that Page 123.
it teaches us to be our own Saviors.

4. Hence it is, that M. Powell (in his inconsiderate violence) assigning many
goodly reasons why De Antichr. page 453 NVLLVS, NVLLVS (inqua^) PAPICOLA
SALVARI POTEST.
no Papist can be saved, includes Page 123.
the figment of Purgatory in that number. Likewise (in the same kind of
precipitation) setting down 23. De Antichr. l. 2. c. 19.
blasphemous opinions, delivered by the Church of Rome against the doctrine
contained in our LORDS PRAYER, he inserteth this particular, viz. Page 457.
She teaches, that WE MVST PRAY FOR THE DEAD.

5. But forasmuch as the glorious Emperor CONSTANTINE ( Great in birth,
Greater in victory, and Greatest in Christian Religion; which, till his time,
was planted in the continual effusion of blood) buylding a magnificent At
Constantinople. See Eusebius. in vita Constant. l. ^. c. 60.
Church in honor of the 12. Apostles, did foresee (in his religious
providence) that the people (moved with the celebrity of that place) would
flow thither, and there pray for him after his decease, whereby he should be
partaker of their devotions for the benefit of his soul, I was desirous to
understand here briefly by the way, whether this imcomparable Prince (following
the instruction of the Catholic Church herein) and whether the Priests,
together with the people, supplicating unto God pro anima Imperatoris, for the
D. Field talks of naming names etc. (see before* page 31) But it is evident,
that the Catholic Church in her best age prayed for the SOVLES of the dead.
And this example it self is an invincible demonstration thereof.
SOVLE of the Emperor, after his death (as Ibid. cap. 71.
Eusebius relates; who was a reverend Bishopp, and in special grace with
Constantine) were guilty of a blasphemous opinion against our LORDS PRAYER, or
not?

6. And my desire to receive full satisfaction unto this point, was the rather
enkindled within me, because our Sovereign Lord the King (to whom all good
Catholics wish the happiness of Constantine, in faith imitating his blessed
Mother; a true Helena in her virtues, though not in her fortunes) made this
just demand, according to the sublimity of his excellent apprehension; See the
book of the Conference at Hampto^ Court; page 69.
What? is it now come to pass, that we shall appeach Omnes norunt Co^stantinum
fuisse admirandum in Christianismo etc. Epiphan. hares. 69.
CONSTANTINE of Popery, and superstition? If the Cross in baptism were then
used, I see no reason but that we may still continue it. Which royal sentence
I applied duly unto this particular [of prayer for the dead] and how effectual
it was with me, the ingenious Reader may well perceive, if he will vouchsafe to
make a little experience thereof in his own respective meditations.

7. I returned speedily unto my purpose; for I was not willing to eclipse the
light of my discourse with the interposition of M. Powells dark conceits.
Finally therefore remembering that M. CALVIN is the Ipse dixit in the purest
Gospel (in which respect it pleased In a sermon at S. Mary's Church in Oxon.
4. years since.
D. Airay to exhort his Auditors; persuading them very earnestly, and
entreating them, that they would by all means defend the estimation of M.
Calvin; and the rather, because he is the man against whom the And what think
you of the Lutheransi does not D. Hunnius himself beseech God to preserve his
Church mercifully from the infection of Calvin? See Calvin. Iudaiz. in fine.
Papists do principally bend their forces) I contented my self with his s
Eldershippes censure; viz. PVRGATORY is a pernicious fiction of Satan,
disgraceful unto the great mercy of God, euacuating the Cross of Christ,
dissipating, and subuerting our faith; pure, and horrible blasphemy against the
blood of Jesus Christ, etc.

8. Hence it is, that we Protestants have sentenced Purgatory to be an
Antichristian Doctrine; For And what think you of the Lutheransi does not D.
Hunnius himself beseech God to preserve his Church mercifully from the
infection of Calvin? See Calvin. Iudaiz. in fine.
he is Antichrist, that denies Christ to be come in the flesh. And we pretend,
that howsoever this doctrine does not positiuely deny that Christ is come in
the flesh, in regard of his Incarnation, and Nature as he is a MAN, Institut.
lib. 3. cap. 5.. 6.
yet it denies the same consequently, in regard of his Satisfaction, and
Office, as he is a REDEEMER.

9. In which our specious venditation of reserving inuiolated honor unto
Christ, Epist. Ioh. 2. verse 7.
I saw that we insist directly in the steps of Nouatians, Nestorians, and the
like; The first pretended that they (forsooth) did exhibit See S. Ambros. de
Poenitent. cap. 2. in initio.
reverence unto God by their doctrine, inasmuch as they teach that he only
(and no man) can forgive sins; The second could not endure that a woman
should be styled the Mother of [their] God. Thus also the infatuated
Presbyterians glory in their excellent cause, saying; See M. Rogers in the
Preface of his Cathol. doctr. number. 16.
Our controversy is, whether Jesus Christ shall be King, or no. The end of all
our travail is to set up the throne of Jesus Christ, our heavenly King, etc.
Which colorable piety, and popular zeal in ancient, or later Heretics
(advancing their opinions, as Mountibancks extol their wares) did move me
unto a just suspicion of their integrity, because S. Cyrill (Archbishopp of
Jerusalem) gave me this infallible prescription; Cateches. 4.
Heretics hide the venime of their opinions grato nomine Christi, under the
acceptable name of Christ. And as the dignity, the glory, the exaltation of
Christ is the mark, whereat they all pretend to shoot, so they will take
their aim from holy Scripture alone, Cap. 37.
and (as Lirinensis does well observe) they spice, and sprinkle their heresies
with innumerable sentences of the word.

. 4. The FOVRTH consideration; touching the lardge diffusion of this doctrine,
received by the universal Church. Whence it follows, that either Gods
PROVIDENCE has failed, and that he has not performed his promise, or that
this doctrine of Purgatory is not erroneous.
1. I Considered Fourthly, that this doctrine of Purgatory, and Prayer for the
dead (things of mutual dependency) has been spread over the face of the Sea
before, page 16. and 17.
universal Church, both Greek, and Latin.

2. For though I was informed by our D Field, page 99. D. Abbot against D.
Bishopp, Part. 1. M. Rogers, Cath. doctr. page 120. etc.
principal Authors, that the Greeks never intertayned this doctrine, yet I
found that their suggestion was untrue, inasmuch as the writings of the Sea
afterward; Book 2. Chap. 1.. ^2. number. 6.
Ancient Greeks, and the practice of the whole Church (including them in that
generallity) did testify the contrary unto me, in most abundant manner. And if
any prejudice could accrue unto this doctrine, because it is denied by some men
in the Greek Church, a greater inconvenience (by the Force of the same reason)
must ensue unto the doctrine of the Procession of the holy Ghost from the
FATHER, and the SON, because this is more generally, and earnestly impugned;
their heresy also herein being such (if we believe the Creed of Athanasius,
which is accepted by our * English Church, Artic. Relig. 8.
though sometimes ill expounded) as excludes men from the possibility of
salvation.

3. But whereas my learned Authors do extend the denial of Purgatory
generally unto the Greeks, they err, not knowing, See the Ce^sure of the
Oriental Church.
or else dissembling the truth. For Jeremiah, the Patriarch of Constantinople,
in his rescript unto the Lutherans, delivers clearly, that the Greek Church
prays for the dead, with intention to relieve some souls afflicted with
temporal pain; and for a more copious explication of his mind, he remitteth
them unto an De fidel. desunct.
oration of S. John Damasce^, wherein this matter is lardgely handled. For he
testifies, that in the unbloody Sacrifice, the Catholic, and Apostolic
Church makes a memorial of the dead. Why? to relieve their souls. Again. God
grant me so to fashion my life that I may not stand in exigence of these helps
after death. But if my life be intercepted, and cut of before I can fulfill my
duty, God grant that my friends may entreat his mercy on my behalf. And thus S.
Chrysostom (the divine Preacher) speaks in these golden words. If in thy
lifetime thou have not so exactly composed thy soul as thou ought, give
commandment unto thy friends to transmitt their help unto thee, by alms, and
oblations.

4. Wherefore I conceived, that howsoever some Greeks, did not, or do not
admit the doctrine of Purgatory, precisely under this Quis nid haereticus
negare audehit Transubsta^t, Pracess. Sp. Sa^cti a P. and F. Purgator, quia
apud priscos sub talibus NOMINIBVS non commemorantur? Alfons. a castro, contra
beres. l. 8. titde Indulgent.
name, and with some other circumstances, yet the Church of Greece (generally)
does retayn the thing it self. And this was farther illustrated unto me by the
confession of the Greeks themselves in the Florentine Council; for it
appears by their public protestation, that they agreed fully with the Roman
Church in the essential doctrine hereof; howbeit they dissented from her in
some points, which are not absolutely pertaining unto the necessity of faith.

5. Now concerning such as have denied this doctrine as well in nature, as in
name, in substance, as in circumstance, I noted a great difference in the
manner, and course, and reason of their denial. For some denied it
Secondarily, and by way of inference, that is to say, by reason of a precedent
error. Thus the Armenians, and certain Greeks have been devolued into a
foolish imagination to conceive, that the soul has no sense of joy, nor pain,
until her reunion with the body; and hence it follows necessarily, that
there is no Purgatory after death. Some have denied it Primarily, and simply;
that is to say, not in regard of any precedent error inferring this denial,
but directly, and precisely in regard of the thing it self. Thus only our
Aerians, Henricians, VValdensians, and finally we Protestants (issuing from
such Progenitors) have rejected this doctrine, by a violent separation of our
selves from the visible society of the Church.

6. But forasmuch as these Henricians, and VValdensians (in whom we glory; and
Catholics do not envy us this honor) were sometimes members, as truly, and
really connexed unto the Papists, as any other men, and fell away afterward
from their communion (as VVickliff also did) I intertayned my self a while in
this consideration; viz. Since there was a time (yea many hundred years) when
no VVickleuian, no VValdensian, or Henrician did appear; who did then deny
Purgatory, and who did then oppose himself against this heresy, this damnable,
and blasphemous doctrine (as we call it) for many generations? Wherefore as
Tertullian does excellently say; There was a time when such, Praescript. cap 30.
and such heresies were not known; Vbi tunc Marcion, vbi tunc Valentinianus?
etc. where was Marcion, and where was Valentinian then? It is manifest that
they themselves were sometime no heretics, but that they observed the
Catholic Religion etc. So I spoke in my secret thoughts, and said; there was
a time, when our opinions were not known: where was Henricus, or VValdo then?
It is manifest that they themselves were sometime no impugners of this
doctrine, but that they did meekely, and dutifully observe it as a part of the
true, and Catholic Religion.

7. I proceeded yet a little farther, and considered, that we Protestants could
not possibly assign so much as the shadow of any one man (our Henricians, and
VValdensians excepted) denying, or doubting of Purgatory, who was not
heretical in some other doctrine, even such, as we our selves confess to
bring very great, and eminent danger unto salvation. And what aduantadge, or
defense could I take from any heretic, to secure my self in such a case? For
if any man did please me in denying Purgatory, yet he did displease me also by
some odious, and hateful opinion, wherewith he was infected: and then I could
not find out any true, and Catholic Church, unless I would distill it
mystically out of sundry persons, and compound their simples into one body of
Religion. Which though it be such an ignoble, and an ungodly deriuation of the
Church, as tends unto the great contempt, and ignominy of Religion, yea the
pure subversion, and annihilation thereof, yet necessity has enforced us
Protestants unto these paradoxicall fancies; for thus, and no otherwise can we
sustayn the essence, and existency of our Church.

8. The conclusion, which yealded it self unto me out of the former
consideration, was this; Whereas there has been no visible Church, nor member
thereof for many hundred years, which was not HERETICAL in an high degree (as
our doctrines do clearly import) it Purgatory is no heresy, nor
Antichristianisme (as we pretend with greater violence, then reason) but a
parcel of the true, ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic faith, as the Papists
do confidently believe.

CHAP. II. The WISDOM of God in designing fit Instruments to be the
Messengers of his will, and Reformers of his Church, does confirm the
aforesaid doctrine of Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead.
. 1. Who were the first enemies of this doctrine, and what was their condition.
1. IT is a grave, and weighty testimony which S. John Damascen delivers in
his Oration concerning them who are departed in the faith. Our merciful Lord
does appoint (says he) and gratefully accept our duty in that mutual relief,
which we exhibit one to an other, both in our life, and after our decease. For
otherwise he would never have ministered this occasion unto us to remember the
departed in the time of the holy Sacrifice, unless this service were
approoueable in his sight. Neither is there any doubt, if this were a
ridiculous, and fruictlesse act, but that, whereas there have been many holy
men (Fathers, Patriarchs, and Doctors) inspired with the holy Ghost, he would
have putt it into some of their minds, to repress such an error. But there is
none of them all, no not one, that ever intertayned a conceit to subvert, or
impugn the same.

2. As this laudable custom of prayer for the dead was thus perpetuated
without any interruption, opposition, or dislike of the best men in the best
age (even of Constantine himself) so the first enemy thereof [AERIVS] was an
insolent, and graceless wretch, Anno Do^. 354.
a disciple of the Arrian heresy, and such perfidious doctrines; as Contra
Campian. page 261.
D. Humfrey himself does liberally confess, though otherwise there are some
things in Aerius, which were not distasteful unto his palate.

3. But this rare illuminate did not contayn himself within these limits.
Wherefore pretending a farther access of heavenly light (as the nature of
heresy did incline him; for it is full of vanity, and Ide^ licuit Martionitis
quod Martioni [Lutheranis quod Luthero] de suo ingenio fide^ innouare etc.
Tertul. praescrip. cap 42.
innouatio^; making poor seduced people to hunt counter in their own fancies,
and prescribing no certain rule unto the instability of their hearts) he vented
three peculiar heresies, devised, and fabricated in the shopp of his own
brayn. The FIRST: that there is no disparity betwixt a Bishopp, and a Priest.
The SECOND: that it is a folly to pray, or offer sacrifice for the dead. The
THIRD: that it is against Christian liberty to have any general, and appointed
days of fasting: for then we should seem to be under the Law. etc.

4. These heresies are no small part of the Geneuian Gospel; and therefore I
have observed it diligently in our Authors (as a very remarqueable point) that
howsoever they corrade, and heap up sundry heresies, fiercely obiecting the
same unto the Papists, yet they are silent in three; Vigilantianisme,
Iouinianisme, and The true Caluinists admit the 3. heresies of Aerius; as we
foe in France, Scotland etc.
this Aerianisme whereof I now entreat. For these are goodly stars in our
firmament, and shine most brightly in our Sphere. Notwithstanding my learned
Authors do exceed Aerius also, forasmuch as he did not wholly impugn the
dreadful Sacrifice, but esteemed it unprofitable for the the dead; whereas
they reject the thing it self, and this use of it, with like contempt.

5. This Aerian heresy was extinct, and buried (some few, scattering fellows
excepted) until the year of our Lord 1156; when it was raised, See afterward,
chap. 3.. 4.
and enliuened again by Henricus, a Frenchman (in whom our Protestanticall
Religion did more spectably rear up it self, then before) furbishing up some
old rags of S. Sainted by D. Fullees authority in his answ. to the Rhem.
Testam. in 1. Timoth. 3. Annotat. 7.
Vigilantius, and others, for the resplendency, and completenesse of his
gospel.

6. Nunc audi quis ille sit (saieih Ep. 240.
S. Bernard unto Hildefonse, the Earl of S. Giles) now it may please you to
understand, what was the quality, and condition of this Apostle. First, a Monk,
and then an Apostata from his order. So was our S. Luther, Secondly; a
pretendent of Apostolical life. Such sheepebiters were our freese-gowne
Preachers, whose doctrines enkindled the furious people, See the statutes of
King Rich. 2. etc.
and seasoned them with the principles of rebellion. Thirdly; a violatour of
Chastity. So was S. Luther; even M. Powell de Antichr. page 324.
Magnus ille Reformator, he our Great Reformer. An example unknown to reverend
Antiquity, and reserved unto our gospel, that a vowed Monk should conioyne
himself in mariadge with a professed Nun; which, though it be not adultery,
yet peius est adulterio, it is tarr worse, in S. De bono Viduit. c, 11.
Augustines censure; howsoever D. Field minceth it, and says, Page 153.
Augustine MISLIKETH them that vow, and perform not.

7. Finally; I saw a co^nfluence of impieties in our French Apostle, whether I
respected his Religion, or Conversation. And therefore I could not withstand
this just sentence pronounced by S Bernard, Ibid.
saying; Non est hic homo a Deo, qui sic contraria Deo and facit, and loquitur;
this man is not sent from God, who acts, and speaks things so repugnant
unto his will.

. 2. God uses no such instruments to reform his Church.
1, HEre (inlardging my meditations) I considered more exactly, that the
supreme Majesty of heaven, and earth, is respective of his honor, and the
incolumity of his Church; and as it is against his gracious Providence, that
the Spouse of his Son, and the Mother of the faithful, should suffer a
general, and diuturnall eclipse in her profession, so now it is farther
against his high WISDOM, that, when she wants a due reformation, he should
not design honorable, and condign Instruments for such an excellent purpose.

2. Where is the difficulty, and impediment in this case? Is it in his
Prescience, that he cannot foresee what is to come, or is it in his Power, that
he cannot effectuate, what he desires? Not in the First; for I have his own
testimony by the mouth of Samuel, his prophet, saying; 1. Reg. 13.14,
QVAESIVIT etc. God has sought a man according unto his heart; to wit, David,
his servant. What he sought, he found; and yet he found no good thing in David,
which was not his own gift. Not in the Second; for I am ascertayned by the
Forerunner of my Lord; Luc. 3.2.
POTENS etc. God is able, even of these stones, to raise up children unto
Abraham.

3. And if Caesar could say in the pride of his mortal heart; Inueniam, aut
faciam viam, either I shall find a way, or I will make one; did it not concern
the Wisdom of God (to speak no more of his Providence; which we Protestants
have already destroyed, by enforcing a damnable error upon his universal
Church) either to find out some man already endued with convenient gifts, or
else to prepare some (in case none were yet adorned by him) to undertake such a
royal, and incomparable work of REFORMATION?

4. For how can I suppose, or once imagine (without injury unto my Lord, and
expectation of his reuendge) that any base, and detestable Caitifs (falling
away from the sweet communion of the Church into accursed heresies, and being
thereupon the Prophetts of hell) should then also (and never before) be stirred
up, and excited by God to redress his Church, the Pillar, and Firmament of
truth? Is it probable, nay is it possible, that they, who remained not in the
duty of her Sons, should be advanced unto the dignity of her Fathers? Are men
actually inspired by God, and by the Devil, to impugn, and to defend her, to
destroy, and to maintayn her, to infect, and to preserve her? Were her sworn
enemies more tender of her good, then her best friends, and were vile Rebels
more respective of Gods honor, then his dearest Servants?

5. You that have the common instinct of moral reason, and the ordinary light
of humane understanding, judge, I pray you, judge impartially in this case;
Luther; thou art the scourdge of God etc. See Sir Th. More co^tra Luth. de
Sacram.
whether such disastrous Reformers as Henricus, Aerius, and the like, were not
rather ministers to execute the Justice of God, then counselors to promulgate
his will, and whether he does not rather correct, then direct; punish, then
prescribe by such men. It was a tyranny in Mezentius to bind living men unto
dead carcasses. But the Wisdom of God does assure me, that he will not tithe
living body of his Church, unto the dead, and putrified members thereof.

6. The consideration of which point was of great power, and efficacy in my
heart, to make me disclayme, and abandon the proceedings of our GREAT Reformer,
M. Luther.
in whom there was no true resemblance of a pious, and divine Spirit. Witness,
his furious declamations against Zuinglius, and all Sacramentaries (the
Patriarch, and Brethren of our gospel) his rude, and vnsaintlike inuectiues
against King Henry the eight, his heretical, and grievous assertions; his
contemptuous This is peremptorily denied by D. Abbot (against D. Hill, page
307) with a marginall reference unto Whitaker. answ. to Camp. But Whitaker. (in
his answ. 10 Raindas c 7.) being better advised in this matter, makes some
confession thereof; howbeit he interlaceth dishonest euasions, and gross
untruths.
reiection of some Canonical Scriptures: his beastly, and unchristian
positions, his light, and vayn imaginations; his familiar conversation with
Devils. All which (and many more) odious things are extant in his own works;
things incredible unto such as do not yet know them, and fearful unto such as
have experience therein.

-- Iuue^al.
Felicia tempora, quae te
Moribus opponant; habeat iam Roma pudorem.
O happy times that brought thee forth,
to thunder out complaynt:
Now Rome may blush to see her self
opposd by such a Saint.
7. But I will omit the work of our late Reformation (transacted by this
boisterous Friar) and return unto my other reforming gentlemen, with whom I
made this brief conclusion.

9. The admirable WISDOM of God does confirm, and ought to establish me in
the doctrine of Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead, inasmuch as the first
adversaries thereof were desperately affected against his Truth, and exercised
open hostility against his Church. There is an Aerius, and an Henricus; here is
an Augustine, and a Bernard: the first deny it, and follow their peculiar
imaginations; the second affirm it, and rely upon the conformable judgment of
the Catholic Church: choose now, whom thou will follow in this case, and with
which of these thou will adventure the eternity of thy soul.

9. Shall I answer, and say: I respect not, what the first, or second have
delivered, but what the Scripture it self has taught herein? A poor evasion:
for the Scripture is clearly against me in this point, and I can not gainsay
it, unless I will come forth with a non obstante of mine own sense; and yet I
am bound (in all humility) to subordinate my understanding unto the instruction
of my Superiors. But if in pride, and insolency (as S. Furiosus mente, clatus
opinione etc. See Epipha^. haer. 75. The same censure belongs unto the rest.
Aerius, Henricus, Luther and others have done) I should prefer mine own
judgment before the learned Fathers, and renounce that due, and convenient
subjection which I should have toward the ancient, Catholic Church (she that
must, and shall judge me, and all my Protestanticall Doctors) oh what monsters
of opinion might I conceive, and what certainty of truth can I bring forth?
Truly, as Aaron formed many precious jewels into the similitude of a calf,
Exodus 32.4.
so I might (happily) fashion unto my self many foolish conceits, by casting the
precious word of God into the mould of my private, and misguided fancy.

CHAP. III. The TRVTH of God has confirmed this doctrine by a renowned
Miracle. An exception of Protestants refelled.
. 1. The nature, and Use of Miracles.
1. I Considered first, that as a Miracle is a Divine work in its nature,
(because it can not be wrought without the special concurrency of Gods power)
so in its use, it is a Divine testimony, because it has a reference unto some
truth; and principally, when it is exhibited unto that purpose: for it
procures an inward conviction of the understanding, A mystery is secret, and
hidden; and so it differs from a miracle in respect of the USE, though it
agree with it in the NATVRE thereof.
by an outward demonstration unto the sense. In which respect I may truly say,
that a Miracle is the broad Seal of Heaven, affixed unto some writing, or
evidence of Gods own hand, bearing his image, and superscription.

2. I considered secondly, that though Heretics, and Pagans, do often
counterfeit this broad Seal, yet their falsehood is discouerable by men of
judgment, waighing the Circumstances with due examination. Nay farther; though
it please God that a true miracle shall be performed by them (as sometimes it
has come to pass) yet there is always a certain limitation therein precisely
unto this, of that As the maintenance of Justice; or some other such moral, and
civil respect. 1. Cor. 10.13.
peculiar end, so that it serves by no means to give assistance, and validity
unto their heretical, or paganicall conceits. For the end, and use of Gods
works is always good; besides; he is faithful, who will not suffer us to be
tempted above our power.

3. I considered thirdly, that Miracles may have a triple respect, according to
the triple distinction of the Church. For the Church has three estates; viz.
of PLANTATION; of PROPAGATION; of REFORMATION.

De Ciuit. Dei lib. 22. cap. 8.
4. In the first estate, there was a necessity of Miracles (as S. Augustine does
well insinuate) to this end, that men might believe. For whereas our Lord did
intend, that his Gospel should be the ordinary means of salvation for ever,
he thought fit to gayn sufficient authority unto it by an extraordinary means
in the beginning.

5. In the second estate, there was no such necessity of Miracles; and
therefore S. Augustine says very excellently; Ibid.
The Protestants do frequently, and earnestly allege this sentence but they
cunningly s^ppresse that which follows. I heartily request you to read the
whole chapter in S. Aug.
whosoever requires miracles now to this end, that he may believe, he is a
miracle himself, forasmuch as he will not believe, when the whole world
belieueth. Notwithstanding in this estate also, there is an vtility of
Miracles, for the glory, and splendor, and exaltation of the Church. Wherefore
S. Augustine proceeds farther, and speaks to this effect: My former answer
may be sufficient for the conviction of infidells; but I stay not here: Nunc
quoque fiunt miracula; for now also (even in this lardge propagation of the
Church) miracles are done in sundry places. Fiunt nunc multa miracula: Many
miracles are done in these days. Some he reports upon his own experience,
others upon certain information, and they are (generally) such, as wound our
Protestanticall Religion to the death. And S. Augustine (as it were foreseing
the judgment of Infidells, and Protestants, and what exceptions they would
take against his report) is very earnest in the delivery of these things,
adding in conclusion of one miracle; Some men will not believe that this was
so: but who are they? even they, that believe not, how our Lord Jesus was borne
of a Virgin, and yet her womb remained entire; or that, he came into the room,
where his Apostles were assembled, and yet the doors were shutt.

6. In the third estate, Miracles are more If Luthers reformation were good why
was it not graced with so me evident miracles, and specially since so great a
mutation has followed ic as was never seen, in the Church of God? Nay, why
are many miracles now done in that church which he renounced? Beda; hist.
Eccles. l. 1. c. 21. Beda; l. 2. c. 2.
necessary then in the second, though not so necessary as in the first. For
whereas it has seemed good unto the singular wisdom of God to adorn his
Church with some miracles always in the second estate, (even when no heresy
assaulted her) it was very conuenable that he should much rather afford this
power in the third, for the extirpation of heresies, and for redress of great
disorders. Examples whereof were frequent in the days of our forefathers, and
Britanny it self has copious testimonies in this kind. For thus the holy
Bishopp S. German confounded the Pelagians; and thus S. Augustine (our Apostle)
reproved the schismatic Bishopps of Britanny, in the public conspect of
the people.

. 2. A miracle wrought by S. Bernard, to the confusion of Henricus, and his
doctrine.
1. These considerations being premised, I took a serious reuiew of an
history, which though I had read long before, yet it did not prevail with me
so far, as the dignity thereof did justly require. For partly the veil was so
closely drawn over mine eyes, that I could not see the truth, and partly I
passed over it with a negligent leuity, and carelessness, as many Protestants
do; not willing to intertayn the knowledge of any doctrine, which sorteth not
with the public State, or their private fortunes. Genes. 11.7.
Howbeit I know, that as the tongues of the Babylonians were divided, and one
conceived not what an other spoke, so the tongues of many principal Scholars
in England are divided from their hearts, and they speak not what themselves
conceive.

2. I come unto my history. S. Bernard hearing of the spoils which Huius rei
gratia, licet in multa corporis infirmitate, iter arripui in has parts etc.
Bernar. ep. 240. S. Bernard. ibid.
Henricus made in the vineyard of our Lord, repaired into the parts of Toulouse
which were greatly infected with his contagion (for now the Churches were left
without people, people without Pastors, and Pastors without honor) and
there, in a frequent assembly, he countermanded the fancies of this Apostata
with learning, and gravity, and in the plain evidence of the Spirit.

3. At the end of his sermon, many of the auditors presented unto him certain
quantities of bread, and requested his fatherly benediction. The devout Abbot
performed their desire with gladness, assuring them that they should discern
the truth of his doctrine, and the falsehood of Henricus, if their sick, and
languishing friends should immediately recover their strength upon the taste
thereof.

4. A venerable Bishopp being there present, and fearing the success, added
this clause (by way of caution) si bona fide sumpserint, if they receive it
with a good faith. But S. Bernard, being secure in the power of almighty God,
answered publicly, non ego hoc dixerim, no, I said not so; only this I said,
and this I proclayme unto you, Let your sick people eat of this hallowed
bread, and they shall be made whole; for hereby you shall know us to be Viz. in
the doctrines which he defended against Henricus, in the name of the Catholic
Church.
TRVE Servants of God. His word was fulfilled and the fame of this miracle was
so dispersed in all the country, that the blessed man, declining the
intolerable concourse of the people, returned home an other way.

. 3. There is no evasion against the clearenesse of this Miracle.
1. THe exceptions, which my heart could apprehend in this case, were three;
but when I had waighed them all in the balance of my reason, I dismissed each
of them successively with a part of Balthazars judgment; Thekel Dan. 5.27.
thou art waighed in the balance, and art found too light.

2. FIRST, to deny the fact it seemed an unreasonable conceit, because as it
was done in a public, and solemn conuenti^, so it is recorded in very
authentical manner by a reverend Gulielm. Abbas in vita S. Bernard. l. 3. c. 5.
person, of S. Bernards familiar acquayntance.

3. If this be not sufficient, yet Epist. 241.
S. Bernard himself did give me such a pregnant intimation, as satisfied me
abundantly in this behalf. For thus he wrote unto the people of Toulouse after
his return. Our abode with you was short but not vnfruictfull, inasmuch as the
TRVTH was manifested by us, not only in speech, but in POWER also.

4. Wherefore that excellent commendation wherewith M. Luther is advanced by
one of his Ioh. Aurifaber, in colloq. mensal. Luth.
disciples (but very unjustly; since that notable Apostle, as Contra Pighium.
Calvin styles him, See Luth. in Esaiam. cap. 37.
did never cure so much as a lame horse) does justly appertayn unto this worthy
Saint, viz. Vir potens erat in dictis, and factis, he was a man mighty both in
word, and deed; as Prophet^ erat, and operator miraculorum. Part. 2. Sermon. de
S. Bernardo, See Guliel. Abbas in vita S. Bernardi lib. 3. cap. 6. etc.
John Gerson himself delivers sutably to the same purpose.

5. SECONDLY; to impute this fact unto sorcery, and incantations, it were a
Jewish, and heathenish folly; so the miracles of Christ himself, and of his
Apostles, and Martyrs were traduced by their enemies. Besides; since all
ingenious Protestants confess, that Bernard was an holy man, and replenished
with divine grace (as his life, and his writings do contestify unto the world)
how could I stayn his honorable name with such ignominy, and disgrace?

6. No; I will leave that humor unto M. Centur. 14. c, 85.
Bale; let it be an argument of his ungentle nature, and not of mine, to accuse
this glorious Saint, and to crucify his name with bitter reproaches; Coecus,
and blasphemus ille Bernardus; that blind, and blasphemous Bernard.

7. But forasmuch as I knew very well, that M. Bale was imbued with a See the
3. Conuers of England. Part. 2. c. 5. number. 25. etc. 6. number. 32. etc.
malignant disposition against this, and other Saints (some of them being the
honor, and crown of our nation) I remitted him unto the sweet, and modest
answer of De Considerat. lib. 2.
S. Bernard, saying; If one of the two must needs be, that either God, or I
must be reproached, it is well for me, if he vouchsafe to use me as his
buckler. I do gladly receive the darts of venomous tongues against me, that
they may not come unto him. I refuse not to be inglorious, if I may defend the
glory of my Lord. It is my honor to participate with him that said; Psalm.
68.11.
Opprobria exprobrantium tibi ceciderunt super me.

8. THIRDLY; to pretend, that howsoever (perhaps) some opinions of Henricus
were expugned by this Miracle, but not (precisely) this concerning Purgatory,
and Prayer for the dead, it was the last refuge which I could make, and the
fairest suggestion, which I could conceive; and yet as Ioab perished at the
Altar (a place of protection) so you will fail in this anchor of your hope. 3.
Reg. 2.


9. My secret dispute in this point, was somewhat lardge; but I will contract
it as briefly as I may, because I am unwilling to abuse your patience with any
long, and tedious discourse.

. 4. Two Considerations: the first, General; touching the Catholic articles,
which HENRICUS impugned: the second Particular, touching Purgatory. The
Protestants are convinced.
1. I Considered FIRST; that whatsoever Henricus disapprooued in the Church, he
is imitated therein by Luther, or by some of his gospel, which is branched
into much variety, and difformity of sects. For a more exact demonstration
whereof, I laid down a catalogue of the particulars impugned by Henr. (which
I will exhibit here unto your sight) and waighed every one singly by itself.

1. Purgatory; Prayer, and Oblation for the dead. 2. Invocation of Saints. 3.
Excommunication by Priests. 4. Peregrination. 5. Temples. 6. Festiuities. 7.
Consecration of oil, and chrisme. 8. Ecclesiastical sanctions. 9.
Transubstantiation. 10. Baptism of Infants.
2. The VValdensians following the Henricians; the Albigensians (Professors of
the same faith, and religion, which we now profess, as D. Against D. Bishop*
part. 2. page 55.
Abbott testifies to our great See the 3. Conuers. of England. Part. 2. c. 10.
number. 2. etc. Also the Exame^ of Fox his Calendar-Saincts. chap. 3. nu^.
17.18.19. etc.
disreputation) following the Waldensians; VVicleuians consorting with them all
(though not in every particular) do symbolize very much in their impugnation of
these things.

3. I descended unto our later Churches (more euangelically ordered, and more
speciously collected then these former were) and making a several inquisition
touching the ten precedent articles, I found that the FIRST, and SECOND are
contemned generally by all the Brethren of my Gospel. In the THIRD there is
no small difference amongst them. For Erastus etc.
some wholly reject that terrible censure. Sundry Divines also of good regard
(says Cathol. doctr. page 191.
M. Rogers) conceive that Christians (cleaving unto Christ their fundation) are
not to be excommunicated either for any error, or misdemeanour whatsoever. The
Presbyterians derive the validity of this censure not from the Clergy, See M.
Rogers, ibid.
but from a Clero-laicall Consistory, the creature of Caluins imagination.

4. I considered farther, that as some amongst us do intertayn a base conceit
of this high matter, so others do unjustly claim the exercise of this power.
For since it belongs unto spiritual jurisdiction, and since this
jurisdiction belongs unto no Ordinarily.
man, who is not lawfully consecrated, and since we have no consecration, but
We plead so.
such as came directly from the Pope, and since he is D. Fields rumbling
phrases page 64.
Antichrist, the child of perdition, with the foame of his impure mouth, and
froath of his words of blasphemy etc. I could not perceive, what just title we
can have unto these celestial, and divine offices in the Church. For what
communion is there betwixt Christ, and Antichrist?

5. The FOVRTH is cashiered by all, as superstitious, and profane. The FIFTH
article concerns the Anabaptists, and Brownists most properly, who detest all
Churches, because they were polluted with Antichristian abominations of the God
Maozim etc. And truly their opinion herein flows naturally from our
principles; for if the Pope be Antichrist, and if the Churches were the temples
of such Idolatry (as we pretend) then these men do laudably hate the very
place of such vntmachable impiety, and desolation.

6. The SIXTH article pertayneth unto the rigid, and sincere Caluinians, whose
Congregations are purified, and cleansed from the festinities of the ancient
Chuch. Witness Scotland, France etc. where the zealous professors imitate
their Forefather Aerius [of unholy memory] and renounce the Christian feasts,
as Epiphans de Aerdo; haeres. 75.
Judicial fables etc.

7. The SEVENTH has been ridiculous unto us all; and yet some blessing
(perhapps) was powered forth upon that oil, wherewith his MAJESTY received his
first unction, to be the King anointed of our Land.

8. The EIGHT article is despised by such pure Caluins, and severe Luthers, as
measure the truth of all things by the yard of their own fancy. Hence it is
that Luther reduces the definitions of holy Concells unto a popular
approbation, and consent of the unlettered people; for (says Tom. 2. l. 2. de
rat. Iud. Eccles.
he) they are the sheep of whom our Savior testifies, that they hear his
voice. Hence it is, that his Apostolical self fears not to pronounce; Contra
Henric. 8.
When Bishopps arrogated power to enact Canons etc. without doubt these were
the cogitations of Satan: yea the first Council of Nice (says he) committed
sacrilege, and impiety against the most evident, and invincible scriptures of
God. Hence follows the contempt of sacred Synods, and neglect of their
decrees.

9. The NINTH is a damnable point in our eyes; and M. Powel de Antichristo;
page 254.
one of those deadly heresies, which was devised by Antichrist himself. The
TENTH, and last article has special refere^ce unto the Anabaptists who
repudiate the S. Aug. de Genes. l. 10. c. 23.
tradition of the Apostles therein, as See M. Rogers, Catl^. doctr. page 169.
the invention of a Pope, yea of the very Devil. So zealous are they against
all things, not literally expressed in the word.

10. But, when I searched into the fountayn of this error, I saw that a
singular disgrace ensues thereby unto the gospel of our reformed Churches.
For whereas S. Luther does often couple the Anabaptists, and Sacramentaries in
one string (protesting that they Defeceru^t ^ nobis primo Sacramentarij, post
Anabaptistae etc. See Luth. in 5. ad Galat.
fell away from him; and therefore he often defieth them both, as hateful, and
execrable heretics) I Staphyl. in lib. de Concord. Luther. and alij.
found that he ministered just occasion unto the formers vanity, by his unjust
position, inasmuch as he taught, that Children have ACTVALL Faith; and that
otherwise they should not be baptized. Whereupon some of his disciples
(assuming that Children have no such faith) inferred necessarily, therefore
they are not to be baptized.

11. Thus the Anabaptisme of See the Examen of Fox his Calendar-Saints cap. 3.
number. 43.
Pacimontanus (a chick of Martins eggs) was an infallible conclusion, by a
true negative of that, which Luther did falsely affirm. This point Cathol.
doctr. page 170.
M. Rogers aymeth at very fayrely, saying; Some are of opinion that none are to
be baptized, which believe not first: and hence the ANABAPTISTS teach, Infants
believe not, therefore they are not to be baptized. Hence also the LVTHERANS
teach [so it pleases M. Rogers to speak; and yet D. Field is driven into a
great passion against the Pope, because Bellarmine uses these Luthera^s:
Caluinist. etc. page 179.
names of faction, and diuision] Infants do believe, and therefore they are to
be baptized.

12. As for the principal SACRAMENTARIES (for thus the Zuinglians,
Oecolampadians, Carolostadians etc. are commonly phrased by S. Luther; howbeit
it pleases Page 170.
D. Field to say, that Some men's MALICE called them so) I saw that great
ignominy does attend them also in this behalf. For Tom. 2. de baptism.
Zuinglius (our renowned, and military Patriarch) inuaighing against this
doctrine, Baptism confirms faith etc. sentenceth it to be a rash, and
inconsiderate opinion. Yea (says he) for this cause it was to be expected,
that some men should deny baptism unto Infants. And I do ingenuously confess,
that (being sometimes deceived with this error) I thought it more safe, that
they should be baptized, when they are come unto a just age.

13. Which Anabaptisme, though he disclaymed afterward, yet this heresy
festered so deeply in his heart, that he always esteemed the baptism of
children to be an external, or ceremonial thing, dispensable by the law of
Charity, which the Church may well, and honestly use, or omit, as it shall
seem good for the edification of our neighbor. The same opinion was taken up
by Inter ^p. Zuingl. and Oecol. l. 2. fol. 80.
Oecolampadius, the Sea Bellarm. de Notis Eccles. cap. 8.
first [pretensed] Bishopp of Basil. Truly a fit doctrine for a Bishopp of
such a stamp.

14. This was the sum, and effect of my first, and general consideration;
viz. that all the innouations, which Henricus propounded unto the Church, were
such, as make up a goodly mess to furnish our evangelical table; and thus I
saw no reason why the Miracle of S. Bernard should not be as sufficient a
proof of all, as of some, and why not as specially of Purgatory, as of any
other point.

15. Wherefore I proceeded unto a SECOND consideration, which is more peculiar,
and which did more forcibly procure my firm resolution, and indubious assent.

16. For since our Lord did give his own testimony from heaven (and we know
that his testimony is true) in defense of S. Bernard against Henricus, without
all question, this doctrine of Purgatory was so included in the whole number,
that it was no less clearly fortified by this miracle, then any other point.
And my reason to conceive thus, was, because as S. Bernard delivered it, and
the people accepted it no less freely then any other, so likewise God himself
did concur in the operation of this miracle for a noble end; viz. the
confusion of heresy, the manifestation of the truth, the honor of his name,
the safety of his Church, the satisfaction of men present, and the instruction
of succeeding ages.

17. Yea forasmuch as he that wrought this illustrious Miracle, did then, and
there (in the voice, and authority of the Catholic Church) publicly teach,
and earnestly persuade, and constantly defend this doctrine, how shall the wit
of an Archangell distinguish, what was, and what was not confirmed by this
Miracle, in case the glorious Saint, and the visible Church were erroneous in
the Sea before; number. 1.
said opinions (as far as the substance thereof extends itself) and
principally in the FIRST, it being a chief article in that catalogue?

18. I concluded. As God will not (nay he can not; and this is a powerful
impotency in him) bear witness unto any falsehood, so he does never
implicate, and obscure the truth in such manner, that we should be necessarily
entangled with error, for want of possibility to discern it, and specially
when the thing is such, as is heretical in nature, and damnable in effect.

5. An exception of D. Field against Miracles, refelled by the authority of
GERSON whom he magnifieth, as a man that wished our Protestanticall Reformation.
1. I Loved, and sometimes esteemed the Church-booke of D. Field, as the best
oracle of our days; and as the work commended the Author, so the Author did
reciprocally commend his work in my simple thoughts.

2. Amongst sundry positions which he there frames, as bulwarks of our
Religion, and impregnable forts thereof, I applauded this, which here ensues:
viz. Page 185.
We say, that howsoever it may be, some miracles were done by such good men, as
lived in the corrupt state of the Church, yet that is no proof of those errors
[ Purgatory, Transubstant. etc.] which the Romanists maintayn against us. For
WE PEREMPTORILY DENY, that ever any Miracle was done by any man in times past,
or in our times, to confirm any of the things, controuersed between the
Papists, and us.

3. In this resolution I was undaunted, because I took it to be substantial;
and I embraced it as a necessary principle, because if it should fail, then it
follows most evidently, either that God is not true, or that our Religion is
false.

4. But now after my long, and serious discourse concerning the aforesaid
miracle, I was compelled to sound retreat, and to deny my peremptory denial;
for my reason did inform me that S. Bernard has long since by miracle
confirmed the doctrine of Purgatory; it being one of those things, which are
controuersed between us, and the Papists at this day.

5. Besides; since any man, who is meanly instructed in the writings of the
Ancient, does know, that S. Gregory was a Papist (for which cause Cathol.
Apolog. in Secunda Classi.
D. Morton has stalled him in the catalogue of Popish Doctors) and that S.
Augustine (his messenger unto us) delivered the same Popish faith in England
(as Centur. 1. fol. 35.
John Bale confesses, saying; Augustine the Roman was sent as an Apostle from
Gregory the first, to season the English-Saxons with a popish faith; whence the
same Bale is pleased to affirm that King Ethelbert died 21. years post
susceptum papismum, after he had received Popery) and finally, that this holy,
and blessed man (who came from far to sing the Lords song in a strandge land)
did work many rare miracles, by cooperation of the Divine Power (for this is
evident by the testimony of Lib. 7. ep. 30.
S. Gregory the Great; of Eccles. hi. l. 1. c. 26. 31. l. 2. c. 2. etc.
V. Beda, and of sundry others; yea Act. and Mon. page 105.
John Fox himself can find no exception against this point, howsoever he
participateth with the malignity of Contra Camp. Rat. 5.
D. Humfrey, In his Reply page 185.
M. Jewel, Centur. 1.
John Bale, etc. and throws out his contumelies against so worthy a Saint, to
disgrace the work of our happy Conversion from Paganism unto Christianity) I
desired to understand, whether we could truly deny (since we do PEREMPTORILY
DENY) that none of those things were ever confirmed by Miracle, wherein the
controversy stands betwixt us, and the Papists, at this day? For I argued
thus in my private cogitations, and said. Did God concur with our Augustine,
and his assistents, by any FALSEHOOD to strengthen the (supposed) heresies,
which they did then, and Papists do now maintayn? No; for this were against his
Truth; and I know that he neither deceives, nor is deceived. Or did he concur
with them by CONFVSION, to strengthen some part, but not all that faith which
they preached in the name, and authority of the Roman Church? No; for this
were against the sweet disposition of his gifts, and works; and I am assured,
that he is the God of order, and not of confusion, as I see in the Catholic
Church.

6. But there is yet an other evidence, which, as it is more particular, so it
was more potent, and perswasiue unto me then the former. And because, as it was
a key to unlock my understanding, so since it does most highly import your
selves (dear Contreymen) to take good notice thereof, I will here deliver it
unto you, briefly and plainly; branching it into three considerations.

7. FIRST therefore it may please you to be informed by Page 171.
D. Field, that TRANSVBSTANTIATION is one of the greatest mysteries of Popish
religion, which all Papists at this day do most firmly hold, and believe.
Whence it follows: if so special a Miraculu^ in Mysterio.
Mystery of Popish faith, as this is, were justified by any Miracle, then all
the Religion of the Papists is thereby confirmed, and established eminenter;
that is to say, in a principal, or eminent manner.

8. SECONDLY, it may please you to be farther indoctrined by the mature
resolution of Page 186.
D. Field, and the grave judgment of the Metropolitan himself (for this
CHVRCH-booke was composed at his See D. Fields ep. dedicat. to the Archb. of
Cant.
direction, approved by his censure, and publicated by his authority) that
there is NO BETTER proof of the goodness of our [the Protestants] cause, then
that that, which we [Luther, Zwinglius etc.] have done in the REFORMATION of
the Church, was before wished for, expected, and foretold by the BEST men that
lived (in former times) in the corrupt state of the Church. In the number of
which best men, he recompteth GROSTHEAD, and GERSON; whom (with some others) he
does Page 85.
elsewhere entitle Worthy Guides of Gods Church. But how good a proof this is,
and how laudable our Reformation is, which stands, and supporteth it self
chiefly upon the same, you may perceive by the little Appendix, which ensues
in the conclusion of this Treatise. Which when you have carefully perused, and
discreetly waighed, then reflect upon this matter, and then speak in the
uprightness of your consciences (betwixt God, and your selves) whether the
Cause be not very bad, and the Patrones thereof much worse. Let that be an
example unto you for ever to see, what immoderate affectation of untruth
possesses your most eminent Authors; and how miserable your Religion is, of
whose goodness there is no better proof.

9. THIRDLY; and lastly, it may please you to understand, that this worthy
Guide of Gods Church, and one of our (pretended) Fathers, Part. 4. Sermon. in
festo Corporis Christi.
John Gerson (the most Christian Doctor; as he is commonly styled by the
Church) discoursing upon the aforesaid great mystery of Popish Religion, and
reproouing INFIDELITY [to wit of Berengarius, and, in him, of Calvin: for it
is a memorable point to consider, that though Berengarius did abjure his error
against the Real presence, and died See Gerson ibid.
penitently for the same; yea though the Centur. 11. c. 10. page 527.
Lutherans of Magdeburge themselves do expressly say, that Pope Leo the 9. did
meritt great praise by condemning the heresy of Berengarius in a Synod at Rome,
Admonit. vlta^d We stphilum.
yet John Calvin protests, that he does, and will follow Berengarius in his
opinion; and it is clear, that our English Church concurreth with them both]
which brought many FRIVOLOVS reasons [the very same, which we now produce, and
allege at this day] against the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, delivers
his mind herein fully, and says, that We ought to believe this truth
[Transubstantiation] and to give creditt unto Gods word without any pledges, or
depositions. as Miracles are. But if any man will" desire these things for his
assurance, he may" have a thousand, and a thousand persons of most holy life,
and profound knowledge, who have testified this truth unto death, by a
thousand, and a thousand Some are remembered by Claud. de Saint. de Euchar.
Also by Bellarm. de Euchar. l. 3. cap. ^.
MIRACLES.

10. Wherefore being thus encompassed on every side, and having no possibility
to escape the pressure of this difficulty, nor to withstand the singular, and
effectual power of this evidence (for one of the greatest mysteries of popish
Religion is now confirmed by many Miracles, even in Gersons testimony, which I
was bound to admit; because as his Person deserves high respect, so it
deserves far greater with them, that will so graciously applaud him) I was
forced either to disclayme D. Fields book, or to renounce my Protestanticall
belief; but yet the later seemed a more reasonable course, because that
Religion can not be good, which is so falsely, and absurdly defended by him,
and all the chiefest Authors, that ever applied their pains unto this service.

11. What remained now, but that I should conclude with S. AUGUSTINE (the D.
Field.
greatest Divine, which ever lived since the Apostles time, and the Calvin.
best witness of Antiquity) and say with De vtilit. credones cap. 17.
him; Since we behold such a special assistance of God, such progress, and
such fruict, shall we doubt to hide ourselves within the lapp of Not of
Donatists, Aerians, Berengarians, Lutherans, etc.
that Church, which has obtained the height of authority, partly by the
judgment of the people, partly by the gravity of Counsels, partly by the
Majesty of MIRACLES, and is descended by the succession of Bishops in the
APOSTOLIQVE Seat [of S. Peter at Rome; a point, which Velenus: Funccius etc.
See Bellarm. de Pontifice Romans l. 2. c. 2. 4. etc.
some men, filled with a spirit of contradiction, deny without honesty, wit,
or learning] frustra circumlatrantibus haereticis, the heretics barking round
about in vayn?

12. Let your own consciences (kind Readers) make a secret application of
these things in the closett of your hearts Which that you may more easily, and
effectually do, I shall entreat you to cast back your eyes of consideration
with me, and to reflect upon the premises (ingenious Academicks) as it
becomes men that rather have a care to see the truth, then a desire to
impugn the same.

CHAP. IIII. A Reflection upon the premises contained in this book.
. 1. Of the grounds, which I followed in this discourse.
1. FIRST I considered that the grounds, and authorities, upon which I builded
my discourse, were so clear, and solid, that no wit could dissolve, or
impeach their strength. For if I accepted the Fathers, they did convince me; if
I rejected them, my folly would be great, and my dispute uncertain. And thus I
saw that the judgment of Ret. 5.
Edm Campian must necessarily take place, viz. AEternam causae maculam coguntur
[Protestantes] inurere, sieve recusent patres, sieve deposcant; nam in altero
fugam adornant, in altero suffocantur. Which points I prosecuted yet farther
(though briefly) in this manner.

2. If I ACCEPT the Fathers to be be my Judges, as they are Churches
VVitnesses, I have the face of all Antiquity confronting me, and speciallly S.
Augustine, whom, for some just respects, I do specially esteem. Was he a
Protestant, and a Papist? then two different Religions are compatible in one
soul; whence must ensue as great a strife, Genes. 25.22.23.
and colluctation, as Rebecca felt in her womb, when two Nations contended in
her body. Or was he a Protestant, and not a Papist? why then is he so
perspicuous against me in this matter? Or was he a Papist, and not a
Protestant? why then do we so triumph, and glory in his name? Or finally; was
he neither Papist, nor Protestant? Then both these Religions (in all
probability) are false, and then (perhapps) none is true. Thus from an
uncertainty, men run into a nullity of faith, and so the end of heresy is
Atheism, because there can be no other issue, unto which it does finally
propend. And verily, who does not conceive (upon due ponderation) that, if the
CATHOLIC Religion, being so spectable in dignity, so continued in succession,
so enlardged in diffusion, and so eminent in all respects, should
notwithstanding seem false, or dubious, by reason of some cauillations framed
against it by her enemies, it will rather come to pass, that no Religion
should be true, then that the Protestants faith, which has such a late
entrance, such base founders, such uncertain grounds, such infinite divisions,
should be more credible, and probable then the said CATHOLIC belief?

3. I proceed. Since I was so powerfully expugned by the Fathers, as you have
seen, how could I elude the gravity of their testimonies, which pressed, and
oppressed me on every side? Should I ( Alexander-like) cut the knott insunder
with violence, which I could never untie with skill?

4. There remained one principal shift for me, but yet it was of no value, or
substance. For though later ages speak more copiously in this particular, and
in many others, then the former, yet I saw, that it was by way of explication,
not innovation; of declaration, not alteration; of exposition, not addition
etc. For it is an excellent prescription, which Lirinensis delivers in this
case; viz. Fides habet profectum, 1 Cap. 29.30.
non permutationem: faith has a progress, or increase, but without any
chandge. Matters of Ceremony are in their nature indifferent, and in their use
dispensable; and herein no private man may prescribe unto the wisdom of the
Church, or limit her power. Matters of Doctrine have their inlardgement, and
amplification; but yet so, as that no other fundation be laid, then the same
which we received in the beginning. Thus Pelagians may not complayn, if the
doctrine of Grace were more clearly illustrated by S. Augustine, then ever it
was discussed before. Thus the Arrians may not complayn, if the doctrine of
Homousia were more fully explicated by the Fathers of Nice, then ever it was
unfolded until that time. Thus also we Protestants cannot justly complayn, if
the Catholic doctrine in this particular, were more abundantly expressed by S.
Augustine, and by succeding ages, then ever it was resolved unto his days.
Lirinens.
Intelligatur te exponente clarius, quod antea obscurius credebatur etc.

5. In REJECTING the Fathers, and recurrring unto the Scripture alone, I saw
that I should strive without success; not because the truth wants defense in
this kind, but because I feared, least I might swear fealty unto mine own
sense, and dwell therein, as a snayle takes impotent sanctuary in the shell,
which her natural art has fashioned out of her proper stuff.

6. Thus Iouinian (a worthy Progenitour of Luthers gospel) did so wrest, and
pervert the sacred writ to establish his sottish heresy concerning the
equallity of Joys in Heaven, and Pains in Hell, that Contra Iouinian. lib. 2.
paulo post med.
S. Hierome himself is forced to confess, Quis electorum Dei non tentetur etc.
who even of Gods elect children may not be tempted with these Scriptures, which
this subtle disputer has artificially, and cunningly inflected unto his
purpose? In which scriptures Iouinian did so exult, and triumph, that, being
construed by his own spirit, they seemed invincible in his conceit.

7. But the desperate folly of such as renounce the judgment of the Fathers,
and dwell in their own sense of holy Scripture, discovers it self most
plainly in the late Founders of our Gospel. For thought Tom. 1. in explanat.
Art. 64.
Zwinglius (declining the trial of Antiquity) says; whereas Papists cry out,
Fathers Fathers; I answer, that neither Fathers, nor Mothers shall carry it
away, but the word of God alone, and we will endure no other Judge; yet every
simple fellow does know that Zwinglius erred notoriously, and damnably in his
exposition of the scriptures; whence Luther protests, that he was
insathanized, persathanized, See the Tigurin Confess. See Luth. Confess. etc.
and supersathanized; and in sundry places of his works he challendgeth him
for intolerable corruption of the Scripture.

8. Howbeit Luther himself was not inferior unto Zwinglius in this kind. And
hence it is, that In respon. ad Luth. Confess.
Zuinglius bids all men to behold, and consider, how Satan endeauored to
possess this whole man. For whereas he does err very often, and is miserably
deceived in the sense of Scripture, he will compel God to excuse him, and to
satisfy for him; devising this refuge, and shift, viz. If I be seduced, Quam
certum est Deum esse Deum, tam certus, and diabolicus mendax est Lutherus;
says Campanus a renouned Zuinglian. in colloq. lat. Luth. tom. 2. fol. 351.
or mistaken, God has seduced, and deceived me, etc.

9. Werefore, seeing, and estimating uprightly, what immortal contentions, and
intestine conflicts passed betwixt our Founders, and how this hereditary war
is descended unto us with farther addition, and increase, how could I believe
them, or why should I not distrust my self hereafter in buylding my faith upon
that peculiar sense, which a new, and late Spirit suggesteth contrary unto the
resolution of Fathers, and Counsels, and the clear consent of the Christian
world? O how justly, and fittly does Prascript c. 17.
Tertullian insinuate unto us the condition of wrangling Heretics! He that is
most exercised in holy Scriptures (says he) may loose his voice by contention
with them, and purchase choler by their blasphemies. For if we affirm any
thing, they will deny it; if we deny it, they will affirm it; and thus the
victory will be none, or very dubious, or not certain by this course.

10. For these, and many more weighty considerations, I settled my thoughts in
this infallible position (not doubting to find the concurrency of all wise,
discreet, and learned Protestants with me in this behalf) viz. See S. Aug. ep.
118. This epistle is often cited against the Puritas and namely by D. Whitgift
against T. C.
No exposition of Scripture is sound, and perfect, which is formed against the
doctrine, or practice of the known, visible, professing Church. Whereunto I
may add (in remembrance of M. Jewels challendge) this clause; viz. for the
space of 600. years after Christ.

. 2. Some chief points in the former discourse, to be observed.
SECONDLY, I considered the particulars of this discourse, and waighed every
syllable as uprightly, as I could balance it in my impartial reason. For I
did not favor the poor thing for the Authors sake; nay, I was more severe
unto it in that respect.

2. The conclusion of all was briefly this; that the said discourse is TRVE or
FALSE; and so consequently, either I must refute it, or it must convince me.

3. If it be TRVE, then my faith is conquered absolutely in this point, and
probably (at the least; if not necessarily) in all the rest; and specially,
wherein I have dissented from the Roman Church.

4. For Charity, and Faith resemble each other in the nature of their process.
Charity is the common bond of the Decalogue, and tyeth all the precepts
together. Whence Romans 13.10.
S. Paull says, that Love is the fulfilling of the law; and 2. 10.
S. James testifies, that Whosoever breaks one commandment, he is guilty
of all.

5. Likewise, Faith is Ephesians. 4.4.
one; not in the matters believed, but in the manner of believing; not in the
object, but in the habit. All the Articles of our Creed, all the doctrines of
Christian Religion have a just connection in the order, course, and assurance of
our belief; whence moral reason does dictate this rule unto all men's
understandings, that the certainty of error in one point of faith, does prove
the uncertainty of truth in all; even as an error in any one parcel of the
Kings Patent, makes a nullity in his whole grant.

6. I noted farther, that as this Rule is infallible in all points of my faith
[a negative faith; buylt, for the most part, ex destructione veritatis, as
Praescript. cap. 42.
Tertullian speaks of the heresies in his time] so principally in this, which
consists in the impugnation of Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead; because I
conceived, Nota.
that the Papists doctrine herein was no less weak in fundation, then it
seemed dangerous in consequence.

7. For which respect, I promised a certain victory unto my self, when first I
singled forth this matter to be the subject of my With a Catholic in England.
dispute; relying more upon the weakness of mine adversaries cause, then upon
the confidence of mine own strength.

8. If it be FALSE, then the contrary unto it must needs be true. For as there
is a Truth in all things (though more difficill, and obscure in some, then in
others) so it is but one, and simple. Yea truth, and falsehood are so
diametrically opposed (the one affirmative, the other negative) that, where all
due circumstances are observed, there a Contradiction must necessarily ensue.

9. Here I attempted, as fairly, and substantially, as I could devise, to
oppose a CONTRARY assertion unto each particular going before. For I conceived,
that as this was a sincere, and perfect way for me to discover falsehood, and
to discern the truth, so, if any one man (perhapps) would make a full, and
satisfactory answer unto me (in case I should object the said particulars unto
some Caeteri eorum, in quos forte incurtislem illum [Faustum] mihi.
promittebant etc. S. August, Confess^ l. 5. c. 6. So these men turned me over
to D. Field etc. of whose collusions I. had too great experience before.
learned Ministers; as truly I did; pretending, that the schedule which I
offered unto them, was directed unto me from a Seminary-Priest) he must follow
the same method: and whatsoever he will oppugn therein as false, he must
prove, that the Contrary unto it is true: Otherwise, he shall throw dust into
the air with more contention, then profitt. And truly nothing is more common,
and triuiall in our Authors, then to bumbast their leaves with impertinent
stuff, containing an uncertain sense of matter in an empty sound of words.

10. Now for the better instruction of the good Reader, I will express my
meaning familiarly, by some few particulars in this discourse. As for example;
Whereas I had deduced the custom of Prayer for the dead from the holy Apostles
[during the time of the gospel; for the Jews, who are most strict in the
observation of their law, practice it by an everlasting Tradition of their
Fathers] I said, no; it came not from the Apostles. But how could I justify,
and maintayn this assertion; and why should I creditt my private opinion, or
the judgment of Luther, and his compeeres, against the testimony of the
Fathers, and prescription of all ages? Or why should I think, that any damnable
error, springing from natural affection, and imitation of the Gentiles, could
thus invade the universal Church, without any resistance?

11. Whereas I had inferred Purgatory from the perpetual custom of Prayer for
the dead, I said, no; the Catholic Church had no purpose in the commendation
of the dead, to free their souls from any temporal pain. But how could I
defend my conceit herein against the clear, and irrefragable authority of See
before page 35.
S. AUGUSTINE, ISIDORE, CYRILL, and others; whose It goes hard, if for a
matter of history, the Fathers can find no better credit (says D. Bancroft in
his Suruay, page 338.) with the Presbyteria^s. The Fathers should know, as well
as Cartwright what was then in fact etc. The like did I conceive also in this
case.
report was strengthened by the conformable practice of all, and impeached by
the contrary assertion of none?

12. Whereas I had declared, that none but Heretics did reject this doctrine,
I said, no; they were not heretics at all, or else they were not heretics
precisely in this point. But I saw that the same Catholic Church which reputed
them [ Aerius etc.] heretics in other things, condemned them likewise in this,
and there was no possibility for me to defend Aerius from the crime of heresy,
but by imputing it unto S. Augustine, Epiphanius etc. which were a desperate
attempt.

13. In a word. Whereas I had noted the virtues, and manifold graces, which
shined in those Fathers, by whom this doctrine was propugned, I could not
prove the contrary. Whereas I had described the vile, and contemptible estate
of Aerius, and Henricus by whom it was impugned, I could not prove the
contrary. Whereas I had informed my self, how Henricus was confounded by a
singular miracle of S. Bernard, I could not prove the contrary; neither could
I learn, that he, or Aerius, or Luther, or Zwinglius, or Calvin or any other
Mint-maister of our late gospel, did give the least resemblance of any rare,
and divine work, whereby I might perceive, that God did concur with him for
the approbation of his new-coyned faith, and warrant of such inordinate
proceedings.

The Conclusion; with the Authors protestation unto the Readers.
THvs being not able to disprooue my former Treatise, I was enforced to
approve it, and therefore I must necessarily persist in this opinion, until
it be refuted in such manner, as that the CONTRARY also unto it, and every
particular therein (pertaining directly, or indirectly unto this issue) be
clearly, and substantially confirmed.

If my reasons prevail not with you, yet despise me not; I am your contreyman,
your flesh, and blood, tied unto you by the strong obligations of nature.
Charity compels me unto this act of love, that I should wish you that
happiness, unto which we all aspire; but how shall we meet in one end, who
insist in such diversity of way?

Let moral reason assure you, that I am not transported by any light, or
sodayn motion, to submitt my self unto a Religion, which is neither delightful
unto carnal affection, nor profitable in these days of mourning. I had my
portion of hopes, as well as many others; Fortune beheld me with a benign, and
comfortable aspect; and if I could prefer such intanglements before that
TRVTH, which cries mightily in my reins, I know no reason, why I should want
that commodity, which I have been invited to enjoy.

But as I give most humble thanks unto them, whose will to do me earthly
pleasures, has showed it self no less ready in promise, then their place does
enable them unto the performance, so I must be bold to say, with their
permission, that my estate (since I am conscious unto mine own thoughts, and
am resolved, that neither fear, nor hope shall foil my Religion, by his
gracious assistance, upon whose mercy I depend) would be uncertainly good, or
certainly evil, when other men's will to command, should be my reason to obey.

Finally therefore, let your reciprocal Charity teach you to conceive, that I
would not strive unwisely against the benefitts of Fortune, or unkindly against
the duty of Nature, unless some superior, and more excellent consideration,
then these, did obtayn a powerable authority in my soul. And as you have
already seen one parcel of that Motive, which made an entrance unto my Royal
Exchandge, so, when you have examined the second, I hope that you will
intertayn a gentle censure of your poor friend, and that you will not torment
his name upon the rack of unchristian, and excessive speech.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK; WHEREIN THE FALSEHOODS, AND CORRVPTIONS OF SOME LEARNED
PROTESTANTS are detected. *
Behold, you trust unto your selves in the words of lying, which shall not
profit you.

Ierem. 7.8. *
The Preface.
IT has pleased many men, partly out of that opinion, which they conceive of
their own cause, and partly out of that affection, which they bear unto me,
to praise, and dispraise me with this Apostolic sentence; He did run well;
Gal. 5.7.
who did let him, that he obayed not the TRVTH?

Unto these men I return a loving, a faithful, and just answer, founded in
the demand of an eminent Professor of their gospel; D. Abbot against D.
Bishopp; Part. 2. in fine.
Will you be any longer led by them, who thus grossly abuse you? My
willingness to believe, meeting with other men's facility to deceive, did
captiuate my blind thoughts into the society of their error.

For as Judah committed folly with Thamar, Genes. 38.
because her habit was chandged, and her face covered; so I was entangled with
their conceits, because they mask their intolerable falsehood, and disguise
it under the shape of great syncerity, and truth. Thus D. MORTON protests, In
Cathol. Apol. Part. 1. Epist. ad Lector.
that he may call God to be a witness, and reuendger against his soul, if he
deceive any man Si sciens fallo.
with his knowledge. Nay, God forbid, that, for defense of truth, which is
life, he should procure the assistance of a ly, which slays the soul.

But Ipse lege^do reperiet etc. See S. Aug Conf. l. 3. c. 12.
discovering their vanities at the appointed time, and seeing how pitifully I
had been Vsque ad annu^aetatis 28. etc. See S. August. Confess. l. 4. c. 1.
Ierem. 17.11. See S. Hierom. in hu^c locum. Also S. August. contra Faustum l.
13. c. 12.
seduced by them, whose words seemed unto me divine Oracles, I could not be any
longer led by them, who do so grossly abuse their own knowledge to deceive
poor, ignorant, credulous souls.

And thus as Nature teaches the young Partridge to forsake the false damme, and
to receive more sweet protection under her wings, by whom she was brought
forth, so Grace teaches me to disclayme heretical Congregatio^s, and to
submitt my self unto the direction of that Mother Church, which brought me
forth unto God by baptism; and therefore does challendge right in me, as in
her own child.

THE FIRST PART, CONCERNING THE VNTRVTHS, AND CORRVPT DEALING OF D. FIELD, IN
THE question of Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead.
CHAP. I. How the 4. Doctors of the Church, viz. S. Gregory, S. Augustine, S.
Hierome, and S. Ambrose, are traduced by D. Field, in this particular.
. 1. S. GREGORY abused by D. Field. A note concerning S. BERNARD.
THE substance of D. Fields discourse concerning the CHVRCH (the greatest, and
most ponderous subject in all religious disputes, as he affirms In his epist.
to the Archb.
saying; that men, desirous of satisfaction in things of such consequence, as
the matters, now controuersed, are, must diligently search out the true Church;
that so they may embrace her communion, follow her directions, and Nota.
rest in her judgment) consists principally in this issue; to wit; that the
opinions, wherein the Papists dissent from the Protestants at this day, were
not the doctrines of the Church, See his third book. chap. 6. 7.
but of a faction only, predominating in the same.

2. Now forasmuch as the copious declaration of this point would exceed the
convenient quantity, Chap. 7.
or compass of that chapter, wherein the several differences betwixt the
Papists, and Protestants are briefly (and See one example afterward; chap. 4.
falsely also, in some part) set down, it pleased him to frame a certain
Appendix, which he annexeth unto his third book, and therein he undertakes to
justify the aforesaid position, by the testimonies of sundry Fathers, and
Schoole-authours, whom he there calls worthy, and learned men. For so he is
accustomed to speak honorably of his enemies for his own aduantadge.

3. Descending unto the controversy, Chap. 20.
Whether any sins be remitted after this life, or not, he uses this
pretense; viz. Whereas Lombard, and others do say, that some venial sins are
remitted after this life, we must so understand their sayings, that therefore
they are said to be remitted after this life, because they are taken away in
the very moment of dissolution; and the last instant of life, is the first
after life etc. This is the sum of that exposition, which he makes of
Lombards, and other men's opinion concerning the remission of sins after this
life; wherein how syncerely, and exactly he deals, I will not now dispute.

4. I come unto his proof (brought forth by him, to corroborate the aforesaid
exposition) which I will here relate, word, by word, as it stands in his
book. Hereunto seems Dialog. l. 4. cap. 46.
GREGORY to agree saying; that the very fear, that is found in men dying, does
purdge their souls, going out of the body, from the lesser sins. Seeing
therefore, as In Psalm. Qui habitat ser. 10.
BERNARD says, if all sin be perfectly taken away, which is the cause, the
effect must needs cease, which is punishment; it follows; that seeing after
death, there is no sin found in men dying in state of grace, there remains
no punishment, and consequently, no Purgatory. So he.

5. But when I viewed the Author himself, I found that the sentence of S.
Gregory does bear much otherwise, then it is here delivered by M. Doctors pen;
for thus it sounds in a true, and faithful translation. FOR THE MOST PART
very fear alone does purdge the souls of JUST men going out [of their bodies]
from their LEAST sins. Wherefore I noted three points of fraudulency
committed by the Doctor in a few words. First; by an Omission: for whereas S.
Gregory says, PLERVMQVE, for the most part it is so, he cashiereth this
particular, and vouchsafes it no mention at all. Secondly, by his Reddition;
for whereas S. Gregory says, MINIMIS, the smallest sins, he chandgeth the
degree, and translateth lesser sins; which was no little deceit in him, that
had a purpose to collude. Thirdly, by an Extension; for whereas S. Gregory
says, IVSTORVM, the souls of just men, he renders the speech in a more
general, and vnconfined manner; viz. the souls of men dying: and thus he
mangleth a clear sentence, to derive a conclusion from it, Many such tricks
were discovered by the B. of Eureux in the writings of the L. Plessis. See the
defense of the Relation of a trial concerning Religion in France. It is
annexed to the Examen of Fox his Calendar-Saints; Part. 1. a Cathol. doctr.
page 121.
contrary to the purpose of the author there, and his doctrine in other places.

6. For, if not all light sins, but the LEAST; in the souls of JUST men, to
wit such, as are of singular sanctity (and not generally of men dying in state
of grace) are FOR THE MOST PART (and not always) purdged out by fear, at the
time of their death; then it follows by inevitable deduction, that some
sins are purdged in an other world, and consequently there is a Purgatory for
this use. This is the intendment of S. Gregory: and therefore a M. Rogers (that
Catholic Author) dissembleth not this matter in S. Gregory, but says
plainly, as the truth is (which fault he is not much subject unto) Some
Papists [viz. Gregor. dialog. l. 4. c. 39.] do think, that only venial sins
are purdged in Purgatory.

7. In which passadge three things offered themselves unto my consideration.
First; the limitation of his speech, SOME; a particle merely superfluous. See
afterward Part. 2. chap. 1.. 2.
For all Papists are of this opinion, viz. that no sins, but venial only,
shall be expiated in Purgatory fire. Secondly; the imputation of POPERY
fastened upon him, from whom we Englishmen received our first instruction in
the faith. This was a good motive unto me, to embrace Popery (as passionate Sir
Martin Luther phraseth the Catholic Religion; whom I might more justly call a
foul mouthed dog, then Against D. Bishopp Part. 1.
D. Abbott bestows this homely courtesy upon a very learned T. W.
Priest) since we were translated immediately from Paganism unto this belief,
by the wonderful, and gracious operation of almighty God. Thirdly; his
confession of S. Gregory's judgment concerning the remission of some sins
after this life; which D. Field would infrindge, as you see, by misinforcing
his testimony against his evident purpose in that Lib. 4. dial. 39.
place, and his resolution elsewhere.

8. For in his exposition of the penitential Psalms, he delivers, in Psalm.
1. and 3. in the beginning of each.
two several places (and strengthens himself in the first, with the
authority of S. AUGUSTINE, whom he there expressly names) that some men pass
into heaven by the fire of purgation, and are expiated thereby, in the future
life. Could I desire a more copious satisfaction in the truth of this matter?
Or could I wish a more abundant redargution of D. Fields falsehood, in
traducing the Testaments of the dead (for so their works are) to establish that
doctrine, which they did wholly disclayme?

9. Now a word, or two, concerning S. Bernard, whom he coupleth very plausibly
with S. Gregory (as you may see) to infer a conclusion against that faith,
which they both professed. I turned unto the place in S. Bernard; which, truly,
can by no means admit such an interpretation, as M. Doctor does colourably
pretend. For it is not the meaning of S. Bernard to deny, that God does at any
time inflict a temporal pain after the remission of the guilt of sin;
because this position were extremely repugnant unto Scriptures, and Fathers,
and Reason (as I shall briefly declare Part. 2. chap. 1.. 2.
afterward) and unto the very condition of the Sacrament of Penance it self,
wherein S. Bernard knew right well, that sin is remitted, and yet all future
punishment is not thereby taken away. This was the conform doctrine of the
Catholics in his time: and who is so meanly skilled in S. Bernards faith, as
to conceive, that he would oppugn a matter of such sublimity, and so
correspondently intertayned by the Church?

10. But the truth is this: S. Bernard persuades men to fly from the
contagion of sin, the effect whereof is such, that as by natural death it
seuereth the soul from the body, so by spiritual death, it sundreth God from
the soul. And as sin brought forth punishment, so the cessation from sin
preuenteth punishment; because no punishment does follow, where no sin is
gone before. What then? does no effect of sin remayn, where the guylt of
sin is remitted? S. Bernard He esteems death it self to be a punishment of
sin, as you may see by the sequel.
denies it; and therefore showing in what sense he there intends, that When
ALL sin shall be Prorsus. D. Field himself confesses (page 98.) that Death
tyrannizeth over the body etc. Sermon. in ^bitu Huberti.
WHOLY taken out of the way, then shall no effect of it remayn, he subnecteth
this sentence in his sweet, and divine manner; viz. Happy is our expectation,
and blessed is our hope, whose Resurrection shall be much more glorious, then
our first estate [of creation, before our fall] forasmuch as neither sin, nor
punishment; neither evil, nor scourdge shall reign, or dwell, or have
possibility to reign, or dwell, either in our bodies, or souls.

11. To conclude; it may please you to read, and to ponderate this one, little
saying of S. Bernard, by which you may take an estimate of his judgment in
these matters. My brethren; while you think to avoid a very small punishment in
this world, you incurr a greater in the next. For you must understand, that you
shall pay an hundred fold in In purgabilibus locis.
Purgatory for those things, which you neglect in this life.

12. I know (most kind Readers) that you marvel no less now, then I did, by
what art D. Field can distill his Church out of the writings of these worthy,
and learned men; or how their authorities may be honestly alleged to prove,
that Papists are nothing else, but a faction in the Church; forasmuch as those
Authors (generally) whom he produces in his glorious Appendix, are really
interessed in that faction, and enemies of our Protestanticall Church.
Wherefore I did now sufficiently understand, that we Protestants, assuming the
name of Israel unto our selves, and imputing the name of Philistims unto the
Papists, could not justify our affectation therein, by any better resemblance
then this, viz. As the poor, 1. Sam. 13.19.20.
distressed Israelites were constrained to repayr unto the Philistims for the
sharpening of their dulled tools; so we miserable Protestants (having no
better means) are enforced to go unto the Papists, to procure some weapons,
for our defense, from them, which we turn ungratefully, and unjustly against
their own bowels.

. 2. S. AUGUSTINE abused by D. Field.
1. YOu have Page 13.
seen the goodly pretense of D. Field, assuring you, that the Protestants
honor, and reverence the Fathers much more, then the Papists do. Which
venditation if it did proceed from a sincere heart, then D. Field should not
stand in need of his inflexions, and corruptions, to sustayn his cause with
their disgrace, and much less with infaming the greatest of them all in this
manner, which I will here represent unto your Christian view.

2. The Romish manner of praying for the dead (says Page 99.
he) has no certain testimony of Antiquity; for NO MAN ever thought of
Purgatory TILL Augustine, to avoid a worse error, did DOVBTINGLY run into
it; And none before? that is false.
after whom And not all? that is false.
many in the Latin Church embraced the same opinion, but the Sea before page 54.
Greek Church never received it to this day.

3. He is yet more severe unto S. Augustine, unto the Papists, and unto this
doctrine; saying; that Page 79.
Augustine doubtfully broached that opinion, which gave occasion to the Papists
of their HERESY touching Purgatory. This imputation [of heresy] does cleave as
strongly unto the Fathers (whom he pretends to honor, and reverence) as unto
any Papist at this day; for what should I speak of Part. 4. Sermon. de defunct.
and in Querela defunct.
GERSONS heresy in this point, whom he honors, and reuerenceth so far, as
to entitle him a Page 85.
worthy guide of Gods Church? etc.

4. Now, though I observed many untruths, which are sparsed in these little
sentences of D. Field, yet I will exhibit the chief only unto you at this
time; reducing the said accusation unto threc, particulars. The first notes
the TEMERITY of S. Augustine, as though he had been the Author of a new fancy.
The second notes his IRRESOLVTION, as though he had been uncertain, and
dubious in this conceit. The third notes his FOLLY, or want of judgment, as
though he had run (inconsiderately) into an error in this point, to avoid a
worse in some" other. Concerning each of these particulars, I will offer unto
you the fruicts of my late Protestanticall meditations.

5. In the FIRST branch of this accusation, I found the dealing of D. Field to
be so corrupt, and incapable of defense, that thereupon I conceived an
extraordinary detestation of my cause, which, surely, is so evil, that our
greatest Divines fall from a good conscience, while they employ their art to
sustayn it from falling; and no doubt, but, if D. Fields aduantadge against
Cardinal Bellarmine (worthy of immortal honor) were suitable unto this, then
his censure were not unjust, which Page 1^7.
he delivers in these words; here Bellarmine shows Divide that word for D.
Field^ own use.
plainly, that his impudency is greater then his learning.

6. The suggestion of D. Field against S. Augustine in this particular,
discovered it self unto me to be vayn, and empty, for two respects. First,
because our own writers teach the contrary; and secondly, because the Fathers
themselves, both Greek, and Latin, are clear witnesses against him in this
behalf.

7. For first, I was informed by M. Rogers in his Page 120. See M. Perkins in
his problem. page 185.
Catholic doctrine, that the Papists are new, and renewed Heretics, forasmuch
as they consort, in the doctrine of Purgatory, with the old Montanists, who
thought that there was a purdging of souls after this life. Likewise M.
Gabriell Powell (patching together a fardell of heresies, and laying them upon
the Popes back) says, that De Antichristo page 243.
the Pope has taken Purgatory from Montanus; a miserable heretic in the
ancient, primitive Church. But here I would be instructed by these gentlemen
Catholics; why neither Haeres. 26. etc.
S. Augustine, nor Epiphanius (promising to deal Haeres. 48. prope sinem.
exactly in registring the heresies of Montanus, and others) nor any Catholic
Authors (who were careful to observe the entrance, and progress of heresy)
did never reprehend this (supposed) heresy in Montanus, nor in Tertullian
(whose testimony my Brethren have alleged) but did receive, embrace, and
deliver the same (really) as true, legitimate, and Apostolical doctrine? Every
thing is not heresy which an heretic does maintayn, but that precisely,
wherein he dissenteth from the conformable opinion of the Church. I proceed.

8. The Magdeburgian Centur. 3.
Centuriatours seem to lament, that the seeds of Purgatory are dispersed in
the works of Origin; but as for Prudentius, Lactantius, and S. Hierome, they
accuse them in express terms, as men wholly imbued with this conceit.

9. I came (secondly) unto the Fathers, as well of the Greek, as of the Latin
Church, and was furnished by each, with singular, and abundant proofs; some
small parcel whereof I will here tender submissiuely unto your view. S. In
Esaiam c. 9.
Basil, surnamed the GREAT, says, that God does intimate unto us an
expurgation according to the sentence of the Apostle; 1. Cor. 3.15.
if any man's work burn, he shall be safe, but as it were by fire. Likewise S.
Sermon. de defunct.
Gregory Nyssen (an holy Bishopp, and most worthy, in the judgment of Cap. 42.
Vincent, Lirinensis, to be the brother of Basil, in respect of his faith,
conversation, integrity, and wisdom) writes copiously of this matter, and
teaches, that the fire of Purgatory shall cleanse the soul, and purify her,
before she take possession of eternal joy.

10. This noble payr was of some more antiquity then S. Augustine; for S.
Gregory Nazia^z. (the Sea G. Nazianz. in orat. funeb.
companion of S. Basills labors) was the instructour of S. Hiero^. in apolog.
aduersus Ruffin.
S. Hierome; and S. Hierome himself was a venerable old man, when S. Augustine
was in his flourishing age, as the sequel shall more amply declare. Now though
S. Basil, and his brother may be sufficient witnesses in this behalf, yet
because the Deuteronomy. 19.15.
Scripture says, that in the mouth of two, or three witnesses every word shall
stand, I will adioyne a third, to wit Homil. 3. de Epiph.
Eusebius. Emissenus (more ancient then them both) who affirms, that such as
have committed things worthy of temporal punishment, shall pass through fire,
and shall there pay the uttermost farthing, etc.

11. The Latin Fathers conspire with the Greeks herein. For S. Hierome, who was
well stricken in years, when S. Augustine was in his strength (whence it is,
Vid. epist. Aug. 11. and 14.
that he takes up this proverb against him; A wearied ox treads sure; and
uses this complement unto him; Farewell dear friend, my son in years, my
father in dignity) says, without all ambiguity; that some souls shall be
afflicted with temporal pain after this life. But I will referr this point
unto the next section, where S. Hieromes name must be delivered from D. Fields
unjust calumniation.

12. I come therefore unto a payr of excellent men, with whose verdicts I will
here rest content. The first is In Psalm. 37.
Ruffinus, auerring, that Purgatory fire is more grievous, then any punishment
inflicted in this life. The second is S. Ambrose, witnessing, that some souls
shall suffer temporal pain by fire, and endure a penal expurgation therein.
In Psalm. 118. Sermon. 20. ^ In psalm. 36. v. 14. etc. See S. Aug. Confess.
The first was little inferior, in his age, unto S. Hierome; the second was
the Father of S. Augustines faith; for he begat him with the word of truth.

13. These things being thus premised, and duly waighed, judge now with me
(courteous Readers) whether there be any color of truth in the first part of
D. Fields accusation, devised against S. Augustine; viz. No man ever thought of
Purgatory TILL Augustine ran into it etc. And so much for this.

14. In the SECOND branch of his accusation, I saw that the learned Doctor
does earnestly seek after some delusions, to entangle his vnrespectiue, and
incompetent Reader therein. For, though he pretends, that as S. Augustine was
the man who, before all others, did run into this opinion, so, likewise, it
was with a perplexed, and uncertain mind: yet many evidences did occur unto
me in his works, which clearly dismaske the vanity of this unreasonable
suggestion.

15. Out of a great number, I selected two, and they are sufficient to eneruate
the disguised shifts of all Protestants in this behalf. The FIRST. De verb.
Apost. Ser. 32. See also de cura pro Mert. cap. 1.
Non est dubium etc. There is no doubt, but that the dead receive help by the
prayers of holy Church, by the healthful Sacrifice, and by alms. The SECOND.
De Ciuit, Dei lib. 21. c. 24.
Non veraciter diceretur etc. It could not be said truly, that the sin
against the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to
come, unless some sins were remitted in the future life. And, in the same
place, he speaks most constantly of temporal pains, which the souls of
some men sustayn, after their dissolution from the body.

16. Wherefore, I reflected now upon D. Fields assertion, and was amazed to
behold such a repugnancy betwixt these things; viz. Augustine ran doubtingly
into Purgatory; and yet he affirms; There is no doubt, but that some souls
are relieved by the Sacrifice etc. Again. Augustine did broach this opinion
doubtfully; and yet he says in great confidence; It cannot be said truly,
that one sin shall not be forgiven in this world, nor in the next, unless
some sins, not remitted here, should be forgiven there. Was S. Augustine so
simple, as not to regard his own positions? or are not other men dishonest
rather, in contorting his words against his purpose, and intention?

17. But forasmuch as I knew, that our best, and most respected Authors do
insist everlastingly in this point, I adhibited all possible diligence to find
out the doubtful sentences in S. Augustine, which may seem to give way unto
this pretensed IRRESOLVTION; and specially such, as belong unto this business,
directly without deductions, inferences, glosses, interpretations, NOT ^
or the like devises, whereby men are wont to heap up many testimonies out of
the Fathers, and to make their conclusions against some doctrine, which is not
particularly handled by the Fathers in those places, whence they assume such
proofs.

18. The principal therefore, and most pertinent sentences, which I could
find, are two; which here ensue. FIRST. Some men are of opinion (says
Enchirid. ad Laur. cap. 67.
S. Augustine) that such as are baptized, and continue Christians (not divided
by any schism, or any heresy from the Catholic communion) how wickedly so
ever they live, and never wash away their sins by repentance, nor Daniel.
4.24. Is this doctrine repugnant unto our Redemption by the blood of Christ
alone? Truly as much as the former doctrine of Propitiatio^ etc. See before,
page 29.
redeem them with alms, but persist therein most pertinaciously unto their
last day, yet they shall be saved by fire; howbeit their punishment shall be
extended according to the quality of their offense. But they, who say thus, and
yet are CATHOLIQVES [viz. not separated from the Church by any heresy; as
Arrians, Marcionites etc.] seem (in my opinion) to be deceived by a certain
humane benevolence.

19. Here S. Augustine, in his mild, and gentle disposition, though he
rejects this conceit in some private men, yet he refers the cause of
their error, unto the simplicity of their love. Neither does he propound any
scruple against Purgatory, but only he denies it unto such persons, as, by an
evil life, and impenitent death, make themselves incapable of this Misericor.
and Iudi^. cantabo tibi Domine etc. Psalm. 101. Which S. Augustine, and his
company did sing, after his mothers decease See Confess. l. 9. c. 12.
merciful justice. As for example. The law in England does provide a
mitigation of penalty for some offenders; as burning in the hand, pillory, or
some like chastisement, and depriueth them not of their life; because she
would, in her justice, punish sin, and yet, in mercy, she would preserve the
person. Now, if any man would exceed the purpose of the law, and, in his
affection, would grant this indulgence unto Murderers also, his error must be
corrected by such, as are more equal in the courses of justice then he is; and
yet they, who deny this benefit unto a Murderer, do not thereby subvert the
Law, which shows mercy unto some transgressors, but they reduce the practice
of it unto the intention of them, by whom it was respectively decreed.

20. The SECOND sentence in Enchirid. cap. 69.
S. Augustine, is this. It is not incredible, that some such thing may be done
after this life, and yet it may be questioned, whether it be so, or not. For it
may be found out, or it may lie hid, whether many faithful men shall be saved
by a certain Purgatory fire, either more slowly, or more speedily, as they have
more, or less affected these temporal goods. Howbeit these men also are not
such, of whom the Scripture says 1. Cor. 6.10.
they shall not possess the kindome of God; that is to say, unless their
sins be remitted unto them upon their convenient repentance.

21. Here S. Augustine does not leave it as a thing uncertain, and disputable,
whether there be any temporal pain, or penal expurgation of some souls after
this life (for he does affirm it confidently in many places, and doubts of
it in none) but he leaves it as a thing questionable, whether any earthly
affections (remaining actually in the separated soul, and cleaving thereunto)
be purdged out after this life, He might doubt also de qualitate poenae, viz.
whether FIRE be the Instrument which God uses in the purgation of souls, or
not. For though this be most credible, yet no man is obliged to receive this
opinion, by absolute necessity of faith.
by affliction, pain, and sorrow, as they are purdged out in this life, very
often, by tribulation, and grief. This is clearly imported by his own words;
TALE aliquid fieri etc. It is not incredible that some such thing may be done
after this life, and yet we may doubt, whether it be so, or not.

22. Wherefore, as in the number. 18.
former sentence S. Augustine disputed of the PERSONS, unto whom Purgatory may
appertayn, so here he disputes of the QVALITIES, which are to be cleansed out
of their souls; but he disputes, or doubts in neither, of Purgatory it
self, or a penal estate (for, to litigate concerning names, and words, it were
a childish folly) wherein the souls of some men shall receive a castigation
for their sins. That this is the true, and genuine sense of S. Augustine in
the aforesaid places, all intelligent Readers will easily perceive by the
connection, and dependency of his discourse.

23. But I proceeded yet a little farther, and considered yet more exactly with
my self, that the very prescription ensuing Cap. 110.
there in S. Augustines profound discourse, does inuincibly, and substantially
demonstrate unto me (always presupposing him to be no simple fellow, nor
gross companion) that he had no purpose, nor intention, in the aforesaid
places, to admit any doubt concerning PVRGATORY (really, and purely conceived
in the nature of the thing it self) but only concerning some accidental
respects. For (says he) Negandum non est etc. It is not to be denied, that the
souls of [some] men deceased, have relief by the piety of their living friends
etc.

24. Now, what an absurdity were it in S. Augustine, to affirm with great
confidence, that some souls are relieved by the piety of their friends, and
yet to be in doubt, whether there be any distinct estate of souls, afflicted
with a temporal pain? But, whether it be more probable, that S. Augustine was
thus carried into a braynelesse conceit, or that the Protestants derive his
words against his clear purpose, I remitt me unto your ingenious, and wise
determination.

25. Mean while, I shall entreat D. Field to take notice of one question,
which I desired long since to propose unto him, and to crave his plain
resolution therein, without ambiguous, or perplexed speech. Forasmuch as S.
AUGUSTINE does often, and constantly deliver unto us (not only by the known
instruction of the Catholic Church, but by the certain evidence of holy
scripture) that there is a temporal pain inflicted upon some souls in a
future estate, why does D. FIELD conceal this point from his Readers, and why
does he Page 7^.
muster up such sentenes only, as bear a show of doubt, and then make a
pretense, that Augustine did DOVBTINGLY run into Purgatory, and that he
DOVBTFVLLY broached an opinion, which gave occasion to the Papists heresy in
this matter? Besides; if the Papists were as greatly proud, as Page 71. 170.
1^9. in epist. dedi^ etc.
D. Field does earnestly object this crime unto them, yet were they so foolish,
and obtuse also, that they would rather assume this doctrine from S.
Augustines* DOVBTFVLL sentences, then from his perspicuous, and irrefragable
authorities in this behalf?

26. To conclude this second branch of D. Fields accusation; it may please you
to consider with me, that as piety does oblige us to reconcile all places of
sacred Scripture (which seem to imply any contradiction) in such manner, that
the truth of each may be inuiolably preserved, according to the intendment of
the holy Ghost: See Zanch. de Redemp. in quaest. de Inuocat. Sanct. what rules
he prescribes in this case.
so wisdom does prescribe unto us, that no doubtful sentence in the Fathers
should be expounded, or admitted against their certain doctrine in other
places, and specially, when it is strengthened by the public approbation of
the Church. For as it is a singular impiety in Luther, and in his truest
disciples, to reject the Epistle of S. James, upon a supposed, or seeming We
are justified by faith, without the works of the law. Romans 3.28. We are
justified by works, and not by faith only, James 2.24.
contradiction therein against S. Paull (whence See Duraeus in respons. ad
Whita^^ru^ page 9.
Pomeranus, in his Lutheranicall violence, says, that the Author of S. James
his epistle, bringing an impious argument, and making a ridiculous collection,
alleges Scripture contrary unto Scripture; and thus he renounceth a part of
holy writ with extreme defiance) so it is a remarqueable folly in any man, to
enforce conclusions out of some obscure, or dubious places in the Fathers,
sensed against their evident, and perpetual doctrine elsewhere; a course, which
the chief Protestants despise, and contemn in the Puritans at this day.

27. In the THIRD branch of this accusation, D. Field is very injurious unto
the dignity of this blessed, and renowned Father. For he knows that S.
Augustine does not fearfully impugn this error [viz. all rightly believing
Christians shall find mercy in the end, whatsoever their wickedness were,
etc.] inasmuch as many testimonies are extant in his Enchi^id. ad Lau^. c. 67.
De fide, and open c. 15. De Ciuit. Dei. l. 21. c. 26.
works, whereby it does appear, that he disclaymed it absolutely, and
disprooued it fully; howbeit he is modest, and temperate in his disputes, and
not of that rusticity, as our brethren in Luthers, and Caluins gospel, who,
like Cadmaean vpstarts, conuulnerate themselves with mutual reproach, whereby
they are exposed unto a public, and just contempt.

28. But now, o This honor may be as duly given by me unto S. Augustine, as it
is given by M. Rogers (in his Cathol. doctr. epist. dedicat. nu^. 4) unto M.
Latimer.
sacred, and reverend Augustine, I will turn my speech unto thy religious,
learned, and excellent self. Did thou so fear to oppugn an error, that
thou did not fear to violate the truth? Could thou not reprove a
falsehood in some men, without giving occasion of heresy unto others? Would
thou so peremptorily affirm, and yet immediately doubt in the same thing, and
specially, the matter being such, as, in extension, did belong unto the whole
Church (for so thou have informed me) and, in consequence, does euacuate
Christ's meritts (for so we pretend) and impart his office unto our proper
satisfactions?

29. If this be so, then Contra Hen^ic. 8.
S. Luther had a good reason for his contemptuous demand: Quis est Augustinus,
and quis nos coget illi credere? Who is Augustine, and who shall compel us to
believe him? If this be not so, why then do we traduce thy glorious name, to
destroy the ancient faith, and why do we depresse thy incomparable worth, to
sustayn our ruinous cause?

3. S. HIEROME abused by D. Field.
1. I Come unto the third Doctor of the Latin Church, S. Hierome, whom our
Great Reformer does not only Luth. in Genesis 22.
trample under his feet, but also Luth. in colloq. conuiual. in cap. de
Scholast. Theol.
expels out of the number of Doctors, and pronounces him to be an
Heretic: for thus he honors, and reuerenceth the Fathers much more, then
the Romanists do.

2. Though D. Field has moderated his style toward S. Hierome, and (using the
testimonies of this Saint at his pleasure) dismisseth him whith a more gentle
imputation, saying, that Page 166.
Hierome was a man of a violent spirit, yet as the abuse, which he offers
unto him (in the question of Purgatory) is subtle in the manner, and hateful
in the matter thereof, so he does plainly discover his affection toward the
Truth, and the Fathers to be such, that he neither respects how vainly he
does elude the first, nor how unconscionably he does entreat the second. Mark
therefore Page 79. This opinion he puts upon S. Hierome, as you shall see
presently.
his artificial passadge, which here ensues.

3. It was an error of sundry of the Ancient, that all Catholic Christians,
how wickedly so ever they live, yet, holding the fundation of true Christian
profession, shall in the end (after great tormens endured in world to come) be
saved, as it were by fire. They durst not say (as Origin) that the ANGELS, who
fell, Note these 4. opinions.
shall be restored [fourth] opinion was so general in Augustines time, that
very fearfully he opposed himself against it; and not daring wholly to impugn
that, which he found to have so GREAT, AND REVEREND AUTHORS, he qualified it
what he could, and so doubtfully broached that opinion, which gave occasion to
the Papists of their heresy touching Purgatory, etc.

4. Here the Doctor (sorting his terms wisely for his own aduantadge) ad
Litera^ K.
quoteth S. Hierome; as though the reverence, which S. Augustine yealded unto
his person, made him fearful to impugn his error. But what ouerture is
there of S. Hieromes error in this point? Behold two places, alleged by the
Doctor out of his works. FIRST. Hierom. in Esaiam cap. 66.
As we believe, that the torments of the Devils, and of all deniers of God,
and of all the wicked (who have said in their heart, there is no God) shall be
eternal, so we think, that in respect of the sinners, and ungodly, Et tamen
Christiancrum, says S. Hierome.
whose works shall be tried in the f^re, the sentence of the judge is
moderate, and mixed with mercy. SECOND. S. Hierome. contra Pelag. l. 1.
He writes, that Christians, being prevented in sin, SALVANDOS POST POENAS,
are to be saved after pains.

5. Now consider, I pray you, with what art D. Field seeks to obtayn his
purpose. For, intending to dazzle the understanding of his Readers, he adioyneth
this sentence immediately unto the former (as Jacob followed Esau in the birth,
Genes. 25.26.
and held his brother by the heel; which signified, that he would, in time,
supplant him viz. Augustine says in his Manuell to Laurentius, chap. 67. that
such as think, that ungodly men, and sinners POST POENAS SALVANDOS, seem, in
his opinion, to be deceived by humane benevolence. Hence a credulous, and
ignorant Reader must necessarily conceive, even for the similitude of these
words [post poenas saluandos] that the opinion of S. Hierome is here
particularly aimed at, and reproved by S. Augustine; and, for this end, D.
Field has craftily conuaighed those words into S. Augustine: howbeit they are
not found at all in the designed Euchirid. ad Laur. c. 67.
place; as you may perceive by that exact, and faithful translation of S.
Augustines sentence, which you shall find in the. 2. number. 18.
precedents; unto which I must remitt the courteous Reader, because I have
confined myself unto a certain quantity, which I may not exceed in this
discourse. For as Procustes extended their legs, which were shorter then his
iron bed, and contracted them, which were longer; so many men are tyrants unto
their own conceits, enlardging, or abbreuiating them according to the
capacity of their paper. I affect not a vanity with the first, but I suffer a
necessity with the second.

6. I proceed. As D. Field would infer out of the two former sentences in S.
Hierome, that he was entangled with the Sea before; number. 3.
fourth error [viz. all right believing Christians shall find mercy,
whatsoever, their wickedness were] so I might infer by the same reason, NOTA.
that he was entangled with the third error [viz. all Christians, how damnably
so ever erring in the faith, shall in the end be saued] and, if any man will
stand so ill affected unto S. Hierome, as D. Field does, he may enforce the
one, as well as the other, out of the aforesaid places.

7. But I satisfied my self, for two considerations, that good S. Hierome (a
great, and reverend Author indeed, as D. Field confesses truly; howbeit with
a purpose to deceive) was guilty neither of the third, nor fourth opinion (as
you see them randged number. 3.
before) nor to be accused (reasonably) by any man in this behalf. FIRST;
because some particulars in the aforesaid sentences, exempt from this
suspicion; as namely; In the first sentence.
QVORVM opera, whose works shall be tried in the fire etc. which word [quorum]
is not taken explicatiuely, to signify all Christians, but distinctiuely, to
note forth unto us one certain What degree this is, you may conceive by his
doctrine, which here follows. number. 3.
degree of Christians, who shall suffer a temporal punishment in fire. Again:
S. Hierome Lib. 1. contra Pelag.
disputing learnedly against the Pelagians, speaks thus, in the name of the
Catholic Church; WE say, that Christians, prevented in sin, shall be saved
after the infliction of some pains. What we? I, and a faction only,
consenting with me? No; but that Church, which you impugn, and which I defend.
And if S. Hierome had exceeded her known intention, he were guilty of
notorious treason against the integrity of her faith.

8. SECONDLY; because many grave sentences in S. Hieromes works, do clear him
wholly from that unjust imputation; and If occasion required it.
so I had greater reason to use D. Fields direction in this case, then Page 166.
he had to use it in some other; viz. Hierome wrote many things, that must have
a favorable construction, to make them accord with that, which, elsewhere, he
has delivered. Consider therefore, with me, the weight, and efficacy of these
testimonies. S. Hierom. in S. Matthew. cap. 26.
It is not sufficient [vnto saluation] to have faith, unless faith be
confirmed with good works. Again. S. Hierom. in Hos. c. 4.
When heretics see men offend against God, they say, that God seeks nothing
of them, but the Heretics faith is false: but as they think it to be true, so
S. Hieromes purpose is to show, that true faith without good works, avails
not unto salvation.
VERITY OF FAITH. For this cause the people are not humbled, but they rejoice
in their sins, and go forward with a stiff neck. Wherefore the People, and
Priest, Master, and Scholars are bound up in the SAME IVDGEMENT.

9. I considered farther, that S. Augustine refuting this error, which D.
Field deriueth upon S. Hierome (as though he were He names none other. See
before, nu^. 3.
one of those great, and reverend Authors, for whose sake S. Augustine
fearfully opposed it, and durst not wholly impugn it, etc.) produces a very
forcible, and powerful reason to expugne it; viz. S. August. in Enchirid. ad
Laur. c. 67.
if men of Catholic, and entire faith, should be saved in the end,
notwithstanding their wicked lives, and perseverance therein unto their last
hour, then it would follow, that faith may save a man without works. But that
is impossible (says he) even by the testimony of S. James; and of this matter
I have treatised elsewhere, in a De fide, and operibus c. 15. etc.
book written by me to this effect. Now, were it not a sottishnes in me to
conceive, that Saint Hierome (let not D. Field, nor Luther be offended with
this reverence, and honor, which I yeald unto the Fathers, by their just title
of SAINTS) is guilty of that error, which S. Augustine disprooueth, since he
also controlleth it, by the validity of the same reason precisely, which S.
Augustine has alleged, and urged to this purpose? Were there any congruity,
or coherence in such a fancy?

10. Wherefore, as I was directed by these considerations, to intertayn a more
reverent opinion of S. Hierome, then ever I admitted unto this time, so that
high conceit, which I had of D. Fields extraordinary value, languished in me
daily; and the The Protestants CHVRCH.
cause it self, which he undertakes to defend, seemed worse, and worse in my
thoughts, forasmuch as the chiefest Patrones thereof, are continually driven
unto such dishonorable, and unworthy shifts.

4. S. AMBROSE abused by D. Field.
1. SAint Ambrose makes up the mess, and bears his part of disgrace amongst
his friends.

2. But as the cariadge of this matter is very smooth, so it seems to be very
sincere, and grave. For when the learned Doctor has laid forth the sense, See
before, page 31.
and intendment of Antiquity in her prayers for the dead, he goes forward,
with a specious pretense, Page 98.
to unfold the truth more amply, and to detect such errors, as were embraced
by some men, contrary unto the designement, and purpose of the Catholic Church.

3. It was an opinion (says he) of many of the Fathers, that there is no
judgment to pass upon men, till the last day; and that all men are holden
either in some place under the earth, or else in some other place appointed for
that purpose, so that they come not into heaven, nor receive the reward of
their labors till the general Judgment, etc. Of this opinion was Justin
Martyr, He taught the doctrine of Purgatory; and so did Lactantius also, by the
confession of sundry Protestants. 1 De natue Dei, l. 4. c 4.
Tertullian, Clemens Romanus, Lactantius, Victorinus Martyr, AMBROSE, Ioh.
Pontifex Romans and sundry other.

4. Here I did suspect the integrity of D. Field in his manifold turnings, and
inflexions, because I was informed long before by n Hierome Zanchy, that prayer
for the dead had not a reference particularly unto the soul, but rather unto
the body (a point not omitted by Page 98.
D. Field himself) and his collection is framed in this manner. Ambrose, in his
funeral oration, upon the death of Valentinian the Emperor, confesses, that
Aeterna vi ^. fruitur viluptate a^e S. Ambrose his words.
his soul is in heaven, and yet he adds farther, that he will be mindful of
him in his prayers, and oblations. Wherefore either Ambrose does contradict
himself (which, in so little a passadge, is unlikely) or else, he referred his
prayers unto the resurrection of the Emperor, and unto his corporal estate.

5. But Zanchius is egregiously mistaken in this collection, and his partition
is insufficient; for S. Ambrose does not contradict himself, neither yet did he
referr the execution of these religious duties unto the body alone, and
resurrection of the Emperor (as it appears by his express testimony in this
oration; viz. Let us prosecute the godly SOVLE with our oblations: likewise in
his oration for Theodosius, he desires God to take the Emperors SOVLE into
his rest; thus also in his oration for Satyrus, he makes a special
commendation of his SOVLE unto almighty God: and this was the practice of the
Church) but as many probable reasons did induce him to conceive, that
Valentinians soul was now in actual possession of eternal joy, so for want
of infallible assurance in this behalf, he would not intermit his duty, nor
neglect his office toward the dead, which charity prescribed, and the Church
appointed in this case. In like manner In obitis Humberti.
S. Bernard, out of his singular hope, which was founded upon very probable
reason, says, that Humbertus (lately deceased) iam obtinet gaudium etc. does
now obtayn those joys, which shall endure for ever. Notwithstanding, it were a
folly to imagine, that S. Bernard would neglect the accustomed piety, and
devotion of the Church, which (happily) might be expedient for his soul. To
conclude. Hence it is that S. Confess. l. 9. c. 13.
Augustine, supplicating unto God for his deceased Mother, says; I believe, o
Lord, that thou have already performed the thing, which I desire (for she was a
woman of singular virtue; and the premises of her good life inferred the
conclusion of her happy death) but yet accept the voluntary petition of my
lips. The first proceeded out of a pious belief, the second out of a wise
fear, and there was charity in both. Which point I wish that Cathol. Apolog.
Part. 1. l. 1. c. 87. q 2.
D. Morton had duly waighed within his heart, before he branded S. Augustine
with this improper censure, Magis affectionis, quam rationis oration, the
oraison of Augustine [for his mother] came rather from affection, then reason.
I return now unto D. Field.

6. Being tormented with a necessary suspicion, rather of D. Fields
unfaithfulness in his report, then of S. Ambrose his folly in this matter, I
made have unto the Author, whom he alleges to justify his assertion: viz.
SIXTVS SENENSIS bibliothec. sanct. lib. 6. annotat. 345. I turned unto the
place, where I found Senensis discoursing to this effect. The opinion of
Bernard [viz. that the blessed souls content themselves with the aspect of our
Saviors humanity etc.] though it be condemned (as Castrensis does observe) yet
I think, that the Author is to be excused with a grateful, and benign
affection, because many excellent Fathers in the Church, SEEMED, by their
testimonies, to give authority unto his opinion; as namely, Irenaeus, Justin
Martyr, Lactantius, AMBROSE, Chrysostom, Augustine etc.

7. When I had diligently perused the place, I noted a subtle collusion in the
Doctor, forasmuch as he singleth forth S. Ambrose, and omitteth S. Augustine;
knowing, that the first might be jaded more coulorably then the second, and
that every nose would not have this crafty dealing so quickly in his sent,
because the savor is not so strong. I considered also; if D. Field had never
been acquaynted with S. Ambrose his works, or if he had not distinctly
remembered his opinion in this point, yet the learned Author (whose testimony
he abuses to the injury of an other) did prohibit him to condemn S. Ambrose
with such have; for he says, that many of the Fathers Visi sunt.
SEEMED to give warrant unto this opinion: and therefore, if Senensis had not
added any interpretation to clear S. Ambrose from that folly, yet this
limitatio^ it self might have mitigated his ce^sure, and it could be said at
the utmost, that Ambrose did seem to be of this opinion: thus one half of the
wrong had been abated, whereas now it is doubled, yea tripled by this
unfaithful dealing; and so the last error will be worse then the first.

8. For though Senensis does presently answer in behalf of S. Ambrose, and
some August. Chrysostom.
others, that he, and they speak of the perfect, and consummate felicity,
which the souls expect to enjoy after the resurrection of their bodies (thus,
says he, we have interpreted the sentences of AMBROSE, Aug. Chrysostom. annotat.
64. and 169. lib. 1. annot. 264. in this book, and elsewhere) yet D. Field
suppresseth that resolution, and so exposes this good Father unto the mercy of
all enimyes, that will calumniate his name. This is the faithfulness, and
such is the exactness of D. Field, to conduct his Readers into the true
apprehension of the ancient Churches purpose in the religious duty of prayer,
and oblation for the dead.

9. With these, and other devices parallelable thereunto, he has replenished
that whole 17. in the third book.
chapter, wherein he treatiseth of this matter, and concludes it with this
reproachful derision of BELLARMINE; Truly, I am weary in following of him in
these SENSE LESS FOOLERIES. But the Reverend Cardinal has now gained a just
defense for him self, from D. Fields unjust accusation of other men, and may
take comfort in this plea; am I better then my FATHERS? I am well content to
bear my part in their fortune, and to participate in their disgrace; Yea,
considering the dignity of their persons, the excellency of our common cause,
and the disposition of him, who stands out in defiance of me, and it, and
them, I regard not the folly of his malice, but I compassionate the misery of
his case.

CHAP. II. D. Field accuses BELLARMINE unjustly of trifling, and senseless
foolery in the question of prayer for the dead. CALVIN does truly confess,
that the Protestants repugne Antiquity in this matter.
1. LEt the Reader observe (says Page 97.
D. Field) what it is, that De Notis Eccles. c. 9.
Bellarmine is to prove, and he shall find, that he does nothing but trifle.
For he is to prove, that Instit. l. 3. c. 5.. 10.
Calvin confesses, that more then 1300. years since, the Popish doctrine, and
custom of PAYER FOR THE DEAD did prevail, and was generally received in the
whole Church of God throughout the world. This if he will prove, he must argue
thus. The custom of praying to deliver the souls of men out of the pains of
PVRGATORY, is the custom, and practice, which the Roman Church defends, and
Calvin impugneth. But this custom, Calvin confesses to have been in use, more
then 1300. years since Therefore Calvin acknowledges the doctrine, and
practice of the Roman Church, to be most ancient, and to have been received
1300. years ago.
The Minor proposition of this reason is false; and Calvin, in the place cited
by Bellarmine, protests against it, most constantly affirming, that the
Fathers knew nothing of PVRGATORY, and therefore much less of prayer, to
deliver men from thence. So he.

2. I turned unto the disputations of Bellarmine; where he proves by the
confession of Calvin, and some others, that many doctrines, now impugned by the
Protestants, and defended by the Catholics, are the doctrines of the ancient
Church. Amongst other particularities in his discourse, the Cardinal
alleges this sentence of John Calvin; viz. It was received into use above
1300. years ago, to make prayers for the dead. But those ancients (I confess)
were Abrepti in errorem etc.
carried away into an error. Whence it follows (in my poor capacity) that
Calvin does confess, that he, and his reformed Churches, are opposite unto
Antiquity in this doctrine. For, does he not impute it unto the Fathers, as an
error, and does he not censure them most indignely in this behalf, saying,
that they yealded herein unto their natural affection, and unto thus the,
Puritans. pervert the testimonies of Epiph. etc. and say, they wrote, according
to the custom, and manner of their age etc. See D. Bancroft in his Suruay.
page 337.
custom, but were destitute of precept, and example in the Scripture?

3. Nay he goes yet farther, and, in the sublimity of his pride, he says;
Whereas Augustine reports that Monica desired to have a commemoration made of
her at the Confess. l. 9. c. 13.
Altar after her decease, this was an old wives request, which the son never
examined by the rule of the Scripture, but, according to his natural
affection, would have it allowed of others. But did not the gentle Mo^sieur
understand, or did he not regard, that neither the old wife (as his Eldershipp
speaks in his Lucianicall vain) nor her son did perform any thing herein,
but what the Catholic Church did warrant, and prescribe unto them? Did he not
conceive, that it was Aerian heresy to impugn this duty? And could the Mother,
or the Son neglect the same, without a singular offense, and just suspicion
of that crime?

4. Wherefore though Calvin having confessed his dislike of Antiquity in this
doctrine, does afterward frame his cunning exception against the Papists, and
deriueth it in such sort, that they (forsooth) can not glory in the ancient
Church, as partaking with their error, forasmuch as she affirmed nothing of
Purgatory, whereof they dream etc. yet I saw, that this was a piece of his
cogging art, and dicing skill (as Caluinus Iud viz. page 59.
D. Hunnius writes) whereby he eludeth the grauest, and most perspicuous
Scriptures, to the great aduantadge of Jews, Arrians, and such like pestiferous
enemies of our Lord Jesus Christ. Again; as sundry testimonies in the Ancients
did assure me, that the general custom of Prayer for the dead was referred
unto the benefitt, and comfort of their souls, so, for the conviction of
Protestants, and for demonstration of their repugnancy unto the Catholic
Church in her most venerable times, it was sufficient for me to know, that
Calvin does abundantly declare his improbation thereof; and that therefore
Bellarmine does not trifle in this issue.

5. For we must distinguish here betwixt this ACTION, which was performed by
the Church, and her INTENTION therein. Calvin confesses the first, and
litigateth about the second. Now it was evident unto me, that the Cardinal (in
the aforesaid place) does allege him precisely in the first respect; but as
for the second, it is a matter of farther dispute.

6. That this was the purpose of the Cardinal, I was induced to conceive, not
only in regard of his excellent understanding, but also by a plain, and
substantial ouerture in his own works. For, De Purgators l. 1. c 6.
discussing the question of Prayer for the dead, he reprooueth Calvin in 4.
points. FIRST; because he condemns himself by his own mouth, inasmuch as he
freely agnizeth the great antiquity, and lardge propagation thereof, and yet
fears not to say, that the Fathers were carried away into an error in this
matter. SECONDLY; because he pretends that the Fathers, in their prayers for
the dead, did seek to express a kind affection unto them, but intended not to
procure ease unto their souls. Which untruth, because it is notorious, and
suggested out of malice, Bellarmine calls it a lie, and says, that it is
refuted by the testimony of Euchir. ad Laur. c. 110.
Augustine himself.

7. I pretermitt the two other points; it was a copious satisfaction for me to
understand, that Bellarmine does distinguish here betwixt the action, and the
intention; and, consequently, that D. Field does calumniate a worthy person, to
defend the inexcusable folly of our Geneuian Apostle, who depraueth all things
in the excessive liberty of his Spirit.

CHAP. III. D. Field does nothing but trifle in his accusation of BELLARMINE,
and defense of CALVIN. His untrue construction of the heresy of Aerius; the
great contradiction of Protestants in this point, being all guilty of this
heresy, and, consequently, no Catholics.
. 1. D. Field refuted by S. Epiphanius, and S. Augustine.
1. AS the confession of Calvin, and practice of our Congregations did inform
me, that the Protestants renounce the custom of prayer for the dead, and
wholly disclayme the ACTION it self; so many forcible reasons did resolve me,
that the Papists, retayning the action, do likewise herein preserve the
INTENTION of the ancient Church; notwithstanding the gloss of D. Field, who,
to confirm, and establish the injury, which he has already done unto the
Cardinal, annexeth this passadge immediately unto the After those words -- to
deliver men from thence. See before; Chap. 2. number. 1.
former viz. But Bellarmine will reply, that the custom of praying for the
dead was most ancient. We answer: The custom of remembering the departed,
naming their names at the holy Table, in the time of the holy mysteries, and
offering the Eucharist (that is, the sacrifice of praise) for them, was a most
ancient, and godly custom, neither is it any ways disliked by us. And surely
it appears, this was the cause that AERIVS was condemned of heretical
rashness, in that he durst condemn this laudable, and ancient custom of the
commemoration of the dead.

2. How does it appear, that SVRELY this was the cause, etc? Behold the proof;
Epiphan. haeresi 75. But surely this is a miserable proof. For when I consulted
with Epiphanius, I found that our forefather Aerius did pick a quarrel against
this religious duty, in the same manner, and to the same effect, as we do at
this day, saying; if the prayers of the living may be profitable unto the dead,
then let a man live as he li^t; only let him procure some to pray for him,
when he is dead, ne quid patiatur, that he may suffer no pains.

3. Here I considered, that if the Catholic Church (against which Aerius
co^tended in the vanity of his heart) did not believe, and teach, that the
Sacrifice of our Lords body was offered, and prayers were powered forth to
relieve the souls of the dead (not all, but some) afflicted with temporal
pain; the exception of Aerius were senseless, and the defense of Epiphanius
were absurd; for, as the first does object that opinion unto the Church, so the
second denies it not; nay he declares, that the prayers of the living are
beneficial unto the dead.

4. But this point was more excellently cleared unto me by S. Augustine, the
best, and most faithful witness of the ancient Church. For this worthy
Father, contexing a catalogue of heresies, registreth this heresy (amongst the
rest) viz. Haeres. 53,
We must not pray, nor offer sacrifice for the dead. A fancy begotten by
Aerius, and by him first hatched into the world.

See the Peroration of S. Augustines treatise.
5. Now whereas Quod-vult-Deus (unto whom S. Augustine directs the aforesaid
catalogue) desired to receive instruction, how he should deport himself against
all heresies, and what opinion he should intertayn thereof, the reverend Father
makes this short, and weighty answer; It is a superfluous demand to ask,
what the Catholic Church thinks of As namely of this particular.
all these heresies? For it suffices thee to know, that the Catholic Church
does hold, and maintayn the CONTRARY assertion unto each.

6. Wherefore it now remained, that I should acquaynt my self with the purpose
of the Catholic Church in her prayers, and oblations for the dead, since she
defended the contrary opinion unto Aerius in these laudable, and Christian
offices, as S. Augustine prescribes unto his well respected friend.

7. What was the success of my study, and meditation in this point, you may
see Book 1. part. 1. chap. 2.. 4.
before, where this matter is more particulary discussed. There you shall find,
that the intention of the universal Church in these things, was (precisely) to
relieve some souls: and hence it follows, that Aerius (teaching the CONTRARY
hereunto) vomited out this heresy; viz. We must not pray, nor offer sacrifice
for the souls afflicted with a temporal pain; and this is licked up by S.
Luther, our GREAT Reformer.

8. Thus the Papists concur with the ancient Church in prayer for the dead,
and Protestants join hands with Aerius to deride, and subvert the same. And
now I perceived, that Ratione. 3.
Edm. Campian did not object this infelicity unto us without a grave
consideration, and necessary cause; viz. The Protestants are enforced to
venditate such a Church, as lay in obscure, and dark corners, unless
(perhapps) they will rejoice in some heretical Progenitors; AERIVS, Iouinian,
Vigilantius, Berengarius, etc. from whom they have begged the fragme^ts of
certain pestilent opinions.

. 2. How some Protestants seem to defy Aerius, and how others yeald him their
protection. Their contradictions, vanities, and falsehood.
1. I Found that our Authors are here distracted into variable, and uncertain
conceits; some, in their subtility, dissembling the truth of the matter; and
some, in their vanity, neglecting the judgment of the Church.

2. In the FIRST rank this learned Doctor may challendge a due place; and he
shall be assisted with his compeeres, M. Jewel, and Ph. Melancthon, men of
great account. The one comes forth with this plausible suggestion; Iuell, in
Apolog.
We hold Therefore not this of Aerius. But here you speak untruly.
none of those 80. heresies which are mentioned by Epiphanius, nor any of
those, which are recorded by Augustine. The other, flourishing at randon, says
expressly; Mela^cth. in apolog. Augustana confess. art. 22.
We do not forbid prayer for the dead, and much less do we defend Aerius, etc.

3. In the SECOND rank, the Magdeburgians (gentlemen of the freest spirits,
that ever lived, to censure the sacred writ, the holy Counsels, the reverend
Fathers, and all antiquity, in ignominious sort) may vendicate the highest
room. The things ( Centur. 4. c. ^ col. 401.
say these good fellows) which Augustine, and Epiphanius noted as errors in
AERIVS, seem not so: but rather the contrary. And so, in their verdict, the
Church of God seemed to deserve more blame, then this heretic, who is branded
with just infamy, and perpetual disgrace.

3. Though Bullinger was fiery, and boisterous against our brethren of the
house of Saxony (the ancienter family of the young gospel) yet he doubts not
to hold some good correspondency with them in this particular; and therefore,
whereas he had made a lardge confession (to his everlasting shame) saying,
Decad. 4. Sermon. 10.
I know that the Ancients prayed for the dead; I know what Augustine (the noble
Doctor) and what Chrysostom (the eloquent Preacher) have written of this
matter: I know that the Fathers say, it is a Tradition of the Apostles; and how
Augustine affirms, that it is a custom of the universal Church to pray for
the dead; I know also that Aerius was condemned, because he did oppose himself
against it etc. he takes upon him, in his liberty, to reprove the Fathers,
and to debilitate the sovereign authority of the Church. But as the leuity of
this man does justly deserve, that the severe Quanta vanitas, q^a^ ta
impude^tia Bulli^geri etc. See Bre^^ius contra B^^ling. page 105. etc.
reprehension of Brentius should be duly applied unto him in this case, so the
pretense of Against D. Kellison book 2. chap. 4.
D. Sutcliffe, saying, that Aerius was reputed an heretik for Arrianisme, and
not for finding fault with Such superstition, as the whole Church embraced. See
before; page 60.
superstitious oblations for the dead, is such a folly, as wise men would
contemn, or such an ignorance, as a mean Scholar would commiserate, and pity
in a Doctor of so great celebrity, and renown. For, though it be true, that
Aerius was infected with Arrianisme, yet forasmuch as he devised new opinions,
repugnant unto the Catholic faith, he has a peculiar, and distinct place in
the Made by S. Aug and Epiphan.
catalogue of heretics: which were a superfluity, and an absurdity also, if
Arrianisme had been the proper cause, for which he was condemned by the Church.

5. I will leave these foreign Authors, and repayr unto our domestics; to
wit, D. Humfrey, D. Abbot, M. Cartwright, and D. Morton, who being of greater
value, then many others, may stand forth, and speak in the name of all the
rest.

6. The foreman is Contra Campian. page 261.
D. HVMFREY, whose resolution seems to be the public, confession of our
Church. NOS non improbaemus, etc. WE disallow not any thing, wherein Aerius
did think Quod recte sensit Aerius.
truly, etc. Truly? The Papists themselves will join issue with us in this
assertion. But the question is, whether Aerius did think truly in this
particular, or not? Here the learned Doctor shows the perplexity of his
heart; See afterward; Part. 2. c. 2. 1.
and yet, adorning a foul matter with fair words, he slideth forward, and
discovers in plentiful sort, that our Church does propend wholly unto the
doctrine of Aerius in this point.

7. The second is D. ABBOT, whose authority must componderate with D. Fields,
and will discountenance his exposition of this matter. Against D. Bishopp Part.
1 page ^6.
In the time of Epiphanius (says he) there was an alteration made of the
custom of Prayer for the dead. Other devotions were added unto it, with
opinion to mitigate, if need so required, the very pains of hell. This AERIVS
spoke against; and indeed spoke against it with greater reason, then Epiphanius
has defended it etc. Here Master D. Abbot deals injuriously with
Epiphanius, in whose behalf S. Augustine shall witness, that See before; page
27.
he was a man very renowned in the Catholic faith. But in the mean time, do
not these men agree like harp, and harrow? One says, See before. 1. number. 1.2.
SVRELY it appears etc. The other says; THIS Aerius spoke against etc. Thus
they differ in their expositions (as you see) betwixt themselves, and yet
neither agrees with the truth. And no marvel, for Lactant.
haec est mendaciorum natura, vt probe cohaerere non possint. May I not say of
these men, as Offic. 1.
Cicero says of pedling merchants; nihil proficiunt nisi admodum mentiantur?

8. The third is M. CARTWRIGHT, who being an See the opinions of Aerius before
page 60.
Aerian heretic in a farther degree then they are, who principally obtayn the
name of Protestants in our country (howbeit that is the proper inheritance of
Luthers more natural children in his faith) and reintegrating the heresy of
Aerius, Page 403.
touching the equallity of a Bishopp, and a Priest, is justly noted by So where
D. W. obiecteth the Counsel of Nice unto him, he turns it off, affirming
that it is spotted with infamy, by decreing that single men, admitted to holy
orders, shall not marry afterward. Which point is fit to be considered by M.
Rogers. saying (p. 115.) that if Paphnutius had not been at Nice, that Council
had erred.
D. Whitgift (justly in respect of the thing; unjustly in respect of their
profession) upon the conformity, which he embraced with Aerius in this matter.
And truly, the pure, or rigid Caluinists are guilty thereof, without all
possibility of defense. But how does the Presbyterian remove this disgrace
from himself, and from the consorts of his folly? I am not to regard (says he)
what Epiphanius delivers in this matter: for he was a man obnoxious unto
error; and if his authority could inconvenience me herein, it might likewise
confirm the [popish] error of prayer, and oblation for the dead; which things
are in no wise retained by our Church.

9. This is the sum, and substance of his answer; whereby I was excited to
consider, that as the Aristot. de histor. animal.
irchin, in her natural providence, makes a double prospect in her nest, that
she may, by this means, defend her self from the injury of all weather; so the
Protestants furnish themselves with a double principle, viz. Scripture, and
Fathers. In their conflict with Papists, they limitt, and confine all things
unto the Scripture, sensed by themselves conveniently for their own security,
and advantage. If they encounter the Puritans, they reduce them unto the
judgment of Antiquity, and suffer them not to randge up, and down in their
vast, and unsettled imaginations. In these principles they are very inconstant,
and, run into a circular absurdity, without any certain, and indubious
resolution of their faith.

10. The fourth, and last, is Cathol. Apolog. Part. 1. l. 1. c. 33.
D. MORTON; who seeing our reformed Churches deeply touched with Aerianisme,
seeks by all means to decline the point, and seems fearful in handling
his own wounds; or (as Luther observed in Zuinglius) he paseth it so gingerly,
as if he trod upon eggs; and like a sheep in the briers, the more he
struggleth, the more he is entangled. Behold therefore his triple evasion.

11. FIRST he uses the art of recrimination; saying, that Aerius held some
heresies, wherein the Papists have great affinity with him, and with other
Tarian^. etc.
heretics; namely in that they taught, it is not lawful to eat flesh; and in
that they admitted none, but continent persons, unto the communion. But as this
was nothing pertinent unto the business in hand; so conscience, and equity
might have treated with the Apologist, to despise such a poor, and unlearned
pretense. For first; what does the heretical prohibition of flesh belong unto
the Papists? I do sometimes abstayn from flesh (says Sermon. ^^. Cantic.
S. Bernard) but my abstinence is a satisfaction for sins, not a superstition
for impiety. If any man abstayn from flesh, by the rule of Physicians, we
reprehend not the care, which he has of his own body. If any man abstayn by
the discipline of Carthusians; who^ Gerson defends; Part. 2.
such, as refrayn it, we approve his virtue. If any man abstayn in the frensy
of Manichees, I detest his blasphemy, etc. Secondly; what does the exclusion of
incontinent persons from the participation of the Sacrament, appertayn unto
them? Do they interdict mariadge, and do they abrogate the institution of God?
Or, if they do not so (as See S. Bernard Sermon. 66. in Cantic.
their works testify in their defense, that they do not) how then does the
aforesaid heresy assimilate them unto Tatians, and unto such profane impes? The
Author of the Treatise concerning the 3. Co^uersions of England, discovering
our imperfections in this kind [of objecting heresies unto the Catholicks]
Part. 2. chap. 2. nu^. 18.
lays down two rules, whereby all our arguments (of this nature) are
abundantly dissolved. For (says he) EITHER we do not hold that, which the
Howbeit this is not a peculiar fault in my brethren; for thus also the Sea S.
Aug. de nupt. and e^cupisc. l. 2. c. 2^.
Arrians objected Sabellianisme unto the Catholics; and thus the Pelagians
chardged them with Manichisme; and so did Iouinian likewise, because they then
against him (as now against Luther) did constantly affirm, that Virginity
excels mariadge. But what pronounces S. Augustine of these disordered
companions? They do not, or they will not understand, what we say. Again. Ibid.
c. 3.
Definite obijcere nomen, and dogma alienum: leave of this foolery, to object
unto Catholics the name, and fancy of Heretics. Which counsel if Against D.
Kellison book 2.
D: Sutcliffe, In his picture of a Papist.
M. Ormerod (the -- Pictoribus atque Poetis. etc.
Paynter) De Antichr. page 243.
M. Powell, and others had observed in their writings (wherein I always found
more heat, then wit) they had brought less disgrace unto their persons, and
smaller disadvantage unto their cause, which, being evil in it self, is made
worse by their defense.

12. SECONDLY; he answers by a demand, saying; What Council did ever
condemn this proposition [WE MVST NOT PRAY FOR THE DEAD] as heretical? But
this simple device yealded me no satisfaction. For, as Ep. 118.
S. Augustine protests, that the Universal Church (successively from the
blessed Apostles) made supplications for the dead, so he prescribes this
admonition, of singular importance, viz. To call any thing in question, which
is frequented by the UNIVERSAL CHVRCH, it is the part of most INSOLENT
MADNESS. Farther; do not the solemn provisions of sundry 1. Nice^. ca^. 65.
ex Arabic. 3. Carthag. ca^. 29. 4. Carthag. can. 79. 1. Braccarens. cap. 34.2.
Cabilonens. can. 39. Tribur iens. cap. 15. See S. Cyprian. lib. 1. ep. ^.
Counsels touching prayer, and oblation for the dead, sufficiently declare,
that to impugn, and reject the same, it were an heresy, and that the
contemners thereof are guilty of this crime? Finally; S. Augustine, S.
Epiphanius, and the Universal Church (with mutual voice, and conformable
judgment) have passed sentence upon AERIVS; as an heretic, even in the
aforesaid proposition: and will D. Morton be his advocate now, and will he now
require, what Council did ever condemn it, as HERETICAL? Besides; D. Morton
can not be ignorant, that, whereas some truths are taught correspondently by
the Protestants, and Papists against Heretics; and whereas he conceiueth, that
many truths are delivered by the Protestants also against the Papists, it would
be an extreme difficulty for him to show, what Council condemned all the
contrary propositions thereunto, and pronounced them to be heretical; if any
man would require this service at his hands.

13. But now, at length, M. Doctor would seem to come unto the point; and yet
he never deflected from it more admirably, then in his answer, which he
reserueth unto this last place. THIRDLY therefore he says, that this
proposition [WE MVST NOT PRAY FOR THE DEAD] is so far from being heretical,
as that true Antiquity gives her approbation unto the Protestants in this
behalf. And what is your reason? Because INVOCATIO MORTVORVM NON VERE ANTIQVA,
invocation of the dead is not truly ancient.

14. The manner of this speech is heathenish, the matter absurd. For, did
Antiquity teach the Apologist to phrase the SAINTS so scornfully, and to term
them DEAD men, in such disgrace? No: but Julian, the famous Apostata, has
learned him this lesson; who, in derision of the Christians piety, says that
they tumbled at the sepulchers of the DEAD. Contra Julian. l. 10. object. 1.
Let any man read S. Cyrills excellent repulse of this accusation, and he
shall find, that Protestants do symbolize with Julian, and reinforce his stale
objections.

15. I passed by the manner, and came unto the matter of the aforesaid speech;
wherein I regarded not his exception against the antiquity of Prayer to the
Saints (howbeit I knew long since, that M. Rogers, translating the sweet
Meditations of S. Augustine, thought good to pretermitt one whole 24.
chapter, wherein S. Augustine inuocateth the blessed Saints: and therefore,
whether D. Fields assertion, Page 148.
viz. The Romanists dare not abide the trial of their doctrines by the
indubitate writings of antiquity, be sincere, or not, the reader may
discreetely judge) but I noted, and pitied the unaptness, and inconsequence of
his discourse. For how do these things cohere? INVOCATION OF SAINTS is not
truly ancient; therefore PRAYER FOR THE DEAD is not defensible by Antiquity.

16. Peradventure M. Doctor wanted sufficient leisure, and so he may plead the
immaturity of his labors for the protection of his error. And the Reader may
well conceive it so, forasmuch as (in the next Cap. 35.
chapter, save one) being drawn, by the objection of De notis Eccles. c. 6.
Bellarmine, to apologize for Luthers uncivil and base folly [viz. The state
of married persons is, in its nature, spiritual, divine, heavenly, and as it
were gold; the state of single persons, is secular, earthly, and as it were
dirt] he vouchsafes to yeald this worthy answer, in defense of our Great
Reformer; Lutheri verba mihi nunc legere non licuit, I could not read the words
of Luther now; howbeit Bellarmine does particularly design the Luth. in
Epithalamio.
place.

17. But M. DEANE (advanced unto this honor for his rare dexterity against the
Papists) has unfortunately prevented this excuse. For, remembering the wise
counsel of an heathen Horat. de art Poetica^.
Poet, who prescribes that (in a thing of lesser importance, then the
controversies of Religion are) a writer should bring forth nothing into public
view, which has not been discussed, even -- Nonumque prematur in annum. a In
his ep. unto the Archbish. of Cant.
nine years space, with great exactness, he took very special deliberation
to compose, and divuldge this renowned Treatise. I bestowed (says a he)
Quidque domu^ fert is DECIMO, nisi dedecus, ANNO^ Ovid.
TEN YEARS pains upon this work, with most ardent desire to find out the
truth, least some man, perhapps, might object unto me either prejudice, or
temerity therein. Moreover, the book which I used, was of a second impression,
and beautified with this advertisement, Editio castigatior, a more exquisite
edition then the former. Wherefore, now that little spark of poor hope, which
remained in me, to find some show, or shadow of probable satisfaction touching
the heresy of Aerius (so severely censured in him, by the Fathers, and so
earnestly objected unto us, by the Papists) became utterly extinct.

. 3. How vainly D. Field excuses the folly of Protestants, which shows it
self in the diversity of their censures, touching the aforesaid heresy of
Aerius. The true reason of their difference herein is assigned. Their perverse
dealing with Antiquity.
1. Unto this wound (very deep, and lardge) Page 139.
D. Field has thought it expedient, for our security, to apply a rare, and
sovereign plaster. viz. If it be said, that sundry of our Divines seem to
acquitt Aerius herein, they are to be conceived, as understanding his
reprehension to have touched the errors, and superstitions, which even then
perhapps began in some places, and amongst some men. For otherwise, his
reprehension, if it be understood to extend to the general practice, and
judgment of the Church, it is not, nor may not be justified.

2. As Sir In respons. ad Epist. Pomerani; page 8. If Luther do co^playn; of
Luther do say etc. D. Field, page 192.
Th. More answered unto Pomeranus (extenuating the heinous crimes of our
brethren, even in the hatching-time of our gospel) though you mince the
matter, with si qui, and si quid, and si alibi, and si non Christianum, etc.
yet it is well known, that you do generally perpetrate diabolical, and
barbarous attemps; so though D. Field does here limitt, restrayn, and obscure a
most eminent truth with if, perhapps, some men, some places, seemed etc. yet I
saw most clearly (let the precedents testify in my behalf) that we do
notoriously conspire with Aerius in this issue: what he denied, the very same
thing do we deny; what he affirmed, the very same thing do we affirm. Es
nimium similis patri etc. o Luther, thou art too like unto Aerius; thy whole
lineaments descry him to be thy Father in this particular conceit. As his
reprehension extended unto the general practice, and judgment of the Church,
so does thine likewise; and we employ our best skill to justify, and maintayn
the very same reprehension, against the faithful relation of her chiefest
Doctors, and the perpetual succession of all ages.

3. But forasmuch as I perceived, that the Doctor does wisely conceal, and
prouidently dissemble the quality, and reason of that difference, which our
Divines are chardged with in this matter, I entered into a serious
consideration thereof, and observed, that it does arise, and flow, NOTA.
not out of their diverse apprehension of the thing it self, but out of a
different opinion, which they intertayn concerning the authority of the Church.
Hence it is, that Luther, Zwinglius, and such passionate gentlemen, neglecting
the trial of their faith, by the testimony of Fathers, and plausibly reducing
all things unto the Scripture (either simply; by admitting no other proof at
all: or respectively; by admitting the Fathers as far as they agree with the
Scripture; and so far they may admit a trial by the Devil himself, and
yeald as much respect unto him, as unto them) confess plainly, and syncerely,
that Aerius did not err in his reprehension, but that the Church erred in her
practice. On the contrary; other men pretending to deal more fairly with the
Church (their mother) and to defend themselves under her protection, will not
(forsooth) seek her ruin, by whom they would seem to stand, and therefore
they are compelled to frame most improper, vayn, and frivolous interpretations
of this, and other things, to maintayn the goodness of their cause, according
to the nature of their defense.

4. Briefly therefore, I noted a triple variety in our courses, which consist
(generally) either in the Rejection, or Misallegation, or Misconstruction of
the ancient, and venerable Fathers. For in the beginning and entrance of our
Gospel, nothing was more triuiall, then to speak contemptuously of the
Fathers, and to disclayme their witness in the controversies of this time.
Shall I name the persons? Nulli nota magis domus est sua; no man kenneth his
own house more familiarly, then that Luther, Zwinglius, Musculus, and our
primitive Fathers, are principalls in this rank. Or if you will ascend a little
higher, and come nearer unto the days of VVickliff himself, you shall find
this article ascribed unto Reginald Peacock (whom, for this, and others of this
kind, De Antichristo page ^7.
M. Powell has registered in the Catalogue of our Evangelical Forefathers; and
M. Fox has favorably granted him a place in the Febr. 11.
Calendar of his Saints) viz. Veterum doctorum authoritati, parum, aut nihil
tribuendum, little, or nothing is to be yealded unto the authority of the
Fathers.

6. In the progress of our gospel, others pretending a more wise moderation
in this case (but performing as little honesty here, as some showed humility
before) would not so intemperately reject the Fathers, and therefore they
excel in misalleadging their testimonies; as Analys. Fidei, page 18. Ego habeo
testimoniae sanctorum Patru^; ego defendo Patrum dogmata; said Dioscorus the
heretic. See Co^c^l. Chalcedon. Act. 1.
Gregor. de Valentia does complayn of many Protestants, and more specially of
Kemnitius, that Examiner (says he) of the Tridentine Council. If this
collusion fail, then succedeth the third, which is, misconstruction of things,
by deriuing the testimonies of the Fathers to an other purpose, then ever they
did, or could intend. A, for example. Lib. 3. c. 3.
S. Irenaeus pronounces, that all the faithful must necessarily repayr unto
the Church of Rome. Why? For she is of more powerful principallity then the
rest. Whence is that? Because she was founded by the two glorious Apostles, S.
Peter, and S. Paul. Against the plain evidence whereof, Against D. Harding.
M. Jewel assumeth, that Irenaeus did referr this more powerful principallity
unto the Emperor, and unto the civil State. But all history does proclayme,
that the Christians were cruelly persecuted in those times, and that they had
no intercouse with the political affairs. Behold also an other example of the
like nature. For whereas In 1. Timoth. 3.15.
S Ambrose does positiuely affirm, Answ. to the Rhem. Testam. ibid.
that Damasus [then Bishop of Rome] is RECTOVR of the Church, D. Fulke
frames an answer to this effect. The Church was then afflicted with
Arrianisme, and because Damasus did oppose himself eminently against it, he
might be called the Rectour of the Church; and yet so, as the same title may
belong also unto other Bishopps. Which poor elusion suteth well with the
palpable vanity of M. Cartwright (justly reproved by Suruay; chap. 27.
D. Bancroft in this behalf) pretending, that S. Chrysostomes vigilance over
the Churches of Pontus, and of Thracia, was none other then such, as every
godly minister ought to have over all Churches in the Christian world.

6. Wherefore I shall now remitt my self unto the consideration of all wise,
and ingenious men, whether that true censure, which Ibid.
D. Bancroft (the L. Archb. of Cant) has passed upon the Presbyterian faction,
may not have a convenient application unto the whole fraternity of our
gospel; viz. When, for the proof of sundry matters, impugned by them, they
are vrdged with the testimonies of the ancient Fathers, and of the
Ecclesiastical histories, they either shift them off with their own false
glosses, or, if that serve not their turn, they disgrace them, as much as they
can, and so reject them etc. 2. Sam. 13.
As when Amnon had incestuously abused his sister, he dismissed her with
contempt.

CHAP. IIII. D. Field shows himself a This is his censure of Bellarmine, page
16^.
notable trifler (in the question of Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead) to the
utter confusion of his Book, and the Protestanticall Church.
1. NO particular in D. Fields highly esteemed Book, did more lively discover
unto me the just correspondency betwixt his cause, and conscience, then this,
which now ensues. But for the more clear and perfect understanding hereof, I
must entreat you (gentle Readers) to reflect upon the Chap. 1.. 1. number. 1. and
2.
precedents, and diligently to reuiew, what is the pith, and quintessence of
his book, and wherein it does consist. For you must remember, that as the
strength of Sampson lay in his hair, Iudic. 16.
so the supportation of D. Fields Church, and Book stands chiefly in this
issue, viz. D. Field, page 74.
the things WHEREUPON the difference grows betwixt the Romish faction, and
us, were never received generally by the Church.

2. The several points of difference (as being most material) he lays down
(to the number of twenty, and seven) in a Chap. 7. book 3.
chapter framed to this purpose; where he assigns the difference betwixt the
Romish faction, and the Reformed Churches, touching It is the one, and
twentieth point: page 75.
Purgatory, and prayer for the dead, precisely in these words. That Church,
wherein our Fathers lived, and died, did not hold the tormenting of the souls
of men (dying in the state of salvation) IN A PART OF HELL; HUNDRED OF YEARS;
BY DEVILS; IN CORPORAL FIRE, out of which, prayer should deliver them.
Wherefore in the Chap. 21.
Appendix (unto which he reserueth the proof of all his assertions, delivered
in this chapter) he accommodateth his style in this manner. Touching Purgatory,
whether they, that are to be purdged, be purgded by Bellarm. de Purg. l. 2. c.
11.
material fire, or no, it is doubtful. Likewise, touching the Ibid. c. 6.
place, the Roman Church has defined nothing; neither is there any more
certainty touching the Ibid. c. 9.
continuance of sinful souls in their purgation etc. Thus then we see, that,
notwithstanding any thing defined in the Church, the souls of Of SOME; but not
of ALL. Remember your dealing with S Gregory.
men may be purdged from all the dross of sinful remainders, and freed from
all punishments in the very moment of dissolution; which is the thing, that we
say.

3. I deal not now with the conclusion, which M. Doctor has artificially
drawn out of his premises; but I come unto his poynt-deuise it self, and the
detection thereof, whereby the very sinews of his book, and Church, are cut
in sunder, and dissolved.

4. Whereas his promise was to explicate, what those things are, whereupon the
difference grows betwixt the Romish faction, and us, and to demonstrate, that
the said things (wherein this difference now stands betwixt us) were never
intertayned by the Church (but only by some particular men) he yealdeth not
the true difference in this matter, nor proposes the question, as in learning,
and honesty, it became so grave a man, and specially, having thus obliged
himself thereunto, by an extraordinary venditation. For your ingenuity will
acknowledge, that, whereas in this dispute (and so in many more) we must
distinguish the matter of SVBSTANCE from matter of CIRCVMSTANCE (forasmuch as
it is sufficient to have fundamental unity in the first, howsoever there may
be accidental diversity in the second) the matter of substance here is
precisely this; viz. Whether, after this life, a temporal pain be inflicted
upon some souls, or not? The matter of circumstance is, whether hell be the
place; whether fire be the instrument; whether Devils be the tormentours;
whether the duration of this pain be 10. 20. 100. years etc.

5. The point controuersed betwixt us, and the Papists herein, is the matter of
substance, and thereupo^ the difference does arise. For the question is, an
sit, whether (simply) there be any such thing: not quid sit, whether it be of
this, or that quality, and nature. It is de subjecto, whether there be a
Purgatory after this life; not de praedicato, of those particulars, which
belong thereunto. We all believe, that there is an hell, wherein the Devils,
and reprobates shall drink their full in the cupp of everlasting wrath; but
where the designed place, or what the instrument of sensible pain is etc. we
may probably collect, we can not clearly define. Or (to instance in a more
gracious, and comfortable subject) it may please you to consider, how we all
believe; that our Lord JESUS did suffer, and died, and was buried, and arose,
and ascended into heaven. But with what kind of whipps he was scourdged, at
what age he deceased, how many hours he lay in the grave etc. we may
conjecture, we cannot determine; we have semblable reasons, but no invincible
proofs.

6. Wherefore, D. Field has not propounded unto us the difference betwixt the
Protestants, and Catholics, but that difference alone, which is merely
betwixt the Catholics themselves; who teach most consonantly, uniformly, and
perpetually, that there is a Purgatory, and that there is a temporal pain
inflicted in the future life. Thus they grant the thing it self, and presuppose
it (as Poster Analytic.
Aristotle says, that Subiectum must be praecognitum, the subject must be
foreknowen, and admitted, before we will demonstrate any thing upon the same)
and then afterward, they dispute concerning other accidental points; such as
are here remembered by D. Field. And what is this, but the liberty of Schools,
which may well consist with the purity of Religion? It is an exercise of wit,
without destruction of faith. The Sun delights to run his course as a
Giant, Psalm. 18.6.
and yet he never exceeds his annual, or diurnall confines; for he knows
his rising, Psalm. 103.19.
and his going down. Likewise, the Catholics may liberally expatiate in these
points; provided always, that they contain themselves within the obedience of
the Church, and the compass of approved truth. Otherwise, 2. Reg. 2.37.
as it was death for Shemei to transgress the precinct, assigned unto him by
Solomon, so it is at their peril, if they go beyond the limitts, which the
spouse of the wisest Solomon has prescribed in this case.

7. But we Protestants (for whom D. Field has aduocated in this business)
deal herein after an other manner; for we first deny that there is any
Purgatory, or temporal pain in a future estate; we damn it as blasphemous,
heretical, and Antichristian doctrine: then consequently (and necessarily) we
deny the place, the time, the instrument etc. Which are certain accidental,
secondary, and subsequent respects. For in our disputes with the Catholics, we
propose not the question thus; Whether some souls suffer in corporal fire,
tormented there by Devils, an hundred years etc. (for this is the difference
amongst themselves only) but, Whether there be any Purgatory, or temporal
pain of souls, or not? As for example; if any man should demand, Whether in
the country of VTOPIA, the soil be fertile, the situation pleasant, and the
air healthful, I would prevent him, and say; Sir there is no such country,
and therefore your demands of the fertility, pleasure, and healthfulnesse, are
superfiuous, and to no purpose.

8. Thus I was now sufficiently instructed to perceive, that though D. Field
does glory in these positions, viz. The things, whereupon the difference
grows betwixt us, and the Romish faction, were never received generally by
the Church; and: See his ep. dedicat.
the things which Papists now publish as articles of faith [PVRGATORY is in
that number] were not the Doctrines of that Church, wherein they, and WE [viz.
VValdensians, Albigensians, Lutherans, etc. who were sometime actual, and true
members of the Roman "Church] lived together in one That is to say, when our
Fathers Wickliff, Luther etc.) were Papists, and not separated from the visible
communion of the Roman Church.
communion, yet he does miserably collude herein, against his own conscience;
which, in so principal an Author, throwing down his gauntlet of defiance in
such manner, is a very lamentable case.

9. For where is that man (in the time of the aforesaid communion) who denied
Purgatory, or showed any doubtfulnesse therein against the essential doctrine,
in which the true difference betwxit the Papists, and Protestants does stand
most eminently at this day? I did employ much time, I searched into the volumes
of antiquity, I neglected no means to gayn all possible satisfaction in this
thing; and yet I could not find so much as the shadow of any one man, See
before, page 54. etc. how Purgatory has been denied, and by whom.
by whom this particular was impugned, unless he were in the number of such,
as departed from the visible society of the Church.

10 Thus necessity compelled me to infer, that D. Field has disabled his own
book, and overthrown his Church; Papists may triumph in the victory, which
their chiefest enemies have wrought in their behalf; yea they may joyfully
applaud the excellency of their cause, which inforceth her greatest adversaries
to prostitute themselves unto such base, and dishonest courses.

Confess. l. 5. c. 7.
11. Finally therefore, as S. Augustine was in despair, to receive contentment
from any Manichee, when Faustus (the most renowned in that sect) yealded no
sufficient answer unto his doubts; so now I could not expect a fair, Magis
desperab am de cateris coru^ doctoribus, quando in multis, quae me mouebant, it
a ille nomitus apparuit.
and just resolution from any professor of our gospel, when D. FIELD himself
(inferior to no Divine in England: for which cause he was selected by the
Archbishopp to treatise of that Of the CHVRCH.
subject, which is the very center, and circumference in all religious
disputes) appeared so untrue, and so mean in this particular [of Purgatory,
and prayer for the dead] which we deride, and contemn as a foolish,
detestable, impious opinion, and void of any reasonable defense. To conclude;
here I took an argument, first a Personis, and said; if D. FIELD deal thus,
what conceit shall I intertayn of all other Professors? Secondly, a Rebus;
and considered; if D. Field deal thus in THIS MATTER, what shall I conceive of
his deportment in all other things? Truly I have necessary reasons to persuade
me, that the cause being very bad will discredit all her Patrones, but the
Patrones, being never so good, can not by any means support their cause.

The end of the first Part.
THE SECOND PART, CONCERNING SOME FALSEHOODS AND CORRVPTIONS OF M. ROGERS, AND
D. HVMFREY, in the question of Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead.
CHAP. I. of M. ROGERS.
I Had just reasons to esteem highly of this man's work. FIRST; the Subject of
it; to wit the Articles of Religion, approved by the Bishopps, 1162.
and Clergy of our kingdom: in which respect, the book is adorned with this
resplendent title; The faith, doctrine, and religion, professed, and protected
in the realm of England, and in the dominions of the same. SECONDLY; the
quality of the Author; who is a Chaplayn unto the Archbishop, and conversant
in our Ecclesiastical affairs: For so he testifies of himself, in his number.
37.
epistle dedicatory unto his Lord, and Master, saying; Years have made mine
hairs gray; much reading, and experience in theological conflicts, and
combats, have bettered my judgment etc THIRDLY; the special approbation of
this book, viz. Perused, and by lawful authority of the Church of England,
allowed to be public.

. 1. Dionysius Carthusianus abused by M. Rogers. Page 121.

1. PApists agree not amongst themselves (says M. Rogers) about the time,
which they, that be tormented, shall abide in Purgatory. For some have given
out, how the poor souls there, be continually in torments, till the day of
Judgment; as De offic. mort. l. 7.
DIONYS. CARTHVSIANVS: others, as De offic. mort. l. 7.
DVRANDVS, De 4. Nouiss.
do think that they have rest sometimes; as upon Sunday, and holy days: others
are of mind, that they shall be set free, and at liberty, because their
punishment is but temporal etc.

2. Here is an ample testimony of an unfaithful heart. For whereas this man of
great experience is pleased to affirm, that some Papists imprison the souls
in Purgatory until the day of Judgment, and that, by this opinion, they
dissent from others, who conceive that their pain is not of such perpetuity,
and length, he offers a general injury unto them all, and more particularly
unto that Author, whom he alleges to this purpose. It is most untrue that
Carthusianus did deliver such a fancy, or that he was of such opinion; witness
that little treatise de modo liberandi animam e Purgatorio. Witness his clear
assertion, that souls, Dialog. de particulari iudicio any me cap. 30.
being cleansed in Purgatory, mount up, and fly into the celestial paradise.
etc.

3. What evidence therefore has M. Rogers to justify this imputation? I find
none but this ensuing. De 4. Nouiss.
Dionysius reports a certain vision of an Englishman, who beheld a soul
grievously afflicted in a place of torment, from which he received this
answer; I know that I shall not obtayn mercy till the day of judgment, etc.

4. But is this a sufficient reason for M. Rogers to pretend, that, in the
opinion of some Papists, the souls, which suffer in Purgatory, shall not come
thence till the last day? And now, has your experience, good Sir, thus
bettered your judgment? That, which is peculiarly spoken of one soul, will
you thus extend generally unto all? The example it self here affords no such
conclusion, and the Authors doctrine elsewhere, does plainly control the same.

5. Whereas you say farther, that some Papists, and namely Durandus, do think,
that the souls in Purgatory have rest upon sundays etc. I will not rashly
condemn your falsehood therein, but you must give me leave to be doubtful of
your truth. For I have diligently, and carefully reuolued the Author, and yet
I find no such assertion in all that book. Peradventure you relied upon them,
who lied unto you, and so you have told a tale after a Crete. As for example;
you Page 115.
affirm, that, if Hierome had not been at Chalcedon, that Council had erred.
What is your proof? B. Jewel, det. fol. 58. Though here your experience did
fail you (for S. Hierome was gathered unto his fathers many years before the
celebration of that Council) yet your greatest fault was your credulity in
believing B. Jewel upon his naked word; which has been the destruction of
many souls.

. 2. S. Gregory noted for a Papist by M. Rogers: how Eckius is abused by him.
1. PApists agree not amongst themselves (says he) about the causes of
Purgatory torments: Ibid.
for some do think that only VENIAL sins; others think that MORTAL sins
also, for which men have done no penance in this life, are there purdged.

2. The first opinion, concerning Venial sins, he attributes unto S.
Gregory, and terms him a PAPIST; either forgetting, or not regarding, that
our Christian faith descended originally from him, and that it was received
conformably by our State, and that it was protected openly for 930. years by
our worthy Princes (in the number of whom, many were pious in religion as
David, wise in counsel as Solomon, valiant in war as Iosuah) in a word, that
this faith has been glorious in dignity, and fruictfull in good works. And
truly these cogitations did enter so forcibly into my heart, even while I was a
member actually of the Protestanticall Church, that, in my secret thoughts, I
could not but acquitt the Papists from the crime of disobedience, and
undutifulness unto the State, forasmuchas they made not themselves contrary
unto it, but it is made contrary unto them; the chandge being in the State,
which propounds a new faith, and not in them, who conserve the old. And so
much briefly touching the Popery of that illustrious Saint.

3. As for the particular, wherewith he is chardged by M. Rogers, it is no
shame, nor disreputation unto him; Tom. 10. homil. 16.
S. Augustine himself is no less deeply engaged therein, saying; that there
idle speeches, evil, and sordid thoughts, and the multitude of light sins,
which infected the purity of our excellent nature, shall be consumed, etc.
Lastly; Whereas M. Rogers says, that, in the opinion of some Papists, only
venial sins are purdged etc. he can not but know, that their assertion is to
be understood of the guilt, and not of the pain, as you shall immediately
perceive.

4. I come therefore unto the second opinion, concerning Mortal sins, which
he ascribes unto Posit. 6.
Eckius; as though this famous Antagonist of our great Reformer, had taught,
that Mortal sins as well as Venial, are remitted, or expiated after this
life. Whence it follows, that he incurred the same fancy, See before; page
121.
which (as D. Field pretends) S. Augstine did fearfully impugn in his time,
because it was embraced by great, and reverend Authors.

5. But here M. Rogers does abuse his Author, and deceive his Reader. For the
position of See Tom. 1. Luh. Witte^ber. fol. 241. b.
Eckius is this. The souls in Purgatory do satisfy for the pains of sin,
from the guilt whereof they were absolved before, and made not satisfaction in
this life. So then it is a falsehood in M. Rogers to pretend, that, in the
opinion of Eckius, mortal sins are purged, etc. For Eckius affirms, that
the guilt being taken away (and consequently the sin it self) there remains
a temporal pain to be inflicted upon the soul. For better illustration of
which point, it may please thee (gentle Reader) to observe with me, that as by
mortal sins, we are obliged unto a double penalty, to wit eternal, and
temporal, so whenever the guilt is pardoned, the eternal (which is most
properly co^sequent unto it) is pardoned likewise, but not the temporal. Thus
the Prophet giving David his absolutio^ [thy sin is forgiuen] added also,
thou shall not die; 2. Reg. 12:
and yet he imposes a penance, to wit, the child shall die: the reason
whereof is this, See how Bell^rmine presses this against Calvin: in his fourth
book de poenitent. cap. 2.
BECAUSE thou have made the enemies of our Lord to blaspheme; and so it was an
affliction for sin past, and not only a caution against sin to come. For
though it be true, that God does rather intend the safety of his children, then
the punishment of their sin, yet he punishes sin in his children, and the
pain is more durable then the fault (as Tract. 124. Ioh.
S. Augustine speaks) least the fault should seem small, if the pain were
finished with it.

6. Now, as the temporal pain of sin is justly reserved after the remission
of the guilt, so it is not always inflicted in this life, De Ciuit. D^l. 21.
c. 13.
but sometimes in the next. Wherefore, S. Augustine confessing, that God does
design poenas te^porarias pro peccatis praeteritis, distinguishes
immediately, and says; poenas temporarias alij in hac vit a tantum, alij post
mortem, alij and hic, and illic patiuntur.

7. Thus I found a double reason of Purgatory; the FIRST; because some smaller
sins, (wherewith grace may consist in the soul) are there expiated, both in
respect of guilt, and pain: the SECOND; because some temporal pain (reserved
by the justice of God, after forgiveness of the guilt by his mercy) is there
sustained by them, who have not been exercised with condign penance in this
life. And here arises a proper solution unto the subtility of D. Field, See
before; page 103.
who would conclude; that, if all sin be taken away, which is the cause, the
effect must cease, which is punishment, etc. For though the obligation unto
eternal punishment, cease actually upon remission of the guilt, yet the
obligation unto temporal punishment does remayn by the justice of God; and his
ordinance concurring with our desert, is a sufficient cause to produce such
effect. Therefore till his justice be satisfied, the cause of punishment does
still endure.

8. To conclude. Whereas M. Rogers would enforce an absurdity upon Eckius, and
other men, as though they were distracted into great variety of opinion
concerning the cause of Purgatory, he misreporteth their intentions. For though
some few men did conceive, that all venial sin is wasted, and taken away
from the soul, immediately upon her separation from the body, yet I saw that
they, and all other Papists (to speak in my old language) do concordably, and
uniformly teach, that no mortal sin (such as See D. Field; page 146.
excludes grace from the soul, and See S. Au. Enchirid. ad Laur. c. 69.
excludes the soul from heaven) is purdged after this life, otherwise then in
reference unto temporal pain, reserved, and inflicted after remission of the
guilt. But M. Rogers would lead his reader to conceive, that the Papists are
singularly divided in their opinions; some affirming, that only Venial
sins, others resolving, that Mortal likewise are cleansed in a penal estate.

9. Many such collusions, and devices, I observed in this Author; but I will
not trouble your patience any longer with the recapitulatio^ of his untruths,
forasmuch as by this little, which you have already seen, you may conjecture
of the rest, which I conceal. What can you expect from them, whose Religion
is founded upon the sands of falsehood, and not upon the rock of truth? Do men
gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Wherefore I will now make have
unto the conclusion of all, and I will end my discourse briefly with him, from
whom my conversion did happily begin.

CHAP. II. Of D. HVMFREY, and his book entitled, Secunda pars Iesuitisini;
co^tayning his answer unto the 5. former Reasons of EDM. CAMPIAN.
COncerning the Author, and his work, I will say little; it is the judgment
of many principal Divines in England, that D. Humfrey was worthy to endito
such a book, and that the book is worthy to proceed from Arch a man, who was
reputed sound in the faith, for which he suffered voluntary banishment, and
profound in that science, wherein he was a Doctor by his degree, and At Oxon.
Professor by his place.

Besides; as the quality of the adversary deserved good respect, and the
weight of his reasons required condign satisfaction (which neither himself,
nor D. Whitaker have yealded thereunto) so it did greatly import him to deal
uprightly, and substantially in his answer, forasmuch as he designed two
Burleigh. Leycester.
honorable Persons to be the Patrones of his labor, and two learned Oxford.
Ca^bridge.
Universities to be the Judges of his exactness.

But when I found his vnfaithfullnes in his relatio^s, his digressions from the
matter, Non ideo vera mihi videbantur quia deserta etc. See S. Aug. Conf. l. 5.
c. 6.
and the general imbecility of his discourse (flourished with a certain
stream of eloquence, and beautified with pleasing phrases) I could not esteem
that to be a true, and venerable Religion, which is so basely and slenderly
supported by the^, who are accounted Pillars in our Church.

. 1. S. AUGUSTINE notoriously depraved by D. HVMFREY.
Rat. 3.
1. Whereas that excellent, and renowned F. Campian, in those short Reasons,
which bring eternal memory unto their Author, does object unto the
Protestants the inuisibility of their Church, and that it was not otherwise
visible for many ages, then in some scattering heretics, AERIVS, Vigilantius,
Berengarius etc. from whom they received not an entyre religion, but begged
certain pestiferous fragments alone; D. In resp. ad Camp. p. 261. 262.
Humfrey finding himself taken in an inexplicable difficulty, windeth up and
down to find some plausible evasion, and therefore he says; Wherein Aerius
did err, we reject it; wherein he held any thing agreably with the Scripture,
we receive it, etc.

2. After this obscure, and uncertain oracle, he resolves most plainly, that
he, and his Church will not digress from Aerius in this point; and therefore
he adds: We do not disapproue that, which Aerius thought, and Augustine has
related, that we ought not to pray, nor to offer oblation for the dead, because
this is not contained in any precept of the Scripture; which He quoteth Aug. de
cura pro mortuis.
Augustine also does seem to signify, when he says, that this commendation
of the dead ^s an ancient custom of the Church. Thus Aerius is justified
against the universal Church, and his heresy is preferred before the
Catholic faith. But of this matter I have entreated more particularly Page
14. I wanted D. Hu^frey his book when I cited his opinion; which I have
faithfully delivered: and though the word (recte) be not in my author; yet it
i^ sufficiently implied in him.
before.

3. The thing which I yeald now unto your consideration, is, the subtle, and
artificial collusio^ of this renowned Doctor. For whereas he pretends
Scripture (negatiuely) against prayer for the dead, and that S. Augustine had
only custom to maintain it, I found that S. Augustine premiseth Scripture in
defense thereof, and then confirms it by that authority, which to Epist. 118.
impugn, is the part of most insolent madness. For ( de cura pro mort. cap. 1.
says he) We read in the books of the 2. 12. 4^.
Machabees, that Sacrifice was offered for the dead. But if this were read no
where in the OLD Scriptures, yet there is no small authority of the UNIVERSAL
CHVRCH, which shines in this custom: for in the prayers of the Priest, which
he powers forth to God at his Altar, the COMMENDATION of the dead has its
place.

4. Here three things occurred unto my ponderation. FIRST; that S. Augustine
does justify prayer for the dead by the Canonical Scripture; for so the books
of the Machabees are recognized by a 3. Carthag. ca. 47.
Council, wherein S. Augustine himself was present, and ca. 50.
subscribed thereunto. Wherefore, in his ce^sure, the Sacrifice for the dead
was firmly established by the testimony of sacred writ: and this being so; how
can it be true, that Augustine could not plead this authority in defense
thereof? And if he did plead it, why does D. Humfrey pretend the contrary in
this place?

5. SECONDLY; S. Augustine makes mention here of the OLD Scripture; whereby he
intimates that in the NEW Testament, some relief for the dead is either
plainly expressed, or sufficiently see before page ^. etc.
deduced from thence. THIRDLY; S. Augustine adioyneth the Church unto the
Scripture; and because there is impeachable sovereignty in the UNIVERSAL
Church, therefore he says, that if other proofs were wanting in this matter,
yet this alone may satisfy, and give contentment unto her obsequious Children:
Which plea seemed unto me so full of equity, that without insolency and
madness (both which must ineuitably fall upon D. Humfrey, and his Church) I
saw no possibility to decline the same.

. 2. An other of his unfaithful practices against S. Augustine.
SAint Augustine makes mention in the former sentence, of a COMMENDATION of
the dead; from which word the Doctor takes an advantage to show, Page 262.
See before, page 38.
that in your Colleges you now retayn this pious custom of the ancient
Church. But he deludeth you with ambguity of speech. For the commendation,
whereof S. Augustine speaks, is referred unto the SOVLES of the dead, which,
in the sacred Mysteries, were specially recommended unto our Lord: but the
commendation of your Founders in your Colleges, is a memory of their names,
which you celebrate with commemoration of their liberality, whereby your
studies are maintained. And this is not to conform your selves unto antiquity,
nor to execute the testaments of your honorable Founders.

2. This noble figment in the Doctor is presently attended with a more eminent
deprauation. For, though Paulinus firmly believing (according to the
instruction of the Catholic Church) that great vtility ensues unto the dead
by the prayers of the living, desires an explication of that scripture, which
says; 2. Cor. 5.10.
We shall all stand before the Tribunal of Christ, and every man shall
receive according to that, which he has done in this life, whether it be good,
or evil; and though S. Augustine yealdeth this resolution, viz. Ibid.
according to the quality of this life, men receive help after their decease
etc. yet D. Humfrey, supressing both these points, flourishes in his
unprofitable rhetoric, and handles the matter artificially to make a
credulous Reader believe, that S. Augustine himself does conuell the use of
Prayer for the dead by the testimony of this Scripture.

3. The detection of these unfaithful courses, which till this time mine ey
saw not, neither did my heart once suspect, did conduct me, occasionally, unto
the truth. Ita ille qui multis laqueus mortis extitit, meum, quo captus eram,
relaxare jam ceperat, nec volens, S. Aug. Co^f. l. 5. c. 7. de FAVSTO.
nec sciens, says S. Augustine of a man happy in name, but unhappy in deed;
and the like I may justly pronounce in my success; thus he, that was the snare
of death unto many, began to lose the snare, wherewith I was entangled; and
this he did, though neither by his will, nor knowledge.

FINIS.
The correction of the principal faults passed only in some copies.
P signifies the page; L the line; M the margent.
P. 5. l. 15. read. Beda p. 8. l. 19. leave out scio, and read, Veteres abusi
sunt etc. p. 10. l. 32. read wit. p. 17. 19. 21. 23. 25-27. in the title,
Chap. 2. p. 21. m. 116. in stead of 114. p. 26. l. 4. elsewhere. p. 32. l. 7.
unto. p. 34. l. vlt. extended. p. 45. m.. 5. number. 8. in stead of. 3. n. 4. p.
51. l. 17 incomparable. p. 52. m. from the infection etc. p. 61. l. 20. says.
p. ^5. m. Rainolds. p. 72. l. 12. convent. p. 75. l. 27. after censure. add
these words; as a thing not to be exercised against any professor of the
gospel. p. 76. l. 2. from l. 28. unmatchable. l. 32. Church. p. 78. l. 9
taught that. p. 82. l. 3. retreat. p. 87. l. 26. are the Churches. p. 90. l. 5.
without. l. 12. gospel. p. 91. 14. Wherefore. p. 112. l. vlt. Church. p. 120.
l. 15. with. p. 121. m. ad literam. p. 122. l. 4. place the parenthesis after
him. p. 123. l. 16. exempt him from. p. 125. l. 16. dishonorable. p. 130. l.
vlt. PRAYER. p. 134. l. 21. construction p. 149. l. 21 Divines. p. 151. l. 10.
testimonies. l. 28. intercourse.

A BRIEF, PLAIN, AND effectual instruction concerning Purgatory, and Prayer
for the dead.
COurteous Reader; the intended breuity of my discourse did not permit me so
to enforce, Book 1. Part. 1. Cha. 2.. 4. nu^. 16.
and to illustrate the testimony of S. AUGUSTINE in this matter, as I had
conceived, nor as the dignity thereof does justly require; and especially for
their sake, who either in regard of their weakness cannot, or in regard of
their negligence care not, or in regard of their perverseness will not see the
clear, and irrefragable truth. Wherefore, having a little remnant of vacant
paper, I have thought good to employ it unto this profitable end; assuring my
self that every Reader may inform his understanding, and settle his conscience
herein, by the weight, and evidence of these THREE ensuing propositions.

The FIRST proposition.
1 THere was always, and now is, and ever shall be a CATHOLIC Church, which
is free from any The Protestants account this doctrine of Purgatory etc. to be
damnable.
damnable error. This assertion is very often delivered by S. Augustine, and
the very same (though not precisely in these words) is yealded by Page 203.
D. Field in the name of his Church.

The SECOND proposition.
2. THe instruction of this Church is the last, and final judgment, wherein
all men may, and must rely, as in the PROPOVNDER of truth. This assertion is
strengthened by sundry testimonies of the Fathers, and In his ep. dedic.
D. Field approoueth it, saying, that men desirous of satisfaction must
diligently search out the true Church, and Therefore it must be known; and
therefore it must be visible.
rest in her judgment etc. In which respect he says, that, Page 193.
if the reprehension of Aerius [touching PRAYER FOR THE DEAD] be understood to
extend unto the general practice, and judgment of the Church, it is not, nor
may not be justified. Whereas he says, it is not justified [by Protestants]
that is not true; whereas he says, it may not be justified, that is very
certain. Wherefore I desire you to stand constantly unto this position, and not
to fly your ground.

The THIRD proposition.
3. THe judgment, and purpose of the ancient CATHOLIC Church is discouerable
unto us by two meaenes; viz. the perpetual succession of PRACTICE, and the
conform testimony of the FATHERS. For where we find no substantial mutation
of PRACTICE, All men know, that the practice of praying for the dead is the
same now susta^tially, as in S. August. time: and, I hope, it was not begun
then but continued. See before; page 25.
but see it perpetuated in all descents, and derived unto us by the long hand
of time, we may infallibly conclude, that the later ages of the Church
conspiring with the former, are free from just reproof. Again; the testimony of
the FATHERS conuaigheth us unto the knowledge of the Churches judgment; so
that we require fidelity in them, authority in it; they are the witnesses, she
the judge; they relate her voice, she pronounces the sentence.

These propositions as they are very perspicuous, and ponderous, so they will
excellently, and forcibly apply themselves in decision of this controversy,
touching PVRGATORY, and PRAYER FOR THE DEAD.

The testimony of S. AUGUSTINE.
The faithful do know, according to the instruction of the Church, that, when
MARTYRS are recited at the Altar of God, this is not done with intention to
pray for them (it being an injury to pray for a Martyr, unto whose prayers we
ought to be recommended) but we pray for other deceased men, whose
commemoration is there made.

Now, for your full satisfaction in this point, you must here observe three
things; viz. the quality of the WITNESS, the competency of the IVDGE, the
resolution of the MATTER.

1. Concerning the FIRST; it imports the witness only to express, what was
the intention of the Church in this practice. And as S. Augustine is a most
faithful witness of Antiquity (in M. Inst. l. 3. c. 3.. 10. etc.
Caluins opinion) so it goes hard, if for a MATTER OF HISTORY, the Fathers can
not find creditt at your hands; they should know, as well as you, what was then
in FACT. Which sentence being very justly delivered against the Presbyterians
by the Suruay page 338.
L. of Cant (in the question of BISHOPPS etc.) ought to be considered exactly
in this issue.

2. Concerning the SECOND; you see that the Churches instruction touching this
matter, was known familiarly unto all the faithful: so that you must either
unnaturally, and impiously (as Aerian heretics) reject your Mothers
instruction, or else as dutiful, and obsequious children, you must submitt your
selves unto her doctrine. Which least you should intemperately renounce, I pray
you to remember that famous sentence of S. Augustine; viz. Ep. ^18.
to call any thing in question, which is frequented by the UNIVERSAL CHVRCH,
it is the part of most INSOLENT MADNESS.

3. Concerning the THIRD; you can not but perceive the clearness thereof
expressed in this distinction; We do not pray for Martyrs: and, We do pray
for other men, By which manifest difference, S. Augustine does sufficiently
declare, that the memory of Martyrs was celebrated at the Altar, by way of
THANSKGIVING, and gladness: but the names of other men were remembered by way
of PETITION, and desire. The reason whereof arises out of their estate. We
pray not for a Martyr; and, it were an injury to pray for him: Why? Because we
know that he is in heaven; and to have any diffidence of his beatitude, it were
injurious unto his cause, and derogatory from his passion; therefore we pray
not FOR him, as though he wanted our relief, but UNTO him rather, that he may
assist us with his charitable intercession.

But we pray for others; that is to say, for all them, of whose actual
felicity the Church has not yet attained a secure, and infallible persuasion;
otherwise, if she knew that they were in present possession of joy, it were as
great as injury to pray for them also, as for the Martyrs themselves, since the
reason, why she prays not for Martyrs, is, because she is confidently
resolved that they, being in heaven, stand not in any exigence of her devotion.

Wherefore, since the CATHOLIC Church prayed for other me^, as not being in
heaven (or not certainly known to be there) she did conceive that they were,
or might be (for ought she knew to the contrary) in some third place, and
consequently in some temporal pain: and so (necessarily) she did believe, that
there is a PVRGATORY after this WORDS, and NAMES, it is a vanity; for it is
sufficient to have a sure apprehension of the THING it self. To litigate about
things ACCIDENTAL, SVBSTANTIALL point: the rest have their probability in
their several degrees, and are permitted unto JESUS proficiebat sapientia,
Luca. 2.53.
and aetate, etc. Now since he, that is WISDOM it self did profitt in
sapience; and he, that is ETERNITY, did increase in age, it may well become the
Church to show a conformity unto her head, and Lord.

The petition of S. AUGUSTINE.
Confess. l. ^. c. 13.
Inspire, o Lord my God, inspire thy servants, and my brethren, that, at thy
Altar, they may remember Monica thy handmayd, with Patricius sometimes her
husband.

FINIS.
TRY BEFORE YOU TRUST.

OR AN ADMONITION Unto the credulous, and seduced Protestants, to examine the
fidelity of their VVriters, and particularly of two principal Doctors; viz.
D. FIELD, and D. MORTON.

A Detection of their falsehood in some matters of great importance: and a
discovery of sundry vanities in the new Gospel according to LVTHER, ZVINGL.
and others.

BY T. H. Master of Arts, and lately Minister.

Added by way of APPENDIX unto his FIRST MOTIVE.

1609.

TO THE WORTHY GENTLEMAN Master S. E.
SIR; though the propriety of this little Treatise be yours (it being first
addressed for your private information) yet the use thereof may be derived unto
others under your honorable name; buried here, and intombed in a parcel of it
self.

For as my hearty affection did single you forth to be the principal object of
my thoughts, so my compassion enlardgeth it self toward all my loving
contreymen, wholly ensnared with you in the same danger, and are held captive
therein by the same credulity, and facility of belief, Popidum, qui sibi
credat, habet. S. Bernard. de Henrico haeretico ep. 240.
which has prevailed with your noble heart, to admit the assertions of your
guides, without a trial of their exactness.

In which course, though I may commend the goodness of your nature, which,
being free from intertaynme^t of base, and dishonest cogitations, does not
suspect any collusion, where it sees a great venditation of Singuli dicurit,
ego veru^ dico, S. Chrysostom. de haereticis Hom^l. 33. in Act. Veritas, and
veritas; was the saying of the Manichees. See S. August. co^f. l. 3. c. 6.
truth, and never had experience of falsehood, yet it does import you in
JUSTICE, and in WISDOM, to try a little, before you trust too much.

For as equity does require all men to avoid partiality in decision of ordinary
causes (which can not be performed without the indifferent audience of each
party; for, si satis est accusasse, quis erit innocens? Yea, says SENECA; Qui
statuit aliquid part inaudita altera, Aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus
fuit.) so discretion prescribes unto them, that they should be very
deliberate, and circumspect in the matters of Religion, which, in their nature,
are sublime, and, in their weight, concern our interminable, and everlasting
estate either in the joys of heaven, or in the pains of hell.

But since GOD has given you eyes to be your immediate witnesses, and endued
you with an excellent portion of understanding, to be a sufficient judge in
this behalf; I desire you, that you would not be ungrateful unto him for his
benefits, but that, with a temperate, and composed mind, you would exercise
these means, which are afforded unto you for a glorious end.

And forasmuch as I know that D. FIELD, and D. MORTON do shine as Castor, and
Pollux in your Church (howbeit, as the house of these brethren was reputed
Castors alone, Sueton. in Iulio Caesare.
by a certain prerogative, and superiority which rested in him; so D. Field
has obtained the chiefest, if not the only name) whose writings are esteemed
the diuinest oracles of this age; I have deemed it most conuenable for me, to
make choice of them only at this time, and to give you so much instruction
concerning their works, as may demonstrate their obliquity, and
unfaithfulness; which your ingenuous disposition did never yet suspect.

But what truth can you expect from the children, whose Fathers were
remarkable liars, and are so recognized by M. LVTHER himself, the great
Reformer of the Church, and grand progenitour of your gospel? These
SACRAMENTARIES (says See Brent contra Bullinger. in Recognit. prophetic. and
apostolic. doctr. page 276. impress. Francosurti. 1585.
he) are non solum mendaces, sed ipsum mendacium, fucus, et simulatio; not
only liars, but a very ly it self, deceit, and simulation: which ZWINGLIVS
does show in word, and deed. I mervayle not, if they lie They pretended that
Luther was vanquished by them at Marpurg.
so impude^tly; for I perceive that they can do nothing else: and I do rejoice
in this event, seeing that they (the DEVIL reigning) do now manifest them
selves not only by craft, but by open lies.

As your Professors are lineally descended from these Creetes, so they
degenerate not from their primitive manners, and conditions. You may not think
that doves have followed those ravens, as Noah first sent a raven out of the
Arc, Genesis 8.7.8.
and then a dove; but you must remember the ancient, and true proverb; mali
corui malum ouum; of an evil stock comes an evil breed. Behold the
continual decourse, and propagation of your pretensed gospel: such root,
such branches; such tree, such fruict; such masters, such scholars; such
founders, such followers; Tit. 1.12.
(...) alvvayes liars. Thus their Religion was newly implanted, and thus it is
perpetuated unto this day.

Page 183.
For though it pleases D. FIELD, and In his ep. to the King prefixed before his
book, entitled; A full satisfaction. etc.
D. MORTON to make a very special ostentation of Truth (the one pretending,
that the Spirit of TRVTH does teach us; the other professing himself to be a
Minister of simple truth in his disputes) yet the sequel will discover such
voluntary falsehood in both, that as they can not but Miru^ est. si no^ riferit
Acuspex qua^^o Aruspice^ viderit.
smile each at others labor (which In his ep. dedicat. page 3 l. 32.
Doctor FIELD had just reason to suspect also from his compeeres, at whom he
gives a secret gyrd) so your self cannot henceforth believe colored, and
painted fictions in your Writers, nor give an hasty assent unto their
protestations, without a condign trial of their performance.

Never the less; I am not so unequal in my desire, that you should subtract
your credulity from them, and translate it unto me, or unto any other: but
measure me, and them with my own prescription; TRY BEFORE YOU TRUST: See both,
compare both, examine both; 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Nemo nostru^mdicat; ia^n inueni
veritatem: sed sic came quaeramus, quasi ab vtrisque nesciatur. Ita enim
dilige^ter and conformiter quaeri ^oteri^, si nulla t^meraria presumptione
inuenta, and cognisa esse credatur. S. Aug. co^tra epist. Manich. c. 3.
Try all things, and keep that which is good. Try the cause, and try the
persons; try the faith, and try the Professors; try the solidity of the first,
and try the fidelity of the second: follow that which is most credible, and
believe them that best deserve your creditt.

My request is little (as you see) but the reason thereof is very great. For
what is more easy, then to suspend your credulity for a week, nay for one day,
or (if that seem too long) for a few hours? And what can be more necessary,
then to adhibitt circumspection, where the danger is in quality extreme, in
evidence probable, in time imminent, as you may behold in your own case? You
know that as heresy does exterminate her unhappy disciples out of the Catholic
Church, so it does precipitate them into an endless perdition. You shall know
likewise that your credulity has (actually) engaged your soul into this
miserable estate. Finally, you know that as life is short, and death uncertain,
so you shall stand immediately before a Judge, whose anger will be inflexible
in that hour, and his sentence irreuocable for ever.

Wherefore, that religious, and grave counsel, which De vtil. cred. cap. 1^.
S. AUGUSTINE gave unto his well respected friend, I will affectionately give
unto you. Which I am the rather invited to do, because I, being mercifully
delivered out of the bands of death, have learned, with Contra epist. Manich.
cap. 3.
S. August. to be co^passionate unto seduced souls; and because your self does
symbolize with his friend; for he was misguided by them that pretended sanctity
in their demeanure, and did iliaqueate much people with their plausibility of
speech: such also has been your case. He was Honoratus.
honored in name; you are honorable in deed. Consider the advice now; apply
it seriously unto your heart. Si quid te vel ratio, vel oration nostra commouit,
et si veram, vt credo, tui cura^ geris, velim vt me audias, et bonis
praeceptoribus Catholicae Christianitatis te pia fide, alacri spe, simplici
charitate co^mittas; Deumque ipsum, cuius vnius et bonitate facti sumus, and
iustitia poenas luimus, and cleme^tia liberamur, orare non cesses, etc. Hos
autem verbosos, and miseros (quid enim aliud dixerim?) penitus desere.

I cease to trouble you any farther with my rude lines. In respect of your
wisdom, a little is enough; in respect of my love, nothing can be too much.
God open your eyes to see his truth, and incline your will to embrace it. Amen.

Yours in all duty T. H.

THE FIRST PART CONCERNING D. FIELD.
CHAPTER 1. D. FIELD does notoriously abuse the name, and authority of GERSON,
GROSTHEAD etc. to defend the late (pretensed) REFORMATION.
. 1. D. Fields positions concerning the Church. Gerson alleged by him.
1. FOUR remarkable positions are delivered by D. Field, which comprehend the
substance of his Of the Church.
discourse. FIRST. Page 19.
There was always a true visible Church. SECOND. Page 76.
This true visible Church was not planted only in Wickliffe, Husse, and others
(either before, or after) who departed from the visible society of the Roman
Church. THIRD. Page 72. 73. 74.
The Papists were not the true Church, but merely a faction in the same.
FOVRTH. The Church wanted a necessary Reformation, which was desired by her
worthy guides, Gerson, Cameracensis etc. long before, and is now effectuated by
Luther, Zwinglius, and the like.

2. For this end, and purpose, it pleased D. Field to intertayn his Reader
before hand with a singular venditation; viz. Page 59.
That the Church needed Reformation when LVTHER began, and that it was not
necessary nor behoouefull to expect the consent of the whole Christian world, I
will make it evident, when I come unto the due place.

3. The principal passadges concerning this matter, are these four, which
here ensue. FIRST. Page 77.
Gerson Dialog. apologetic. ^udicium de Council. Goust.
reports that there were sundry lewd assertions, prejudicial to the states
of Kings, and Princes, which the Council of Constance could not be induced to
condemn, by reason of a mighty faction that prevailed in it, though many great
ones much vrdged it, and though they made no stay to condemn the positions of
Wickliffe, and Husse, seeming to derogate from the state of the Clergy, though
many of them might carry a good, and Catholic sense, if they might have found
a favorable construction. Whereupon he breaks out into a bitter complaynt of
the partialities, and unequal courses holden in the Church, and protests,
that he has no hope of a Reformation by a Council, things standing as they
did.

4. The SECOND passadge is a very admirable devise. For whereas De notis Eccles
c. 10.
Bellarmine does object the intestine divisions, and conflicts of the pretensed
Ghospellers, the doctor turns him off with this answer; Page 169.
We say, that th^s diversity is to be imputed WHOLY unto our adversaries.
For, when there was a Reformation to be made of abuses, and disorders in
matters of practice, and manifold corruptions in very many points of Christian
doctrine; and in a Council, by general consent, it could not be hoped for (as
Ibid.
GERSON long before, out of his experience, saw, and protested) by reason of
the preuayling faction of Popes flaterers, but this was necessarily to be
assayed severally, in the particular kingdoms of the world; it was not
possible, but that some diversity should grow, while one knew not, nor expected
to know, what an other did.

5. Then he subnecteth an other defense, and says; Yet it fell out by the
happy providence of God, that there was no material difference amongst them
etc. But of this matter, I will entreat more particularly in the second
chapter, Mean while, observe the THIRD passadge, which is more excellent then
the former. Page 18 6.
Many men, that lived in the days of our Fathers, and were of the TRVE CHVRCH,
did most certainly foresee, and foretell the ruin of the Popes estate, and the
alteration, and Reformation of the Church in our time, and gave most clear
testimony unto that, which we have done. Neither is there ANY BETTER PROOF of
the goodness of our cause, then that that, which we have done in the
reformation of the Church, was before wished for, expected, and foretold by the
best men, that lived in former time, in the corrupt state of the Church.

6. If D. Field can justify this glorious assertion, he deserves to be
received in triumph, and to be advanced with immortal commendation, as David
himself, 1. Sam. 18.
when he obtained a great victory over the proud, uncircumcised Philistim.
Otherwise, as Sampson overthrew the house, Iudic. 16.
wherein the Philistims were assembled, by demolition of the pillars, Quibus
omnis domus imminebat, etc. verse. 26.
upon which it was sustained: so forasmuch as the Protestants cause has no
better proof etc. it is evident, that whosoever can disable this proof,
brings a necessary ruin unto their cause. For just experience whereof, I
remitt me unto the sequel in this Chapter.

7. But who are these best men, in whom D. Field does plant the strength, and
validity of his cause? Behold his marginall annotation, and that directs you
unto the persons, viz. GROSTHEAD, GERSON, SAVANAROLA, and many other, mentioned
before. That is to say, in the third book, and 12. chapter; where I noted his
FOVRTH, and last passadge, which is delivered by him precisely in these words
Page 85.
. What is now done in this Reformation [made by Luth. Zwingl. etc.] which
Cameracensis, Picus, Sauanarola, Gerson, and innumerable other WORTHY GVIDES
OF GODS CHVRCH long before, thought not necessary to be done, as appears by
that, which we have already delivered touching that matter?

8. These are the several passadges of greatest importance, which I noted in
his discourse. In all which there is such falsehood, and collusion, as
redoundeth not only unto the shame of the Author himself, but unto the
subversion of the Protestanticall Church. And forasmuch as Gerson is the most
eminent person, whom he has cited frequently for his purpose, I will acquaynt
you first with his clear resolutio^s in these matters, and afterward I will
reflect upon certain particulars going before, which are of especial
consideration.

. 2. Positions of Gerson; by which it does appear, that he utterly detested
the Reformation, which has been transacted by Luther, Zvvinglius, and the like.
1. When I addressed my self unto a serious, and continual lection of Gersons
works, upon those extraordinary praises, which D. Field does attribute unto
him, I found many evidences, (some PARTICVLAR, some GENERAL) which countermand
the suggestions of D. Field. A small parcel whereof I will now present unto
your view.

2. The particular evidences, are his several opinions in the matters of
faith, which are controuersed betwixt the Catholics, and Protestants at this
day. As for example. GERSON believed the doctrine of See before; page ^5.
Transubstantiation; which D. Field abhors, page 171.
saying, that it does imply sundry consequences of horrible impieties. GERSON
was a patron of the Part. 4. sermon. 2. de defunct, etc
Mass; which Luther hated as impious, and wicked, and was so See Serarius de
Lutheri Magistro.
instructed by the arguments of the Devil: with both whom D. Field page 192.
does absolutely conspire in this issue. GERSON was resolute in the doctrine of
See before; page 108.
Purgatory, which D. Field has pronounced to be an page 79.
heresy of the Papists.

3. If I would proceed unto other particularities (as namely Invocation of
Saints, Indulgences, Communion under one kind, etc) I might fill many pages, in
laying forth the irreconciliable differences betwixt D. Field, and this worthy
guide of Gods Church. But I will pretermitt the rest, and come to the supreme
difference, unto which all other points are subordinate, and inferior, as I
conceive; that is to say, the sovereign primacy of the Roman Bishopp, in whom
4. principalities concur. For he is a Diocesan in one precinct, an
Archbishopp in one Province; a Patriarch in one part of the world; finally the
chief Pastor of all; in which administration he succeeds unto S. Peter, as
holy de considerat. l. 2.
Bernard does excellently speak. Thou [Eugenius] art he, to whom the keys are
delivered, and to whom the sheep are commended. There are other Ianitours of
heaven, and other Pastors of the flock, but thou much more gloriously then
they, by how much thou do obtayn each name more eminently then the rest.
They have their flocks assigned unto them; every bishopp his peculiar chardge;
but all are credited unto thee, and all are one flock unto thee, who art one
pastor of all, for thou art the pastor not only of the sheep, but of the
pastors themselves. Do thou ask me, how I prove it? By the word of our
Lord. For, to whom, I say not of (...) the Bishops, but of the Apostles are
all the sheep so absolutely, and so indifferently committed? If thou love me
PETER, feed my sheep. What sheep? The people of this, or that city, of this
region, or of that kingdom? No; but my sheep, says he: and who does not
Cunctis Euangelium scientibus liquet quod voce Dominica sancto, and onmium
Apostolorum principi Petro totius Ecclesiae cura commissa est: says S. Gregor.
Registr. epist. l. 4. c. 76.
plainly see, that our Lord did not here design some, but assign all unto
his care? There is no exception, where there is no distinction, etc. So he.

4. Behold now also two very effectual testimonies of Gerson to the same
purpose FIRST. Part. 1. de Auferib^. Papae co^siderat. 8.
The forms of civil government are subject unto mutability, and alteration;
but it is otherwise in the Church. For her government is MONARCHICAL, and is
so appointed by the institution of our Lord. If any man will violate this
sacred ordinance, and persist obstinately in his contempt, he is to be judged
an heretic, as Martinus of Padua, and some others consorting with his fancy.
Likewise, prescribing many directions to compose the differences betwixt the
Greek, and Latin Church, he premiseth this consideration as a fundamental
point; viz. Part. 4. de Unit. Graecoru^. Considerat. 3.
There must be one head in earth, unto which all men must be united. For though
God himself, who in the second Person assumed our nature, be the principal,
and essential head, yet he has constituted a vicarian head, to be his deputy
amongst us, for the administration of his Church, for the preservation of
unity, for the communication of the faith unto all the members thereof, etc.
Which head we call the POPE, and OUR HOLY FATHER. etc. If any man either in
malice, or folly disturb this union, he is a schismatic. As we must employ
our diligence to procure unity, so we must endeavor to bring all men unto the
obedience of one head.

5. Here Gerson declares himself truly to be a worthy Guide of Gods Church,
and a singular enemy of the Protestanticall Reformation, which has conuelled,
and dissipated this ground, and principle of unity, by impugning the supremacy
of the Pope. Wherefore, as the In his Suruay; page 140,
Lord Archb. of Cant. had good reason, in his experience, to say: those
Churches, that have followed the humor of BIZA, in the abolishing of their
Bishops, and Archbishopps, may they not justly wish, that he had never been
borne? So there is greater reason, upon more lamentable experience to say;
those Churches, that have followed the intemperate humor of LVTHER in
abolishing the sovereign Bishopp, may they not justly wish that he had never
been borne? For the sects, factions, and divisions which have ensued upon this
breach, are in number many, in quality odious, and there is no certain end unto
which they finally incline. Which evils are well expressed by the Author of
them all. Luth. in Galat. c. 5. 15.
The concord of the Church being once violated, there is neither measure, nor
end of dissensions. When Aphrick was subverted by the Manichees, then
succeeded the Donatists, who, contending also amongst themselves, were parted
into three sects. Likewise in our time, first the SACRAMENTARIES fell away from
us, then the ANABAPTISTS, and neither of these agree together. Thus one sect
breeds more, and each condemns the other.

6. But if we would reflect upon the true cause hereof, thou, o Luther, thou
art the cause of these perturbations: for thou have taken away the means of
unity, by displacing the head of the Church, in whom it should be eminently
preserved, as Gerson (that worthy guide) does gravely, and wisely teach.
Wherefore let any man of conscience, and discretion examine the truth, and
substance of D. Fields assertion, saying; Page 179.
it is the pride of Antichrist [the Pope] that has made all the breaches in
the Christian world, and would have laid all waste, if God had not preserved a
remnant. Of whom? Lutherans, Sacramentaries, and the like.

7. I come unto a SECOND proposition delivered by the said worthy guide of Gods
Church. Gers. Part. 4. Contra bullam mendicant.
If you demand, whether a man may be saved, though he reject the true Martin. 5.
Pope? I answer. he may; if ignorance excuse him, and if he have a good will,
or a mind prepared to yeald obedience, when the truth shall be explaned unto
him: for then he departs not from Christ (the essential head) and from his
ordinance, viz. THERE MVST BE ONE POPE IN THE UNIVERSAL CHVRCH. To which
effect (as I conceive) certain penitent Nouatians did confess, and Lib. 3. ep.
11.
S. Cypriaen does record it, that there is one God, one Christ, one holy Ghost,
and that there ought to be ONE Bishopp in the Catholic Church: not one without
others, but one above others; as S. Epist. 84.
Leo the Pope writes unto a Grecian bishopp; We have called thee in partem
solicitudinis, non in plenitudinem potestatis, into a part of our care, not
into the fullness of our power: and this sentence De Co^siderat. l. 3.
S. Bernard brings unto the consideration of Eugenius the Pope, sometimes his
Ibid. l. 1. praefat.
son by institution, but now his father in administration of the Church. To
conclude; the inequality of all other Bishopps, is by humane law, the Popes
superiority is by divine right. Other bishopps are equal unto him in respect
of their ORDER; he is superior unto all, in respect of his IVRISDICTION. I
proceed.

8. Compare this severe judgment of D. Fields WORTHY GVIDE with the violent
opinion of M. Powells GREAT REFORMER, and behold as great difference therein,
as betwixt the light of the Sun, and Egyptian darkness. And that you may
conceive it fully, see, I pray you, the censorious temerity of Luther, as it is
represented by M. Powell (in the end of his inhumane De Antichr. page 68.
compellation unto the Jesuits) in this manner.

S. LVTHERVS. Non potest is salutem consequi, qui non ex toto cord
Antichristum [ T^CE^To SCIO Papam esse magnu^ diu^ Antichristum, quam D^u^
ips^m esse^m coelis etc. M. Powells protestation in the first leaf in his
book.
Papam] and Papatum oderit. I Will not ask M. Powell by what authority he has
canonized Martin Luther, for I know, that he has a warrant from (z) Luther
himself, saying, Iam, by the grace of God one of the TRVE SAINTS. Wherefore as
the Athenians made a decree, Quoniam Alexander vult esse Deus, es^o; so since
Luther will be a Saint, let him be so, by my consent.

9. But now, for the correspondency betwixt Gerson, and Luther (the second
effectuating that, which the first desired, if you will believe D. Field) in
their Reformations, consider, I beseech you, the resembla^ce, and similitude of
these things. He that rejects the Pope, shall not be saved, says the one; He
that does not hate him, and the Popedom with his whole heart, shall not be
saved, says the other. Thus they damn themselves mutually in a capital
point, and exclude each other from the possibility of salvation. And, if M.
Powells judgment be of any value, I may undoubtedly pronounce, that Gerson is
damned unto the nethermost hell. For the truest formality, and essence of a
PAPIST is his union, and conjunction with the Pope; Whence it follows, by de
Antich. page 453.
M. Powells rule [No man dying a Papist, that is to say, truly, and formally a
member of the Papacy, or Popish Church, did ever obtayn the kingdom of heaven,
or escape hell] that Gerson living, and dying a true, formal Papist, could not
be made partaker of Luthers beatitude in the number of the SAINTS. What? And
yet has Luther accomplished that Reformation, which Gerson did expect?

-- risum teneatis amici? 10. I will knitt up this matter with the counsel of
part. 1. de Eupt. ^hri^^, and Ecclesiae.
Gerson, which he prescribes unto the spouse of Christ, saying; The Church
must entreat the Pope (the vicegerent of Christ in the holy Ghost is Vicarius
Christi by spiritual influence, etc.
external administration) with all honor, and call him FATHER; for he is her
Lord, and Head. We may not expose him unto detractions etc. And hence it is,
that he makes his protestation; Nolo de Sanctissimo Domino nostre, and Christo
Domini, velut os in coelum ponendo, loqui; I will not speak of our most holy
Lord, and the Lords anointed, as it were by setting my face against heaven. But
did the Cham of Saxony thus demean himself toward his spiritual Father? No;
but setting his face against heaven, he uttered the words of blasphemy, and
intolerable reproach against all dignity (withstanding his violence) Papal,
Imperial, and Regal. And thus he discovered himself to be guided by the
Spirit of AERIVS, concerning whom it is Epipha^. haeres. 75.
reported, that ipsi sermo furiosus magis, quam erat humana conditionis. Does
not page 64.
D. Field also approximate unto them both? We have not received (says he) the
mark of this Antichrist [the Pope] and child of perdition in our foreheads,
nor sworn to take the foame of his impure mouth, and froth of his words of
blasphemy. Truly you never learned this tempestuous language from your worthy
guide, but from your great Reformer.

11. I have insisted long in the particular evidences; Wherefore I will deal
more briefly in the GENERAL, two ensuing.

12. The FIRST concerns the infallibility of the Roman Church, A QVA
CERTITVDO FIDEI PETENDA EST (says Part. 1. Sermon. coram Alexandro Papa 5.
Gerson) from whence we must receive the certainty of our faith. From thence we
Englishmen received our faith, by the vigilance of S. GREGORY, the glorious
Pope of blessed memory for ever. From thence the Britannes received their faith
(in their second conversion) by the fatherly provision of Eleutherius, a
renowned Martyr. From thence the Indians, and sundry people, who sat in
darkness, and shadow of death, have lately received the abundant light of
the gospel. Mean while, the Protestants disseminate See Tertull. praescript.
cap. 42. Old heretics followed the same course as Protestants now do.
heresy at home, and revile them, who plant the Catholic religion abroad.

12. Now for this particular assertion, delivered here by the worthy guide of
Gods Church, I will remitt me unto the consideration of the discreet, and
ingenious Reader, to take a resolution from his own heart, whether Gerson, or
any man (who maintayneth the same principle with him) can tolerate the
Protestanticall Reformation, which is reared up against the faith of the Roman
Church, and founded in the ruins thereof.

14. The SEGOND general evidence is yet more potent, and effectual then the
rest; for it shall now sensibly appear unto you, that Gerson damned your
articles, and detested the truest Progenitors of your gospel. Observe
therefore a memorable protestation of this worthy guide. Part. 3. dialog.
Apoget. de Council. Constant.
The Council of Constance was celebrated especially for the extirpation of
Protestants Religion.
heresies, and errors; which was attempted first, by imprisoning the
offenders, and by committing some of them [ Husse, and Jerome of Prage] unto
the fire. The Bohemians exhibited 45. errors of WICKLIFFE unto the Council;
the English men brought in more then 200. For the condemnation whereof, I was
as zealous, as any other, and preached publicly [in Constance] to this effect.

15. Here you may perceive that Gerson had an eminent part in condemning the
articles of John Wickliffe (the first, and principal Saint in Fox his
Calendar) and that (in all probability) he gave his furtherance to the just,
and necessary execution of the said Bohemian Martyrs. Which proceeding against
rebellious, and insolent persons, the Protestants do continually exagitate with
infinite calumniations. But I will confine my self unto D. Field, and unto his
Reformer. The FIRST speaks in this manner. Page 76.
We acknowledge Wickliffe, Husse, Hierome of Prage, and the like, who with
great magnanimity opposed themselves against the Tyranny of the Sea of Rome,
and the impiety of those, who withheld the truth of God in unrighteousness,
who being named Christians served Antichrist (as Sermon. 33.
Bernard complained of some in his time) to have been the worthy servants of
God, and holy Martyrs, and Confessors, suffering in the cause of Christ
against Antichrist. The SECOND (in a certain epistle to the Earl of Passun,
Tom. 2.
prefixed before his Satyricall script against King Henry the eight) thundreth
out this terrible denunciation: Homicidae and Antichristi Papitta Ioannem
Hussium innocentem virum exusserunt, ipsi septies heretici: The Papists, being
homicides and Antichrists, burned that innocent man John Husse; but they were
seven times heretics themselves.

16. Compare these things together, and judge indifferently in this case.
Gerson was a worthy guide of Gods Church; There is no better proof of the
goodness of our cause, then that our Reformation, was long since desired by
him etc. And yet, this Worthy Guide was 7. times an heretic; yea a Patron of
the Antichristian cause; a sworn enemy of Husse, and Wickliffe, the most
illustrious Saints in the petigree of the Reformed Church. Is there any sense
in these devises, or is there any conscience in the Authors? Woe be unto them,
whose souls are pinned upon their sleeves; and most unhappy men, that tread in
their deceiptfull steps.

17. I might proceed now to unfold sundry falsehoods, and artificial tricks in
the 4. precedent. 1. number, 3. etc.
passadges; but before I dismiss this last assertion of D. Field, I may not
forgett, how subtly he conuaigheth a sentence of S. Bernard into the same,
whereby the matter should seem more odious against the Papists, forasmuch as
Wickliffe, Husse, and others, opposed themselves against the impiety of those,
who withheld the truth of God in unrighteousness, and being named Christians
served Antichrist, even by the verdict of S. Bernard himself.

18. But how fraudulently the learned Doctor has demeaned himself in this
suggestion, I remitt me unto the conscience of all indifferent Readers, to
determine thereof in their private cogitations. For, it may please you to
consider, that the purpose, and intention of S. Bernard in that place, is, to
reprehend, and to censure the evil manners, which reigned generally in the
Church. What verdict Luther has passed upon the general impiety of his new
Ghospellers, see Just. Calvin. In Apolog. Page 115.
She has been afflicted (says he) by the cruel persecution of the HEATHEN,
and molested by the perverse opinions of HERETICS. The first affliction was
repelled by the patience of the Martyrs; the second, by the wisdom of the
Saints. And though the Church be now delivered from both, yet Esaias. 38.
ecce in pace amaritudo mea amarissima, may she say; behold, in peace is my
bitterness most bitter. It was bitter before, in the death of Martyrs; then it
was more bitter in the conflict of heretics; but now it is most bitter in the
manners of her own household. She has peace from heathen, and peace from
heretics, but not from her own children. For now the wickedness of men is so
great, that as for the abundance of it, they can not, so for their impudency,
they care not to conceal the turpitude of their life. Hence it is, that
lamenting their dissolute conversation (even in the integrity of the faith) he
breaks forth into this complaynt; All are her friends, and all are her
enemies: all are her allies, and all are her adversaries: all are her
domestics, and none are peacemakers: all are nere unto her, and yet all seek
their own: the D. Field translateth it, named Christians. But S. Bernard
speaks of true Catholics in religion.
ministers of Christ, serve * ANTICHRIST. Honorati incedunt de bonis domini,
qui domino honorem non deferunt etc.

19. * What similitude now is there, I pray you, betwixt S. Bernard, and
Wickliffe in their desires? S. Bernard extolleth the Religion, which
Wickliffe destroyed; S. Bernards complaynt extends merely unto the evil
manners of men; Wickliffe impugned the good faith of the Church. Wickliffe
made war against her peace, which she had from heretics; S. Bernard grieved
to behold the molestation, which she suffered from her own children. Who? the
Pope? He knows not S. Bernard, that dares impute this opinion unto him.
What should I say more? Does not every man sufficiently understand, that the
opposition betwixt S. Bernard, and Wickliffe is very great, and founded in
many differences, which admit no reconciliation? To conclude; I say briefly;
Wickliffe was so far from conspiring with S. Bernard, that he has pronounced
an heavy judgment against him, Council. Constant. Sess. 8. Artic. Wickliff. 44.
saying; Augustine, Bennet, and BERNARD are damned (unless they repented)
because they had possessions, and because they instituted, and entered into
religious orders, etc. Truly if this were a sufficient reason to condemn S.
Bernard with such severity, how much rather may Wickliffe give his censure
against him, in respect of all those doctrines, which seemed Antichristian, and
damnable in his sight? But of his intemperate humor, you shall. 3. number. 14.
etc.
receive presently more copious information.

20. The thing, which I now offer unto your consideration, and which I do most
earnestly beseech you to ponderate in your religious heart, is, the falsehood,
the inflexions, the pretenses, and subtilities, which this learned Doctor does
mingle in his discourse; being a very labyrinth, and maze, of intricate, and
perplexed paths: a dark oracle of uncertain resolutions; whereby the simple,
and credulous Reader is carried into an obscure, and mysty confusion; not
knowing how he may find any secure, and infallible ground, to rest his thoughts
therein, with sweet, and comfortable peace.

. 3. A reflection upon the 4 passadges of D. Field, cited in the first. of this
Chapter. A detection of sundry untruths, and vanities wilfully committed by him
in the same.
1. SInce it is most perspicuous, and evident by the premises, that the
Reformation of Luther must necessarily be odious, and execrable unto Gerson, or
unto any man imbued with the principles of his Catholic Religion, I will
reflect upon the former 4. See before; page 1. 2. 3.
passadges of D. Field, and discover his futility therein, as briefly, as the
matter it self (being of such consequence) can permit.

2. In the FIRST passadge, you may observe 4. remarqueable points; in all
which, the Doctors craft redoundeth unto his own loss.

1. First; he says, that Gerson reports sundry lewd assertions prejudicial
to the states of Kings, and Princes, which the Council of Constance could not
be induced to condemn, etc. And hereupon he protests, that he has no hope
of a Reformation by a Council.

2. Secondly; he says, that THEY made no stay to condemn the positions of
Wickliffe, and Husse.

3. Thirdly; he says, that they condemned the positions of Wickliffe, and
Husse, seeming to derogate from the state of the Clergy.

4. Fourthly, he says, that they condemned the said positions, though many of
them might carry, a good, and Catholic sense, if they might have found a
favorable construction. 3. In all these propositions, there is nothing else but
subtility, and circumuention, as you shall perceive by these particulars
ensuing, which I observed long since, and will now communicate unto you, for
your instruction, because I know, that your good nature is much abused by these
pretenses, unto the eminent perdition of your soul.

4. Concerning the FIRST, you must understand, that amongst many scandalous,
and erroneus assertions (as well in faith, as in manners) his was presented
unto the Council of Constance, viz. Every tyrant, may, and ought to be
lawfully, Sess. 15.
and meriteriously slain by any of his vassalls, or subjects, by deceit, and
flattery, or adulation; Notwithstanding any oath, or co^federation made with
him; and without expectation of sentence, or mandate from any judge whatsoever.
This assertion was condemned by the Council, as heretical; and In the place
cited by D. Field.
Gerson himself sets down the Counsels definition touching this matter,
wishing more over, that it had been prosecuted more particularly, for the
better satisfaction of himself, and others, who did instantly desire the same.
Then he goes farther, co^playning of the perverse humors, which reigned in
some men to the disturbation of the tranquillity of the Church.

5. But what aduantadge can D. Field gayn from Gersons improbation of the
aforesaid lewd assertions, prejudicial to the states of Kings, and Princes?
etc. Why does he press the authority of Gerson, whose medicine he knows to
be very sharp against the disease of all such Princes, as by the infection of
heretics, are seduced from the integrity of the Catholic faith? I take no
pleasure in the mention thereof: for I am, and shall be careful in all things,
to decline the exasperation of the State. But now in this case, when by
sinister, and intolerable deprauations, D. Field will thus endeavor to extort
a patronadge for his cause, by wresting Catholic authors out of the
Catholics hands, and by clayming interest in GERSON, and others, who hated our
Reformation, even with a perfect hatred; this injury can not be repelled, nor
this collusion displayed, without a simple, and sincere narration of their
judgments. Wherefore as S. Paul makes a good plea for his imprudency (as he
censured himself) saying; vet me coegistis, 2. Cor. 12.
you have compelled me unto it: so I doubt not but mine offense (if it be any)
shall be excused, and mitigated, since it proceeds from that defense, which
does ineuitably force me unto the same.

6. Behold now the assertion, and monition of this WORTHY GVIDE. Part. 4.
Decom Considerat. co^tra adulatores Principum.
Every Christian King, and Prince must take heed before all things, least that
by evil information, or by any other means, he fall into errors, repugnant
unto our holy faith, and wholesome doctrine; that he may justify himself in all
his doings, and that he may appear wise, howsoever he be a great sinner by
humane frailety. For there is no sin (that he can committ) which makes any
King, or Prince so displeasing unto God, and so infamous unto the world, even
unto persecution by fire, and sword, etc. And to this end, the laws
Ecclesiastical, and civil do conduce.

7. I leave it unto the conscience of all Readers to intertayn such a conceit
of these things, as their own discretion shall suggest; and so I proceed unto
a farther, and more weighty consideration.

8. If the Reformation, which Gerson wished, did consist only, or principally,
or at all, in the redress of sundry lewd assertions, prejudicial to the state
of Kings, and Princes etc. then it is most certain, that the Protestants have
not effectuated his desire. For their positions are execrable, and their
practices are odious in this kind, as their own seditious writings, and as the
perturbations of many common wealths do testify by a bitter, and woeful
experience: and for a copious illustration of this point, I remitt you unto the
learned Of P. R. against Tho. Morton page 38. 39. etc. page 122, 123. etc.
Treatise tending to Mitigation, where this matter is excellently discussed.

8. Notwithstanding, least I should be too injurious unto myself by passing
over this matter wholly in silence, I will acquaynt you with some observations,
which, as I conceive, are of very special importance. For, I beseech you, who
are the most eminent progenitors of your ghospel? Are not Wickliffe, and
after him, Husse, and after him Luther, and then Zuinglius, and finally Calvin?
Are not they the chief instruments (as you esteem them) of God, raised by him
for the purgation of the Church?

9. The opinions of Wickliffe herein are most desperate: See Council. Constant.
Sess. 8. Artic. Wickliffe, 15. 17.
namely: No man is a Bishopp, or Prelate, or temporal Lord, while he is in
mortal sin. Again. The people may, at their own arbitrament, correct their
Lords, when they offend. These are lewd assertions indeed, and these were
condemned by the Church. Hence issued rebellions, and insurrections, hence
treason, and complotments of seditious people against their sovereign Prince,
See Stow; in Henry 5.
as the tumultuations of Sir John Oldcastle, and others may witness unto us.

11. As for John Husse, I need not say much of him: VVickleffi discipulum
possis agnoscere: such pernicious doctrines as he sucked out of Wickliffe, he
propounded unto the people; and hence came the miserable euisceration of the
Bohemian state. I come therefore unto Luther, whose bloody, and barbarous heart
was the center, whence treasons, wars, and plentiful effusion of blood, in
later years, has proceeded to the vnrecompensable damage of the Christian
world. Will you know the reason, why the Protestants rebelled against CHARLES
the fifth, a Prince of sweet, and amiable disposition? John Sleydan shall yeald
it unto you in these words. Quia Caesar religioni [viz. Comme^tar. l. 18.
Lutheranae] eiusque libertati moliebatur exitium, causam prabebat, cur ipsum
oppugnarent bona conscientia; they had just reason to oppugn Caesar with good
conscience, because he labored to extinguish the gospel, and to hinder the
liberty thereof. In Galat. c. 5. v. 12.
Will you know the resolution of Luther himself? Benedictus dies, in quo ista
videre licet, etc. Blessed is the day, wherein we may see wars, seditions,
tumults, which have followed upon my doctrine. To conclude; admire, with me,
the fury, Tom. 1. page 364. b.
and insolency of his implacable spirit. Whereas, thou say (o Spalatine)
that my The Elector of Saxony.
Prince will not suffer me to write against the Archbishopp of Mentz, least
this might disturb the common peace, etc. quin te potius, and Principem ipsum
perdam, and omnem creaturam; which is such a raging speech, as if the Author
had been a Bear spoiled of her whelps.

11. But, was Zuinglius possessed with the same distemperature also? His
counsel was dangerous, but this words are smooth, Lib. 4. epist. fol. 186.
where he persuades the Ghospellers of Vlmes, and Memming to renounce their
obedience unto the Roman Empire, and to root the name thereof out of Germany,
to the uttermost of their ability, and power.

12. As for John Calvin, his expulsion of the Bishopp from his just authority,
temporal, and spiritual over the City of Geneua, may be an example for ever,
how peaceable the fifth Gospel is, which begins by craft, and goes on by
fury, to attayn unto its end, and purpose. The treasonable complotments in that
place, See P. R. Ibid.
the dangerous propositions, hatched, and allowed in that Sion (as some men
call it) are recognized for all ages.

13. Thus much, I have thought it expedient, to intimate unto you (though very
briefly) that you may not be any longer blinded by the golden, and fair
pretenses of them, who never cease to exclaim against the Papists, as me^
wholly imbued with lewd assertions, prejudicial unto their King, and country.
Finally therefore, upon due consideration of the premises, I doubt not, but you
will easily discern, how impertinent, and how empty the suggestion of D. Field
is in the first particular; and by this you may learn to be suspicious of the
rest, which now come orderly unto their several examination.

14. Concerning the SECOND particular, I say briefly, that though Master D.
Field would derive the hatred upon others, by concealing Gersons forwardness,
and alacrity in the condemnation of Wickliffe, Husse etc, and would lay it upon
those men in the Council, against whom Gerson takes his exceptions for other
things, yet (as you have already seen) this Worthy guide himself did provoke,
and instigate the Council against their heresies, and he did enkindle his
audience against the same, according to the place, which he sustained there,
and the gift wherewith he was endued. Now, is it not a maruaylous contradiction
(in your judgment) that Gerson should wish your Reformation, and be a worthy
guide of Gods Church, and yet, that Husse also should suffer in the cause of
Christ against Antichrist? Alas, good Sir; what certainty of truth can you
expect from them, who thus inuolue you, and themselves in such paradoxes, as
are impossible, and ridiculous even in the light of nature, and unto moral
reason?

15 Concerning the THIRD particular, I shall inform you of a double collusion,
which the learned Doctor has notoriously affected therein. First, he
extenua^eth the turbulent, and impious positions of, Wickliffe, and Husse,
saying, that they SEEMED to derogate from the Clergy etc. But if their
positions (of this nature) were now in force, D. Field, and all his Clergy
might wring their hands for woe, and lament the time, which brought forth such
monstrous opinions. As for example; It is against the holy Scripture, that
Ecclesiastical men should have possessions. Again. See Council. Constant. Se^^
8. in Artic. VVickl.
Temporal Lords may, at their pleasure, take away temporal goods from the
Church etc. Farther. Tithes are pure alms, and the parishioners, for the
sins of their prelates, may take them away as their will. To conclude. It is
against the rule of Christ, to enrich the Clergy. The Emperor, and secular
Lords were seduced by the Devil, Act. and Mo^. in the history of VVickl.
to endow the Church with temporal goods etc. What censure has John Fox
passed upon these exorbitant humors? Perhapps, says he, some blemishes may be
noted in his assertions. And, if he have blemishes etc. See the pitiful
cariadge of this man; for though the matters be most odious, and apparent, yet
he comes in with his mitigation, and hesitation to take away the infamy of
Wickliffe, which cleaves fast unto him, and unto his disciples, as the
leprosy unto Gehezai, and unto his posterity for ever. I will end therefore
with Melancthon, In Apolog. tit. de human tradit.
and say with him; plane furebat Wickliffus etc. Wickliffe was stark mad, when
he denied, that Priests might retayn any thing in proper unto themselves.

16. The second vanity of the Doctor (in the aforesaid particular) is a
singular demonstration of his unfaithful mind. For as he diminishes the folly
of Wickliffe in one point, so he concealeth his impiety in the rest, and would
make a simple Reader believe, that the positions of Wickliffe against the
Clergy, were the only, or principal matters, which drew some men in the
Council to proceed against him with greater malice, then reason.

17. But you may perceive by the Council. Constable. etc. Fox Act. and Mon. Powell
de Antichr. page 20. and others. Page 77.
Catalogue of Wickliffes opinions, that the points, wherein he dissented from
Gerson, as they are many so they are capital; yea such, as do necessarily
exclude one of them from the participation of heaven. Why do I name Gerson
only? I must enlardge my style, and say, that Wickliffe dissented therein
from the whole Christian world. For whereas D. Field informs us out of
Gerson, that certain matters, concerning the Popes power, were defined in the
Council of Constance by the universal consent of the whole Christian world, I
may most justly assume the like in this case, concerning all the opinions of
Wickliffe, either embraced, or renounced by your Church. I might here take
good occasion to discuss many things, but the opportunity is not so
convenient; wherefore I will knitt up this point with a double consideration.
The first appertains unto the ingenious, and learned Academicks, whose
dignity, honor, and liuelyhood must suffer a necessary dissipation, if way
were given unto the fury of Wickliffe, and of his truest disciples. Council.
Constant. sess. 8. in artic. Wickl. 29.
Universities, studies, colleges, degrees, and maistershipps in the same, are
brought in by vayn Gentility, and they profitt the Church, as much as the
Devil himself.

18. This is the verdict of your dearest Father; and were they not your
brethren also, who affirmed, that the Papists buylt Seminaries to advance the
kingdom of the Devil? See D. Bancrofts Suruay. page 232.
Let other men conceive, as they see cause; for mine own part I am resolved
with confidence, that they, and Wickliffe, did seek the ruin of the Church
by the inspiration of the Devil; and that the followers of their impiety,
shall be partakers of his pain; God grant you grace to hate the one, and so you
shall escape the other.

19. The second consideration is more important then the first. For though the
rivers of our late gospel are issued from VVickliffs fountayn, yet Melancthon
himself (no small Saint in John Fox his Calendar) shall testify, that there is
no correspondency betwixt him, and your Evangelical Churches, even in some
principal articles of your faith. Melancth. in ep. ad F^eder. Micon.
I have looked (says he) into Wickliffe, who behaueth himself very
tumultuously in this controversy [of the Lords supper] and more then this, I
have found many errors in him, by which a man may take judgment of his
spirit. It is certain, that he did neither hold, nor understand the justice of
faith: he does make a foolish confusion of the gospel, and temporal
affairs. He brawleth sophistically, and seditiously concerning the civil
Magistrate etc. These things being duly, and conscionably waighed, I see not
what aduantadge the Protestants can take from such a base, and unworthy
progenitou^ of their Religion. But whereas D. Field does artificially pretend
smaller things, and conceal the greater, you may see with what skill, and
subtility he labors to sustayn an evil cause, which can admit no competent
defense.

20. Concerning the FOVRTH particular, I will not say much; though in this also
the Doctor has used a very cunning deprauation. For, as before he laid the
condemnation of Husse, and VVickliff upon other persons (but not upon Gerson)
and alleges no other reason thereof, but only his positions against the
Clergy, so now he adds farther (as a parcel of Gersons continuate discourse
in the same in dialog. apologetic.
place) that many of those positions might carry a good, and Catholic sense,
if they might have found a favorable construction.

21. Good Reader have a little patience in thy admiration of this faithless
dealing; for I assure thee, that Gerson, in all that discourse, has not one
syllable directly, or indirectly sounding, unto this purpose; neither does the
learned Doctor insinuate unto us, whence he took, or where we may find that
extenuation of VVickliffs crime. Howbeit, perusing the works of Gerson almost
from the a to the o thereof ( D. Fields maruaylous suggestions inuiting me
first unto that happy labor) I Part. 1. Sermon. pro Vi^gio Regis Romsecund^
part principali directione 3.
found this assertion delivered by him; viz. A general Council may condemn
many propositions, with their authors, though they may have some glosses, or
expositions, or true logical senses. This rule was practiced by this Council
in many articles of Wickliffe, and Husse, some whereof might receive some
defense either by the force of logic, or grammar etc. But the Council did
carefully attend that speech of Hilary saying; intelligentia dictorum ex causis
est assumenda dicendi etc. and that of Augustine, saying; Theologis ad certam
regulam loqui fas est etc.

22. I remitt you unto the author, for the rest, only I will now entreat you
to consider these three points. First; the Doctors craft in conuaighing those
things into one sentence, which are dispersed in sundry places; and thus he
intangleth his Reader with perplexed, and obscure devices. Secondly; he
pretends, that the positions of Wickliffe (which might bear a Catholic
sense by a favorable construction) were such, as seemed to derogate from the
state of the Clergy. But as Gerson gives no signification thereof by any one
instance, so it is evident, that those positions, can not possibly receive a
favorable construction to yeald any Catholic sense; as you may judge by your
own wisdom, and discretion; and for a just experiment hereof, I report me
unto the number. 15.
precedents. Thirdly, and lastly; you see, that though D. Field would
exaggerate the severity of the Council herein, forasmuch as, it did not
condescend unto a favorable interpretation etc. ye^ Gerson himself (whom he
would seem to follow in this matter) does approve the Counsels prudency and
he prescribes it as a direction also in the like cases. And thus (gentle
Readers) I have compe^diously noted forth unto you many frauds, and
corruptions of this Doctor in his FIRST passadge; the farther prosecution
whereof I leave unto your wise, and religious hearts, nor doubting, but that
you will remember my advise, for your souls health; TRY BEFORE YOU TRUST.

23. I come now unto his Appendix only at this time, and therefore I shall be
enforced to contract my self, and to draw my discourse into a narrow compass.

24. You must remember that in this passadge, the Doctor has found a means,
how the disgrace of that hostility, which reigns betwixt the Lutheran, and
Caluinian factions, may be derived upon the Papists: yea this diversity (says
he) is to be imputed wholly unto them, because a Reformation was to be effected
in the Church, and the faction of the Popes flatterers being an impediment
thereunto, so that it could not be done in a general Council (as Part 3. in
dialog. apologetic.
Gerson foresaw out of his experience) it was necessarily to be assayed in the
particular kingdoms of the world. Whence some diversity could not but ensue,
while one knew not, nor expected to know what an other did.

25. That Gerson did earnestly desire a Reformation, his own testimony will
euince. I see (says ibid in fine.
he) that the Reformation of the Church will never be made by a Council,
without the presidency of a well affected Guide, wise, and constant. Let the
members therefore provide for themselves throughout all kingdoms, and
provinces, when they shall be able, and know how to compass this work. Here D.
Field triumphs, See before. 1. number. 4. etc.
applying this counsel of Gerson unto the tumultuations of Luther, and
Zwinglius and such disastrous Reformers. But with what conscience, with what
honesty, with what respect of God, or man, could D. Field thus deprave the
intention of Gerson, and thus obscure the light of the truth, and thus abuse
the credulity of his Reader? For does not Gerson, in the words immediately
subsequent, most abundantly demonstrate, that there is no proportion, nor
conformity betwixt his desire, and their fact? Compare therefore their
proceedings with his prescrition, and the difference will soon appear. They
must atchieue this Reformation (says he) not by multiplying new constitutions
(which is rather an hinderance, then an aduantadge) but by a lively, and
couradgious execution of the laws al ready made in great plenty; the
superuacaneous being either cut of or quite omitted.

26. I must entreat you now to consider the resemblance betwixt Gerson, and
Luther in this issue, The first refers us unto the provision of the laws;
but what laws did the second follow in his disordered innouations? The first
requires an execution of the Ecclesiastical decrees; but what decrees were
then enacted by the Church, to regulate such exorbitancies, as were incurred by
the second? What Counsels, what constitutions, what sanctions did he, or could
he propose unto himself? Wherefore since Gersons laws are such, as ^end unto
the castigation, and suppression of VVickliffians, Hussites, and all other
sectaries proseminated from such fathers, it follows clearly that Luther
has performed the contrary unto his designement, and, consequently, that D.
Field has delivered a vast untruth, not only unto his own just
disreputation, but unto the certain evident, inevitable ruin, and subversion
of his Church.

27. Here also the wise, and ingenious Reader may observe the great disparicy
betwixt the Catholics, and Protestants in their courses. The first prooceed in
legitimate manner against the second, by virtue of Canonical, and
Ecclesiastical process. The second proceed against the first by laws
temporal, and by Parliamentary decrees. The first proceed against the second
directly, and without circuitions, as guilty of schism, and heresy; and to
this effect they bring forth the ancient, and the modern constitutions of
sacred Counsels, Oecumenicall, National, Provincial etc. The second proceed
against the first really, and merely for their Religion it self, but under the
name of treason, and disobedience, and such like pretenses. Which preposterous
order of unjust justice does irrefutably convince the Protestants of heresy,
and impiety against the Catholic faith. For, does not every man (endued with
any measure of understanding) conceive, that the Church of God (the pillar of
truth) as it has, and must preserve the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, pure,
and immaculate from the contagion of heresy (or else there was no Catholic
Church; and then there is no Christ, no God, no hell, no heaven, no
immortality, no retribution) so it is, and was furnished, and strengthened with
proper laws for the due correction of heretics, and for the extirpation of
their errors? I say, that to suppose the contrary, it is a senseless
imagination; and to affirm the contrary, it were an Atheistical position.
Reflect now, I pray you, upon your own Congregation, she that has invested
her self with the glorious title of the CATHOLIC Church, Where are her ancient
Ecclesiastical laws, her Canons, her constitutions wherewith she is armed,
and assisted to proceed against the Papists, whose heresies you exclayme
against with violence, supporting your mighty accusations with slender proofs?
But I return unto the farther prosecution of D. Fields untruths; for these
things are manifest unto all men, and need not any copious explication.

28. Whereas it pleases the learned Doctor to say, that it was not possible,
but some diuersi^y should grow [betwixt Luther, Zwinglius etc] while one knew
not, what an other did, this excuse also is too short to cover the turpitude of
their dissensions. For you see, that the laws, which were of force in Gersons
time, had been an infallible rule to preserve conformity in their procedings,
if their intention had been suitable unto his prescription in this behalf. But
these immoderate Reformers, intertayning no such rule for their direction
(Word, and Spirit was the burden of their song) were necessarily distracted
in their actions, while they followed the variable illuminations of their
uncertain fancies.

29. Let me proceed yet a little farther, to consider the inordinate, and
distempered passion of these men. They rejected laws (as you see) because they
attempted a lawless action; and this is sufficiently proved unto you by the
grave authority of Gerson, a WORTHY GVIDE of Gods Church. Now also you may
behold their pride, temerity, and singular precipitation; for this shall be
proved unto you by D. Field himself, who has accused them by his own
defense, saying; one knew not, nor expected to know, what an other did. Why did
they not know? were they disterminated by sea and had they not means of
access each unto the other? Was there a great Luke 16.26.
chaos betwixt them, so that they could not have passadge, and transmeation
from Zu^ick unto Wittemberg, and from Wittenberg unto Zurick? No man, be he of
mean capacity, will suffer himself to be abused with this pretense.

30. But, did they not expect to know, what an other did? It is an argument of
their folly, and insolency, who in a matter of such consequence, (as from the
first plantation of Christianity, can admit no example to parallele it by
innumerable degrees) would not consult, nor retayn familiar intercourse in so
important affairs.

31. I must now address my self unto the plain narration of this matter,
wherein the learned Doctor has trifled with you all this while, and concealed
the truth from your knowledge by his false, paradoxicall, and impertinent
sugestions. For you must understand, that all Sacramentaries (in which number
you are) fell away from Luther, and departed from the communion of his Church.
Do you require my proof? The demonstrations are many, and irrefragable; but I
will content my self with the protestations of them, whose authority is free
from all exceptions. Let Bull^nger know (says Recognit. propheticae, and
Apostolica doctrinae etc. page 10.
Brentius; a venerable old man in M. Jewels verdict) that from the beginning,
since the Zwinglians departed from us (that is to say, from the true doctrine)
I was not a clandestine, but an open adversary of their impious opinion
concerning the supper of the Lord etc.

32. What need I drink of the rivers, when the fountayn it self is so near at
hand? Behold therefore the constant asseueration of M. LVTHER, the third Eliah,
the Germayn Prophet, a true Evangelist, a singular Apostle, the great Reformer,
the man of God, the flying Angel, etc. (for this, and much more is spoken of
him by your ghospellers) who Tom. 3. in Genes. cap. 41.
says, that, now the refined doctrine of the gospel has gained many, who
where oppressed by the tyrany of Antichrist; but yet withal the Anabaptists
the Sea before; page 6.
SACRAMENTARIES, and other fanaticall men are gone out from us etc. They were
not of us, though for a time they were with us, they sought their own glory,
and estimation.

33. Again. There is no wickedness (says Tom. 2.345.
he) not cruelty, which Zwinglius lays not unto my chardge, so that the
Papists, mine enemies, do not tear me, as those my friends, who without us,
and before us, were nothing, and durst not stir one jot; but now being puffed
up with our victory, they turn their force against us. These perturbations in
the gospel (which he began, and preached alone, without any copartner; as
See Iustus Caluinus, in apolog. page 78
himself does often witness) did work great affliction, and vexation within
his bones, yea they did excruciate, and torment his soul (as See locos com.
Luth. part. 5. page 36.
he complayneth) even unto the extreme danger of his faith. Howbeit, resumpsi
animum, and dixi etc. I took couradge again, and said; these things are done
without my fault; therefore let the authors vex themselves, and not I. Verily
I will attempt, by all means possible, to cure these evils; but if I can not
do it, yet I will not be consumed with grief. If one Munzer, one Carolostadius,
one ZWINGLIVS be not sufficient for the Devil, excitet plures, Zwinglius was
raised by the Devil to afflict the Church.
let him raise up more.

34. This is the perpetual style of Luther against the Sacramentaries, whom he
damneth unto the lake of fire, and brimstome; as obstinate, and malicious
heretics, fallen away from his Church by apostaticall defection. And here you
may see how the nature of heresy is always variable, and uncertain, as
Tertullian observed long ago; Praescript. c. 4^.
saying; Heretics differ amongst themselves, while the scholar does modulate,
at his pleasure, that which he received, as the Master did compose, at his
pleasure, that which he delivered. The progress of the thing does acknowledge
the condition of it, and the manner of its beginning. The Valentinians, and
Mart^onites may chandge their faith at their own arbitrament, as well as
Valentine, and Marcion themselves. Denique penitus inspectae haereses omnes in
multis cum authoribus suis dissentientes deprehenduntur etc.

35. Thus I have truly discovered unto you the deportment of your pretensed
Reformers: the crime, and cause of whose implacable dissentions, D. Field would
unconscionably derive upon the Papists, by abusing the authority of Gerson;
whereas it is most evident, that these men sought not the end, at which Gerson
aimed, nor followed the means, which he prescribed; but as Luther did
boysterously impugn the Catholic Church, so Zwinglius, and all the troop of
Sacramentaries fell away seditiously, and factiously from his society, and
communion. And so much concerning the SECOND passadge.

36. In the Gerson, Grosthead etc. 3. Reg. 2.2^.
were of the TRVE CHVRCH. But here I may say of D. Field, as Solomon pronounced
of Adoniah, his brother; contra animam suam locutus est Adonias verbum hoc;
against his life, and the life of his Church has D. Field spoken this word.
For, was not Gerson, and likewise Grosthead, a member really, and essentially
of the Roman, or POPISH Church? The precedents may testify for the first, and
the. 4.
sequel shall witness for the second: wherefore I must infer necessarily,
that the Popish Church was the TRVE CHVRCH in their time; and that it is so at
this day, because it still continues the same, Finally; as Wickliffe, Husse
etc. were not of the true Church, because they were not of the same Church with
GERSON; so the Protestants are not members of the true Church, because they are
excluded from the society of the Church of Rome, which is the Sea S. Cyprian l.
4. ep. 8.
root, and mother of the Catholic Church. For, in that See, se^per
Apostolicae cathedrae viguit principatus, as epist. 162.
S. Augustine himself does witness.

37. A second point i^ this. Gerson, Grosthead etc. gave testimony unto the
work, which WE have done. What we? LVTHER, and ZWINGLIVS? You know that the
SACRAMENTARIES are exiled out of the fellowshippe of Luthers Church. contra
artic. Louan. thesi 27.
Censemus serio etc. We think seriously (says Luther) that all Zwinglians, and
Sacramentaries are heretics, and aliens from the Church of God. Which severe,
and true sentence of the great Apostle himself, a Synod of Lutherans has
established by a solemn decree; Epitome Colloq. Maulbrunae. Anno 1564. page 82.
viz. Zwinglianis nullum locu^ in Ecelesia concedimus etc. we grant the
Zwinglians no place in the Church. To what purpose then serves this particle
of extension, WE have done etc? But I will admit, that you, and the Lutherans
are of one Church: howbeit I must absolutely, and confidently deny, that you,
or they, or both have the testimony of GERSON for the approbation of your
work; and this is so copiously declared already, that I need not allege new
proofs, no^ reinforce the old.

38. Thirdly, it pleases M. Doctor to advance Gerson, Grosthead etc. with the
resplendent title of BEST men that lived in the corrupt state of the Church.
Truly they were so good, that Luther (your great Reformer) was dirt and dongue
(to speak of him in See before; page 146
his own phrases) in comparison of their excellent demeanure; and they shined
as gold, in respect of his ignoble conversation. And yet was he (sweet Saint)
peculiarly inspired above them all?

39. I am weary (and, I fear, troublesome unto you also) in the prosecution of
these lamentable devices: but I am now unto some farther issue.

40. In this passadge there are 2 points, which do specially require your very
deliberate ponderation. FIRST; you shall there find, that Cameracensis, Picus,
Sauanarola and GERSON (he is the principal man) and innumerable others (for so
the learned Doctor amplifieth his vanities) were the WORTHY GVIDES OF
therefore the Protestants Church is not Gods Church.
GODS CHVRCH. But what Church, I pray you, did they guide, administer, and
direct? That Church, whereof the Protestants are members? No; for they detested
your opinions. That, whereof the Papists are members? Yea; for they were
firmly united unto the Church of Rome, and unto the Pastor of that See; and
therefore heretics, and proud Romanists, and Antichristian Vassals, sworn to
take the foames of the child of perdition, and Vassals of the man of sin,
etc. all which hobgoblin-termes the Doctor has congested upon such men, as
now retayn the very same faith, which Gerson constantly professed, and are
knitt unto that Church, which he humbly obayed. And yet is a Gerson also a
WORTHY GVIDE OF GODS CHVRCH? You may remember, that D. Field, (and hi^ Church)
does willingly admit a trial of your cause by the testimony of the Fathers.
See before; book 1. Part. 1 chap 2. 1. number. 4. etc.
Do you admire that venditation, and wonder at that assertion, when Gerson
himself shall be made a worthy guide of the Church etc? I leave it unto your
ingenuity, and wisdom (since it does import your eternity) to consider, what
truth, what solidity, what assurance you, or I, or any other may expect at
these men's hands, for the information of our understandings, the satisfaction
of our doubts, the direction of our souls in the way of secure, and certain
peace.

41. The SECOND particular is this. It appears by that, which we have already
delivered touching that matter, how nothing is done in our Reformation, which
these men [ Gerson, Grosthead etc.] long before thought not necessary to be
done. But where is that delivered, and how does that appear? I know that the
Doctor has pitifully mangled some sentences, and notably depraved the
intention of GERSON, throughout 2 whole 10. and ^^.
chapters going immediately before; as you shall perceive by this example,
which has more show of probability on his side, and is of more importance,
then all the rest. His words are they. page 83.
Touching the second cause of the Churches ruin (which is, the ambition,
pride, and covetousness of the Bishopps, and Court of Rome) Part. 1. in 4
co^siderat. post Tract. de Vnitate Ecclesiastical.
Gerson boldly affirms, that whereas the Bishopps of Rome, challendging the
greatest place in the Church, should have sought the good of Gods people, they
contrarily sought only to advance themselves; in imitation of Lucifer they
will be adored, and worshipped as Gods. Neither do they think themselves
subject to any, but are as the sons of Beliall, that have cast off the yoke;
not enduring, whatsoever they do, that any should ask them, why they do so.
They neither fear God, not reverence men.

42. What credulous, and ignorant Reader, may not be entangled by such sugared
speeches, so full of deadly poison? For first to deal with some of his words,
and then to come unto his matter; why does the Doctor produce Gerson boldly
affirming, that the Bishopps of Rome CHALLENGED the greatest place in the
Church? Does not Gerson say boldly, that the Bishopp of Rome is a Monarch in
the Church by divine right? Page 5.6.
See before; and deal impartially in this matter. Again; whereas it may seem
an odious imputation, and specially out of Gersons mouth, that the Bishopps of
Rome would be adored, and worshipped [which word M. Doctor supplieth out of
his own store, for exaggeration sake] as Gods, you may consider, that without
all question, Gerson does not reprove the exhibition of condign honor unto
the vicegerent of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ. For Part. 1. de Potestate
Ecclesiastica considerat. 11.
Gerson does freely agnize, that, in respect of the admirable power, which is
committed [by Christ] unto the Pope (as Pastor of the universal Church)
though he be most wicked [in person] yet [in respect of his place] he may be
called most holy [which assertion is extremely repugnant unto the temerarious
malice of John Husse, saying, that See Council. Constant. Sess. 12. in Artic.
Huss. 23.
the Pope may not be called most holy in respect of his office, for then the
Devil himself may be called holy also] and that he may be adored cultu duliae
even unto the kisses of his feet; and so in other honors. Which humble
deiection will hardly agree, as I conceive, with the proud Spirit of Luther,
Zuinglius, or their compeeres.

43. I pretermitt my just exception against some words (whence the Doctor
sucketh no small aduantadge) and come unto the purport of the matter it self,
wherein you may behold his general obliquity, and deceit. Far^ was it from
Gersons heart to impayr the dignity of our Lords anointed (as See before; page
8.
himself speaks) and to scandalize the Apostolical See; much less did he
intend to yeald the least defense unto any man of VVickliffs race. But you may
be pleased to understand, that the Catholic Church had suffered much
diuexation in his time by the pernicious schism of Antipopes (the Sea Gerso^ a
little before, in his treatise Quot schif mata, etc.
two, and twentieth schism of that kind) by whom a great distraction ensued
among Christians, as he does bitterly complayn. To extirpate this evil a
Council was indicted at Pisa, and thither the prelates of the Church flowed in
great abundance. Wherefore this worthy guide of Gods Church (and severe enemy
of all VVickliffian heretics) laid down certain weighty considerations for
the direction of so important a business; See the place cited by D. Field.
number. 41.
in the number whereof is this particular ensuing. The unity of the Church (now
to be procured in the Council of Pisa) unto one certain VICAR of Christ, ought
to rest more solidly upon the sentences, and deliberations of the Council and
of the wise men, that will repayr thither (yea though they offer no evident
reasons) then upon the allegations, and assertions, or excusations, or
iustifications either of them, who now contend about the Papacy, or of any
their abettours. This consideration is easily deduced from hence; viz. that the
mean of virtue is to be accepted, as a wise man shall judge thereof, and as a
spiritual man, who discerns all things, shall say, but not as a carnal man,
who favors not the thing, that are of God, shall feign unto himself. For,
who will doubt (when more causes concur in their behalf, who shall assemble
together in the Council) but that such as employ their diligence to make union
in the Church, should be credited, rather then The Antipopes.
they, woe strive to possess that presidency, which they already obtayn? ^orthe
too much, and carnal love of a man unto himself, and unto his necessaries, is
it not wont to deceive, and to carry into impious errors, even unto the
imitation of Lucifer, that they would be adored as Gods, and repute not
themselves subject unto any man (as sons of Beliall without an yoke) and
that no man may say unto them, Why do thou so? They fear not God, nor
reverence man, whereas they ought to be more humble, and more prompt to serve
in the office of their prelacy, by how much they see themselves more obliged to
render their account.

44. Thus I have presented the matter completely unto your view, with the true
substance, and due circumstance thereof. I know that your excellent
apprehension will not suffer you to be transported by vayn pretenses against
the clear light of irresistable truth. Wherefore your prudency shall ease me
of farther pain in the explication of this thing.

45. Finally; to give a plenary satisfaction unto you, and others concerning
GERSONS opinions (generally) and your REFORMATION (the ruin of the Church
being masked in that glorious name) you must understand, that whereas he
reprooueth the ambition of some Popes, you have renounced the institution of
Christ. He accuses the exorbitancy of some disordered persons; you disclayme
the verity of the Catholic faith. He disprayseth the unlawful abuse of
things; you contemn their necessary use. He wished a remedy of some evils;
your remedy is worse then the evils themselves. He desired to euacuate the bad
humors; you have le^t forth the life-bloud of the Church. In stead of
conversion, we see subversion, in stead of reformation we behold deformation;
Church against Church; faith against faith; intestine conflicts with endless
strife. And whence is this? Because unity is necessarily dissolved, where all
the members are not conjoined unto one head; a mischief, which had never been
known, if Luther had applied Gersons See before; number. 25.
remedy in the curing of her sickness. To conclude therefore; there is a
resemblance betwixt Ioabs cruelty against the son of his Master, and Luthers
insolency against the Father of the Church. When Ioab pursued Absalom in his
rebellion, 2. Sam. 18, 5.
he had a chardge from David saying, Seruate mihi puerum Absalom etc. Save my
son Absalom, and the people heard the King, when he gave this commandment
unto his Princes; so Gerson did most strictly prescribe unto all men, that they
should not reveal heir Fathers nakedness, nor disleize him of his rightful
inheritance, (howsoever his evil manners might deserve a just reproof) nor
putt their hand to violate the sacred ordinance of Christ: and all the world
may take notice of this injunction. But as Ioabs sanguina^ious heart neither
respected the compassion of a father, nor the commandment of a master, to
Luther, in his insatiable fury, regarded not his Saviors institution, his
Churches safety, the judgment of Fathers, the decree of Counsels, but
trampled all their under his feet, and insulted against our Lords anointed
with diabolical contempt. Pardon me (good Sir) if I seem earnest against him,
who was so singularly opposite unto the worthy guides of Gods Church. I
remember that Sueton dividing the gests of Caligula into two parts, gives this
censure of him; that in the former, he had spoken tanquam de homine, as of a
man; but in the rest, be is to speak tanquam de monstro, as of a monster, and
of no man. Likewise, whenever I make mention of your other Reformers (as you
call them) I will speak of them all, as of men, participating humane nature
with me; but I cannot conceive a thought of Luther, which does not represent a
very monster unto my understanding: so unlike I find him in all his courses,
unto the worthy guides of Gods Church, and consequently your Reformation most
dissonant from the purity of their faith, and contrary unto their designements;
notwithstanding all the shadows, colors, and gloriations of D. Field.

. 4. The name, and authority of GROSTHEAD abused by D. Field to justify the
Lutheran (pretensed) Reformation.
1. IS not the gleaning of grapes of Ephraim better then the vintage of
Abiezer? Iudi^. 8.2*
Though D. Field has placed Gerson in the front of his battle against the
Papists, and se^te^h him forth in complete armor, as you have seem, yet a
principal, yea the greatest part of his victory may seem to depend upon
Grosthead, whose name is gracious unto us for country sake, and venerable also
in respect of that dignity, which he enjoyed in the Church. Wherefore a little,
a very little signification of his mind, warping toward this late, pretensed
Reformation, may justly prevail with us much more, then the profuse, and
copious discourses of other men not so much indeared unto us, as this worthy
guide of Gods Church: concerning whom you have received this instruction from
D. Field page 84.
When the Pope resolved to accurse, anathematize, and excommunicate GROSTHEAD,
the renowned B. of Lincoln, because he contemned his Papal Bulls, and
Letters (who was therefore, in his time, named Romanorum malleus, and
contemptor) the Cardinals opposed themselves saying, that he was a right good
man, and holier then any of them; that the things wherewith he chardged the
Pope, were most true, etc.

2. To deal with every particular in this artificial passadge, it requires
much pain, and the sum thereof would exceed that quantity, unto which I am
now co^fined. But I will direct my self first unto the mayn issue and then I
may draw you unto a consideration of the inferior points.

3. You know that the scope, and purpose of D. Field is to justify your
Reformation by the testimonies, and verdicts of Gerson, of Grosthead, of
Sauanarola, and the like. Now if this worthy guide of Gods Church were a true,
formal, essential Papist, I appeal unto your conscience, whether it be
probable, or possible, that he could wish, or tolerate the Reformation (of
Luth. Zuingl. etc.) which D. Field pretends to be conformable unto his
desire? To satisfy you in this matter unto the full, I pray you, (good Sir)
take notice, that a D. Godwyn in his catalogue of BB.
Bishopp of your own, has freed this worthy guide from all suspicion of
propending unto your reformed Church. For thus he writes. page 240.
The Pope having read the letters of Bishopp Grosthead grew into great choler,
and breathing out many threats, intended some terrible reuendge of this so
intolerable reproach (as he took it) until such time as one Giles, a
Cardinal of Spayn, stepping unto him, used these words: Holy Father; it shall
not do well, in my opinion, to take any hard, or extreme course against this
man; it is but too true that he has written; he is, for Religion, NOTA.
a CATHOLIC as well, as we, etc.

4. Here you may demand of your highly esteemed Doctor first; Whether the
Cardinals of Rome were not real members of the Antichristian Synagogue, and
whether, to be a Catholic AS WELL AS THEY, it be not (identically) as much as
to say, a proud Romanist, a factious Papist etc. terms much affected by
himself. You may demand of him secondly; Lutheran, or Zwinglian Reformation of
the Church? You may demand of him thirdly; Whether Grostheads virtues, that so
(dissembling his correspondency in faith with the Roman Church) he might
color, and beautify his evil cause with fictions, exaggerations, and other
pretenses of the same nature?

5. Consider a few of them, and by these you may conceive the quality of the
rest. Your Doctor, for his own aduantadge, does liberally permit the title
of a renewned Bishopp unto this worthy guide. Truly Sir, I doubt not, but if
Grosthead were now suruiuing, and knew by what manner of men, he is thus
praised, he would say, what evil have I done, that they should speak well of
me? But this is a triuiall art in Protestants to eleuate men, and to depresse
them again, as their humors do propell them; and therefore their language is
always varied according to their occasions. Hence it is, de Antichr. page 23.
that M. Powell has a trick to place William Wickam in the catalogue of his
Evangelical fathers, and to style him a most godly Bishopp; howbeit John Fox,
knowing him to be a most infense adversary unto the gospel of Wickliffe,
phraseth him the wicked Bishopp of Winchester etc. But forasmuch as my
original discourse is concerning a Bishopp of Lincoln, I will exemplify
rather in Rich. Flemming (sometimes a Prelate of that See) ibid. page 42
to whom M. Powell does afford very special commendation, for his evangelical
truth, for his affection unto the word of God etc. To conclude; he also did
rerceiue, that there must be a Reformation of the Church. Notwithstanding in
his catalogue of BB.
D. Godwyn may inform you, that B. Flemming was the man, who (according to the
decree of the Council of Constance) did exhumate the bones of VVickliff, and
committ them unto the fire. Which proceeding drew this angry sentence from M.
Powells pen; ibid. page 22
Vah inauditam tyrannidem!

6. I point at these things by the way, that you may see how your Protestants
are omnium horarum homines; praising, dispraysing; advancing, deprauing whom
they please, and as they please, to extort any shadow of defense for their
unhappy cause; so that every writer amongst them may garnish his title page
with this Horatian motto, Quo me cunque rapit tempestas, deferor. I proceed.
Your Doctor tells you, that Grosthead contemning Papal bulls, and letters,
was therefore named Romanorum malleus, and contemptor. But he should inform
you, that Grosthead was so named, because he would not permit Italians (who in
many respects were incompetent for the places designed unto them in England, by
the Pope) to possess Ecclesiastical dignities within his episcopal precinct;
and howbeit sundry letters were directed unto him from the Pope, yet he thought
it lawful for him to gainsay an unlawful demand, and therefore he would not
condescend unto that, which he esteemed utterly unjust. Whereas your Doctor
says farther, that the Cardinals opposed themselves etc. he should say, that
they interposed themselves; by counsel also to entreat, not by authority to
control.

7. I will not exercise your patience any longer in detection of your Doctors
crafty, and subtle fetches to entangle his Reader both in his matter, and in
his words; a snare is laid in every line, and the foolish among the people
are taken therein; wise men, and circumspect, and endued with mean knowledge,
and solicitous of the truth, will soon discover the obliquity of his paths.

8. Thus much (most dearly respected Master S.) out of my heartiest love unto
your noble, and heroical self, I have thought good to set down briefly, and
plainly, and (perhapps) effectually, concerning some worthy guides, whose
names are exceedingly abused to prove that, which they disapprooued, and to
support that cause, which they abhorred as exitiall, and deadly heresy, from
the very bottom of their hearts. There remayn yet other worthy guides, viz.
Camoracensis, Sauanarola, etc. traduced also, and enforced to give testimony
unto that, which they did always disclayme. As for Cameracensis (or Petrus de
Aliaco) he was the instructour of Gerson, and you may discern the Master by
the Scholar. See Gers. part. 3. in dialog. Apologetic. In the Examen of Fox
his Calendar. chap. 9. number. 9. 10. etc.
As for Sauanarola, he is quite dischardged from the communion of John Fox his
Saints, as you may see in the right excellent Treatise of the three Conuersions
of England (a book, which I do specially recommend unto you for matter, for
method, and for style; assuring you, upon my own experience, that you shall
read it with great profit, and incredible delight) where the vanity, and
falsehood of that deceyuer is dismasked, and laid forth in such manner, as it
does justly require.

9. Now it remains, that, according to the acuteness, and viuacity of your
ingenious spirit, you should penetrate deeply into a consideration of your
present estate. Out of the Church there is no salvation (as all men perished
out of the Ark, which was a type thereof) and that you are not within the
Church, as I do certainly know, so your self can not but necessarily suspect.
For you see that the guides of your soul are deceiptfull, and that the grounds
of your Religion are absurd. If you repayr unto such worthy guides as Gerson,
Grosthead etc. they condemn you; if unto Wickliffe, Husse, etc. as they
dissent from you in many things, so there was a time, when they did not exist,
and they were Papists also before they apostatized from the Church. Where was
your Religion then, and in whom was it perpetuated for many ages? Will you
recurr unto an invisible Church? S. Augustines disputation: against the
Donatists do clearly convince you, for he proves that the Church neither
was, nor can be invisible, and concealed; page 19. etc.
yea your learned Doctor does liberally confess the same. Will you content
yourself with a linsey wolsey, mixed, heterogeneous Church, which has not a
pure, See before; book 1. Part. 2. chap. 1. 1. and 2.
immaculate faith, but is composed of sundry factions, imbued with different,
and incompatible opinions? This were to make the Virgin-Church of Christ an
harlot, and to turn the Catholic religion into heretical confusion. And yet
unto these impious paradoxes your Professors are ineuitably driven for the
mayntenance, and supportation of their cause.

CHAP. 2. The singular vanity of D. Field, pretending that there is no
material difference betwixt the Luthera^s, Zwinglians etc.
. 1. Their difference about the question of Vbiquity. D. Fields
pseudo-theologicall determination thereof. Their difference about the Sacrament.
1. AS one wave in the sea follows immediately upon the neck of an other, so
the untruths of D. Field come rolling together, and where one has ended, there
an other begins; -- finis alterius mali Gradus est futuri.

2. You have seen page 2.
before, that he imputes the diversity of his Cadmaean brethren wholly unto
the Papists; and then, without any intermission, he yealdeth a farther plea in
their defense, saying; Yet it fell out by the happy providence of God, and the
force of that main truth they all sought to advance, that there was no
material, or essential difference amongst them, but such as, upon equal
scanning, will be found rather to consist in the diverse manner of expressing
one thing and to be but verbal upon mistaking, through the hasty, and
inconsiderate humors of some men, then any thing else. Yea, I dare confidently
pronounce, that after due, and full examination of each others meaning there
shall be no difference found touching the matter of the SACRAMENT, the
VBIQVITARY presence, or the like, between the Churches reformed by Luthers
ministry in Germany, and other places, and those, whom some men's malice called
SACRAMENTARIES etc. And this shall be justified against the proudest Papist of
them all.

3. I find no justification made by your humble Doctor concerning the
Sacrament; but in the question of Vbiquity he has given just aduantadge unto
the Papists, if they were proud before, See Fabricius in loc. com. Luth. part.
4. p. 55. page 1^1.
to remember what M. Luther has left written unto posterity; viz. Scio me in
hac causa non fuisse tam animoso and SVPERBO spiritu, quam sum modo etc.

4. Wherefore, I pray you see the salve of a misappled distinction, by which he
seeks to heal the wound of your incurable dissension: saying; the humane
nature of Christ has two kinds of being; the one NATVRALL, the other
PERSONAL; the first limited, and finite, the second infinite, and
incomprehensible. For, seeing the nature of a man is a created nature, and
essence, it can not be but finite; and seeing it has no personal subsistence
of it own, but that of the Son of God communicated unto it, which is
infinite, and without limitation, it can not be denied to have an infinite
subsistence, and to subsist in an incomprehensible, and illimited sort, and
consequently every where. Thus then the body of Christ secundum esse natural
is contained in one place, but secundum esse personale may rightly be said to
be every where. So he; and then he glories of the facility to reconcile all
the assertions of your Divines touching this part of Christian faith, to stopp
the mouths of your prattling adversaries etc. Truly the Geneuians themselves
(who excel in the art of See D. Bancrofts Suruay; page 195.
reconciliation) may yeald the buckler unto him.

5. But yet he has failed exceedingly in two points, FIRST, in saying that
there is no place, where the body of Christ is not united personally unto that
God, who is every where; and that it does subsist every where etc. For though
the divine Person, wherein the humane nature subsisteth, be every where, yet
the humane nature subsisteth therein finitely, and in one determinate place;
the union it self being a created thing. You may take a familiar example to
illustrate this point for your more exact comprehension thereof. tota in tato,
and tota in qualibes part. So the whole divinity of Christ assumed the
humanity.
The soul of man is every where in the body, and is not divided in quantity,
but has different operations according to the disposition of the organicall
parts, wherein, and whereby she exercises her functions. Now, though it be
indiuisibly in all the parts of man, (the head, and feet being united unto the
same soul) yet the head is not united unto the soul in the feet, nor the
feere unto the soul in the head; howbeit she is the same equally, and
impartibly in both. Likewise, the similitude holds in this case. For the
divine Person is essentially present in all places alike, as much without
heaven, as within; but yet to say, that the body of Christ has union with his
person in all places, because it is united unto that, which fills all places,
it is an heresy, which the Doctors falsehood has cast him into, as you may
sensibly perceive.

6. The SECOND error is notorious, viz. the humane nature of Christ may
rightly be SAID to be every where, in as much as it is united personally unto
that, which is every where. For it is a known, and infallible maxim in your
schools; that by virtue of the personal union in Christ, the proprieties of
the divine nature are attributed unto the Person in concrete viz, GOD, and MAN:
not unto the humane quando ^a, quae sunt propria diuina natura, non possu^t
participari ab humana^ etc. See S. Thomas p. 3. q. 16. art. 5. ad tertium.
nature in abstracte, viz. unto the manhood. For as we may say truly, that GOD
suffered, but not the Luther says, that diuinitas passa est.
GODHEAD; and MAN raised up Lazarus, but not the MANHOOD; so, in regard of the
personal union, we may truly say, that the Man Christ is every where, but not
the manhood. And therefore in this point also your learned Doctor has abused
you with a pseudotheologicall conclusion.

7. This shall suffice briefly concerning the matter of Vbiquity; and no doubt,
when he has scanned the doctrine of the SACRAMENT, but his reconciliation
therein will be proportionable unto his device in this. And that you may be
furnished to expect his skill therein, I will prepare some observations for
your better direction in this important matter.

8. To this end, you must conceive how your Euangelicks differ from the
Catholics, and from themselves also in this issue. The CATHOLICS teach with
one consent, that after the words of consecration [This is my body; 1.
Transubst.
This is my bloud] there is the true, real body, and blood of Christ contained
under the similitude of bread, and wine. For, benedictious etiam natura
mutatur, by the benediction the nature it self is chandged. As the word of
Christ can make something of nothing, De mysterijs init. cap. 9. 2. Consubst.
so it is able to turn one thing into an other; as S. Ambrose does
perspicuously, and irrefragably deliver unto us touching this sacred
transelementation.

9. The LVTHERANS teach, that in the Sacrament there is the true, real body,
and blood of Christ together with, or under the bread, Sir Th. More.
and wine. A good child was Luther, that would not eat his flesh without
bread, for fear of breeding worms in his belly.

10. The SACRAMENTARIES (so styled by Luther; and you may not forget it;
because the Doctor says, that some men's malice called them so) have many
idle, and base interpretations of this mystery. The Sacramentary sect has now
six heads, as I take it (says M. Luther) borne in one year; See Fabric. in
loc. com. Luth. part. 5. page 48.
it is a wonderful spirit that so dissenteth from himself. But the fairest,
and best exposition, which any Sacramentary has made, is this; viz. the body
of Christ is truly, and really exhibited unto us in the Sacrament, to be
participated only by a true, and a lively faith. This is the proper doctrine
of John Calvin, whereby he would seem to speak more magnifically, then
Zwinglius, and the rest. Howbeit they and he concur absolutely in two points;
wherein they all differ from the Catholics, and from M. Luther himself. FIRST;
that Christ is not otherwise in the Eucharist, then by a sacramental union of
the thing signified in, and with the sign. SECONDLY; that he can not be
participated there otherwise, then by the act of faith; and consequently the
faithful only do eat his body, and drink his blood in the holy communion.
This also is the doctrine generally of your English Church. See M. Rogers in
his Cathol. doctr. page 178.


11. Now whether your learned Doctor can possibly excogitate, or scanne out
any reconciliation betwixt the Lutherans, and Sacramentaries in this matter,
you may inform your self by him, and use him as the living commentary of his
dead letter. Mean while three reasons do very strongly persuade, yea assure
me, that their difference herein is not capable of any reconciliation. My FIRST
reason is derived M. LVTHER, writing thus unto his friend; See Fabricius, in
loc. com. Luth. part. 5. page 49.

Fabric. ibid


The opinion of Zwinglius, and Oecolampadius spreads it self far, and has
diverse sects within it self. But thou, if thou regardest my counsel, shall
fly it as the pestilence: for it is blasphemous against the word of Christ, and
against our faith.

12. To the same effect he enditeth a letter unto an other friend, and says.
Unless I knew the wrath of God, and saw the experience of it, I could never
have been persuaded that so many, and so great men could be seduced by such
base, silly. and childish reasons into this testilent, and sacrilegious of
Zwing. etc.
heresy. For, what argument, I beseech you, is this? Christ is at the right
hand of his Father, therefore he is not in the Sacrament. The flesh profits
nothing; therefore the body of Christ is not there. And these are their
principal the same they bring against the Catholics also.
arguments. But it is a madness to be moved by these toys from the simple,
and plain words of Christ; THIS IS MY BODY. Which clear sentence the
Sacramentaries deprave by their interpretation, viz. this is a sign of my
body. An exposition no less absurd ( Tom. 7. contra fanaticos Sacramentariorum
Spiritus.
says Luther) then if a man should make this gloss upon the Scripture; In
the beginning God made heaven, and earth; that is to say, the cuckoo did eat
up the titling bones and all: or, The Word was made flesh; that is to say, a
crooked staff was made a kyte.

13. But I will leave Sir Martin in his facetious vain, and come unto a
farther point, which touches your religion to the quick. For, in his
commentaries upon the epistle to the Galathians (a work, which I know to be
singularly magnified by your Ghospellers; and it is translated into our
mother tongue for the public vtility of your Church) he makes sundry
digressions against the Sacramentaries (but I suspect your translation to be
unfaithful in this behalf) and namely in his exposition of this sentence,
Chap. 5. verse. 9.
a little leaven corrupts the whole lump, he says; We must highly esteem
of this cautele in our age. The SACRAMENTARIES, who deny the corporal presence
of Christ in the Lords supper, object unto us, that we are intractable, and
contentious etc. These are the collusions of the Devil, whereby he labors
to subvert, not that article alone, but all Christian doctrine. A true saying
of M. Luther.
To deny God in one article, is do deny him in all, for he is not divided into
many, but he is all in eueryone, and one in all. Charity in this case is not to
be exercised, neither is error to be approved. For here [viz. in the
Sacramentaries heresy] the word, faith, Christ, eternal life are all lost.
Wherefore, we continually return unto them this proverb of the Apostle, a
little leaue^ corrupts the whole lu^p.

14. This is such a weighty, and severe reprehension of your Sacramentarisme,
as would move any heart amongst you (tenderly affected in matters of so great
consequence, and sublimity) to be fearful, and suspicious of his souls
estate. But I will proceed unto an other consideration of greater importance,
and far more effectual then the rest. For what can be more horrible, and
dreadful unto you, then that the Devil himself should vrdge Luther (your
great Reformer) and press him with the arguments of Zwinglius, and his
co^federates, See the places cited by Iustus Caluinus in his annotat. upon
Tertull. praescript. cap. 43.
to draw him unto your Sacramentary opinion? And though the Devil disputed
earnestly with Luther to this effect (as he confesses) yet he solued the
Devils objections, and vanquished him (and therefore all your English
professors in him) by the power, and majesty of the word.

15. By this evidence you may well conjecture, what admonitour he was, that
instructed your Patriarch Zwinglius in his fanaticall interpretation of these
words, hoc est pro significa^t; see before; book 1. part. 1. chap. 1.. 3.
number. 8.
est corpus meum; and by it also you may know, that the spirit of truth does
not teach you; though page 183.
D. Field has confidently affirmed it, where he speaks of the inward
testification, and of the great, happy, and heavenly alteration, which you find
in your hearts, upon the receiving of your doctrine. Which internal
persuasion, the Brownists, the Anabaptists, and other sectaries do boast of, as
well as any Sacramentary ever did, or can. But what verdict M Luther has
passed concerning the Spirit, and truth of Sacramentaries, you can not but
tremble to understand. Brent. in Recognit. page 277.
Vos habetis alium Spiritum quam nos, said Luther unto Zwinglius; you, and we
have not the same SPIRIT. And as for your TRVTH, he gives this terrible
censure upon the perfidiousnes (for so he speaks) of Bucer in this
Sacramentary doctrine; Fabric. in loc. com. Luth. part. 5. page 50. 2.
He that takes pleasure in his own damnation, let him believe that the TRVTH
is taught by these SPIRITS, since they began, and defend their opinion by
lies.

16. I leave the due ponderation of these things unto your best thoughts, and
so I proceed unto my SECOND reason, which is derived from the Magdeburgian
Centuriatours, who (in their Ce^tur, 4.
epistle unto Q. Elizabeth) complayn, that some men [viz. the Caluinists]
euacuate the testament of our Lord by their philosophical reasons, when,
against the most clear, most evident, most true, and most powerful words of
Christ [This is my body] they remove the presence of his body, and blood out
of the Sacrament, and deceive men with their wonderful perplexity of speech
etc. Likewise Ce^tur. 11. cap. 10. col. 527.
they do expressly commend Pope Leo 9. because he damned the Berengarian
heresy [which now is a piece of your Caluinian ghospell] with the author, as
soon as it peeped forth. In the same ibid. cap. 11. col. 656.
history, they place Berengarius in the catalogue of Heretics, saying, that he
transmitted his poison by wicked scholars, and impious writings, into sundry
regions. Howbeit, in resp. ad Campian. rat. 3.
M. Doctor Humfrey fears not to affirm, that Vigilantius Berengarius,
Caluinus, homines profecto singularibus diuinae gratiae muneribus prastabiles
etc. And no doubt but D. Field has taken order to draw all these men, with
Gerson himself, into the communion of his true, visible, Catholic Church.
Which is a device to turn religion into a fable.

17. My See M. Rogers in his Cathol. doctr. page 178. 179.
as her CATHOLIC DOCTRINE in this matter; The wicked, and such as be void of
lively says, do not eat the body, nor drink the blood of Jesus Christ, in the
use of the Lords supper. Which assertion being explicated by M. Rogers, he
proceeds (according unto the accustomed manner of his discourse) to note the
errors, and adversaries unto this truth, and says; The adversaries of this
doctrine are the VBIQVITARIES, both Lutheran, and Popish. For the Lutherans
teach, that the very body of Christ, at the Lords supper, is eaten as well of
the wicked, as of the godly; and that, the true, and real body of Christ, In,
With, Under the bread, and wine, may be eaten, chewed, and digested even of
Turks, which were never of the true Church.

18. Here it imports you very much, to entreat your Doctors resolution unto
their three particular demands. FIRST: since it is infallibly evident by the
testimony of your own Church (for by her approbation the book of M. Rogers
has a singular warrant, as you may see page 160.
before) that your Catholic doctrine in this point is impugned substantially
by the Lutherans, why does he pretend, that the difference between the
reformed Churches, is merely verbal in this issue? SECONDLY; since your
doctrine herein is graced with the name of Catholic, is not theirs heretical,
and consequently are not they heretics, and excluded thereupon from the
society of your Church? THIRDLY; since M. Rogers, by the lawful authority of
your Church, brandeth the truest disciples of your great Reformer, with the
name of LVTHERANS, page 179.
why does D. Field disclayme it with contempt of Card. Bellarmine, and why does
he say, that it pleases the Antichristian sectaries odiously to name them so?
It is not possible for any man to conceive, or to express your Euangelicks
without these distinctiue Luthera^s, Caluinists.
appellations, or some others equivalent thereunto.

. 2. Three false, and empty pretenses of D. Field to mitigate the scandal of
the dissensions, which rend, and tear his Evangelical Churches.
1. AS your learned Doctor has a special talent in the reconciliation of
your differences, so he has an excellent art to extenuate the scandal
thereof, saying that whereas the Tigurines, Gesnerus and others disliked the
distempered LVTHER, it is not to be meruayled at; page 192.
or that some differences were amongst them; seeing the like were in former
times between Epiphanius, and Chrysostom; Hierome, Ruffinus, Augustine, and
others.

2. Nothing but fraud, and falsehood. For though your Doctor tells you, that
the Tigurines, and Gesnerus did (forsooth) DISLIKE the distempered passions of
Luther, yet you must know, that they did execrate this great Reformer, and
detest him with a deadly, and immortal hatred. Peruse the orthodox confession
of the Tigurines, and you shall find, that Luther was possessed with a legion
of Devils. See the writings of Gesnerus, and you may perceive, that Luther was
a man of an impudent mouth; and these are moderate censures in comparison of
the rest, which are affoorded in their virulent, and fiery discourses.
Wherefore, though D. Field says farther, that it is not to be meruayled at
etc. yet how just occasion there is for you to tremble at these things, I
remitt me unto the secret testimony of your inward judge.

3. I proceed unto the brief discussion of his other false-hoods, which are
transparent unto every eye. For what can be more untruly suggested, ibid.
then that the LIKE differences were sometimes betwixt the ancient Fathers, as
passed betwixt Luther, Zwinglius, and others of the reformed Church? S.
Augustine dissented from S. Hierome; See S. Aug. epist. 8. 9. etc.
but whether you respect the * matter, or manner, their difference was far
unlike unto your capital, concerning S. Paulls reprehension of S. Peter.
and immortal belligerations. S. Augustine speaks See S. Aug. contra Julian.
Pelag. l. 1. and 2.
honorably of S. Hierome, and calls him that holy Priest; that holy man etc.
Yea, in his epistles, he saluteth him by the name of fellow-Priest and much
desired BROTHER etc. Which kind, and familiar nuncupation, See Brentius contra
Bullinger. in Recognit. page 276.
Luther would not vouchsafe your dear Patriarch Zwinglius, though he sought it
with many tears. Likewise S. Hierome speaks respectively of S. Augustine,
and calls him true Father, and Lord, etc. But how obsequiously See Fabric, in
loc. com. Luth. part 5. page 49.50.
Zwinglius demeaned himself toward Luther, and what acerbity of style he
exercised against him, Luther shall deliver unto you. Zwinglius sent a most
vayn book unto me, and an epistle (written with his own hand) well befitting
that most proud spirit of his: he rages, and fumeth, and threateneth, and
raueth so modestly, that he seems unto me past all recovery, being con^inced
by the manifest truth, Now whether the difference betwixt Augustine, and
Hierome were LIKE unto the furious, and implacable assault of these men, I
leave it unto your wise, and religious determination.

4. The mutual contention of Ruffinus, and S. Hierome was sharp, but far
unlike unto the garboyles of Luther, and Zwinglius; which surpass the
conflicts of S. Chrysostom. and Epiphanius themselves. Wherefore it may please
you to consider the dissimilitude of these things, which I will briefly tender
unto your careful examination.

5. FIRST, if you respect the quality of the persons, you shall find that S.
Hierome, Chrysostom. Epiphan. and Ruffinus, though they were men endued with
excellent gifts, yet they had an ordinary function only, and continued in the
faith of the universal Church. See Zanch. de Rede^pt. in explicat 4.
praecepti; quaest. de vocat ad minister. etc.
But you pretend, that Luther, and Zwinglius were extraordinarily stirred up by
God to reform his Church, and to replant the decayed faith of Christ. Yea
Zanchius fears not to say, that they (principally) are the Apocal. 11.
two VVitnesses, that should contend against Antichrist, the Man of sin; for
which cause, as we are bound to require a special sign of their vocation unto
that excellent office, so, above all things, we must expect Unity, and consent
both in their words, and deeds.

6. SECONDLY; if you observe the cause of their dissensions, you may note, that
the quarrel as well betwixt Epiph. and Chrysostom. as betwixt Hierome, and
Ruffinus, concerned the writings of Origin, and the inprobation thereof. But
the terrible fulminations of Luther, and Zuinglius, each against the other,
were founded originally in matters of faith, pertaining unto the necessity of
salvation. Hence it is, that Luther says, Luth. tom: 2. de Caena Dom.
I reckon not Zwinglius any more to be in the number of Christians. He says
farther; I have damned Zwinglius, Oecolompaduis, and all Sacramentaries to the
uttermost of my power; and this glory I shall carry with me unto the tribunal
of Crist,

7. THIRDLY; if you consider the extent, and duration of their hostility, you
shall see, that it was soon extinguished, and not derived as an hereditary
war unto posterity, and unto entire Churches. But it is otherwise in the case
of Luther, and Zwieglius: for their personal strife is general unto whole
Churches, propagated in succession, increased with continual addition, so that
we may sooner expecta ruin of their gospel, then a reconciliation of their
differences, the measure whereof is unmeasurable, and consequently the end is
endless. And this event agrees with the prophecy of Luther, the man of God
(as in loc. co^. Luth. part. 5. page 43. See also. page 41. lin. 2. 3. etc.
Fabricius says) who foresaw this misery, and dissipation of the Church by
SACRAMENTARIES, and other heretics.

8. And here you may perceive the singular falsehood of M. in apolog.
Jewel pretending, that they, whom Papists do contumeliously call Lutherans,
and Zwinglians, are truly FRIENDS, and BRETHREN. For as S. Luther himself would
by no means permit the name of BRETHREN unto the Zwinglian, but repelled them
for heretics (as he testifies in a certain cited by Brentius in Recognit.
etc. page 276.
epistle) so ibid. page 282.
Brentius and Melancthon resolved, that they could not acknowledge them to be
their brethren, in regard of their impious, and vayn opinions. And though the
judgment of Melancthon chandged as the moon (whence his name is See the
examen of Fox his calendar. chap. 16. number. 72. 7^. etc.
odious unto the truest disciples of Luther) yet the Lutheran part of the Synod
holden at Maulbrune (1564.) make this declaration; Whereas the Zwinglians have
delivered abroad that we agnize them to be our BRETHREN; this is feigned by them
so impudently, that we cannot sufficiently admire their impudency herein. For
as we grant them no place in the Church, so we do not take them to be our
brethren, whom we have found to be carried with the spirit of lies, and to be
contumelious against the Son of man.

9. These things are very plain, and therefore I referr the decision of this
whole matter unto your self: let your own heart be the oracle, whence you may
assume a faithful resolution. And if your conscience shall assure you, that
the LIKE differences were not betwixt the ancients, as are, and were betwixt
the primitive fathers, and brethren of your gospel, then judge of your
Doctors fidelity, wherein you have (formerly) had such a firm repose.

10. I come unto a that the Papists themselves have divisions, and differences,
page 168. etc.
and that therefore nothing can be concluded against the Protestants, or for
the Papists from the note of Unity, or from division, which is opposite
thereunto.

11. But this poor recrimination can yeald you no defense. For, if the ey may
be a judge in this case, we see a comfortable harmony in the Catholic Church;
the same doctrine preached, the same Sacraments administered, the same
government established. But as your Ecclesiastical government in England, in
Scotland, in Heluetia, in Saxony is distinct, so the doctrines betwixt your
said Churches conspire not in some essential points. In a word; The Catholics
in Asia, Africa, Europe, America have a just correspondency in faith: but the
Protestants in Europe (for in it, and some part of it alone, are they confined)
have great diversity in faith, and one faction does prosecute the other with
Vatinian hatred.

12. Wherefore a We want not a most certain rule (says D. Field. page 169.
he) whereby to judge of all matters of controversy, and difference; to wit,
the Scripture, or written word of God, expounded according to the rule of
faith, practice of the Saints, and the due Ad alium scripturae locum
recurrendum est, and non expectanda hominis sententia ad lite^ dirimendam,
says Zwingl. tom. 2. in respons^ad epist. Eckij.
comparing of one part of it with an other, in the public confessions of
faith, published by the Churches of our confession. In all which there is a
full consent, whatsoever our malicious adversaries clamorously pretend to the
contrary etc.

13. If this rule be most certain, how comes it to pass, that the difference
betwixt Lutherans, and Caluinists stands vnco^posed at this day? Why did See
loc. co^. Luth. part. 5. page 52.
Luther pronounce so severely, that the Anabaptists, and Sacramentaries
contemn the WORD, howsoever they make a show of religion? Why did Zwinglius so
peremptorily affirm, that Luther oppressed the Evangelical truth? Why did M.
Cartwright so constantly protest, that the Church of England is destitute of
one moity of the word? Finally; why do all your sects, as well the supreme [of
Lutherans, and Caluinists] as the subordinate factious in each, cry out
continually, the word, the word, and yet no rule has drawn them unto a
conformity of sense therein?

14. Give me leave therefore to except against the pretended rule of D. Field,
for three respects. FIRST, because the Principle of your religion excludes the
means of reconciliation; viz. the gravity of Counsels, the dignity of
Fathers, the authority of the Church. For though D. Field (in his epistle unto
the Archb. of Cant.) does iudiciously advise all men to rest in the judgment
of the Church, and says elsewhere, that you admit a trial by the Fathers, yet
your ghospellers have not accepted, nor practiced this direction. It is not
accepted by you; for Clebitius (to name one amongst many) setting down the
laws of a Synod betwixt the Lutherans, and Zwinglians, says precisely; Solum
Dei verbum sit iudex; let the word of God be the only judge. Likewise,
Zwinglius delivers this assertion against the Catholics; we will endure no
other judge, but the word alone. Now where is the means to define the
questions of religion, See F. Cam^ pia^s fourth reason, and compare it with the
assertion of D. Field ( page 168.) viz. the authority of a Council is not the
if the Church of God (represented in a lawful Council) has not authority to
judge of the sense of Scripture, and to oblige men to rest in her decision? But
this prescription is not practiced by you; for you receive the ancient,
Oecumenicall Counsels, with this restriction, as far as they agree with the
scripture; and so every man is left unto his own choice to determine whether
this, or that particular in the Council be agreeable unto the scripture, or
not. Notwithstanding, this liberty is not permitted by your Bishopps unto their
own inferiors; for they know, what inconvenience would follow by leaving the
* Ministers unto that uncertain limitation; and so they presume to require more
duty of their children, then they dare yeald unto their Fathers: but with what
equity, and indifferency, your wisdom may easily conceive; as also, how the
unity (such as it is) in your Church, proceeds only from the vigor of law,
and not from the principles of Religion.

15. My D. Fields pretended rule, is taken from a consideration of your
persons, which have not that subordination, which is requisite in this behalf.
For, lib. 1. ep. 3.
whereas S. Cyprian does excellently observe, that heresies arise from no other
cause, then that the Priest of God is not obayed, and that men think not of one
Priest, and Judge in stead of Christ, it is most evident, that heresies will
increase daily in your Churches, and no conclusion of peace can possibly ensue,
because there is not submission of judgment, nor subjection of spirit, nor
union of members unto their head. Lutherans seek to predominate; Caluinists
will not obey; where is the vmpire of their contention?

16. It is a memorable history, which Sturmius records in his book fol. 33.
de ratione concordiae ineundae; complaining pathetically against the
Lutherans, who are so deeply exasperated against the Zwinglians, that they
will not endure any conference with them, but reject them as damned heretics,
anno 1560.
unworthy of any farther dispute. Thus the Ienensian Lutherans made their
supplication unto the Princes, that a lawful Synod (consisting only of such,
as embrace the confession of Sacrame^taries deny to subscribe thereunto,
whatsoever D. Field pretends. See Josias Simlerus in vita Bulling.
Augusta.) might be assembled to condemn the Zwinglians, and all other enemies
of their religion. Likewise the Flacians (a particular sect of Luthers
gospel) desired to have a public Synod, but with this caveat, that all
Sacramentaries, Swhenchfeldians, Osiandrines should be excluded from the same.
Which unequal courses stirred up Bullinger to write, that since the Lord has
freed us from the servitude of the Pope, we will not suffer our selves to be
oppressed by the new tyrany of such, as under the pretense of the gospel,
aspire unto a primacy, and dictature in the Church. We w^ll not be shutt out
from the company of Saints at their choice, and pleasure etc.

17. But their mutual fury is so augmented, that Sturmius, seeing no submission
on either side, professes, unless the Evangelical kings, and princes
interpose their authority to take away these contentions; without doubt the
Churches will be infected with many heresies, and hence a great vastation of
Christianity will ensue, as it came to pass in Asia, Greece, and Africa for
the like causes. The fundations of our Religion are conuelled, the chief
articles are called in question, a plain way is prepared for Turcisme, and
Atheism to enter in upon us* If I would proceed farther in this argument, I
might inform you, how fatal, and unhappy the conuents of your Ghospellers
have been at Marpurge, at Swabach, at Smalcald, at Maulbrune, where they
treated about their own Religion; and at Ratisbone, where they should have
entered into a conflict with the Catholics: but the precedents are sufficient
to let you understand, that you have not a due subordination of persons, and
consequently no rule of peace; page 169.
howsoever D. Field is pleased to affirm, that, with your Churches, an end is
made of all controversies etc. See the place, and judge of his exactness.

18. My THIRD exception against D. Fields pretended rule, matters, wherein your
dissension does consist. For they are many in number, real in evidence,
substantial in weight, as I could prove abundantly out of the writings of
Luther, Hunnius, Conradus etc. of the one part: Zwinglius, Sturmius, Clebitius
etc. of the other: to the just reproof of D. Field, who says, that your
differences admit an easy reconciliation, and that this shall be justified
against the proudest Papist of them all.

19. My counsel unto you is always the same; TRY BEFORE YOU TRUST; you have
already seen an example of his reconciling art in one point, and by that, you
may take an estimate as well of his syncerity, as of his solidity in the rest.
If your excellent, and heroical Spirit will be so grossly abused, and deluded
by him, or any other to the certain peril of your soul, you can never plead
invincible ignorance for a just excuse.

20. Now to conclude this chapter; good Sir; if I did not experimentally know
the variety, and vanity of opinions in your Church, 2. Timoth. 4.
and that as some men heap up a multitude of teachers unto them selves, so
others confine all things unto their own sense, and spirit, I could easily
believe that you would admit a trial by the Fathers, and that you would rest
in the judgment of the Church. But forasmuch as I know that neither all, nor
the greatest part of ghospellers in England will submitt themselves dutifully,
and humbly unto this rule (though I may, and do challendge it at their hands)
therefore I will lay down three considerations, whereby you may see the
equity, yea the necessity of the said rule, and how you are bound, in Christian
simplicity, to accept it with true, and hearty obedience.

21. Tantum obstrepit veritati adulter sensus, quantu^ and corruptor stylus.
Tertull. in praescript. c. 17.
to wit the sense, which is the very soul thereof. If pure necessity compel
you to fly unto the Church for your assurance in the first, and second points,
will you rely upon your own discretion, and wisdom in the third? If you
object your Spirit, I also object mine. If inward testification; I have the
same. You compare Scriptures; so do I. You pray; I do the like. You are sure;
my certainty is as great. You have reason; mine is as strong. You have faith;
mine is not inferior. Thus our contention is earnest, and our success is none.

22. What remains, but that we both should try our Spirits, and examine our
private thoughts according to the perpetual, and general doctrine of that
Catholic Church, from which we received the Scriptures, and which, by
singular notes of Antiquity, Universality, Consent, Succession etc. is most
eminently approved unto us? For which cause cap. 15.
Tertullian does excellently prescribe (and, if I be not much deceived, in his
epist. to the Archb. of Cant.
D. Field does condescend unto him) that, Whereas Heretics pretend the holy
Scriptures, and as they move some men with their boldness before hand, so in
the congresse of disputation they tire the strong, and ensnare the weak, and
dismiss the middle sort with scruples; we must prevent them in their course,
and not admit them unto any disputes concerning the Scripture; and if this be
their strength, we must consider first of all, to whom the possession of
Scriptures does agree, least he be admitted unto them, who has no right
therein etc. The residue I commend unto your own perusal: and so I referr the
event of all unto the blessed disposition of our only Lord, and Savior Jesus
Christ.

CHAP. 3. The falsehood, and inciuility of D. Field traducing Card. Bellarmine.
. 1. Three criminations devised against the worthy Cardinal by D. Field.
1. Your learned Doctor has sprinkled many untruths in his discourse to the
personal disgrace of Bellarmine, and then triumphs in his own fictions. But
since the number, and quality thereof require a copious explanation, I will
present unto you three criminations only at this time, connexed, and couched
immediately together in his page 167.
discourse.

2. The FIRT crimination against Bellarmine is framed in de notis Eccles. c. 10,
Bellarmine says, that all Churches in the world, that ever divided themselves
from the fellowshippe of the Roman Church, like boughs broken from a tree, and
deprived of the nourishment, which they formerly received from the root, did
presently wither away, and decay. But the falsehood of this saying of
Bellarmine is too apparent. For the Churches of Greece, Armenia, Aethiopia and
Syria continued a long time after they had forsaken the communion of the Roman
Church. Yea many of them continue to this day, holding a more sound, and
sincere profession of Christian verity, then the Romanists do.

3. Here your learned Doctor has made a bad translation of Bellarmines words,
and a worse construction of his mind. For Bellarmines assertion bears
directly thus; Videmus con^inuo aruisse etc. We see that all Churches, divided
from this" head [viz. the Bishopp of Rome] have incontinently withered. He
says not, that they withered away, and decayed, as though they had not
retained some principles of Christian Religion (for then your Doctor might
justly impute apparent falsehood unto him) but that their glory, splendor, and
dignity was forthwith impaired, and that their ancient luster was exceedingly
abated, by the contagion of heretics, and by the incursion of enemies: as
history, the witness of time, and mistress of truth, does sufficiently relate.

4. Wherefore, though Bellarmine does not affirm, that these Churches did
wither away, or that they do not continue at this day (nay he calls them
expressly by the name of CHVRCHES; and says that the Churches of Asia, and
Africa do remayn at this day, howbeit in very great ignoranrance) yet (as I
conceive) he may justly apply that sentence of S. Augustine unto them: non quia
videntur Ecclesiae habere nomen, idcirco pertinent ad eius consecrationem; they
do not therefore pertayn unto the consecration of the Church, because they
seem to be invested with her name. The crime of heresy, and schism does
amputate them (for the most part) from the blessed communion of the CATHOLIC
Church; howsoever it pleases D. Field to say, that some of them hold a more
sound, and sincere profession of Christian verity, then the Romanists do.

5. If this be so, it shall be your honor, and safety to associate your selves
unto those Churches, more sincere, then the Church of Rome is. But which, I
pray you, seems most sincere in your judgment? Doubtless the Church of
GREECE: and yet See Iustus Calvin. in apolog. page 11.

Graeci nobiscum sunt, et nosunt; iuncti fide, pace diuisi etc. S. Bern. de
Considerat. lib. 3.


Jeremiah (the Patriarch of Constantinople) in his rescript unto the Lutherans,
who desired familiarity with his Church, does utterly renounce your society,
and alleges that counsel of S. Paul; reject an heretic, after the first,
or second admonition.

6. The SECOND crimination is contrived in this manner. Bellarmine says that
NONE of the Churches, divided from Rome, had ever any learned men, after their
separation. But here he shows plainly that his impudency is greater then his
learning. For what will he say of Oecumenius, Theophylactus, Damascenus,
Zonaras, Cedrenus, Elias Cretensis, Nilus Carbasilas, and innumerable more
living in the Greek Churches, after their separation from the Church of Rome?
Surely these: men were more then matchable with the greatest Rabbines of the
Romish Synagogue.

7. Truly, as Bellarmine will leave impudency for your Doctors use; so he will
not respect the note of ignorance, because he desires to know nothing, but
Christ Jesus, 1. Cor. 2.
and him crucified: howbeit, other men will say in his defense, that so much
modesty, with so great learning did seldom meet together in one man; and as
far less of each is in D. Field, so far less was also in his Bucer,
Melancthon, and Calvin, with whom (as he says) Bellarmine is NO VVAYES
MATCHABLE either in piety, or learning. Nos despiciunt tanquam idiotas, and
nihil scientes, scipsos autem extollunt; says Irenaeus of the Gnostics.


8. But I come unto the matter it self, and whether it may deserve that
ungentle imputation, which your Doctor fasteneth upon the Cardinal, I remitt
me unto your own wisdom. You must understand therefore, that when the
Cardinal had delivered this general proposition, We see that ALL Churches
divided from this head did incontinently wither, he adds this limitation in
the words immediately following; certe Ecclesiae Asiaticae, and Africanae,
quae quondam ita florebant etc. truly the Churches of Asia, and Africa, which
sometimes did so flourish, that they celebrated very many Counsels, and
always had sundry men, famous either in sanctity, or in science, or in both:
have celebrated no Counsels since they made their schism from the Roman
Church, and have not had any men known unto the whole world for the renown of
their learning, or holiness; and at this day they abide in exceeding ignorance.

9. The FIRST untruth therefore in your Doctor is an intolerable abuse; for
whereas he chardgeth Bellarmine with this assertion, NONE of the Churches
divided from Rome had any learned men after their separation, and then
confuteth it by his instances of such, as lived in the GREEK Churches, you see
that Bellarmine does (even in this respect) purposely decline the mention of
the Greek Church, by restrayning his former general proposition particularly
unto the Churches of Asia, and of Africa: which limitation, otherwise, had been
ridiculous, and absurd.

10. The SECOND untruth is, that Damascen lived "after the separation of the
Greeks from the Church of Rome: which is not so. For Damascen lived about the
year of our Lord 740. (as de Eucharist. l. 2. c. 33.
Bellarmine does truly affirm) and opposed him self religiously against Leo
Isauricus (the Protestanticall Iconoclast) who deceased about the year our
Lord 741. as in Annal. ad annum D. 741.
Baronius does witness. But the violent separation of the Greeks from the
Latins was occasioned principally about the year of our Lord See Baron. tom.
9. page 277.
766* by reason of their different opinion concerning the procession of the
holy Ghost; and this is not obscurely signified by page 62.
D. Field himself.

11. The THIRD untruth is, that surely these men, in the Greek Churches, were
more then matchable with the greatest Rabbines of the Romish Synagogue, that is
to say then any Doctors, who (in their times) were members of the Romans Church.
But here you may plainly see, that your learned Doctor does, in the violence
of his passion, exceed the limits of his reason. For though S. John Damascen
has no peer amongst all those Greeks, yet out own country shall yeald his
match, to wit, V. Beda (a Rabbine of the Romish Synagogue) who lived in the
same age, and may be parallele with Damascen for his singular piety, and
admirable science.

12. As for the rest, either expressed, or concealed, we will find their
matches also, yea their superiors by many degrees; as namely S. Anselme,
Lanfranck, S. Bernard, Hugo de S. Victore, P. Lombard, Alexander of Hales, S.
Thomas of Aquine, S. Bonauenture, Scotus, Lyranus, GERSON ( a worthy guide of
the Church; and a Rabbine of the Romish Synagogue; for both these terms are
afforded by your Doctor) Tostatus, and (to use his own words) innumerable
others, with whom these Greeks (generally) are no ways matchable, but much
inferior in all respects.

13. The Bellarmine says that they [viz. NONE of the Churches separated from
Rome] could ever hold any council since their separation. If Bellarmine mean
General Counsels, it is not to be maruayled at, seeing they are but a part of
the Christian Church. If National, or Provincial, it is most childish, and by
sundry instances to be refuted.

14. The Cardinal speaks of National, and (as I take it) of Provincial
Counsels; howbeit your Doctors Eldershipp does wrongfully impute
Childishness unto a reverend person, whose years, and dignity, and other
ornaments, deserved more vrbanity at his hands. For the Cardinal attributes
this infelicity unto the Churches of Asia, and Africa, but not of Greece: and
if your Doctor can reprove him by any instance in the former, there is some
equity in his accusation, which, otherwise, will prove (as indeed it is) to be
merely calumnious, and unjust. If Bellarmine had enlardged his style, said,
that the ORIENTAL Church has been thus unfortunate, since the time of her
separation from the Church of Rome, the Doctors exception might seem very
reasonable, and the Cardinals fault inexcusable in this behalf, because Greece
is a part thereof, no less then Asia it self.

15. But as the Cardinal does plainly disioyne the Church of Greece (which is
placed in the table of Europe) from the Churches of Asia, and of Africa, so D.
Field does often, page 167. 173. etc.
and truly distinguish the Church of Greece from the Churches of Syria,
Armenia, Aethiopia, Russia, and the like, being several parts of the Oriental
Church. And though custom (founded upon just reasons) does warrant us to
comprehend Churches of Asia under the name of GREEK Churches, yet there is no
reason, why the Church of Greece (being parcel of Europe) should be
comprehended under the names of the ASIAN, or AFRICAN Churches, in which the
Cardinal does particularly instance, saying, that THEY celebrated no
Counsels, and that THEY brought forth no men known unto the whole world (that
is to say, men of public renown) either for learning, or sanctity, since the
time of their segregation from the Church of Rome.

16. Thus you may clearly discern the conscience, and integrity of your
principal Doctors in their deportment toward the Catholic religion, and the
greatest lights, that shine most gloriously in the Church; whose names will be
transmitted with honor unto posterity, when their adversaries shall be
forgotten, and ly buried in silence, or be remembered to their infamy, and
disgrace.

. 2. The inciuility of D. Field toward the Cardinal.
1 IT will not be impertinent (and specially because I write unto a Gentleman,
whose generous, and noble disposition can not approve calumnious, and
opprobrious insultations) to add a word, or two concerning your Doctors
discourteous, and uncivil entreaty of the Cardinal; whom he traduceth, not
only by imputation of false crimes, but by aggeration of base, odious, and
unworthy names.

2. As for example; he phraseth him page 154.
Cardinal heretic, 148.
heretical Romanist, 152.
impious Idolater, 128.
shameless Jesuit, 135.
shameless companion, with 180.
his idle brain, 100.
his senseless fooleries, etc. Which vsadge of a most learned, and honorable
person, whether it be tolerable, or not, I remitt me unto your own discretion;
who, being learned above many of your rank, and honorably descended, are able
to judge more competently in this case, then others, either meaner in knowledge,
or inferior in birth.

3. And though I need not inform you, either of the profound learning of the
CARDINAL (which expresses it self in his own works; for they do testify of
him) or of his virtues (a greater commendation then the former: o hominem bonum
is preferred by Seneca before o hominem literatum) yet I will make a brief
recapitulation of both, that you may perceive how much it does concern your
Professors to deal ingenuously with a man of his quality, and desert; and
secondly, whether D. Field has any just reason to postpose him so far unto
Calvin, and others, in LEARNING, and PIETY, that "he is NO WAYS MATCHABLE,
forsooth, with him, "or them in these respects.

4. FIRST therefore, for his intellectual parts: his excellency therein is so
celebrious, and renowned, that the praise, which common fame did attribute unto
S. Hierome, viz. Nemo omnium sciuit, quod Hieronymus ignorauit, may truly
belong unto the Cardinal; in whom Nature, being the guide, and Industry, her
companion, have wrought an admirable perfection. For NATVRE has prodigally
bestowed her greatest riches upon him: as namely, sharpness of wit, solidity
of judgment, tenaciousnesse of memory, facility of deliverance, grace of
elocution.

5. And here, by the may; whereas it pleases page 176.
D. Field to lay a crime unto Bellarmines chardge (and then to let us pardon
him etc.
pardon it also, in his courteous malice) forasmuch as Bellarmine (showing
himself to be in their number, who are liars of the worst MEMORIES) says in de
notis Eccles. c. 2.
one place, that Sanctity of doctrine is no note of the Church, and in an ibid.
cap. 11.

This untruth of D. Field is accompanied with more, which I referr unto your
perusal.


other, that Sanctity of doctrine is a note of the Church, I must assure you,
that Bellarmine is neither iniudicious, nor obliuious, but D. Field traduceth
his author, and abuses his reader. For Bellarmine, in the former place,
makes no mention of the Sanctity of doctrine; and, in the later place, his
whole discourse is to prove, that the assertions of pagans, and heretics
contayn absurdity in reason, and impiety in manners; from both which the
doctrine of the Catholic Church does utterly abhorte. See the particulars, and
judge wisely, what cause D. Field has to impute a fault unto Bellarmine, or
what need Bellarmine has to desire the pardon of D. Field. I proceed.

6. His INDVSTRY is famous in those Churches, Louayn. Rome.
and Schools, which have acknowledged him a Chrysostom in sermons, and an
Augustine in disputes. Whatsoever is most comme^dable in Humanity, for tongues,
or arts; whatsoever is most respected in Theology, for scholasticall, or
positive; he has attained the flower therein by his long study, and much pain;
so that Catholics rejoice in his worth, and Heretics tremble at his name,
which is dreadful unto them, as HANNIBAL was sometimes in Italy, or SCIPIO in
Africa.

7. Now SECONDLY, for his moral parts; they are such, as envy it self can
stayn with no reproach. And herein one thing is very memorable; to wit his
humility, and contempt of honor, which though he fled in his youth against the
will of others, yet it followed him in his age against his own liking, and
that, which he deserved by his virtues, he accepted only upon his obedience.
To explane my self more familiarly in this matter; it may please you to
understand, that he being nephew unto Pope Marcellus (the second of that name)
refused a Cardinals dignity, and made himself a member of that SOCIETY, which
professes a special abdication, and incapability of preferment in the Church.
In which estate he conuersed with such piety toward GOD, and affability toward
men, that as he feared the one, so he was beloved of the other, and grateful
unto both.

8. But the necessity of obedience did compel him at length to accept that
honor with renitency, he was made Cardinal by Pope Clem. ^.
which some affect with care; so that I may truly say, it was an exercise of
patience unto him, and never elevated his heart in pride: a mutation was made
not of him, but in him (as de considerat. in praefat.
S. Bernard speaks of his Eugenius) that is to say, his state of life was
chandged, but not the disposition of his mind. Let Capua testify how he lived
therein his Archiepiscopall function, with what vigilance, with that zeal, and
devotion, with what pastoral regard of his flock, with what paternall love of
his children; with what leuity in correction, with what indulgency in justice,
with what vnpartiallity toward all, without the just offense of any.

9. When the public affairs of the Church, and the voice of the chief Pastor
required his presence at Rome, his people lamented his departure, and expressed
their grief with the truest signs thereof; which affection in them is an
argument of his desert. And because the care of the common good did hinder him
from the execution of his private duty, he voluntarily resigned his
Bishopprick; his tender conscience not permitting him to swallow down a
perpetual, or long non residency without regret, or perturbation of his heart.
Here also I may not forgett his religious, and grave sentence (worthy to be
written in letters of gold) which he delivered by way of answer unto a
reverend person (our contreyman) admiring his exemplary course of life. I may
not lay a Bishopprick under my feet, A memorable sentence of Card. Bellarmine.
and make one dignity a stepp unto an other; but I must lay it upon my
shoulders, and remember, that as Bishopps enjoy honor by their place, so they
sustayn a burden in their office.

10. It was not my intention to write an history, or panegyricall oration (when
our Basil is dead, and gathered unto his fathers, some Nazianzene will
perform this duty) but I have briefly, and faithfully related so much, as may
reprove the temerity of D. Field, and others, whose pens are steeped in gall,
and wormwood, to vent malicious untruths against this happy, and blessed man;
yea more happy, and blessed, because he suffers such contumelious vsadge at
their hands. But I must entreat their leave, and tell them plainly, that
since he was lately an ARCHBISHOPP (invested with that dignity in as
justifiable manner, at the least, as my Lord of Cant. himself is) and since he
does yet retayn the place of a CARDINAL, the consideration hereof might plead
with Scholars, who profess ingenuity, to deal more uprightly with his GRACE
in all their controversies, and more respectively in their demeanure toward his
Person.

11. I conclude; and now (kind Master S.) I will turn my speech again unto
your noble self Whereas you have seen, that your learned Doctor rejects all
conscience of truth, and ciuility of manners in his accusation of Bellarmine,
this may be a document, and instruction for you to know a lion by his paw, and
to conceive the proportion of Hercules his body by the quantity of his foot.
You may take measure of D. Field by himself, and of your chiefest Professors
by him: for his (supposed) fidelity has been a special anchor of your hope.
Wherefore I will remitt you unto your own thoughts, and consultation with your
wise heart, whether you may expect condign satisfaction from him, or others in
private conference, when he, and they are not ashamed to publish their
falsehoods unto the whole world, and to eternize them for all ages.

The end of the first Part.
THE SECOND PART, CONCERNING D. MORTON.
THE PREFACE.
IF you consider the sea before page 147.
deliberation of D. MORTON in the contexture of his APOLOGY, or his ibid. and
page 99.
pretended syncerity therein, it may seem very strange, that this work, which
was borne after so long travail, should be surcharged with impertinent
trifles, or subtle collusions, or malicious untruths. For which respects,
defens. Bellarm page 435.
James Gretzer (a very noble Author) has exotned it with a special encomio^;
viz. Hoc opus, merito suo, inter stultissima, qua ex Nouatorum officina
prodierunt, sedem sibi deposcit: adeo fatue, stolide, and insulse non
dissertat, sed delirat. etc.

This censure, because it proceeds from an adversary (and a IESVITE also; with
whose order, it pleases D. Morton to contend more eminently, then with any
other) may peradventure seem unjust; but yet the equity of it, or credibility
(at the least) may appear unto you by the sequel, which, being a part, does
delineare the condition, and quality of the whole. Believe me, Sir, that I
write this out of my certain experience; not provoked by any personal dislike
of the Author himself (for I may freely say with the Apostle; he has not hurt
me at all) but moved thereunto by tender compassion of your estate, Galat.
4.12.
and others, lending your credit unto them, who pay you with falsehood, and
buyld up their fortunes in the ruin of your Souls.

CHAP. 1. D. Mortons untruth in his defense of LVTHER, and CALVIN.
. 1. How D. Morton diuerteth the scandal of the Devils dispute with Luther
against the Mass.
1 THat the lying Devil had familiar conversation with your flying Angel,
himself does liberally confess; as namely; that he was as much, or more
accompanied by him then by Kate, his wife; and that he had eaten much salt
together with him. For he remembered the saying of antiquity; Cic. de Amicit.
Multi modij salis simul edendi sunt, vt amicitiae munu^ expletum sit.

2. But one particular conflict, which he had with his good Master touching
the MASS, is famous above the rest. And though Part. 1. l. 2. c. 21.
D. Morton would decline the infamy of that memorable dispute, wherein Luther
was See Serarius de Lutheri Maegistro
convinced by the arguments of the Devil, yet why should it not seem as
credible, and reasonable (in your judgment) that the Devil did dissuade
Luther from the MASS (which lib. 5. epist. 33. considerit^ for surely that
Mass was not a Zuinglian communion.
S. Ambrose celebrated according to the public custom; and the same
descending unto see Bellarm. de Misia. l. 1. c. 23.
S. Gregory without any substantial mutation, is now continued in the Catholic
Church) as he labored to persuade him unto the SACRAMENTARY opinion?

3. I will not handle this controversy now: wherefore I come unto D. Morton,
who expediting the same in 6. questions, proposes this in the third place,
viz. Ought the MASS to seem HOLY, because the Devil did reprehend it? He
answers; no: and yealdeth this reason of his denial. Apud Delrius. Jesuit.
lib. 4. de Magia cap. 1. q. 3. 5.
Surium liquet, DIABOLVM in specie Angelica apparuisse, and statim Abbatem, vt
MISSAM CELEBRARET, HORTABATVR. Do you see how the infernal serpent does
implicate, and wynd himself? He objecteth the MASS unto Luther as a thing
execrable, and odious unto God; the same [Diuell] endeavors to allure the
Abbott unto it, as it were to kiss Gods dearest daughter. Therefore, the MASS
is no more to be accounted HOLY because Satan seemed to reprehend it, then it
is to be accounted EXECRABLE, because he seemed to allow it. And thus the one
may co^po^derate with the other; the Devil is always a knave.

4. But, do you see how this glorious Doctor does implicate, and wind
himself? Before I go any farther, I must putt you in mind of his protestation;
viz. I may call God to be witness, and revendger against my soul, si sciens
fallo. Again; you may perceive here, that he cannot possibly derive the cause
of his error upon the weakness of his memory; for he is very exact in his
quotation of book, chapter, question, section; and therefore you will see,
that I had just cause to chardge him with malicious untruth, when you have
examined the Authors discourse, which he has mangled by a rare deprauation.
For thus writes his Author. Item DIABOLI reuelatio censenda est, si suadeat
aliqua contra Canones, vel constitutiones, vel regulas, vel alia praecepta
maiorum. Hoc indicio B. Simeon, Monachus Treuerensis, cum deprehendit. Narratur
historia ab apud Surium. 1. Iunij.
Euerwino Abbate. In verticem montis Sinai iussu superiorum cum missus fuisset,
ibi habitaturus; nocturnis horis illi specie Angelica Demon apparuit, and, vt
Missam celebret, hortatur. Ipse, nec plane dormiens, nec perfect vigilans,
contradicit; NOTA.
non debere SINE PRESBYTERII ORDINE hoc ministerium implere. Contra, inimicus
instat, se Dei legatum esse, Christum hoc velle, nec decere sanctum locum
ministerio tali diutius priuari. Renitentem ergo, and contradicentem, adiuncto
sibi consortio alterius Daemonis, de lectulo educunt, ante altar iam
vigilantem statuunt, alba induunt, de stola^ vtrimque alterca^tur, hostis more
presbyteri, Simeo^ more diaconi cote^debat sibi imponi debere. Tandem Dei
famulus, ad se reuersus, virtute orationis, and sign Crucis inimicum repellit,
seque delusum ingemiscit.

5. This is the narration of Delrius; concerning this matter. And now (all
circumstances duly waighed) I dare be bold to say, that, if D. Morton himself,
or any other in his behalf, can clear this corruption from the just imputation
of voluntary, known, resolved, determinate malice, then the infernal Serpent
(as he speaks) did never tell a lie, for which he, or they, may not likewise
extort some colorable defense.

6. Finally; does D. Morton believe that this history is true, or does he
repute it to be false? If false; why does he vrdge it? If true; then he must
remember, that there is some efficacy in the sign of the Cross, to terrify
his infernal Serpent. If he say with Brentius, that the Devil does fly it in
subtility, to draw men into superstition, I answer, that Pagans, and
Protestants do symbolize as well in this devise, as in many others. Theodoret.
hist. l. 3. c. 3.
For when Julian admired to see, that the Devils fled away at the sign of the
Cross, the Magitian answered, oh Sir; it was not for any fear of that sign,
but for detestation of your fact.

. 2. How D. Morton defends Calvin from the note of Iouinianisme. A
contradiction of D. Field.
1. AMongst sundry errors of Iouinia (a Father of Protestants; whence Loc.
com. Luth. part. 4. page 44.
Luther says, that Hierome wrote pestilent books against Iouinian; but he at
that time, had more learning, and judgment in his little finger, then Hierome
in all his body) this was one; A man cannot sin after baptism; if he were
truly baptized: that is to say; if he truly received faith, and grace. This
error is imputed by de notis Ecclesic. 9.
Bellarmine unto Calvin; and the reason is, because Calvin teaches, that true
faith (which, in his opinion, is inseparable from grace,) can never be lost.
For though Calvin does not, by way of positio^, defend, that a faithful man
cannot sin, yet the question is now, whether it follow out of the aforesaid
principle, by way of necessary deduction. Bellarmine affirms it, Part. 1.
lib. 1. cap. 34.
D. Morton denies it; and pretends, that this Iouinianisme may be imputed as
well unto Augustine, or Campian, as unto Calvin.

2. The sentence, which he produces out of de corrept. and great. cap. 7.
S. Augustine, is this. Horum fides, quae per dilectionem operatur, aut omnino
non deficit, aut reparatur, priusquam haec vita simatur. I grant that S.
Augustine says so; but what is this unto Calvin? For first; S. Augustine does
not teach, that faith can not be severed from grace. Secondly, he does not
affirm, that a man can never fall from faith, or grace. Thirdly; he does not
teach that only the elect can have these gifts, but he shows the contrary in
that place; and who knows not that many have lost both faith, and grace?
Lastly; S. Augustine does there distinguish betwixt the elect, and reprobate;
and teaches that the faith of Horum fides etc. that is spoken of the elect.
elect, which works by Charity, either does not fail at all; or if it do [as
sometimes it doth] yet it is repaired again, before their departure; but in the
reprobate, the case is very different; for they may have faith, and grace; but
faith and grace endure not in them with perseverance; a gift proper only unto
the elect.

3. Wherefore, there is no correspondency betwixt S. Augustine, and Calvin in
this point. For Calvin annexing grace inseparably unto faith, and auerring,
that faith can never be lost; must ineuitably thence infer, that a faithful
man does never loose grace also; and consequently he does never sin mortally,
because a mortal sin excludes grace inherent.
grace from the soul. And this I will prove unto you by D. Field; who page
176.
accusing the Papists to be liers of the worst memories, (whence it is, says
he, that every second page in their writings, if not every second line, page
147.
is a refutation of the first) does perplexe himself about this matter very
stra^gely, within the compass of a few lines, and inuolueth himself in
manifest contradictions.

4. For first he says, that the Elect, notwithstanding any degree of sin
they run into, retayn that GRACE, which can, and will procure pardon for all
their offenses. In which respect also he says, that the reprobate have no
GRACE in them, which may cry unto God for remission; and hence it comes to
pass, that all sin is venial unto the one, and all is mortal unto the
other. But see how, within 3. or 4. lines, he contradicts this assertion:
saying; All sins (that against the holy Ghost excepted) are venial ex
euentu; that is to say, such, as may be, and oftentimes are forgiven through
the merciful goodness of God, though there be NOTHING in the parties
offending, while they are in such state of sin, that either can, or does cry
for pardon. Who are they, unto whom God vouch safeth this goodness? Surely the
elect; for D. Field says, that in other men, who are strangers from the life
of God (as he speaks) all sins are mortal, and not remitted, for want of
Grace, which may cry unto God for pardon. Well then; in the elect oftentimes
there is therefore, no Grace.
NOTHING that can, or does cry unto God for pardon; and yet the elect also do
still retayn that GRACE which can, and will procure pardon for all their
offenses. Is not this a real contradiction? Again; he lin. 37.
says. We confess that all sins, not done with full consent, may stand
with grace; wherefore it follows by the contrary, that all sins, done with
full consent, exclude grace. Now since it is manifest, that many elect, after
grace received, do sin with full Consent (for such was David's case) it is
clear likewise, 2. Sam. 11.
that they fall from grace; which is restored unto them afterward, as de
corrept. and great. c. 7.
S. Augustine does excellently discourse; and Catholics concur with his
opinion.

4. I conclude this passadge with the public testimony of your Church: Artic.
Relig. 16.
After we have received the holy ghost, we may depart from if they loose their
faith also, then Calvin says falsely that true faith can NEVER be lost. If
they do not loose i^, the^ Calvin says falsely that true faith can not be
separated from GRACE.
grace given, and by the grace of God we may rise again. Whereby it is plain
against D. Field, that the elect do not retayn grace in them, notwithstanding
any degree of sin; but they fall not from that grace of God, by which they
are infallibly destinated unto salvation, and therefore unto a newness of life
also, which is necessary unto this end.

5. Thus much for S. Augustine. The sentence of Rat. 10.
Campian is cited in these words. Nisi Diui e coelo deturbentur, cadere ego
nunquam potero; and here your Doctor pretends that Campian, even as Calvin
himself, did believe constantly, that he could never fall from faith, but was
certain of his salvation. Which if it were so, then judge of the soundness of
your Deuinity, according to the principles whereof, Campian, a resolute Papist,
and opposite unto your Religion, might be infallibly secure of his salvation:
and the like all sectaries may, (as many do) apply unto themselves, with a
supposed certainty of perseverance. But as F. Campian does Rat. 8. Age, somuiet
hocised vnde etc. post medisi^
elsewhere particularly reprove this conceit, and taxes your Calvin precisely
for the same; so in in the conclusion of his tenth Reason.
this place he is far from that imagination, howsoever it pleases D. Morton
to propose his words by the half, and to pervert his meaning in the whole.
For that blessed Martyr having yealded a reason of his confidence (which he
deriueth from all kinds of witnesses in heaven, earth, and hell it self) non
diffiteor (says he) animatus sum, and incensus ad conflictum; IN QVO, nisi
Diui de coelo deturbentur, and superbus Lucifer coelum recuperet, cadere
nunquam potero.

6. Now I remitt me unto your ingenuity, and conscience, whether D. Morton did
not with voluntary, and determinate malice (as I said before) abridge the
sentence, and violate the intention of Campian, to deceive the Reader, with,
sciens fallit.
and against his knowledge. For what does F. Campian affirm? but only this;
since I have these testimonies of my religion, it is not possible that, relying
thereupon, I should ever causa cadere, be vanquished in that combatt, which I
do seriously desire.

7. This may be a sufficient instruction for you; and by it alone, you may
perceive, whether his heart be single, and sincere in his impugnation of the
Catholic faith; which he labors to extinguish by these miserable
inventions. But it will flourish much more, even for his sake God, of his
infinite mercy, will either mollify his affection, or cohibit his purpose. And
now (kind Master S.) I might ease my self, and you from any more pain in this
kind, if one more vast untruth then all the rest, did not compel me to proceed
yet a little farther; the master being of great importance, and, for many
respects, not to be passed over in silence.

CHAP. 2. D. Mortons untruth concerning the article of Christ his descent into
Hell.
. 1. The necessity, and weight of this article.
1. AMongst sundry difficulties, which did sometimes afflict my conscience,
when I was a brother of your society, this was not the least, viz. What is
that, which does properly, and entirely make a man to be a member of your
Church, so that, precisely, for defect thereof he cease absolutely from being
of that communion? In which argument though book. 1. chap. 7. 8. etc.
D. Field has bestowed his diligence, and pain, yet he is so full of
perplexity, and uncertainty, that I could never settle my conscience firmly,
and vnmooueably in his dubious, and enigmaticall resolutions. in his Reply.
Book 2. chap. 6. number. 11.
D. Kellison has lately proposed this question unto D. Sutcliffe; and though
he has handled it briefly, yet he has performed his designement with such
facility, and such gravity, so appositely, and so punctually, that any man
would be moved thereby to pity, and commiserate your chaos, and Babylonian
confusion.

2. But this position (with me) is an impregnable bulwark of my Religion: viz.
Whosoever does pertinaciously reject any point of faith (accepted by public
consent of the CATH. Church) he is an HERETIC, and no member of her communion.
For which consideration, I am as tenderly affected in this article, as in any
other of my Creed; esteeming my self obliged thereunto for two respects. FIRST;
because the essential truth thereof, is clearly revealed unto me by God, both
in his word written; and by Apostolical Tradition. In his word written; for
what can be more perspicuous, then this saying? Act. 2.27.
Thou will not leave my soul in hell etc. By Apostolical Tradition; for what
can be more plain, then this article? He descended into hell. That the common
Creed is an Apostolical Tradition, your chiefest writer H. de Pede^pt.
Zanch us does confess, and (as I conceive) page 238.
D. Field dissenteth not from his judgment therein. What de Antichr. page 48.
M. Powell, or his proud Peacock, or some precipitate Spiritts imagine to the
contrary, I am not to regard. But if this Creed be an Apostolical Tradition,
then it is See D. Fields rule, which I have cited before; Book 1. part. 1. c.
2.. 2. number. 3.
equal unto the written word of God, even for that cause. For it proceeds
from divine inspiration, and so it has sufficient authority of it self.
Wherefore it was not respectively decreed by your Artic. Relig. 8.
Bishopps, that this Creed ought thoroughly to be received, BECAUSE it may be
proved by most certain warrants of holy Scripture.

3. SECONDLY; I am moved by the authority of the Church. For who (says epist.
99.
S. Augustine) denies that Christ descended into hell, unless he be an
INFIDEL? And for the sense of this article, Tract. 78. in Ioh.
he has this clear resolution. Who is he that was not left in hell? Christ
Jesus: but in his SOVLE only. Who is he that lay in the grave? Christ Jesus:
but in his FLESH only. For the NATVRALL union of his body, and soul was
dissolved, but not the HYPOSTATICALL union of either with his Person.

4. This truth being so potent, and perspicuous, I ask you now; what reason
have you for any part of your faith, if you have not assurance in this? And if
you fall from this, See Luthers saying, before; page 40.
what certainty have you in any other point? Therefore it imports your Church
to show a due conformity in this article of the Creed. Finally; you may
remember, that S. Athanasius in his Creed (which your Artic. Relig. 8.
Church pretends to admit thoroughly etc.) having premised this denunciatio^;
Whosoever keeps not the Catholic faith entire, and inuiolate, without doubt
he shall perish everlastingly; does afterward subnect this article of Christ
his descent into hell, as parcel of that CATHOLIC faith.

. 2. D. Mortons pretense of his Churches unity in this point, is clearly
refuted.
1. NOw see your Doctors syncerity, who may call God to reuendge it upon his
soul, if he deceive any man with his knowledge. First, he cites the opinion
of l. 4. de Christo. cap. 15.
Bellarmine in these words: Opinio Catholica haec est; CHRISTVM VERE SECVNDVM
ESSENTIAM FVISSE IN INFERNO. As much as to say; Christ, in his soul
substa^tially, did descend into hell. Then he adds. Hanc vestram sententiam
NOS quoque iuxia cum Augustana confessione libentissime profitemur; non tamen
quatenus vestram, sed quatenus veram. WE also, together with the Augustane
confession, do most willingly profess this opinion etc.

2. It is well that he left out the Scottish, French, Belgian, and Heluetian
confessions; for he knows, that the true Caluinists are heretics in this
behalf. And this is an incuitable conclusion; because they do obstinately, and
wilfully reject the true, and Catholic opinion, and so, defending an opinion
CONTRARY unto CATHOLIC verity, they can not be exempted from the crime of
heresy; which casts them into a damnable estate. But, I beseech you, do YOU
(that is to say, your Church of England) most willingly profess this Catholic
opinion? Alas, that your Apologist has so justly called God to reuendge this
falsehood upon his soul: let him entreat our Lord to pardon that provocation
of his judgment, and, in the mean time, I will demonstrate his falsehood by
four evidences. FIRST; if YOU be of this opinion (as he pretends) why are
your Bibles infected with this absurd Translation? Act. 2.27. some say life; or
person. some body; or carrasse.
Thou will not leave my soul in grave. Is this to submitt your sense unto the
Scripture, or is it not rather to draw it unto your preiudicate opinion? This
is to measure the yard by the cloth: and thus, while you should be faithful
Translatours, you become corrupt Interpreters of the Scripture. SECONDLY; why
was your Church so distracted in this matter upon the Sermon, and Treatise of
D. Bilson? How came it to pass, that D. Rainolds his Caluinian resolution in
this matter, was confuted by M, Perks, and why did M. Willet (the Synopticall
Theologue; as he is phrased by in his epist. prefixed before the book of
Conference at Hampton Court.
D. Barlow) oppose himself against M. Perks his answer? Why do your Ministers
publicly in Sermons, and in print, impugn this true, and Catholic opinion?
THIRDLY; Why is no Minister punished for his repugnancy unto this truth? which
is of greater consequence, then cross, cap, surplice, or any ceremonious
thing, or whatsoever institution of your Church, for which many have suffered
deprivation of their livings. FOURTHLY; the testimony of M. Rogers (whose book
has a special approbation, as you may see page 160.
before) will convince D. Morton of notorious falsehood. For though his purpose
was to deliver the that is the title of all his pages.
Catholic doctrine of YOUR Church, yet when page 16.
he comes unto this article, he says, that, in the interpretation of it,
there is not that consent, which were to be wished; some holding one opinion
thereof, and some an other. Wherefore, yealding no certain doctrine, but
leaving men unto their choice, he adds; TILL we know the native, and
undoubted Faith consists not in the words, but in the sense.
sense of this article, etc.

3. If this be not a sensible conviction of M. Doctors singular untruth, I
must confess that I have done him injury, and will be ready to make any
satisfaction, that he can reasonably demand. Mean while, he must give me leave
to detect an other of his excellent sleights, and then I will referr him unto
his best thoughts. As it was a notable vanity in him to affirm, that YOU do
willingly embrace the Catholic opinion in this article, so that is a delicate
collusion, which ensues within the compass of three lines: viz. a VOBIS etc.
WE [in England] differ from YOU [Papists] concerning the place, unto which
Christ descended. For WE say that he descended unto the hell of the damned; but
YOU say that he descended only ad limbum Patrum, the region of the Fathers.

4. The author cited by him, is Theomach. l. 7. c. 1.
Feuardentius, whose opinion he imputes here as generally unto the Papists, as
he applied the other unto your English Church. But, forasmuch as M. Doctor
does continually deal with BELLARMINE, and in the words immediately precedent,
alleged him particularly also in this matter (as you number. 1.
see) why did he now pretermitt him, and select an other? I will show you the
reason; for Bellarmine himself in the very next chapter, is of a contrary
opinion unto that, which M. Doctor deriueth generally upon the Papists. What
piety then, or humanity was in this preposterous devise?

5. Know you therefore, FIRST; that the opinion, which he here imputes unto US
without exception, is as falsely attributed unto all Catholics, as the other
unto YOUR English Church. SECONDLY; that your difference is in the substantial
sense, and meaning of this article; but our difference is a scholasticall
disceptation in a matter of greater, or lesser probability, which, being a
doubt not resolved by the Church, may be indifferently accepted by her
children, without breach of charity, or violation of faith.

6. Thus I have given you a little signification of those many untruths, which
I have observed in this Doctor. If it consist not with his credit, or profitt
to yeald, yet it concerns you to beware of his Sirenicall incantations. Your
benefitt shall be my reward; if not so, yet this schedule may be a token of my
love; and be you well assured, that either, by following my counsel [TRY
BEFORE YOU TRVST] you shall prevent an heavy doom; or, by neglecting it, you
shall increase your judgment.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE GENERAL CONTENTS.
IN THE FIRST PART.
CHAP. 1.. 1. GERSONS testimony alleged by D. Field to justify the pretensed
REFORMATION.. 2. It is impossible that GERSON could wish, or tolerate this
REFORMATION;. 3. A detection of D. Fields untruths in citing the testimonies of
GERSON.. 4. The name, and authority of GROSTHEAD abused by D. Field to the same
effect. CHAP. 2.. 1. D. Fields untrue suggestion, concerning the unity of
Lutherans, and Caluinists, is refuted. Their difference touching Vbiquity, and
the Sacrament.. 2. D. Fields excuse of their litigation, is refelled. They
neither have, nor can have any conclusion of peace. CHAP. 3.. 1. D. Field
deuiseth criminations against Bellarmine.. 2. His inciuility toward the
CARDINAL; whose excellent parts are briefly noted.
IN THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. 1.. 1. D. Mortons untruth in defense of Luther.. 2. His untruth in
protection of Calvin. CHAP. 2.. 1. Of the article concerning Christ his descent
into hell.. 2. D. Morton does untruly pretend the unity of his English Church,
in the sense thereof.
The PARTICVLAR contents are many; which I referr unto the diligence of the
courteous Reader.

THE CORRECTION OF FAVLTES, PASSED IN SOME COPIES.
P. signifies page; I line; M. m^^gent, p. 10. l. 40. read, the same p. 12.
^^ number 15. p. 22. l ^ proceed. p. 26. l. 6. brimtione. p. 60. l. 27 ^^dery. p.
44 l. 15. (...) p. ^5. l, 4. improbation, 12. l. ^^ist. 17. (...), p. 48. l. 1^
Iudes p. 5^ ^ ^: with any p. ^^. l. 8. his style, and said page 58. l. 15 what
(...) p. 59. l. 22. your p. 64. l. 26. ^^cl^sasti^.


