A QVARTRON OF REASONS OF CATHOLIC RELIGION, WITH AS MANY BRIEF REASONS OF
REFVSALL: By Tho. Hill.

depiction of the Crucifixion

Imprinted at Antwerpe, with Privilege. 1600.

A COPY OF A LETTER SENT FROM TWO CITIZENS of London, to their friend
remaining beyond the Seas for cause of Religion.
WE had great hope (dear friend) that you would have been a stay and comfort
to us all, and an ornament to your kindred and Country, and therefore no costs
nor charges were spared in bringing you up in learning, but all was thought
well bestowed, not doubting but if God spared you life, you would in time be
able, not only to provide well for your own self, but also to pleasure the
best of your friends. But we see all to fall out quite contrary, to our
great grief and endless anguish: for the blind opinions, and selfe-willed
conceits which you have taken, have overthrown the good fortune which
otherwise lay before you, they have discredited you with your kindred, disgraced
you in your country, caused you to have your native soil, and to lead a
poor life in a strainge land. And yet all these might in some sort be borne,
were they not accompanied with the endless moan of your Parents. If you well
remember, you were long since told, that if you perseuered to take, and to
hold such opinions as you then began to do, your burning would stand you in
small steed, and consequently your kinsefolkes and friends should have little
joy, or comfort of you. And so we see it is come to pass. Your aged Parents
never cease to urge us to write to you, to move you yet at the length to
remember your self, and either by returning to amend all which is amiss, or
else by showing some Reasons to purge your self, and so to yield them some
satisfaction. We therefore pray you in all kindness to write unto us, and if
by no means you will be drawn back from this doleful course, yet vouchsafe
to set down some reasons of your Religion, to the end you may clear and purge
your self of the suspicion of sottishness, and selfe-wilfulnesse. For you are
mightily condemned, and of your kinsfolks here, thought to be, Bud. ex Cicer.
Opinator vehemens, one very opinatiue, for that you stick so stiffly to the
old, which here in a manner of all sorts is utterly condemned as a gross
and a palpable error. Yet have not we your loving friends so base conceit of
you, but we rather think that you have great and weighty Reasons (at the
least in your own judgment) to move you to take so hard a course as you
do. Our desire therefore is, that we may have them written, and sent us in as
brief manner as you possibly may, (for to return we will not move you,
except we thought you would conform your self to the Laws and Religion of
your Country) thereby to show and to declare to them who wish you well, that
you are no such opinions companion, as some would have you to be. Thus hoping
you have a care to accomplish our request, and not to reiecte our Letters, and
neglecte the aunswering of them, as your woonte and custom has been
heretofore, with our most hearty commendations, we commit you to God
Almighty. London this 13. of September. 1599.

Your very loving friends, R. and G.H.

A COPPIE OF THE ANSWER TO THE LETter afore-going.
MY DEAR AND loving friends, the 23. of October. Ann. 1599. I received your
Letter, dated the 13. of September of the same year. In it you give me to
understand, how that my Parents, with other of my kindred, as also you your
selves do greatly grieve for that you are frustrated of the hope, and
expectation, you had of my worldly ability in time to come, with many other
profes, of my blind opinion, selfe-willed conceits, crossing my good fortune,
of disgrace among my kindred, banishement, poverty, and of other such like. All
which words I count but as wind, or as vain florishes, the more for that I
see all your affection toward me to be mere carnal, and that you love me,
Amore concupiscentiae, rather than Amore amicitiae, seeking your own good
thereby, as may appear by your own writing, yet do I conster all in the best
manner. And whatsoever you write or say, I know does proceed from love and
affection, and from true amity, but yet savoring merely of flesh and blood. I
know my Parents to be kind and loving, according as nature gives to them the
instinct so to be, and I for my part am ready, and ever have been to yield to
them all duty of an obedient Son, as also to you the offices required in a
kind friend. But this I must entreat both them and you, to give me leave to
serve and to honor God Almighty, who is Father of all Fathers, and therefore
more to be harkened unto than any kindred, yea or creature whatsoever. Which
thing I cannot do but by cleaving to this Religion, wherein I was Borne,
Baptized, and Confirmed, and which I am most strongly persuaded in my
understanding and conscience, to be the only true Religion. Which settled
persuasion and assurance of Faith is not remooueable by any humane means, and
therefore in vain do you write such letters unto me, and in vain do my
Parents grieve at my course, for I more lament your state and theirs, than you
do mine. Assure your selfs that I can never be persuaded but that I take the
only way to gain Heaven, and so to save my soul, and only for that end do I
take this course of life, as God Almighty best knows, and me thinks you
should not deem it to be any discredit or disgrace so to do, considering I
cleave to the Religion of all our Ancestors and Forefathers, which has been
Universal over all Christendom, for above these thousand years, and
therefore cannot disgrace me, but it must disgrace the whole Christian world
also. Indeed if I took or held any new opinions, as of Puritanisme,
Brownisme, Martinisme, or of Family of Love, or such like newe-sprung conceits,
you might both justly condemn my course, and be utterly ashamed of such a
brainsicke fellow as should cross his worldly welfare by such sottishness,
and selfe-wilfulnesse. To satisfy my Parents and your request, I have here
written and sent you a Quartron of Reasons of Religion, not intending thereby
to persuade you or others there, to this religion which I profess, because I
know that to be dangerous, as prohibited by the laws of the land wherein you
live; but only to show to them who wish me well, what grounds, and reasons
I have for my doings. I could have yielded you so many (if I had thought it
fit so to have done) as would have made up a just volume, and yet have left
behind me infinite more: but I thought these to suffice, for that I know you
have not leisure, or at the least are unwilling to trouble your selves with
reading overmuch of such matter. I term them a quartron of reasons, because
that number is usual here in this Country, signifying the fourth part, or
quarter of an hundred; for when they will name any number, as we usually do
when we say a dozen, a scoare, etc. they say vnquartron, and by that number
they commonly buy buttons, lace, etc. as we do by dozens in England. Take them
in good part my dear friends, and assure your selves that wheresoever I live,
I will still carry a true English heart with me, by ever bearing a sacred and
reverent respect toward my Sovereign Princess, and my dear country; as
also a dutiful and obedient mind to my loving Parents, and a friendly
affection toward you: for I would not have you to think, that living out of
my Country for my conscience, does any way hinder the duties aforesaid: for I
call God to witness, who is the searcher of all hearts, that (my Religion
reserved) I be are all loyalty, affection, and fidelity, which a poor
Subject ought to do, toward our Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, (whom I pray God
bountifully to bless, and allaue affection toward my native Country, with
duty to Parents, and love to kindred as is aforesaid. And thus desiring my
father and mothers blessing, with many humble commendations to them, and no
fewer to you, I leave you to our Lord, who send us all of his heavenly grace.
From my Chamber at Phalempyne this 16. of February Anno 1600.

Your very loving friend. T. H.

THE I. REASON. If the Prophecies of the Holy Bible be true, (as they be most
true) then must the Religion of the Protestants needs be false.
BEFORE the coming of the MESSIAH, there was not any people, or nation which
did serve the true and living God, but only the Jews, all others whatsoever
being overwhelmed in a Sea of blindness, and worshipping false Gods, which
indeed were Devils, and thereupon the Master Devil LVCIFER was termed
Princeps huius mundi: that is, Joan. 12.
Prince of this world, for that he was honored and worshipped in all Lands,
and Kingdoms, Iewrie, and that in part, only excepted: which miserable state
and condition God of his infinite mercy greatly pitying, promised in time to
send a Savior, which should Redeem all nations and people, free them from
that pitiful servitude and blindness, and bring them to the knowledge of true
and right Religion, by suffering death, and consequently by planting a Church,
to the which al nations should repair. This he did foretell by diverse and
sundry Prophets, as by Esaias, Cap. 2.
who said the Church should be as a mountain, to the which, All Nations
should flow. And many people shall go and say: Come and let us ascend to the
mountain of our Lord: and after, Idolles shall utterly be bruised, and to be
brief, all this Chapter, yea all the rest in a manner fore-shewe the same
matter, declaring most plainly the conversion of all Nations to the Church of
the Messiah, Cap. 49. and 60. Dan. 2. and 7. I^sal. 47. Mich. 4.
and how Kings and Queens should come and do homage unto it, and that it
should ever continue without interruption, and that it should be most ample and
large the Prophet David most manifestly foretells, Luc. 1. Psalm. 71.
saying that it should extend, From Sea to Sea, and from the river to the ends
of the world, and how the Aethiopians should fall down Before the Messiah,
with the kings of Tharsis, Arabia, and Saba, and to be short, all kings, and
people should acknowledge this Church, as innumerable propesies of the old
Testament do plainly foreshewe. Hereupon it was that good men thirsted, and
longed so greatly for the coming of the Messiah, knowing that by him all
people which sat in darckenesse, and in the shadow of death, should be
lightened, delivered, and set in the right way to Heaven. And so our Savior
himself being now in the way to Jerusalem to suffer, said. Now the Prince
of this world shall be cast out: Ioh. 12.
and If I shall be exalted from the earth, I will draw all to to my self;
meaning by his Passion to draw al people from heathenish Idolatry to serve
him. Now if the Religion of the Papists (as these new men term them) be
false and erroneous, then is it against the Messiah, and consequently it is a
Religion of the devils own invention, and he the master and inspirer thereof,
and so by it he is served and worshipped, and then must it needs follow that
the Prophets were false, yea Christ himself said not truly, in telling his
Disciples, That the Prince of this world, that is, the devil should then be
cast out, and that he would draw all to himself, for that since his
Passion, the devil has had a more large and ample dominion than he had
before. For before the coming of the Messiah, the people of the Jews, and
Gentiles, and almost all Nations, Trybes, and Kingdoms, have been ever in
Lucifer his thraldom until this our age, in which Luther came to expel
Lucifer, and to rid all the world out of his captivity. And so the Passion
of our Re^deemer auailed little or nothing at all for the space of these
fifteen hundred years, and for a thousand years together he was not so far
from drawing all unto him as he said he would do, Ioh. 12.
that he drew not so much as one person, that any man can name. And in our
own Country there of England, it is most manifest that all were Papists,
without exception, from the first Christening thereof until this age of King
HENRY the eight. Luther. in postil. Ger 1537. part. 2. fol. 141.
And so the Protestants affirm of other Countries, and boldly say, that until
this age, the Gospel lay in the dust, and was hidden under the benche, and
CHRIST was unknown. Which to say (as the protestants must needs say, and
blush not so to say indeed) is mere madness, and flat infidelity, and a plain
denying of Christ, and no small establishement of Mahomets religion. For the
Protestants and Mahometanes agree in this, that the Church which Christ
founded, fell some five or six hundred years, after his Ascension, into most
horrible errors, and then (say the Turks) the Angel Gabriell was sent from
God to Mahomet, to teach him how he should reform the said Church, because it
would not stand with the wisdom, and goodness of Almightye God, to suffer
his Church to vanishe away through errous, and superstitions, without sending
in time to reform it. And in this out of doubt the Turks have far greater
reason than the Protestants have, which Protestants by their Doctrine make
Christ the most simple, and most improuident Lawegiuer that ever was in the
world. For neither Plato, Solon, Lyeurgus, nor any other Lawe-maker whosoever,
was so simple and improuident, as to fashion and plant a common wealth, which
before it were well settled, should vanishe away, and come to nothing, having no
sufficient means to prevent errors, and such abuses as would overthrow their
Laws, and destroy their common wealths. And therefore if Christ be God, and
the Holy Bible true, the religion of the Papists, must needs be that religion
which he ordained, and left to all generations, and consequentlye, the only
true and right religion.

THE II. REASON. The name of Catholics.
NO man can justly deny, but that they who ever have holden the name of
Catholics, and have been known thereby, were undoubtedly of true religion,
for that they had ever on their side the Scriptures, Miracles, Fathers,
Counsels, and Martyrs, and for that every one which was against them, was ever
accounted, and reputed for an Heretic. And the same Catholics were ever taken
as the trounke, or as the body of the tree, and all others bearing the name of
Christians, as branches, or boughs cut off the same tree. Now all the
world knows, that whosoever in any age, was a member of the Roman Church,
and under the obedience of the high Bishop thereof, he was ever taken for a
Catholic, and so termed, although in these our days it has pleased the
protestants, to call such by the name of Papists, which indeed is all one with
the name Catholics, for that it signifies such as follow and embrace the
Doctrine of that Church which has for her head under Christ the Pope. And it
is not amiss as Saint Chrysostom says, Hom. 33. in acta.
to be named of them who govern the Church in Christ's steed, so that they
take not their name of any particular man, as Heretics do. But yet the
Catholics are not called Papists, but only of a few Lutheranes in Germany,
and of some others their adherents in other countries near about, for in
Greece, Asia, Affrike, and in the Indies, as in Italy, Spain, Sicily, and in
other countries of Europe, the name of Papists is utterly unknown. The name
therefore of Papists is no name commonly used, but only of a few, and never
heard of before Luther invented it, for that he could not call them after the
proper name of any one man, because there was never any such in the Church,
which either brought up any new Doctrine, or chainged the Religion of his
Predecessors, whereas contrariwise, heretics have ever taken their names of
some one who began that heresy: as the Nestorians, of Nestorius, the
Pelagians, of Pelagius, Lutherans, of Luther, Caluinists, of Calvin, etc. And
although Luther termed them Papists, yet knew he so well in his conscience,
that they ever had been, and ought to be called Catholics, as that he caused
his folowers to chainge their Creed, in saying: Brist. Mo. 1
I believe the Christian Church, and not:
I believe the Catholic Church: for fear least they should be thought to
confess that they believed in the Church of Rome, which ever was called
Catholic. And it seems that the Protestants know in their own consciences,
the name of heretics to be so proper to themselves, as that in their
translations of the Bible, where the name Heretic occurreth, they put in place
of it, a man that is the author of sects: assuring themselves that the Reader
finding the word Heretic, or Heresy, would presently judge it to be meant
of them. As for their own name, whereby they term themselves protestants
(which name they take from certain Lutheranes in Germany, who first named them
selves so, differing, and disagreeing altogether from these Protestants in
Doctrine) it is new, and never heard of before in the world, and of the same
quality and condition, that the name Zwinglians is of. And therefore I conclude
with the saying of Saint Hierome. Aduers. Lucif. Chrysostom. in act. hom 33. and
Just. in Tryph.
If any where thou hear, them, which are said to be of Christ, to be termed,
not of our Lord Jesus Christ, but of some other, as Marcionites. Valentinians,
Hil-brethren, or Fielde-breethren, be thou sure, that they are not the Church
of Christ, but the Synagogue of Antichrist.

THE THIRD REASON. Unity and Consent.
THE Catholic Roman Religion being received by so many Nations, in Africa,
Asia, and Europa, and in this last age in both the Indies, has notwithstanding
such variety of wits, such diversity of manners, such multitude of tongues and
languages, such distance of places, such numbers of matters to be believed, yet
ever kept Unity, and Concord in such peaceable and consonant manner, as never
any one in England or Ireland, which are the uttermost parts of the
west-world, dissented, or disagreed in any point of Doctrine, concerning
Faith, from him which lived in the utmost parts of the East. But whosoever they
be, or in what place, or region soever they remain in all the world, if they be
catholics or papists (if you will call the^ so) they all have one Faith, one
Belief, one Service, one number of Sacraments, one Obedience, one Judgment
in all, with other like points of Union, and Unity, which makes a general
uniformity also in the peace of men's minds, and to be brief they have all
one heart, and one soul: But on the other side, Act. 4.
if you look into the doings of Protestants, you shall see such discentions,
such divisions, such schisms, such contrariety of opinions; as the like was
never among the Arrians, among the Eutychians, among the Donatists, among the
Nestorians, among the Valentinians, no nor yet amongst the most iarring
Heretics that ever were. So as you may plainly behold in Luther his seed the
selfsame thing that the Poets feign of Cadmus his sowing; you may see the
Madianytes and Amalekites in one tent against the people of God; Ovid. Metam.
lib. 3. Iudic. 7.
builders of the tower Babell, accusars of chaste Susanna: for they are not
only different, and divided from the general body of Catholics in
Christendom, with whom they were united heretofore: but amongst them selves
they have implacable wars. I would you did but see, what I have seen in
these Countries, as concerning the deadly hatreds, contentions, and discentions
of Luther his offspring: as of the Muntzerans, Anabaptists, Adamites,
Steblerians, Sabbataries, Clancularians, or Gartenbrijder, Manifestarians,
Daemonians, Commonholders, Byslipers, Howling Anabaptists, Dauidgeorgians,
Memnonites, Polygamistes, Signifiers, Figurers, Valewers, Pledgers,
Presentaries, Metamorphists, Iudaists, Neutersacramentaries, Image breakers,
Zealous Lutherans, Soft Lutherans, or Interimistes, New-Arrians, Trinitaries,
Hell-maisters, Hell-tormentors, Antidaemonians, Amsdorfians, Antadiaphoristes,
Antosiandrians, Anti-Swenckefeldians, Anti Caluinists, Hand-impositors,
Bisacramentarians, Sacerdotales, Inuisibilists, Scripturians, Adiaphoristes,
Trisacramentarians, Quadrisacramentarians, Luthero Caluinists, Semiosiandrians,
Maiorists, Penitentiarians, Noui-Pelagians, Politicke-Lutheranes,
Swenckefeldians, Osiandrians, Stancarians, Antistancarians, New-Manichees,
Sternbergers, and of such like: all which have sucked their errors out of the
dregs of Luthers Doctrine, and yet forsooth, will be sound Protestants all.
And what divisions you have there in England you may in some sort know, who do
(as I think) now and then hear preachers of different doctrine. What combats
your Bishops, Councillors, and moderate sort of Protestants have to defend
their Parlimentarie Religion, and the QVEENES Proceedinges as they term it,
against Puritans, brownists, and other suchlike good fellows, that by show of
Scriptures impugn it, you can not but know and see with your eyes. Neither
can it be answered, that the Sects here rehearsed differ one from another
only in matters of small moment, for they differ and disagree in weighty
points of our Salvation, as might here easily be declared, but that it
would not benifit this mine intended brevity so to do.

This Unity of CATHOLICS, and discord of PROTESTANTS, most manifestly
shows, that as the Apostles were they, for whom our SAVIOVR prayed to his
FATHER, and was heard of him: Holy Father, keep them in thy name, whom thou
haste given me, that they may be one, as we also be one, John seauenteene: so
they of the CATHOLIC ROMAN Religion, be they, for whom in the words
following he prayed, and was heard: Not for them do I ask only, but also
for them, which shall believe, by their preaching in me, that all may be one,
as thou Father in me, and I in thee, that also they in us, may be one: and
hereof it necessarily follows, that they be of the true CHVRCH, for that
none but they observe and keep the Unity which he obtained for them of his
Heavenly FATHER. Aug. l. 18. de ciuit. dei. C. 41.


And surely it can not proceed but from the HOLY GHOST, that all Sacred
vvriters of the CATHOLIC ROMAN CHVRCH, although being men of diverse Nations,
Times, and Languages, yet have so vvonderfullie consented, and agreed amongst
themselves, as we see they have done.

And lastly, it is wonderful to behold, how all decrees of lawful Councels,
and of Popes do agree in all points of Doctrine, one with another, although
they were made by diverse men, in diverse places, at sundry times, upon diverse
occasions, and against Heresies, not only most different, but oftentimes
contrary one to another. This, no doubt, is the finger of God.

THE IIII. REASON. Conversion of Countries.
IT is most plain and manifest, that all Countries, which ever believed in
Christ, were first converted to his faith by such, as either were precisely
sent, or at the leastwise had their authority from the Pope, which lived in
the time, in which they were converted. This thing is so openly set down in
the History of the first conversion of every Country, as no Protestant, were
he never so impudent, can without blushing deny it. True it is, that Heretics
have corrupted such as were Catholics before, but that they ever converted any
Heathen Nation to Christianity can never be showed. I know very well that John
Calvin to get glory, sent certain of his Ministers into newfound lands, but
I never could hear that any of them ever converted so much as one silly woman
to their Gospel in those parts. The truth is, their agreement in doctrine
was so great, that one destroying another buildings, they became laughing
stocks to the Heathens, and so were glad to depart with shame. But who knows
not that the Catholics, as they have converted all to Christianity that ever
were Christians: so in this age they have brought infinite numbers to the
Christian faith in the East and West Indies, by the means and labors of the
most happy and holy Fathers of the holy Order of S. Frauncis, of S. Dominick,
and of the blessed Society of JESUS, which blessed Religious men in our own
Country there of England, only in regard of their Sacred function, are
executed as Traitors. And have not these I pray you their authority from ROME?
I will not here speak of the infinite number of Miracles wrought by
Catholics in the conversion of countries, and namely of those which are now
done in both the Indies by the Holy Fathers aforesaid, for that I reserve that
matter for his proper place, but I would advise you here diligently to weigh
the sequel of the Assertion of the Protestants; how that if Papists be not
true Christians, and of the right religion, then does it necessarily follow,
that neither Spaniards, nor Portingales, nor Sardinians, nor Sicilians, nor
Italians, nor Germans, nor Tra^syluanians, nor Hungarians, nor Polonians, nor
Danes, nor Flemminges, nor Scots, nor Irish, nor English, no nor any Nation
under Heaven had ever true Religion, before Friar Luther married Nonne Bore,
before John Calvin run away to Geneua, before Peeter Martyr with his
Fustelugges came to teach at Oxford, and before a number of such like good
companions, led only by sensuality, and carnal zeal dishodded themselves,
and became such spectacles to the world as every man knows. Which thing to
affirm, is flatly to deny Christ, and all Christianity, as I showed in my
first Reason. And surely I am greatly confirmed in the Catholic Religion,
beholding the Heavenly manner used by the professors thereof in gayning souls
to Almighty GOD, for that I see them neither to spare goods, nor labors, no
nor their own lives, so that they may win people to Heaven.

GREGORYE the thirteenth Pope of that name in these our days, spent all the
renennewes of the Popedom in founding SEMINARIES and COLLEGES in diverse
Lands and Provinces, thereby to restore the Catholic religion.

Many Holy and Religious Priests do go daily into Germany, into Hungary,
into Greece, into Palestina, into Egypt, into Syria, into Aethiopia, into
Africa, into Moscouia, into Ireland, into Scotland, into England, and into
other heretical and heathen countries, yielding themselves to all dangers by
sea, and land, and to all worldly miseries, having mortified all their carnal
affections, renounced all riches, honors, and kindred, and having made
themselves most ready for their grave, and consequently for another world,
moved only by the zeal of saving souls. And it moves me not a little to
see what patience, mildness, and quietness these men use in all their
dooinges. And I see also on the other side, that no protestant ever had so
great zeal of his Religion, as that he would for spreading abroad the same,
forgo any worldly commodity, either by founding Seminaries, or Colleges in
Countries, or by going, or sending where any difficulty or danger was, but as
one wholly respecting this world, he walloweth in wealth, and pleasures at
home, or if by any accident he be compelled to fly into foreign Countries,
he may not travail except his preatie parnell go with him; but such a one
to go simply, and as they say, bona fide, to convert others was yet never
seen. And if by any occasion offered unto such, they go about to plant their
Gospel any where, they do it in such a turbulent, and mutinous manner, and
not by Epistles after Saint Paul's use, but by Pistols as Beza did, as every
one may see what spirit pricketh them forward. Neither do they take any other
course in their proceedinges, but to destroy States and Kingdoms, and to
displace lawful Monarchies and Magistrates, as the Low Countries, Germany, and
Scotland can sufficiently witness, and ever their beginning is of Pride and
Envy, as Luthers was; or by abusing themselves in their former estate, as
Sir John Calvin did, or by yielding themselves slaves to ambition, as they did
in Scotland, or by following Lust and Leacherie, or of some such like brutish
occasion, and never indeed upon any good ground, using their religion only as
a serueturne, when other means fail to atchieue their unlawful desires. It
is plain therefore in my judgment, that the Catholics are they, who ever
fished simply and syncerely, with Saint Peeters Net, and therein have enclosed
myraculous multitudes of fishes, and that the Protestants, by their
extraordinary, and late angling have caught none, but such as were in a better,
and more sound manner taken before. And although Freculphus writes, In Chron.
tom. 2. li. 4 cap. 20.
that the Arrian heretics converted the whole nation of the Goths from
Paganysme to the Faith, in the time of Valens the Emperor; socrates. lib. 4.
cap. 27. sozom. l. 6 cap. 37. Theodoret. lib 4. cap. vlt.
yet it appears by Socrates, Sozomenus, and Theodoretus, that the greatest
part of those Goths were Catholic Christians before, and afterward seduced by
the Arrians: for Heretics cannot possibly convert any to such faith as may
make the converted better then they were before, for that they having indeed
the Scripture in some sort, yet have not the true sense thereof, which
properly is the sword of the spirit, and the words are rather the scabard, in
which the sword is sheathed. And therefore they fighting only with the scabard,
without the sword, cannot wound the hearts of Infidels. And no marvel though
they pervert Catholics, for that men are prone to liberty, and to looseness
of life, which by such doctrine is permitted. So that they are indeed most
aptly by S. Augustine likened unto Partridges, lib. 13. contra faust. cap. 12.
which gather together young ones which they begot not; whereas contrariwise
the Holy Church is a most fertle Dove, which continually brings forth new
Pigeons.

THE FIFTH REASON, largenes of Dominion through the multitude of Believers.
THE Church which the Messiah was to plant, must be (as is aforesaid)
dispersed throughout al nations and kingdoms, as the Holy Prophets most
plainly foreshewed, and namely the Royal Prophet, speaking of the Apostles,
and Preachers, which should Succeed them, says: Psalm 18.
Their sound went forth into all parts of the Earth, and their words unto
the ends of the circle of the earth. And most manifestly does he foretell the
largeness of Christian Religion in the 71. Psalm. And S. John saw the four
beasts, Apoc. c. 5.
and the four and twenty Elders fall down before the Lamb, singing thus:
Thou art worthy Lord to take the Book, and to open the seals thereof, for
thou have bin slain, and have redeemed us to God in thy Blood, Cap. 7.
out of every Tribe, and people, and Language, and Nation: and in another
place: After these things, says he, I saw a great company, which no man was
able to number, of all Nations, and Tribes, and Peoples, and Tongues. These
things with many such like in Holy writ are no wise verefied in any Religion
under Heaven, but only in the Roman Catholic Church; for that none but it
(as every man knows) has had any large scope to account upon in any age.
And it has been for these thousand years at the least throughout both the
Hemyspheres, in such sort as the sun stretches not his beams further then
it does, and has done: yea, there is no tongue nor people, nor climate in the
world, which has not heard of, and in some measure received the Catholic
Roman Religion. Neither can the Protestants say, that the Church now
begins to flourish, and to dilate it self in the world after so many ages;
for that now it is grown old and aged, as is most plain, and to say that she
increased not in her young years, but now in her old age is to make her a
monster. She must therefore of necessity, have grown, and increased, and
occupied, if not all the world, yet no doubt the greatest part thereof, and so
has the Catholic Roman Church, and none but she done: Colloss. 1.
for in the Apostles time she began to fructify in all the world. And in S.
Irenaeus his time, Irenaeus. l. 1. cap. 3. Tertul. li. contra Iudaeos. ca. 4.
Cyprian de vuit. eccles. Athanas. lib. de humanit.
she was spread all over the world then known, as she was afterward in
Tertullian his time, and in the days of S. Cyprian, Athanasius, Chrysostom,
Hierome, Augustine, Theodoretus, Leo the great, and Prosper, who in his book
De Ingratis has these words.

verbi Chrisost. and Hieron. in Mat. 24. Aug. in Epist. 78. and 80. ad
Hesychium. Theod. lib de legibus Leo. Mag. ser. 1. de S S. Petro and Paulo.
Seeds Roma Petri, quae pastoralis honoris,
Facta caput mundo, quic quid nos possidit armis,
Religione tenet. Which thus may be Englished.
Rome, Peter's seat, whose Bishop is of Prelates Peereles Lord,
Religion Lady makes of all, which arms do not afford.
But the Protestants peradventure, will grant that the true Church flourished
in those days, but not afterward until this age, in which they have
reformed the same: yet is it most manifest, that it flourished afterward even
until this our time, no less then it did before, if not more: for in Saint
Gregory his days it was spread all over the world, as appears by his
Epistles to the Bishops of the East, of Afrike, Spain, France, England,
Sicilie. And by Saint Bede in cap. 6. cantic: In vita S. Bernardi. lib. 2. ca.
7.
as also by Saint Bernard, who disputing before Rogerius King of Sicilie,
avouched that in those days, the East, all the West, France Germany,
England, Spaniardes, and many barbarous nations obeyed the Bishop of Rome. And
in these days, it is all over Italy, all over Spain, and in France, in most
parts of Germany, in Poleland, Boheme, besides England, Hungary, Greece,
Syria, Aethiopia, Egypt, in which Lands are many Catholics; and in the
nevve world it flourishes mightily, in all the four parts of the world;
Eastward in the Indies; Westward in America: Northward in Iaponia, Southward in
Brasilia, and in the uttermost parts of Afrike. And to name somewhat more in
particular some Countries, in which it is happily received of many, if not
universally of all, but yet in many lands it is received of the greatest part
of the inhabitants, in Goa, in Malabar, in Cochin, in Bazain, in Cola^, in
Tana, in Daman, in Ciaul, in Coran, in Salsetta, in Pescaria, in Manar, in
Trauancor, in Cogiro, in Bugen, in Cicungo, in Cicugne, in Oian, in Gomotto, in
Gensura, in Xichi, in Ormuz, in Ternate, in Momoia, in Ambonio, in Macazar, in
Cerignano, in Siligan, in Butuan, in Pimiliran, in Camigu, in Supa, in Sian, in
Bacian, in Solar, in Malacca, in Tidor, in Selebi, and in the Islands of S.
Thomazo, S. Domingo, Madera, and in all those innumerable Islandes, which the
King of Spain there possesses: So that the Catholic Roman Religion has
had, and has yet a far greater sway in the world, then any other religion ever
had, or has. And worthy it is to be noted, that in no land nor country under
Heaven ever was, or is, any persecution, of any moment against Papists (as you
term them) or against the Priests of that religion, in regard that they be
Papists, or Priests made by authority from the Sea of Rome, but only in
England. And in very deed, the whole world does wonder, that little England
dare, and is not ashamed to do that, which never was seen in the world
before: for let a Seminary priest (as they call him) keep him out of England,
and he is safe enough in any region under heaven. This I say by the way, for
that it greeueth me at the very heart, to hear that my dear country does
persecute that religion, which all the world has ioifully embraced, or at the
least, does willingly tolerate, as though she were wiser then all the world
besides is, or ever has been, or then al her Elders. Or, as though English
Protestants knew, and saw more, than all the whole Learned men of
Christendom have done for so many ages together. And I pray you, tell me, if
an herb should be presented to you to eat, that al learned Physicians for a
thousand years together, have judged to be ra^cke poison, and only some one
or two of later years, have begun to teach the contrary, without actual
experience whether it be so or no, but only by discourse, and new arguments,
of their own brain, would you abstain to eat it or no? Or if an action
should be offered you there in England, which by all old Lawyers judgment of
former times has been taken for high treason Ipso facto, and consequently
loss of life, and lands, though some newer lawyers were of contrary opinion
that now it is not, would you not look twice before you would leap, except
you were out of your wits? But in this other case, although all ancient
Divines, and Doctors, for above a thousand years together, have taught the
Catholic Roman Religion, to be true indeed, and only Friar Luther a loose
Apostata, and Sir John Calvin, a seare-backt Priest for Sodomy, have begun in
our days to teach the contrary, for fear of being punished by the
Magistrates of the said Catholic Religion, for wicked, and badde life, yet
will they Protestants rushe out, and cast at all, and will hazard Hell, and
all Eternity of torments thereon depending. Who will deny this to be
headlong, and hare-braine dealing? Surely this universal consent of
Christendom, against two or three so contemptible authors of novelties, are
more than sufficient to induce any man of reason to look about him, and to
consider what he does, and whether he may adventure his soul upon such
inequality of testimonies, as this is between two, or three Nouellants, and
twenty millions of holy and grave auncientes, and no doubt in Westminster hall
this difference of witnesses would prevail with any equal, and discreet
judge or jury. Neither may the Protestants now at length glory in their
great number, as some of them have done, for that their Religion, is there in
England, and in Scotland, and some thereof in Irelande, Apol. Eccles. Ang.
and in the Lowe-countries, and in some parts of Germany, and a few of them in
France, for they never yet passed into Asia, nor into Africa, nor into
Greece, nor into many places of Europe, much less into the Indies. But indeed
if you rightly scanne their Doctrine, you shall find that your Religion
Protestantine of England, is no where in the world else, and that English
service contained in your book of Common prayer is unknown, and condemned of
all other Nations, and people under the cope of Heaven. So that in very deed
the doctrine of your Protestants is taught, or received, no where but in
England, and the Puritan Doctrine of Scotland (the contrariety thereof
duelye considered) is no where but in Scotland, the Lutherane Doctrine taught
in Denmark, is no where but in Denmark, and in a few places of Germany, the
libertine Doctrine taught in the Low Countries, is no where but in the
Low Countries, and the like may be said of other sects.

Lastly, I do here consider with my self, if I should refuse the Catholic
Roman Religion, so universally taught, received and professed through out all
the world so many ages together, and embrace any of these new silly sects,
aduenturing my soul thereupon, what all my progenitors and ancestors, if they
were here again, and saw me do so, would say unto me, I guess they would use
such speeches as these: what do thou condemn all our judgments, and
doings? Do thou malign that Religion, which we so highly esteemed and
sought to advance? Do thou send us al to hell and damnation? Will thou
judge thy self wiser and more in Gods favor than any of us were? And many
such like speeches I think they would use.

THE SIXTH REASON. Miracles.
True miracles were never wrought but by them, who were of true religion, for
that they are done only by the power of God. Now it is so manifest that there
has been almost an infinite number of miracles wrought by those who were of
the Catholic Roman Religion, and never any by them who were not of that
Church, since Christ's time, as he who shall deny it, may be proved no less
impudent and shameless, than he who shall deny, that ever there was any Mass
said in times past in England, or that ever there were any wars between
Turks and Christians, or that there be any such countries as the East and West
Indies. Which things if a man should deny, would he not of all men be deemed,
not only impudent, but mad, drunken, or a fool? And surely the one is no
less known by all approved writers, and eye witnesses than the other. For as
in the Gospel, and in the Acts, the holy Scriptures witness, that miracles
were wrought by Christ and his Apostles, so do most approved authors of every
age until this day testify and record the continuance of the working thereof
in the Catholic Roman Church, the which Authors for the most part were
eie-witnesses of the said miracles, as for example. In the second age were
wrought those wonderful miracles by the Christian Soldiers in the army of M.
Antonius, Tert. in lib ad Scap. and in apol. c. 5 Eusebius. lib. 5. hist. c. 5.
Oros. lib. 7. hist. c. 15
which Tertullian, Eusebius, Orosius, and the Emperoor himself have recorded.
In the third age were the miracles of Gregorius Thaumaturgus, witnesses S.
Basil lib. de spiritu sancto Cap. 29. Gregory Nyssen in vita eius. Hierom de
viris illustrib. Ruffinus lib. 7. hist. cap. 25. In the fourth of S. Anthony,
Hilarion, Martine, Nicolas, and of others. In the fifte, those which S.
Augustine sets down lib. 22. de ciuit. Cap. 8. In the sixth, those which S.
Gregory makes mention of, lib. 3. dial. Cap. 2. and 3. In the seventh, those
which were done in England, in the co^uersio^ thereof, written by the same Greg.
li. 9. ep. 58. And by venerable Bede. l. 1. hist. Ca. 31. In the eight, the
miracles of S. Cutbert, and S. John in England, also Bid. lib. 4. hist. and 5.
In the ninth, the miracles of Tharasius, written by Ignat. Nicen. and of
others. In the tenth, the miracles of S. Romuald. recorded by S. Pet. Damian:
of S. Wenceslaus, and of others which Surius writes. In the eleue^th, the
miracles of S. Edward k. and vir. of S. Ans. and of others In the twelfth, the
miracles of S. Mal. S Barn. and of others. In the thirteenth, the miracles of
S. Fran. S. Dom. S. Bonauent. S. S. Celest. and of others. In the fourteenth,
the miracles of S. Bernardine, S. Kather. of Sieuna, and of others. In the
fifteenth, the miracles of S. Vinc. S. Ant. and of others. And last of al in
this our sixteenth age are the miracles of the glorious S. Fran. de Paula, of
the holy Jesuit Zauer, Aug. de vtil. cred. cap. 17. and lib. cont. ep. fund.
cap. 4.
in the Indies, and of many more. And therefore I say unto you out of S. Ang. I
am bound and tied in the Catholic Church by the band or chain of miracles.
And I am bold considering, and most steedefastlye believing these infinite
glorious miracles of all times and ages in the Catholic Roman Church, to cry
out to Almighty God, with Richard de S. Victore lib. 1. de trin. cap. 2. Lord,
if it be not true which we believe, thou have deceived us: for these have been
confirmed in us by such signs and woonders as could not be wrought but by
thee. But on the contrary part, never any Protestant could work any miracle
at all, but assaying to make some show thereof, to make their Doctrine the
more probable to their followers, felt the just reuengement of God, who turned
all to their shame and confusion, as he did by Simon Magus, Egesippus lib. 3.
de excid. hierosol. ca. 2.
by Cyrola the patriarch of the Arrians, as witnesses Grego. Turones. lib. 2.
hist, Franc. cap. 3. by the Donatists. Optatus lib. 2. contr. Parmen. And in
our days by Luther, endeavoring to dispossess a wenche, and by Calvin going
about to delude his disciples, as you may read in Hierom Bolsec. in vit.
Calvin cap. 13. Vid. Staph in abs. resp
And therefore they are most foolish and miserably inconsiderate, who believe
these new fellows, not being able to quicken a flea, and leave the doctrine
of the Catholic Church confirmed with innumerable miracles.

THE VII. REASON. Visions, and the gift of Prophecy.
AS TRVE Miracles never were wrought but by them who were of the true Church,
so heavenly Visions, and the gift of Prophecy, were never found to be but
in the same. And therefore the holy Apostle amongst other things which he
uses to commend his Doctrine, and himself to the Corinthians against
Heretics, 2. Cor. 12.
and false Apostles, he brings in this as one saying. Now will I come to
Visions and Revelations of our Lord, etc. 2. Pet. 1.
And S. Peter alleges for confirmation of his preaching the tra^sfiguratio^
of our lord in the mount which he saw, Mat. 17. Act. 10. and 11.
and calls it a Vision, he had a Vision of a sheet with all kind of beasts in
it, when he was to deal with the Gentiles. And for the truth of Religion, and
confirmation of that which they did, Act. 2. he alleges the prophecy of
Ioell, Joel. cap. 2
who says amongst other things: Your young men shall see Visions, and to be
brief, of this sort is the whole book of the Apocalypse. So that to see these
kind of heavenly Visions, and thereby to foretell things most certainly, is only
amongst them who are of the true Church. For although there have been
prophecies amongst the Heathens, yet were they not undoubtedly true, as the
Oracles of Apollo, and such like illusions, except they were for the
confirmation of right Religion, as the prophecies of the Sybills, Eusebius. lib.
5. hist. cap. 16. and 18.
and of Balaam. And the same may be said of heretics, as of Montanus, of
Luther, of Muncer, and of such like, who look upon them to prophecy some to
their utter shame, and some to their own destruction. But the Catho. Roman
Church has had in it in all ages those which had true Visions, Cochlaeus in
actis Lutheri.
and the gift of true prophecy, as Agabus. Act. 11. Gregory Thaumaturge, so
Basil. li. de spiritu sancto Cap. 29. S. Anthony, the Abbote John, of whom, see
S. Aug. lib. 5. de ciuit. Cap. 26. S. Monica, see Aug. lib. 3. Confess. Cap. 11.
S. Benedicte see Gregor. lib. 2. dial. Cap. 15. S. Bernard, see in eius vita.
lib. 4. Cap. 3. S. Frauncis, see in eius vita Bonauentura, with many others,
for seldom was there any who had the gift of miracles, but the same had this
gift also. And in these days, I know diverse and sundry Papists, (as you call
them) who have seen undoubtedly wonderful Visions, which perhaps you may see
recorded hereafter, with sufficient and irrefragable testimony.

THE VIII. REASON. Scriptures.
NEither may here the Protestant reply, and say, that the Papists build upon
Miracles, Visions, Prophecies, and upon such like, but not upon the WORD, for all that they allege are most agreeable to the word of God. Neither do they
teach any Doctrine but such as is derived out of the holy Bible, and for the
maintaining thereof, they are not compelled to deny certain parts of Gods
holy Book, as the Protestants, and their predecessors, heretics, have bin
enforced to do. The Manichees, for that their heresies were so manifestly
confuted by the Gospel of Saint Mathewe, Aug. l 28. con Faust cap. 2. and de
vtil. cred. cap 3.
and by the Acts of the Apostles, as they could coin no answer, nor other
shifte, they denied them to be Scripture. The Ebinites, because the Epistles
of Saint Paul disproued most plainelye Cyrcumcision, which they maintained,
denied them to be Scripture. Luther rejected the Epistle of S. James, because
it was so plain against the doctrine, of only Faith. His offspring refused the
books of Tobias, of Ecclesiasticus, of the Machabees, and of some others,
because in them is plainly taught the Doctrine of the custody of Aungells, of
Free Will, of Prayer for the Faithful Souls departed, and of Prayer to
Saints, al which they deny, and therefore must they needs deny those parts of
the holy Bible. For heretics ever framed the Bible to their opinions,
chainging, wresting, paring, and sometimes flatly rejecting, al which made
ouerplainely against such Doctrine as they devised, and so do most impudentlye
the Protestants now. Whereas the Catholics ever squared their Doctrine by
the line and the level of the Word of her Spouse, and therefore never had
cause to reiecte the least ^otte of the holy Bible, and at one word, the
Catholics follow the Bible, but the Protestants force the Bible to follow
them.

THE IX. REASON. Counsels.
THe Church of God has ever bin accustomed, when any heresy did spring up
therein, to gather a Council of Bishops, Prelates, and of other Learned Men,
in which the truth was approved, and the heresy condemned. And whosoever were
condemned by such Counsels, confirmed by the Sea Apostolic, were ever deemed,
and in very deed, were heretics, and for such at length were taken of all men,
and in the end vanished away. So were the Arrians condemned in the Nyceene
Counsel, the Macedonians in the Council of Constantinople, the Nestorians in
the Ephesyne, the Eutychians in the Chalcedonian, and others in other Councels.
Al which heretics, although they flourished for a time, and drew many people,
yea Emperors, Kings, States, and Countries after them, yet in time they came
to nothing, and the councels which condemned the^, were universally embraced.
And no doubt the late famous council of Trent, which by the same authority and
order has condemned the Protestants and other sectaries for heretics, will in
time be every where received, and these new fellows by it anathematized, will
utterly vanishe away. For indeed if a man consider the matter thoroughly, he
shall plainly perceive that these sects have no likelihoode of continuance, by
reason they have no means to gather a Council, and much less to decide
matters therein, if it were gathered, being without an head as they are, and
every one cleaving only to his own private opinion, and therefore can never all
meet together, or if by any power they were compelled thereunto, they have no
means to agree in one, for that they will not yield to any judgment, but what is
framed of their own brain, and therefore it must needs be amongst them, as we
see it to be, Quot homines, tot sententiae; So many men, so many opinions.
Lastly I would have you here to mark the dealing of heretics, who play by
general Councels eue^ as they play by the scriptures, for they take and leave
as they lust, and as best serves their turn. There have bin in all, general
Councels 18. Al gathered, allowed, and confirmed by one and the selfsame
authority, of which the Greeks receive only 7. the Lutherans, Council. Florent.
sess. 5. and 6. Magdebur cent. 8. cap 9. and cent. 9. cap. 9.
the first 6. the Eutychians which are in Asia only the first 3. the
Nestorians which are yet in the East, only the first 2. the Trinitaries which
are in Hungary, and Poleland, receive none at all: Behold the liberty of your
Gospel.

THE X. REASON. Fathers.
THE Catholic Roman Religion is most plainly taught by all the ancient
Fathers of the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth hundred years
after Christ, and has bin ever, (without al controversy) taught of the
Fathers of every age since until this day. That religion did Dyonysius,
Areopagita, Saint Paul his Scholar, so manifestly teach, Causaeus dialogue. 5
and 11.
as Causaeus a french Protestant called him for his labor, a doting old man,
much like as his Father Luther had said before him, that, Areopagita his
works were like to dreams, In Capt. Babilonica
and most pernicious. The same faith was taught of saint Ignatius, Clemens,
Justinius, Tertullian, Cyprian, Irenaeus, and in one word all the ancient
Fathers not one excepted. This is very plain in that the Catholics are put,
and compelled by the Protestants to defend, maintain, and uphold the credit,
and authority of the said Fathers; for the Protestants rail at the^, the
Catholics defend them: the Protestants refuse their authority, the Catholics
hold it for good: the Protestants will not be tried by them: the Catholics
appeal to their judgment; and to be brief, the Protestants make no more
account of them, longer then they can wrest them to serve their turn, then thy
do of Beuis of Southampton, or of Adam Bell. And in naming the Protestants, I
include all the Puritanes: for I am not ignorant how the said Protestants are
driven by the said Puritanes, to defend the Fathers, and also are called
papists for their labor. And hereby it is manifest that the Fathers are with
the Catholics, and neither with the Protestants, nor Puritanes. And whether
all those ancients, being men of excellent wits, of continual study, of
wonderful learning, fervent in prayer, holy in conversation, greatly in Gods
favor, mighty in vvorking of miracles, and adorned with many such like
gifts, were more like to understand the Scriptures freshly delivered unto them
from the Apostles themselves (who also no doubt, taught their scholars the
true sense thereof, and they theirs, from one age to another,) or these late
foolish, vnstudied, unlearned, profane, and arrogant fellows, be judges your
selves But indeed it is no marvel though the protestants do contemn, yea
revile the Fathers, Luther in Capt. Bab. Causaeus, vbi supra. Centuriat.
centur. 2. cap. 10. Calvin instit. cap. 13 number. 29. Centur. 2. cap. 5. Causaeus
dialog. 8. and 11. and 6 beza in act Apost. ca. 23.
in saying they taught things most like to dreams; they were doting oldmen;
they had foul blemishes, and told trifling tales; they had weeds and
dregs, blasphemies, and monsters: they were childish, dull, and destitute of
God, and babled they knew not what: they were bewitched of the Devil, as
damned as the Devil, blasphemers, naughty, wicked: for they who cannot endure
certain set times to fast in, no marvel though they revile S. Basil, S.
Gregory, Nazianzene, S. Leo, S. Chrysostom, which wrote such notable Sermons
of Lent, and of other fasting days, then used as they are now in the Catholic
Church. And they, who be given to Lust, to Gluttony, to Ambition, to
Covetousness, and do teach such doctrine as necessarily brings forth such
fruits, must needs contemn S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, S. Hierome, and S.
Augustine, who have written so excellently of the Order, Rule, and Virtues of
Monks. And generally whereas the Doctrine of the ancient Fathers is clean
contrary to the Doctrine of Protestants, no marvel though they be rejected
by the^, as they ever have bin of Heretics. And although Iwell in his Sermon
at Paul's Cross, most impudently challenged the Catholics to bring any thing
for certain points of their Religion out of the Doctors of the first six
hundred years: yet Laurence Humfrey his pue fellow, Humfridus in vita Iwelli.
confessed that he gave, and granted to the papists more than was meet, and
was to himself injurious, etc. and so he confessed against his companion,
that the FATHERS of the Primitive Church were on the Papists side, and
consequently not on theirs. And yet because they have found by experience,
that to teach Doctrine contrary to the ancient Fathers, sounds but badlie in
the peoples ears, in their Sermons they gladly now and then allege the
authority of some Doctor or Father, when they can by any means wring, or
wrest any piece of a sentence so, as it may seem to make for them And indeed
he who alleges the Doctors most, is most praised of the audience, as you
well know, which is a pitiful thing in the^, and ridiculous in the Preacher,
who cannot but know, (if he have read any of them himself) that the Fathers
detest utterly that Doctrine which he wresteth them to confirm, and in the
mean time the pore audience thinks that they were of this new Religion,
whose simplicity therein is most pitifully abused, by the Preacher.

THE XI. REASON. Trial of Truth.
IT is manifest by the Holy Scriptures that it appertains to the Church to
try and to discern spirits, as also to determine and to decide doubts. And
agreeably thereunto she has in all ages mastered, ouer-ruled, and captiuated
the understanding of every one, were he never so wise, never so learned, or
had he never so extraordinary gifts, except he obstinatly defended an error,
which if he did, he was condemned for an heretic, and so came to nothing. The
Chatholike Church, I say, directed by the Holy Ghost, has ever separated
from the truth, all moales, all singular opinions, al errors and corruptions
in every man's works and writings, in such sort as that easily and securelye
every one may know the truth. And certainly the Protestants although
they say that they give no credit to the CHVRCH, but so far forth as they
find in their Scriptures, do, and can not otherwise but receive the same
Scriptures upon the Catholic Roman Churches credit, and also the three
Creedes of the Apostles, of Athanasius, and of Nice, and some Articles of
belief, as, the Holy Ghost to proceed from both the Father and the Son, and
yet as from one beginning, and many terms, as, Person, Trinity,
Consubstantiall, Sacraments, etc. which none could ever have invented, but
only the Catholic Church. Neither is it possible for any man to know whether
this Bible, which is used amongst Christians, be the true word of God indeed,
or some fained thing, but only upon the Catholic Roman Churches credit. And
Saint Augustine confesses plainly, that he would not believe the Gospel,
but that the authority of the Catholic Church moved him thereunto. Con. Epist
Manich. c. 5. lib. 2. de doct. Chr. cap. 8.
And by the same Churches authority he was moved to believe the books of
Tobie, Judith, Canticles, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Machabees, etc. as he
himself sincerely affirms. And surely it is wonderful to see, how the
Church of God receiving the Old Testament from the Jews, and manifesting to
the world the Canon of the Holy books of the new Testament, has in all times,
in so many alterations, and chaunges, kept from the destruction, and corruption
of Heretics, Jews, and Panims the whole authentical corpse of Holy Scripture,
in such manner, as no Heretic in the world can charge her with adding, or
diminishing the least jot thereof. Judge you here whether the madness of these
new fellows, be worthy to be wondered at, or no, who do credit and believe
the Church in this point, and will not do the same in others? Why should they
rather trust the Church in this, the^ in other things. And I would every man
would here consider the wonderful integrity of the Catholic Roman Church,
in keeping the Holy Bible so entire, and uncorrupted these fifteen hundred
years together at the least, and the atheistical treachery of these of the
the new Religion, who occupying no Bible, nor having to do with the holy
scriptures for a thousand years together (as they themselves confess) have
after the unjust wresting it out of the hands of the just possessors thereof,
robbed the Church of so many whole books, and besides of so many parts, and
particles of the same. What these fellows would bring the Holy Bible unto in
time, if they should hold on, they may easily guess, who know their manifold
corruption thereof in so few years. And yet forsooth, they will have all
controversies to be tried by only scriptures; which if they were not by them
corrupted, and falselie translated, yet could theye never find out any secure
truth by them only, for that none of them allows any other man's exposition
but his own, and in so dealing they can but have a guess, or an opinion, or
fantasy, but no faith at all. Which thing to declare more plainly; I ask the
Protestant how he relying upon only scripture, can show me certainly which
books be Scripture, and which not? And if he be unlearned, how knows he
that the translation which he uses is truly made out of Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin? And then how is he sure of the sense, and exposition? And if he be
never so learned, and have never so many helps, all that he can search and
find out, is but a private man's opinion, and consequently, his Faith which
he seems to have, is grounded upon his own particular judgment, and so
indeed is no faith at all, but an opinion only, as I said before: for faith
must have Gods express authority for her foundation. Here you may consider
the miserable state, and condition of your new Ghospellers: in that forsaking
the Catholic and universal faith of Christendom, delivered to the^ by the
universal Church, as founded upon Scripture (which Church Christ and his
Apostles gave the^ express Commission to believe) which was properly Faith,
and founded upon a rock which could not fail; in that forsaking (I say) that
fortres, they cast themselves into the waves of new opinions, whereby they have
no certainty at all, but every one chooses what he likes to himself,
which choice is properly called Heresy, and so the word signifies. And let
any Protestant in our Country of England tell me, why he does rather believe
his own judgment in points of Religion, then the judgment of Luther, Calvin,
and Beza, whom he thinks were so excellent men? for every one that has any
learning knows that they taught otherwise then now is taught in England. This
you may plainly see the only touchstone of truth, to be the Catholic Church,
which cannot fail, and that they who cleave to her judgment, have most
undoubtedly the truth; whereas on the other side, they, who ground only upon
Scriptures, expounding them according to their own fantasy, and brain,
playing the Masters, and Pilots, and Boat-swaines themselves, and admitting no
judge, no interpreter, no antiquity, nor any other manner of trial, (which is
the greatest madness, and malediction that can be) must needs be destitute of
all certainty, and of all Religion, and of all stay, and of all foundation,
and of all rule, and of all order, and must needs wrangle and iangle without
end, and without means to make an end, and must needs cause Novelties without
number, and liberty of life without fear or force of Ecclesiastical
Discipline to restrain them; and to conclude, they have no means to rest,
until the end in Atheism.

THE XII. REASON. The use and custom of the Church.
THE use, custom, and practice of the Church, has (as it was in the prime
thereof.) been alvvaies an infallible rule to direct and order things by.

This the Apostle, after many arguments, to prove that women should not be
beareheaded in Churches, applied as a Fort most strong, and invincible to
bear down the gainsayers thereof: If any man (says he, notwithstanding
mine arguments) do seem to be contentious, 1. Cor. 11.
we have no such custom (as women to pray uncovered) nor the Church of God.
And agreeablie unto this Saint Augustine says: If the whole Church throughout
the world do use any thing, Epist. 118. cap. 5.
only to call in question, wheather that thing should be so done, is a point
of most proud, or most strange madness. And for this cause against the
Pelagians, he argues ordinarily out of the Churches custom, proouing
Children to be borne in sin, Epist. 105.
because the Church does Baptize them for Remission of sins. And because the
Church uses to Exorcise them, and to blow upon them, therefore the Devil
has power over them, and that by sin. And to this says he, the Pelagians
with all their craft could not answer: for they durst not say, (as the
Protestants say) we care not for the Churches custom, we weigh not thereof.
De bono perseu. ca. 23.
Many such like arguments has the same Saint Augustne else where: But in
few words the custom of the church was a thing so undoubted, as never any
Heretic before this our age durst adventure to stand against the same
altogether: But Heresies ever consisted only in some matter of erroneous
judgment, and false opinion, but the teachers thereof never went about to
change the face of Religion, as to take away the Sacrifice of the Church, as
the Protestants are bold to do. And surely in this point the malepeartnesse,
and desperate boldness of the new Ghospellers is wonderful, who durst not
only attempt to change diverse points of the Churches use, and practice,
which in all ages, of all men, was accounted so heinous an offense to do, but
also made no bones to take all quite away, Customs, Ceremonies, Orders, yea
and the Holy Mass it self, placing insteede thereof in some places Chapters
and Psalms ill translated into the Vulgar tongue, and in some other places,
Ballades made of Psalms, commonly called Geneua Psalms, with railing
Sermons, and in other places other stuff, as best pleased the humors of the
deuisers thereof. And to these new inventions (forsooth) must the common people
be compelled to come, and to forsake and renounce the Service and Sacrifice of
the Catholic Church, left by God Almighty, and continued ever through out all
Generations, as it must do (manger all Protestants heads) even unto the
worlds end.

THE XIII. REASON. Doctrine.
THAT Church whose Doctrine tends to Mortification, and Holiness of life
must needs be the true Church, and consequently directed by Gods holy
Spirit; and contrariwise, that Sect or Congregation, which teaches the
contrary, is most undoubtedly false, and consequently guided by an evil
spirit.

This is so manifest, as it needs no proof: for every man knows that the
Catholic Church is called Holy, because it professes or teaches, nothing but
that which is Holy. Now if a man consider duly the Doctrine of the Roman
Church, he shall find it to be of the former sort, and easily he may perceive
the Doctrine of this new religion to be of the latter. But I will not here
speak of the fruits of CATHOLICS, and Protestants, (although indeed there
be no comparison in life, for that every one sees and easily confesses the
Catholics to live most vprightlie, and Saint-like) but I speak of that which
their religion teaches them to do: for of that especially our Lord meant
when he said: Math. 7.
You shall know them by their fruits. First, therefore to declare this point,
if you compare the clergy of the Roman Religion, with these new Clergy men,
you may see the Orders, and Institutions of the one sort to move them to
mortification, and to the contempt of earthly things, and the institution of
the other to prick them forward to all vanity, and to carnal liberty: for a
Priest of the Catholic Church, receaueth in a most solemn manner seven
Orders, whereof three are called Holy, because they are about Sacred and holy
things, as the Body and Blood of our Savior, holy vessels, etc And every
thing which the said priest must use, is holy, and therefore there is required
in him the greatest purity possibly to be had, so as he must have and
thoughts free from all carnallitie, and worldly things, and for such like
causes he is restrained from marriage, although it be in it self honorable,
and instituted by God himself, but yet who so is yoaked therein must needs
apply himself to worldly affairs, and so is divided as the Apostle says. 1.
Cor. 7.
And because he is restrained from marriage and bound to live Chaste or
continent, he may not use any trimming, or tricking up of himself in amorous
attire, nor use any dalliance, or fondnes with weomen, but ever remembering that
he is as a dead man, in regard of such things, he must be far from such
lightness, but on the other side, the Protestant Minister having received no
Orders, but a certain kind of Deaconshippe, and Ministershippe, of their own
invention, and having no Holy or Sacred things to deal withal, but left to
all liberty of winning and rewinning, which he cannot ordinarily do without
woing, woe he cannot handsomely, without he something trick and trim up
himself to allure, and please the eye of his sweet heart, must needs go
trickly with fair starched ruffes, fine mousaches, trim tuscalonians, use
amorous glaunces, yea and that sometimes when they are reading their Chapters
in the Church, with a thousand suchlike fond and foolish inconveniences,
which ensue thereupon. Furthermore, the Roman Religion teaches Restitution of
goods wrongfully taken, and of all wrongs whatsoever, which brideleth and
restrains people from bribery, extortion, theft, usury, symony, and from such
like: But the Protestants meddling little with such doctrine, leaves al at large
to his folowers, without restraint of any such crime. The Catholic religion
teaches observation of vows and promises which must needs cause great trust
and fidelity in the professors thereof, the Protestant teaches, that they bind
not in conscience, which opens the doare to distrust, and makes the people
that one will not trust another, but must have him in bands, with suerties and
with all fastnes possible to be devised. The Catholic religion teaches
abstine^ce and fasting, which mortifieth our bodies, and enricheth our country,
the Protestant teaches to eat flesh and al kinds of meats every day, as often
as the belly desires, which causes plenty of lust in the carcass, and dearth
and scarcity in the commonwealth. The Catholic Religion forbids Landlords
to raise their rents, except vrge^t occasion drive the^ so to do, by which
prohibition infinite numbers of people be benefited and help, the Protestant
teaching the Landlord to do what he list with his own, ruyneth, and utterly
beggereth thowsandes of poor people. The Catholic religion teaches Marriage,
to be indissoluble, so as they who be once lawefully Married, can never be so
divorced, as either party may ever Marry again, whilst the other lives,
which causeeth Man and Wife to bear much one with the other, knowing there is
noe hope of changing, but the Protestant teaching that they may Marry again,
yields them occasion, one easily to dislike of the other, being both in
hope to marry again, and to chainge as often as they list. The Catholic
religion teaches that al Laws of magistrates, which be not expreslye against
the word of God, do bind the subjects in conscience* to obey them, not only
openly, but also in secret, whereupon do follow peace, quietness and
obedience to Superiors, but the Protestant teaching the contrary, brings
Magistrates into contempt, and causes al disorder in the Commonwealth. The
Catholic religion teaches differences of sins, some to be more grievous
than others, some Mortal, some Venial, and that Concupiscence or natural
inclination to lust of it self is no sin, whereupon Catholics are taught to
strive against this motion, knowing it to be no offense except they yield unto
it, and also they manfully fight against greater sins, although they cannot
easily avoid lesser, or Venial offenses: but the Protestant teaching, that
every sin, be it never so small does deserve damnation, and Concupiscence to
be sin, which no man can avoid, makes people, to leave all to God his mercy,
but never to resist sin, nor motion thereunto, for that in his opinion it is
but lost labor so to do. The Catholic Religion teaceth, reward of good and
bad life in the world to come, which causes people to endeavor to do al good
works, and to avoid all evil as far forth as possibly they can: but the
Protestant teachching the contrary, gives the people occasion to be negligent
in doing of good, and little or nothing fearful to do evil. The Catholic
Religion teaches Confession to a Priest of all deadly sins which we can
remember, under pain of damnation, which restrains people from sin, and
causes them particularly to be well instructed and counseled: but the
Protestant taking that away, sets open a doare to all wickedness, and to
losenesse of life, as also to ignorance. The Catholic Religion teaches
Satisfaction to be done either in this life, or in Purgatory in the next,
which causes people to undertake willingly penal works, as fasting, prayer,
almese-deeds, etc. and upon the consideration of this, and of reward in
Heaven, they builded so many goodly Churches, Colleges, Monasteries,
Hospitalles, Schools, etc. they gave such large Alms, they punished their
bodies with Fasting and wearing of hair-cloath, they watched, they prayed, they
Married pore and fatherless children, and did a thowsande kinds of such like
good works: but the Protestant denying Satisfaction, and taking away
Purgatory, robs the pore of their Alms, children of their education, the
sick of their relief, and makes me^ unwilling to do any good work at all.
The Catholic Religion teaches Free Will, which causes people to endeavor to
do good, and to fly from evil: the Protestant taking it away, discourageth
men utterly from doing good works, for who will go about a thing which is not
in his power, or for the which, if he did it, he shall have no recompense. The
Catholic Religion teaches the holy Mass, to be a Sacrifice in which the very
Body and Blood of our Savior is offered up, which makes people so devout,
and reverent at the service thereof, as that they kneel altogether, pray
continually, give atte^dance to no other thing for that time, and thereupon it
comes that they bear such respect and reverence to Priests: but the
Protestant, allowing nothing but certain chapters, psalms: and collects, to
be read in the vulgar tongue, gives the people occasion to be undevout,
irreligious, and vnreuerent for that they see nothing worthy of reverence.
Hereupon you may see the people at the Protestants service, some staring about
them, with out Book or Bead in their hands, some walking, some talking, some
^angling, but none kneeling, or praying, or using any reverence at al, either
to service, or to minister, and no marvel when every one of the^, if he can but
read, can play the minister at home as well as the best curate of the^ al. Many
such differences of doctrine might be set down, ^^ are the publishers, and
maintainers, and Heretics and Protestants the destroyers, and denyers thereof:
for the Catholic affirms Baptism of children to be necessary, the
Protestant denies it. The Catholic affirms men to be justified by inherent
justice, the Protestant denies it. The Catholic affirms certain
preparations to be necessary to justification on the behalf of man, the
protestant denies it. The Catholic affirms good works to be necessary, and
to have their reward, the Protestant denies it. The Catholic affirms that
we have free will, the Protestant denies it. The Catholic affirms that
we may keep the Commandments, the Protestant denies it. The Catholic
affirms humane Laws agreeable to GODS WORD to bind in conscience, the
Protestant denies it. The Catholic affirms seven SACRAMENTS, the
Protestant denies five, if not all. The Catholic affirms Priest-hoode, the
Protestant denies it. The Catholic affirms single life of the Clergy,
the Protestant denies it. The Catholic affirms Penance, the Protestant
denies it. The Catholic affirms Contrition, the Protestant denies it. The
Catholic affirms Confession, Satisfaction, Indulgences, Prayer for the
dead, Exequyes, Anniuersaries, the Protestant denies them all. The Catholic
affirms the Real Presence, the Sacrifice of the holy Mass, Aultars, and
all things belonging thereunto, the Protestant denies them all. The
Catholic affirms worshipping of Saints, prayer unto them, feasts of
them, adoration of their Riliques, and Images, the Protestant denies all. The
Catholic affirms trimming up of Churches, Ceremonies, Singing,
Pilgrimages, Supremacy of Saint Peeter, Monastical vows, choice of meats and
fasting, the Protestant denies all. The Catholic affirms all the Bible to
be Canonical Scripture, the Protestant denies diverse parts thereof. The
Catholic affirms the perpetual virginity of our blessed Lady, the
Protestant denies it. The Catholic affirms the Church to be visible, the
Protestant denies it. And many more such like points of Christian Doctrine the
Catholic Church delivers to her Children* as she has received them from her
Spouse Christ, which the Protestant utterly denies, and indeed affirms, or
puts down nothing more then he found before in the said Catholic Church:
whereby you may see their Doctrine to be altogether nothing, but mere
negations, and flatt denyals; and so I see plainly that by their Negative
Doctrine they have profited the Christian world nothing at all, but have taken
away from it much of that which it had; and in this manner as they are, any
horse, or ass, if he could but speak as Balaams Ass did, so it were but one
word, that is, Nego, might be as good a Protestant as the best of them all.
Neither can it be said, that they do as the first Christians did, which
denied and destroyed the false and superstitious religion of the Heathens: for
that the Christians did that by manifest Commission from God himself, by
working of Miracles and by planting Christian religion in place thereof: but
the Protestants neither do that which they do, by any authority from God,
nor ever could work any one miracle, as is afore-saide, and insteede of that
which they reject and pull down, they place just nothing.

THE XV. REASON. Divinity.
IF you look into the Universities of the Catholics, and of Protestants, you
shall see in the one the whole corpse of Divinity, and of Christian truth most
pythelie and profoundly taught: but in the other nothing but a number of
pelting objections taken out of Caluins Institutions, or out of the
Magdeburgenses, or out of some Heretical Pamphlet, together with wrested
interpretations of the new Testament, which they have learned of Beza, or of
some such like fellow, and in some they trouble themselves with nothing, but
only with the Controversies of this time, and that is all the Divinity which
they have, or meddle withal. But the Catholic Divines study, and teach in
their Schools most exactlie, all things which man may in this life know of
God ALMIGHTY, of his Simplicity, Perfection, Goodness, Infinity, of his
being in his creatures, of his immutabilitie, Eternity, Unity, knowledge, and
seeing of him, of his names, Science, Idees, Life, Will, Love, Justice, and
Mercy, Providence, Power, Felicity, of the Blessed Trinity of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, of their Equality, Unity, Consubstantialitie in one
GOD-HEADE, of the Creation of things, of Angels, of their substance,
Incorporcitie, local motion, Knowledge, Will, Love, Production, Goodness, and
Badnesse, of man's Creation, of his Body, Soul, of all the powers, and parts
thereof, of his Propagation, of the end whereunto he is created, of Virtue,
and Vice in general, and in particular, of the Incarnation of Gods Son,
joining two most different natures of God, and Man, both entire, both complete,
without co^mixtion, or confusion into the unity of one person, of the
perfections and defects assumpted by him, of the Resurrection and Judgment,
and of many other profound points, which the Protestants never beat their
brains about, and indeed they cannot possibly study these things
thoroughly, being so much occupied about wooing, vvenching, and wiueing, taking
upon them to be Doctors of Divinity, and Husbands also.

And therefore if the learned amongst them should appear in Catholic
Schools, or Universities abroad, he would not once dare to open his mouth in
matters of Learning, among the great number of most excellent learned men,
which there are found, as we have well proved by such of your Protestants as
now and then go abroad to foreign UNIVERSITIES, and are very quickly
brought to Confess their inequality in this kind, for that they scarce
understand the very ordinary terms of the learned sciences, which the
others do fully possess. And I pray you, what a learned Clargie was there in
Queen Maryes time in our Country of England, in respect of these pore
creatures, that occupy now their Prebends, and sit in the sunneshine of their
new pretended Gospel with their Wives and Children round about them? Were
not one Tonstall, one Watson, one Christopherson, for learning, one Feckna^,
one Gardener, one White, for wisdom and learning together, able to set to
School all your ruffed Clergy at this day, for term of life, and after, as
by their works and writings yet extant does well appear. This gross ignorance
of these new Ghospellers is the cause that the people do remain utterly
void of the knowledge of mysteries, which they are bound to believe upon
pain of damnation, and they cannot otherwise be, when as their Leaders and
Doctors are altogether unskillful of the points aforementioned: But if they can
speak a little Greek, and a few words in Hebrew, and use some Ink horn
Eloquence, with railing against Pope and Papists, then are they forsooth deep
Divines. Take the most learned Doctor of them all, and set him to reason with
an Heathen, or with an Atheist, and you shall see what goodly arguments he
will make, nay you shall see him betray the truth for lack of learning, for
that he is utterly ignorant (as they are all) of School Divinity. And
hereupon it is that their Preachers coming to reason with the Turkish
Priests have been driven to yield, and have become Mahometans: for indeed
one who takes upon him to be Doctor of Divinity, ought to be so instructed
and furnished with Philosophy, Moral, Physical, and Metaphysicall, with
Logic, and with all humane helps, with Councels, Fathers, Histories, and such
like, and not only with the bare text of the Bible, as that he may be able to
defend the faith of Christ in all points, against Jews, Turks, Heathens,
Atheistes, and not only against heretics. And here I cannot but admire the
providence and goodness of God toward his Church, in furnishing it with all
kinds of learning, and sciences, whereby it may defend, and maintain it self
against all sorts of enemies, be they Jews, Turks, Heathens, Atheists or
Heretics whatsoever: for in the Universities thereof, you may see most
learnedly, substantially, orderly, and universally taught all Christian truth,
and that in short space: for in 4. or 5. years the whole course of Divinity is
taught under two or three readers, and in the same time the Controversies by
another reader, by another all the new Testament is learnedlie, and foundly
expounded, besides an 100. public Disputations every year of some whole
matter, as of Baptism, of the Eucharist, of the Trinity, of the Incarnation,
of Angels, of the Supremacy, etc. and withal, the whole Bible read over at
Table every year, and always after Dinner and Supper, two Chapters of it, one
of the new, and another of the old testament diligently examined, with
familiar conference between the learned, and the younger sort. And besides all
this there are taught Cases of Conscience, in which is set down, what is
sin, and what not: the differences of sins, which great, which lesser,
etc. which is a most fruitful and a most profitable kind of knowledge, and
therefore is much studied, and practiced by Catholic Priests, and Divines, who
teach the people thereby to rule, and to order their lives and actions. Neither
does the Protestant meddle with these matters of Conscience, but fraighteth his
ship only with Faith, and never beats his brain about sins, for that he
thinks none to be imputed to such Predestined, as they all ween
themselves to be, which causes the people their followers to be utterly
ignorant of the nature, differences, and quality of sins, and consequently
nothing fearful, or stayed by any conscience to committ the same.

THE XVI. REASON. Holiness of Life.
ALthough upon external and outward holiness we may not infallibly infer
true Religion, for that among Jews, Turks, and other Infidelles, some make
great show of piety and devotion, yet we may truly argue that amongst what
company or congregation soever, there is not generally, any piety, devotion,
mortification, or holiness of life, but contrary-wise, impiety, irreligiosity,
carnallity, and losenesse of life, universally to be seen, and that
necessarily issuing out of the bowelles of their doctrine, that there possibly
can be no true Religion: For that the spirit of God, who guides, directs,
and as it were informs true Religion, will not suffer it to be universally
fruitless, and of no efficasie: For otherwise it should be frustrated of it
end, which is to make the embracers thereof Holy, and good. And besides it was
foretold by the Prophet, Esa. cap. 11
that CHRIST his Doctrine should alter men's conditions, and natures, so as such
as were most fierce, savage, and wicked before, should by it become most
humble, kind, and gentle, which can no way be applied to the Protestants, as
their bloody tragedies raised in France, Flaunders, Scotland Switzerland, and
in other parts of Germany sufficiently do witness, where were slain above
an hundred thowsande people within one year, by the rebellion and wars of the
countrieme^ against their Lords for the controversy of Religion, such
humility, Sledan.
obedience, and meekness of heart, this new Doctrine imprinted presentlye as
it came. And albeit external holiness does not (as is aforesaid)
necessarily infer true religion, yet does it give a great presumption
thereof, especially if there be inward zeal, and above all, Charity. Now it
cannot be but most plain to every one, who knows both, that the lives of
Catholics, in all lands, and that in all ages, and namely of our ancestors,
and predecessors there in England were, and are of those who now be, for the
most part most Holy, most Innocent, most Religious, and most Godly: and the
lives of the Protestants ordinarilye most lewd, loose, and void of piety.
And first, if you take a view of the Clergy, and of the Religious-men, and
weomen of the Catholic church, you shall find infinite numbers to have lead
Celestial and Angelical lives here on earth, free from all worldly, carnal,
and earthly desires, with contempt of all humane and transitory things, as S.
Paul the first Eremite, S. Anthony, S. Hilarion, S. Greg. S. Ier. S. Aug. S.
Bern. S. Fraun. S. Dom. S, Bened. S. Thom. Aquinas, S. Bonauenture, with
innumerable others suchlike, whose lives were most heavenly, together with
millions of professed Virgins, vowed Widows, poor by will and promise,
persons of both sexes dedicated to God by renouncing the world with the
delights thereof, some living in Deserts, or Caves of the earth, some in
Cloisters in community under obedience; with infinite numbers of secular
Priests, most godly and devout. And although I will not deny, but that some
there were among the Clergy, and Religious people in this latter age, which
lived not according to their Orders, and Rules, but scandalized the Church of
God: yet may I truly say, that they who did so, were not the hundredth part
so many, as the Protestants most falsely make them: But the truth is, that
among a great number (for there were of Priests and Religious men, at the
least five times so many, as there be now ministers) a few were bad, and now
the ministers being but few in respect of them, are all naught. And no
marvel: for the Catholic Clergy, and Religious persons, were by their
Orders bound to sundry and diverse hours of prayer, as to seven in the day
and night, the religious to rise every night at midnight, to pray and sing
lauds to God, when others sleep two or three hours together, besides other
Exercises, Contemplations, and Meditations in the day time, and never to have
so much as one whole hour void of some godly employmentes. I would you did
but see the manner of the lives of the blessed Capucynes, which here to recount
would be so long, and hardly could I reckon up all their holy Exercises of
mortifications, or of the happy Fathers of the Society of Jesus, or of others
such like. Oh what Fasting, what Prayer, what Meditation, what Contemplation,
what wearing of Haire-cloth, what whiping, of themselves, what watching, what
visiting of the sick, what teaching of the ignorant, what rebuking of
Sinners, what comforting of the afflicted should you behold? These pray,
whilst your ministers play: These taste, whilst they feast: These meditate
the Contempt of the World, whilst they beat their brains, to compass worldly
commodities: These Watch and sing Praises to God in the Night, whilst they in
a warm bed hug their Sweet heart in their arms. Who is he amongst you
which sees not, and is not ashamed of the lives of your ministers? Are not
some of them almost in every circuit hanged for robberies, for rapes,
imprisoned for Zodomie, for having diverse wives at once, for debt, and for
other knaueries. The law binds them to have but one Wife at once, and she
must be vewed by two Justices of Peace, to see that she be a maid for sooth.
But do they not now and then take their wives from Colmans hedge, From thence
had the vicar of wearam his trul by his own confession.
and some, other common strumpets? and do not their wives prove thereafter? An
hundred examples I could here allege to prove these things, but I will not
pollute my paper at this time with such filthy matter. Look into the Laity
of the Protestants, and tell me weather there ever was such Pride, especially
in apparel? Did not all these new-fashioned attyres, come in with your new
religion? Your loose Gowns, your Trains, your Verdingales, your Borders, your
Peringles, your Coronets, your Wyres, your Ruffes starched, white, blew, etc.
your (...) Show me whom this Gospel has made of a ravenous glutton, a sober
abstainer: of cruel gentle: of covetous, liberal: of a slaunderer, a good
reporter: of an unchaste sinner, a virtuous liver. I will show thee many that
have bin made worse then themselves. Thus far Erasmus. And no marvel though
the followers be such, when as their very first Apostle, Ringleader, and
Reformer of all, who first broake the ice, and was indeed the Author, and
founder of their Religion, led a most brutishe life: for was he not a
leacherous Friar? took he not a Nun to Wife, if so I may term it? An act
not only forbidden by holy writ, but by the Civil Laws, L. Si quis non
dica^. cap. de Epist. Cop. and cleric.
and by Iouinian the Emperor above a thousand years ago, and that under the
pain of death. Surpassed he not all other in Pride? Confesses he not that
he had conference with the devil about the Mass? Was not Envy and
Covetousness the causes of his revolt? Read his life, and see whether he was a
man fit to Reform the Christian World, or rather sent to shame all his
followers? Good Lord, that men can be so blind, and so bewitched, as to think
that the truth from Heaven should be revealed to such a one; or that such
should have grace to know the truth, and to follow it, who never fast,
seldom, or never pray to obtain the same, never punish their bodies, never
mortify their earthly members, etc. rather then to a number of quiet, modest,
and harmeles men, who by prayer, by fasting, by alms deeds, by works of
mercy, by all virtuous means labor to attain the knowledge of the truth.
And who is he that can deny, but that in our ancestors days when Catholic
Religion flourished, bravery in apparel was unknown, and insteede thereof
innocent plainness was to be seen, and that there was no change, no new
devises, little lawing, for when any strife fell out, the Priest their Ghostly
Father decided the matter, and made them friends; seldom any single woman
miscarried in any parrish, no Simony, no Usury, little fraud or deceit, each
one trusted other without bill or bond, and to be brief, that every where
reigned simplicity, and innocence? Oh how many thousands then left the world
before it left the^, dedicating themselves wholly to the service of God, and
that of all Estates: many Kings and Queens not only of other Countries, but
diverse even of England, gave over their Kingdoms and became Religious men, and
women. And the like did innumerable of inferior degrees: whereas the
Protestants provide by wast, desolation, destruction, and (as it were) by law,
that no such orders of holy men and women be amongst them: they will have no
Maids, but such as can get no matches, no man is poor amongst them but with
grudge, and much against his will, no vow is made to God, but if it should be,
it must not be kept, fasters with them are Pharisees, Monks mad men, and those
which mortify themselves, they account Hypocrites, and in in one word they are
in their lives, as they be in doctrine, Libertines. And in nothing more does
the difference of the efficacy of their doctrine, and the Catholics appear
then in this; that if for fear of troubles, or for any other cause, one who
was a Cath. is become in outward show a Protestant (for in his conscience such
a one seldom or never thinks the Protestants religion to be true) the same
is so far from bettering his former life thereby, (according to Erasmus his
saying before alleged) as that you may see him wallowe in all kind of sins. Set
before your eyes any one there in England, who has left the Catholic Religion,
and is become a Protestant, and mark whether he be not as a young calfe let
out of his crew, or as a colt leapt out of his enclosure? How many may you see
there amongst you of such good fellows, which show plainly that they have,
Conscientiam cauteriatam, a seared Conscience. If you turn any Seminary Priest
to your side, does he live more vnspottedly with you, then he lived before in
his own profession, or does he not rather then drink up any kind of sin as
easily as a Dog lapeth water? But on the other side, if any do leave the
Protestants, and become a Catholic, does he not forthwith leave al his vices?
I wish you would but consider a little the wonderful change of such a one,
whom I may more easily leave to your consideration, then describe him: but
surely if you did see into it, you would say: Digitus Dei est hic, this is the
finger, or power of God.

THE XVII. REASON. Constancy in Doctrine.
THE Doctrine of the Roman Church has ever remained settled, and stated
without change or innovation, howsoever time ever fleeting, alters many
things to disadvantage, and no man will deny but that it had the truth, when
the Apostles said to the Romans: Romans ca. 1.
I give thanks to my God through Jesus Christ for you all, because your faith
is reported in the universal world. Therefore until it be showed that it has
swarued from that Faith which the Apostle then spoke of, I cannot but judge it
to have the true Religion. And I think that no man can prove, that ever any
Pope, or Bishop in any See did at any time change in any point the
Religion of his predecessor. For example sake, if you look but into the Sea
of Canterbury in your own Country, and rekon from him who was Archbishop
thereof in King Henry the eight his days, before he changed Religion, you shall
find that that Archbishop taught the same Religion in all points, which his
next predecessor had do^e before him, and he the same that his next
predecessor, and so from one to another even until the first that sat in that
See. The very same may you see in other Bishops Sees, and especially in the
Apostolic See, the Sea of Rome, for never was any man able to prove that the
successor at any time changed the doctrine of his predecessor, and so it must
needs be al one and the same that was immediately before this new religion,
and at the first beginning, or in the Apostles time. For I ask the protestants
(for examples sake) when Italy, France, or Spain, changed their Religion? I
am sure they never changed, but kept still the same, which was delivered to
the^ by their first Apostles. But contrariwise the Protestants beginning but
some fifty or threescore years ago, have in this small time so chopped and
changed, so altered, and transformed their Religion, as you may well say
Proteus, in regard of them to be constant in shape: wherein they show themselves
like their Fathers the old Heretics, Greg. lib. 3 mor. expo sit. in Job. cap.
19.
who also in inconstancy of doctrine were very notable: and no marvel, for
when they be once forth of the right way, they take every pathe which
offers it self unto them, but never can happen upon the right way again,
except they go back from whence they came, but run still further, 2. tim. 3.
and further out of the way, ever learning, but never coming to the knowledge
of the Truth. This inconstancy and change in Doctrine was so great in Luther
his followers, Riuander in lupo excoriato fol 73.
as that they themselves complained thereof. And hereupon it is that the
Lutheranes are so easily changed into Zwinglians, or Caluinistes, Caluinistes
into Anabaptists, or Arrians, Anabaptists into Libertines, Fra^kistes, or into
the Family of Love. And this lenity they have (as they have all their other
Capricches) from their grandsire Luther, whose inconstancy in Doctrine is most
notable. For at his first beginning, he protested that he only misliked the
abuse of Indulgences, and in no wise the Indulgences themselves. A little after
he plainly despised the Indulgences themselves. Vlemberg. causa 12. page 391.
Then he began to call in question the authority of the Pope, afterward
Ceremonies, and by little and little going forward, at the length, he denied
Free Will, and rolling up and down as it were a snowe-ball of heresy, made
the same bigger and bigger, in such sort as he came to that audacitye, that he
burned openly at Wittenberge, the books of the Canon Law, affirming the Pope
to be Antichrist, and the catholic church to be the Synagogue, and stews of
Satan: yet stayed he himself not so, but still played the Proteus even unto
his end: for at Worms before the Emperor, although he professed himself an
enemy to the Church, yet he maintained the sacrifice of the Mass, and said it
still himself, as also prayer to Saints for the dead, Purgatory, Communion
under one kind, and many such like Catholic points, all which 9. years after,
before the same Emperor he utterly denied. The same inconstancy was in his
Disciples Melanchton, Calvin, Bucer, and in them of Wittenberge, in the
Anabaptists, and in such like, as also in your Protestants there in England.
And I pray you what a changing, and turning in and out was there of your
COMMUNION Book? For first the deuisers thereof highly commended it, and
affirmed it to be agreeable to Christ's institution, and to the service of the
Primitive Church; and a while after they utterly misliked it, and
disauthorising it, they set forth another in principal points quite contrary
to the former, and yet they affirmed that also to be according to Christ's
institution, and iump as the use was in the Primitive Church. And yet how this
is approved, and liked of your Preachers, and ministers, you cannot but know,
who see and behold such carping, and finding fault thereat, and such contempt
thereof, as that the Minister who does observe duly the order thereof, is
accounted a temporizer, or a cold Protestant (I might say an Atheist) for his
labor. And he who can most contemn it, and can wed, bury, baptize, minister
the Communion, and do such like, after some other new fashion of his own
inuenting, is accounted a iollie fellow, and a man of zeal. What stir is
there (I pray you) in every sheire, yea almost in every parish, about the
Ministers observing the order of this their book of COMMON PRAYER? What hold
and tie is there between the Parishioners and their Curate? What a do is
there, and has been from the beginning about the Communion? One while it
must be done in common, and leauened Bread: by and by not so, but in unleavened
Bread, after in loaf Bread, although your cup ever had wine in it, till now of
late that some do begin to take instead thereof good nappy ale: the like
inconstancy you might see in placing the communion table: for first it must be
placed in the middle of the quire, then in the body of the church, after in
the cha^cel again as the altar was: one while the minister must turn his face
toward the south, another while toward the north, and another while toward
the east: whereby al wise men may see, that the^ your religion first began, and
never was in the world before: for if ever it had bin before, you might surely
have had some president, by which you might have ordered these things. And to
speak plainly what I observe, I find a great cause of your inconstancy in
Doctrine to be advantage, and disadvantage: for your religion is framed only to
serve turns, and times: for when they were but few in number, by wresting the
Scriptures, they taught that Christ's flock was but little, Jewel in Apol.
and therefore they gloried much in their small number: but after that their
opinions were spread through Germany, France, England, Scotland, and in
other Countries they vaunted much, and argued that their Doctrine must needs be
true, because it was spread so largely. When it served their turn they stoutly
defended with tooth and nail, Goodman Knoxe.
that a woman might not lawfully govern a realm, no not in civil, or
temporal matters: but within a while after, when it fitted their purpose, they
taught as they yet do, that a woman may rule a realm, not only in temporal
things, but the Church also in spiritual causes. When it served their turn,
Luth. tom. 3. Ger. Ie^. fol. 115.
they taught that it was a horible thing to put me to death for Religion, and
expressly against the word of god: but when they had gotten the sword, they
cried out in sermons on the contrary side, and never left off, until it was
decred by public authority, that those who were not of their religion, should
suffer death therefore. When it fitted their purpose, Tom. 5. I^. Ger. f. 157. a
and f. 444. and 159. and 491. Tom. 1. Germ. fol. 537. Colloq. Men's. f 4. in
fine lib. ses. 3. b
they taught that none ought to preach, but he who was allowed, and licensed by
the Magistrate, afterward upon other occasion; they wrote that a Christian man
may without leave of any person take upon him that function. One while they
taught that the BIBLE was the plainest, and the most easiest book in the
world to be understood, anotherwhile they wrote upon advantage, that it was
impossible for any man to understand thoroughly any one word in the Bible, for
that it was so obscure and profound. One while they taught that no Commentaries
of SCRIPTVRES written by men, Melancth. in Loc. co^. ann. 1524.
must be received, yea that they must be shunned as a plague or pestilence,
anotherwhile they themselves set forth Commentaries and Postilles, and obtruded
them to the people. To. 2. Ger. fol. 255. a and f. 404. a
One while they teach that all men ought to be judges of doctrine and
religion, another-while they teach that no man, no not an Angel, must judge
thereof. And a thousand such like contradictions and proofs of inconstancy,
and change may you find in their doctrine, which here further to account
would be over tedious. I will therefore end with the saying of Gregory Duke
of Saxony: We do know what these fellows do teach this year, but what they
will teach the next year we cannot guess.

THE XVIII. REASON. False Prophets and Teachers.
THe Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself fore-tolde that in the latter
days there should come false Prophets, and to the end we should take heed of
them, they painted them forth in their colors, whereby they might easily be
known. Now it can not be denied, but that we be in the latter days, and
therefore we must be very vigilant, and watchful to discern, and to know
these seducers when they come. And conferring the Preachers afore-saide with
the manners of these Protestants, we do plainly se^ that they be the very
same which were foretold, and as it were, pointed at by the finger of God: for
first they come unsent, Ierm. 13.
as Jeremy fore-tolde in these words. I did not send them, and they did
run: for certain it is, that they neither have orders, as they ought to
have, nor any Consecration, or right calling: for they were not sent by the
Catholic Church as is manifest, but utterly condemned for Heretics, and when
any of them is converted to the Roman Religion, they plainly see that they
have no more to do with any spiritual function the^ other laymen have. But on
the contrary side, if any Priest of the Catholic Church become an Apostata by
forsaking his religion, if he profess himself a Protestant they account and
esteem such a one, very fit for their Ministry, yea and more worthy then one
of their own making: for that they assure themselves, and so confess, that
the Catholics have ordinary calling most lawful: but they neither have
ordinary calling as is most plain: nor extraordinary, for that they can work
no miracle to prove the same: Ergo no calling at all, but they come of
themselves unsent for. Then are they, as it was Prophicied of them like their
Fathers, smooth tongued fellows, Romans 6.
which with sweet speeches, and pleasant clawings deceive the hearts of
innoce^ts and have a show of godliness, 2. Tim.
but deny the virtue thereof: for they cry out. The word of the Lord, the
light of the Gospel, the only Passion of our Savior, 3. Reg. 22.
no sin to the Elect, Ier. 5.14.23. and 27. Isay. cap. 3
al are clean which believe their Doctrine: with a thousand such like
plausible speeches, as the false Prophets did in times past. But consider them
well, and you shall find them to be lying masters, and deceauers, 2. Pet. 2.
and 3.
who do not only themselves walk after the flesh in concupiscence of
uncleanness, but do also draw others in the desire of lust, and leacherie,
promising liberty, whereas they themselves are slaves of corruption, Math. 7.
and in few words they lead the people the broad way to perdition.

This you may plainly see by that which has been said before, and therefore
I would have you to judge wheather it be like that the Protestants be those
false teachers which were foretold, or no. Surely in mine opinion, there are
al things in them which were fore showed to be in the false prophets, and
seducers of the latter days. Ier. 29.23.
They come unsent, they teach plausible things to flesh and blood, they teach
their own fancies, and say they be the words of the Lord, Ezech. 13.
wresting and wreathing the Scriptures as they list, they color and set out
their cause in such brave terms, and with such fraunde and deceit, as if it
were possible the very Elect might be drawn into error, Math. 24.
they make a show as they were the Apostles of Christ, 2. Cor. 11.
and thereby they seduce the innocent, they know not that God uses them as a
scourge, Romans 16.
and that he tempts his people by them, Deuteronomy. 13.
they make an outward show of humanity, of peace and concord, and of such
like, putting upon them the clothing of sheep, Mat. 7.
but they are indeed, according to the Flemmish Protestants proverb Bares in
wolves places.

THE XIX. REASON. Liars, slaunderers, and reuylers.
IT seems that the Protestants have either no conscience at all, or else that
it is seared with an hoate iron, for that they make no boanes to bear so
manifestly false witness against their neighbors, in charging the Catholics,
and all their Elders with so plain untruths, and in slaundering and reuiling
they care not whom in a most injurious, and opprobrious manner. And a most
pitiful thing it is, to see the simple people drawn away from the true
Religion of their Elders by such shameful means: for every man of
understanding may easily see how they make lying their help, Esaias. 28.
and defend themselves thereby. And yet do their miserable adhaerentes
believe every thing to be gospel which they say, never going about to try out
the truth thereof. To this shameful shift are they driven (as they be to many
others) for that they cannot otherwise excuse their departure from the ancient
Church: for if they had little or nothing to say against it, every simple man
might marvel why they left it. They feign therefore, and make upon their own
fingers many horrible things concerning the doctrine, ceremonies, and condition
of the said Church. And this they do in places where they dominier and reign,
where they know no man dare show his face to defend the cause of the christian
world. And no marvel though they deal thus with the Catholic Church, when as
they slander and tell lies of each other, as the Luherans bear witness against
the Sacramentaries, the Maiorists, against the Flacians, Vlenbergius causa. 10.
and both these against the Lutherans, and other Sectaries one against another.
And to give you a little taste of their dealings I will put down a few of their
sayings, but briefly for that I doubt I be over tedious. 1 They say that
Christ was unknown before their coming, In postilla Germ. An. 1537. part. 2.
fol. 141.
and that the Gospel lay in the dust, and was hidden under the be^ch, and
Luther doubts whether Germany ever heard the word of God before he preached
it. Which thing if it were true, then undoubtedly infinite people, yea al
Christendom was deceived under the name of Christ, for 1500. years together,
and consequently were all damned. And how impudent a lie is it, that Christ
was not known before their coming? whereas al churches throughout
Christendo^e did by pictures, and external ceremonies set before the eyes of
people the Death, blood, Cross and Passion of our Savior? was there not in
every rode loft the picture of Christ crucified? And did not the very stones,
walls, and sumptuous buildings declare, that the erectors thereof were me^, not
only believing in Christ, but also most zealous, and forward to set forth his
honor, by furthering his religion, and 10000 manifest proofs might here be
brought forth against this sha^cles lie of theyrs. 2. They inculcate, and even
dull the ears of the people, with often telling them of the Idolatry of their
elders, and affirm it to be more abominable tha^ the Idolatry of the Jews, or
Heathens: And although they be so divided among themselves, as that they accuse
one another of that crime, yet in this they all agree, as Pilate and Herod did
in putting Christ to death, but otherwise being mortal enemies, the one to the
other. But until they prove this Idolatry, which they never could, nor never
will be able to do, I cannot but deem it an intolerable lie and cavil, the
which is more tha^ sufficiently proved by almost innumerable arguments, which
are to be seen in many learned writers. Aug. conf in artic. de Missa.
3. They say that the Catholics hold, that Christ satisfied only for
Original sin, and that he ordained the Mass for other sins; which to be a
most manifest lie, all the books written of this matter by Catholic Divines
do plainly testify. Aug. conf. tit de delectu ciborum.
4 They affirm that the Catholics do teach, that by choice of meats, and by
other humane constitutions, remission of sins, and salvation is obtained, and
that thereby the doers are justified. Which is a lie so manifest as it needs
no confutation. 5. They say how the Papists hold that if a man be Contrite,
Confessed, and have done Satisfaction for his sins, In artic. Smalcal. dic.
in artic 3. fall paenit. papist.
that he is thereby just before God without Christ, or faith, which is a lie no
less shameful than the other. For the Catholics teach, that no Justice is
had, no sin forgiven, no good thing obtained, but by the Passion of our
Savior Christ. 6. They affirm, that the Papists do worship Saints in steed
of Christ, and do honor them as Gods, which is a gross impudent lie as every
man knows. Hadd cont Osorium.
7. They are not ashamed to write, that Religion was not changed in England but
by the consent of the Bishops, and that the lands, and goods of Abbeys and
Religious houses, were distributed to Godly uses, as to Schools, Universities
and Hospitals. And that the Pope for an ordinary tribute to him yearly paid,
gives free leave under his great seal to Priests, to keep concubines openly
without controlement. And the like lies they lay upon the ancient Fathers, as
Melancthon said of S. Austen, In Apol. tit. de pec. orig.
that he taught Original sin to be taken away in Baptism, not that it was
not any more, but that it was not imputed. Whereas S. Austen spoke not there of
Original sin, but of concpiscence. So they say S. Bernard reca^ted monachisme
at his later end, Luth. tom. 5. Ien. ger. fol. 457. Teleman. Heshus. l. 1. de
vera ec. p. 60.
and that most of ancient writers, and Fathers retracted, and revoked before
they died the Doctrine which they had written; or else, that they thought
otherwise than they wrote, and spoke. By this means to defend their new
doctrine, and to shift off the ancient Fathers, which are altogether plainly
against it, they are constrained to lay two notable lies upon the said fathers,
the one that they recalled their doctrine before their death, the other that
they wrote, and spoke one thing, but thought another. And no marvel though
they slander, and wrong in this Atheistical manner the Holy Fathers, when as
some of them spare not the Apostles themselves. If the three Apostles Peter,
Paul, and Barnabas, Tom. 3. Ien. Ger. fol. 261.
(says Luther) had not held their tackle, about Faith without works, all the
multitude had failed therein, and James stu^bled in it. But of this kind of
stuff I will not here allege any more; he who desires to hear more of their
lies, and slau^ders, may find the^ abundantly set down by diverse and sundry
authors at this day, but yet take with you this saying of your M. Luther, He
who once lies, Tom. 1. Germ. fol. 423.
(says he) certainly is not of God, and is worthily suspected in all things.
And as for reuiling, and railing, I think that Lucifer himself could little
have exceeded the Protestants therein, and especially their first Apostle, the
said Martine Luther, who with filthy, beastly, scuruy, and opprobrious
speeches, so be daubeth the Catholic church, and the magistrates thereof, as
every one may see what spirit possessed his heart, the same out of all doubt
which delights in filthiness and scurrility. And to the end you may have
some aim what kind of fellow this Arche-apostle of your protestantisme was,
I will here briefly set down a few words of his filthy mouth. He calls the
Archbiship of Ments, being a Prince Elector, and descended of the Princely
Electorall family of Brandeburge, Tom 3. Germ. fol. 533. a. b. and f. 326.
360. col. men's. f. 342. 343.
a fraudulent, a most shameful liar, a shifting Bishop, a filthy shitten
Priest, an hellish Cardinal, a great, and a notable Epicure, an impudent and
evil worm, a damned and lost man, a crafty scoffer, the greatest knave that
ever was except Nero, and Caligula, etc. He reuileth the Princes of the
Empire, Tom. 5. Germ. in glossa. super edictu^ imperat.
which did meet at the Diet at Angusta, Anno. 1530. calling them, traitors,
wicked men, the devils servants, knaves, mad hogs, great and gross asses.
He calls the Princes of Germany, fools, Tom. 3. fol. 195. b. and fol. 200
and 190. Tom. 2.
scales, and bubles of the Pope, Gods Isbeers, and hangemen, Germane beasts,
the devils puppies, etc. He braggeth that he esteemed the King of England, and
other Catholic Princes as miserable beggars, dizzards and fools, which make
him pastime, and as new n^ttes, which he would have to glory and to sing in
this manner. Here we nits do sit upon the head of the noblest beast in the
earth in his hair, we are of a base lynage, lice are our Parents, those great
Giants, which killed even Scilla the Roman Emperor, Tom. 3. Ie^. Ger. f. 331.
and f. 334.a.
and many others. What have we to do with Luther a beggar, it is true you are
nits, but yet you are not lice. And in his infamous libell against the said
King of England, he has great store of oprobrious titles and names, as:
Henry by the inclemencie of God, King of England, King of lies. etc. So dealt
he with that most famous Prince, George Duke of Saxony, Tom. 2. Ger. fol.
206. a. and Tom. 6. f. 6.
calling him a Tyrant, freneticall, mad, possessed corporally of the devil,
the devils Apostle, etc. And in his infamous libell entitled: Wider hans,
worst, he calls Henry Duke of Brunswicke, a gross ass, a stock, a tronke,
an impudent liar, a mad man, lunatike, damned, the thief on the left hand,
ass of all asses in Wolfenbutell, a pudding, a sausage, an house-firer, who
stuffeth himself not by drinking wine, but by devouring and drinking
Diuelles, a fearful and fugitive knave, a doting eunuch, Prince of cut
throats, a broudy dog, and by a thousand such like names. But against the
Catholic divines, yea, and against his own offspring the Sacrame^taries. Jesus,
what terms uses he, where he has so often that malepert interiection* Trotz,
Swinglius setting forth the said Luther in his colors, brings him in this
manner reuiling: In resp. a. v. a.
Swe^mer, a knave, a devil, a thief, an hypocrite, Trotz, Botz, Plotz, Plitz,
tonitru, po, pu, pa, plump, etc. And when he had put the word (Sola) of his own
brain into the text, Romans 3. being admonished by some of it, he braied out
and said, Tom. 5. Germ. fol. 141. and fol. 144.
Doctor Martine Luther will so, and affirms, that a Papist, and an ass are
all one, I will have it so, I command it so, and again, Luther will so, and
says, that he is a doctor, above all the doctors in the Papacy. Yea afterward
it repented him, that he had not corrupted the text of the Apostle worse in
putting in more of his own head, and that he had not made the Apostle to say:
We suppose a man to be justified by faith only, without all works of al Laws.
And many more such like outrages I could here set down of his, but I hope these
may suffice to make you to know what a mild and modest man this reformer of
the christian world was, and what a notable ring leader you have in your
Religion.

THE XX. REASON. Keeping in memory Gods benefits.
GOd almighty having bestowed infinite benefits upon man, beginning even at his
creation, demanded chiefly at his hands, as a sign and token of gratitude
and thankfulness that he would be mindful of them, and never by any means
suffer them to depart out of his memory. And this was the cause of so many
Ceremonies and of the Celebration of so many Feats amongst the Israelites.
The like has the Catholic ROMAN Church done, by ordaining diverse and sundry
feasts for the due worshipping of God, in yelding thankful, and lively
remembrance of special benefits received at his hands, and namely of the
benefit of Redemption, (which without comparison surpasses all the rest) by
calling yearly to mind, and by setting before the eyes of her children in a
most uniform manner all that our Savior did and suffered for us, as his
Conception, his Aduent, his Nativity, his Circumcision, his Manifestation, his
Presentation, his Baptism, his Fasting, his Preaching, his Miracles, his
Passion, his Death, his Burial, his Resurrection, his Ascension, his sending
down of the Holy Ghost, his second Aduent, etc. The which are Celebrated,
Solemnized, and recalled to memory in a most solmne, and decent manner, with
lystories most apt and fit for every sason, and with exact application of
all Shadows, Figures, Promises, Prophecies, and with such like out of the old
Testament, as may testify and confirm the Christian faith, at Chrst-Masse,
at Candle-Masse, at Shro^etide, at Lent, at Easter, at Whitsontide, and at
other seasons of the year. And I would to God that you were but once present
here upon Christ-Masse Eve at night, and upon Christ-Masse Day, to behold the
liuelye representation of our Lords Birthe. Oh what Torches, what Tapers, what
Lights, what Singing, what Sensing, what Mirth, what Melody, what playing upon
Organes, and other Instruments, what praying upon Books and Beads, what
weeping for joy and devotion, and what a number of goodly Ceremonies should
you see? And as great solemnity is at other times of the year befitting the
season. Whereby all that our Redeemer did for us is most lively, and most
freshly renewed in the memory of mankind. Besides all this, there are also
celebrated, and that very solemnly the birth days, (not into this world, but
into heaven) of his Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and the feasts of
his blessed Mother. By all which there is a kind of heaven upon earth, Christ
with his Saints and Angels being continually seen here after a sort as he is
there, in face and fruition. Thus is he honored in himself, thus is he
worshipped in his Angels, thus is he praised in his Saints, And to all this may
be added the Dedication of every particular material Church, which Feast in
England you usually call the Wakes, being a most solemn Feast, to put the
Parishioners in mind of that triumphant Church in heaven, which they daily
travail toward, and to recall, and refresh in memory the day that their
parish church was first dedicated to God, or to some one of his Saints, who
in particular sort has the protection thereof, declaring thereby their
gratitude, and thankefulnes to God for his benefitts of Redemption, and
calling. All these Feasts, and solemnities (I say) do renew and retain in
the memory of man the acts and benefittes of his Redeemer, and do move and
stir up his stony heart to love him, praise him, and to serve him; they
do set before his eyes, the holy lives, and happy deaths of his blessed
Saints, thereby to make us to imitate them, to honor GOD by them, and to
pray to them to be a means to him for us, that we may hereafter enjoy their
blessed company for ever. Many other things has the Catholic Church
ordained, thereby to keep continually in the mind of man the matters
afore-saide, as Crucifixes, Pictures, Images, and Crosses, in every common
place, and highwaie, which people beholding, may presently convert their
mind to some heavenly mystery represented thereby. And by these means the
most unlearned amongst the people, were they young Maidens, or old Wives,
knew more of the Mysteries of Christian religion, then many of your Ministers
daughters, or their wives, yea or some of the Ministers themselves do know.
And no marvel, when as they have abolished, and abrogated in a manner all
Ceremonies, and after a sort, all feasts, and those who hold themselves the
purest, do altogether lay away all Ceremonies, and Feasts, in such sort as
you may see the^ do all kind of work, yea upon Christmasse day it self, and to
make no more account thereof, then of any work day in the whole year. And
they all have abolished generally all Shrines, Pictures, Images, Crucifixes,
Monumentes, and every thing which might present to the mind of the beholder
any Mystery or Document of Christian Faith, or any good example to be
followed, and they have leaft their churches as fit to move people to piety
and devotion, as their barnes are, when all the corn and hay is out of them,
and nothing left to be seen besides the roofes, walls, and silles. Consider
here with your selves, whether Jews, Turks, or Heathens, if they had gotten
any Catholic countries, could have made greater spoil in the churches, or
have left them more bare, then the Protestants have done? Or wheather
Christians, if they had vanquished Heathen countries, could have dealt
otherwise with the churches of their Idols, then the Protestants have done
with Catholic Churches? And besides this, they have defaced and thrown down
Crosses in Market places, and in high ways, as though they would not suffer,
nor endure, that people by beholding any such thing should remember and call to
mind the Passion of their Savior. This out of all doubt, was no small
subtlety of the Devil to move them, under some other pretense, to make and
rid all away, that should retain and keep in peoples minds that, which
chiefly they ought ever to have before the eyes of their mind. And very
rediculous it is to see them keep such a stir about keeping Holy the
Sabbath, rejecting al other holy days: whereas they have no more vvarrant for
the solemnizing of the Sondaie, then they have for S. Laurence his day, or for
any other holy, or festival day in all the year: for other reason or warrant
they have not, but the authority of the Catholic Roman Church, which
instituted, and ordained all Festiual days by the same Commission, that it
changed the Sabbath of the Jews, which was upon Saturday, into the Sabbath of
the Christians, which it ordained to be upon Sunday. And in time, I assure my
self, if they should proceed on, the Devil would bring them to lay away
Sunday also (as he has caused some to do already) and consequently the Word
and all: and so drive them to plain Atheism, to which many of their brethren
are driven to already.

THE XXI. REASON. The Protestants beginning, and proceeding against then
consciences.
In colloq. men's. Ger. fol. 458. b. and 369. b.
I Know that no man can see into another man's heart or conscience, (although
Luther, and his followers bragged that they could so do) and therefore we
cannot judge thereof by suspicion only; but yet we may be bold to give our
censure of them, by the plain words, and manifest deeds of the parties. We
dare not be so rash in this matter as the Protestants are, who by only
conjectures judge the hearts of one another, and stick not to write, Tom. 1.
Ie^. Ger. fol. 4. coll. men's. fol. 244. a. Tom. 2. Ger. Ien. fol. 9. b.
that they speak and write against their consciences and knowledge: whereby we
may gather that they use so to do: for otherwise how could they suspect such a
detestable fault in others, for commonly a man thinks others to be as
himself is. Col. men's. fol. 10. b.
Luther confesses that he began this Tragedy against his conscience, and
therefore he thought others to do the like. Zwinglius says, that he believed
not the Real Presence for many years together before he brake off from the
Catholic Church, but yet he vvarilie dissembled his mind, and outwardly
showing himself a Papist, Collo men's. fol. 53.
and in his opinion others do the like. Nenno openly tells that before he
was an Anabaptist, he sought after nothing, but his belly, In adm^nition ad do
and the desires of the flesh, and therefore he thought that all Catholic
Priests did the like: but you may ask me, if Luther, who first began the
protestants Religion, had at his entry such repugnance of conscience, why did
he not leave off that course, and return to his Cloister again. I answer;
for that he had proceeded so far, as he himself thought, that by desperate
necessity he must go on, howsoever the matter would fall out. Even as Iu.
Caesar, Suetonius in vita Caesaris.
who doubted much, and had diverse Co^bats with himself, whether he should march
forward with his army against the Romans or no: but at the length when he had
proceeded so far, as that he had passed over the river Rubicon, he burst
out into these words: Now is the chance thrown, Col. men's. fol. 241.
now must we needs proceed wheather we will or no. In like manner Luther, after
he had gone further then his conscience would have suffered him to have done,
he utterly dispairing the recovery of his credit (much like as one Thomas Bell
who yet lives, in England, has done) justified his actions, Col. men's. fol.
158. b. 273. b.
and so began his hell in this life, having his conscience ever after unquiet,
and still reproouing him, and causing him to repent, as Judas did, for that he
had proceeded so far, and to wish all his Books buried in the earth, In
praefat. in tom. 1. Germ. Ien.
and was so troubled in disputations that as one ready to die, he would go out
into the next chamber, and there throw himself upon a bed. And yet for all
this, Melanct. in vita Luth. page 13.
the Devil at the last grew so big with him, as that he made him in all
desperation to break out into all malice against the Catholic Church without
any regard of conscience, Tom. 3. Ie^. Ger. f. 274
or honesty; as you may see by that he flatly says, that if the Council
of Trent would allow Communion under both kinds (which he the^ taught to be
instituted by Christ, and therefore of necessity must so be done) yet he and
his followers, would in despite of the Council, either use but one only, or
none at all, and would plainly account them accursed, which should use both
kinds by the authority of the Council. And in like manner he says, that if the
Catholic Church, should by any Council decree that Priests, and
Ecclesiastical persons might lawfully marry, (which Doctrine he him self
not only taught, Tom. 2. Ger. f. 214.
but even practiced the same by marrying a Nun) he would rather dissemble and
believe, that that man was more in Gods favor who all his life long, should
keep one or two, yea or three whoores, then he who after the decree of the
Council should marry, yea he would command under pain of damnation, that no
man by permition of the Council should marry, but either live chaste, or if he
cannot so do, by keeping a who are he should not despair. So played he about
the Eucharist, for although he taught that the Elevation of the Blessed
Sacrament was wicked and horrible Idolatry, and therefore would have it
abrogated, Tom. 3. Ien. Germ
yet after that he had understood that his adversary Carolastadius did teach
the same, he to contradict and to oppose himself against him, retained and
kept the Elevation in Wittenberge, whole twenty years together, mauger the
head of his said emulator Carolastadius. Yea he openly protested, that rather
than he would yield an hairs breadth to him, he would go and be a Friar
again, and observe all orders in his Monastery, as duly as ever he had done
before. The like course he took about other things, and namely, about
Transubstantiation: Because the Papists (says he) do urge Transubstantiation,
Tom. 2. Germ. fol. 225.
we only that we may be contrary to them, and insulte against them, will
believe that true Bread, and true Wine do there remain together with the
Body and Blood of Christ. Yet said he of Transubstantiation against the
Sacramentaries, that he would rather believe it with the Papists, than he
would deny the Real Presence with them. This may you plainly see, that this
your first Apostle and general Captain of all you Protestants, had no
conscience, nor Religion at all, but led by a spirit of contradiction, he
sought to be singular in himself, and contrary to all others. Neither did he
only in this manner against his conscience, but his companions and Scholars
were also in the same predicament, and had the same repugnance in themselves.

For Melancthon in the diet at Aspurge was so troubled in conscience, Chytraeus
in hist. Aug. conf.
that he was altogether sad, pusillanimous, and doubtful in mind, and gave
him self so to weeping, as that no comfortes, nor encouragementes could
prevail, or do him any good.

And Carolastadius openly confessed that what he did was clean against his
conscience. Col. m^ger. f. 1 and 517.
The like repugning conscience had Zwinglius in expounding the words of our
Savior of the B. Sacrament, Lib. de cae na. page. 216. a.
as witnesses Kemnitius, and the Lutherans write, that he openly showed, and
declared in his manners, gests, and in all things that his conscience accused
him of errors: Ioannes Shutz in serp. antiq. fol. 19.
but yet he had leifer forsake the truth, then to loose his honor in yielding
to Luther. The like write the same Lutherans of Oecolampadius. And as for Bucer
it is well known, that he had no conscience, nor religion at all: for at
Wittenberge he was a Lutheran, at Colone half a Catholic, in England a
Zwinglian, and every where of every Sect. I could easily show the like
dealing against their consciences, and knowledge in diverse other principal
Protestants, and namely in your countriman I well, who in citing and coating
Scriptures, Doctors, Councels, and other Authors, does so rent and tear in
pieces the text, inuert the sense, change and alter the words, and pull out of
the sentence by piece meal some little parcel, which is forced to sound for
his purpose, when as he cannot but see plainly, that the Author speaks
clean contrary, as any man may wonder to see a man so desperately and damnably
shameless, as openly, and in the view of the whole world to show himself
without God, or conscience: but mine intended brevity will not admit any more
allegations in this place. When I had found out the Premises to be most
true, and had duly weighed with my self the dealinges of these new
Gospellers, I thought it better to adventure my soul with all the whole
Christian world of all ages who had their consciences most quiet, caulme, and
joyful, then with a few desperate fellows, who thus deal against their own
knowledge, and consciences, and so show themselves most impudent, and
shameless to the whole world.

THE XXII. REASON. Vnreuerent dealing.
THE Catholic Roman Church has ever both in doing, and speaking, and every
manner of way borne great repect, and reverence toward Gods holy Saints, and
toward all holy things in regard of him, from whom proceeds all holiness, as
in reverent entering into the Church, in reverent taking of holie-water, in
reverent behavior toward the holy Aultars, toward pictures, and images of
the saints of God, in reverent and meek kneeling, in reverent and devout
praying, in all reverence and attention at the holy Mass, and in every
action, and jest which Catholics use in the Church, you may see great
reverence, and humble veneration: But contrariwise amongst the Protestants as
all things are profane, so are they most profanely used. They enter into
their Churches with no greater reverence the^ they enter into tauerns, they bow
or make reverence to nothing therein, for that they have made all Sacred things
away, if any of them kneel, it is but upon thorns, for full soon are they up
again, and the^ with their hats upon their heads they either iangle, or talk,
or walk, or sit staring about them, as if they waited to see when the
players would come forth upon the stage, or else the good fellows go to the
alehouse (where now and the^ they find their minister drinking his morning
draught before he go to his service) to drink a pot or two of nappy ale, that
thereby they may the better hold out the service time; during which space they
stand gazing and staring upon their Minister, as a Country clown which never
was in London before, does gaze when he goes down Cheap Side, at the
Gold-smithes stauls, or else they stare one upon another, like as thieves do
when they are taken in a robery, or else some of them walk without in the warm
son, and make their bargains, and generally you do see no more devotion
there, then you do in a Fair or Market; no man nor woman saying one prayer,
but all waiting for (that which they ca^ never have in that state) the peace of
God. The which being hastily chopped up, they rush and gush out of the Church
as water does out of a mill pole, when the flood yeates are suddenly plucked
up, no man moving lip, or leg, but striving who shall be soonest at his
pottage. Neither do they use any reverence to their Minister, no nor yet to
his wife, but account of the^ (as they are indeed) most abject persons. And no
marvel, when as their superintendents, whom they term Bishops, are little
esteemed of among their Diocesanes, and especially among Gentlemen, and are
least accounted of among Barrons, and other Noble men, who disdain their
company, and contemn their presence: whereas amongst Catholics, Priests have
ever bin greatly reverenced, Bishops and Prelates highly honored, and all
Clergy men much esteemed, and their company and presence, of all sorts
desired, and reverently accepted of. The same reverent respect have Catholics
ever observed in speaking, and in making mention of Gods Books, Angels, Saints,
or of such like holy things: for speaking of such they usually say: The holy
Bible, or the holy Scriptures, the holy Gospel, the blessed Sacrament, the
holy Sacraments etc. And of Angels and Saints: the holy Angels, S. Michael, S
Gabriel, etc. And the French more reverently use to say: Mounsieur S. Michael,
Mounsieur S. Pierre, etc. Our blessed Lady, or the holy virgin S. Marie, or
the mother of God, S. Peeter, S. Paul, S. Amb. S. August. S. Greg. S Hierome,
S. Bernard, etc. and generally in speaking of Holy things, they use Holy
terms: But the Protestants show as little reverence and devotion in speaking,
as they do in doing: for they speak no more reverently of such, then they
do of the prophanest things they have. They term all, as if they were in
puris natalibus: The Bible, the Word, the Testament, the Communion book,
Baptism, Bread, the Supper, Angels, Michel, Gabriel, Peter, Paul, Marie, or
Marie the virgin, Ambrose, Austen, Gregory the Pope, Hierome the monk,
Bernard the Abot, etc. with as great inciuilitie, irreuerence, and want of good
manners, as if rude Countriemen in talking of her Majesty's Nobles should say;
the Keeper, the Treasurer, the Admiral, Essex, Southampton, Monioy, etc. or
insteede of naming men of worship by their Christian names should say: Tom,
Dick, Will, Robin, Jack, Hodge, etc. Which diversity of dealing when I
considered it with my self, I could not but think, and deem the Protestants
profession void of all impression of piety and devotion; and contrariwise in
the Catholic Church to be all sincere affection, and celestial humility
toward almighty God, and toward al things appropriated to his service, as
also toward those, who are the greatest partakers of his heavenly favor.

THE XXIII. REASON. Resembling in Doctrine, and deeds, old Heretics.
Irenaeus l. 1. cap. 20. Theo lib. 1. Haeretic. fab. Aug. here is. 54. Hist.
trip. l. 8. cap. 9.
I HAVE conferred the Doctrine, deeds, and manners of Protestants, with those
of the old Heretics long since condemned by the Catholic Church, and I find
the^ little or nothing at all to differ: for as touching Doctrine, the
protestants hold with Simon Magus that good works are not meritorious: they
renounce the Pope with Nouatus: they refuse to fast on such days as the
Church has prescribed, Hierom in prae. in dia. aduer. Pelag. Aug. de her. cap
45. Epiph. l 3 her 75 Hier. lib. 1. co^. Iouin. idem coa. vigilant. ad
Exuperium.
and deny free will with the Manichees: they deny sacrifice, and prayer for
the dead with Aeriu: with Iouinia^ they put no differences of sins, nor make
virginity any better the^ marriage: they permit no tapers, nor lights in their
churches, and they speak against worshipping of Saints, and despise holy
relics of blessed Martyrs with Vigilantiu: they take away the oblatio^ of the
sacrifice, and the hallowing of Chrisme with Eutyches: Leo Epist. 75. Aug.
here is 88. and de pec. merit. lib. 3. cap. 5. loa. Shut^ lib. 50. causarum cap.
18.
they teach that children may be saved without baptism, and therefore that it
is not of necessity with the Pelagians: they brag with the Donatistes that
all the world has swarued from the right faith, and they only are the true
Church. And all the rest of their doctrine in a manner is borrowed thus of old
heretics, which here particularly to set down my breuity will not permit. The
like cobaerence and agreement they have with the old heretics in deeds and
manners: for I have found by experience that the Protestant preachers expect,
Eusebius. l. 7. Hist. c. 26.
and desire great applause of their hearers, as Paulus Samosatenus did of his
followers; they overthrow Aultars, Opt. lib. 6 contr. Do.
abuse the blessed Sacrament, handle despitefullie Holy Chrisme, as the
Donatistes did; they faigne causes, and come excuses why they will not go to
General Councels, Aug. lib. 3. con. Crescon. Gram mat. ca. 45. and hist. trip
lib. 5. c. 34.
as the said Donatistes, Macedonius, and Dioscorus did. The Donatistes also
fained that diverse Bishops who were absent, and that one who was dead did take
their part against Catholics, thereby to make their number to seem greater:
and there in England, when not so much as one Catholic Bishop could be
induced by any perswations, promises, gifts, or honors, to consent to their
Protestancy, yet were not the Protestants ashamed to abuse the Queens
Highness with this fained Supplication: Anno. 1. Reginae Elizabethae.
Most humbly beseech your most excellent Majesty, your faithful and obedient
Subjects, the Lords spiritual and temporal, etc. The same Donatistes, did
torment most cruelly Catholic Priests, plucking out the eyes of some, Aug.
Pon. com. Epist. 50.
and of one Bishop they cut out the tongue, and hand, and murdered many. And
the Protestants of late in France did the like to Catholic Priests, and
besides tying haulters about their necks, they drew them dispiteouslie after
their horses, that done, they cut off their ears, noses, and privy parts,
they ware their ears in their hats instead of brooches, and finally they
either hanged up their carcasses, Claud. de Sanctis in lib. du Sacrament des
eglyses.
or else shot them through with Pistolles: of others they hackled and mangled
their faces: of othersome to try force and strength, they did cleave in two at
one stroke their heads: and of an old Religious man at Man's, they first cut
off his privy parts, then they fried them, after they forced him to swallow
them down, and last of all they did rip his stomach; being yet alive, and see
what was become thereof. At S. Macharius they buried the Catholics quick,
they cut Infants in two, they ripped the bellies of Priests, and drew out their
intrals by little and little, winding them about a stick, or tree. At Patte a
village, some 6. leages from Orleaunce, they burned Catholics and threw infants
into the fire there to perish with the rest. And many other like outrages, and
barbarous cruelties they co^mittd, which who so desires to know, Victor de
persec. va^- l. 1. cap. 3. and l 1. cap. de offic. praef. praetor lib. 3,
Episc. Egipti Epist. ad Marcum Papaem.
may find them set down by Claudius de Saints in his book noted before i^
the margent. The Arria^ heretics troadeth B. Sacrament under their feet, they
overthrew the churches in Africa, and made of the^ stables for their horses, of
Altars clothes, and vestments they made shirts and breeches, they burned the
books, and carried the ornaments of the Churches away. And how the Protestants
have abused the B. Sacrament, spoiled churches, burned books, and have not
only made breeches, shirts, and cushions, but even coats for players, and
dizzardes of holy vestments, and Altar clothes, you cannot but know. Theod.
lib 1. cap. 6
Julian that wicked Aapostata, robbed Churches, spoiled the Clergy of their
privileges, banished the Priests, overthrew Aultars, caused the sacrifice to
cease, reproved the Christians for doing reverence to the Cross, Cyrill lib.
6. contra Julian. and l. 10 coa. eundem.
and for making the sign thereof in their foreheades, for painting it upon the
doors of their houses, and for worshipping the Relics of Mattyrs, for
visiting their tombs, for praying to them at their graves, Zozom. li. 5. cap
12.
and Sepulchers, and termed them deadme^: he overthrew and destroyed the
images, and pictures of Christ, he brake open the sh^ne, wherein the bones of
S. John Baptist were religiously kept, Theod. lib 5. cap. 6.
burned them, and dispersed abroad the ashes. Now whether the Protestants have
iumped just into the steps of this wicked Apostata in doing the like or no? I
leave to your judgment, knowledge, and consideration. Zozom li. 5. cap 21
Athan. lib. de passion. imag. Chr.
The Panims or heathen men brake the image of christ: the Jews crucified it,
as their Elders had done Christ himself: the Jew in in whose house it was
found, was troubled for it, and brought before the high priest, for that he
seemed by keeping that picture, that he was a Christian. And do not the
Protestants even as the Heathens and Jews did? The Jew was thought to be a
favorer of Christ, because he kept his picture in his house: and why should
not Catholics by the like reason, be judged favorers, and lovers of Christ,
for having his Image in their Churches, houses, and chambers? Or why should not
Protestants be deemed adversaries and enemies to Christ, as the Jews and
Heathens were, seeing they can no more endure his Picture or Cross then they
could? The old Heretics, as Nestorius, Socrat. lib. 7. hist. cap. 23. Eus. lib
6. cap. 55. and lib. 7. c. 24. Nicephor. lib. 6 cap. 30. Theodor. lib. 1. cap. 4
Nouatus, Paulus Samosatenus, the Arrians and others were out of measure proud,
arrogant, and wonderfully conceited of themselves, contemning the Doctors of
the Church, which had writttn before them, and preferring themselves before
all others whatsoever: the very same do the Protestants in a most proud, and
arrogant manner, and the ringleader, and Father of them all is not ashamed to
break out into these speeches: Lutherus col. men's.
I have Excommunicated Origin long ago, there is nothing singular in
Athanasius, fol. 474. and 460. and 932. and 476 and 477. and 17.
Tertullian is very superstitious: I make no count of Chrysostom, for he is
but a pratler: Basil plainly is nothing worth, he is altogether a Monk:
Cyprian the Martyr is a weak Diuiner: Hierome ought not to be numbered amongst
the Doctors of the Church, for he was an Heretic: amongst all the Doctors
scarcely one, except Augustine, To^. 2. ger. fol. 443. and 449.
understood what the spirit and the letter were: in all their books there is
great darkness of Faith: Gregory's Sermons are not worth a deaf nut, the
devil deceived him grossly in his Dialogues.

Thus do they censure the ancient Fathers, but of themselves they speak far
otherwise: for the same Arch-Protestant says that he himself is a faithful
Prophet, an Apostle, an Evangelist, Tom 2. Ger fol. 522. and fol 79. Tom. 3. f.
334. Coll. men's. fol. 488.
a living Saint, etc. And further he said of himself, that he is Esaias the
Prophet, and Phillip Melanctho^, Jeremy. Was there ever any Thraso so
impudent, as thus to brag of himself. And yet his followers were not
ashamed to extol and praise him in such sort, as I cannot without shame and
offense to Christian ears declare the same: but yet to give you a little taste
thereof, I will here set down a distichon, which his Disciples made in praise
of him, In part contra Stephanum Agricolam ca. 4. b. 9. a.
and which Cyriacus Spangenbergius one of his principal followers stoutly
maintains to be true, and allowable the distichon is this.

Christ is habet primas,
habeas tibi Paul secundus,
Ast loca post illos
proxima, Luther habet.
Which thus may be Englished.
The chief of all is Christ himself,
the next is Paul by grace,
Back Saints, Apostles, Angels all
for next is Luthers place.
Col. men's. fol. 159.
And Luther himself in another place coupleth himself with the same holy
Apostle Saint Paul: But to see what staff his adhaerentes use in his
commendation and praise, is too redicu-to behold, Col. men's. ger fo. 354 and
159. and Beza in lib Icom r 4. a and in praef. in nouum test. f. 144. a. and
Luth. in praefati. in comme^. Phill. in Epist. ad Ro^. p. 2. and tom 2. Ien.
fol. 79. and in li. coa. rege^. ang. and to^. 2. Ie^. f. 119 and col. me^. f.
144. and f. 474 and to^. 2. Lat. Witten. f 457. and in l. de^eruoarbit. and
Stigel. l. 2. Poemat. n. 4. Amsd. desc. Luth. and Ab. co^. Carola. an. l. 7. b.
Eus. l. 7. cap. 24 Soc. li. 6. c. 8. Zozo^. li. 8. c. 8. Nicph. l. c. 16. idem
li. 11. cap: 12. Tertul. in lib. de preser aduers. hers. Epip: her: 49. and 79:
Aug: her: 27: Hieron: ad Etesiph: aduers. pelagianos: Eusebius
which you may see at large in their writings, and thus they do not only write
of their master and captain, but even one of another and of themselves in a
most shameful and lying manner.

They follow also the fashion of old heretics in that they disagre so greatly
in Doctrine, and are so contentious, and do affect and seek after eloquence,
and smooth speeches, more than after the truth, as they did. And never any
Arch-heretike among them is converted, as there never was in the ancient time:
for that their sin was over heinous, and against the Holy Ghost; neither do
they put any difference between Ecclesiastical persons and civil, as they
old heretics did not. And they season their errors with songs, and ballades
in the vulgar tongue, to the end that the common people delighting to hear and
singe them, might thereby suck their errors, as you see them do by the
Geneua Psalms, which women, children, and all sorts confusedly sing, and so
did the old heretics, as historiographers make mention. The women among the
heretics in times past were so shameless, and malapert, that they took upon
them to dispute, and to reason of matters of religion: and they helped foreward
the Heresy, by teaching, preaching, prating, wra^gling, iangling, prophesying,
and by all means possible. 5.
And do not, p. 14. Niceph. l. cap. 22. Tom 1. Ie^. Ger. f. 336 and f. 17. and
341.
I pray you, the women amongst the Protestants the like, following therein
their Father Luthers advise, who licenseth them to do such things, and namely
to preach?

The old Heretics were very inquisitiue, and desirous to hear of the
sins, and faults of Priests, and of other Ecclesiastical persons, Aug. Epist
137.
and when they heard any such, they greatly rejoiced thereat, and blazed it
abroad with great exaggerations, and additions: and do not the Protestants the
same? Yea it were more sufferable if they blazed abroad only things which
were true: but they most impudentlie feign, and make upon their own fingers the
greatest part of such tales as are told of Ecclesiastical persons. Wherein
they show how far they are from the spirit and mind of that most Religious
Emperor Constantine the great, Zozom* li. 1. cap 6. Niceph. li. 8. cap. 16.
who would not in any wise hear the faults of Bishops and Priests, but
affirmed that if he should chance to find such an one violating wedlock, he
would cover him with his purple cloak, for fear of scandale.

I could here allege many more things both of doctrine and manners, in which
the Heretics of old, and the Protestants of these days, do agree, and iumpe
together, and because of brevity I will surcease, praying you warily to weigh
whose steps you tread in, and whose examples you follow.

THE XXIIII. REASON. Peace and tranquillity.
THE Catholic Roman religion (according to the prophecies of the old
Testament) began with meeknes, mildnes, and with all quiet, and peaceable
means, by which it also increased, and dilated it self: the teachers, and
professors thereof, using all patience and humility, but never any violence,
or force in the planting thereof; whereas the Protestants both have begun, and
hold on their course with seditious tumults, wars, cruelties, and other
outrageous Tragedies: as with overthrowing noble families, making away
honorable personages, and with destroying all before the^, where they set
foot, as Germany, where they began, can sufficiently witness, where were slain
within one year by rebellion and war for this new religion, Sled^n
above one hundred thousand people, countrymen taking arms against their
Lords, and subjects against their Princes for the same. And what rule, and
revel they have kept about their Gospel in France, in Flaunders, in Poland,
in Switzerland, and in Denmark, is well known where they have gathered sundry
armies, pitched many camps, fought many battles, made many insurrections,
destroyed Countries, Cities, Towns, Villages, caused such slaughter, and
havoc of Christian blood as every man abhors to hear of. And what
tragedies I pray you have they raised in Scotland? Have they not murdered
their Princes, and overthrown Noble houses, and Lynages, as the houses and
Lynages of Hamiltons, of Duglasses, of Stewardes, and of others? Neither has
Ireland escaped scot free. But to speak of our own Country, I cannot without
tears recount sommarily the troubles, calamities, destructio^s, and utter
ruins of noble families, honorable and worshipful personages, and of the
commonwealth it self caused by the Protestants, or for the controversy of
religion In k. Henry the 8. his time, two, the chiefest of the whole Realm,
for virtue and learning were put to death, with great numbers of others, both
spiritual and te^porall, and many noble families were quite overthrown. King
Edward being crowned King: new Lords, new Earls, new Marquises, and new Dukes
took the places of the old: new fellows were called out of Germany, to wit,
Peter Martyr, and Martin Bucer two Apostataes Friars, waited on by two
Fustelugge wenches, which had been Nuns, who came to teach a new
religion: but with express condition to be indifferent to teach what sect, or
opinions, either of LVTHER, ZVVINGLIVS, or CALVINE, or of any other
whatsoever, which the Parliament then in gathering should agree upon. The
poor irreligious Apostataes with their sacrilegious lasses were content so to
do, and upon that condition they were sent, the one to Oxforde with his wench
at his tail, and the other to Cambridge accompanied with his less. Then might
you have seen jolly holding and drawing about Religion, placing, and
displacing, prisoning, and setting at liberty, all men forced to swear to a
form of service drawn out in have by certain of the L. Protectours
chaplains, (which service was never heard of in the world before) but the
Clergy refused so to do, and therefore were deprived, and imprisoned. The
Duke of Somerset was head, and ruler of the new devised Church, (for the
Childe-King, was a playing him, and could not once think of any such thing)
and attended to his own advancement by purchasing good old land, whilst the
two sillye Apostataes kept the people occupied with new doctrine, and with not
trobling of him. And then began such revel, and hold, and tie in the land, as
that the Protector first of all cut off the head of his brother the Admiral:
the Earl of Warwick beheaded the Protector, and diverse others of his
friends, making himself Duke of Northumberland, and complotting with the
Duke of Suffolk to cut off all king Henry's children, and to bring in
Suffolkes daughter, and Northumberlands son as they did: for the which both
their heads were afterward cut off by Queen Marie. And in her Majesty's
time, that now is, all the Sacred Bishops were deprived in one day, and al, or
the most of them imprisoned during their lives. Many noble houses abused, and
disgraced, and diverse overthrown, many both of honor and worshipp
intollerably afflicted, many thousands of inferior sort greiuously
persecuted, above an hundred Priests tortured, hanged, and quartered, the most
of them being Gentlemen of worshipful descent, of rare wit, learning, and of
other parts incomperable. The Realm is divided, and shiuered into a thousand
pieces, the old friends and allies thereof, made enemies to it, new friends few
and weak, the natural inhabitants most pitifully divided amongst themselves
at home, and tossed and turmoiled abroad, every man of what state, conditon,
or religion soever he be of, has felt the smart of this new Gospel, either
in himself, in his friends, children, servants, kinsfolks, goods, honors,
and most of all the Realm, and Commonweal in it self, with ten thousand
other troubles, and afflictions, which the Protestants Religion carries
with it, wheather soever it goes. Ever expelling and driving away Peace, and
Tranquillity, which find harbor, and entertainment only in Catholic
realms, and commonweals. When I weighed, and considered these things
diligently with my self, I could not but dislike your new Religion, ever
accompanied with Tumults, Insurrections, Ruins, Desolations, and with all
manner of Tragical miseries, as is afore-saide, and cleave unto the old
Catholic Religion, ever bringing with it peace, quietness, love friendshipp,
plenty, and all kind of happiness, as we see in Lands and Countries which
ever have kept the same.

THE XXV. REASON. All kind of witnesses against one and that only in show, or
in very deed none at all.
EVERY man knows that the Protestants can bring forth nothing to witness
their religion, but only the Scriptures, and how they make for them, I have
partly showed before: for in every deed they being rightly examined, and
truly interpreted bear witness most of all other things against them: for
out of all doubt, Gods word is not contrary, but most consonant to all things
before aleaged, and practiced through the whole christian world for so many
ages together. And whereas they will admit no expositors of holy Scriptures, but
the Scriptures themselves: for that (as they say) one place expounds another;
I ask the^ then, how their chief master M. Luther, when as he would most
gladly have denied the Real Presence, thinking thereby to wreake his teene
the more on the Pope, confessed that he could not do it, because the words were
so manifest for it? And why has that text been so tossed and wrested in this
age, as that sundry sectaries have wringed out of it, above foure-score
different opinions, or expositions; and yet every one defends with tooth and
nail his interpretation to be sound, and right? So that in fine they have no
witness at all of their new invented doctrine, but every one his private
fancy, or conceit: whereas the Catholic Religion, besides all the reasons
before alleged, has all things in the world witnesses of it: for if you
look up to Heaven, you may there see amongst innumerable Martyrs, which all
gave their lives for the said Religion, three and thirty which were Popes of
Rome. And to speak some what in particular, In Epist. ad Smyr.
the zealous Martyr S. Ignatius, who in Ecclesiastical affairs would have no
man, no not the King equal to a Bishop, and who wrote Apostolical traditions,
which he himself had seen, sealed his religion with his blood. Lib. 3. c. 3.
Irenaeus who declared the true Faith by succession in the Sea of Rome was of
this religion. S. Victor, Eusebius. 5. hist. 24 Eusebius. 4. hist. 14.
who by his po^tificall power, kept in subjection all Afric, was of this
religion. S. Polycarpe who went to Rome about the question of Easter, was of
this religion. S. Cyprian, S. Sixtus, S. Laurence, with infinite others, both
Doctors and Saints do witness the Roman Religion. Thousands of Virgins,
which defended their virginity against devils, and men, Eusebius. 8. hist. 17.
Aug l. 9. conf. cap. 7. us. ad 3.
were of this religion. Saint Helen, who went to Jerusalem, to find out the
Cross of our Savior was of this religion. The mother of S. Austin. S. Monica,
who at her death requested that she might have Mass said for her, and to be
prayed for, was out of all doubt a Papist: So were S. Paul the Eremite, S.
Hilarion, S. Anthony, S. Nicolas, S. Martine, S. Benet, with millions of such
like, who were fed with fasting, clothed with sacke-cloath, and enriched with
all manner of virtues. And to be short, were there, I pray you, any Saints in
heaven, before this our age, which were not Papist? I am sure that either
heaven was empty until Luth. shook of his hood, or if there were any there
they were Papists.

Now if you look down into hell, you may behold the Heathen persecutors,
Jews, Turks, and Heretics, in perpetual torments for persecuting, and
striving against the Catholic ROMAN CHVRCH To this Constantine the great
brought peace, and quietness. In this Church there has been continual
succession of Bishops without any interruption. All Bishopps and Pastors of
particular Churches, in what land or country soever they were in under the cope
of heaven, were members of this Church. As for example, S. Ignatius, at
Antioch, Peter, Alexander, Athanasius, Theophilus, at Alexandria: Macharius,
and Cyrillus at Jerusalem: Proclus at Constantinople: Gregory, and Basil, in
Cappadocia: Thaumaturgus in Pontus: Polycarpas at Smyrna: Justinius at Athens:
Dyonisius at Corinth: Gregory at Nysa, Methodius at Tyrus, Ephreem in Syria,
Cyprian, Optatus, Austin in Afric, Epiphanius in Cyprus, Ambrose, Paulinus,
Gaudentius, Prosper, Faustus, Vigilius in Italy, Irenaeus, Martine, Hylarius,
Eucherius, Gregory, Saluianus in France: Vincentius, Orotius, Hildefonsus,
Leander, Isidorus, in Spain, Fugatius, Damianus, Iustus, Melytus, Beda in
England, were Bishops and Pastors of this Church. In brief, whatsoever
deeds or works, signs or monuments, fragments, or relics remain yet in
any land or country of them, who planted the Christian Faith there, do
testify the Catholic Roman Religion. All Princes, Kings, and Emperors, all
States and commonweales which ever were christened: the Theodosians in the
east, the Charles in the west, the Edwards in England, the Lewesses in
France, the Hermigildes in Spain, the Henry's in Saxony, the Wenceslaes in
Boeme-Lande, the Leopoldes, in Austria, the Steeuens in Hungary, the Iosophates
in India professed, and protected the Roman Religion, they builded Churches,
founded religious houses, and erected many other Monuments of piety, not for
Protestants Iwis, but for the professors of the Catholic Roman Religion:
which Faith and Religion S. Pattricke brought first into Ireland, Palladius
into Scotland, S. Augustine into England, and other Apostles into other
countries: witnesses of this Religion are al Universities, Colleges,
Hospitals, Monasteries, Churches, Chapels and innumerable other monumentes:
Witnesses their foundations, their ordinances, yea and the very buildings
themselves: witnesses all Reuestryes, Chauncels with steps up, Aultars, Rood
lofts, Cross-buildings, al Crosses in Church and Church-yeardes, Marketplaces,
and Highways: witnesses all Bishoprics, Deaneries, Arch-deaconries,
Prebendes, Parsonages, Vicariages, and such like, ordained trow you, for women,
and children to make them gentles? Witnesses all tithes, and other liuely-hoods
so religiously lotted out, not for ministers wenches, and their brats, but for
Sacred anointed Priests. Good Lord, what would the founders of all these
premises say, if they might come but to see how their lands and goods, which
they so religiously bestowed to honor God withal, are by Protestants
employed? Witnesses spiritual Courts, Visitations, Conuocations,
Excommunications, and Suspensions: witnesses probations of dead men's wills:
witnesses bidding and forbidding of banes: witnesses partitions of Diocese and
parishes; all ordained, and instituted by Papists. Witnesses ancient laws and
customs: witnesses the vulgar manners of people, the Election, and
Inauguration of Emperors, the rites of annoynting and crowning of kings, the
dubbing of knights, etc. witnesses coins, windows, towne-gates, town-houses,
all rules, and to conclude, all things in the world witness the Catholic Roman
Religion.

Thus have I briefly my dear friends set down some plain reasons of the
religion which I profess, and for the enjoying of which, I am content to
forgo my native soil, my dear Parents, you my dearest friends, with all the
rest, and all those commodities and pleasures, which you account in your
letter. I wish you not to think evil of me for so doing, for it is the
religion wherein I was borne, baptized, and confirmed: it is the religion which
from time to time has bin universally received throughout all Christendom:
it is the religion which there in our own country of al others is the first,
the auncientest, the most benificiall of all the rest, the mother, and
begetter of the others, and the religion of all our Christian Predecessors,
and therefore bear with me I pray you, in that I will not yield up my title,
and interest of that which I have received from mine Elders, by lineall and
lawful descent, no man for these thousand years at the least seeking to put
me, or any of my predecessors out of it. Yet if any Protestant or other
whatsoever, can show me any good evidence, why I should not possess the same,
I am ready to give it up: but hitherto they promising and vaunting to show
good evidence, have brought forth nothing but words, and forgerie. And
therefore by Gods grace, I purpose to hold the same, even until my dying day,
except such evidence come against my title, as is not to be showed, no not by
an Angel, if he should come from heaven. God bless you in the abundance of
his mercy, who send us joyful meeting, either in this world, or in the next,
or in both.

A COPY OF ANOTHER LETTER WHICH THE TWO Citizens of London wrote to their
friend beyond the Seas, shortly after that the other was sent.
DEAR AND WEL-beloued friend, after that we had sent the last Letter dated the
13. of September Anno. 1599. we consulting, and weighing the contents thereof,
with some what more deep considerations then before we had done: it was
thought good to write unto you this second Letter, to let you understand that
we will not receive, nor meddle with any grounds or reasons of your faith and
religion, and therefore you need not to trouble your self with writing any:
for we assure our selves that you can bring forth none, but such as Papists
use to allege, which are now grown very stale, and out of request. Only
this is the desire of us al, that you would return without delay: but yet so,
as you may show your self obedient to her Ma. laws in coming to the Church
as other good dutiful subjects do: for surely what Religion soever you
profess, we think you may with safe conscience come to hear Divine Service,
or a Sermon, being no further urged, but that you may think, and pray as you
list. And what Scripture, authority or reason can you show, or pretend for
refusing so to do? For we know the common answer, which women, and such
silly souls are accustomed to make in saying: It is against my conscience, I
may not with a safe conscience so do: is too foolish for you, who seem to
have more knowledge. We supposed at the first, that your refusal proceeded of
a timorous and over scrupulous conscience, but now we begin to suspect, that
because you have gone so far in that course, you think it would be some
discredit, as to be deemed unconstant, and a turne-coate, if you should in any
sort relent, and come to conformity, and therefore you mind still to be
obstinate: but we friendly advise you to beware of such peeuishnes, proceeding
indeed from the root of pride, and we wish you to submit your self to your
gracious Princess, her honorable Counsel, and to the laws of your native
Country, and weigh with your self, what you are to stand against a whole
Realm, and we see no reason, but that you may as well come to Church, as you
did once (if we be not deceived) eat upon some occasion, flesh upon a friday,
a thing so opposite to your religion. If you can master your mind, so as you
may come home in this sort, we shall be all most glad of you: for if you do,
neither Parents nor friends will entertain you, nor speak one word in your
cause, for if they should it were but in vain, and besides might bring them
into some suspision and discredit. God give you grace to be wise in time, for
if you hold on in this your wilful folly, we fear much, that you who should
have bin most comfort to your friends, will become their greatest grief, and
give the^ occasion to wish that you never had bin borne: whereas being
tractable in this our request, you may salve all sores past, benefit your self,
pleasure many, do great good in your country, comfort your kinsfolks, prove
your self wise in deed, gain credit amongst the best, and live pleasantly
many an year. Which thing your Parents, and we most earnestly desire to
see. And thus, they with paternall blessings, and we all jointly with
millions of commendations, commit you to the Almighty. London this 2. of
October. an. 1599.

Your most kind and loving friends. R. and G.H.

AN AVNSWERE TO THE LETTER BEFORE GOING.
MOST loving frindes, I had written the reasons of Religion before I received
the countermaunde in your last letter, which came to my hands very late, for
being dated the 2. of October Anno 1599. it came not to me until the 20. of
December of the same year. Perusing the same, and weighing the contents
thereof, I find that you little care what religion I retain in my mind and
conscience, so that I be conformable to the Laws of our Country, in hearing
Service, as it is now set forth, or a piece of a Sermon, as it is now there
preached. Many circumstances and surmises you use, but all drive to the final
scope by you intended, which is to drive me to your Church. And indeed as
worldly friends, for an especial kind of such love toward me, you labor
very much, for the which I heartily thank you, but alasle your counsel and
desire is no other than S. Peter's was to our Lord Christ, Mat. 16.
or those pitiful frinds was to Eleazarus, 1. Mac. 6.
for you build all upon our present safety, and welfare in this world. And if
I thought that I might follow your counsel, and nevertheless save my soul,
surely then I were the most miserable fool that ever was in the world, if I
would not so do For to speak of my fellow Catholics in England, as well as
of my self, can there I pray you any man be more mad, than to suffer loss
of goods, and living, to be discredited, contemned, and trodden under every
man's foot that lists to spoil them, to lie in prison, in dungeons, to be
racked, reracked, hanged, bowelled alive and boiled, and after all this, to go
to hell, there to be tormented eternallye with Fire and Brimstone, and all for
Religion, when as being conformable to the Laws of their country: in going to
Church, they may enjoy livings, liberties, and lives, feed at large, and live
gallantly, alofte in all delicacy, mirth, pastime, and pleasure in this world,
and after all this, in the end to be sure of joy in the next. If you could
prove this to me, then I say, you might condemn me for the wretchedst
miscreant that ever lived, if I did not yield to your advice and desire. But
until you can prove it, I hope you will conster my course in charitable manner,
and judge better of me, tha^ that I do it of obstinacy, or for fear of
discredit, or for any worldly respect, for I call God Almighty (before whom
we are sure to meet one day, and to receive according to our thoughts, words,
and deeds) to witness that I do refrain and refuse to go to your service,
only for conscience sake, that is, because I think it not laweful: for in so
doing I should offend God Almighty greatly, which I must not do for a
million of worlds: But because you write, that you suppose me to have more
knowledge, then to answer with silly women, it is against my conscience, etc.
and ask, what Scripture, authority, or reason I have for my refusing? I
thought it good and convenient to show you briefly some arguments and reasons,
which I know not how to answer if I should follow your counsel: But I will
not amplify or explane them at large, for so I should be long and over tedious
for you, who (if I be not deceived) can hardly endure to read through any
prolixe discourse: but I will only point as it were at them with my finger, for
I know your wits to be ready enough to conceive the whole by a part, or
parcel. To begin therefore, I tell you plainly, that the reasons, why I being
a Catholic, and most steadfastly believing the Catholic Religion to be most
true, and consequently all other Sects and religions false, and damnable, will
not go to hear your service, or a sermon of your religion, are these which
follow.

1 In so doing, I should furnish the Camp of the enemies of the Cathotholike
Church with my visible presence, which may not be done without offense, for:
Prouer. 14
In the multitude of his people is the Kings dignity, and in the small number
of his folk, the ignominy of the Prince; I lessen thereby the number of
Catholics, and increase the number of Protestants, at the least in open show.

2 I should yield to an act of a contrary religion, exacted of me as a denial
of mine, which may not be done without great offense: for although you
inculcate, and ingeminate obedience, and dutifulnes to our Prince, and that it
is but an act of obedience: sure lie I cannot see but that it is an act of
religion: for albeit the Statute bear this title: An act to retain her
Majesty's subjects in their due obedience, yet is not mere obedience the mark
intended in the Satute: for the ordinary way to exact obedience is by oaths of
fidelity, and homage. And why should this law be made for odedience, and none
else? or why should obedience be rather showed in the Church then in other
places? or why by joining with protestants in their service, rather the^ by
other manner of ways? And I pray you, is not obedience included in every law as
well as in this? for it is very plain, that every precept or law besides
obedience to it self, intends some act of some other virtue. And in this
law none can be intended but about religion: and so in going to your service I
should make outward profession of your religion, which in my conscience I judge
to be false.

3 I should deny my Faith by so doing: for before the law of going to the
Church was made, there was no such bond for Catholics to profess their faith
in refusing the Church, as after there was, although I do not deny, but that
it was unlawful even before the Satute, as being a thing evil in it own
nature, to go formally to their Service: but now every Catholic is bound to
profess his faith in refusing to go to the protestants Service, when it is
exacted of him according to the Satute, which intends to draw him from
Catholic Religion And we see by experience, that what Catholic soever goes
to their Service, be he never so zealous in mind in Catholic Religion, yet
is he of every man reckoned in the number of Protestants, and of all
Catholics utterly disclaimed. And such a one is in very deed a flat
partaker of Protestantisme, and is incorporated ipso facto with the members of
the same, and utterly excluded from the participation of the Mystical Body of
Christ our Savior. 4 You might by the same reason urge me to receive your
Communion, by which you move me to go to your Service: which I hope you will
not do, knowing it to be so opposite to my faith, and religion: for I may show
my obedience to my Princes laws as well in the one as in the other. And I know
well enough that the Communion is but a piece of bread, and a suppe of wine,
which are things no less indifferent of themselves, the^ my presence at your
service is. And as I know that your minister would give me that bread and wine
insteede of a far better thing: so would he buzze, and sound in mine ears
your service, I am sure, in liew of a far more holy thing. And as I little
esteem your service, so make I small account of your bread and wine: But
indeed the true cause why I will do neither the one, nor the other, is
because they be both a like acts of religion, used in things which I deem
most untrue: yet might obedience excuse the^ both in your opinion.

5 I should ipso facto be Excommunicated, Calet. 2.2. ^. 12. ar. 1. and q. 94.
ar. 1.
and cut off from the Catholic Church of Christ: for she excommunicating
generally all heretics, comprehends me in the number of the^, because in
exterior court or show, I am an heretic by going to any other service, then
that of the said Catholic Church, and she not knowing the mind or affection,
judges according to the outward show, and so reputeth me for an absolute
heretic, although keeping my Faith inviolable, I be not so inwardly, and in
very deed. By this means I should be used as an excommunicat person,
altogether cut off from Gods visible church, barred from holy service, and
sacraments: for no Catholic Priest could lawfully admit me to any such, so
long as I would continue in that miserable state.

6 I should be contrary to my conscience, a favorer, and a furtherer of
Protestants Religion; for I by my presence increasing your number (as I said
before) must needs somewhat augment the credit of your congregation, and so
make your sect to flourish the more, and encourage others by mine example to
help forward the same.

7 I should loose that peace, which coupleth us to God, and makes us of one
heart, and soul amongst our selves: Act. 4.
and which was so much sought for by the penitent lapsed Christians of the
Primitive Church. Their admission, or reconciling again to the Church after
their fall was termed giving of peace: Cyp. lib. 1. Epist. 2.
for GOD knows how little peace, rest, or quietness of mind a Catholic
going to your service has. And no meruail, when as his body goes one way and
his mind another, yea he a member rent off from the whole body.

8 I should be adjudged by the Catholic Church both a Schismatike, and an
Heretic in so doing. A Schismatike, because I go to a Congregation separated
from the church of God: an Heretic, in that I couple my self to them who
teach heresy: for being by that deed (as I said before) an exterior Heretic,
I am consequently a schismatike, because that every heretic is withal a
schismatike, but every schismatike is not an heretic: for a schismatike only
is he, who holding the same opinions, Lib. 20 co^. Faust. c. 3. and con.
Crescon.
and using the same ceremonies of worshipping God with others, yet only is
pleased with a several congregation.

9 I should in so doing make a greatly in profession of my faith, which must
needs be a great sin: for a lie is as well committed in deed by dissimulation,
Ambr. ser. de Abra.
as in speech. And my presence at protestants service tells that I am a
protestant, whereas in my heart and conscience I am a Catholic. This kind of
lying (as says S. Augustine) ought most chiefly to be avoided, for that it is
made in the most noblest of all moral virtues, I mean Religion.

10 I should give great scandale, and occasion of fall to others; for that they
seeing me do against my conscience in this, may think that I will as easlie
do any thing else which I know to be naught, upon hope of repentance, and so by
mine example may be moved to do the like: for he who knows or thinks in
his conscience your Service to be unlawful, and yet will be present at it,
why will he not as easily do any other thing which he knows to be
evil? Besides, others vvoulde by this mine example, be Confirmed in Schism,
and Heresy, thinking the service either to be good and godly indeed, or at the
leastwise that it may begone unto without any scruple. As those who saw others
eat Idolothytes, 1. Cor. 8.
were confirmed, and encouraged to do the like.

11 I should endaunger my self to be infected with that doctrine, which I
judge to be damnable. And I am told that: Eccl. 13.
he who loves danger shall perrish therein. And if I will not be bitten with
a Snake, I must not sleep nigh an hedge: neither ought I to touch pitch, least
I be defiled by the same. And if David had not adventured to gaze upon
Bethsabee he had not fallen into so great liking of her, as to commit such
horrible sins as you know. And if no Catholic would have heard Luth. to
have preached, when he began this new doctrine, there had been at this day
neither Lutheran, Zwinglian, Protestant, Puritan, nor any such late sprung up
fellows, to trouble and molest the Catholic Church. Romans 6.


12 I should disobey S. Paul his commandment, bidding me avoid an
Heretical man. Tit. 3 2. Tim. 4
And far should I be from the mind of the holy Apostle, and Evangelist, S.
John, who durst not so much as stay in the bathe to vvash in the company of
Cerinthus the Heretic. Eusebius. li. 3 cap. 22
What would the same Holy Saint have said think you, if he had bin requested
by his dear worldly friends, to have bin present at the prayers, service,
and sermons of Cirinth. for the Apostles, Lib. 3. c. 30
and their scholars (as witnesses Nicephorus) were so wary in this case,
that they would not so much as once reason the matter with any of them that
endeavored by their leasinges to corrupt the truth. And holy Ignatius boldly
affirms that, Epist. 6. ad Philadelphenses.
who so flies not from a false preacher shall be damned into Hell.

13 I should be partaker of all their wickedness, and consequently in danger of
all the punishment and mischief which may befall them, especially being present
with them at the deed, wherein principally they offend God: from which thing
I am discouraged by the terrible death of all the^ which were in company with
the Schismatikes Chore, Number 16.
Dathan, and Abiron: which example (as says Saint Cyprian) ought to move us
not to assiste, or further Heretical oblations, Cyp. Epist 76.
prayers, sermons, and errors.

14 I should contrary to the judgments of the learned of all Religions: for
the Gentiles thought it not lawful to enter into the Jews Synagogues, Lact
lib. 4. and 5. divine. instit. cur. Senec de hist. mahom. chronic. Wolsang
Drisl. Eus. lib. 3. and 4. Aug. li. de unit. Ecl. and lib. 2. coa. Petilian.
Ioh. Guard. in his Cat. art. 86.
or into Christian Churches The Turks at this day refuse to do the same, the
Arrians, Donatists, and such like, would not one go to another conuenticles,
nor to the Catholics service, nor the Catholics to any of theirs. The
Anabaptists will not go to the Lutherans, Churches, nor the Lutheranes to the
Trinitaries. The Puritanes will hardly be drawn to Protestants service:
neither will the Protestants in Catholic Countries come to Catholic Service.
And the Jews will not go to any Service but their own. Those Protestants
which in Queen Mary's days had any conscience, refused to go to Mass. And
therefore in reason you should not move me, much less urge me, to do the
thing, which the learned on your side in their own case would not do,
because they judge it unlawful.

15 I should do evil to go to your Service because I cannot, but in mine own
conscience judge it to be dishonorable to God, and consequently naught. For
to omit to speak how, it is devised by your selves, and how your fellovv
PVRITANES do utterly condemn it. I know your Translations of Holy
Scriptures to be false and shameless, so as if my scholar should translate one
of Tullyes Epistles in such corrupt manner, I would soundly breeche him for his
labor. Then your Ministers are no Priests, but mere Laymen, and
consequently have no authority to deal in such things. Besides you have in
your Service diverse false and blasphemous things, and put them to the people
for Scripture; as in a Geneua Psalm you pray to be defended from Pope, Turk,
and Papistry, etc. And to speak what I think, you have left out all good
things, and have chosen to your selves just nothing of Catholic service,
although the people were made to believe that it was the old Service put into
English.

16 I should go to that Service which never was heard of in the world before
these days: nor yet is in any place else in all the world, but only there in
England.

17 I should go to that Service, which you amongst your selves cannot agree
upon, or decree to continue. And it had by all likelihoode been changed
again before this day, if the grauer sort had not made some stay, for fear
of incurring the note of inconstancy: for how many bills I pray you, have there
bin put up in Parliaments about the changing of your Service? Agree therefore
amongst your selves first what service you will have to continue, and then I
will answer you reasonably to your demand.

18 In so doing my soul should go one way, and my body another; which ought
not to be: for if they should go two ways in this world, they could not be
joined together after the resurrection in the next life, but the one should
go to heaven, and the other to hell; which cannot be: for if the body serve
not God together with the soul in this life, why should it enjoy heaven in the
next? And if it be with Protestants at their Service in this world, why
should it not be where the Protestants be in the next?

19 I should loofe all the benefit of Catholic religion, and so either leave
off all conscience, or else live in continual torment of mind; and if I should
die in that state, I should be utterly cast away for ever. Besides I should
loose the merit of all the good works that I ever did in all my life; because
I give over working before evening, and so loose my penny, and wages which
otherwise would be truly paid me. Mat. 20*


20 If I should so do, either to gratify you, and other of my friends, or by
commandment of any power under her Majesty: neither you, nor they, could
take it well, or account of me, better then of a traiterous caitiue, for that
you must needs think that I, who will violate my faith to God almighty in doing
contrary to my conscience, and judgment for any worldly respect, will easily
break my faith and promise with man, according to the judgment of Constantius
the Emperor: Eus. de vit. canstant. l. 1. cap. 11.
for how can he be true unto man, that is convicted of perjury to God? verily
such must needs be deemed of the wise, to be flatterers, turne-coates, and
great hypocrites.

21 And now to come to the answer, which you say women, and such silly
souls are accustomed to make; I should do contrary to my conscience: which
thing in no case is lawful to be done. Yea if your service were good, and
godly indeed, and the very true Service of God, yet so long as I think
otherwise of it, I may in no case yield to go to it: because an erroneous
conscience binds a man to follow it, and never to do any thing against it,
according to judgment of all learned men, of what sect, or religion soever
they be. And therefore you may not request me, much-lesse urge me to go to your
service, before I be persuaded in my conscience that it is lawful so to do.
Greatly therefore do you offend God there in England, in forcing people to go
to the Church, contrary to their consciences, and in imprisoning those, who
refuse so to do: for no man is able to master his own conscience, and
knowledge, and to do against it he ought not, and therefore it is not in his
power or will, to go to your Service without offense.

22 I should do contrary to the Ca^nons and custom of the Catholic church, and
against the examples of all Holy Saints, and learned Fathers. Contrary to the
63. Canon of the Apostles, and against Council. Carth. 4. cap. 71. and 72.
Council. Antioch. cap. 2. and 5. Con. Laodicen. c. 9. 32. 33. 37. Con. Mag.
Later. cap. 70. and against diverse other Councels, as also against the late
Council of Trent, where the matter was put ( English Catholics making suite
that it might be covertly discussed, and decided) to 12. learned Fathers; whose
judgment in this matter is yet extant, and it had bin superfluous to have in
any public Cano^ there condemned the same, which by so many Councels before
that was plainly forbidden. Against the examples of Saints, and learned
Fathers, as of S. I. Euang. which I recited before, of S. Polycarpe, of S.
Denis Bishop of Alexandria, of S. Anth, of Origin, of Beniolus, S. Amb. S.
Athan. S. Chrisost. and of many more.

23 I should in so doing show my self a Neuter, that is, such a one as is not
affected to either religion, and consequently of no religion, Apoc. 3.
but an Atheist or neither hot nor cold, but luke warm, and therefore to be
spued out of the mouth of God: 3. Reg. 18.
for he who haulteth on both sides, is on neither side, but a traitor to
both. And from the one, and the same fou^tain there runs not sweet and
sower water: Jacob. 3.
neither can any man serve two contrary masters: as he can not plow with an Ox
and an Ass, Mat 6. Deuteronomy. 22.
nor wear garments of linnin and wolle^, nor sow his field with two manner of
seeds.

24 I should in so doing be (as is said before) one of your congregation, and
yet I should be but the very excrements, or chippings of your Church: for
receiving no life from Catholic religion, in the corpse of Protestantisme I
should serve for no necessary use, because I could not be there, but for some
worldly respect, and so in body only, and by that means but as the hairs of a
man's body, or nails, or evil humors: which although they be within the body,
yet are they not animated by the soul, but void of sense, and lost without
pain, and by nature not fit to be quickened: for from the Protestant spirit I
hope I should suck no zeal of that sect, and from the soul of the Catholic
Church I could receive no life, because I cut my self off from it, by
yielding to your service, and so I should remain void of sense, life, and
soul, and should be nothing but Caluins excrements.

25 I should show my self a cold Catholic, and indeed to have no zeal at
all, for that deeming you to be Gods enemies, yet I can find in my heart not
only to be in company with you in civil affairs, but also in your service,
far from the spirit of the Prophet David, Psalm. 16.
who hated the congregation of such, and was even eaten with the zeal of Gods
Church, and greatly loved the beutye thereof. Yea, I should do quite
contrary, for when I see a thief, I should run with him, and take part with
the adulterers. And to conclude with answering your demand, why I will not as
well go to your service, as eat flesh upon a friday, when urgent occasions
drive me thereunto: I say, that Religion being a virtue which gives honor and
reverence to God, does sometimes command other virtues, and directs their
actions to Gods honor. Theod. 22. q. 85. art. 3
As fasting is a virtue that subdueth man's body, and may be commanded by
religion to serve God withal. Other acts there are, which only belong to
religion, and not to other virtues, which have no other praise, but that they
are done for the reverence of God: of which sort are sacrifies, kneeling,
knocking on the breast, and such like. And of this sort is the ceremony of
going to such a place more then to another. Hereupon it is that one may eat
flesh upon a friday, or other fasting in diverse cases, and yet in no case go
to service with those who are of a false religion: for to abstain upon
certain days, is not a proper, or immediate act of religion, but commanded
by religion, being indeed an act of temperance, and so intended by holy Church,
although it may be used to honor God with all. And because none use to fast on
such days but Catholics, it does oftentimes betoken a Catholic, and
distinguishes him from Protestants: yet because the immediate end of the law
is temperance, and the act of eating of flesh or of other forbidden meats, has
other natural ends besides religion, therefore it does not necessarily
contain any signification of religion: but the act of going to the Church
does of it own nature, and by common acceptance of all betoken devotion and
religion.

Thus have I briefly yielded you some reasons and authorities, why I may not
satisfy your request, and condiscende to your desires in going to your
service. I could have yielded many more, but I thought these might suffice you,
and cause you to surcease from your worldly, and carnal perswations: for
hereafter I mean not to answer you any more such letters, but only to say
unto you, go behind me Satan's for you are scandales to me. And so desiring
our Parents blessing with humble commendations to the^, and hearty to you, and
to all the rest of our kinsfolks and friends, I leave you all to our Lord
and Savior, who send us his grace in this world, and his glory in the next.
From my Chamber at Palempyne this 18. of February. 1600.

FINIS.
A bryef and short declaracyon made, wherbye e^ christen man may know, what
is a sacrament. Of what parts a sacraments consysteth and is made, for what
intent sacraments were instituted, and what is the pryncypall effect of
sacraments, and finally of the abuse of the sacrament of christen body and
blood.

Imprinted At London by Robert Stoughton Dwelling within Ludgate. at the sign
of the Bysshoppes Myter.


