CLII LECTVRES UPON PSALM LI. PREACHED, At ASHBY-DELAZOUCH in Leichestershire.

By that late, faithful, and worthy Minister of JESUS CHRIST, Mr. ARTHUR
HILDERSAM.

Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is
covered.

Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity: and in whose
spirit there is no guile.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller for Edward Brewster at his shop at the great
North door of PAUL'S as the sign of the Bible. MDCXXXV.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND RELIGIOUS LADY, KATHARINE COUNTESS OF
CHESTERFIELD:

^AMUEL HILDERSAM presents this Book in testimony of his humble and thankful
acknowledgement of her noble favor and respect showed to the Author both
living and dying.

The Contents of the whole Book collected by the Author.
Lect. 1.
IN the expounding of the Psalms, the Titles ought not to be omitted as
superfluous, Page 1. No part of the Word is to be neglected, but reverently to
be esteemed of, though we cannot at first discern, what use is to be made of
it, and thus our reverend esteem of it, is to be showed six ways, p. 2, 3.
Why this Psalm was committed to the chief Musician, p. 4. To sing Psalms,
even David's Psalms in Gods solemn worship, is an ancient and excellent
ordinance of God, Ibid. How Psalms should be sung, p. 6. They that have grace,
and have truly repented, dare not speak broadly, nor immodestly of filthy
actions, Ibid. The heinousness of David's sins, both in respect of the nature,
and circumstances of them, p. 8. The truly regenerate may fall fearfully into
gross sins, p. 8. Therefore 1 fear thy self, p. 10. 2 be willing to die, p.
11. 3 strive to hold out to the end, p. 12. 4 Despair not if thou fall, Ibid.
Lect. 2.
No man when he is fallen, is able of himself to rise up aga^ne, p. 13.
Therefore 1 Embolden not thy self to sin, upon hope of repentance, p. 15. 2
Fear hardness of heart, as the greatest judgment, p. 16. 3 Be thankful for
a penitent and humbled heart, p. 17.
Lect. 3.
The ministry of the Word, is the means which God has sanctified, and by
which he is wont to work repentance, and saving grace, p. 18, viz. 1 an
effectual sense of sin, Ibid. 2 a comfortable assurance of pardon, p. 19. 3 a
true change in the heart, Ibid. For 1 God accompanies it with his divine power
and blessing, p. 20. 2 that so he might grace and dignifie his own ordinance,
p. 21. 3 it pleases God to show his power, in this rather then in stronger
means, Ibid. Therefore esteem highly of this ordinance, reverence the
faithful Minister, and how far forth, Ibid. and p. 22. Some we may reverence
above others, Ibid. and p. 23. yet the meanest faithful Minister is to be
reverenced, Ibid.
Lect. 4.
Most men 1 esteem not of the Ministers of the Word, at least not for their
works sake, p. 24. 2 Few esteem rightly of the ministry of the Word: for 1
they care not what ministry they live under: 2 in placing themselves and
children, they have no respect to that: 3 they will be at no cost: 4 they will
take no pains for it: 5 though they may have it freely and without labor,
they care not for frequenting it. 3 Few or none are thankful for it, or count
it a blessing, p. 25. Their great sin, that care not for the ministry of the
Word. p. 26. Their great sin and danger, that hear much and are never the
better, p. 27.
Lect. 5.
The ministry of the Word is ^or fruitful and three causes of it, 1 Want of
due inspection, 2 A secret curse of God, p. 2^. 3 The hearers fault, p. 30.
Preparation is necessary to the profitable hearing of the Word, viz. Come with
an heart, that is 1 penitent, Ibid. 2 freed and emptied of worldly cares, 3
that has a good appetite and desire to learn, 4 humble and sensible of the
need it has of the Word, p. 31 5 open and ready to receive whatsoever God
shall teach, 6 resolved to obey and practice, p. 32. 7 Come in faith, 8 Pray
earnestly for the teacher and themselves, p. 33.
Lect. 6.
To hear the Word profitably, is a laborious and painful thing, p. 34. In
the hearing of the Word, 1 We must set our selves as in Gods presence, for as
the Word is his, so is he, in a special manner present, where its preached, p.
35. 2 attend diligently unto it, p. 36, 37. 3 labor to understand what we
hear, p 38.
Lect 7.
4 Labor to hear with affection and delight, Ibid. 5 Take every thing as
spoken to thy self, p. 39. After hearing we must 1 Be careful to keep what
we have heard, Ibid. 2 Meditate and think seriously of it, p 40. 3 Confer of
what we have heard, and repeat it among our selves, Ibid. and p. 41. This
repetition, conference, examining, chiefly required of such as have families,
Ibid. Four benefits of it, Ibid. and p 42. 4 Resort to the Minister for
resolution, if we doubt of ought we hear p. 43. 5 Set presently upon the
practice of that we have heard, Ibid.
Lect. 8.
The ministry that God uses most to work by, is that that is most particular
in application, that does most plainly, and boldly reprove sin, p 44 1 The
Ministers that God has given best testimony to, preached thus, Ibid. 2 God
has commanded his servants to preach thus, p. 45. 3 In this kind of preaching,
God has been wont to show his power most, Ibid. Application of the Word,
necessary in preaching, because 1 Men so apt, to put off all that they hear
from themselves, p. 46. 2 till men's sins be effectually discovered, they cannot
attain to soundness in faith and grace, Ibid. 3 the more faithful a Minister
is, the readier is the Lord to work with him, and his faithfullnes consists in
this chiefly, Ib. Therefore 1 No marvel though the best Ministers, be so much
hated, and this should not alienate, but increase the love of the godly toward
them, Ibid. and p. 47. 2 profitable for the people, that their Ministers may
know them well, Ibid. and p. 48.
Lect. 9.
Therefore the Minister had need be one, 1 that knows well the estate of his
people, Ibid. 2 that is of an unblameable life, Ibid. 3 that is wise, for in
reproving sin: he must not tax every fault he knows, but forbear and pass
by smaller offenses; he must be able substantially to prove, and convince it
to be a sin, which he reproves: he must have due respect to the persons that
he reproves, p. 49. he must be able to discern when its fit to reproove sin,
and when to forbear. Its the Ministers wisdom not to reprove, when either he
sees more danger of doing hurt, and dishonor to God by reproving, then by
holding his peace, or when he can see no hope of prevailing or doing good by
his reproof, p. 50. 4 that is a peaceable man, and not given to suits and
contention, p. 51. 5 that loves his people, and shows his love even in
reprooving, by reproving sin, neither in rage, nor in a merry and flouting,
manner, nor so as to set a brand of infamy upon them, Ibid. Therefore desire to
live under such a Minister, as will faithfully reprove sin, and the great sin
of the people, that cannot endure it, p. 52. the reasons why men cannot endure
such a ministry; Ibid. and p. 53. the folly and sin of these men discovered in
four points, Ibid. Objections answered that are made against such a ministry.
1 That they use to rail, and give bitter and opprobrious terms to men, 2 they
use in a most unseemely fashion to cry, and stamp, and beat the pulpit, p. 54.
3 They are always chiding and inveighing, and show no love to the people, page
55. 4 They love no^ to deal with then people in private, but disgrace them
publicly, 5 They are given to hearken to ^ale-beare^s, page 56.
Lect 10.
In all our distresses, we must fly to God by prayer and seek comfort that
way, p. 59. for 1 In all our afflictions God has 2 chief hand, 2 He is able
to releeve us, 3 himself has prescribed this course to us, page 60. 4 The Lord
is ready to be found this way, p. 61. The means of comfort, we all apt to
neglect, Ibid.
Lect. 11.
Impediments that keep us from this remooved, 1 Th'extreamity of my
affliction, overwhelmes me, and the tokens of Gods anger upon me, are such,
that I have no hope to speed, p. 63, 64. 2 I am so vile a sinner, that I dare
not pray Ibid. and p. 65.
Lect 12.
3 I cannot pray, p. 66, 67. Every faithful man has the spirit of prayer, yea
a man may pray most acceptably, though he do not feel that he has faith, or
the spirit of prayer, Ib. Such must bewail, their case to God, and strive to
pray, for all they cannot do it with feeling and comfort, p. 68, 69.
Lect. 13.
4 It is to no purpose, for me to pray, Ibid. Resolve this is but a tentation,
and resist it, and how, p. 70. Particular answer to Satan's reason in this
tentation, 1 They that never use to pray, do as well, as those that are most
given unto it, ibid. 2 men use ordinary means for their comfort, with
discretion, they may do well enough, though they never pray, p. 71. Though God
usually help men by means, and best by best means, p. 72. Yet he is the
giver of all means, and the virtue that is in them to do us good, comes
wholly from him: and Gods servants have therefore in the use of all means, and
in all occa^sions of their life sought to him, Ibid. and p. 73.^
Lect. 14.
3 God knows our necessities well enough, and has decreed what he will do for
us, and is of himself apt enough to do us good without our asking, Ibid. and
74. 4 I have long used to pray, and find no good by it, Ibid. It may be God
rewards our prayer, though we obtain not our suite presently, p. 75. Four
reasons why God delays his answer, Ibid. By five things we may know God
answers us, though we obtain not what we ask, p. 76, 77.
Lect. 15.
When we have prayed long, and find no audience, this must trouble us, p. 78.
We should hearken after our prayers, what answer God gives them, Ibid. We must
not give over praying, though we receive no answer, p. 79. Examine the cause,
why thy prayers speed no better, p. 80. Six causes for which the Lord uses often
to put back, the prayers of his people, without a gracious answer, p 81, etc.
Lect. 16.
Pardon of sin is more to be desired, then deliverance from the greatest
judgment, that can befall us, p. 84. for 1 sin is the greatest evil, p. 85 2
pardon of sin, a sufficient ground of comfort in any distress, Ibid. 3 in this
suit we should be more earnest with God, then in any other, p. 86. 4 he has
enough to make him happy, that has that, Ibid for 1 sin is a debt, p 86. 2 sin
is filthiness, and uncleanness p. 87.
Lect 17.
Most men seek after many things, more then the pardon of sin, count not sin
the greatest evil, nay no evil or misery at all, p 88, 89. our sins not
smaller, then such as Gods people, have been greatly humbled for, Ibid and p.
90. The knowledge of Gods mercy should not cause us, to be the less troubled
for our sins, p. 91. for 1 His mercy in pardoning of sin is not common to
all, but shall be denied three sorts of sinners, Ibid. 2 That will aggravate
sin, and not make it the lighter, p. 92. Nor this conceit, that others worse
then we, have found mercy both in life and death, yet were never humbled. For
1 it may be they found not mercy with God, though they prospered, Ibid. 2 We
are bound in charity to judge the best of their estate, Ibid. 3 They may have
been soundly humbled for sin, though we know it not, p. 93. Its no good
argument a sinner dies in Gods favor, because he dies quietly, p. 93.
Lect. 18.
Seek pardon of sin above all things, Seek it without delay and earnestly,
Ibid. For 1 its possible to be gotten, 2 in regard of the excellency of this
pardon, p. 94. Seek it speedily, 1 in regard of the continual danger of death
we are in. 2 in respect we are daily liable to afflictions, p. 95. 3 in respect
of the present comfort of our life, page 96. Means to obtain it, 1 Bring the
heart to a sound sense of sin, Ibid. 2 Pray and beg pardon for even such as
want assurance of pardon may pray, page 97. 3 Confess thy sins to God, 4 Fly
by faith to Christ for it, page 98. A man may have his pardon, and not know and
perceive he has it, and the reasons of it, Ibid. and p. 99. Yet may a man in
this life, be assured that his sins are pardoned, Ibid. We must not be our own
judges in this case but this must be known by the Word, viz. 1 if we came to
it the right way, viz. by the four means mentioned, 2 If we find ou^ hearts
changed, and sanctified, p. 100* 3 If the knowledge of Gods love, has bred in
us a love to him, 4 If the knowledge of Gods love makes us willing to forgive
men, p. 1^1.
Lect. 19.
The best of Gods servants, have no other ground of hope to find favor with
God, for the pardon of their sins, but only in the mercy of the Lord, p.
102. For 1 Though Christ has dearly purchased our pardon, yet is it merely
of Gods free grace, that we receive any benefit by him, p. 103. 2 Though good
works be strong foundations of our hope, and comfort: yet the maine
foundation of all the hope and comfort, we have in our works is the mercy and
free grace of God, p. 104 -- 106.
Lect. 20.
The best man cannot rely on any goodness he finds in himself. For 1 he
knows many blemishes in his best works, 2 though he did not, yet he knows
the Lord may, 3 Though there were not, yet can we not ground assurance of
pardon, and eternal life upon them, p. 106. The mercy of God is such, as we
may safely ground our hope upon it, for 1 the Lord is of a gracious, kind, and
liberal disposition, his love is most free, 2 in the Lord there are tender
mercies, bowels of mercy, p. 107. 3 In the Lord, there is a multitude of tender
mercies, p. 109. The religion and Doctrine of the Church of England must needs
be true, because it ascribes our salvation wholly to Gods free grace, p. 110.
Lect. 21.
The true knowledge of Gods mercy* has great force to move men to forgive
wrongs and to live in charity, p 111. Take heed of coming out of charity, to
the Sacrament, p. 112. Yet do they also sin, that absent from the Sacrament
upon this pretense, they are not in charity, p. 113. Many think they are in
charity, when they are not, and six notes to judge of this by, p. 114.
Lect. 22.
He that has truly tasted, of Gods mercy to him in Christ, will be merciful
unto others, p. 115. viz. 1 apt to pity them that be in misery, 2 bountiful
and ready to help them, and do them good, p. 116. great promises are made to
this, p. 117. 3 Free in his bounty, moved to it only, by the sense of their
need and misery, yet must respect be had to the deserts of the poor, p 118.
But the badnesse of the poor, should not keep us from relieving them, p. 119.
Necessary to urge men to this duty. The great sin of many in neglecting to give
to the poor, Ibid. and p. 120:
Lect. 23.
Gods people are not only peaceable, and harmless. but strive to be
profitable, and to do good to the places they live in, p 121, 122. Popery in
this shows it self, not to be of God, for it teaches men to be treacherous
unto, and to seek the ruin of their own country, p. 123. The great sin of
oppressors, and depopulators, p 124. This aggravates much the sin of wicked
men, that they bring Gods curse upon the Country and places they live in,
Ibid. A great sin for any man, to live unprofitably and idly, p. 125. and to be
all for our selves without care of the common good, Ibid.
Lect. 24.
We must not content ourselves, to know God i^ merciful, but labor to know,
that his mercy even his special mercy belongs to us, p. 126. Five differences
between it, and the common mercy of the Lord, Ibid. and p. 127. Five notes
whereby we may know, whether Gods special mercies belong to us, p. 128
Lect. 25.
Five effects, that the true knowledge of Gods mercy, will work in our hearts,
p. 129, 130. The knowledge of Gods mercy, may encourage him, that has been the
vil^st sinnet, to turn^ to God, and to seek unto him, p. 130 131. 1 Proleps.
That which the Scripture speaks of Gods severity against sinners, belongs
only to the impenitent, p. 131. 2 Proleps. Though the number of the elect be
small in comparison of the reprobate, yet no man that desires to repent, may
judge himself to be a reprobate, but rather that he is one of Gods elect, p.
132. Many grounds there are for this in Gods revealed will, which we are rather
to look into, then to pay into, or meddle with his secret will, p. 133.
Lect. 26.
The best souls, most subject to doubts* and fears, p. 134. Though the most
hearers, have more need to hear the terro^rs of the law then the comforts of
the Gospel, p 135. yet we must preach as well these (and rather them then
the other) because 1 that there be some in every Congregation, that have present
need of these comforts it is to be presumed, 2 all of us, are like to have need
of them, one day, Ibid. 3 of all hea^ers we must have most respect to the^, p
136. Such as fear God must strive against their terrors, and heaviness, and
stir up themselves to receive the comforts of the Gospel, p. 137. 1 Its the
commandment of God, they should be cheerful. 2 They heart themselves greatly
by giving way unto this fear and h^avinesse, Ibid 3 They have manifold causes
of joy and comfort, p. 138.
Lect. 27.
4 The reasons they give against themselves why they have just cause to be so
heavy and uncomfortable, are insufficient. viz. 1 Obj. They cannot be
persuaded, they are in Gods favor, but rather that he has utterly rejected
them. Five considerations, that may stay and comfort us in this case. 1 This is
but a tentation of Satan, and therefore not to be credited. It follows not,
thou art rejected of God, because thou art in thine own heart so persuaded, p.
139. A man may be in Gods favor, and yet himself not feel and perceive it,
p. 140. an excellent grace to rest upon Gods Word and promise, even when we
want sense of his favor, Ibid. 2 This has been the case of many of Gods
dearest servants, and there is great force in this consideration, Ibid 3 The
Lord has a special hand, even in this kind of affliction, p. 141. 4 The Lord
does this in love, and intends to do us that good by this kind of affliction,
that could not have been done by any other, Ibid. and 142. for hereby 1 he
causes us to repent of our security, 2 he prevents such sins, as he sees us
in danger to fall into, 3 he prepares us for such measure of comfort, as
otherwise we should be incapable of, p. 142.
Lect. 28.
4 He weaneth us from the world, and makes us think of home. 5 He works us
to an high and precious esteem of his favor, p. 143. 6. He causes us to be
better rooted and settled in a christian course, the^ otherwise we could be, p.
144. The 5 and last consideration to stay us in this case* that God will
certainly sustain, and not suffer us, to be overcome in it, Ibid. Take heed of
seeking ease in this case, by false ways, p. 145. Yield not to this ^entation,
but resolve to resist it, Ibid. 1 by considering what God has said in his
Word, concerning them that are in this case, Ibid. 2 resolve to rest upon Gods
promise, and trust him on his bare word against thine own sense, p. 146. The
heinousness of the sin of infidelity appears 1 by Gods severity against it,
Ibid. 2 by the dishonor it does to God, 3 by three dangerous effects of it,
page 147. what ability is in us to believe, Ibid.
Lect. 29.
Directions how to recover our selves, and overcome this tentation, 1 find out
the chief sin, that is the cause of it, and mourn more, that thou thereby
have forsaken God, then that God has thus forsaken thee, 2 call to mind the
comfort thou have found formerly, for from thence thou may ground hope of
recovery, p. 14^, 149. 3 examine thy present estate and thou shall find, thou
art not void of grace now by five notes, p. 150. From this four conclusions
may be gathered for our comfort, p. 151.
Lect. 30.
Take the help of some faithful Minister, or other friend, for recovering of
thy comfort p. 151. 5 Fly to God by prayer, and wait on him, p. 152. Five
motives and encouragements to seek to God by prayer in this, and in all other
afflictions, p. 153. 6 Meditate of the goodness of God, 1 toward all
creatures, p. 154. 2 toward thy self, when there was no goodness in thee, 3
toward thy self even now, and in that state thou art now in, p. 155.
Lect. 31.
He that truly repents, cannot hide nor cloak his sin, but will be ready to
confess it, p. 158 This willingness to confess sin, will give a man great
hope and assurance of mercy and pardon, Ibid. and p. 159. Gods servants have
been wont to confess, even the sins of others, that they have prayed for, p.
160. Why confession so necessary, p. 161, 162.
Lect. 32.
How far forth confession of sin in private, to a Minister, or other friend, is
not necessary p. 163, 164. How far forth it is profitable and fit, Ibid, and
165.
Lect. 33.
What manner of men, Ministers had need to be, p. 166, 167. Gods people bound
to reverence our calling, and take heed nothing move them to despise it, p.
167. Resolve never to live without the benefit, and comfort of a faithful
ministry p. 168. They that do enjoy it must labor to make their full use of
it, 1 by admitting that spiritual authority, God has given us over you, 2 by
making use of us in private, and seeking resolution, in your cases of
conscience, 3 in approving your repentance* and spiritual estate unto us, 4
resting upon that we shall teach by warrant of of the Word, p. 169. The
peoples great neglect of the ministry Ibid.
Lect. 34.
David made public confession of his sin, and profession of his repentance and
why, p. 170 They whose sins are public and scandalous, must be willing to make
public confession, and profession of their repentance, p. 171, etc. Three
cautions to be observed, Ibid. The reasons that moved Gods people to publish
their repentance for public sins, p. 173.
Lect. 35.
Three great mischiefs of this, that scannalous sins abound so, where the
Gospel is preached, 1 it makes the preaching of the Gospel odious to worldly
men, p. 175. 2 it hinders the success and fruit of all endeavors, that the
state or Gods people can use, for the good of Church and nation, Ibid. 3 It
threatens great plagues* yea a general dissolution, Great cause we should all
take to heart the great increase of al gross sins among us: for they will
bring Gods plagues on us. And this stands well, with Gods justice, because we
are accessory to those sins, p, 178. We make our selves guilty of other men's
sins 1 by applauding, and liking them the better for them, 2 by maintaining
voluntary familiarity with them, p. 179. 3 If we do not profess our hatred of
these sins, 4 If we be not grieved, and troubled to see and hear of the^, p.
180. Yet may we not absent our selves from Gods public worship for any sins,
they are guilty of, that join with us in it, p. 181.
Lect. 36.
5. If we neglect to do, what lies in us, to bring these foul sinners to open
shame. This is the great fault of officers, that are bound by oath to detest,
and present infamous persons: They sin ^ against the places they live in: 2
against these lewd men themselves, p. 182. 3 against God, and their own souls,
in the light account, they make of an oath. When a man has bound himself by
oath, to do that which is lawful, let him take heed how he break that oath,
p. 183. The great sin of Christians in nor furthering the execution of good
laws, for the detecting and punishing of lewd men. Proleps. Every man has a
calling, 1 to oppose himself against sin, and do what he can to suppress, 2
to reprove sin, 3 to bear witness (being required) before a Magistrate
against gross sinners, p 185. 4 to inform and complain of an offendour,
that is incorrigible, yet with four Cautions, p. 186. Four true causes why men
will do nothing, for the punishment of lewd men, Ibid. and p. 187.
Lect. 37.
The sin of those that keep men from public penance, p, 187, 188. The sin
of such as shun and refuse public profession of their repentance, p. 189 --
191.
Lect. 38.
Confession of our sins to God is (of all kinds of confession) most
necessary and useful, p. 191, 192. Specially in secret, for 1 that's necessary,
2 in secret we may do it, both more freely and fully, and with more
expressions of grief then in public, p. 193. 3 This most beneficial to us,
for 1 it will give us best assurance of our uprightness, p. 194. 2 it will
give us best assurance to find mercy with God, p. 195.
Lect. 39.
The means whereby we may be enabled to confess our sins aright unto God are
five. 1 Get knowledge in the Word, p. 196. 2 Observe well and consider thine
own ways, p. 197. 3 Take a daily account of thy self and of thy Ways, p.
197. 4 Call often to remembrance thine old sins. 5 Beg grace and ability of God
to do it p. 198.
Lect. 40.
Five properties there be, of sincere confession of sin. 1 It must be
particular, p. 198, ^99. 2 It must be free and full, without cloaking or
extenuation, p. 200. 3 It must be hearty with feeling and affection, p. 201. 4
It must be honest, joined with an unfeigned hatred of sin and resolution to
forsake it, Ibid. 5 It must be ^iliall, not slavish, out of love of God, and
hope of mercy, p. 202.
Lect. 41.
David's sin, was ever in his sight. They that have truly repented, cannot
forget, but are apt often, to think of their sins, and to be much troubled with
them, p. 203. for ^ their conscience set in them by God, to be both a register,
a witness, and a censurer of their actions, p. 204. 2 They more subject to
affliction then other. 3 This is the Lords doing for their good, p. 205. Six
benefits God procures to his people, this way, p. 205-207
Lect. 42.
Therefore be afraid to sin in any kind or degree, for 1 thy conscience will
say thy secret sins in thy dish one day, p. 207. 2 It will smite and wound thee
for it, 3 How soon it will begin to do this, how long it will do it, and in
what measure, God only knows, p. 208. 4 The bitterness of this, will far
exceed the pleasure of any sin, p. 209. The most never troubled for any sin,
but strangely hardened but such have no cause, to bless themselve in their
estate. Ibid -- 214.
Lect. 43.
David's sin was not against the Lord only, but against himself, and other men
sundry ways, p. 215. The wrong that David by his sin, did to men, even his
own subjects and servants, though he were a King, did and ought to trouble
him, p. 217. Even the consideration of the evil consequents and punishments of
sin, should make us fear, hate, and mourn for sin, p. 218. and the
consideration of the hurt, we have done to other by out sin, specially by
making our selves guilty of the blood of their souls, which is done three
ways, p. 219 Yet the consideration of the offense and dishonor done to God by
it, is the chief thing, should make us hate and mourn for sin, Ibid and p.
220.
Lect 44.
For 1 Every sin is a transgression of the law of God, and an offense against
him, p. 220. 2 By every sin we despise the Lord, and do an injury and contempt
unto him, p. 221. 3 The Lord whom we do this offense unto, 1 is present every
where, and privy to all our ways. 2 Infinite in holiness, and hatred of sin,
p. 222. 3 Infinite in greatness, and majesty, p. 223.
Lect. 45.
4 Infinite in goodness and bounty toward us. This expressed six ways, in
the things that concern this life, p. 224, 225. and three ways in the things
which concern our souls, viz our redemption, conversion, perseverance, p.
225, 226. The sinning against so good a God should most trouble us, p. 227.
Lect. 46.
No sin is small, or lightly to be accounted of. as appears, 1 By the
father, that begets and engenders it in us. 2 By the punishment that the
righteous God has inflicted upon the least sin, p. 228. 3 By the price,
whereby we were redeemed from the least sir. ^ By the person, whom by the least
sin we do contempt unto, p. 229. Yet are some far greater then others, viz.
as are most directly committed against God, p. 230. 1 Sins of the highest
degree against the first Table. 2 Sins against knowledge, p 231. 3 Sins of such
as are of special note for profession, p. 232. Sincerity of repentance to be
judged, by 1 our sorrow for, and forsaking of sin chiefly for this cause,
because God is offended, and dishonored by it. 2 When our sorrow for sin, and
forsaking of it, grows from faith, Ibid.
Lect. 47.
Take heed of giving liberty to our selves, to commit any sin, or making light
account of it, when we have committed it, upon this conceit, that it is but a
small sin, three Motives to this, p. 233, 234. Yet does not this preciseness,
make the yoke of Christ intolerable, p. 235. None are to be blamed, for being
precise in small matters: 1 Though there be a preciseness in small matters,
that is to be blamed as a certain sign of hypocrisy, p. 236. 2 Yet all
preciseness even in small matters, is not to be blamed, Ibid. for 1 We may not
commit the least sin, for preventing the greatest danger. 2 Nor for the
preventing of a far greater sin. 3 We may not dare to do ought, that we see
cause to doubt God has forbidden, p. 237. How to carry our selves toward
them, whom we think too precise in trifles, Ibid.
Lect 48.
The Lord must be justified, in whatsoever he has spoken. How the Lord
speaks to his people, and how he is justified therein, p. 238. 1 We must
undoubtedly believe and give credit to every thing God has spoken, p. 239. 2
We must also approve it as most just and equal without all murmuring against
it. 3 We must receive, take to heart, and submit our selves to ^t, p. 240.
Because 1 of the authority of the Speaker, 2 because all spoken for our good,
p. 241. Though it be not a sign of a faithless heart, 1 Not to believe, that
which the best man teaches, till we have tried it, Ibid. 2 to make questions,
and moo^e doubts of something we read, and hear, 3 to have sometime thoughts
of infidelity, and atheism, p. 242. yet its a dangerous sign, 1 not to be
able to believe the Word, nor troubled with infidelity, Ibid. 2 to gain say
and dispute against the Word, 3 not to endure the word of reproof, p 243. 4 to
take nothing to heart, that they hear, p. 244.
Lect 49.
David's meaning in these words. That thou might be clear, when thou
judge, p. 244. The humbled sinner, will clear in Lord from all aspersion of
injustice, or extremity in any of his judgments, inflicted on himself or
others, p 245. Four degrees of this passive obedience. 1. We may not in word,
or thought murmr against any of them, p. 245. 2 We must give testimony to the
righteousness of them. 3 We must be willing to bear them patiently, p. 246,
247. 4 Even in those, we can conceive no just cause, or reason of, p. 247.
Reasons of this, 1 respects the judge himself, Ibid. 2 them that are judged
and corrected by him, p. 248.
Lect. 50.
We have all need to seek the grace of patience, for 1 Crosses daily to be*
looked for, 2 we in this land have cause to look for evil times, 3 a very
difficult thing to the flesh, to bear crosses well, p. 250. Notes of true
patience, 1 its a fruit and effect of repentance and humiliation, 2 and of
faith, 3 and of our obedience, p. 251 4 It makes us willing to bear that
cross (whatsoever it be) that God sees sit to exercise us by, 5 It makes a
man more desirous to profit by his affliction, then to be rid of it, 6 It
makes a man unwilling to ease himself of his cross by unlawful means, 252.
7 It will moderate our passions, and make us meek spirited even toward men,
p. 253.
Lect. 51.
Motives unto patience, 1 Every child of God must look for a^^liction, even
for much affliction, no possibility of going to heaven, but this way, p. 253. 2
We can no way ease our selves, by impatiency, but make our cross more
grievous: but the contrary by patience in three respects, p. 254, 255. 3 God
has a special hand in all our crosses: this consideration has great force,
to preserve from fear of troubles and to keep us from fainting under them, p.
256. For he does afflict us always in love, as appears in five points. 1 He
does it not willingly, but when need requires. 2 The end he aims at, is to
do us good: yea some special good, that could not otherwise be done, p. 257.
3 He will recompense, whatsoever loffe we sustain by it, p. 258. 4 He
moderates all our afflictions, both for time and measure. 5 He will be with
them, in their affliction, to strengthen and comfort them, p. 259.
Lect. 52.
Means. 1 Think often of the evil day, and prepare for it, p. 260. These
thoughts would 1 keep us from surfeting of our pleasures, 2 restrain us from
sin, 3 make affliction less bitter to us, when it shall come, p. 261. A great
mercy that God gives us such warnings, p. 262. 2 Weane thy heart before hand,
from the love of earthly things, Ibid. 3 Acquaint thy self well before hand
with the Word, p. 263. 4 Get a true knowledge and sense of thine own sins,
p. 265. This also the best preparative to the Sacrament, Ibid.
Lect. 53.
5 Get before a lively faith, p. 266. the reasons of this, the necessity of
faith in this respect, p. 267. rules to try our faith by, p. 268. Comfort for
such as have true faith, though in the least measure, p. 269.
Lect. 54.
6 Get before hand a sound hope and assurance that when thou dyest, thou shall
go to heaven, p. 270. Notes to try true hope by, p. 271, etc. 7 Get before
hand a good conscience, and be careful to lead a godly life, p. 272. 8 Seek
this grace of God, by hearty prayer, p. 273.
Lect. 55.
The Text 1 Psalm. 51.5. cleared against the Anabaptists by answering two
questions, p. 275. The youngest infant is guilty of sin, and deserves to be
damned, p. 277. In what respect infants called innocents and holy, Ibid. p.
278. and some also borne in the state of grace, p. 279. How severe God has
been in his judgments toward some infants, Ibid Three ways they are guilty
of sin, page 280. Therefore 1 Anabaptists err grossly. 2. Great need they
should be baptized. 3 Observe and take to heart Gods judgments on them. 4. The
sins of little ones, not to be neglected, p. 281.
Lect. 56.
The sin that is in infants, is derived to them from their parents. Though
there be three other causes of actual sins, p. 282. yet of original sin this
is the only cause, Ibid. (Why the children of the holiest parents are borne in
sin, p. 283.) yet this does not excuse or extenuate their sins: nor give cause
to deny reverence, or duty to parents, Ibid. Great is the duty, that children
owe to their parents, p. 284. For they have all received, that benefit from the
parents, godly or ungodly, rich or poor, which no duty of theirs, can requite,
Ibid p. 285. No man has cause to be proud of his parentage, Ibid. Parents
should be humbled, for the sins of their children, p. 286.
Lect. 57.
Our original sin is that for which God may most justly abhor us, and for
which we should be deeply humbled, p. 301 -- 303.
Lect. 58.
Parents should use their utmost endeavor to breed grace in their children.
For 1 No. way like this can we show, we love them as we ought. 2 Justice
binds us to it. 3 It will be our chief comfort, to see grace wrought in
them, p. 287. 4 They will be more dutiful to us. 5 This will give us
assurance; that there is truth of grace in our selves. 6 God has charged us
and put us in trust with their souls, p. 288. 7 The hope of the Church and
propagation of the Gospel depends on this, 290.
Lect. 59.
Means to destroy corruption, and to breed grace in our children, are these.
We must 1 Maintain our authority. There is an honor due to us from our
child; p. 291. This we must take heed, we loose not, Ibid. This many loose by
neglecting, 1 to fear God themselves, and to give good example, p. 292 2 to
keep their children in awe when they are young, p. 293. Correction necessary
for children, and three great sins, parents commit in neglecting this, Ibid.
and 294.
Lect. 60.
Secondly, we must instruct our children, 1 By teaching them the principles
plainly, even whiles they are very young, p. 294. 2 By acquainting them with
the practice of religion, 3 bringing them to Church even while young, 4
examining them how they profit at Church, p. 295. 1 Obj. Absurd to teach little
ones religion. Answ. 1. No, for they are capable of the feeds of grace, 2
childhood the fittest age, to be wrought upon this way, p. 296. 3 Though it
do them no good for the present, it may prepare them for grace, and do them
good hereafter, p. 297. 2 Obj. No heed to be taken, to the good things seem to
be wrought in children, for they will loose them again. Three answers given to
this, Ibid. Thirdly, we must give good examples to our children; great force in
this, p. 298. Fourthly, we must take heed how we place them at school, or in
service, or in marriage, p. 299. Fifthly, we must be earnest with God, in prayer
for them, Ibid. In using these means, we may comfort our selves, though we
see them fruitless often, p. 300.
Lect. 61
Two rules to try all doctrines in religion. That Doctrine cannot be of God, 1
that gives any thing to man in matter of his salvation, any cause of boasting,
or confidence in himself. 2 That is agreeable to natural reason, and grounds
it self most upon that, page 304. The Papists error touching original sin,
p. 305. How dead we are by nature, and void of all freedom of will unto good,
in four points, Ibid. Concupiscence without consent is sin, p. 306, 307.
Lect. 62.
The knowledge of our natural corruption is of great force to humble us, p.
308. viz. 1 to keep us from priding our selves in best duties we have done, p.
309. 2 to humble us, when we pray, Ibid. Long prayers, not unlawful, so it be
with four cautions, p. 310. respect to be had to th'ability of them, that
join with us, Ibid. 3 to humble us in our fasts. Fasts are to no purpose, if
we be not humbled in them, p. 311. 1 for Gods judgments upon ourselves, and
the Church, Ibid. 2 for th'outragious sins, committed every where that we
know or hear of, page 312. 3 For our own sins specially, Ibid. 4 specially
for our original sin, Ibid.
Lect. 63.
Every one should endeavor to be delivered, from the danger of his original
corruption especially, p. 313. Three motives to this, p. 314. Means 1. Seek
to be justified from it, by Christ. Labor to be in Christ, and to know by
faith that Christ is ours, for then God cannot loath us for it, Ibid, and p.
315. 2 Labor to find that by the Spirit, thou art delivered from the dominion
of it: and to cleanse thy self from it, and to mortify it. This means more
sensible, then the first, though not so perfect, p. 316.
Lect. 64.
Means, we must use to mortify corruption in our selves. 1 Observe the first
stirrings of it, and what sins thy heart is most inclined to, p 317. 2 When
thou discernest it, set thy self against it, viz. resist it, hate and dislike
it, and grieve for it, Ibid. and 318. 3 Shun all occasions, and provocations to
it. Be sober 1 in the use of the comforts of this life. p. 319. 2 In following
the business of our callings, some part of every day, to be spent in religious
duties, p. 320.
Lect. 65.
The fourth means to mortify corruption is a diligent and conscionable use of
the exercises of religion, p. 321. Great force in reading and hearing of the
Word to mortify corruption, Ibid. Prayer has great force to mortify sin, p.
322. The fifth means, of mortification, is to bear afflictions willingly and
patiently, Ibid Great force in affliction this way, p. 223. The sixth means,
labor to be willing to die, Ibid. There is in the best great unwillingnesse,
and fear to die: but for this cause we should be willing, because till then
we shall never be rid of our corruption, p. 324, 325.
Lect. 66.
The seventh means: Hie to Christ by faith for strength against it. Till one
have faith, he can mortify no corruption, p. 326. True faith will mortify
sin, Ibid and two reasons for that, p. 327, etc.
Lect. 67.
For the mortifying of sin, faith a most be exercised, we must put it forth,
and make use of it, p. 330. Christ cured all that came to him for help. and the
cure is still ascribed to their faith, Christ required nothing else of them, to
make them capable of cure, p. 331. Go to Christ likewise for help, in all
diseases of thy soul, and with faith as they did, Ibid, four grounds we have
for our faith in this 1 Christ is able to cure out souls, as bodies. 2 He is
as willing. 3 This is the chief work, he came into the world to do, p. 332. 4
He has bound himself by promise for this. We have his promise for curing us
of 1 our ignorance, 2 hardness of heart, 3 profanesse, 4 inconstancy, p 333. 5
every other sin, p. 334. We should stir up our selves to lay hold on these
promises, Ibid. Objections against this answered, 1 I am so unworthy; I dare
not go to Christ, 2 my faith is so weak, I cannot say hold of these promises 3
None of the godly, though they have faith, can thereby mortify their
corruptions, p. 335.
Lect. 68.
The consideration of the vileness of our nature, should cause us to admire
Gods goodness toward us, p. 336. Even in his restraining grace toward
others, that men being so lewd, we live so safely and peaceably by them, yea
that many of them, are so kind to us, p. 337, 338. Secure thy heart in Gods
providence in the worst times and places, Ibid. But specially in his
restraining grace toward our selves, 1 many foul sins that we have the seeds
of never show themselves in us, 2 Many foul sins, we have felt our selves
inclined to have not set upon us, with their full force, p. 339. 3 God lets us
not know all the vileness, that is in us, but hides a great part of it from
us, p. 340, 341. How far forth the discovery of sin to us, is a blessing,
Ibid.
Lect. 69.
The wonderful power and goodness of God, is seen in our conversion, p. 342.
1 that he sought us out, and made us turn, when we drew back, 2 that he made
love to us, and sought reconciliation, 3 that he should so change us, and work
any goodness in such hearts as ours, p. 343. Errors touching man's conversion,
p. 344. God has set a just time for nations and particular persons, and we
must count the present time to be that, p. 345. Rejoice if thou have any grace
in truth, though in the least measure, p. 346.
Lect. 70.
Its an admirable work of God, that any of us should be able to persevere for
any time in the state of grace. viz. either 1 in the profession of the truth,
or 2 in the comfortable assurance of Gods favor, or 3 in a Christian course of
life, p. 347. Considering 1 what a world and age we live in, 2 what the malice,
power and subtlety of Satan is, Ibid. 3 How fearfully others have fallen, 4
what corrupt hearts we have, p. 348. Our Perseverance to be ascribed only to
God, viz. 1 to his power, 2 to his goodness p. 349. Therefore 1 Seek saving
grace its the only durable riches, 2 if thou have it, bless God for it, and
admire his power and goodness, in it, 3 be not proud of thy standing but
ascribe it to God, 4 Be not secure, but watchful and fearful least thou
fall, p. 350, 351.
Lect. 71.
The faithful apt to think, they have lost al grace because they have lost
their first love, delight, and fervency in good duties, 2 their faith and
assurance of Gods favor, 3 their strength to overcome tentations to sin. Two
preservatives against this tentation. 1 The best of Gods servants have been
thus subject to variableness in their spiritual estate, p. 352. God sees it
good they should be so, p 353. Object. Wicked men will be apt to stumble at
this, Ibid. 2 Though thou think in this case, thou have lost all grace, yet
it is not so, 1 if thou would examine thine heart well, thou would find
grace in it still, 2 though thou cannot another may, 3 Though neither thy
self, nor another can discern it, yet certainly it is in thee, for no elect
child of God, called according to his purpose can so fall as utterly to loose
all grace, p. 354. This evident in all the three degrees of their spiritual
decays. p. 355. Obj. But though I be now in the state of grace, I fear when
the fiery trial shall come, I shall fall, I shall not be able to stand in the
last and sharpest combat, I shall have with Satan at my death. Answ.
Certainly thou shall not perish irrecoverably, if there be the fruit of Gods
eternal love and election, in any truth of grace in thee, two pillars thou
have to uphold thee, 1 Gods power, 2 his will, p. 355, 356.
Lect. 72.
Admirable it is, that God should respect any service comes from such as we
are, that have so filthy and corrupt hearts, considering 1 how corrupt we and
our best services are, a how pure and holy the Lord is, p. 357. 3 Yet 1 he
takes notice of all the poor services we do, 2 winks at, and passes by the
stains, and blemishes of them, p. 358. 3 delights in them, 4 rewards them. p.
359. Reasons why he does so, 1 Because he sees our hearts are good and upright
in them. 2 They are fruits of his own Spirit, 3. They are in Christ, p. 360.
Lect. 73.
Carnal men have no just cause to stumble at this, that God is so apt to wink
at, and pass by the slips of his children, for 1 They are not his children, p.
361. 2 If they were, he would not bear with such faults as theirs, no not in
his children, Ibid p. 362. 3 To the^ that are wicked, he will be every whit as
rigorous as he is indulgent to his children, for 1 he will not bear with the
least fault in them, 2 he will take nothing in good part they do, Ibid. 3 he
likes the worse of them, even for the service, they presume to do unto him.
p. 363. Yet must the most wicked men pray, and do other duties for all this,
and may receive good thereby three ways, for 1 this will less^n his
condemnation, 2 This will procure him temporal blessings and deliverances,
Ibid. 3 He may thus further his own salvation, p 364. Its the fault of Gods
people, 1 that they of all other, have the saddest hearts, most subject to
fear, whereas they have three causes to be comfortable, Ibid. 2 that they
serve God without alacrity, because they cannot do it so well as they would. p.
365. Five things to be observed in the disposition of our master, that should
cause us to serve him cheerfully, Ibid. and 366.
Lect 74.
The heart is the seat of truth, and when a thing may be said to be done or
spoken in truth and sincerity. p. 363. The Lord highly esteems of the truth
and uprightness of the heart, for 1 The Lord cannot abide we should halt with
him, but looks for, and desires uprightness in every service, we do unto him,
Ibid. 2 This he delights in, 3 This is all he requires, 4 He valueth all our
actions according to this, he esteems highly of a little grace, where he
sees this, and will bear with many frailties and takes nothing in good part
where this is wanting, p. 369 5 He accounts him a perfect man, that has this,
p. 370. Four reasons for this, p. 371.
Lect 75.
Necessary, we should diligently examine, whether our heart be upright: for 1
This is an hard thing to be known, as appears, 1 by experience both of good
and bad men, 2 by the testimony of God himself, p. 372. 3 By reason, because
many things are like to true grace, p. 373. Yet 2 this is possible to be
known, a man may get assurance of this, that his heart is upright, this is
proved three ways, Ibid. and 374. 3 To be certain of this, will yield us
unspeakable comfort, p. 375.
Lect. 76.
He that has any one saving grace in him is no hypocrite, but has an upright
heart, p. 376. He is no hypocrite, that is apt to suspect himself, and
fearful to be deceived in this point, Ibid. The hypocrite uses to be
confident, p. 377. God bears most tender affection to his weak ones, p. 378.
Our conscionable care to obey God, and lead an holy life, is a sure note of
uprightness, and more sure and sensible, then the former, p 378. Obj. Many
hypocrites, and natural men has done sundry good works. Answ. These no good
works indeed, p. 379.
Lect. 77.
The first property of a good work, and of true goodness is this: it must be
materially good. Nothing is truly good that we do, unless it be done, by the
direction and warrant of the Word, p. 380. The Word is an absolute pattern and
rule: for 1 In it we may have clear and perfect direction, for every duty of
holiness and righteousness. 2 Nothing can be a sin, that God has commanded,
p. 381. 3 The least thing, he has appointed us to do, is a good work, p 382.
4 Nothing we do, can be a good work, unless done by direction of the Word.
5 Though it be commanded of God, yet if in the least circumstance, we swerve
from the direction of the Word, the work is not good in Gods strict account:
Yea 6 God is highly provoked with it (though never so good in show) if not done
by direction of his Word, p. 383. They make the Word only the rule of our life
and cleaving to it, a note of an upright heart, p. 384. Therefore 1 Exercise
thy self in the study and meditation of it, Ibid 2 take heed of will worship,
and making conscience of, and being religiously strict in the observation of
such things, as God has given us no direction for in his Word, p 385. 3 Take
comfort in thy estate, if thou love, and delight in the Word of God, and depend
upon it, p. 386.
Lect 78.
The love of God is the root of all true obedience and righteousness, p. 386.
That may be well done, that's done out of fear of Gods judgments, 387. but it
must be out of such a fear is mixed with love, p. 388. The true love of God is
a certain sign of an upright heart, Ibid. and 389. No wicked man does indeed
love the Lord, p. 390, 391.
Lect. 79.
One may be subject to slavish fears, and yet truly love the Lord, p. 392.
The reasons therefore, 1 Their own weakness, both natural and sinful, p.
393. 2 The hand of God, who sees this good for his servants, Ibid and that in
three respects, p. 394. Yet its evident the faithful (notwithstanding these
fears) do indeed love God by six notes, Ibid. and p. 395. The faithful must
strive against these fears, Ibid. Six means whereby they may do this, p. 396.
Lect. 80.
All true love to God, all true piery and uprightness of heart proceeds from
faith, for 1 that only knits us to Christ, 2 That only persuades us of that
love of God to us, as is able to breed in us, the true love of God, p. 397.
Though many that have no faith are persuaded God loves them; and God does
indeed love such; p. 398. But that love that's wrought in men toward God by his
common favors appears, to be unfound in three points, Ibid. and 399 400. True
faith assures of such a love of God to us, as cannot but kindle in us an
unfeigned love to God, p. 400, 401.
Lect. 81.
Rest not in the common favors of God, and fruits of his love, till thou have
got assurance that he loves thee, with his special love, p. 401, 402. In this
point three sorts offend much* Ibid. Motives to this, 1 This love of God, is an
everlasting love, 2 This would free the heart from vexing fears, 3 Bring with
it unto us all good things, p. 403, 404. 4 This would make Gods commandments,
and every duty easy to us, Ibid. 5 This would cure the stone in the heart, and
make our hearts soft, p. 405
Lect. 82.
Five means to be used to get assurance of Gods love to us in Christ, p. 406.
1 Be persuaded that its not impossible to get this assurance, Ibid. 2 Bind thy
self to a con^stant and conscionable use of the Word, the Lords Supper and
prayer, Ibid. and p. 407. 3 Seek to be more humbled in the apprehension of
thine own wretchedness: seek the Lords favor with a more humbled soul, p.
408.
Lect. 83.
Fourthly, nourish in thy heart a fear to offend God, and a care to please
him, in all things, p. 409. None but such can have any true assurance of Gods
favor, and all such shall have it, Ibid. and p. 410. Fifthly, rest by faith
upon Christ, and cleave to him, Ibid. There may be true faith, where there is
no assurance of salvation, p. 411. The nature of true faith, consists in four
acts of the soul, viz. 1 True knowledge of Christ, and of that which the
Gospel reveals concerning him, viz. that Christ is an all-sufficient
Savior, that he is offered in the Gospel to me as well as to any other,
Ibid. and how and upon what terms he is offered to me in the Gospel, viz. If
I will receive him in a matrimonial covenant, page 412. 2 The assent and
credit the mind gives to all this, that the Gospel has revealed concerning
Christ, 3 The consent that the will gives to this blessed offer, when the heart
accepts of, and embraces it, Ibid. 4 a resting and relying upon Christ, and
him alone, p. 413. He that can with an humbled heart, cast himself upon Christ
alone, and rely upon him for obtaining Gods favor, shall certainly obtain
assurance and comfort in the end, Ibid.
Lect. 84.
True grace goes through the whole man and works a total change in him,
page 414. Yet is 1 there in the b^st, 2 defect throughout in the measure and
degree of grace, p. 415. 2 There is in every faculty, much old ^even remaining
still, in the best, 3 Corruption is more sensible in every faculty, then grace
is, p. 416. Three things argue truth of grace to be in the whole man, even
where the p^^ty himself sometimes cannot discern it, viz. conflict, mourning,
desire, Ib. and p. 417. The vanity of those that glory in the uprightness of
their hearts, though no grace appear in their outward man, Ibid. and 418.
Lect. 85.
He that has truth of grace in him, makes conscience of the whole will of God,
in one point as well as in another, p. 419. Though no man can keep all, nor
any one commandment Legally, yet Evangelically every Christian does, in his
mind and will, p. 420 A man may have an upright heart, though he be more ^lack
in some duties, then in some others, more apt to offend in some sins then
others, and two reasons of that, p. 421. Yea a man's heart cannot be upright,
unless he make more conscience of those things God has laid most special
charge upon us for, then of others, p. 422. viz. 1 matters of substance, more
then matters of circumstance, 2 duties of our particular callings, more then
general duties, Ibid. 3 duties that concern our selves, more then such as
concern others, p. 423.
Lect 86.
The upright hearted man shows his equal respect to all the commandments, 1
He desires to know the whole will of God, in all things that concerns him to
know. An ill sign to desire to know more, then God is pleased to reveal, or
to be inquisitive in that, that concerns others, more then our selves, or to
desire to know things, that are no way useful to our edification, p. 423. But
its a good sign to be desirous to know the will of God, in all things, that
concern us, p. 424. There Is little uprightness of heart in them, 1 That care
not for knowledge, but despise the means thereof, 2 Never enquire after the
will, of God, in those things that concern their own practice, Ibid. 3
purposely than the knowledge or some truth, p. 425. 2 He makes conscience of
every sin, of one as well as another, Ibid. 1 Of his darling sin that sin
which natural inclination, or custom, or profit, or pleasure has made
dearest to him, Ibid. 2 Of secret as well as open ^^s which are of three sorts,
p. 426. 3 Of small sins as well as of gross sins, Ibid. 3 He makes
conscience of every duty God has commanded him, of one as well as of another,
he desires, and st^^ves to attain to every grace, p 427.
Lect. 87.
True saving grace is durable and everlasting p. 428, A man may 1 Seem to have
saving grace (by profession, in the judgment of the Church) and fall from it,
Ibid. 2 He that has in truth many of the common gifts of Gods Spirit, may
loose them, and fall away, p. 429. 3 He that has saving grace in truth may
seem to himself to have lost it utterly, p. 430. yet true saving grace is of
a lasting permanent and continuing nature, Ibid. We should highly prize and
esteem of grace above al other things, 1 because it is the surest way to get
all other good things, 2 It will make all other good things comfortable to us,
3 whereas all things are transitory, this is durable substance, p. 431. Take
heed of declining and falling from grace, Ibid. For 1 Though the seed of grace
be incorruptible, yet a Christian may loose the sense of grace, and the vigor
and operation of grace, in these respects the Spirit may be quenced four
ways. 2 Every man is of himself, exceeding prove to quench the Spirit thus. 3
Fear of falling away is the means to keep us from falling. 4 Constancy in
well doing, and an uniformity in a Christian course, is an inseparable property
of true grace, p 432.
Lect. 88.
He that would approve the uprightness of his heart, must not content himself
to abstain from evil, and do good, unless he do this in the right manner, p.
433 viz. 1 to the right end, p. 434. etc. 2 Not with the outward man only, but
feelingly and with the heart, p. 437. 3 In humility, p. 438.
Lect. 89.
The third and last sign of uprightness is, when a man can find in himself,
that (notwithstanding all his failings in practice and obedience, yet) God has
his heart, viz. he does 1 in his mind allow and consent to the law and word
of God in all things, 2 in his will unfeignedly desire and purpose, to please
God, and do his will, p. 438. Truth of grace better discerned by this, then by
any performance we are able to make, p. 439. as may appear, 1 by the Lords
describing good men by this, rather then by ought else, Ibid. 2 By the comfort
the best men have found in this, rather then in ought else, Ibid. 3 By the high
account God makes of this, more then of ought else, p 440. for 1 he accepts
the will for the deed, Ibid. 2 he esteems more of the will, then of the deed,
3 where he has wrought the will, he will also work ability to do, p. 441.
Obj. Every wicked man, will bless himself in this who has good desires, p.
443. Answ. 1. admit wicked men take offense, this truth must not be concealed,
2 No wicked man has any good and unteigned desires to do well, as appears by
five differences between their desires, and the desires of the regenerate, p.
442, 443.
Lect. 90.
Their folly and sin is great, that refuse Gods service, and to be soundly
religious out of this conceit, that the conscionable profession and practice of
religion is too heavy a yoke and bondage, p. 444. He that will be Gods
servant must 1 depend upon him, 2 do his will, Ibid. 1 Satan has many more
servants then God, Ibid. 2 yet his service, most toilesome drudgery, and so is
not the Lords, 3 The service most men do to Satan they do it willingly, and
cheerfully, not so to God, p. 445. Sundry reasons there are of this, why men
so shun Gods service, viz. 1 because there be so few go that way, 2 They
should make themselves odious to all men, 3 Gods servants are much subject to
trouble, 4 full of faults, 5 Gods service is spiritual. But the chief reason
is this, that they think Gods service an intolerable bondage, p. 446, 447.
But this is not foe, for
Lect. 91.
1 Religion does not abridge man, of lawful liberties and delights, p. 448. 2
The taskes God sets his servants are not hard nor heavy, 1 Indeed to wicked
men, they are not only difficult, but impossible, Ibid. 2 To the godliest the
commandments of God (as the law enjoynes them) are impossi^le. 3 To yield
Evangelicall obedience to the commandments of God, is very difficult to the
regenerate in respect of the remnants of natural corruption in them, p. 449.
Yet is not the service of God so painful as needs discourage us from it, for
1 The Commandments are possible to the regenerate, 2 yea to the weaker
Christian, they are easy as Christ enjoynes them, 3 They are to them, in
respect of the inward man, nothing grievous, p. 450. This none can doubt of,
that considers the gracious disposition of the Lord and master we do service
to, p. 551. This appears in four points, 1 his aptness to pass by, and
wink at our offenses and failings in his service, Ibid. 2 his aptness to
accept of that little we are able to do, 3 when he enjoynes services of
extraordinary difficulty, he gives extraordinary supply of strength and
assistance, p. 452. 4 The wages and reward he gives: Even in this life if we
serve him, we shall be sure 1 of his countenance and special favor, 2 of
protection and safety in times of greatest danger, 3 of competency in outward
things, 4 when time of payment comes, we shall be abundantly recompensed, for
all the pains we have taken, p. 4.53 The consideration of this wages, and the
hope of it, should make us go through with our work cheerfully, p. 454.
Lect. 92.
This does greatly aggravate the sin and damnation of wicked men, that they
have no grace, nor are saved, because they have no will, nor desire to have
grace, and to be saved, p. 454. Wicked men are apt to impute all to Gods
decree, and will only, Ibid. But as the Lord is not the cause of any man's
sin, but man himself; so is not God the cause of any man's destruction, but
man himself, p. 455. for 1 they will take no pains to obtain grace, and to
escape damnation, Ibid. 2 when they may have the means of grace and salvation
without charge or pains they neglect them, and account them a burden, p. 456.
3 when God forces good motions upon them, they resist them, 4 They do in
their hearts despise grace and salvation, Ibid. Obj. This cannot be, because 1
a man is dead in trespasses, and who can blame a dead man for not desiring to
live? 2 the matter of man's salvation depends wholly upon the will of God, 3
God can if he will, overcome this unwillingnes, that is in man. Answ. 1. God is
not the cause, why man is dead in sin, but himself, 2 God is not bound to
restore him to life, 3 He is not so dead, but there is enough left in him, to
make him inexcusable he may do more then he does, p. 457. for he may if he
will, 1 forbear many sins, that make him, more incapable of grace, and will
increase his damnation, 2 do many good works, 3 frequent the means, even the
best means, Ibid 4 So observe and take to heart the Word and judgments of
God, as to bring his heart thereby unto Legal repentance and humiliation, p.
458. 5 Out of the sense of his own wretchedness, not only desire the prayers
of others, but himself also pray and cry to God for mercy, p. 458. Obj. All
this, that the natural man can do, is nothing worth, nor pleasing to God.
Answ. Yet 1 he is nearer to salvation, that does thus, what lies in him: then
any other natural man is, 2 though by doing all this, he cannot deserve, nor
be assured, God will give him grace, yet may he hope herein to find mercy
because 1 God so infinite in goodness, Ibid. 2 he seeks to the vilest
sinners, 3 he has showed much respect, even to these endeavors, of sundry
natural men, p. 459. 3 They that do not thus what they are able are hereby 1
made more inexcusable, 2 worse and worse, and 3 shall receive greater
damnation, Ibid.
Lect. 93.
Gods Ministers are (of all works of their ministry) most bound to comfort
the afflicted souls, p 459. Obj. They apt to doubt, they are hypocrites, and
that they have not one of the signs of uprightness in them, p. 460. Answ. 1.
The having some dregs of hypocritic, or other sins will not prove one an
hypocrite or wicked man, unless it reign in him, p. 461. 2 Hypocrisy nor any
other sin, does reign in him, that discernes it, and feels it to be a
burden, Ibid. and 462. 3 He that cannot take comfort, in any of the rest of the
signs of an upright heart, may in this, if he find that in his mind, he
consents to the Word, and unfeignedly also desires to please God in all things,
and to do his will, Ibid. Because he that has this, has all the rest, p.
463. This confirmed by three forts of proofs, Ibid. Four signs of an heart
that's set to please God, and truly desires grace, p. 465.
Lect. 94.
Motives to persuade us, to labor to be upright in heart. Such God has
promised to be good unto, p. 466. 1 in outward things, viz. 1 in their
habitations and dwellings, 2 in their children, 3 in all other good things, 4
yea in times of common calamity, p. 467. And in spiritual things also, for
such 1 shall never loose Gods favor and grace, 2 shall have strength from God
to endure any trial, p. 468. 3 Have a joyful issue, out of all their
tentations, and spiritual desertions, p. 469. Means to purge us from
hypocrisy, and to get and preserve uprightness, 1 The heart must be broken,
before ever it can be found 2 Get true faith in Christ, 3 Take heed of living
in known sin, Ibid. 4 Think often of this, that Gods eye is upon thee, 5
Complain to God, of the falsehood of thine heart, and beg an upright heart of
him, p. 470.
Lect. 95.
What Is meant by knowing of wisdom, in the hidden part, p. 472. True and
saving knowledge, is the principal work of Gods grace, in the conversion of
man. For 1 in every one whom he converts, he works saving knowledge, Ibid. 2
This the first work of grace. 3 The change and conversion of a sinner consists
chiefly in this, p. 473. Reason 1 Because it is the foundation and that gives
stability and durablenesse to all other graces. 2 It is the seed and beginning
of all other graces, p. 473 -- 477.
Lect. 96.
We are bound to desire and procure (so far as in us lies (that all men may
have the means of knowledge, for we are bound to pity the estate of all, even
the worst men that live and to desire their salvation, and knowledge is the
only means to bring them to salvation, p 477, 478. A sound ministry the
greatest outward fruit of Gods mercy, to a people, 478. The Gospel has been
more fruitful in good works then popery, p. 479. Though it be the great sin of
many professors of the Gospel, that they give little or nothing to charitable
and pious uses: yet the greatest work of charity and mercy, that can be don is
to provide for a people able Ministers, and to maintain, and encourage them,
Ib. and 480. Parents and masters of families, must use their utmost endeavor,
to bring their children and servants to knowledge, and by what means, p. 481.
Ministers first and chief care must be, to bring the people to knowledge,
Ibid. and therefore must 1 Catechize them, 2 teach plainly, 3 ground all their
application upon sound doctrine, 4 study for their Sermons, p. 482.
Lect. 97.
All Gods people should seek for knowledge, 1 not resting in any good thing,
they seem to have without this, 2 not contenting themselves, with every small
measure of knowledge, but seek for a settled and well grounded knowledge and
certainty in religion, p. 483. Yet is there a kind of knowledge in religion
and divine things, that 1 many hypocrites do attain unto, Ibid. 2 and wherein
they excel most Christians, 3 yea which is the greatest bar and impediment
to grace of all others, p 484. The knowledge we should labor for is
sanctified knowledge, such as Gods Spirit works in the regenerate, Ibid. We
should examine whether our knowledge be such, or no. Signs of saving
knowledge, p. 485. 1 the object of it, is the Word, 2 Specially such parts of
it, as are most useful, and most concern us, Ibid. 3 Its a clear, and
certain knowledge, 4 There Is no fulness, nor satiety in it, but the more a
man has it, the more he feels the want of it, and desires it, p. 486.
Lect. 98.
Saving knowledge may be known by the effects of it. 1 It humbles them that
have it, and puffs them not up, p. 487. 2 It works upon the heart, to stir
up good affections, p. 488. 3 Its operative and powerful, to reform the heart
and life of him that has it, p. 489, 490. 4 It strengthens a man against
tentations, p. 491.
Lect. 99.
Motives to seek knowledge, 1 The matters we are exhorted to get knowledge in,
concern all, one as well as another, for 1 all challenge an equal interest in
God, and therefore it concerns one as well as another to know him, and his
will, p. 492. 2 all Gods people have equal interest in the holy Scripture, one
as much as another, and therefore it concerns all to be well acquainted with
them, and expert in them, p. 493. 2 Great is the necessity and benefit of
knowledge and great is the danger and mischief of ignorance, for 1 knowledge
is a duty commanded, a grace highly pleasing to God, and such as has a promise
of blessing; Ibid. Whereas ignorance is a sin, which much grieveth and
provokes God: yea such a sin as he has revealed his wrath from heaven
against, by judgments both corporal, spiritual, and eternal, p. 494. 2
Knowledge is a comfortable sign of a man's election, and that he is in
covenant with God, and that his heart is upright, page 495. Whereas ignorance
is a sign of reprobation, and that one still remains under the power of
Satan, and has a wicked and naughty heart, p. 496. 3 He that has knowledge
will be constant in religion, and not be corrupted by any seducers whereas he
that is ignorant, will easily be drawn away from the truth he professes,
Ibid. 4 He that has knowledge walks boldly and comfortably in all his ways,
whereas he that is ignorant, must needs be full of doubts, and fears, p.
497.
Lect. 100.
Means of sanctified and saving knowledge, 1 None can attain it, that is not
sensible of his own ignorance, p. 498. 2 nor he that has not an heart truly
humbled, Ibid 3 nor that does not attend diligently and conscionably upon the
sound ministry of the Word preached, p. 499 -- 502. 4 Reading of the Word is
also a good means to confirm and establish the heart in knowledge, So is 5
Meditation, 6 good conference, and 7 Prayer, p. 502.
Lect. 101.
The Conversion of a man is to be ascribed wholly unto God, and the mighty
working of his grace, 1 of God it is, that any man enjoys sufficient means
of grace, even a sound ministry, in this Gods special hand and goodness is
to be acknowledged, p. 503. 2 This is no common favor, but a special and rare
favor of God, p. 504, 505. 3 The right use of the light of nature cannot
deserve God should give his Gospel to any, neither has he respect to any
goodness in man: but is moved to it only, by his own free grace, p. 506,
507.
Lect. 102.
That the means of grace become effectual to the conversion of any, is to be
ascribed only to the Spirit of God not to the means themselves. Why so much
is ascribed in Scripture to the Word it self, and to the ministry thereof, p.
507 -- 509. Powerful and effectual grace, is not given to all men that enjoy
the means, to profit, and be converted by them if they will, p. 510. The work
of grace, in the conversion of man, is most free, it depends wholly upon the
will and good pleasure of God, Ibid. and 511
Lect. 103.
No man is able to attain to that knowledge of the truth, as is sufficient to
salvation, by any ability, that is in him, by nature without the supernatural
work of Gods grace, p. 512. for 1 though the Scripture be plain and
lightsome, and all truths needful to be known are clearly and evidently
delivered in it, specially in the New Testament, and more especially being
interpreted to us, in the ministry of the Word, yet are we all by nature
blind, Ibid. and p. 513. and void of capacity, and a veil is over our hearts;
which till God do cure and remoove, we can make no use of that light, p. 514.
Proportionable to the work of the Spirit in opening our eyes, and curing our
blindness shall our knowledge be. God perfects not this cure in any during
this life: nor does he so fully cure it, in some of his good servants, as in
other some, but in heaven this cure shall be perfected, Ibid. 2 Though some
natural men have attained to a great measure of knowledge, yet not such as is
sufficient to salvation: for it is but literal, and historical, it is not a
full assurance of understanding, its not spiritual knowledge: that none can
attain unto, without supernatural grace, Ibid. and p. 515. This supernatural
work of Gods grace, as it is extraordinary and miraculous, so is it rare and
vouchsafed, but to few, Ibid. and 516. The Only cause why God vouchsafes it to
one, rather then another, is his own good pleasure and will, nothing in man
himself, Ibid.
Lect. 104.
Every man by nature is dead in trespasses, and our conversion is the reviving
or raising of a dead man, p. 516, 517. From the Scripture similitudes,
doctrines may be taught and errors convinced, p. 517, 518. Though some natural
life, be in the unregenerate, he is utterly void of all spiritual life, p.
518. God does in the work of conversion, show and exercise his omnipotent
power, p. 519. In denying the means of conversion, or grace to profit by them
unto any, he does not, nor can do them any wrong, because he is an absolute
Sovereign, Ibid. and 520. God denies effectual grace to profit by the means,
to some: that his free grace and mercy to the elect, might be thereby more
manifest and glorious, p. 520.
Lect. 105.
The whole glory of man's salvation, is due unto the Lord alone, p. 521. The
salvation of man is to be ascribed only, to the free grace, and mercy of God,
p. 522. The ascribing all glory to God, and none to man, the best note to try
all doctrines, and religions by, p: 523. The Lord does not only (in the work
of conversion) offer us grace, and persuade us to accept of it; but conferres
and infuseth that grace into the will, which actually inclines it to receive
grace, p. 524. The grace of conversion, is not a fruit of Gods common love, but
of his special love, Ibid. God does not only make us able to convert and
believe, but he does cause us actually to repent, and to believe, p. 525.
Though we may not receive any thing in religion, upon the credit of any man:
yet we should be constant in the truth, we have received by warrant of the
Word, and teaching of the Spirit, Ibid. yea we are bound, 1 to be resolute in
it, 2 to hold it with affection, 3 to hate all errors that oppose it, 4 to shun
seducers, p. 526. By our constancy in the truth received, we may approve to our
selves, our own election and calling, Ibid.
Lect. 106.
They are in a fearful estate, that live where they cannot enjoy, the
ministry of the Word, p. 526, 527. They are also in a fearful estate, that
enjoy long the means of grace, the ministry of the Word, and cannot profit by
it, p. 528. Many complain without cause, they cannot profit by the Word, Ibid.
What the true causes are, men profit not by the Word, p. 529. What they must do
that have long enjoyed the Word, and cannot profit by it, p. 530. They that
enjoy the means of grace, have great cause to be thankful to God, page 531.
But most of all they, that have also obtained grace to profit by them, Ibid.
and p. 532.
Lect. 107.
The regenerate elect child of God, sins not so hainously as every
unregenerate man may do. 1 There is no sin so heinous, but the unregenerate
man may fall into: but there is one sin ( viz. that against the Holy Ghost)
which it is not possible for any regenerate elect child of God to commit, p.
533. 2. Though he may possibly fall into any other most heinous sin, yet he
cannot commit it so hainously, and wickedly as the unregenerate man does, p.
533. The sins of the regenerate, are not so prejudicial and dangerous to
them, as the sins of the unregenerate and wicked are, for 1 their ordinary
and unavoidable frailties which they discern and bewail: God will never enter
into judgment with them for them, nor so much as take notice of them, 2 the
greatest sin^ they do fall into, for them there is hope and promise of pardon,
3 No such child of God being regenerate, can fall so fearfully and
dangerously, but he shall rise again, and be renewed by repentance, p. 534,
535. 4 all the sins they fall into, shall be sanctified to them, and tend to
their good three ways, p. 535 -- 538.
Lect. 108.
The Sins of the regenerate are in sundry respects more heinous, then of any
other man, as appears 1 by the testimony of the regenerate themselves, who
have thus judg^d of their own falls, and have been most deeply humbled for
them, even out of this respect, p. 538. 2 testimonies the Lord has given in
this case, 1 that he hates, and will plague sin, as much in them, as in any
other in the world, p. 539 -- 542.
Lect. 109.
God does in this life, snew his hatred more against the sins of his own
people, for 1 He afflicts in this life, all his own people, but not all wicked
men, p. 542, 543- 2 when he intends to bring a general judgment on a nation,
he uses to begin at his own house, page 543. 3 When he will make any an
example unto others of his anger against sin, he uses to c^ll out his own
people, for this purpose, rather then lewd and wicked men, p. 544. 4 His
judgments are wont to be more heavy, and sharp upon his own people, then
those are that he uses to inflict upon wicked men, p. 545. Reason 1 In the
respect he has, and love he bears to his people, that he may keep them
from sin and perdition, p. 546.
Lect. 110.
The Lord afflicts his own people, with notorious and public judgments, of
purpose that other men, even the wicked among whom they live, may take notice
of them; and has therein not so much respect to their own sins, as to those
wicked men, from whom he gains glory by this two ways, p. 547. 1 This is most
effectual to awaken the conscience of such of the wicked, as belong to God,
and to bring them to a serious consideration of their own dangerous estate, p.
548. 2 this has force to harden the hearts of desperate sinners, and to make
them hate religion the more, Ibid. The foul sins that they fall into, that
are of note for piety, are more odious to God and men, then the sins of any
other, Ibid. For 1 They are committed against greater means of knowledge and
obedience: and the greater means any enjoys, the greater is his sin, p.
549. 2 They are committed against knowledge and conscience, more then the sins
of any other, and the more knowledge any has, the greater is his sin Ibid 3
They are committed against greater mercy received from God, and the more
kindness any has received the greater is his sin, p 550. 4 They do more
hurt, for 1 Wicked men are more encouraged and hardened in sin, by their evil
example, then by any other, p 551. 2 Their sins are imputed to God and
religion, and so more dishonor redounds to God, from their sins, then from any
other, Ibid.
Lect. 111.
1. Great is the sin and danger of such, as rejoice to hear and speak of the
falls of Gods people, and that raise and receive slanders against them, p. 552.
2. Great is their sin and danger, that take occasion, from the sins of
professors, to hate religion, and blaspheme it, p 553. 3. Great is their sin
and danger, that embolden and harden their hearts in sin, by the example of
the falls of Gods Saints, p. 554 -- 557.
Lect. 112.
All men are apt to think them, notorious and heinous sinners above others,
whom they see to be more afflicted, then others, p. 557. We may in two
respects, judge of men's sins by their afflictions, p. 559. But we may also
therein offend two ways, Ibid. and p. 560. The folly, wickedness, and danger
of rash judgment, appears in three things, p. 560, 561. None of us are so
affected, with the miseries of the Church as we ought, Ibid. Four duties God
requires of us, in these times of the misery of other Churches. 1. By the best
means we can, inform our selves, how it fares with the Church of God, p.
562.
Lect. 113.
2 We are bound to take to heart, and to work our hearts to unfeigned grief
for the Churches misery, p. 562-, 567. 3 We are bound to remember them in our
prayers, and to importune the Lord for them, p. 567. 4 The example of the Lords
strange severity upon them, should cause us to fear our selves, Ibid. Three
reasons we have for this fear, page 568.
Lect. 114.
He that is in the state of grace, must be afraid to sin. The extent of this
fear in the object in seven degrees of sin, that he must not dare to commit, p.
569, 570. and in the continuance of this fear, p. 570. He has more cause to
be afraid of sin then any other man, for 1 He can have less hope of impunity
then any other, p. 571. 2 He has more to loose then any other, viz. 1 The
Spirit of adoption, Ibid. 2 the Spirit of Sanctification, 3 The credit and
honor of the Gospel, p. 572. He that is in the state of grace, has more
cause to be deeply humbled, for his gross sins, then any other man, p. 573.
No disposition of soul, is fitter to prepare us to the Sacrament, then a sound
humiliation for sin, p. 574. Four great benefits we receive, by sound
humiliation of soul, Ibid.
Lect. 115.
The least thing, that God has appointed in his worship, may not be neglected:
but is reverendly to be esteemed of, and observed, p. 577 -- 579. Because God
has ordained them, and we may receive help in faith and piety by them, p.
579, 580. We must depend upon Gods direction in his Word, in matters of his
worship, p. 581. Three sorts of men are too precise, but yet not they, which
cleave precisely to the warrant and direction of the Word, Ibid. Conscience to
be made of all outward parts of Gods worship, and exercises of religion, and
four motives to it, Ibid. and. page 582.
Lect. 116.
We must labor to understand every thing we do in the service of God; this God
required even under the law, in his ceremonial worship, but much more, in his
moral worship, specially now under the Gospel, page 583. 1 We can receive no
good by the reading of the Word, unless we endeavor to understand what we
read, Ibid. 2 nor by our hearing, 3 nor by the Sacraments, p. 584. 4 nor by
prayers, 5 nor by our singing, 6 an oath may not be given to any, but such as
are of understanding, Reason. For no service pleases God, unless it be
spiritual, and done with feeling, and affection, and that cannot be without
knowledge, p. 585. 1 Every part of Gods worship is spiritual, and there is in
it, somewhat to be done by man, and somewhat by the Lord himself. 2 The Lord
has promised to accompany all his own ordinances, and to work with them. 3
All that man can do in Gods worship, is nothing worth, unless God work with
him, p. 586. 4 Our chief care in every part of Gods worship, should be to
find that God is with us in it, p. 588. The true cause, why so little fruit
appears of the ministry of the Word, and other ordinances is because the Lord
joins not with us in them, and three causes there are of that, 1 the sins of
the times, Ibid. 2 we do not our part, but serve God by halves, with the body
only, 3 because we rest too much upon the means, p. 589.
Lect. 117.
They that would serve God aright in any duty of his worship, must first seek
to get knowledge. Our people generally believe not this as appears in three
things, page 589, 590. Their great sin and danger that make so light account of
knowledge: and what is the best way of instruction to breed knowldge, p. 590.
Both Ministers and peoples chief care should be in every part of Gods worship
to find God present with them, assi^^ing and blessing his ordinances, p. 591.
Four motives to stir us up, to this care, Ibid. Four means to make Gods
ordinances powerful, and effectual to us, p. 592, 593. We must not neglect to
frequent and use Gods ordinances, though we feel no fruit or comfort, we
receive by them, p. 594. Four things to be considered for the comfort of such
as complain and mourn for their unprofitablenesse, in the use of Gods
ordinances, p. 595.
Lect. 118.
No mercy is to be hoped for from God, but only in and through Christ, p. 596.
No mercy can be expected from God by Christ but only through his blood, p.
597. For 1 We by nature and pracus^ have made God our enemy, and Christ
the only Mediator to reconcile us, p. 598 2 No mercy can be expected from God,
till his justice be satisfied for us, and that is done by Christ fully and by
him only, p. 599. Yet is whole salvation to be ascribed to the free grace of
God, p. 600, 601.
Lect. 119.
Four points to be observed in the passion of Christ, that do notably set
forth, how odious and heavy a thing, sin is. 1 No creature in heaven or
earth, could have procured us the pardon of the least sin: Christ only was
able to do this, page 601. 2 Christ himself, could not have done it, for us,
by any other means, then by dying for us, p. 602. 3 Christ himself by dying
for us, could not have done it, if he had not dyed the cursed death of the
Cross, p. 603. 4 Christ himself by dying for us, that cursed death, could not
have done it, if he had not been God, as well as man, p. 604. This should
persuade us, to se^ke to rectify our judgment in this point, for 1 till then
we can never be affected with our sins, as we ought, nor perform those five
things that are necessary to true repentance, p 605. 2 till then Christ can
profit us nothing, Ibid. Five means there are to rectify our judgment in
this point; and to cause us to esteem of sin, as it ought to be esteemed of,
Ibid. 606.
Lect. 120.
Every man should labor to know that Christ is h^^, and that he is one of the
number, that he did undertake for, p. 607. for 1 till then, he cannot be
assured, that any of his sins is pardoned, but has cause to judge he abides
under Gods curse, 2 till then, though he be jocund now in the days of health
and peace, yet in distress he can have no hope of mercy, or comfort from God,
3 till then, he can have no assurance of any blessing p. 608. 4 till then, he
cannot know, he has any thing from God in love, p. 609. Proleps. How ever men
conceit, its certain all shall not have benefit by him, but few in comparison,
Ibid. We may know we are Christ's, if we have his Spirit, and specially by four
effects of it, p. 610, 611. He that would get comfortable assurance that Christ
is his, must, 1 Desire and thirst after him, more then any thing else, p. 611.
2 Be content to buy and purchase him by parting with whatsoever is dearest to
him, that he may obtain him, 3 feel the burden of his sins, and see how
damnable his estate is without him, p. 612, 613.
Lect 121.
No man can receive comfort by the blood of Christ, till he has it sprinkled
upon his heart, and applied to him, p. 614. None but the Lord himself, can
thus apply and sprinkle the blood of Christ upon the heart of any man, p. 615.
For 1 the more a man knows of Christ, the more will he be vexed, if he cannot
know, he has any part in him, himself, Ibid. 616. 2 man's infidelity is such
he cannot apply Christ to himself, p. 616. Popery deprives men of true
comfort, in four doctrines, that they teach, Ibid. We should give no rest to
our selves till we have got Christ's blood sprinkled upon us, and assurance it
was shed for us, p. 617. for 1 it is possible to get this assurance in this
life, p. 618. 2 Great is the benefit of it, page 619.
Lect. 122.
Necessary to examine well, that assurance we seem to have, that Christ is
ours, for 1 Many most lewd men, have seemed to be strongly assured of it, in
whom certainly Gods Spirit never wrought it, 2 its much better to live in
continual doubt of it, then to have such false assurance, p. 620. The Spirit
of God only works true assurance, because he is the only comforter, the
Devil also works a kind of peace and assurance, but he can never be a true
comforter, p. 621. 1 Sign of true assurance. Those in whom the Spirit works
assurance were first humbled with doubts and fears; and after they have it,
they never have it in this life in perfection; yea they are subject often to
spiritual disertions, Ibid. He that never doubted of his salvation, was never
acquainted with any fears, or trouble of mind, has just cause to doubt of his
assurance, p. 622. 2 Sign. All true assurance is grounded upon the Word, the
Spirit and the Word go always together, the work of the Spirit to be judged by
the Word, Ibid. Every true Christian has the Word to assure him in particular,
that he is in the state of salvation, p. 623. Proleps 1. A man that has grace
in him, may certainly know that he has it, Ibid. 2. By the Word he may know
certainly, that every grace that is in him, is in him in sincerity, p. 624. No
trusting to any assurance, but such only as is grounded on the Word, for 1
that only is of the Spirits working, Ibid. 2 by the Word only Satan to be
convinced, when he shall question our assurance, and ^ift us about it, 3 the
Lord will judge every one of us by his Word, p. 625. Most men are confident
they shall be saved though they have no Word of God, to assure them of it: nay,
though the Word give express testimony against them, Ibid.
Lect. 123.
The third sign of true assurance, is the effects and fruits it produces in
them that have it. 1 It is operative and will breed in him that has it, an
unfeigned love to God, and care to express his love, by the uttermost service,
he is able to do unto him, p. 626. It will work a through reformation, in the
inner man, Ibid. Nothing will make the heart, 1 So soft and apt to mourn for
sin, 2 so fearful to oftend God hereafter, 3 So to desire and delight, in
the Word and means of grace. 4 So careful to practice what he knows, and to
please God in all things as this will do, p. 627. He that has it, cannot
content himself to serve God inwardly, and in Spirit, but he will also. 1
Profess openly, and declare himself to be Gods servant, Ibid. 2 put forth
himself to do God in his place, all the service and honor he can, p. 628.
The Assurance most men have of their salvation appears by this to be false and
counterf^it, because its idle and unfruitful: Nay it works quite contrary
effects, 1 it hardneth the heart, and keeps men from sorrowing for sin, Ibid.
2 it makes them bold to commit any sin, 3 it makes them despise the Word, and
means of grace, 4 it makes them utterly careless of practice, 5 They count
it their wisdom to conceal their love to God and religion, and a disgrace to
be noted for it. 6 They have no care to honor God, p. 629. 1 Masters of
families, may greatly honor God, and their sin that do not, p 630. 2 So may
Ministers, 3 So may Magistrates, p. 631.
Lect. 124.
Though true assurance of the pardon of our sins, be the supernatural work
of Gods Spirit, yet does the Spirit work it by means, p. 632. Great force
there is in Gods solemn worship, and conscionable use of his ordinances to
work, and preserve and recover it, Ibid. and namely 1 in the Word, because 1 it
was given to that end chiefly, p. 633. 2 God has promised to accompany it by
his Spirit, in the hearts of his people, 634. 2 in the use of the Lords Supper,
for therein Christ is 1 offered most particularly, 2 applied, p. 635. 3 in
prayer, p. 636. Five causes why Gods people find not the fruit of it, p. 637.
Lect. 125.
1 A constant care to please God in all things, and fear to offend him, is a
singular means to get; preserve and recover assurance, and without it, it will
not be, p. 638-641. 2 If Gods people would diligently observe and examine their
own ways; they might get, preserve and recover assurance better then they
do, p. 641. for if we can find, that we do any one good thing, with an
upright heart; we may from thence grow assured, that we are in Gods favor, p.
642. yet a full and strong assurance will not be gotten in a day or two, but by
a long and constant continuance in well doing, Ibid. A Christian (even the
meanest, and when he is at the worst) may by due examination find the truth of
grace in him, Ibid. and page 643. Though he can for the present find no
goodness in himself, yet it will be profitable for him, to call to mind, the
signs of grace he had in former times, page 643.
Lect. 126.
3 If Gods people would call to mind the special experiments, they have had
formerly of Gods goodness toward them, even in temporal and common favors,
it would be a great help to obtain and preserve and recover the assurance of
his love in Christ, p. 644. But specially th'experiments of his love in
spiritual things, p. 645. We should take notice, and observe well all Gods
special favors, and keep a register of them, and repeat them often to our own
souls. See what helps Gods people have used this way, p. 646. 4 The last and
surest means of assurance is to renounce our selves, and with an humbled
soul, to cast our selves upon the free grace and mercy of God in Christ, and
to look for help and comfort that way only, p. 647. Proleps. 1. He that can
find no goodness at all in himself, may yet be able to do this, nay none so
fit to do it, as he, Ibid. Proleps. 2. He that has much doubting, and
infidelity in him, may be able to do this, p. 648. We wrong our selves much, in
trusting too much to that inherent grace, we find in our selves, p. 649.
Lect. 127.
The use of comfort that the former Doctrine serves unto (though it may seem
in two respects unfit) yet may not be omitted, p. 649, 650. A man may be in
the state of grace, and have true faith, though himself cannot perceive it:
yea though he seem to himself to be utterly out of Gods favor, p. 650, 651.
He that has the least measure of true faith, has Christ's blood sprinkled
upon his heart, by the Spirit of God though he perceive it not, p. 652. The
nature and essence of true faith, consists not in sensible assurance, (though
that be a sweet fruit of it) but in an obedientiall affiance in Christ, p. 653.
The humbled sinner, when he finds least assurance, and comfort in himself,
yet should rest upon Christ, Ibid. The weakest faith may receive help this
way, p. 654. If we find our selves unable to believe and rest on Christ, we
must cry to God, to make us able, Ibid. Even our broken and troubled prayers,
may much prevail with God in this case, Ibid.
Lect. 128.
All true believers are perfectly cleansed from all their sins, and are as
pure and white in Gods eyes, as any snow, page 655. The faithful are cleansed
from their sins two ways; 1 in their justification by the blood, 2 in their
Sanctification by the Spirit of Christ, p. 656. These two go always together,
yet are there four maine differences between them, Ibid. etc. Though in
respect of our sanctification, we be not perfectly cleansed, yet in respect of
our justification we are, p. 658. The largeness of the pardon, that every true
believer has received, and how perfectly he is thereby discharged of all his
sins, appears in five points, p. 659. The reasons and grounds of it, are
three, p. 660.
Lect. 129.
The controversy between us and the Papists touching justification, not unfit
to be handled, p. 662. They err dangerously in denying that Christ has
satisfied as well for the temporal, as for the eternal punishment due to our
sins, Ibid. as appears by four evident reasons, p. 663. Though th'afflictions
that men endure be in their own nature punishments for sin, yet are they not
so unto all men, for 1 God has often inflicted them upon many without all
respect to their sin as the cause, page 664. 2 Even when they are infflicted
upon the faithful for sin, yet are they not properly punishments of their
sins, but chastisements only, p. 665. Though the faithful upon their first
believing, have obtained a full pardon of all their si^s, yet must they daily
beg the remission of their sins, for three reasons, page 666, 667.
Lect. 130.
Five things to be granted touching inherent righteousness. 1 God justifies
none but he sanctifies him also, and makes him holy inherently, p. 667. 2 Yea
he will make him perfectly holy, by inherent holiness, but not during this
life. 3 This inherent holiness is called in Scripture, the righteousness of a
man. 4 It may be truly said a man is justified by this inherent righteousness.
5 It may be said in some sense, that a man is justified before God by it, 668.
Yet is not this the righteousness, whereby a sinner can be justified before
Gods tribunal, absolved from condemnation, and adjudged unto life eternal, p.
669. for then a man might be justified by the works of the law, which no man
can be. 1 No not by the works of the moral Law, Ibid. 2 No not by the works
done in the state of grace, p. 670. Reason 1 because the inherent
righteousness of the best, is imperfect and defiled, Ibid. No sin is
venial, and the holiest men have had greater sins then venial, p. 671. 2
Reason. If a man could be justified by inherent righteousness, he might have
some cause and matter of boasting in himself, 1b. The works that the
regenerate do are their own, not merely the works of Christ and his grace,
p. 672. Six plain proofs, that we are justified by Christ's righteousness
imputed to us, and by it only, p. 672, 673. Reason for it, 673. 1. Proleps.
Its no way unreasonble o^ absurd, that we should be justified by righteousness
imputed. 2. Proleps. God justifies none who do remain impious. 3. Proleps. No
injustice in God to account them perfectly righteous, in whom yet there are
many corruptions, p. 674.
Lect. 131.
He that truly believes he is justified by Christ, must needs take comfort in
the knowledge of Christ, and rejoice in him, p. 675. There is comfort enough to
be found in Christ for the soul that is most afflicted, p. 676. For 1 the
knowledge of this, that Christ has purchased for us the pardon of all our
sins, is a most just and sufficient ground of comfort, for 1 Sin is the cause
of all other evils, that befall us, 2 Sin is that, that makes all evil
bitter, and painful to us, 3 If all the evils and miseries, that are in the
world, should befall us, they could not be so intolerable to us, nor torment us
so much, as one sin will do when God charge it upon us, 4 Sin is the only
thing, that separateth between us and God, p. 677. 2 The knowledge of this,
that Christ's perfect obedience and righteousness, is imputed to us, is a just
and sufficient ground of true comfort, Ibid. For 1 Even that inherent
righteousness that God works in us by his Spirit is a just cause of comfort
to us, Ibid. 2 Adams righteousness, wherewith God clothed him in his
creation, was a robe that did greatly adorn him, and was a great glory to him,
but the righteousness of Christ, which is imputed to every true believer, is
much more glorious, 1 his was uncertain, ours by Christ is made more sure, 2
his was in his own keeping, so is not ours, p. 679. 3 his was but the
righteousness of a man, ours is the righteousness of God, p. 680. Applic.
Every humbled sinner should count this his great sin, that he cannot rejoice
more in Christ, and check himself for it. 1 Proleps. he may and ought to
rejoice, notwithstanding the multitude and greatness of his afflictions, p. 680.
2 Proleps. and notwithstanding the heinousness of his old sins, and present
corruptions which he yields not unto, p. 681. 3 Proleps. and notwithstanding
he say, he cannot believe, for 1 he has four just causes and encouragements
to believe, 2 He does indeed truly believe, though weakly, and though he
perceive it not, p. 682.
Lect. 132.
We should all highly esteem of Christ, and hunger and thirst after him, and
his righteousness, laboring above all things to win him, and to be found in
him, p. 683. 1 Motive else our state will be woeful, when extreme affliction
and death, shall seize upon us. Six things to be distinctly considered in
this. 1 Motive, 1 Certain it is a change, affliction, sickness, and death
will come, 2 how soon none knows, 3 nor in what kind and measure, p. 684. 4
when it comes it will awaken the conscience, and that being wakened will
bring into our remembrance our sins, and the judgment, we must go to, 5 If
we have not gotten Christ before, we are in danger then to be made incapable,
6 our case will be most woeful, if we be without him then; for there is no hope
of mercy, or comfort from God without him, p. 685. On the other side, they that
have Christ, may be safe and comfortable in any affliction, nay never so
comfortable as then, p. 686. 2 Motive, He that has not Christ, can have no
sound comfort in his prosperity, nor in any of Gods outward blessings, for 1
though they be blessings, and good things in themselves, yet to him they are
not. He had better be without them, they shall do him no good, but much hurt,
Ibid. For they are none of their own, they have no spiritual, sanctified, or
comfortable title to them, p. 687. 2 God has not given them any thing in love.
Though these things, be fruits of his common love, they are no signs of his
special love. And no man can have any sound comfort, in the common love of
God, but in his special love only, Ibid. and p. 688. On the other side he
that is in Christ, may have sound comfort, even in the outward and common
blessings of God, for 1 they are his own, and he has the highest title to
them, 2 They are good to him, and shall do him good, and no hurt, p. 688. 3
They are to him pledges of Gods special love, p. 689. Applic. Great folly and
danger of such as prefer worldly things before Christ, Ibid. and p. 690.
Lect. 133.
None are fit to receive Christ, nor can thirst after him, but the poor and
such as feel themselves utterly void of all goodness, p. 691. The civil
honesty and those moral parts that are in many natural men, are in themselves
good things, pleasing to God, and such as he uses, to reward, and the reasons
of it, p. 692, 693. Professors should walk honestly, and the greatness of
their sin, that do not set out in three points, p. 694, 695. Yet there is no
sound comfort, to be found in it, the Lord is never a whit the better pleased
with a man in resepct of salvation for his civil honesty unless he be in
Christ, p. 695, 696.
Lect. 134.
There are sundry good things, to be found in many an hypocrite, and better
things then in any mere natural man, and that in three respects, p. 697.
There is in many an hypocrite, 1 a kind of love to the Word and the ministry
thereof, he will hear constantly and with delight, he will commend and
profess much love to the teacher, so does not the civil man, 2 he will keep
a constant course in praying, not ordinary only but extraordinary, so does not
the civil man, 3 He is a strict observer of the Sabbath, so is not the civil
man, p. 698. 4 He hates Idolatry and the monuments of it, and loves the
sincerity of religion, so does not the civil man, 5 He is reformed not only
from gross sins, but even from the least sins, so is not the civil man, p.
699. These things are not therefore to be misliked, because they are to be
found in some hypocrites: neither may we despise and scorn any for any of
these things: for though they be found in many hypocrites, yet are they no
signs of an hypocrite, Ibid. 1 Its a singular good thing to love the Word, and
he can have no true goodness, but is in a woeful estate, that does not, 2 to
keep a constant course in prayer is a very good thing, and such as God will
bless, and he can have no true goodness in him, but is in a woeful state,
that uses not to pray, p. 700.
Lect. 135.
Though 1 the bodily observation of the Sabbath, and such as may be performed
by the outward m^n be nothing (in Gods account) in comparison of the spiritual.
2 The bodily test from our own works be the leaft part even of that; the
spending of the day in holy duties is a far greater matter then that, p 701,
702. yet God is highly pleased with that and has promised great reward unto
it, p. 702. and a chief cause of common calamities, has been the neglect
even of that, p. 703. No man can become poorer, by the conscionable keeping of
the Sabbath day, Ibid. Man receives a greater blessing by the Sabbath, then by
any other day specially in spiritual things, but also in temporal, p. 704
705.
Lect. 136.
We have all cause to praise God for the good laws have been made to provide
for the better observation of the Sabbath: and the hypocrisy and profanesse of
the people generally appears in seeming so zealous for the laws, and
neglecting these so much, p. 706. Every Minister is bound to reproove sin, p.
707. The ^ and chief thing that belongs to the right observation of the
Sabbath, is the keeping of the rest, and performing the duties of the day
cheerfully and spiritually, and against this they offend, that sleep
ordinarily at Church: this sin is worthy of open reproof, p. 708. This is more
then a sin of infirmity. Four notes given to discern a sin of infirmity, from
a reigning sin, p 709. The second duty required in the observation of the
Sabbath, is to spend the day in religious duties, specially public: against
this they transgress, that absent themselves from the Church, p 710. The third
and last thing is, that we rest from al our own works, on that day: against
this the profanesse and open contempt of the Sabbath by children, and youth is
a gross sin, Ibid. God will not endure profannesse, and open contempt of
religion, no not in children, yet will he lay this their sin to the charge of
Masters, and Parents and Governors chiefly, p. 711.
Lect. 137.
It is a good thing, and highly pleasing unto God, to love the sincerity of
Gods worship, and to do nothing in that, but what he can see warranted by the
Word, p. 71^. It is also a good thing to ^ate all Idolatry, and every thing
that belongs to it, and proceeds from it, p. 712. Its no sign of an
hypocrite, to make conscience of the least sin, p 714. Answer to them that
blame professors, for their scrupulousness in indifferent and lawful things,
1 O^e may see that to be a sin, which another more godly or learned then he
cannot see, neither should we judge one another for difference in judgment. 2
Some good men may be more scrupulous then they ought to be, and yet not to be
despised. 3 No cause we should judge one another for using, or not using our
liberty in indifferent things, p. 715. Though we may hate the sins of
professors yet its a dangerous thing to hate them, for the goodness they
profess. Many hate professors, not for their faults, but for their goodness,
and three notes to discern that by, p. 716, 717.
Lect 138.
The state of every hypocrite is most woeful and dangerous, neither can he have
any sound peace or comfort, p. 718. Though in some respects the open profane
sinner be in worse case then he, both in this life and in that to come, Ibid.
yet is the hypocrite also, and every thing he does most odious unto God, yea in
some other respects his case is more woeful, both in this life, and in that to
come then the open profane man's, p. 719. Its a good sign in a Christian to
doubt and suspect himself of hypocrisy, Ibid. 1 He that lives in gross sins,
and yet makes a good profession, is a gross and palpable hypocrite, p. 720. 2
Much more he that makes a good profession, for this end chiefly that he may
thereby the better hide and cloak his foul sins, p 721. 3 He is also an
hypocrite, that makes never so good a show of godliness, if he deny the power
of it, if he obey not and practice what he hears. Many of the best professors
fail much in this, p. 722. Even to our ministry (so far forth as we teach
nothing, but by good warrant of the Word) obedience is due as well as to the
ministry of the Prophets and Apostles, p. 723, 724.
Lect. 139.
He that lives in any one sin, though he forsakes all the rest, and whose
obedience is not universal, is no better then an hypocrite, p. 724. Sacrilege
is a great sin, Ibid. The care to keep our selves unspotted of every sin, is a
sure sign of an upright heart, p. 726. No hypocrite does any thing with a good
heart, but upon some by respect or other, p. 727. The true Christian (even the
poorest and weakest of them) does whatsoever he does unto the Lord, as a
service to him, his maine intent is to please, and approve himself to him, p.
728. Though he may have some respect to himself also in it, Ibid. None can
please God in any thing, he does unless he do it, out of love to God, neither
can any love the Lord aright, till he know Christ is his, p. 729. The
goodness that is in the regenerate does surpass that that is in any moral
man, or hypocrite in three respect, Ibid, and p. 730. Yet can no man have any
true comfort in it, till he know himself to be in Christ, p. 730.
Lect. 140.
No man can be sanctified till he be justified, p. 730. The only sure way to
get strength against any corruption, and obtain any saving grace, is first to
get assurance by faith, that our sins are pardoned and we reconciled to God in
Christ, Ibid. 1 faith is the only inward instrument, whereby the Spirit of God
sanctifies the heart, p. 731. and the outward instrument whereby the Spirit
works sanctification in the heart of man is the preaching (not of the law
but) of the Gospel, p. 732. The Only means to work true mortification of sin
is a justifying faith, Ibid. Great is the force of faith to subdue, and
mortify 1 covetousness, 2 maliciousness, 3 sl^vish fear, and 4 hardness of
heart, p. 733 -- 736.
Lect. 141.
When a man is once by faith assured of Gods love, then will he be renewed and
become fruitful in holiness, and righteousness and never till then, p 737.
For 1 faith receives Christ, and makes him our own, and they that have
Christ, must needs have his sanctifying Spirit also, 2 Faith exercises it
self in the meditation of Gods love to us in Christ, and in apprehending the
promises, whereby God has bound himself to give us sanctifying grace, p. 738,
739. Faith is the ro^te and cause of all true 1 repentance, 2 fear of God, 3
obedience, 4 love to God, p. 740 -- 742. It only enables a man 1 to hear well,
p. 742. 2 to pray well, p. 743.
Lect. 142.
Necessary we should have signs given us in the Word, whereby they to whom
Christ merits belong may be known: for many are apt to think they have title
to him, that have not: yea a chief thing that keeps many from hungring after
Christ, is this conceit, that he dyed for all men, and therefore they shall
have benefit by him, p. 744. But this is a dangerous delusion, for all shall
not have benefit by him, but few in comparison, viz. 1. only the true Church
of Christ, and that is, but a very little flock. 2 Not all that live within
the Church, and profess the true religion, but a few even of them, Ibid. 3
Many that profess the true religion, are so far from receiving benefit as they
receive much hurt by him, p. 745. The reason why so few shall have benefit by
Christ, is because, how sufficient soever Christ's death, was to save all
mankind, yet true believers only, shall receive benefit by it, and all men
have not faith, but a few only, Ibid. 1 al men by nature unable to believe, 2
Some for their sins, are smitten with a supernatural inability to believe, p.
746. It stands us therefore upon to know, whether our selves are of that small
number, Ibid. Christ has set a mark on his sheep ( viz. his holy Spirit)
whereby themselves may know they are his, p. 747. By certain fruits and
effects of the Spirit, the faithful may certainly know, they have the spirit
of Christ, Ibid. Specially if they can find in themselves true charity, Ibid.
and 748.
Lect. 143.
We must love the persons of all men, and express it in nine duties, p. 748
-- 751. We may pray for the worst, even for Idolaters, p. 751. We must love our
enemies, and express it in eight duties, p. 752, 753. This he that has the
Spirit of Christ, is able to do Evangelically, and that appears in five
things, p. 754. We must bear a special love to all that fear God, though
they differ from us in judgment and practice about things indifferent, p. 754
-- 766.
Lect. 144.
He that has the Spirit of Christ, will be constant in the religion of
Christ, p. 766. Yet is not all constancy in religion, but constancy in the true
religion a sign of the Spirit, p. 767 True religion is that that is grounded
only upon the Word, Ibid. Every necessary truth in religion, is so plainly
set down in the Word, as the simplest Christian, may clearly understand it,
p. 768. The testimony God has given to them, that cleave constantly to his
truth, p. 769. The faithful themselves, have found much comfort in this, p.
770.
Lect. 145.
The Spirit of God wheresoever he dwell^ will teach and effectually persuade
the heart in the truth of religion, p. 771. No man can grow to certainty in
matters of religion, by any other means, but by the teaching of the Spirit:
and proportionable to the measure of the Spirit of sanctification that a man
has, shall his certainty, be, p. 773, 774 Yet is not this to be accounted
every man's private Spirit, p. 775. The Spirits teaching to be judged by the
Word, Ibid. The ministry of the Word, is the means whereby the Spirit uses
to teach men; p. 776 They whom the Spirit, has once taught and persuaded will
certainly persevere in the truth, Ibid.
Lect. 146.
Th'exhortation to constancy in the truth is very needful, and that even in
these days, p. 777. by reason 1 that Papists increase, 2 the multitude of
other erroneous spirits; 3 the general decay of the zealous love of religion,
and of the life and power of it; p. 778. 1 Motive to constancy. Corruption in
judgment, is the most dangerous corruption of all other, p. 779, 780. 2
Motive. He that falls from the truth* and embraces error, was never taught of
the Spirit, p. 780. Though in some things of smaller moment, the faithful may
be subject to error (and errors of that nature should not alienate Christians
one from another) yea in fundamental points for a time, Ibid. and 781.
Lect. 147.
Though our perseverance in the truth, be to be ascribed to the Lord alone, yet
he works it by means, and will have us to be agents, in this work, our
selves, p. 782, 783. 1 We must carefully sh^n all things whereby we may be in
danger to be corrupted, and drawn from the truth, viz. 1. We must shun the
hearing and conferring with them, that are heretics and seducers; and the
reading of their books. We should not long to hear, what they can say for
their errors, or against the truth, p. 784. 2 We must take heed of affecting
the knowledge of intricate curious, and unprofitable points, p. 785. There is a
desire of knowledge, which is commendable, and no Minister should mislike in
his hearers, p. 786. Yet is there a desire of knowledge that is most dangerous,
Ibid. 1 When we desire to know more of Gods matters then he has pleased to
reveal in his Word, Ibid. 2 When (neglecting other things) we seek the
knowledge of those high points only, that are above our capacity, to
understand and busy our selves, in matters of controversy, p. 787. 3 When we
desire knowledge, only for knowledge sa^e, without respect to the use and
profit, we may make of it, for our edification in faith and holiness, p 788.
Lect. 148.
He that desires to hold fast his profession, must use the means, whereby he
may be established in the truth, and preserved from falling away from it,
four directions are given us, in Gods book for this, p. 788. 1 He must
ground himself well in the knowledge of the truth, and labor to be assured
(upon good grounds) that it is indeed the truth he holds, Ibid. 1 He must
acqu^^nt himself, with the maine principles of religion and seek to be
perfect in them, p. 789. 2 examine by Scripture, what ever he hears or
reads, and labor to get good proofs of Scripture, for whatsoever he
holds, p. 790. 2 He must labor to take to heart, that which he knows, love
it, and make conscience to practice it. He that by reading or hearing seeks
knowledge with an honest and good heart, shall hold fast, that which he
professes, and none but he, p. 792, 793.
Lect. 149.
3 He must take heed of declining from or forsaking the least truth, his
conscience has been convinced in. Two things there be, that deceive men in
this case, p. 793, 794. Though some truths be of greater moment then others,
yet its a dangerous sin to be wilfully ignorant of any truth, God has
revealed, or forsake it when we know it, upon conceit that it is but a tris^e,
for 1 nothing that God has revealed is of small moment, or lightly to be
accounted of, 2 a man may make himself abominable to God, by forsaking
wittingly the least truth, or receiving the least error, p. 794. 3 the best
way to keep us from falling from the truth, in the maine points, is to make
conscience of falling from the least truth, p. 795. 4 He must be constant in a
conscionable use of all Gods ordinances, 1 the ministry of the Word, p. 796. 2
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, 3 prayer, p. 797, 798.
Lect. 150.
Every one that has the Spirit of Christ will take to heart, the cause of God,
and his holy religion, p. 798. 1 No man can have the Spirit of Christ's* unless
he love God unfeignedly above all things else, Ibid. 2 He that does thus love
God, must needs be zealous for God, grieved and troubled, to see him
dishonored, 3 He that has any true zeal to God in him, will show and
express it principally toward the house, and worship of God, p. 799. More
particularly, 1 He that has the Spirit of Christ, must needs rejoice to see or
hear that the true religion of God, does prosper and that the purity of it, is
restored or set up any where, p. 800. 2 He that has the Spirit of Christ, will
rejoice in the frequencie and fulness of Church Assemblies, 3 In the
plentiful and free preaching of the Word p. 801. 4 He will rejoice to see and
hear that the ministry of the Word is fruitful among them that enjoy it, and
powerful to reform their hearts and lives, p. 802, 803.
Lect. 151.
Three Reasons and grounds of the former doctrine, 1 He that has the Spirit of
Christ cannot but love the persons of all men, and we love no man, unless we
love his soul, and unfeignedly desire his salvation; and grieve to see his
soul in danger of perishing, p. 803. He that desires the salvation of all,
will joy in the plentiful and sound preaching of the Word, p. 804. Though God
can save men without preaching yet he does not ordinarily without it, and its a
fearful sign, he means not to save them, he denies preaching unto, Ibid.
and 805. Though all be not saved that have preaching, yet its a cause of
comfort to see sound preachers abound, p. 805. A man that has no truth of
grace in himself may yet be a means of conversion to others, Ibid. 2 The
respect we have to the state and Church wherein we live, which we are bound to
love, p. 806. 1 Nothing will make the state and Church so honorable, as the
liberty of the Gospel, 2 nor so strong and peaceable, 3 nor so prosperous and
plenteous in blessings, p. 806, 807. On the other side, nothing will sooner
deprive it of all blessings, then the neglect and opposing of religion, p. 808.
3 The respect we have to the Lord and his honor, ought to be dearer to us,
then any other thing. And that is no way so much advanced, as by the liberty of
the Gospel, and the good success of it, p. 809.
Lect. 152.
Its a great error to think that much preaching is not now necessary, for 1
though prayer be a chief work of the Minister, and part of Gods public
worship, yet is it not the chief of all, but preaching, p. 810, 811. 2 No man
can pray, till by preaching he be made able to pray, 3 Preaching is the best
means to quicken and stir up the Spirit of prayer in them, that have it, p
812. 2 Preaching is necessary for them, that have longest enjoyed it, for 1 in
the best Congregations, the greatest part are still ignorant, 2 Such as have
profited by it, have still need of it, for 1 the most are weak and unperfect
in knowledge and grace, 2 they that are of best growth in grace, are apt to
decay, 3 most care, must be had of them that have most profited, p. 813. 3 Its
no good reason, against the necessity of much preaching, because men grow
weary, and are glutted with it, for 1 much preaching is not the cause why men
loath the Word, 2 Its the best means to cure that disease, p. 814. 4 Its no
good reason against much preaching, that it is said to do little good, where
its most used, p. 815.
Several places of Scripture opened and applied in this Book.
Book. Chap. Verse. Folio. Geneses. 2 2 701 Geneses. 3 704 Geneses. 4 7 209
Geneses. 20 16 694 Geneses. 33 10 645 Geneses. 50 19 752 Exodus. 9 16 16
Exodus. 14 15 72 Exodus. 23 5 119 Exodus. 34 7 599 Leuit. 24 14 186 Leuit, 26
42 159 Number. 15 35 231 Number. 23 21 659 Number. 25 12 631 Deuteronomy. 4 9 42 Deuteronomy. 6 7 Ibid
Deuteronomy. 25 433 Deuteronomy. 7 9 719 Deuteronomy. 17 20 321 Deuteronomy. 26 13.14 724 Deuteronomy. 29 19.20 91
Deuteronomy. 30 ^.3 288 Deuteronomy. 6 390 Deuteronomy. 32 5 533 Deuteronomy. 3^ 4 49^ Josh. 23 14 4^8 1.
Sam. 2 25 602 1. Sam. 14 ^8 148 1. Sam. 15 23 230 1. Sam. 2^ 30.31 209 2. Sam.
23 1 5 2. Sam. 24 24 25 1. King. 8 13 104, 601 1. King. 23 33 544 1. King. 15
14 369 1. King. ^0 35.36 381 1. King. 21 9.10 312 1. King. 12 180 1. Cron. 23
30 4 2. Cron. 5 13 5 2. Cron. 11 16.17 807 2. Cron. 17 7 480 2. Cron. 30 19 593
2. Cron. 35 1 718 Job. 1 22 246 Job. 2 3 664 Job. 8 13.14 ^18 Job. 11 13.14 593
Job. 13 23 665 Job. 18 15 687 Job. 21 14 424 Job. 23 620 Job. 23 11.12 770 Job.
27 5 374 Job. 6 209 Job. 29 3 404 Job. 14 678 Job. 34 31.32 606 Job. 36 89 685
Job. 42 7.8 561 Psalm. 4 6 402 Psalm. 5 7 130 Psalm. 9 12 735 Psalm. 16 9 7 Psalm.
18 21 533 Psalm. 2^ 7^6 Psalm. 25 466 Psalm. 19 7 408 Psalm. 22 30 290 Psalm. 26 3
627, 741 Psalm. 5, 6 179 Psalm. 27 4 13^, 632 Psalm. 28 1 78 Psalm. 31 23 154 Psalm.
32 1 677 Psalm. 2 161 Psalm. 34 8 488 Psalm. 36 6 247 Psalm. 7 645 Psalm. 37 23 360
Psalm. 37 469 Psalm. 42 4 801 Psalm. 44 17, 18 771 Psalm. 51 8 99, 153 Psalm. 18 171
Psalm. 56 3, 4 146, 268, 653 Psalm. 10, 11 624 Psalm. 13 798 Psalm. 59 10 126 Psalm.
62 8 194 Psalm. 63 1, ^3 632 Psalm. 67 1, 2, 3 478 Psalm. 68 21 390 Psalm. 69 9 695
Psalm. 73 1 466 Psalm. 76 10 338 Psalm. 77 1 67 Psalm. 6 643 Psalm. 84 9 647 Psalm.
11 467 Psalm. 85 8 620, 639 Psalm. 88 15 392 Psalm. 89 50, 51 553 Psalm. 101 6, 7
630 Psalm. 102 10 250 Psalm. 106 4 401 Psalm. 107 42, 43 645 Psalm. 111 10 490
Psalm. 112 4 686 Psalm. 116 16 454 Psalm. 118 28 628 Psalm. 119 16 38 Psalm. 30, 31
770, 789 Psalm. 33 776 Psalm. 64 130 Psalm. 66 424 Psalm. 73 493 Psalm. 92 263 Psalm.
104 490, 714 Psalm. 113 36 Psalm. 130 513 Psalm. 147 637 Psalm. 155 424, 456 Psalm.
130 3, 4 365, 451 Psalm. 137 1, 6* 7 564 565 Psalm. 143 5, 6 644 Pro. 1 27, 28
590 Pro. 4 12 497 Pro. 26 642 Pro. 5 12 590 Pro. 7 2 235 Pro. 14 721 Pro. 8 9
514 Pro. 17 391 Pro. 9 10 484 Pro. 10 22 688 Pro. 14 14 643 Pro. 16 371, 620
Pro. 26 376, 638 Pro. 19 27 497, 784 Pro. 20 12 7^, 650 Pro. 21 2 372*727 Pro.
15 678 Pro. 21 27 721 Pro. 22 6 584 Pro. 12 497 Pro. 24 29 752 Pro. 25 12 49*
707 Pro. 27 7 620 Pro. 28 4 749 Pro. 29 24 186 Pro. 30 2, 3 484 Pro. 9 118
Eccl. 5 1 197, 585 Eccl. 2 310 Eccl. 6 494 Eccl. 7 2, 3, 4 260 Eccl. 16 381
Eccl. 10 1 549 Eccl. 11 2 117 Eccl. 8 2^0 Eccl. 12 9, 10 482 Cant. 1 7 796
Cant. 3 1 -- 4 143 Cant. 4 4 263 Cant. 5 2 32, 355 Cant. 3 640 Isa. 6 5 282,
347 Isa. 11 2 488 Isa. 9 476* 734 Isa. 26 2 769 Isa. 27 9 323 Isa. 28 12 617
Isa. 29 9 211 Isa. 30 20, 21 776 Isa. 31 9 543 Isa. 32 2 676 Isa. 32 17 638
Isa. 38 16 739 Isa. 18 289 Isa. 19 630 Isa. 42 23 650 Isa. 44 5 628 Isa. 48 10
258 Isa. 50 4 165 Isa. 10 653 Isa. 51 7 488 Isa. 52 15 614 Isa. 53 1 588 Isa.
55 1 648, 691 Isa. 3 127 Isa. 57 1 561 Isa. 19 19, 797 Isa. 58 1 45, 707 Isa.
10 117, 273 Isa. 59 21 634 Isa. 61 3 46, 144 Ier. 2 10, 11 706 Ier. 3 12, 13
158 Ier. 4 2 585 Ier. 3 498 Ier. 9 7 237* 546, 666 Ier. 10 25 70 Ier. 13 11 809
Ier. 15 10 47 Ier. 17 1, 2 299 Ier. 16, 17 273, 396 Ier. 22 16 490 Ier. 23 6
673 Ier. 32 23 419 Lam. 3 29 311 Ezekiel. 5 15 547 Ezekiel. 13 19 695 Ezekiel. 14 7, 8
593 Ezekiel. 16 9 -- 14 107 Ezekiel. 18 10, 11 726 Ezekiel. 20 12 702 Ezekiel. 24 7, 8 718
Ezekiel. 13 345 Ezekiel. 28 19 548 Ezekiel. 33 11 455 Ezekiel. 31, 32 27, 698, 723 Ezekiel. 36
26, 27 739 Ezekiel. 28, 31 736 Dan. 1 8 382 Dan. 4 27 117, 1^8, 364 Dan. 3 5 627
Dan. 6 3 497 Dan. 6 589 Dan. 8 12 2, 493 Dan. 10 1 437 Dan. 12 7, 8 210 Dan. 13
9 455 Dan. 14 7 535 Amos. 5 10 52 Micah. 2 7 241 Micah. 6 9 219, 606 Micah. 16
545 Zeph. 3 18 801 Zach. 9 11 615 Zach. 12 10 17, 627, 736 Mal. 2 2 489 Mal. 4
2 639 Mat. 1 21 85 Mat. 3 14 658 Mat. 4 4 72 Mat. 5 3, 5 308 Mat. 19 33, 427
Mat. 44, 45 115, 752 Mat. 48 111 Mat. 6 23 780 Mat. 9 2 681 Mat. 38 801 Mat. 10
17 338 Mat. 37 399 Mat. 11 11 165 Mat. 19 472 Mat. 12 43 7 Mat. 13 13 37 Mat.
14 591, 795 Mat. 44 372 Mat. 57, 58 24 Mat. 15 14 12 Mat. 16 17 515, 773 Mat.
18 356 Mat. 22 38 582 Mat. 23 13 551 Mat. 24 14 510 Mat. 25 29 69, 330 Mat. 26
26, 28 6* 6 Mar. 2 27 580 Mar. 4 11 769 Mar. 16, 17 474 Mar. 6 20 725 Mar. 7 11
188 Mar. 8 17 499 Luke. 1 6 668 Luke. 2 14 521, 597 Luke. 25 675 Luke. 34 745
Luke. 3 10, 14 158 Luke. 4 18 621 Luke. 6 35, 36 750 Luke. 7 29, 30 240 Luke.
38, 47 17, 104 Luke. 9 24 256 Luke. 11 52 479 Luke. 12 1 719 Luke. 33 272 Luke.
57 458 Luke. 13 24 450 Luke. 14 26 262 Luke. 15 21 667 Luke. 16 9 118 Luke. 12
126 Luke. 17 599 Luke. 17 3 112 Luke. 5 327, 734 Luke. 18 14 97 Luke. 21 19 255
Luke. 14 47 667 John. 2 22 3 John. 3 12 518 John. 21 196, 642 John. 7 18 110,
523 John. 9 2, 3 664 John. 40, 41 498 John. 11 25 535 John. 13 27 112 John. 14
15, 16 639 John. 21 Ibid John. 21 15 399 Acts. 8 30 584 Acts. 9 31 137, 571
Acts. 10 43 667 Acts. 14 22 254 Acts. 15 10 449 Acts. 17 2 242, 590 Acts. 11,
12 42 Acts. 19 18 158 Romans 1 17 658 Romans 2 4 131 Romans 3 5 248 Romans 19 Ibid Romans
20 670 Romans 22 657 Romans 25 597 Romans 28, 29 670 Romans 31 602 Romans 4 5 648, 669
Romans 15 221 Romans 5 3 266 Romans 5 268 Romans 6 492 Romans 18 324 Romans 19 673 Romans 20
681 Romans 6 14 326 Romans 19 536 Romans 7 7 196 Romans 17 421 Romans 24 313 Romans 25 207,
336 Romans 8 15 621 Romans 16 615 Romans 27 655 Romans 9 23 520 Romans 10 3 673 Romans 4
602 Romans 15 22, 26 Romans 11 6 522 Romans 11 356 Romans 22 351 Romans 12 1 583 Romans 2
605 Romans 6 789 Romans 12 454 Romans 17 694 Romans 13 12 683 Romans 14 Ibid Romans 13 693
Romans 14 1 -- 6 755 Romans 6 435, 729 Romans 8 630 Romans 15 14 51 Romans 18 509 1 Cor.
1 12 629 1 Cor. 30 673 1 Cor. 31 671 1 Cor. 2 2 607 1 Cor. 4 509 1 Cor. 12 651
1 Cor. 15 774 1 Cor. 3 18 498 1 Cor. 22, 23 597 1 Cor. 4 4 671 1 Cor. 5 727 1
Cor. 6 383 1 Cor. 20 586 1 Cor. 6 11 656 1 Cor. 8 2 488, 498 1 Cor. 3 388 1
Cor. 10 16 615 1 Cor. 11 4 292 1 Cor. 10 709 1 Cor. 29 112 1 Cor. 12 3 773 1
Cor. 7 501 1 Cor. 13 775 1 Cor. 14 3 459 1 Cor. 24, 25 508 1 Cor. 15 31 262 1
Cor. 16 9 47 1 Cor. ^2 389 2 Cor. 1 18, 19 427 2 Cor. 22 105 2 Cor. 2 14 488 2
Cor. 15 508 2 Cor. 3 6, 8 732 2 Cor. 11 582 2 Cor. 16 473 2 Cor. 5 9 729 2 Cor.
14, 15 628 2 Cor. 21 673 2 Cor. 7 5 622 2 Cor. 8 23 572, 631 2 Cor. 11 5, 6 607
2 Cor. 30 250 2 Cor. 12 7, 8 313 2 Cor. 9 353, 452, 469 Gal. 2 5 795, 796 Gal.
16 669 Gal. 20 737 Gal. 4 12 51 Gal. 5 6 742 Gal. 19 372 Gal. 6 1 13 Gal. 14
267 Ephesians. 1 3 668 Ephesians. 6 104 Ephesians. 7 597 Ephesians. 2 3 301 Ephesians. 5 226, 511 Ephesians. 8, 9
522 Ephesians. 9 691 Ephesians. 3 14 578 Ephesians. 18, 19 119, 328, 401 Ephesians. 19 732 Ephesians. 4 8, 11
478 Ephesians. 12-14 474 Ephesians. 20, 21 490, 329 Ephesians. 30 223 Ephesians. 5 18, 19 5, 6.728 Ephesians.
25-27 668 Ephesians. 6 9 729 Ephesians. 15 266 Ephesians. 18 274 Phil. 1 9 474 Phil. 22 591 Phil.
3 8, 9 607, 608.684 Phil. 4 7 85 Col. 1 9-11 474 Col. 27 271 Col. 2 4 496 Col.
3 12 116 Col. 17 147.3^9 Col. 16 485 Col. 8 48 1 Thessalonians. 4 13 668 1 Thessalonians. 3 3,
4 7 1 Thessalonians. 4 19, 20 ^1.432 1 Thessalonians. 5 21 790 1 Thessalonians. 23 415 2 Thessalonians. 1 10
520 2 Thessalonians. 2 10, 11 233 1 Timothy 1 5 397 1 Timothy 9 131 1 Timothy 2 1-3 751, 752 1 Timothy 4 3 448 1 Timothy 3-5 688 1 Timothy 5 4 284 1 Timothy 17 -- 811 1 Timothy 6 3 10 1 Timothy 19 638 2 Timothy 3 15 485 2 Timothy 4 2 45.70 2 Timothy 6, 7 770 Titus. 2 7 298
Titus. 15 49.291 Philom. 15 537 Heb. 2 210 254 Heb. 3 3.12 147 Heb. 6, 7, 8 27
Heb. 10 69 Heb. 11 410, 6^2 Heb. 17 104, 739 Heb. 9 10 578 Heb. 13, 14 626.731
Heb. 10 19 598 Heb. 22 409.619 Heb. 11 6 737 Heb. 13 240 Heb. 34 327 Heb. 33-37
735 Heb. 12 1 318 Heb. 9 ^93 Heb. 24 614 Heb. 28 592 Heb. 13 5, 6 733 James 1
21 20.321 James 27 109 James 2 10 419 James 11 Ib. and 420 James 19 616 James
21.25 668 James 3 13 487 James 4 1^ 231 James 5 16 ^59 1 Pet. 1 2 614 1 Pet. 6
257 1 Pet. 18 601 1 Pet. 2 2, 3 130.627 1 Pet. 1-3 ^28.232.593 1 Pet. 3 5, 6
237 1 P^t. 4 11 434 1 Pet. 5 8, 9 141 1 Pet. 12 110 2 Pet. 1 1 657 2 Pet. 2, 3
475 2 Pet. 4 7^1 2 Pet. 2 14 16 2 Pet. 20 699 2 Pet. 3 2 791 1 Ioh. 1 9 159 1
Ioh. 2 3, 4 3^9 1 Ioh. 27 776 1 Ioh. 3 4 2^1 1 Ioh. 7 656 1 Ioh. 9 355 1 Ioh.
17 116 400 1 Ioh. 18 400 1 Ioh. 19 641 1 Ioh. 4 12 395 1 Ioh. 18 Ibid. 1 Ioh. 5
2 697.748 1 Ioh. 3 400 1 Ioh. 12 738 1 Ioh. 14 81 2 Ioh. 6 748 Jude. 4 628, 629
Rev. 3 18 683 Rev. 4 9 -- 11 521 Rev. 5 6.9 603 Rev. 12 597 Rev. 6 2 178 Rev.
16 92 Rev. 9 5 -- 10 616 Rev. 12 11 255.267 Rev. 1^ 8 661.673

Errata.
PAge 22. line 16. for in, read an. p. 48. l. 4. leave out but. p. 50. l. 17.
only, r. always, p. 71. l. 39. therefore, r. there for. p. 93. leave out the
last line. p. 172. l. 30. every, r. a very. p. 193. l 24 r. we may have. p.
196. l. 30. our Savior, r. Solomon. p. 208. l. 27. testify, r. typifie. p.
279. l. 24. ye, r. yet. p 333. l. 32. evil, r. veil. p. 389. l. 50.
indifferent, r. different. p. 433. l. 27. leave out duties, p. 484. l. 33.
goodly, r. godly. p. 496. l. 8. cannot, r. can. l 39. r. they that are. p. 528.
l. 26. r. all that think they profit not. p. 534. l. 48. regenerate, r.
unregenerate. p. 550. l. 16. evil, r. veiled.; 6. above r. over. p. 591. l. 1.
in, ^. is. p. 599. l. 19. irrecoverable, r. irrevocable. p. 601. l. 27. many,
r. money. p 613. l. 21. whereof, r. where. p. 618. l. 8. r. though I be not.
p. 639. l. 50. hide, r. have. p. 646. l. 5. inforceth, r. infers. p. 745. l.
12. any, r. an. p. 755. l. 46. differency, r. indifferency, p. 813. l. 46.
more, r. most.

Places of Scripture misquoted are thus amended.
PAge. 9. line 47. read Cant. 5.3, 6. p. 37. l. 3. r. Isa. 55.2, 3. p. 38. l.
20. r. Job 12. p. 45 l. 33. r. 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. p. 62. l. 49. r. Cant. 1.8. p.
73. l. 1. r. Hag. 1.6. p. 87. l. 19. r. Romans 13. p. 99 l. 11. r. 2 Cor. p. 103.
l. 40. r. 1. Job. p. 105. l. 28. r. Heb. 11. p. 114 l 15. r. Romans 12.20. p.
122. l. 18. r. Esth. p. 131. l. 23. r 2 Chronicles. p. 149 l. 29. r. Ioh. 5.24. p.
150. l. 17. r. 1 Ioh 2.27. p. 154 l. 47. r. Matthew 6. 28. p. 191. l. 9. r. Psalm
3.3. p. 193. l. 5. r. Neh. 1.6. p. 196. l. 17. r. Ephesians. 5.13. p. 200. l. 27. r.
Ezra. p. 207. l. 32. r Mat. 7.1, 3. p. 212 l. 31 Zeph. p. 213. l. 20. r. Psalm.
75.8 p. 216. l. 33. r. Josh. p. 219. l. 52 r. Psalm. 119. p. 229. l. 27. r. Romans
5. l. 45. 1 Ioh. 1.7. p. 234. l. 44. r. Pro. 4. p. 236. l. 5. r. Mar. p. 248.
l. 11. r. Mat 20.15. p. 249. l. 26 r. Rom 9. p. 265. l. 19. r. Ezra 9. p. 270
l. 21. r. Romans 5.2, 3. p. 290. l. 18. r. Josh. 22. p. 296. l. 34. r. Eccl.
11.6. p. 310. l. 29 r. Am. 8.5. p. 314. l. 36. r. Romans 8.1, 8. p. 360. l. 27.
r. 2 Chronicles. 30. p. 362. l. 1. r. Mal p. 394. l. 45. r. Cant. 3. p 410. l. 30. r
Mal. p. 424. l. 45. r. Mal. p. 431. l. 28. r. Pro, 15. p. 453. l. 10. r. Psalm.
84. p. 455. l. 44. r. Mat. 23. p. 456. l. 20. r. Job 21.14. p. 479. l. 3. r.
Luk 11.52. p. 480. l. 24. r. 1 King. 18.3, 4 p. 484 l. 11. r. Isa. 47. p. 494.
l. 2 r. Col. 3.16 p. 504. l. ult. r. Romans 1.19. p. 517. l. 25. r. Mar p. 522.
l. 13. r. Phil. 3.4. p. 529 l. 10. r. 2 Chronicles. 25. 16. p. 536. l. 46 r. Isa.
57. p. 541. l. 17. r. Psalm. 106 p. 559. l. 43. r. 2 Timothy p. 568. l. 47. r. 1
Cor. 4. p. 616. l. 20 r. Heb. 3. p. 641. l. 30. r. 1 Pet. 5.8. p. 657. l. 1. r.
Rev. 1.5. p. 658. l. 52. r. 1 Ioh. 1. p. 677. l. 29. r. 1 Cor. 15.56 p. 700. l.
39. r. Psalm. 14.1, 4. p. 709 l. 25. r. Psalm. 1.4. p. 806. l. 11. r. Mat. 10.6.
p. 812. l. 7. r. Luk 23.20. p. 813. l. ult. r. 1 Ioh. 2.11.

LECTVRES ON PSALM. LI.
Lecture I. on the Title of Psalm Ll. September. XXVIII. MDCXXV.
To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David, when Nathan the Prophet came unto
him, after he had gone in to Bathsheba.
THIS Psalm is commonly called (and so it is indeed) a Psalm of repentance;
Expressing the repentance of David, who (of all other men we read of in holy
Scripture) is propounded to us for the most lively pattern, and example of a
truly repentant sinner. And I have therefore made choice to entreat of it in
these times wherein the Lord does so many ways, call us unto repentance.

The whole Psalm divides it self into two parts. 1. The Title, and
inscription of it. 2. The Treatise it self, and matter of the Psalm.

In the Title or inscription we must observe. 1. The person to whom it was
dedicated, and directed; that is to say, the chief Musician, or Master of the
Music in the temple. 2. The person by whom it was penned, that is, David. 3.
The time when, and occasion whereupon it was penned. When Nathan the Prophet
came unto him, after he had gone in to Bathsheba.

The first thing then that we are to observe, Doct. 1.
here is this. That there is a Title and inscription prefixed here before this
Psalm that gives great light to the understanding of the Psalm. From whence
we may learn, this as following upon it by evident necessity of consequence.

That in the expounding of the Psalms, the titles ought not to be omitted as
superfluous and impertinent. No more then those inscriptions that the Apostles,
and our blessed Savior himself have prefixed before their Epistles, which
they di^ected unto the Churches of God. Romans 1, 1 -- 7. Iam. 1.1. 1 Pet. 1.1. 2
Ioh. 1 -- 3. Jude 1.2. Rev. 2.1.

First, Reason 1
because they give light (many of them) to the understanding of the Psalm by
showing the occasions whereupon they were penned, as Psalm. 3.7. 18.^0.14.52.54.
and this, and many more.

Secondly, 2.
because they are part of the holy Scripture given by divine inspiration. From
whence these two things will necessarily follow. 1. That they are profitable,
and instruction may be had from them if the fault be not in our selves. For so
says the Holy Ghost of all Scripture. 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable. And Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were
written aforetime were written for our learning. 2. That it is a sin, and
matter of great danger to neglect, and slight them, and so (as it were) to cut
them of from the rest of the holy Scripture. For so says the Holy Ghost also,
Revel. 22.19. If any man shall take away from the words of the bo^ke of thi^
prophecy (and the words of any other of Gods books are of equal authority, and
dignity to the words of the book of that prophecy) God shall take his part
away out of the book of life.

Use 1.
This Doctrine serves first to improve, and convince the error of the Papists;
who though they glory so much in the title of the true Catholic Church, and
hold the Church cannot err, and boast of Gods Word as if it came out from them
and came unto them only, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 14.36. Yet do take
liberty both in the public reading of the Psalms, and in their latin
translation also (which they are commanded by the C^unc^ll of Trent (the rule
of their faith) to hold for authentical in all their public readings,
disputations, preachings, and expositions, and charged that no man may dare or
presume to reject it, upon any pretense whatsoever (and consequently) no not
then when it does most evidently, and palpably swor^e from, and pervert the
meaning of the original copies) both to leave out sondr^ of the Holy Ghosts
words as Selah always in their (...), (as they do also the conclusion of the
Lords prayer) as also to add unto the ^oly (...) many words, yea and sometimes
whole verses.

2.
Secondly, to teach, and exhort us to neglect no part of the Word, no not the
least word nor syllable, nor title of the canonical Scripture, (of which our
Savior speaks so honorably, Matthew. 5.18. Verily (...) unto you, till
heaven, and earth pass, one jot or one title shall in no wise pass from the
law, till all be fulfilled) but to esteem reverently of it, though we cannot
at the (...) reading or hearing of it profit by it, or discern what use it may
serve us unto. True it is, that as the Ministers in reaching may, and ought to
make choice of, and most insist upon those portions of Gods truth above others,
which are most profitable and useful for their hearers (for this rule the
Apostle himself followed in his preaching as appears by his speech, Acts
20.20. and this rule he prescribes to all other teachers, Tit. 3.8.) so may
Gods people likewise in the reading of the Word exercise themselves most in
those parts of it, that they can best profit by. The respect we owe even to
those parts of the Word which we understa^d not.
But seeing it is certain that whatsoever is written, is written for our
learning, Romans 15.4. we must learn to blame our selves, and not the Word if we
can receive no profit by every part of it. We must lay the fault upon our own
dullness as the Apostle teaches the Hebrews to do, Heb. 5.11. The duty, and
respect we owe even to those parts of the Word which we cannot understand nor
profit by; and the use we should make thereof stands in these six points
principally.

Hos. 8.12. that they accounted the great things of his law which he had
written unto them, as a strange thing that nothing belonged unto them.

Search the Scriptures, says our Savior, Ioh. 5.39. Herein we should imitate
the holy Prophets themselves, of whom the Apostle Peter says, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11.
that they enquired, and searched diligently what the meaning of those things
might be which God had reveiled, and caused them to write concerning Christ,
and our salvation by him.

Thirdly, learn thereby to acknowledge the necessity of a learned ministry,
God would have thee to say of sundry parts of his Word (which yet are necessary
for thee to understand) as the noble Eunuch did, Act. 8.31. How can I
understand them except some man should guide me?

Fourthly, learn thereby to see the necessity of joining with thy reading
David himself did, who was both a King, and a Prophet also Psalm 119.1^. Open
thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law.

Fifthly, come to the reading and hearing of the Word with an heart that is the
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him (says David, Psalm. 25.14.) and
he will show them his covenant.

Sixthly, mark, and lay up in thine heart even those things which thou
understandest Luke 2.50, 51. So we find the Disciples of our Savior did, and
had use of that part of Gods Word afterward, which when they first heard it,
they did not understand what it meant. When he was risen from the dead (says
the Evangelist Ioh. 2.22.) his Disciples remembered that he had said this unto
them; and they believed the Scripture, and the word that Jesus had said.

Now in the Title of this Psalm, the first thing that offers it self to our
consideration is the person to whom it was dedicated or directed to the chi^fe
musician, where we are to observe. That they had in Gods public worship in
David's time musicians, and diverse orders, and degr^^es of them.

Three things are to be observed concerning the worship under the law even in
this respect.

First, they had then music in the public worship of God, not singing of
Psalms only, but playing upon instruments, 1 Chronicles. 25.6. Nehem. 12.2^. some
stringed instruments called Neginoth, Psalm. 4.1. some windy called Nehiloth,
Psalm. 5.1.

Secondly, these musicians were all Levites; and had a special function, and
calling in that Church (by Gods appointment) whereupon they were wholly to
attend and whereunto they were enabled by special gifts received from God, 1 Chronicles. 9.33. And these are the singers chief of the fathers of the Levites,
who remaining in the chambers, were free: for they were employed in that work
day and night. And 2 Chronicles. 29.25. He set the Levites in the house of the Lord
with Cymballs, with Psalteries, and with Harpes according to the commandment
of David, and of God the Kings Seer, and of Nathan the Prophet; for so was the
commandment of the Lord by his Prophets. Therefore also they are called the
Lords instruments of music, 1 Chronicles. 16.42. 2 Chronicles. 7.6. And the Priests
waited on their office, the Levites also with instruments of music of the
Lord. And unto this function also God did enable them with such skill, as
whereby they did excel all other musicians in the world. Of the Caldea^s we do
read, that they had great variety of excellent musicians of their own, Dan.
^.5. yet did they greatly desire to hear these musicians of the Temple, Psalm.
137.3. And this may also seem to be the cause of that special favor, and
bounty that Artaxerx^s the King of Persia showed to them, more then to any
other of the Priests and Levits that belonged to the Temple, N^h. 1^.23.

Thirdly, of these musicians there were sundry orders, and degrees; some were
masters, and chief musicians, some were scholars, and inferior unto them; as
we shall find them set down, 1. Chron. 25.1, 6. Neh. 12.46.

It follows now that we consider why this Psalm was committed to the chief
musician. And three reasons there were of that. First, that by that means it
might be kept, and preserved as a part of Gods holy Writ in the Sanctuary, for
the use of the Church. For so we find that all the parts of the holy Scripture
were wont so to be preserved, and kept by the Levites in the Santuary, Deuteronomy.
17.18. The King is commanded to write him a copy of the law in a book out of
that book which is before the Priests the Levites. And 31.9. Moses is said
when he had written the law to have delivered unto the Priests the sons of
Levi. And verse 26. of that Chapter, he commanded the Levites to take the book
of the law, and put it in the side of the arc of the covenant of the Lord
their God, that it might be there for a witness against them. And there by the
special providence of God it was preserved, and kept safe, even to the days
of Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.14, 15. though there had been most wicked Kings, such
as Ahaz, Manasses, Amon, and many others that were great enemies unto it.

Secondly, this Psalm was committed to the chief musician, that by his means
it might be published, and sung in the temple. For this was the office of the
Levites (and all the musicians of the temple were Levites) to sing David's
Psalms in the temple as we shall see, 2 Chr. 29.^0 and Am. 8.3. we read of the
songs of the temple.

Thirdly, this Psalm was committed to the chief musician that it might be
sung in the Temple, in the best manner, with that music as might best affect
the people of God, with the matter of this Psalm, and so serve best to their
edification. For though there were none of the musicians in the Temple but they
were well instructed in the songs of the Lord, and were cunning therein, 1 Chronicles. 25.7. yet among them some were more skillful then other some, 1 Chronicles.
15.22. Chenaniah chief of the Levites was for song; he instructed about the
song, because he was skillful.

Now this being premised for the opening of the words; we are to observe here
that David commits this Psalm to a musician to be sung in the Temple; yea
to the chief musician that might sing it in the best manner. From whence we
are to learn,

Doct. 2.
That it is an ancient, and excellent ordinance of God that in his worship, and
service we should sing Psalms, even David's Psalms, and that we should sing
them in that manner as may be most unto edification.

Observe the proof of this Doctrine as I shall propound it unto you distinctly
in three points.

First, it has ever been esteemed a chief part of the worship, and service
of God wherewith he has been highly pleased. It was used in Moses time, Exodus
15.1. and in the time of the Judges, ^udg. 5.1. and in the days of Samuel, 1 Samuel 18.6, 7. in David, and Solomon's time, 1 Chronicles. 6.32. in the days of
Iehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.21.22. and of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 29.28.30. and after
the captivity in Nehemiahs time, Neh. 12.42. yea in the New Testament, our
Savior himself, and his Apostles used it, Matthew 26 30. and prescribed it to
Gods people, Col. 3.16. yea it was the exercise of the holy Angels themselves,
Luke 2.13, 14.

Secondly, this exercise was wont to be used by Gods people (and that by Gods
ordinance) at all times when they met to perform public worship to God, 1 Chronicles. 23.30. It is said the office of the Levites, that were musicians for the
Temple, was to stand every morning and thank, and praise the Lord, and
likewise at even; that is at the time of the morning, and evening sacrifice;
yea they were wont at their private prayers also to sing Psalms; for so did
Paul, and Silas, Act. 16.25.

Thirdly, The Psalms that GODS people did use to sing in the worship of GOD
were most usually David's Psalms, and those that are accounted among his: and
that even at such times when there were Prophets in the Church that had
extraordinary gifts, and were inspired by the Holy Ghost, yet the Church did
not usually sing any other then David's Psalms: This we shall see in the days
of Hez^kiah, 2 Chronicles. 29.30. Hezekiah the King, and the Princes commanded the
Levites to sing praise to the Lord, with the words of David, and of Asaph the
Seer. The like we may see in Ezraes time, Ezra 3.10. They set the Priests in
their apparel with trumpets; and the Levites the sons of Asaph with Cymballs
to praise the Lord with those songs (as Tremelius renders it) that David the
King of Israel did deliver; and the Psalm they sung was, Psalm. 136. as
appears by the 11. verse. And this may also further appear by that which we
read, Neh. 12.46. To which purpose it is worthy the observing that though
there were many of Gods holy servants that made songs, and Psalms beside David
as Deborah, Judge. 5.1. and Anna the mother of Samuel, 1 Samuel 2.1. and Solomon,
Cant. 1.1. and Mary the blessed Virgin, Luke 1.46. such as might be used, yet
were none of them committed to the musicians, to be publicly song in the
temple, but these of David only. In which respect he (by an excellency) is
called the sweet Psalmist of Israel, 2 Samuel ^3.1.

The reasons, and grounds of this Doctrine are these. Reason


First, God has often showed himself to take great delight in this part of his
Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 5.13. Just at that instant when they lifted up their voice in
singing (the 136. Psalm) the glory of the Lord filled the house. The other in
that miraculous deliverance God gave to his people against the Ammonites, in
the days of Iehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20 22. When they began to sing and to praise
God, the Lord set an ambushment against the children of Ammon, and Moab, and
mount Seir.

Secondly, it is a singular help, and means to stir up in us holy
affections in Ephesians. 5.18, 19. Be not drunk with wine wherein is excess, but be
ye filled with the spirit; speaking to your selv^s in Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual songs As if he should have said; whereas the chief pretense men have
for their excessive love of wine, is that it reviveth, and cheereth their
spirits, Ps. 104.15. I will prescribe a better thing for that purpose to revive
your heart, and make you cheerful, even to stir up spiritual affections, and
that is this, use to sing Psalms.

The use of this Doctrine is, Use.
first to reprove the general neglect, and falling of from this exercise of
singing of Psalms.

First, it was wont to be the custom, as well to end our Church meetings, as to
Psalm. 147.1. Praise yet the Lord for it is good, to sing praises unto our God;
for it is pleasant, and praise is comely; This is now a days much left in many
Congregations.

Secondly, it was wont to be the custom not only to sing David's Psalms in the
Congregation much, but to sing them in order, that the people of God might be
acquainted with them all; and so the best reformed Congregations use still to
do. And indeed (though upon extraordinary, and special occasions special
choice may be made; as we shall find that the 136. Psalm was often made choice
of in such cases, 2 Chronicles. 5.13. and 20.^1. Ezra 3.11. yet in the ordinary
occasions of the Church it is most fit they should be song in order, because
the sweet Psalmist of Israel 2 Samuel 2^.1. did pen them all, for the public
general use of the Church. This also now a days is much left in most
Congregations.

Thirdly, it was wont to be the ordinary custom of the professors of the
Gospel, to sing Psalms much in their families; according to that, Psalm.
118.15 The voice of rejoicing, and salvation is in the tabernacles of the
righteous. This is also much laid down, and (which is worse) it is laid down
upon this ground, because if men should use it, they should be noted to be
religious, and so be subject to the scorns of men. I would have such men
seriously to consider, and meditate on these two places of Scripture, Romans
10.10. With the heart a man believes unto righteousness, but with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation; and Mar. 8.38. Whosoever shall be ashamed of
me, and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him shall
the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the
holy Angels.

Behold (says Samuel, 1 Samuel 15 22) to obey is better then sacrifice.
Secondly, to endeavor to perform this duty in the right manner; that is, 1.
With understanding: Sing ye praises with understanding, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 47.7. 2. With feeling, Col. 3.16. With grace in your hearts. 3. Singing
to the Lord, and lifting up your hearts to him in this service. Unto thee o
Lord will I sing, says David, Psalm. 101.1. And the Apostle, Col. 3.16. Singing
with grace in your hearts, unto the Lord* 4. Speaking to our selves in this
duty, and laboring to find our selves edified by it, as the Apostle directs
us, Ephesians. 5.19. 5. In a decent manner observing the tune, that the whole
Congregation may be as one man in this service, as it is said, 2 Chronicles. ^.1^.
The singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard in pra^sing and thanking
the Lord: And Esa. 52.8. With the voice together they shall sing.

Follows the second thing I told you was to be observed in the Title of the
Psalm; that is, the person by whom it was penned; to which we will add the
third, and last; that is the time when, and occasion whereupon this Psalm was
penned; When Nathan the Prophet came unto him, after he had gone in unto
Bathsheba.

In all which we are to observe. 1. The sin committed by David, He had gone in
unto Bathsheba. 2. His continuance in this sin, which was till Nathan came to
him. 3. The means of his repentance Nathan the Prophet came unto him.

And as touching his sin we must observe 1. In what terms it is here
expressed. 2. How heinous it was.

And for the first. It is worth the observing that repentant David (or rather
Gods spirit by his pen) calls his foul adultery, only a going in to
Bathsheba, a going into her chamber, or into the room where she was. Does he
intend by these terms to extenuate his sin? No certainly, he was far from
that at this time; he does in this Psalm disgrace, and lay out the foulness
of his sin to the full; yet does he express that filthy act of his in a
modest, and seemly phrase, and thereby casts as it were a veil upon it; Which
teaches us

Doct. 4.
That they that are endued with the spirit of God, and have truly repented of
sin, cannot think, or speak of their sin without shame, dare not speak
broadly or immodestly of filthy actions Ephesians. 4.29* Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth, and 5.12. It is a shame even to speak
of those things which are done of them in secret.

Observe this holy modesty, and shamefastness in the Scripture Phrase, or
manner of speaking. 1. Of the foul, and filthy acts of lewd men, Amos 2.7. A
man, and his father will go in unto the same maid. Genesis 19.5. Bring them out
unto us that we may know them. 2. Of such things as were lawful, and
necessary, and yet had some filthiness in them. As in speaking of the lawful
use of marriage, Genesis 4.1. Adam knew Eve. Judge. 15.1. I will go^ in to my wife
into the chamber Esa. 8.3. He went unto the Prophetess, and she conceived.
Gen* ^0.4. Ab^mel^ch had not come near her. So speaking of the privy and
unseemely part, he calls it, our nakedness, Genesis 9.22. and our flesh, Genesis
17.13. and our shame, Esa. 47.3. Ier. 1^.26. And speaking of the necessary
evacuation of the body, he calls it a sitting down, Deuteronomy. 23.13. And
covering of the feet, Judge. 3.24. 1 Samuel 24.3.

The reason of this is. Reason 1
First, the detestation that the Lord bears to all filthiness, Hab. 1.13.
Thou art of purer eye then to behold evil. Deuteronomy. 23.14. That he see no
unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee. On the other side Satan is
called Mat. 12.43. the unclean spirit that delights in filthiness.

Secondly, 2.
our tongue is our glory, and that member, which (above all others) is given us
to glorify God with, So it is called Psalm. 16.9. for by his glory there he
means his tongue; as will appear if that place be compared with, Act. 2.26.

Thirdly, 3.
there is great force in broad, and unclean speech to corrupt the heart, and
set it on fire with filthy lust, 1 Cor. 15.33. Be not deceived; evil
communications corrupt good manners. Therefore it is called corrupt or rotten
communication, Ephesians. 4.29. such as is apt to corrupt them that hear it.

The use of this Doctrine is, Use 1.
First, to exhort us to a hatred, and fear of all uncleanness; and a care of,
and delight in holiness in our whole conversation. As he which has called you
is holy (says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.15*) so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation. Remember that speech of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3, 4. This is the
will of God even your sanctification that ye should abstain from fornication.
1. God would have us holy, that is the chief thing that he desires. 2.
Holiness consists chiefly in a care to abstain from fornication; nothing is
more opposite to holiness then that.

This modesty, and care to keep our selves from all show of uncleanness, and
filthiness we must declare. 1. In our speech, Col. 4.6. Let your speech be
always with grace, seasoned with ^^lt. Even Ministers tho they may lawfully
speak of women's matters, and even of those marriage duties that are most
secret, Levit. 12. 1 Cor 7.^, 4 yet may they not speak of these things broadly
nor rudely, but with great gravity, and purity, 1 Timothy 5.2. 2. In looks, and
countenance; for even therein a filthy and immodest heart is often discovered, 2
Pet. 2.14. Having eyes full of adultery. 3. In our apparel, and attire, 1 Timothy
2.9. Let wom^n adorn themselves in modest apparel with shamefastness, and
sobriety. 4. In the conscience we make even of our very thoughts, Job 31.1. I
made a covenant with mine eyes why then should I think of a maid?

Secondly, 2.
this Doctrine serves to reprove the extreme immodesty of these times, and
that liberty men take to speak filthily. And surely, in respect of this, all
that fear God have cause to bewail, and complain with the Prophet, Esa. 6.5.
I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips. I know the excuses men make
for this sin.

First, that though they speak so, they mean no hurt, but their hearts are as
good as theirs that are most precise; but for this I say, that it is not
possible the heart should be clean when the mouth is so filthy, Matthew. 15.18.
Those things which proceed out of the mouth, come from the heart, and they
defile the man. And 12.34. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.

Secondly, that they do it but in mirth, and will you not (say they) allow men
to be merry? To whom I answer that this will be found a poor excuse one day.
For 1. Such mirth is expressly forbidden. The Apostle having condemned (among
other sins) foolish talking, and jesting which are not convenient, Ephesians. 5.4.
concludes his speech thus in the 6. verse, Let no man deceive you with vain
words; for because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the children
of disobedience. 2. Our mirth extenuateth not our sins, but aggravateth them
rather; and those sins are usually most outrageous that we commit in our
merriment, Eccle. 2.2. I^^ia of laughter it is mad. 3. If thou had grace in
thee thou would find that such mirth would end in heaviness, as Solomon
speaks, Pro. 14.13 and grieve Gods spirit in thee, Ephesians. 4.30.

Thirdly, that if they do no worse but speak a little idly, and vainly in
their mirth they doubt not, but they shall do well enough. But to these I say
that they are foully deceived, in thinking it so small a matter to offend in
their speech; as they shall perceive, if they would consider well what our
blessed Savior says, Matthew. 12.37. By thy words thou shall be justified, and
by thy words thou shall be condemned.

Hitherto we have heard in what terms this sin of David is expressed:
Follows now that we consider the sin it self that was committed, and the
heinousness of it.

First, in respect of the kind, and nature of his sins; they were. 1.
Adultery, of which Job faith, 31.11, 12. This is an heinous crime, yea it is an
iniquity to be punished by the judges, for it is a fire that consumes to
destruction, and would root out all mine increase. 2. He (to cloak his filthy
whordome) committed murder also. A sin that defiles the land where it is
committed, and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein
but by the blood of him that shed it, Number. 35.33. Yea what manner of person
murdered he? Not an innocent only, but him that was one of his worthies as
appears, 2 Samuel 23.39. yea he murdered with him sundry others of Gods people,
2 Samuel 11.17. and that by the sword of Gods enemies, giving occasion of
insultation thereby, 2 Samuel 12.9.

Secondly, in respect of the circumstances whereby it was aggravated greatly;
that is: First, in respect of the person that committed these sins. 1. He was a
man that had the remedy that God has sanctified to keep men from
uncleanness, as Nathan tells him, 2 Samuel 12.2.11. 2. These sins were not
committed by him in the heat of his youth, but when he was now ancient, and
had many children; as appears by 2 Samuel 3.2 -- 5. compared with 2 Samuel 5.13,
14. 3. These sins were not committed by one before his conversion, or that was
a novice in religion, but by a man that had attained to a rare degree of
knowledge, as himself professes, Psalm. 119.99.100. and one that was of great
note for the profession of the truth, and had most solemnly bound; and devoted
himself to God, Psalm. 119.106. by one that had attained to a great sense of
Gods favor, as appears by that prayer of his, Psalm. 51 12. by one that had
been exercised with manifold tentations, and so had had great experience in
cases of conscience, as appears by that he says, Psalm. 40.12.

The second circumstance that aggravateth his sin was the time when this
whoredom was committed; even when Gods host was gone out against his enemies,
2 Samuel 11.1. that greatly increased his sin, Deuteronomy. 23.9. When the host goes
forth against thine enemies, then keep thee from every wicked thing. This may
appear also by Vriahs example, 2 Samuel 11.11. Tho he was not with the host in
person now, yet should he have been so much the more earnest with God in
prayer for them as Moses was, Exodus 17.9.11. This sin is therefore counted his
chief sin, and such wherein he sinned in a more presumptuous manner, then in
any other, 1 King. 15.5. And yet the man that did thus heinously sin, was
certainly a regenerate man, and upright in heart; a man of whom the Lord gives
testimony, 1 Samuel 13.14. that he was a man according to his own heart. From
all which laid together this Doctrine will arise,

Doct. 5.
That the man that is truly regenerate, and has attained to a great measure of
saving grace, may fall fearfully into most odious sins.

For first, admit the regenerate use not to fall into the same gross sins
again, that they have formerly repented of. As it is said of Judah, that after
he saw his sin that he had committed with Tamar, Genesis 38.26. He knew her again
no more. I do not deny but the regenerate may, and do fall often into the same
smaller sins and infirmities that they have often been humbled for, and repented
of. Yea it is also possible that they may fall into the same gross, and
scandalous sins again that they have formerly repented of. But this I can say,
that they use not so to do; and that we cannot in all the Scripture find an
example of any regenerate person, that has done so. Iehosaphat sinned greatly
in joining in league with Ahaziah an enemy of God, but after his sin was
effectually discovered unto him, 2 Chronicles. ^0.37. he could not be drawn to do
so again, 1 King. 22.4^. The like we see in ^oah that fell not again to
drunkenness; in David that sinned never after in adultery; in Peter, who after
he had repented of his Apostasy, was the furthest of from falling into that sin
again of any of the Apostles; none was more forward, resolute, and constant
ever after then he, in professing his love to Christ, Acts 1.15. and 2.14. and
3.12. and 4.8.19. tho he had afterward far stronger tentations to deny Christ
then he had at that time when he did it, Acts 5.18 40.12.4.6. and now grant
this.

Secondly, admit the regenerate cannot fall totally, so as he should loose all
saving grace, to which end are brought usually those places of Scripture as 1
Ioh. 3.9. Whosoever is borne of God does not commit sin (that is, with the full
sway of his soul) for his seed remains in him. Which seed of God, and
regenerating grace is therefore called immortal, 1 Pet. 1.23. and that David
when he fell thus fearfully had not lost all grace may seem to appear by his
prayer, Psalm. 51.11. Take not thy holy spirit from me.

Thirdly, grant the regenerate cannot fall finally, but he shall be restored,
and renewed again by repentance: so that in this case it might be said of him,
as David speaks in another sense, Psalm. 37.24. Though he fall he shall not be
utterly cast down: for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand. Let all this be
granted, yet it is possible for the regenerate man, for one that unfainedly
fears God, to fall fearfully, into most gross sins; yea even into the
grossest sins that can be committed by any man, excepting only the sin
against the Holy Ghost. See three notable examples, and instances of this, in
three of the most foul sins that lightly can be committed. 1. Idolatry; more
gross idolatry you shall hardly read that ever man was guilty of, then that
which Solomon fell into, 1 King. 11.4-8. 2. Apostasy. Observe all the
circumstances of Peter's fall into this sin, and you shall find it was as
shameful as could be, Mar. 14.71. 3. Persecution. And into this Asa fell, 2 Chronicles. 16.10. He was wrath with the Seer, and put him in prison for he was in a
rage with him because of this thing.

The reason, Reason 1
and ground of this is. First in themselves, for they have in them the seeds of
all sins, even of the foulest that can be named. They have in them that deadly
body, (the whole body of original corruption) which the Apostle Romans 7.24
calls the body of this death. And that any of us are kept from any the
foulest sin, comes wholly from the free grace of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. All our
sufficiency is of God.

Secondly, 2.
in Satan; Who as he hates the best men most, so will he endeavor more to
make them fall into gross sins then any other. Satan has desired to have you,
that he might sift you as wheat, says our Savior of all the Apostles, Luke
22.31. Because he knows God shall receive more dishonor by the sins of one of
them, then of many others. The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles
through you, says the Apostle, Romans 2.24.

Thirdly, 3.
in the Lord himself. Who withdraws his grace from his best children
sometimes, and leaves them to themselves, as he did Hezekiah, 2 Chro. 32.31. 1.
To correct their carelessness, and carnal security; so dealt he with his
Church, Cant. 5.36. 2. To make it evident to themselves, and others, that the
best man's standing in the state of grace, is to be ascribed to the mercy, and
favor of God alone, not to any goodness that is in themselves. It is not of
him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy, says
the Apostle, Romans 9.16. 3. To make them examples, and grounds of hope to other
poor sinners. For this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ
might show forth all long suffering, for a pattern to them that should
hereafter believe on him, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.16. 4. To keep them from
pride, and to work in them more sound humiliation, and so make them more
capable of grace and comfort from him. Lest I should be exalted above measure
through the abundance of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the
flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above
measure, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.7. Deuteronomy. 8.15, 16. Who led thee through
that great, and terrible wilderness, wherein were fiery serpents, and
scorpions, and drought (which were the occasions of their murmurings, and
rebellions) that he might humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee
good at thy latter end.

Use.
The use of this Doctrine is, not to give any man encouragement unto security in
any sin; or to cause men to think thus, is it such a matter for a man to slip
into sin now, and then, into adultery, or drunkenness, or oppression, or
revenge in many things we offend all, James 3.2. the best have had their
faults, I may be Gods child for all that. For this is to abuse that which the
holy Scripture has reveiled touching the falls of good men. All the words of
God are wholesome words; and the Scripture teaches no doctrine but that which
is according to godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3. There is nothing written in the Word,
that gives the least just occasion to encourage, or harden a man in sin. Nay it
is a fearful sign of reprobation for a man thus to stumble at the Word, and
to take occasion from thence to fall into any sin; as the Apostle teaches us,
1 Pet. 2.8. But the right use of this Doctrine is.

These things were our examples to the intent we should not lust after evil
things as they also lusted (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.6. and again verse
11.) all these things happened unto them for ensamples, and they were written
for our admonition; (which words, though they be principally meant of the
judgments that fell upon others for sin, yet may they also fitly be spoken of
the falls of others also that are recorded in the Word) that he that thinks
best of his own standing may take the more heed to himself lest he also fall,
1 Cor. 10.12. Thus Nehemiah labored with the Jews, to make them fear
themselves, Neh. 13.26. Did not Solomon King of Israel sin by these things? yet
among many nations was there no King like him, who was beloved of his God, and
God made him King over all Israel; nevertheless even him did outlandish women
cause to sin.

If I were a Prophet, and could say to any of you, thou will become a Papist
before thou die, and thou an Atheist, and thou a scorner, and persecutor of
all goodness; you would say to me as Hazael did to the Prophet, 2 King. 8.1^.
But what am I a dog, or am I a devil incarnate, that I should prove so vile a
wretch? But though I be no Prophet to say so, yet can I say with as great
authority, and warrant as though I were a Prophet, that there is never a one of
us here, but may prove such a one before we die. And therefore we have need to
fear, and suspect our selves.

Object.
If any man shall object, this is the manner of all your preaching, to disquiet
men's minds with fears, and doubts. What cause have we thus to fear, as long
as we are sure we can never fall totally, we cannot fall finally? Job. 5.24. He
that believes in Christ has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation but has passed from death to life.

Answ.
I answer, Happy is that soul that upon good ground can say he is sure of this.
But admit thou were sure of that, is it no cause of fear, that thou moist for
all this fall into so foul sins as thou have heard of? I tell thee that by
falling into such sins. First, thou shall greatly dishonor that God whose
servant thou professest thy self to be, and open the mouths of his enemies to
blaspheme his name; as Nathan charge David to have done, 2 Samuel 12.14.
Secondly, thou shall greatly grieve thy heavenly father: Forty years long was
I grieved with this generation, says the Lord, Psalm. 95.10. Thirdly, thou
shall make him thine enemy, and provoke him to smite and plague thee thou
know not how deeply. They rebelled, and vexed his holy spirit, therefore
was he turned to be their enemy, and he sought against them, says the Prophet,
Esa 63.10. Take David for an instance, and example of this. The sword shall
never depart from thy house, because thou have despised me, says the Lord by
Nathan unto him, 2 Samuel 12.10. Though thou break not thy neck with these
falls, to the loss of thine everlasting life, thou may break an arm, or a
leg, to thy extreme anguish. Fourthly, though the seed of God will remain in
thee notwithstanding these sins, yet will thou loose all the use and comfort of
that grace that is in thee, Psalm. 51.12. Restore to me the joy of thy
salvation; that was gone, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. thus far forth the spirit may be
quenched. Fifthly, thou may bring on thyselfe, by such fails, the intolerable
torment of a wounded spirit and who can bear that, says Solomon, Pro. 18.14?
Sixthly, no man can tell thee how long thou may continue in this uncomfortable
and wretched estate: Which is a thing that greatly aggravateth thy misery that
thou may say in this case as Psalm. 74.9. There is not any that knows how
long. O then we have all great cause to fear these falls, and not to be
secure, but to use all means we can to prevent such falls. And the principal
means are these.

First, nourish in thy heart this fear of falling from God, fear of sinning
against him. See how this is often commended to us as a chief mean to keep us
from falling. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart
from me, says the Lord, Ier. 32 40. and Pro. 28.14. Blessed is the man that
fears always; and Phil. 2.12. Work out your salvation with fear, and
trembling. The want of this (even his presumptuous confidence) was a chief
cause of Peter's fall, Matthew. 26.33.35.58.

Secondly, learn to make conscience, even of the least sins, Psalm. 19.12, 13.
By the care he had to be cleansed of his secret sins, and from every
presumptuous sin, he was sure he should be free from the great transgression.

Thirdly, neglect no means of grace either public or private, but use them
conscionably, and daily. If vision fail (either through the Ministers fault,
or the peoples) the people will decay, Pro. 29.18. He that would not quench the
spirit, must not d^^ise prophecyings; that is the often hearing of the Word
preached, says the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19, 20. If we exhort not one another
(or our selves) daily we shall be in danger to be hardened with the
deceitfulness of sin, as he reaches (...), Heb. 3.13.

Fourthly, Pray daily to God that he would uphold thee. So our Savior teaches
us to pray daily, Mat. 6.13. Lead us not into temptation, but pull us by thy
mighty arms from the evil one. This was David's prayer, Ps. 119.116, 11^ ^phold
me, according to thy word, that I may live, hold thou me up, and I shall be
safe.

The second use is to exhort us to be willing to die, whenever God shall be
Cor. 5.6 While we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord; we
shall never enjoy Christ fully till then. Secondly, while we live here we shall
be subject to many sorrows, and vexations of spirit. Every day will bring upon
us one evil, and occasion of sorrow, or another, Mat. 6.34. All tears shall
never be wiped from our eyes while we live here, Rev. 21.4. But this third is a
principal, that while we live here we are in a continual possibility, and
danger of falling from God. Till we die we can never be perfectly freed from
our corruption, nor cease from our own works as the Apostle speaks, Heb.
4.10. As the earthen vessels that were legally polluted, could not be purged
but by breaking, Levit. 11.33. and 15.12. Till we die we can never be freed
from Satan's assaults, and tentations. The life to come, is the only time of
our full redemption, Luke 21.28. And consequently we know not how far we may
fall so long as we live. Death will free us perfectly from all our sins, and
corruptions, Romans 6.7. For he that is dead is freed from sin.

finish our course with joy, Act. 20.24. For 1 according to that we are at our
end, will God judge us. When the righteous turns away from his righteousness
(says the Lord, Ezekiel. 18.24.) and commits iniquity, and does according to
all the abominations that the wicked man does, shall he live? all his
righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned in his trespass that
he has trespassed, and in his sins that he has sinned, in them shall he die.
2. If we fall away we shall be in far worse case then if we had never begun
well, 2 Pet. 2 21. It had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment delivered unto them. And to that end let us strive to make sure to
our selves the truth of our regeneration; as the Apostle exhorts us, 2 Pet.
1.10. For they whose hearts are not upright may fall irrecoverably, how good
shows soever they make, as is evident in those that are compared to the stony
ground, Mar. 4.16, 17. and those of whom the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6.4 -- 6.
But if thy heart be sound be the measure of grace thou have received little or
much; 1 Thou may be of good comfort. For such shall be kept by the power of
God through faith unto salvation as the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 1.5. Though
God visit their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquities with stripes,
nevertheless his loving kindness he will not utterly take from the, nor suffer
his faithfulness to fail, his covenant he will not break, as he promises, Ps.
89.32 -- 34. 2. Thou have great cause to hope thou shall never fall into
scandalous, and foul crimes. For concerning such falls the faithful may
confidently expostulate with the Lord, as David does, Psalm. 56.13. Thou have
delivered my soul from death; wilt not thou deliver my feet from falling that
I may walk before God in the light of the living?

Quest.
Thou will say, But how may a man be sure of this considering that the heart of
man is so deceitful, that none can know it, as the Prophet speaks, Ier. 17.9.

Answ.
I answer, Thou may be assured of it, if the fault be not in thy self. A man
by proving, and examining himself may know, that Christ Jesus is in him except
he be one whom God rejects, and disalloweth as unsound, and false hearted; as
is plain by that which the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 13.5. And thou may know
this.

First, by making conscience to practice what thou hear, and learnest out of
Gods Word. He that hears the Word, and practices what he hears is like to
him that builds upon a rock, whom no rain, nor floods, nor winds can
overthrow, as our Savior teaches us, Matthew. 7.25, 26.

Secondly, If thou make conscience to do the will of God in one thing as well as
in another. If ye do these things (says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.10. that is
seek for one grace as well as another) ye shall never fall. Then shall I not
be ashamed (nor disappointed of my hope, says David, Psalm. 119.6.) when I have
respect to all thy commandments.

Mat. 15.26. Say not it is pity these examples were written for many have
stumbled at them. I answer that it is better reprobates should stumble at them,
and perish through presumption, then that one of the elect (that is dejected in
the sense of his sins) should have lost the comfort of them, and so have
perished in despair. When our Savior was told, Matthew. 15.12. that the
Pharisees were offended at his Doctrine he answers, verse 14. Let them alone;
as if he should say, It is no matter what offense such as they are do take; no
truth of God that tends to the edification of his children, must be concealed
for their sakes. For thy sake that art an humbled sinner were these things
written. And of these things we may say as the Apostle does, 1 Cor. 9.10. He
says it altogether for our sakes, for our sakes no doubt this is written. And
Romans 51.4. Whatsoever is written, is written for us, That in the ages to come
he might show the exceeding riches of his grace (says he, Ephesians. 2.7.) in his
kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. Thy sins cannot be greater then thou
have examples of in Gods elect that found mercy with him. Were they before thy
calling? then have thou Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33.9, 10. and Mary Magdalen, Mar.
16.9. Were they committed after thy calling? then have thou David, and Peter.
So that I may say to every humbled soul, as Eliphaz does unto Job 15.11. Are
the consolations of God small with thee? Is it not thy great sin that thou
stirrest not up thy heart to take comfort in these examples, and presidents of
Gods wonderful mercy, that are recorded in the Scripture for thy sake?

Lecture II. On the Title Psalm 51. October 5. 1625.
Follows now to be considered in the Title of this Psalm, that David made
not this Psalm, and repented not of his foul sins, but continued in them till
Nathan came unto him. And when came Nathan unto him? It was about a year or
more after the sin was committed; for he came not before David had a child by
Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 12.14. and how old the child then was is not expressed. So
long he lay (like a swine) sleeping, and snorting in that filthy puddle
whereinto he was fallen, and could not rise nor recover himself by repentance.
And the Doctrine that we have here to learn is this.

That no man (no not the child of God) when he has sinned is able of himself
to repent; Doct. 6.
when he is fallen he cannot rise up again. The proof, of this Doctrine you
shall see in four points, all to be observed in this example of David.

First, he continued a great while in his sin, and could not leave it; till
Nathan Vriah was dead, and his wife had mourned for him, did he give over his
sin? No, 2 Samuel 11.27. When a man is once fallen into sin he can no more rise
again then the least child that is, till some body come to help him up; but
is apt to lie still where he fell, to continue in his sin, he cannot leave it.
When he is once in, he is like the gamster or pot companion, he cannot give
over nor get out again. It is an easy matter to fall into any sin, but to
rise again by repentance, and to leave it, that is difficult, nay impossible
for any man by his own strength to do it, It is said of Iehu, 2 King. 10.29.
From the sins of Jeroboam that made Israel to sin, Iehu departed not. And of
Menahem another King of Israel, 2 King. 15.18. He departed not all his days
from the sins of Jeroboam. But these were hypocrites (you will say) and such as
never had any truth of grace in them. The case sure is not so hard with Gods
child, if he through infirmity fall into a sin, he will easily recover himself
again. No no, ye have here in David an example of the contrary. And so have ye
in Jacobs sons. When they had first conspired the death of their brother, and
then cast him into a pit, and then sold him for a slave to the Islamaelites,
they lay twenty years in that sin, before we can read any thing of their
repentance; when they were apprehended for spies in Egypt, then came their sin
effectually to their remembrance, Genesis 42.21. and not before. See also the
proof of this in that speech of the Apostle, Gal 6.1. Brethren, if any man be
overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such a one. As if he
should say; help him up again, he cannot recover himself.

Secondly, David after he had fallen into this foul sin, fell in love with
it, Vriah to be thought the father of his bastard, 2 Samuel 11.8. David said to
Vriah go down to thy house, and wash thy feet: and though no more be
expressed in that verse, yet by Vriahs answer, verse 11. it appears well be
said more to him, and what his drift was in persuading him to go home to his
house. When a man is fallen into any sin, he is so far from repenting of it,
that he is apt to fall in love with it, to nourish, and make much of it, to
hide, and cloak it. And whence comes that care men have to hide their sin (for
the most part) but from the love they bear to it, and unwillingnesse to part
with it? Job 20.12, 13. Wickedness is sweet in his mouth, he hides it under
his tongue, he spares it, and forsakes it not, but keeps it still in his
mouth. Thus did Adam, and Eve our first parents (from whom we have all taken
it) when they had eaten the forbidden fruit, o how careful they were to hide,
and cloak it, and maintain what they had done? Genesis 3.12. The man said, the
woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat:
and verse 13. And the woman said the serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.

David after he had fallen into this foul sin grew worse, and worse; added
more sins unto it. He that before made conscience of the least sin, not
only of presumptuous sins, but even of secret faults; as appears by his
prayer, Psalm. 19.12. now he had committed adultery, makes no bones of making
another man drunk, 2 Samuel 11.13. no nor of practicing the death of an innocent
man, and one of his Worthies, 2 Samuel 11.15. By sinning (especially against our
conscience) we make our selves apt to sin more, and more. One sin draws
on another. So we shall see, Ier. 41.5 -- 7. When Ishmael had slain Gedaliah,
and was flesht with his blood, he stayed not there, but murdered fourscore
innocent men that came with offerings, and incense to the house of the Lord.
Yea Peter, after he had once denied Christ, the first denial brought on a
second, and the second a third, one worse then the other. First, he barely
denied that he knew him. Matthew. 26.70 then he denied him with an oath. Matthew.
26.72. after that he denied him again both with an oath, and fearful
execrations, Matthew. 26.74.

David after he had once fallen into this foul sin, became senseless and
impudent in it. He that before was so tender hearted, that when he but cut of
the skirt of Saul's garment, his heart smote him for it, 1 Samuel 24.5. now his
adultery troubles him not at all, he had no remorse for it till Nathan came
unto him; nay his heart smote him not at all for murdering of Vriah. He was not
moved at all, neither with the gracious speech, nor with the example of Vriah,
2 Samuel 11.11. The arc (says he) and Israel, and Judah abide in tents, and my
lord Ioab, and the servants of my lord are encamped in the open fields, shall I
then go into my house, to eat, and to drink, and to lie with my wife? As
thou live and as thy soul lives I will not do this thing. When report was
brought him of Vriahs death his heart smote him not for it, he was not moved
with it at all, 2 Samuel 11.25. Thus shall thou say unto Ioab, let not this thing
displease thee for the sword devoureth one as well as another. Yea he grew
impudent in his sin, he durst make sundry of his servants privy to his
whoredom, 2 Samuel 1^.4. He sent messengers, and took her. He was not ashamed
to make Ioab a witness of his murder, 2 Samuel 11.14. He wrote a letter to Ioab
about it. When a man falls into any gross sin he (usually) grows senseless
in it, and void of shame, and remorse for it. Three notable examples we have
for this. The one in Joseph's brethren, of whom it is said that after they had
committed that heinous crime, in conspiring the death of their brother first,
and then in casting him into a pit, they sat down to eat, and drink, Genesis
37.25. The other of the Israelites, who when they had committed that gross
Idolatry with the golden calfe, they sat down to eat, and to drink, and
rose up to play, Exodus 32.6. The last is of Jonah, who when he had fled from the
presence of the Lord, and the Lord pursued him with a mighty tempest in the
sea, was altogether senseless, and void of remorse for his sin, Jonah 1.5. The
mariners were afraid and cried every man to his God-but Jonah was gone down to
the side of the ship, and he lay, and was fast a sleep. Yea the Prophet Jeremy
speaks of this as the disposition of all that fall into gross sins, Ier.
8.12. Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay they were not
at all ashamed, neither could they blush.

The reasons and grounds of this doctrine are principally four. Reason


First, because repentance is not in any man's power, but is a great gift of
God, Lam. 5.21. Turn thou us unto thee O Lord, and we shall be turned.

Secondly, it is a natural effect, and fruit of sin to harden the heart ( Heb.
3.13. Lest any of you (says he) be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin)
and to make men worse and worse, Romans 6.19. As ye have yielded your members
servants to uncleanesse, and of iniquity unto iniquity. As in any other thing,
when we are a while practiced in it, it grows easier unto us, and we increase
in ability to do, so is it in this case.

Thirdly, by committing of sin we give place to the divest, Ephesians. 4.26.27. and
Tim. 2.26. And so give him more power over us then he had before.

Fourthly, God (in his just judgment) uses to punish sin with hardness of
heart, Ioh. 12.40. He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart. Yea he
is wont to punish sin with sin; and that not only in the reprobate, Romans 1.24,
26, 28. but even in his own people, Ps. 81.11, 12. My people would not hearken
unto my voice; Israel would none of me, so I gave them up unto their own
hearts lusts.

The use of this Doctrine is first to terrify us, Use 1.
and make us afraid. Few are so lewd but they count it a miserable thing to die
in their sins. And so indeed it is spoken of Ioh. 8.24. I said therefore unto
you that ye shall di^ in your sins; if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall
die in your sins. The thing that most encourages men to sin, is this hope
that they will repent before they die. And indeed if men could be sure of this,
sin were nothing so much to be feared as it is. But this is the mischief of it
(as you have heard in the Doctrine) when men are fallen they have no power to
rise again; no more then thy staff that falls out of thy hand has.
Consider therefore for a remedy, and preservative against this presumption
(besides that which you have heard in the reasons of the Doctrine) of these
four things.

First, besides thine own daily experience, how few there be that rise again
David thou see here that was a far stronger man then thou, could not do it,
he that had mortified his corruption much more, and had more grace then thou,
could not repent after he had sinned; and will thou feed thy self with such
vain hopes? Thus Nehemiah presses the example of Solomon's weakness, Neh.
13.26. Did not Solomon King of Israel sin by these things,? yet among many
nations was there no king like him, who was beloved of his God, and God made
him king over all Israel, nevertheless even him did outlandish women cause to
sin.

Secondly, Repentance is the mighty work of God alone, whom thou by thy Phil.
2.12, 13. Work out your own salvation with fear, and trembling: for it is God
which works in you both to will, and to do of his good pleasure.

Thirdly, the longer thou continuest in any sin, the harder will thy heart be,
and the more unable will thou be to repent, Ier. 13.^3. They that are
accustomed to do evil can as hardly be changed as the skin of a blacke-more,
or of a Leopard. And the Apostle says of them that were exercised in covetous
practices, they could not cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2.14.

Fourthly, the fouler the sin is that thou committest, and the more against
the light of thy heart, the harder will it be for thee to repent of it. For
smaller sins David's heart was wont to smite him quickly, ^ Sam. 24.5. 2 Samuel
24.10. But now he had fallen into these foul sins we see how senseless, and
impenitent he grew. So speaks the Holy Ghost of whordome, Pro. 2.19. None
that go unto her return again, neither take they hold of the paths of life:
And of drunkenness, Pro. 23.35. They have beaten me, and I felt it not; when
shall I awake? I will seek it again.

Use 2.
The second use of the Doctrine is to teach us; that seeing hardness of heart,
and impenitency does usually follow the committing of sin, specially
presumptuous sins, sins against knowledge, even in Gods own children; to
esteem this a judgment of God greatly to be feared, and trembled at.

There be many men that have hearts like to Leviathan as the Lord speaks,
Job. 41.24. His heart is as firm as a stone, yea as hard as a piece of the
neither millstone. That can commit gross sins, and live daily in them, without
all trouble of conscience, feel no burden in them, but esteem them as light
as a feather, and can go away merrily with them. And this they count their
great happiness, that they are not like your professors, always troubled in
their minds, they thank God they have quiet consciences, Zach. 11.5. Their
possessours slay them, and hold themselves not guilty, and they that sell them,
say, Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich. O the state of these men is fearful;
I advise thee that fear God to take heed of this judgment, to tremble at
it, and strive against it. And to move thee unto it consider.

Pharaoh (of whom the Lord says. Exodus 9.16. For this cause I have raised thee
up to show on thee my power: As if he had said; what I can do against mine
enemy) was thus plagued, Exodus 9.12. Better it were a great deal to be
delivered up to Satan, then to a man's own lust. For of that judgment the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 5 5. It serves for the destruction of the flesh, that
the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord. But this judgment tends to the
destruction of the soul in the day of the Lord, Ioh. 12.40. He has blinded
their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they might not be converted, and he
should heal them.

treasureth up wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2.5. The foulest sin may be
pardoned to him that can repent, Matthew. 12.31. All manner of sin, and blasphemy
shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. And why
cannot that be pardoned? Because it cannot be repented of, Heb. 6.6. It is
impossible to renew them again unto repentance.

Pro. 1.27. When your fear comes as a desolation, and destruction as a
whirlewinde, when distress, and anguish comes upon you. And who are they
that are thus threatened? verse 22. Ye scorners that delight in scorning. Labor
therefore for a soft, and tender heart, that can easily feel, and be humbled
for sin as with a more in thine eye.

The means to attain to this, and to deliver, and preserve thy self from
hardness of heart, are these.

Heb. 3.7, 8. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Say
not, nor resolve with thy self as those wretched Jews did, Ier. 44.16, 17. As
for the word that thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not
hearken unto thee; but we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth out
of our own mouth. Say not in thine heart I can give them the hearing, but let
them say what they will, I will be as I have been. O take heed the Lord take
thee not at thy word, as he did the Jews, Matthew. 7.25. Why did God harden
Pharaoh? Exodus 9.12. Pharaoh had first hardened his own heart, Exodus 8.32.

Secondly, take heed of the least sins, of the beginnings, and occasions of
sin. Job was, who bound himself even from wanton looks, and thoughts, Job
31.1. And as David, who was afraid not only of every presumptuous sin, but
even of his most secret faults, Psalm. 19.12, 13. Remember what our Savior
says of him that gives liberty to himself in the least thing that he knows
to be evil, and holds it lawful to do so, Mat. 5.19. he shall be least in
the kingdom of heaven: And Luke 16 10. He that is unjust in the least is
unjust also in much. It is in this case as it is with a breach in the sea
bank. Neither David nor Peter fell to senslessenesse in sin, at the first, but
but by degrees.

Thirdly, let no sin lie long upon thy soul: That charge that the Lord
gives Levit. 19.1^. that thou shall not suffer sin to abide upon him,
concerns thee much more for thy self. If thou let the sun go ^^wne upon
thy wrath, thou give place to the devil, Ephesians. 4.26. and so do thou by
lying long in sin. Therefore speedily seek too make thy peace with God. They
that seek me early shall find me, says the Lord, Pro. 8.17.

Fourthly, lay thy sins, Gods threatenings, and promises upon thy heart by
Esa. 47.7. Thou did not lay these things to thy heart. And 57.11. Thou have
not remembered me, nor laid it to thy heart. And Mal. 2.2. I have cursed your
blessings, because ye do not lay it to heart.

Fifthly, use daily some means to soften thy heart, and stir up grace in thy
Exhort (or stir up) your selves daily, says the Apostle, Heb. 3.13. As the
wax when it has been but a little from the fire, will grow as hard again as
ever it was. So is it with man's heart in this case.

Sixthly, meditate often of the mercies of God, and of his exceeding love to
thee. Zach. 12.10. It was the love of Mary rising from the consideration of
Christ's love to her that made her weep so, Luke 7.38, 47.

Seventhly, complain often to God of the hardness of thy heart as the Church
Esa 63.17. and cry to him for a soft heart; and charge him with that promise of
his, Ezekiel. 11.19.

The third use of the Doctrine is for the comfort of Gods people.

First, it is a just cause of comfort to thee, and of thanksgiving unto God,
that thou have repented of, and forsaken such sins as thine own heart knows,
thou have in times past lived in, and loved dearly. Mark how the Apostle
praises God in the behalf of the Romans for this, Romans 6.17. God be thanked
that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart that form
of Doctrine that was delivered you. Yea see how the Angels rejoice in this,
Luke 15.7. I tell thee this is no common favor, look well about thee in the
town, and place wheresoever thou dwell and thou will find it so. Thou
shall find by sense, and experience how true that is which the Apostle writes,
1. Ioh 5.19. The whole world lies in wickedness. Seems it nothing that God
should do this for thee rather then for all thy neighbors? I tell thee none
of thy sins shall ever hurt thee; the sins that thou have repented of, are
all forgiven certainly. Where Christ has given repentance, he has certainly
given remission of sins, Acts 5.31. And thus he charged his Apostles to
preach, and proclaim unto the World, Luk 24 47.

Mat 5.3, 4.

with tears cried Mar. 9.24. Lord I believe, (...) mine unbeleife. So is the
sense, and sorrow for the hardness of the heart, a sign of a soft, and
fleshie heart. It was the true Church that complained so, Esaias 63.17. O Lord
why have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear?

Lecture III. On the Title of Psalm 51. October. 19. 162^.
Follows now, that we proceed to consider of the last point that is to be
observed in the title, that is. The means whereby David, that w^^ so deeply
sunk in rebellion, and hardness of heart, and had so long continued in it, was
recovered, and brought unto repentance. Nathan the Prophet came unto him. Where
two things mu^t be observed. 1. That Nathan was the (...) God used to recover
him. 2. H^^v, and in what manner Nathan dealt with him.

And for the first we must observe. 1. That God sent Nathan to him to that end.
2. Sam. 12.1. 2. That David professes here to all ages, that till Nathan came,
he repented not. 3. That when Nathan came, he prevailed with him, as 2 Samuel
^^.^^. And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord* From all
which three points thus observed, this Doctrine ^^^eth for our instruction.

Doct. 7.
That the means which the Lord has sanctified, and by which he has been
want to work repentance, and grace in his people, is the ministry of his
Prophets, and messengers which he ^indeth to that end.

True it is, 1. that God can work without it* for he is abl^ of stones to
raise up children unto Abraham, as John Baptist says to his hearers, Mat. ^.9*
2. He has often wrought grace without it, as we see in the example of (...) H^b.
11.31. But yet 1. he has not bin wont to do i^, specially where the ministry
of the word may be had. 2. He has sanctified in his word this, and no other.

See the proof, and confirmation of this Doctrine in all the three degrees of
Nathan came to him, David could not say as he does here, verse ^.4. I know my
transgressions, and my sin i^ ever before m^^ against thee thee only have I
sinned. So 2. Sam. 24.10. We read that David's heart smote him after he had
numbered the people. But the means whereby he was brought to that remorse and
tenderness of heart for that sin, is expressed in the next two verses,
11.1^. God had sent the Prophet God, David^ Seer (his own pastor) to reprove
him sharply for that sin. And this is alleged in the text for the cause of
David's remorse. David's heart smote him, and he said unto the Lord, I have
sinned greatly in that I have done; for (says the text) When David was up in
the morning, the word of the Lord came to G^d, and commanded him to go, and
denounce Gods judgment against him for that sin. So though it be said of
Manasses, 2. Chron. 33.12. that when he was in affection he besought the Lord,
and humbled himself greatly before God; as if his affliction were the means
to bring him unto repentance; yet it is evident by the text that his a^fliction
was but a subordinate, and secondary, and infer^^ur mean to bring him to this,
the principal was the ministry of the word as appears, verse 18. God sent
unto him Seers, and Prophets, that ^ake to him in the name of the Lord. So it
was Peter's ministry that pricked the hearts of those three thousand mentioned.
Acts 2.37. and brought them to a saving sense, and remorse for that horrible
sin. Yea this is the means that God has sanctified in his word, and
appointed to that end, Ier. 23.^9. Is not my word like a fire, says the Lord?
and like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces?

Secondly, This is Gods mean whereby he is wont to bring men to Christ,
Corinthians were brought to faith, 1. Cor. 4.1^. In Christ Jesus I have
begotten you: And the Ephesians 1 13. In whom also ye trusted, after that ye
had heard the word of truth. Yea, this is the mean that God has in his Word
sanctified, and put apart to do this work by; namely, to bring men unto
Christ, and to faith in him. This we may see plentifully confirmed unto us in
the holy Scripture, Esaias 57.19. I create the fruit of the lips peace, peace, to
him that is far off and to him that is near says the Lord, and I will heal
him: Peace, peace, that is, abundance of peace; and the healing of those
wounds, that God has made in the soul, is called the fruit of the lips, that
is, of the lively voice in the ministry of the Word. This is also plain by the
speech of our Savior, John 6.45. Every one that has heard, and has learned
of the Father, comes unto me. Hearing is the means to bring men unto Christ.
But what hearing may you say? Is it hearing of the word privately read? or the
hearing of my friend privately instructing, or admonishing? No, rather it is the
hearing of the Word publicly preached, as is plain, Romans 10 14. How shall
they believe in him of whom they have not h^ard? and how shall they hear
without a Preacher? Private men that publish to their families o^ neighbors,
and speak of that which themselves have learned, may be said to preach to
them, as the L^per that was cured did, Mark. 1.45. and the deaf man with his
friends that brought him to Christ, Mark. 7.36. and the Daemmiack, Luke 8.39 of
all these it is said in the text that they did (...) which properly signifies,
to cry, proclaim, or preach; and is the very same word that is used to
express the preaching of Christ, and his Apostles. But is this the preaching
that the Apostle means when he says, Romans 10.14. How can they hear without
a Preacher? No, verily he means it of public ministerial preaching of the
preaching of such men as are called, and sent of God, and endued with special
gifts to that purpose, as is plain by the next words, verse 15. How shall they
(...) except they be sent? And this is further confirmed, 2. Cor. 5.18. God
has given to us the ministry of reconciliation. And again, verse 19. He
has committed to us the word of reconciliation.

And for the third degree in man's conversion, 1. This is the mean whereby Paul
says of the Galatians that were Gentiles, Gal. 2.2. that they received the
spirit by the hearing of says. So Peter says of the faithful he wrote unto,
that were Jews, that they were borne again, not of corruptible seed, but of
uncorruptible by the word of God, 1. Pet. 1.22. Yea by the word preached, as he
expresses himself, verse 25. 2. This is the mean God has sanctified in his
word, and appointed unto this work of changing, renewing, and breeding Grace
in the soul. Therefore Paul calls the ministry of the Gospel the ministration
of the spirit, and the ministration of righteousness, 2. Cor. 3.8, 9. And the
Apostle James 1.21. calls it the engrafted word; To teach us, that as the
science of a good apple grafted into a crab-tree-stocke, has virtue to change
the nature of it; so has the word preached (for of that he speaks as
appears verse 19.22, 23.) virtue to change the heart of man.

Reason.
Now if we will enquire into the reasons, and grounds of this Doctrine, we
shall find three given unto us in the holy Scripture.

Matthew. 18.20. I am with you unto the end of the World. It is therefore called
the power of God unto salvation. Romans 1.16. It is not in the power of the best
minister (be his gifts and graces never so good) to convert a soul: Neither is
he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters, says the Apostle, 1.
Cor. ^.7. This is the only work of Almighty God, yea such a work as wherein
he shows his omnipotent power, as much as in any work that ever he wrought.
The Apostle prays for the Eph^sians, Chap. 1.18, 19. That the eyes of their
understanding being enlightened, they might know what is the exceeding greatness
of his power to ^^-ward that believe ac^ording to the working of his mighty
power. O that those men who think they can repent when they will, and easily
convert, and turn to God, would think seriously of this place, and see their
error. It is a strange thing to consider how wonderful a change the ministry
of the word has wrought in men; how it has tamed and subdued such sinners as
have seemed most desperate, as have been most hard-hearted, and unlikely ever
to come to grace: Publicates and harlots were won to God by John's ministry.
Matthew. 21 3. Many of those Priests that had a chief hand in crucifying Christ,
by it were made obedient unto the faith, Acts 6.7. Ignorant and graceless men
have felt themselves rebuked, and judged, and the very secrets of their hearts
discovered unto them by it. 1. Cor. 14.25. It has pulled down their strong
holds, and cast down their imaginations, and every high thing that exalted it
self in them against the knowledge of God (stopped their mouths quite, and made
them past reasoning against it) and brought into captivity every one of their
thoughts into the obedience of Christ. 2. Cor. 10.4, 5. yea so quite changed
their natures, that the Wolf could dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard lie
down with the Kid, and the Calfe with the young Lion, Esa. 11.6. How was this
change wrought? Only by the word of God, which is called the rod of his mouth,
and the breath of his lips, Esa. 11.4. Yea, some that at that very instant when
they have come to hear it, have hardened their hearts against it, and come
with hateful minds with purpose to cavil, and oppose it, has it thus
mightily subdued. As we shall see in those Officers that went with Commission
from the Pharisees to apprehend Christ, John 7 32, 46. and those that mocked
Peter, and the Apostles, and said they were full of new wine. Acts 2.13, 37.
And in Dionysius, Areopagita, Damaris, and such others in Athens who by Paul's
Sermon were won to cleave unto him. Act. 17.3.* though when they came to
hear him they esteemed no better of him then of a babbler, as you may see verse
18. The like we may see in the Princes and people spoken of Ier. 26. who being
mortal enemies to the Prophet, and such as thought him unworthy to live, a
little before as appears verse 8. were by hearing him preach, quite changed in
their minds, as you see verse 16. And not a marvel; for so has the Lord
promised, Esa. 29.24. They that erred in spirit shall come to understanding,
and they that murmured shall learn Doctrine. And from whence has the ministry
of the word had this power to work so mightily? Surely from this only, that
the Lord has wrought with this his own ordinance. This, this was it that made
Nathans ministry here to prevail so far with David, though he were his Liege
Lord and Master, and though he were so deep sunk in sin. The weapons of our
warfare are mightily through God 2. Cor. 10.4. This made the convert mentioned,
1. Cor. 14.24.25. When he had felt the piercing, and searching power of the
Word to cry, of a truth God (...) in you: So is also the power that the Word
has to breed faith, and comfort to be ascribed to this, John 6.45. They shall
all be taught of God; God is in this ministry.

Secondly, If you ask me yet a reason of this, why the Lord has not rather
David's case; and in that case of Manasses, 2. Chron. 33.18. and in the case of
the noble Eunuch. Acts 8.29. the spirit ^ad Philip go join himself unto his
Chariot. Nay, when God himself had begun (as it were) the work, yet would
he not effect it himself, but has sent men over unto his ministers, that the
work might be done by them. So did he with Saul, Acts 9.1^. he sent Ananias to
him: and with Cornelius he bad him send for Peter, Acts 10.5.6. Yea, it has
pleased God to ascribe this mighty work of saving souls, and all the degrees
of it unto his ministers. Many of the children of Israel shall be convert to
the Lord their God, says the Angel of John, Luk 1.16. I send thee (says the
Lord to Paul, Acts 26.17.18.) to open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light. And 1. Tim. 4.16. In doing this thou shall save thy self,
and them that hear thee.

Thirdly, If you will not yet be satisfied, but ask me further a reason, why
Tim. 3.16) all Scripture is given by inspiration of God Yet though this be in
itself a weaker means, God has chosen to work Grace by it, rather then by
any of the other And if you would know the reason of it, I can go no higher
than this that the Apostle gives, 1. Cor. 1.21. It has pleased God by the
foolishness of peaching to save all believers, all his elect, Matthew 11.26.
Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. Unless I should add this,
that the weaker the mean, and instrument is whereby God does work, the more
is the power of God glorified, and magnified in working so mightily by it.
According to that which the Lord says to Paul, 2 Cor. 12.9. My strength is
made perfect in weakness. What reason could be given, why the waters of
Damascus should not have as sovereign virtue to heal Naamans leprosy, as the
waters of Jordan: but only this, that the Lord was pleased to sanctify, and
appoint the one to this work, and not the other? 2 Kings ^.12, 13. and the
like may be said in this case, 1 Cor. 1.25. Because the foolishness of God is
wiser then men, and the weakness of God is stronger then men.

The use of this doctrine is great, Use. 1.
and manifold. For it serves for exhortation. 2. For reproof. 3. For
direction.

First, it serves to exhort, and persuade us unto two duties. And the first of
them is this. That we should learn to esteem highly of, and to reverence this
ordinance of God in the ministry of the meanest of his faithful servants. It
is the exhortation of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. And we beseech you
brethren to know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and
admonish you, and to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake.
That ought to be the speech of all Gods people which is mentioned, Romans 10.15.
How beautiful are the feet of them which preach the Gospel of peace? and
mark how that is inferred upon the former words: Surely whosoever believes
this Doctrine, that they are the only men by whom God has ordained to work
every saving Grace in the hearts of his elect, if either he have any Grace in
him, or desire to have any, cannot choose but love, and reverence Gods
faithful ministers, 1. Cor 4 1. Let a man so account of us, as of the
ministers of Christ,

If any man shall object in pressing this point you plead for your selves, 1.
First, we may answer him with the Apostle, 2. Cor. 4.5. in pressing this We
preach not our selves but Christ Jesus the Lord.

Secondly, I plead not for Pharisaicall pre-eminence (Let proud Pharisees do
that, who love the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the
Synagogues, Matthew. 23.6.) but in inward reverence for their work sake, to
which These. 5.13.

Thirdly, Neither do I persuade you to esteem highly of all that wear our
cloth, and to reverence all men that go under the name of ministers. For I know
there be too many such whom (1. for their gifts, as the Lord speaks Ier.
23.21. I have not sent them* yet they run, I have not spoken to them, yet
they prophecy; 2. For their lives) the Lord has most justly made contemptible,
and base before all the people, as he did the Prophets in Malachies days, Mal.
2.9.

Antichrist have brought the people unto. They appropriate to themselves only
the title of the Church; the people they say have no further to deal with
matters of Religion then this, to believe as the Church believes, to receive
whatsoever the Priest teaches, or enjoyneth, and never make any question of
it. For to such Gods people may justly say that which Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram, did speak most wickedly, and rebelliously, Numb. 16.2. Ye take too
much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the
Lord is among them, wherefore then lift ye up your selves above the
congregation of the Lord? You may, and ought to judge of the Doctrine that is
taught you, and not to reverence the best minister in the world so much, as to
receive any doctrine upon his credit, till you have examined and found it to
be agreeable to the Word, Paul himself bids the Corinthians, judge of that he
said, 1. Cor. 10.15. and the Bereans are commended for this, that they examined
by the Scriptures those things that Paul and Sylas taught, Acts 17.11.

there are diversities of gifts, 1. Cor. 12.4. And it is no fault, but a good
grace of God, to esteem best of the best gifts of God. That may by good
consequence be concluded from that speech of the Apostle. 1. Cor. 12.31. Covet
earnestly the best gifts.

And I will tell you what ministry you should most prize, and esteem of.

Paul say, 1. Cor. 14.5. Greater is he that prophesies, then he that speaks
with tongues; and 4.20. The kingdom of God stands not in words, but in power.

Cor. 14.25. did show to that ministry, because he found that of a truth God
was in that ministry. And thus Paul challenges esteem, and reverence to his
ministry. 1. Corinthians 9.2. because God had set his seal unto it.

Thirdly, you may, and ought to esteem most of that ministry, that your
selves have received most good by. So Paul prooveth, the Corinthians ought to
esteem more of him then of others, because he had begotten them to Christ. 1.
Cor. 4.^5. And in this respect, certainly your own Pastors should be more
esteemed then strangers; 1 Thessalonians. 5, 12. We beseech you brethren to know them
which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you.

All this notwithstanding, you must hold your selves bound to esteem
reverently of the meanest of Gods faithful ministers, and may not admire and
praise one, with disparaging, and making light account of another. This is
taxed by the Apostle, as a foul sin, 1. Cor. 3.4. When one says I am of
Paul, another I am of Apollo, are ye not carnal?

Now for to help, and strengthen thee against this corruption, consider these
six points.

First, The ministry of one man is Gods ordinance as well as another, 1. Cor.
16.10, 11. Timothy works the work of the Lord, as I also do, let no man
therefore despise him. And the word is the same, the treasure as precious, in
one vessel as in another, 2. Cor. 4.7.

Secondly, The difference of gifts is the Lords doing, and for the benefit of
divides to every one severally as he will, 1. Cor. 12.11. Yea, in this
difference, and variety of his gifts in his ministers, the goodness of God to
his Church is greatly to be admired. All this is done for the benefit of the
Church, 1. Cor. ^.22. One kind of gift is fitter for some to profit by, and
another for other some, Mat. 11.17, 19.

Thirdly, He that receives a meaner gift then he whom thou most admirest Cor.
12.21. Paul had a better gift in speech then Barnabas, Acts 14.12. yet was
Barnabas also a good man, and full of the holy Ghost, and had excellent gifts
in his kind. Acts 11.24.

Fourthly, Thy profiting by the ministry of the word, depends not so much
Cor. 3.5. The Preachers are but the ministers by whom we believe, even as the
Lord gives to every man.

Fifthly, God sometimes works most mightily, and gives the greatest blessing
Peter's gifts were far inferior to Christ's, yet won he more to God by one
Sermon, Acts 2.41. then Christ did by all his, as may appear, Acts 1.15.

Sixthly, If thou refusest to receive, and esteem duly of the meanest of Gods
John 13.20. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that receives whomsoever I
send, receives me.

Lecture IIII. On the Title of Psalm. 51. October. 26. 1625.
SEcondly, This Doctrine should persuade us of the necessity of this ordinance,
David's resolution, Psalm. 23.6. I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.
Yea, he prays that he may be so happy, Psalm. ^7.4 One thing have I desired of
the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord
all the days of my life. We should be content to be at cost, and to strain
our selves to get it home to us, rather then we would want it, Pro. 23.23. Buy
the truth, and sell it not. How may that be? He answers in the next words,
Also wisdom, and instruction, and understanding. We should be content to take
pains to go abroad to it, Mark 8.3. diverse of Christ's hearers came from
far. Admit you have knowledge, yet have you need to live under a continual
ministry. David had more understanding then all his teachers, Psalm. 119.99.
yet you see how he resolved he would not live without Gods ordinance. For, 1.
the knowledge of the best is unperfit, and we have all need to learn and know
more then we do, 1. Cor. 13.9. for we know in part. 2. We are apt to forget
that we have known and learned, and the continual ministry of the Word is
needful in that respect, 2. Pet. 1.12. I will not be negligent to put you
always in remembrance of these things, though you know them, and be
established in the present truth. 3. Knowledge is nothing worth without
feeling, and holy affections, without conscience, and care to practice what we
know, 1. Cor. 8.1. We know that we have all knowledge; knowledge puffs up. Of
many that have a high conceit of their knowledge, it may be truly said, as
verse 2. They know nothing yet as they ought to know. And you have all need to
live under a continual ministry, even in this respect, ^. Pet. ^.13. I think
it meet to stir you up by putting you in remembrance. It serves not only
to breed knowledge, but to stir us up to the exercise of that we know. Admit
you have attained to a great measure of Grace and sanctification, yet have you
need to live under a continual ministry. For, 1. Faith and sanctification are
weak and imperfite in the best, and the ministry of the word is needful in
that respect, 1 Thessalonians. 3.2. Timothy was sent to establish the Thessalonians
concerning their faith, and verse 10. Paul prayed exceedingly that he might
come to them, to perfect that which was lacking in their faith. 2. Grace will
decay in the best, if we live without the means, specially if we willingly
live without the means, Pro. 29.18. When there is no vision, the people
perish, or are made naked.

Use. 2.
Follows the second use of this Doctrine, which is for reproof of two sorts.

1. Sort.
First, Of such as despise this ordinance of God, and make no reckoning of it,
1. They esteem not, nor love the persons of Gods faithfullest servants, For,
1. they show no kindness to them, though they know that commandment, Gal.
6.6. Let him that i^ taught in the word, communicate unto him that teaches, in
all good things. 2. They make no conscience of withholding from them their
due, though they know this is a robbing, and stealing from God himself, Mal
3.8. 3. They are apt to think they have too much, and to envy their welfare,
1. Cor. 13.4. Love envieth not. 4. They are apt to receive any slanderous
report against them, though they know the commandment, 1. Tim. 5.19. Against
an Elder receive not an accusation, but before t^o or three witnesses. But if
you esteem not, nor reverence our persons, you cannot esteem or profit by
our ministry. When the Nazarenes are taxed for their unbelief, which was such
as Christ by his ministry could do little or no good among them. Mat. 13.^8.
this is given for the reason of it, verse 57. that they could not honor nor
reverence his person.

2.
Secondly, Many that seem to esteem well of, and to love the persons of Gods
servants, do it not for their ministry, and works sake, as they should, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13, They receive not a Prophet in the name of a Prophet. Mat. 10.41.
they esteem and love them in some carnal respect, either to their credit
(for I tell you Saul himself may sometimes get credit, and honor before the
people by Samuels means, 1. Sam. 15.30.) or to their advantage, and gain,
like those that our Savior speaks of, John 6.26. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, ye seek me not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the
loaves and were filled.

Thirdly, 3.
The ordinance of God in the ministry of his Word, few or none do make any
reckoning of; nay they despise it in their hearts. For, 1. most men Tim. 3.5.
they must go to Church sometimes, they must needs have their children
christened, they must needs receive the Sacrament at Easter; But whether their
minister be good or bad, they are indifferent; a profitable and sound ministry
they desire not; nay they rather desire to have either an ignorant one, or one
that makes no conscience of his ways; for such will never trouble them, nor
have any authority in their hearts, Iere. 5.31, The Propets prophecy falsely,
and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my people love to have it so.
Whereas the sound ministry will bite, and trouble their lewd hearts. Such as
Eliah are troublers of Israel, 1. Kings 18.^7. They count such a ministry no
blessing at all, but a burden, and would feign be rid of it, as the Gadarenes
would be of Christ, Luke 8.^7.

Secondly, few (even of the better sort) can be persuaded of the necessity of
Genes. ^3.10 11. If the place be likely to yield them profit or pleasure
(though it be otherwise as bad as Sodom) it pleases them well. 2. They will
be at no cost for the ministry of the Word, but count it a chief privilege
to live tythe-free: where as David professes, 2. Sam. 24.24. I will not offer
burnt offerings to the Lord my God, of that which does cost me nothing; I like
not to enjoy the worship, and ordinances of God without charge. 3. They will
take no pains (if they have no ministry at home) to go abroad for it.
Whereas our Savior tells the Jews they should be condemned for not doing as
the Queen of the South did. Mat. 12.42. And Christ shows his approbation,
and special respect to them that came from far to hear him, ( Mar. 8.3) 4.
Though they may have it without cost or labor, they care not how seldom they
hear it. They confess it is good sometimes to hear a Sermon, when they have
nothing else to do, but to hear it constantly, every Sabbath twice, and on
the week day too, that is more then needs a great deal, as they are
persuaded. Whereas we should count it our happiness if we might hear daily,
Pro. 8 34. Blessed is he that hears m^ watching daily at my gates. And as it
is said of our Savior, that he taught daily in the Temple, Lu. 19.47. So of
his hearers it is said, Lu. 21.38. that all the people came early in the
morning into the Temple to him, to hear him. And our Savior was so far from
blaming them, as if they neglected their worldly business this way, that he
defends, and praises Mary for doing this, Luke 10 4^. though happily she had
some whatelse to do at that time.

Thirdly, few or none are thankful to God for this ordinance of his, nor do
Iere 3 15. I will give you Pastors according to mine own heart, that shall
feed you with knowledge, and understanding. And Amos 2.11. I raised up of your
sons for Prophets, and of your young men for Nazarites. And Mic. 6.4. I sent
before thee and Moses, Aaron, Miriam. Yea, such a blessing it is as should
abundantly content us, and assure us of Gods favor, even in the want of all
other blessings. For so speaks the Lord of it, Esaias 30.20. Though the Lord
give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy
teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy
teachers. 2. We should account a faithful ministry, the very glory, and
strength of our land. When the Ark of God was gone, the glory was departed
from Israel, 1. Sam. 4.31. And the true ministry of the Lords Levits is said
to be that that strengthened the kingdom of Judah, 2. Chron. 11.17. And Abijah
makes this a maine ground of his confidence, and hope of success in his
battle against Jeroboam, that he in his kingdom had a true, and faithful
ministry which the other had not, 2, Chron. 13.9, 10. Have not ye cast out the
Priests of the Lord, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made you
priests after the manner of the nations? But as for us, the Lord is our God,
and we have not forsaken him, and the Priests which minister unto the Lord, are
the sons of Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their businesses.

Now to this first sort of persons that this Doctrine reproves, I have no more
to say, but this that I would have them to think seriously of two things.

First, That they have cause to suspect whatsoever grace or goodness seems
Eccles. 5.1. To hearken, is better then the fat of Rams, 1. Sam. 15.22. And
for both thy praying, and thy believing in Christ, mark well that known place
(well known indeed, o that it were as well believed) Romans 10.14. How shall they
call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him,
of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? How
can thou pray, that have no faith? how can thou have faith, that came not
to it by hearing the Word preached, that art no hearer? But me thinks I hear
many of you say, this touches not me, for I am a hearer, I have heard many a
Sermon. O but mark what follows in the next verse, verse 15. and thou shall
find thou art no such hearer as Paul speaks of; the hearers that Paul speaks
of, are such as can cry, O how beautiful are the feet of them that do preach
the Gospel of peace. But thou see no beauty in their feet, thou hear
them, but thou joyest not in them, thou countest them no blessing, nor art
thankful to God for them, thou see no great need of hearing of them, thou
art weary of them, and how should thou have any true faith, how should
thou be able to pray aright?

The second thing I would have these men to consider, is this, that the holy
Pro, 15.32. He that refuses instruction, despises his own soul. Nay, 2. more
then that, such a one cares not for God, or the things of God, regards him
not, fears him not, is in his heart a very Athiest; they that desire not the
knowledge of his ways, say in their hearts unto God, depart from us, Job
21.14. My people would not hearken to my voice, Israel would none of me, says
the Lord, Psalm. 81.11. Nay, 3. to refuse to hear the word preached when we
may, and God offers it unto us, to have no mind to it, no love to it, is a
greater sin (if Christ be to be believed) then the sin of Sodom and
Gomorrah, Mat. 10.14, 15. When all is done, and the time of reckoning shall
come, this will be found to be thy chiefest sin.

hear often, and seem also to delight in the best ministry, and yet profit
not at al by it, but remain as ignorant, unreformed, profane, as they that
never heard Sermon. If trial were taken of the most hearers, they would be
found such as the Apostle speaks of, 2, Tim. 3.7. ever learning, and never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Such hearers I desire to consider,
and weigh well with themselves these six points.

First, That it is no great matter of comfort to a man, nor thing wherein any
Esa. 58.2. They seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, and Ezech 33 3^,
32. They come to thee (a faithful Prophet) as the people comes, and they sit
before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, with their mouth they show
much love (praising the faithful minister greatly) and lo, thou art unto them
as a very lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on
an instrument. No music did ever delight them more then a good Sermon. Yea,
of Herod himself it is said, that he heard John Baptist gladly, Mark. 6.20 O
that many now adays that say they are Christians, and perfect Protestants,
were come so far to hear constantly, and with delight, a faithful minister.
And yet that is no great matter, (you see) no man may rest in that.

Secondly, Consider that God looks for this at every one of your hands that
should bring forth grapes, Esa. 5.2. And Luke 13.6. He came and sought fruit
on his fig tree, yea verse 7. every year when the season served, he came to
look for fruit, yea he commands his servants also to require fruit of his
vineyard, Math. 21.34. O that Gods servants would do this more, would examine
their people how they profit; O that Gods people would endure them to do it,
and would not be like to those husbandmen, Mat. 11.35. ready to offer violence
to the Lords Bayliffes, for demanding fruit. But I tell you, God looks for
this, that you should profit by the means Jews, Matthew. 1^.41, 42. A greater
then Jonas is here, a greater then Solomon is here, Proportionable to the
variety of them, Mat. 11.17. We have pip^d unto you, and ye have not danced, we
have mourned unto you, and ye have not (...); Proportionable to the time
wherein ye have enjoyed them. Luke 13.7. These three years have I come,
seeking fruit of the fig tree, and find none, cut it down. What sentence will
God one day pass (think we) on such a nation as ours, yea, on such a town
as this that has enjoyed excellent means, great variety of means for
threescore and three years together?

Thirdly, consider that it is no petty sin, nor matter of small danger, to be
an unprofitable hearer of the word, Heb. 6.7, 8 The earth that drinks in the
rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by
whom it is dressed, (answerable to their gifts, and their labors, and their
continuance) receives blessing from God; But that which bears thorns, and
briers is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing (how nigh, and what kind of curse
even in this life, God only knows) whose end is to be burned. A fearful
sentence, and such aone as ( m^thinks) should startle us all that have bin
unprofitable hearers so long.

Fourthly, consider, that if this ordinance of God cannot work upon thy the
power of God unto salvation, Romans 1.16. And what hopest thou will convert thee,
will reform thee if Gods power be not able to do it? Luke 16.31. If they hear
not Moses, and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose
from the dead.

Fifthly, think seriously of this, that the Sermons thou hear, if they do
thee no good, they will do thee harm; if they do not enlighten, and bring thee
to saving knowledge they will make thee blinder; if they soften not thy heart,
they will make it harder. The word that goes forth out of m^ mouth: shall not
return to me void, says the Lord, Esaias 55.11. So speaks the Apostle, 2 Cor.
2.16. To the one we are a savor of death unto death, and to the other the
savor of life unto life.

l^den with sins, and l^ad away with diverse lusts, 2 Timothy 2.6. Thou can have
no certainer a sign of the naughtiness of thy heart then this 2. The devil
is busy with thee when thou art hearing; and works effectually in thee,
Matthew. 13.19. When one hears the Word of God, and understands it not, then
comes the wacked one, and catches away that which was sown in his heart; He
is the cause why thou art so sleepy, and so (...) at the hearing of the Word,
why thou can not mark what thou hear, not carry it away. And will thou
let the devil have his will of thee? Resist him (man) and he will fly from
thee, (...) 4.7. Yea cry to God to rebuke him, as Z^ch. 3.2. The Lord rebuke
thee o Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee. 3. The
Lord himself has a just hand in this, that thou can not profit by his Word,
Ioh. 8.47. He that (...) hears Gods Words, ye therefore ^eare them not,
because ye are not o^ God A fearful sign he belongs not to Gods election,
that cannot hear (that is, not hear with profit, for otherwise they did
hear) Gods Word, Ioh. 1^.40. He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their
hearts, lest they should be converted, and I should heal them.

I speak not this to drive any of you into despair (for though you have not
hitherto heard profitably, you may yet do it while it is called to day, Heb.
3.^^.) but to awaken you out of your security, to humble you for your
unprofitablenes under the means, and to increase your care to bear profitably
hereafter. And how you may do that you shall hear the next day in the use of
direction, which is the third, and last use of this Doctrine.

Lecture V. On the Title of Psalm 51. November 2. 1625.
Use. 3.
Follows the third, and last use of the doctrine, which is for direction; even
to direct us how we may hear the Word so as we may feel this divine power,
and efficacy of it in our own hearts. Before we come to the direction it self
consider I pray you the necessity of this use in three points.

Luke 8.18. Take heed how you hear.

Esa. 53.^. Who has believed our retort, and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? I have my self known the time when it might have been said in
this, and many other towns as Act. 2.4^. The Lord (...) the Church daily, such
as should be saved. And as Ma^th. 11 12. The kingdom of heaven suffered
violence, and the violent took it by force. In those cases (...) have been
said of us as Esa. 32.20. Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters, that send
forth thither the feet of the Ox, and the Ass. Men might have called us
blessed, and happy men in the fruitfulness of our ministry, the ground God
gave us to till, and husband was a most fruitful soil. But those days are
gone, no such thing is to be seen now, we now plow, and sow in stony, and
thorny, and barren ground, you hear still but with no such affection, love,
and delight as once you did, you feel no such power in the Word to reform
you, and draw you unto the practice of that you learn, as once you did. So
that I may say to many of you as the Apostle does, Heb. 10.32. Call to
remembrance the former days.

Thirdly, consider well what may be the causes of this, that though there be

First, it cannot be denied but that one cause why the ministry of the Word
Act. 20.28. Take heed to the slocke over which the Holy Ghost has made you
overseers. Heb. 13.17. Remember them which have the rule over you who have
spoken unto you in the name of the Lord. They have authority from God, not only
to teach you his will, but to oversee all your ways at home, and abroad, to
observe how you profit by that which you hear, to require at your hands the
practice of that they teach you, Matthew. 21.34. The Lord sends his servants to
demand fruit of them that occupy his ground. The Guides of Gods Church have
also authority from God not only to admonish, and reprove you if you be
unfruitful, but also to correct you by executing the censures of Christ's
Church upon you. Paul speaks of a rod that God has committed to his servants
to that end, 1 Cor. 4.21. Shall I come to you with a rod? Certainly Gods
vineyard, and garden has need not only of such as plant, and water it, but of
such as take continual care of it, to look unto it, to dress, and husband
it, Luke 13.7, 8. If it be not pruned nor dug no marvel though it bear
briers, and thorns rather then any thing that is good. Mark that curse, Esa.
5.6. I will lay it wast, it shall not be pruned nor dug, but there shall
come up briers, and thorns. And surely this is a great cause why the ministry
of the Word does so little good. 1. That Ministers take so little care of their
people, how they live, whether they profit or no by that they hear, but think
if they preach constantly unto them they have done as much as God requires of
them. Whereas it is a chief part (as I have told you) of the Ministers office
to oversee the flock. 1 Pet. 5.2. Taking the oversight thereof; and to take
care of them, 1 Timothy 3.5. If a man know not how to rule his own house how
shall he take care of the Church of God? 2. That the people generally are
sons of Belial will not bear Christ's yoke, but conspire together against it,
and say, Psalm. 2.3. Let us break their bands asunder, and cast their cords
from us. They will be content to hear us now and then in our public
ministry, but if we offer to deal with them in private, and come in our
Masters name to demand fruit of them, they will be ready to offer all violence,
and despite unto us, as they did, Matthew. 21.35.

Secondly, another cause of the unfruitfullnesse of the ministry is this, that
Esa. 5.6. I will command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it: And as
Matthew. 13.14. By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand, and seeing
ye shall see, and shall not perceive. Many aone there is (and would to God
there were none such among you) that seemed once to be fruitful, and to profit
much by that they heard, that are now grown so senseless, so sottish, so
hardened in their evil courses, as if (for their apostasy) God had pronounced
of them in his decree as once he did of the figtree, Mat. 21.19. Let no fruit
grow on thee hence forward for ever.

Esa. 59.1, 2. The Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot save; but your
iniquities have separated between you, and your God. And as the Apostle says
of praying, James 4.3. Ye ask, and receive not because ye ask amiss, so may
I say of hearing, ye hear, and hear often, but receive no profit at all,
because you hear amiss.

It is therefore necessary for you all to be directed, how you may hear to
profit by your hearing, how you may hear so as your hearts may feel the
divine power of God in this his ordinance. This direction then consists of
three parts. For such as would profit by their hearing must do something before
they come to hear; something during the time that they are in hearing; and
something after they have heard the Word.

For the first, As Physicians before physic use to give somewhat to prepare
the body that their physic may work the more kindly; so must the soul be
prepared for the receiving of this heavenly physic, or it will never work
kindly upon it.

Object.
But you will object, There is no such need of this. The Word has wrought
mightily to the conversion of some that never prepared their hearts to receive
it; as in that convert mentioned, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. Yea in some that came with
that in their hearts as might utterly have hindered the saving operation of it,
even with hateful hearts, and with full purpose to cavil, and oppose it: As
in the case of the pursevants that were sent to apprehend Christ, Ioh. 7.32,
46. And in those Jews that immediately before Peter's sermon mocked him, and the
rest of the Apostles, and said they were full of new wine, Act. 2.13.37. And in
those Athenians who when they came to bear Paul esteemed him no better then a
babbler, Act. 17.18, 34.

Answ.
To this I answer. 1. That I speak not now to the unconverted (for such I know
can do nothing to prepare their own hearts, seeing they are dead in their
sins, Ephesians. 2.1.) but to Gods people, and such as are regenerate. 2. I speak
of the outward means that God has revealed in his Word, and appointed us to
use, to make this his ordinance effectual in our hearts, no way limiting Gods
power, but leaving his secret working to himself. According to that, Deuteronomy.
29.29. The secret things belong to the Lord our God; but those things that are
revealed belong to us, and to our children for ever. 3. Though many have felt
this ordinance effectual in themselves that never thus prepared their hearts
unto it, yet can none such have any assurance or hope that they shall profit by
it, that are not careful to prepare their hearts before hand, because they
have no promise of God for it.

Now this preparation consists in eight things, which I will distinctly
deliver unto you, and run over them with all the speed I can.

Mar 1.15. Repent, and believe the Gospel, says our Savior. Men must repent
with legal repentance before they can believe. And the Word can profit no man
unless it be mixed with faith, Heb 4.2. This preparative the Apostle
prescribes, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. Laying aside all malice, and all guile, and
hypocrisyes, and envies, and evil speakings, as newborn babes desire the
sincere milk of the Word that ye may grow thereby.

Applic.
Is it therefore any wonder though they that are usually drunk on the Saturday
night or spend it in gaming, and then come hither on the Lords day to hear; or
that (immediately before they come to the Sermon) have been scoulding or acting
some other foul sins, should go away from the Ministry of the Word never a
whit better then they came? Did you ever know any salve so sovereign, that
could cure a wound that had a splint or an arrow head remaining in it? Surely
so will every known sin unrepented of, hinder the saving operation of the word
in any man's heart; yea it will make the Word a savor of death unto a man. See
how God threatens such, Ezekiel. 14.7, 8. For every one of the house of Israel,
or of the strangers that sojourneth in Israel, which separateth himself from
me, and sets up his idols in his heart, and puts the stumbling block of
his iniquity before his face, and comes to a Prophet to enquire of him
concerning me I the Lord will answer him by my self. And I will set my face
against that man, and will make him a sign, and a proverb, and I will cut him
off from the midst of my people, and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

Secondly, you must come with an empty, and free heart; lay aside, and cast
Exodus 28.8 -- 10. This is that that God intended to teach by that ceremony he
commanded. Moses to use, Exodus 3.5. Put of thy shoes from of thy feet for the
place whereon thou stand is holy ground; to lay aside all their worldly
thoughts, and affections. They that in this ordinance of God seek for wisdom
(that is to be made wise unto salvation) must first separate themselves from
all other matters to this business; as Solomon speaks, Pro. 18.1. 1 Timothy
4.15. Give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all.

And how should they then profit by the Word, Applic.
that jumpe out of their worldly business, from busying their heads, and
tongues about such matters, into the house of God, and will never take the
pains to put of their shoes, and to sequester their thoughts from such things?
Whereby it comes to pass that though they draw near to God with their ears,
and lips yet their hearts are far removed from him, Esa. 29.13. Their heart
goes after their covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.31.

Thirdly, you must come with an appetite, and earnest desire to learn, and
David to the Word, Psalm. 119.131. I opened my mouth, and panted, for I longed
for thy commandments. This preparative also the Apostle prescribes, 1 Pet.
2.2. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow
thereby. To such God has ever been wont to bless his Word, He fills the
hungry with good things, Luke 1.53. This makes the Word sweet, and wholesome to
us, Pro. 27.7. To the hungry soul, every bitter thing is sweet.

But the most of our hearers come to the Word without all appetite or desire
after it, Applic.
as may appear by the heaviness of their countenance while they are hearing,
Of whom it may be said as Esa. 3.9. The show of their countenance does witness
against them.

Fourthly, you must come with an humble heart, affected with the sense of Psalm.
25.9. God will teach the humble his way. He gives grace to the humble, 1 Pet.
5.5. All conceit of our own knowledge must be cast of if we would profit by the
word. We must first become fools (in sense of our own ignorance) before ever
we can be made wise unto salvation by the Lord in this his ordinance, 1 Cor.
3.18. No man can hunger, and thirst after righteousness, and grace till he be
first poor in spirit, Matthew. 5.^, ^.

And what marvel is it then that our hearers profit so little? Applic.
1. Many come only to hear for novelty sake, that they may try, and pass
their sentence, and censure on the preachers gifts, Luke 23.8, 9. Herod had
heard a great fame of Christ, and therefore was exceeding glad both to see him,
and to hear him too, that he might try whether he were such a one as he had
heard him to be. 2. The most are Laodicean hearers too well conceited of
themselves as it is said of them, Revel. 3.17. void of all sense of ignorance
or any other corruption in themselves.

These. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good, and nothing else.
As the noble Bereans did, Act. 17.11. Even in these days Gods people have need
of that caveat, Mar. 4.24. Take heed what you hear. But this I say you shall
never profit by the Word, unless you come to it with open hearts, ready to
receive whatsoever God shall teach you. With such a heart came Cornelius to
hear Peter, Act. 10.33. We are all here present before God, to hear all
things that are commanded thee of God. It is the suit of Christ to his Church,
Cant. 5.2. Open to me my sister, my love, my dove, shut not thy heart against
me, and my Word. To this also a promise is made, Ps. 24.7. Lift up your heads o
ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall
come in. And Revel. 3.20. If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will
come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. Certainly if men would
come to the Word with such open, and teachable hearts, ready to receive, and
learn whatsoever God shall teach, they would profit must more then they do.

Applic.
But alas most that hear us come with prejudicate, and forestalled hearts, they
have certain imaginations, and errors of their mind which they are resolved to
hold concerning the Sabbath, and recreations, and even this point that I have
now so largely handled touching the necessity of living under a sound, and
profitable ministry, and diverse other things. And these imaginations, and
errors of their judgment serve as strong holds to keep Christ, and his truth
out of their hearts, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. With this mind many a one comes to hear
us; I know the preacher well enough, he differs from me in judgment in sundry
things; but it is no matter, I can hear him, and hold mine own well enough, I
like his gifts well, and will receive his doctrine so far as I judge it to
be true, but if once he fall upon his own conceits, there I will leave him.
And do so still in Gods name, if any preacher teach his own conceits, though
he had the gifts of an Angel believe him not, Gal. 1.8, 9. But take heed thou
count not that his conceit which he teaches thee by good warrant of Gods Word.
For in that case if thou receive not whatsoever he teaches thee, I will assure
thee that that which thou seem to receive will do thee no good. For
certainly these men that in their hearing do thus limit, and gage the Word,
and spirit of God, would if it lay in their power, as those wicked men
mentioned, Esaias 30.10. Say to the Seers see not, and to the Prophets prophecy
not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things. And those that did so
the Lord calls despisers of his Word, verse 12.

David to the Word, Psalm. 119.33, 34. Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes,
and I shall keep it unto the end, give me understanding, and I shall keep thy
law, yea I shall observe it with my whole heart. To this the promise is made,
Ioh. 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether
it be of God or whether I speak of my self. Such shall attain to a settled,
and certain knowledge of the truth. And Luke 8.15. They that with an honest
heart hear the Word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience. Mica 2.7.
Do not my words do good to him that walks uprightly?

And how can they then profit by the ministry of the Word that in their
hearing seek nothing but knowledge, Applic.
intend nothing less then to practice ought they hear, like those Ezekiel.
33.31. They hear thy words but they will not do them But rather resolve before
hand they will be still as they were, they will do as their neighbors do; as
Ze^echia did, 2 Chronicles 36.13. He s^iffaed his work, and hardened his heart from
turning unto the Lord God of Israel. No preacher shall alter them, they can
hear them they trow, and ver do still as they list. What? We were wise men
indeed if we should practice what we hear, leave our good fellowship, bring
religion into our families, so should we be counted Puritans, God forbid we
should ever become such fools, Oh take heed, God forbid it not indeed. When
Pharaoh had hardened his own heart against the means God had used to soften
it, Exodus 8 15. ye read often in that book afterward that God hardened his heart,
Exodus 9.12. O therefore take heed of this, Heb. 3.7.8. If ye will hear his
voice harden not your hearts.

Seventhly, come in faith to the hearing of the Word, and in a certain Mat.
28.20. Believe this, and expect his gracious presence to make his ordinance
effectual in thine heart. He has said, Luke ^1.28. Blessed are they that
hear the Word. Consider who spoke this, believe him of his word, and expect a
blessing from him in thy hearing. The Lord has said, Psalm. 19.7 The law of the
Lord is perfect converting the soul: And Romans 1.^6. ^t is the power of God
unto salvation. Thou feel sundry corruptions which thou would feign have
power to overcome, and thy heart converted from them unto the Lord, believe
this which God has said of his Word, and expect to find this converting power
of God, in this his ordinance. So the Lord has said of this ordinance, Acts
20.32. that it is able to build his people up* and to persit the work of grace
begun in them: and thou would grow, and art troubled that thou grow^st to
better; come in says to it, and look to receive this benifit by it. So the
Lord has said, Esa. 57.19 that he creates, and ordains the fruit of the
lips: to be peace peace to them that are n^are, and to them that are a far of.
And thou w^ntest peace in thy conscience, believe what God (that cannot lie)
has said, and look verily to have peace wrought in thy heart by this means.
In a word God has said of this his ordinance, Esa. 55.3. Hear, and your soul
shall live And Iam 1.21. That it is able to save your souls; believe this
then, and expect life, and salvation by it.

How should the most of our hearers then receive any good by this ordinance of
God, Applic.
when few or none come to it in this faith? They never stir up themselves to
think of these promises, or to expect any such good by it. As it was with them
that desired to receive good by Christ's divine power, in working miracles, they
must bring faith with them, Mark. 9.23. Jesus said to him (that came to have
his son dispossessed) If thou can believe, all these things are possible to
him that believes. And still according to their faith, so they sped. Matthew.
9.^9. So is it in this case. They that desire to receive good by the divine
power of God in this his ordinance, must bring faith to it, and according to
their faith, so shall they speed. And as it is said of Christ, Matthew. 13.58. He
did (...) are (...) works (in Nazareth) because of their unbelief. So may it
be said of our Church assemblies now adays, God shows not his saving power
much in them, because of the unbelief of our hearers.

Eighthly, and lastly, If thou would profit by thy hearing, pray before thou
hear, No good thing ye know can be expected from God with a blessing if it
be not sought by prayer, Deuteronomy. 4.7. The Lord our God is nigh unto us in all
that we call upon him for. And in this particular, it is the duty of Gods
people to pray for their teachers, that they may so speak as they ought to
speak. Col. 4.4. and specially that in their ministry they may so apply the
word, as it may effectually meet with their corruptions. Let the righteous
smite me (says David, Psalm. 141.5.) it shall be a kindness, and let him
reprove me, it shall be as an excellent oil. For themselves also they should
pray, that (through Gods assistance) they may hear profitably, and be blessed
in their hearing. Thus did David go to the Word Psalm. 19.18. Open thou mine
eyes that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law. For the Lord only is
he, that can teach us to profit, Esa. 48.17. I am the Lord thy God which
teaches thee to profit. To this is the promise made, Pro. 2.3, 5. If thou
cryest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding, then shall
thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.

And surely this is one chief cause, why there is so little profiting by the
ministry of the word. Applic:
For before they come to Church, pray either for the preacher, or themselves;
nay, few when they are at Church have any heart to join with the Preacher in
the prayer that he makes before the Sermon. But that complaint may be made in
this case which the Prophet makes, Esaias 64.7. There is none that calls on
thy name, that stirs up himself to take hold of thee.

Lecture VI. On the Title of Psalm 51. November. 23, 1625.
IT follows now that we proceed to the other two parts of the use of
Direction. And for the better stirring up of your affection to that which I am
to deliver, you must know this, that to hear the word profitably, is a
laborious, and painful thing. The bringing of your bodies hither, and lending
of your ears, is not all (though that be painful to you that come far) but
there is more belongs to it then so, there is a labor of the mind, and heart,
required in this work, Strive (says our Savior, Luk 13.24.) to enter in at
the strait gate. Every gate, every part of that way whereby we must come to
life eternal, is strait, and narrow, and without much striving and labor, it
is not possible to pass through it. To pray aright, you (that are acquainted
with the conscionable performance of this duty) find it to be a painful, and
laborious thing. Romans 15.30. Strive together with me (says the Apostle) in
your prayers to God for me. And surely it is no less painful a thing to hear
spiritually, and profitably. Labor (says our Savior, John 6.27.) not for the
meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures unto everlasting life.

And no marvel, For, 1. there is an utter indisposition of our own hearts by
nature, to every thing that is good; being alienated in our minds from God, as
the Apostle speaks. Colos. 1.21. and estranged (as David says Psalm. 58.3.)
from the very womb, 2. Satan also is very busy with us, when we go about
this work of hearing Gods Word, to hinder us by all the cunning he has, from
hearing it fruitfully, Luke 8.12. Those by the highway side are they that
hear: then comes the devil, and takes away the Word out of their hearts,
lest they should believe, and be saved. 3. The Lord, though he first converted
us without any help of our own will and endeavor; for we were by nature
dead in trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1. yea, he converted us against our will, Romans
10.21. All the day long have I stretched out my hands unto a disobedient and
gainsaying people. Yet will he not save us, nor build us up in grace, nor
bless the means of grace unto us, without the help of our will and
endeavor; but when he has once regenerated and renewed our will, he will
have us^ employ it in his work: Phil. 2.12. Work out your own salvation. We
had need therefore to take pains with our own hearts, and strive to hear
profitably. For certainly as a great cause why we profit so little by the Word
is this, that we will not do that that lies in us to make our hearing
profitable, we will take no pains in this work; so if we would take a little
pains for it, we should find that the fruit and comfort we should receive by
it, would abundantly recompense all the pains we have taken in it. That which
Solomon says of labor in our lawful callings, Pro. 14.23. In all labor
there is profit, and 13.11. He that gathers by labor, shall increase (there
is a secret blessing of God upon men that labor in the meanest calling that
is, that they are able to live, and thrive by it) may fitly be applied to this
purpose; they that labor, and will take pains in the work of their own
salvation, to make all means of Grace profitable unto themselves, shall
certainly thrive, and increase in Grace, whereas the lazy soul (under the best
means of Grace that are) shall still be like Pharaohs Kin^, l^ane, and
ill-favored. Genesis 45.21. We find by experience, that it is not the greatness
of a man's living, that makes him rich, but the good employing, and careful
husbanding of it. A little ground, if a good husband, a careful, and painful
man have the occupying of it, proves oftentimes more fruitful then a great
deal more land will do in the hands of a lazy and careless husband, though
it be of it self a better soil, and have more helps, from God and nature,
then the other has. Pro. 24.30, 3^. I went by the field of the slothful, and
by the Vineyard of the man void of understanding, and lo, it was all grown
over with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall
thereof was broken down; So it is not the greatness, and excellency of the
ministry that a man lives under, and daily frequenteth, that will make one
rich in Grace, but the care, and endeavor himself uses to make it profitable
to him. A weaker ministry with this care, will be more availeable to enrich
the heart, then the strongest can be without it.

As I therefore showed you the last day what you must do before you come, to
prepare, and fit your selves to the hearing of the word; so will I now show
you, what your labor must be while you are in hearing of it, and lastly what
you must do after you have heard it, if you desire to profit by it.

And that which is your part to do while you are hearing, consists in five
points.

First, you must set your selves as in Gods presence, while you are hearing of
his word. 1. Remember, and think with your selves, you These. 2.13. It is God
himself that speaks to you from heaven by us, Heb. 12.25. How shall we
escape if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven. Luke 10.16. He that
hears you hears me. John was the voice of him that cried in the
wilderness, John. 1.23. It is the Lord himself that speaks and cries to
you in our ministry, we are but his voice: Therefore Moses makes this preface
to his Doctrine, Deuteronomy. 32.3. Because I will publish the name of the Lord,
ascribe ye greatness unto our God. And as it is God that speaks to you in
our ministry; So 2. is he always in a special sort present where his word is
preached, to observe, and mark how it is delivered, and received, and either
to bless, or curse the hearers accordingly. Of this, and such like places it
may be said, as Jacob said of Bethel, Genesis 28.16, 17. Surely the Lord is in
this place, and I knew it not -- this is none other but the house of God, and
this is the gate of heaven. Though you knew it not before, know it now, surely
the Lord is in this place, this is none other but the house of God, and this is
the gate of heaven. Not that God dwells more here then there (though he did so
in the temple of Jerusalem) but I speak it in reference to his majesty, and in
respect of the assemblies, and meeting of Gods people, to join together in the
use of his ordinances, Matthew. 18.20. Where two or three are gathered together
in my name, there am I in the midst of them.

Remember, and think on these two things, whenever you hear, that you may
set your selves as in Gods presence, when you are about this work. So did good
Cornelius though a soldier, and a great man too. Acts 10.33. We are all h^re
present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God. This is
profitable for us to do in our whole course of life: David did so, Psalm. 16.8.
I have set the Lord always before me. This will greatly further our profiting
by hearing, for it cannot choose but breed in our hearts an awful fear of
God. When Jacob had said, Genes. 28.16. Surely the Lord is in this place, verse
17. He was afraid, and said, how dreadful is this place? And without our
hearts be stricken with this awful fear, and reverence of God, we can do no
service unto him ^n an acceptable manner, Psalm. 2.11. Serve the Lord with
fear, Hebr. 12.28, ^9. Let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably,
with reverence and godly fear, for our God is a consuming fire. This fear
will keep us in that behavior and disposition of body and mind, as is meet.
1. It will keep our bodies from sleepiness, and all other unreverent
behavior. For so will the presence of any man do whom we reverence, and fear,
Proverbs 23.1, 2. When thou sit to eat with a ruler, consider diligently
what is before thee, and put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to
appetite. 2. It will keep our thoughts from roving, without which we can never
relish the Word. Psalm. 1.9.113. If we do not hate vain thoughts, we cannot
love Gods Word. 3. It will make us careful to receive, and obey that, that
shall be taught; for so has God bin wont to prepare his people to receive his
Word: yea, he said of them when they were thus affected, Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that
there were such a heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep my
commandments always.

Applic:
No marvel then, though we profit so little by the Word, we perform this
service with little or no reverence, and fear. The Apostle notes it for a
sign of an ungracious heart, Jude 12. to eat without fear; how much more to
hear without fear; witness the liberty men take to sleep at Sermons, not
once striving against their own corruption (by stirring up, rowsing
themselves, or desiring them that sit next them, to awake them) none resisting
Satan, who certainly helps forward this corruption in it. Luke 8.12. and who,
if they would resist him, would fly from them, James 4.7. Three notable
contempts, and wants of reverence these men do show. 1. To the congregation;
It is a sign of a graceless heart to bear no reverence to men, Luke. ^8.2.
worse, not to reverence any godly man, or care for grieving or offending him,
or regarding what he thinks of us, Mat. 18.10. Take heed that ye despise not
one of these little ones; worst of all not to reverence the congregation of
Gods people, when they are assembled to worship God, 1. Cor. 11.22. despis^ ye
the Church of God? I tell you, it becomes the greatest Prince that is, in his
coming in, and going out, and his whole behavior to show reverence to the
Congregation. 2. They show contempt to the holy Angels, who are present, and
have a special charge given them, to attend the holy assemblies of Gods
people, both to be as a guard unto them, and as witnesses to observe their
behavior, 1. Cor. 11.^0* 3. But chiefly they show contempt to God, who (as we
have heard) is in a special sort present here, Levit. 6.2. Reverence my
sanctuary, I am the Lord.

Unto me m^n gave care (says Job. 29.21, 23.) and waited, and kept silence at
my counsel. And they waited for me as for the rain, and they opened their
mouth wide, as for the latter rain. And it is said, Luke 19.48. That the
people So it is in the margent.
hanged upon Christ. This Gods people are often called upon for, Mar. 4.23.
Christ was wont to say to the people in the beginning of his Doctrine, hearken;
and again at the end of his Sermons, verse. 9. And 7.14. Hearken every one of
you. Esa. 55.23. Hearken diligently unto me, incline your ear, and come unto
me; hear, and your soul shall live. Pro. 22.17. Bow down thine ear, and
hear. No hope the ministry of Christ himself should draw us, and make us to
come unto him, and cause our souls to live, unless we thus hear, hearken
diligently, incline, and bend our ears to hear; Put these things into your
ears, says our Savior, Luke 9.44. For 1 the Word is so precious as it is
worth the harkening unto. Psalm. 19.10. It is more to be desired then gold, yea
then much fine gold; sweeter also then honey, and the honey comb. 2. Who
knows how soon you may be deprived of it. 3. As in all other the parts, and
faculties of man's body, and soul there is a natural averseness, and
indisposition to that that is good; so it is in the ear, there is a mavelous
unaptnesse, and untowardnesse in it to hearken to the Word; it is not so soon
weary of hearing any thing, as of Gods Word. Mat. 13.15. This peoples heart is
waxen gross, and their ears are dull of hearing. Yea we are by nature deaf
as well as blind. Esa. 43.8. Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and
the deaf that have ears. So that it is noted for a special work of Gods
Spirit (which every one of you which find it, in your selves, may take great
comfort in) to be able to mind the word, and to attend unto it. Esa. 32.3. The
ears of them that hear, shall hearken. And Act. 16.14. It is said of Lydia
that the Lord opened her heart, that she attended to the things that were
spoken by Paul. If the Lord had not opened her heart she could not have done
it; this is not every man's case. Our Savior speaks of some that hearing hear
not, Mat. 13.13. How can that be will you say? Yes very well. Men may hear,
and not mind nor regard what they hear, and so in hearing not hear. The
hearing ear, and the seeing eye (says Solomon, Pro. 20.12.) the Lord has
made even both of them. To have an ear able to hearken, and attend to the Word
is a rare gift of God; which made our Savior say to his Disciples, Matthew.
13.16. Blessed are your ears, for they hear.

Observe then another cause why the Word is so unfruitful in Many. Applic.
1. Some think it enough that they come to Church, though they show no desire
to hear at all, though they sit so as they can hear nothing. True it is that
it is fit there should be a decent order in the Congregation, and (above all
other places) there should there respect be had unto seemelinesse; every man,
and woman should be placed there according to their years, and degree, and
should keep their places, 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently, and
in order. Paul joyed in the seemly order be beheld in the Church Assemblies of
the Colossians, Col. 2.5. Among other things the Queen of Sheba observed, and
admired in Solomon's house, the sitting of his servants, in that decent order,
was one 1 King. 10.5. and if it were fit they should fit in such a decent order
in Solomon's house, much more is it fit they should do so in Gods house; as
that decent order did so much commend Solomon's house, so would it do our
Church Assemblies certainly. It is a fault I observe amongst you here that
many of you use to stand up upon your forms, and seats. For 1. It is an
unseemely sight, and decency becomes Gods house. 2. It hinders their hearing
that sit behind you, and so it is not only against decency, but against
edification also. 3. You do it without any just cause at all, when you may
hear well enough though you sit or stand down. All this notwithstanding if
you cannot hear where you sit, the poorest or youngest of you should not be
ashamed or afraid to come up higher, and sit or stand nearer to the pulpit. You
should strain courtesy in this case. What a disorder was in that congregation
mentioned, Luke 12.3. they trod one upon another; and yet because their desire
to hear, and to be edified by his doctrine forced them to it, our Savior
never blamed them for it. It is said of Christ's hearers that they were wont to
Sit about him, Mar. 3.34. and Luke 15.1. that they drew near to him to hear
him; and Mary sat down at his feet when he preached, that she might be sure
to hear him, Luke 10.39. Yea to help their attention, and keep their minds
the better from roving they were wont to fix their eyes upon him, Luke 4.20.
Secondly, Of them that do hear us, few are able to hearken or attend to that
they hear, Esa. 43.20. Seeing many things but thou observest not; opening the
ears, but he hears not. So that we may justly take up the complaint of the
Prophet, Ier. 6.10. To whom shall I speak, and give warning that they may
hear? behold their ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken.

Mat. 15.10. He called the multitude, and said unto them, hear, and
understand. How should we else profit by any thing we hear? Acts 8.30.
Understand thou what thou read? says Philip. So say thou to thy own
heart in hearing, else it is not possible for thee to profit by that thou
hear. Mat. 13.13. In hearing they hear not, neither understand; they that
understand not what they hear, in hearing hear not. Ps. 45.10. Hearken (O
daughter) and consider, and incline thine ear. 2 Timothy 2.7. Consider what I
say. Yea 2. We should be able also to judge of that we hear, 1 Co^. 10.15.
Judge ye what I say. Job 21.11. Does not the ear try words? and the mouth
taste his meat? 1 These. 5.21. Prove all things (not by thy proud fansy and
conceit indeed, but by the Word, in reverence, and humility) hold fast that
which is good. Christ's sheep can put a difference between the voice of their
true Pastor, and of a stranger, Ioh. 104, 5.

Applic.
Take notice of this for one chief cause why the Word is so unfruitful, ye
hear without understanding. 1. Many understand not what they hear; but that
heavy judgment is upon them, that is mentioned, Mat. 13.14. In them is
fulfilled the prophecy of Esayas, by hearing, ye shall hear, and shall not
understand, and yet they neither bewail nor feel it. No marvel therefore
though they profit not. Mat. 13.19. When one hears the Word of the kingdom,
and understands it not, then comes the wicked one, and catches away that
that was sown. 2. Many that understand well what we say, yet here without all
judgment; can put no difference twixt truth, and error, Pro. 14.15. The simple
believes every word, but the prudent man looks well to his going. They
cannot judge when the Scripture is wrested, and when it is well applied.
Unskillful they are in the word of righteousness: for they are babes, Heb.
5.13.

Lecture VII. On the Title of Psalm. 51. November 30. 1625.
Moses gave to Gods people, Deuteronomy. 32.46. Set your hearts unto all the words,
that I testify among you this day; and he gives the reason, verse. 47. For it
is not a vain thing for you; because it is your life. It is said of Gods
people in the primative Church that they received the Word gladly, Act. 2.41.
And of Christ's hearers, Mar. ^2.37. The common people heard him gladly. 1. It
is a great sign of grace to hear the Word with joy. Ps. 119.162. I rejoice at
thy Word as one that finds great spoil; to be cheerful while we are in
Gods house, Esa. 56.7. I will make them joyful in my house of prayer. That
that is said of alms, 2 Cor. 9.7. God loves a cheerful giver, may be said
likewise of the hearer of Gods Word. 2. This will be a great help to your
memory, and make you better able to keep that you hear, when you hear it
with delight, Psalm. 119.16. I will delight my self in thy statutes, I will not
forget thy word. 3. This will greatly encourage thy teacher, and add spirit,
and life to him, to see thee hear chearefully. Even our blessed Savior
himself was much stirred up in his affections by beholding the zeal of his
hearers, Mat. 5.1. Mar. 6.34. Ioh. 4.30 -- 32. Mar. 3.20.

Know therefore this is one cause why most get so little good by their hearing,
Applic.
they hear without all delight, and affection. Their very countenances
testify that they say in their hearts, as Mal. 1.13. Behold what a weariness
is it. And thereby 1. They dishearten, and grieve their teachers, which must
needs be their own disadvantage, Heb. 13.17. If they do their work with
grief, it will be unprofitable for you. 2. They provoke God to anger, 2 Thessalonians.
2.10, 11. Because they received not the love of the truth that they might be
saved, for this cause God shall send them strong delusions that they should
believe a lie.

Fifthly, in the hearing of the Word we must take every thing as spoken to John's
hearers did, Luke 3.12.14. So 2 must we strive to apply all that we hear to
our selves, Job 5.27. Hear this, and know it for thy self. For 1. There is no
truth of God taught out of Gods Word, but it concerns every one of Gods
people, and was intended by the Lord for his use. Whatsoever things were
written afore-time, were written for our learning, Romans 15.4. 2. There is no
truth that can be taught (be it never so wholesome or sovereign) can do us
any good, if we do not apply it; as the best food cannot nourish us, unless
we take it, and eat it. And this comparison the Prophet applies to this
purpose, Esa. 55.2. Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is
good. 3. It is noted for a property of Gods Elect that they are apt, to apply
Gods Word unto themselves; as there is in every member of our body to draw from
the stomach, and liver, and veins nourishment for it self, and to make it
his own; to which the Apostle alludeth, Ephesians. 4.16. This we shall find in the
elect Disciples, Mat. 26.22. And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began
every one of them to say unto him, Lord is it I? The like you shall see in them
when he spoke of the dangerous state that rich men are in, Mat. 19.25 -- 27.
and yet one would have thought that Doctrine did little concern them.

And certainly this is one cause why so many (though they hear us constantly)
profit so little. Applic.
Heb. 4.2. The Word preached did not profit them (says the Apostle of the
Jews that perished in the wilderness) not being mixed with faith in them that
heard it. They are apt to put of from themselves to others, whatsoever is
taught, like to those the Lord complains of, Hos. 8.12. I have written to him
the great things of my law, but they were counted as a strange thing.

And thus have I finished those duties that are to be performed by us during
the time that we are in hearing the Word. Now follow those that are to be done
after we have heard the Word, if we desire to reap fruit by it. And those also
are principally five.

First, we must be careful to keep that which we have received both in our
Heb. 2.1. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which
we have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip. And of the the blessed
Virgin it is said, Luke 2.51. But his mother kept all these sayings in her
heart. For 1 as the best seed must have a time to tarry in the ground, or it
can never bring fruit; so is it with the Word, Luke 8.15. The good ground are
they which in an honest, and good heart, having heard the Word keep it, and
bring forth fruit with patience. 2. Our carelessness in laying up the Word, and
hiding it that we may keep it, gives great advantage to Satan to steal it
from us; as the loose, and careless laying of our money or goods does to a
thief, yea makes many a child, and servant false that otherwise would have
beer true. Mark this in the parable. Out of what hearers hearts did Satan
steal the Word? Out of theirs that were like the high way that had no earth to
hide or cover the seed, Luk 8.12. 3. This carelessness to keep the good Word,
is a high contempt done to it, which God must needs take vengeance of.
Therefore the Apostle, Heb. 2. when he had said verse 1. We ought to give the
more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we should
let them slip; he adds this for a reason, verse 3. How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation?

Applic.
Let men then impute the small good they get by their hearing unto this profane
carelessness of keeping that which they have received. 1. They are like sives
that while they are in the water seem to be full, and to have a great quantity
of water in them, but take them out, and there is not a jot left in them. They
forget presently what they hear and it never troubles them. Every one would
count it a great judgment, and be sensible of it in his temporal estate, to
get much, and to put it into a bottomless purse, not to be able to keep it,
because God blows upon it, as Hag. 1.6.9. And if a thief had taken your purse
or broken into your house, and robbed you, what outcries would you make? But in
his spiritual estate no man regards this. 2. Nay they have no care nor desire
to keep, and remember what they have heard, for this indeed is the cause why
men's memories are so bad, they take no delight in the Word, Ier. 2.32. Can a
maid forget her ornaments; or a bride her attire? 3. The good affections, and
desires wrought by the Word they nourish not, but they are presently choked
with worldly business, and pleasure, Luke 8.14.

Phil. 4.8. think of these things. It is not enough to hear Gods Word but we
must consider of it in our hearts. Deuteronomy. 4.39. Know therefore this day (says
Moses) and consider it in thine heart. David was much given to this, Psalm.
119.15. I will meditate in thy precepts. The blessed Virgin is commended for
this, Luke 2.19. All the things she heard concerning Christ she kept them, and
pondered them in her ^eart. This is enjoined as a duty most necessary to this
purpose. Esa 46.8. Bring it again to mind O ye transgressors. For 1. This
would argue a love to that we hear and a delight in it, Psalm. 1.2. His delight
is in the law of the Lord, and in that law does he meditate day and night: and
119.97. O how love I thy law? it is my meditation all the day. 2. This would
greatly increase our comfort in the Word, and cause us to feel more sweetness
in it, as the chawing of our meat makes us taste more sweetness in it, Psalm.
119.15, 16. I will meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto thy ways: I
will delight my self in thy statutes. 3. This would greatly increase and
confirm our knowledge, Psalm. 119.99. I have more understanding then all my
teachers, for thy testimonies are my meditation. 4. This would cause the Word
to have more power in our hearts to draw us to practice, and to nourish and
increase the life of godliness in us. As meat (though it be never so good,
never so well dressed) nourishes us not, but is rather a burden then benefit
unto us, if our stomach cannot concoct, and digest it; so it is with the food
of our souls, Josh. 1.8. Thou shall meditate in the law day and night, that
thou may observe to do according to all that is written therein.

Applic.
How then should the Word you hear do you good, when you never think of it
after you have once heard it? It is noted of the Disciples that though they had
seen Christ's mighty power in the miracles of the loaves, yet their faith was
never the stronger, but upon every new tentation and occasion of fear, they
were extremely troubled; and that this was the cause of it, Mar. 6.52. For
they considered not the miracle of the loaves for their heart was hardened. They
had seen that miracle, and it may be also remembered it, but they had not
considered, and meditated of it, and therefore they were never the better for
it.

your selves. 1. It is often spoken of in Scripture as a duty we owe to God
and his Word, to speak of it unto others, Psalm. 119.172. My tongue shall
speak of thy Word; for all thy commandments are righteousness. Yea this is
noted as a special use we should make of our reading and hearing of the Word,
to speak of it unto others, it must not be in our heart only but in our mouth
too, Josh. 1.8. This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth. And
that which is said of the Priest, Mal. 2.7. that his lips should keep
knowledge; is said likewise of every one that truly fears God, Pro. 5.2. My
son attend unto my wisdom, and bow thine ear unto mine understanding -- that
thy lips may keep knowledge. 2. You that go home together from the Sermon
should make this use of your company, to confer together of that which you
have heard; as they did, Luke 24.14. 3. Yea you should all count it a benefit
to have a companion you may confer with about that which you have heard.
Christ's Disciples used it much. When Christ had taught how hard it was for rich
men to be saved it is said Mar. 10.26. They were astonished out of measure, and
said among themselves, who then can be saved? The like you shall find spoken of
their conferring among themselves of another Sermon of our Saviors, Ioh.
16.17, 18. Yea it is reported of other of his hearers too besides his Disciples
that they did use to confer among themselves of that which he had taught,
Ioh. 7 35, 36. 4. But chiefly this is required of you that have families, that
you repeat unto them, examine them, confer with them about that which they
have heard. For this we have a plain commandment, Deuteronomy. 11.18, 19. Ye shall
lay up these my words in your heart-and ye shall teach them your children,
speaking of them when thou sit in thy house, etc. Yea it is said to be a
chief thing, that the Lord had respect unto in giving us his Word, and
vouchsafing to us the knowledge of it, that we might instruct our families in
it, Deuteronomy. 4.10. Gather me the people together, and I will make them to ^eare my
words that they may learn to fear me, and that they may teach their children.
According to that proverb, Mat. 5.15. Men do not light a candle, to put it
under a bushel, but on a candle-sticke, and it gives light to all that are in
the house. For this we have an example which (above all others) we should
desire to follow, even the practice of our blessed Savior himself; who
(though he spent himself so much in his public labors, yet) did use to
confer with his family of the Sermons he had made, to examine them, and make
all things plainer to them, Mat. 13.51. Have ye understood all these things?
And Mar. 4.34. When they were alone he expounded all things to his Disciples.
This repeating, and conferring of that we have heard would certainly greatly
further our profiting by the Word. In this that proverb will be found true as
much as in any other thing, Eccl. 4.9. Two are better then one. We may all in
this kind receive help one from another, even he that is stronger in
knowledge and grace, from another that is weaker then himself is. Yea God is
so pleased with it that a blessing may be expected from God in the use of it.
It is said of the two Disciples that went toward Emmaus, Luke 24.^5. That wh^le
they communed together, and reasoned, Jesus himself drew near and went with
them. And again that when they went to relate to the Apostles that they had
seen him, and what he had said to them, and the Apostles, and they were
conferring of this matter, it is said Luke 24.36. That as they spoke, Jesus
himself stood in the midst of them.

Four special benefits certainly you might reap by it. First, It would Mat.
^3.16. Blessed are your ears for they hear. And what made them so attentive?
Surely this was one cause, that they knew their master was wont to examine them
as you heard, Mat. 13.^1. Secondly, It would much help, and confirm both your
families, and your selves also in the understanding, and believing of that
which has been taught you, if you would thus repeat it, and confer of it,
and examine the proofs that have been delivered for the confirmation of it.
See a notable example of this in those noble, and worthy Christians of Berea,
Acts 17 11, 12. They received the Word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so; therefore many of
them believed. You would believe, and be better stablished and settled in the
knowledge and persuasion of that which we teach you, you would receive, and
embrace it with more readiness of mind then you do, if you would take pains
to examine how it is proved, and confirmed, and Deuteronomy. 4.9. Take heed to thy
self, and keep thy soul diligently lest thou forget -- but teach them thy
sons, and thy sons sons. As if he should Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. These words that I
command thee this day, shall be in thine heart, and thou shall teach them
diligently to thy children* and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine
house. But that which ye read in your book, thou shall teach them diligently
unto thy children; the margent of your Bibles says is read thus in the Hebrew,
thou shall whet or sharpen them upon thy children; noting that this repeating,
and conferring with our family of the Word, will whet, and sharpen it, and make
it fitter to work upon our hearts. I think it meet (says the Apostle, 2 Pet.
1.13.) to stir you up by putting you in remembrance* This bringing the Word
to remembrance again, is a mean to stir up our affections unto it.

Applic.
I pray you therefore take notice of your great sin in this as another chief
Psalm. 37.30, 31. The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom, and his tongue
talks of judgment; For the law of his God is in his heart. 2. This silence
of ours proceeds from this, that we are ashamed to speak of Gods Word, Ier.
6.10. Behold the Word of the Lord is unto them a reproach, and o how great a
sin is that? David was of another mind, Ps. 119.46. I will speak of thy
testimonies 2. For repeating of Sermons in your families it is generally
neglected. You are all in your families like Martha to whom our Savior said,
Luke 10.41, 42. Martha, Martha, thou art careful and art troubled about many
things, but one thing is needful. You can spare no time for that one thing, no
not one hour of a week in these long winter nights, no not on the Lords day.
And what hope is there that our labor here in the Church should do you any
good when you will do nothing at home; which (as you have heard) you have as
express a commandment for as we have for the pains we take here at Church.
Or what comfort can you have in your profession of religion, that have so
little care of your families? whereas the Christians that Gods spirit gives
testimony unto in his Word, are ever discribed thus, Ioh. 4.53. himself
believed and his whole house. Acts 10.2. One that feared God, and all his house.

A fourth thing you ought to do after the hearing of the Word is this, that if
Acts 8.34. I pray thee (says he) of whom speaks the Prophet this of
himself, or of some other man? But specially we should do so when we doubt of,
and cannot tell how to understand what we have heard in a Sermon. So did our
Saviors best hearers use to do, Mat. 13.36. His Disciples came to him, saying,
declare to us the parable of the field? So did they again, Mar. 7.17. So did
they also at sundry other times come unto him to be resolved in their doubts
that rose in their minds at the hearing of him, Mat. 17.10. and 19.10. For Mal.
^.7. as the Priests lips should keep knowledge; so the people of God in their
doubts should seek the law at his mouth for he is the messenger of the Lord of
hosts.

This duty also the hearers of the Word do much neglect. Applic.
1. Sometimes indeed through the fault of some Ministers, who count it a great
indignity, and take it in foul scorn that their hearers should make a
question of any thing they teach; and not count every thing an oracle that
comes out of their mouth. But such Ministers should hearken to that which
Christ says, Matthew. 11.29. Learn of me for I am meek, and lowly in heart. He
always showed himself most ready to declare the meaning of any thing he
taught, to them that did demand it; and to resolve them in any doubts, that did
rise in their minds from his doctrine. Yea he was wont to offer himself unto
them this way, and to prevent them when he saw them purposed to ask him such
questions as Ioh. 16.19. Jesus knew that they were desirous to ask him, and
said unto them do ye enquire among your selves of that I said? and thereupon
he took occasion to satisfy them fully in that they doubted of. But 2. The
neglect of this duty proceeds principally from the people themselves, who as
they are apt often times to mistake and misunderstand the preacher, so are they
as ready to go away with it, and slanderously to report most absurd, and
improbable things which they conceive he did teach; and all because they will
not vouchsafe to come to the Minister himself, and to desire him to resolve
them in the things they doubted of. Such hearers Paul himself had, Romans 3.8.
We are slanderously reported of, and some affirm that we say, let us do
evil that good may come, whose damnation is just.

The fifth, and last duty that you are to perform after the hearing of the
Word, Deuteronomy. 5.1. Hear o Israel the statutes, and the judgments which I speak
in your ears this day that ye may learn them, and keep, and do them. 2.
That that we hear is not blessed to us, we receive no good nor comfort by it,
till we practice it, Iam. 1.25. Who so looks into the perfect law of liberty,
and continues therein, he being not a forgetful hearer but a doer of the
work, this man shall be blessed in his deed. 3. It is a great advantage to us
to set presently upon the practice of that we have heard, when God has by his
Word convinced our consciences, and stirred up in us, good desires and
purposes; as it was for them that lay at the poole of Bethesda, to step into it
presently after that the Angel had stirred the water, Ioh. 5.4. For delay will
make the practice of any good duty a great deal more difficult. Which made
Abraham go presently about the circumcising of his family, Genesis 17.23. and the
offering up of his son Isaac, Genes. 2^.3. so soon as ever he had received the
commandment from God to do it. This also made David to use such speed in this
case, as we shall find Psalm. 119.60. I made have, and delayed not to keep thy
command^ments.

Alas then, how can the most of our hearers thrive in grace, or be the better
for that they hear? 1. Few practice any thing they hear, ^eave any sin, do
any good duty ever a whit the more, for any thing they hear, and therefore
must needs prove like the house built upon the sand, when the time of trial
shall come, Mat. 7.26, 27. 2. Many, that when they are hearing, have good
motions, and purposes, yet through delay they vanish, and come to nothing; of
whom (in respect of their spiritual poverty) that may be said which Solomon
speaks, Prove. 24.3^, 34. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little
folding of the hands to sleep; so shall thy poverty come, as one that
travelleth, and thy want as an armed man.

Lecture VIII. On the Title of Psalm 51. December. 14. 1625.
We have already heard that in the means that are here mentioned whereby David
was brought unto repentance, two things are to be observed. 1. That Nathans
ministry was the means to recover him. 2. What that course was that Nathan
held with him, and whereby he did so mightily prevail. The former of these we
finished the last day, and it follows now that we proceed unto the second.

This is set down in the 2. Sam. 12.1. -- 14. But I intend not to handle the
whole speech of Nathan, but only to observe this in it in general, that he
did particularly, and boldly reprove him, and denounce Gods judgment against
him, and by that means he brought him unto repentance. The parable whereby he
laid open the odiousness of his sin in another man's person moved him not,
but when he directed his speech to him in particular, and boldly, and sharply
reproved him, that (through the blessing of God) prevailed mightily with him.

Now from this thus observed, in the course that Nathan took with David, this
Doctrine arises for our instruction.

Doct. 8.
That the ministry that God has sanctified for the conversion of sinners, and
wherein he uses to show his mighty power that way, is such a ministry as
applies the word particularly to the hearers, such as plainly and boldly
reproves sin.

See the proof of this Doctrine in three points.

Eliah speak to a King, 1. Kings 18.18. It is thou and thy fathers house that
have troubled Israel, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of the Lord,
and thou have followed Baalim. So preached John the Baptist (who came also in
the spirit, and power of Eliah, Luke 1.17) to another King Luke 3.19. Herod the
Tetrach was reproved by him for Herodias his brother Philips wife, and for all
the evils that Herod had done. Thus did the Prophet Malachy preach, Mala. 2.1.
And now o ye Priests, this commandment is for you. And thus did the Prophet
Hosea preach, Hos. 5.1. Hear ye this o Priests, and hearken ye house of
Israel, and give ye ear, o house of the King. You see how particularly they
dealt, and how boldly also, not with the common sort of the people only, but
even with Kings, and with Priests; whom it has ever been as dangerous a
matter, and cause of greater persecution to meddle with, then with Kings
themselves. Yea, this was so usual in the ministry of the Prophets, to
reprove and denounce judgments against sin, that it is made a note of
difference to distinguish the true Prophets from the false, Iere. 28.8. The
Prophets that have bin before me, and before thee of old, prophesied both
against many countries, and against great Kingdoms of war, and of evil, and
of pestilence. And Mic. 3.5.8. The Prophets make my people err, that bite with
their teeth, and cry Peace. But truly I am full of power by the spirit of the
Lord, and of judgment, and of might, to declare unto Jacob his transgression,
and to Israel his sin.

Secondly, God has straightly enjoined his servants to preach thus, and
commanded Eliah, John Baptist, and the Prophets, for they (say some) had
another manner of spirit, another manner of power and authority, then the
ministers of the Gospel now have. And indeed I cannot deny but this is true in
some part, for the Prophets. 1. Had an immediate calling from God. 2. Spoke by
divine inspiration, so as they could not err, either in the matter that they
delivered, or in the manner of their delivery, 2. Pet. 1.21. Yet in this point
there is no difference betwixt us, and them, we also are bound as well as they
to apply our doctrine, and to reprove sin boldly, and particularly. Observe
therefore, that this manner of preaching, is enjoined to the ministers under
the Gospel, as a chief work of their ministry. See this first in the
commandment given by that Evangelicall Prophet, Esaias 58.1. Cry aloud, spare
not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgressions,
and the house of Jacob their sins. As if he had said, Do it zealously, and
with feeling, cry aloud; do it boldly, and without partiality, spare not; do
it plainly, and particularly show my people their transgressions, and their
sins. Two other commandments we find for this: the one, Tit. 2.5. These
things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all authority, the other is, 2. Tim
4.^. Preach the word, be instant in season, and out of season, reprove, rebuke,
exhort with all long suffering, and doctrine, Where observe both that
application is made the chief part of preaching, and that reproving of sin,
is made the chief part of application. Yea, observe in what manner the Lord
has commanded his servants to preach, in this manner, thus plainly and boldly
to reprove sin in their ministry, 2. Tim. 4.12. I charge thee before God,
and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead, at his
appearing, and in his Kingdom, preach the Word, reprove, rebuke, etc. And
Iere. 1.17. Gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them, all that I
command thee: be not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee before them.

Thirdly, this kind of preaching is that wherein God has been wont to David,
till Nathan dealt thus roundly, and particularly, and told him, 2. Sam. 1^.7.
Thou art the man, he could do no good on him. By this course also Peter
prevailed so with the three thousand mentioned, Acts 2.36, 37. And so did our
blessed Savior with that woman of Samaria; when he had effectually discovered
to her her foul sin. Job. 4.18. He that thou now live with, is not thy
husband; yea verse 29. He told her all things that ever she did, then she that
before was most secure, and made no reckning of him, but could discourse very
malaperdy with him, now began to have her conscience awakened, and to
acknowledge and reverence him, not only as a Prophet, verse 19. but even as the
Christ, and Savior of the World, verse 29. This is the manner of preaching,
which makes men feel and acknowledge the mighty power of God in his ordinance;
and fall down (as the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 14.24, 25.) and worship God, and
say, of a truth, God is in you, when the hearer feels himself to be
convinced of all, and judged of all, and the secrets of his heart manifested to
him. Now the reasons and grounds of this Doctrine, are principally three.

Reason. 1
First, Every man (through that self love, and hypocrisy that is in his heart)
is apt to put of from himself to others general doctrines and reproves, is
wont to be little moved or affected with them; they make no more use of them
then little children can do of a great loaf that is set before them, the Word
must be cut and divided to them. 2. Tim. 2.15. and every one his own portion
given unto them, by a wise steward, Luk 12.42. or else they will never be able
to make good use of it. The general parable whereby Nathan did notably lay
open the foulness of his sin, made David vehement, and fierce against
another man that should do so, 2. Sam. 12.5, 6. but it never brought him to
any touch of heart for his own sin; but when Nathan applied his doctrine to
him verse 7. then he was humbled, ver. 13. So the Jews while Christ spoke in a
parable (as in general doctrine and reproof) of their sin, they posted it
of to others, and gave a most sharp censure of them that should offend in such
sort, Mat. 21.41. They say unto him, he will miserably destroy those wicked
men, and let out his vineyard unto others, but when he applied it unto them in
particular, ver. 45, 46. then they were moved.

2.
Secondly, Till men's sins be effectually discovered unto them, they can never
attain to any soundness of faith, or of any other saving grace, Tit. 1.13.
Rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith. So we shall find,
John 16.8. that this is the course which the spirit, the comforter, uses to
take in bringing Gods elect to true comfort. When he is come (says our
Savior) he will reprove the world of sin. And Esa. 61.3. None can ever
attain to the happiness to be called trees of righteousness, the planting of
the Lord, till they have first been mourners for sin, and have had in them
the spirit of heaviness. Nay, till then, men can never seriously desire
salvation. So that in this respect also, the ministry whereby God uses to
convert sinners; must needs be such as does plainly, and boldly reprove sin.

Thirdly, The Lord uses to work most mightily with, and to bless the
ministry of such of his servants most, 3.
as are most faithful to him in their ministry. It is the chief grace that
God delights in, and requires in his stewards, and servants, that they be
faithful. 1. Cor. 4.2. It is required in stewards, that a man be found
faithful. Ier. 23.28. He that has my word, let him speak my word faithfully.
Such the Lord uses to work most mightily by. This is given for a reason, why
Levies ministry was so powerful and effectual, that he did turn many away
from iniquity, Mal. 2.5, 6. He did himself fear God, and iniquity was not
found in his lips. Now the faithfulness of Gods messengers, consists
principally in this, even in delivering his whole message, Acts 20.26, 27. I
take you to record, that I am pure from the blood of all men, for I have not
shunned to declare unto you, all the counsel of God. The faithfulness of Gods
steward, consists chiefly in giving to every one in Gods family, their own
portion in due season, Luke 12 4^. The faithfulness of the Preacher consists
in fitting his doctrine to his audience, and discovering to them their special
sins; as Paul did, when he preached before Felix, Acts 24.25. He spoke so of
righteousness, temperance, and the judgment to come, that he made Felix to
tremble.

Use.
This Doctrine serves, 1. for instruction; 2. for exhortation; and 3. for
reproof.

And it serves for the instruction, first of you that are the people of God,
the hearers of his Word, secondly, of us that are his messengers and servants.

And it serves to teach you two things.

First, What is the true cause of that bitter hatred that the World has ever
borne to Gods faithfullest ministers. No people have ever been so much hated
and persecuted in the World as they. Christ bids his Apostles look for no
better entertainment in the World, then to be reviled and persecuted, and to
have all manner of evil spoken of them, and tells them the Prophets of God had
been so used before them, Matthew. 5.11, 12. And Paul says of himself and the
rest of his fellows, that they found their Masters words true, in their own
experience, for they were reviled, and persecuted, and defamed, and counted
continually ( unto this day says he) as the filth of the World, and the
offscouring of all things, 1. Cor. 4.12, 13. And when God opened unto him at
Ephesus, a large and effectual door (that is, blessed his ministry mightily,
and gave it entrance into the hearts of his people) he tells us, there were
many adversaries raised up against him, 1. Cor. 16.9. Yea, this hatred of the
World does so inseparably follow the faithful ministers (as the shadow does
the body) as it is made a note of an unfaithful minister, not to be thus hated
in the World, Luke 6.26. Woe be to you when all men shall speak well of you,
for so did their fathers to the false Prophets. And Gal. 1.10. If I yet (after
so long preaching) pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ. Will you
know the true cause of this; Alas, it cannot otherwise be, they use (according
to the charge the Lord has laid upon them) to cry out boldly, plainly, and
particularly against the sins of all men. When the Prophet Jeremy
complains, Iere. 15.10. that though he had neither lent on usury, nor
borrowed on usury, yet every one did curse him: he gives this for the reason of
it, that he was a man of strife, and a man of contention with the whole earth.
And this reason Ahab gives, why he hated Mi^ajah the Prophet, for he does not
prophecy good concerning me, but evil, says he. 1. Kings 22.8. The two
witnesses by their ministry did vex and torment men, Revel. 11.10. And this
has made many a good man even afraid to enter upon this thankelesse office and
function. Moses was so, as you shall find by the excuses he made, Exodus 3.11.
and 4.10. And Jeremy was so, Ier. 1.6. And Jonah was so, Jonah 1.3. Yea for
this cause, many a good man being in this function, has had strong tentations,
either to give it over, or at least to give over his faithfulness in reproving
sin, because it bred him so much displeasure and hatred of men. So was it
with good Jeremy, Iere. 20.9. I said I will not make mention of him, nor speak
any more in his name, (I will give over preaching) but his Word was in my heart
as burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I
could not stay. Think not, think not (beloved) that it is any pleasure to us,
to cry out against your sins; Alas, we are menlike your selves, too desirous to
have every bodies good will; it may be it troubles us as much to do it, as it
does you, and we would be as glad to forbear it, as you would have us to be,
if we could do it, if we durst do it. Consider well I pray you of this true
cause, why we are so disliked, and hated in the world, and you will discern
great cause. 1. Why you should not be apt to receive the evil reports you may
hear of Gods faithful ministers, 1. Tim. 5.19. Against an Elder ^eceive not
an accusation; Alas man, consider evil will never speak well. 2. Why you
should pray heartily for them that God would protect, comfort, and encourage
them, as the Apostle teaches you, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2. Pray for us, that we may
be delivered from unreasonable men. For Satan and his instruments will never
give over practicing against them. 3. Why your selves should yield them all the
comfort, and encouragement, you can in their ministry, as Paul speaks
concerning Epaphroditus, Phil 2.29. Receive him in the Lord with all gladness,
and hold such in reputation. Matthew. 10.41. He that receives a Prophet, in the
name of a Prophet (loves him the better for his faithfulness) shall receive a
Propets reward.

Secondly, this doctrine serves to teach you how profitable it is for the
people of God to have, and to depend upon an ordinary ministry of such as
know These. 5.12 We beseech you brethren to know them that labor among you,
and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you. David knew this, and therefore
though he were himself a great Prophet, yet kept three Seers and Prophets
about him that lived with him continually, but to know him well, and to observe
his ways, that they might do him the more good by their ministry, the one
was Nathan, 2. Sam. 7.2. the other Gad, 2. Sam. 24.11. and the third was
Ieduthun. 2. Chron. 35.15. Yea, be willing and desirous thy minister should
know thee well by questioning with thee himself, or enquiring into thy ways.
It is no true wisdom, but extreme folly to seek so carefully to hide and
conceal your faults from the^ that might minister strength to you against
them. Thy Physician that should minister physic to thee for the health of thy
body, thou desire may thoroughly know the state of thy body, before he
minister unto thee. And thou will make thy case fully known to thy Lawyer. Nay
thou desire that the Tailor that should make thee a garment, should first
take measure of thee. How much more does it concern thee, that thy minister
should know thee well. For indeed, they that are strangers unto you, and know
not your ways, cannot apply their Doctrine to you so particularly, nor so well
meet with your special sins, and consequently (as you have heard) not preach
unto you with that power and profit, as they might do, if they knew you better.

Lecture IX. On the Title of Psalm 51. December 21. 1625.
Follows the use of instruction, that concerns us that are ministers, and
Preachers of the Gospel. For seeing that if we would do good by our ministry,
we must apply our Doctrine to our hearers, and boldly, and plainly, reprove
their sins; and that this is a chief work, and duty of our ministry; we
learn that five propertyes had need be in him that would perform the work of
the ministry faithfully.

First, He had need know his people well. The minister had need not only P^t.
5.1, 2 The Elders which are among you, I exhort, feed the flock that is among
you. The Lord wheresoever he plants a vineyard, builds a watchtower, for the
keeper of it in the midst of it, Esa. 5.2. In this point, our Savior makes
himself a pattern, and samplar to all good pastors, John 10.14. I am the good
shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. And so does Paul, when he
says, he taught them not only publickely, but from house to house, Acts
20.20. and in the care he had to know the state of the Philippians, Phil. 2.19.
Phil. 2.19. I trust in the Lord Jesus, to send Timotheus shortly unto you, that
I also may be of good comfort, when I know your state. And of the
Thessalonians. 1. These. 3.5. For this cause, when I could no longer forbear, I
sent to know your faith. This then (the estate of his flock) is one of the
books the minister must study, if he would preach well, for certainly, such
will be best able to apply the Word well. Tychicus was sent to the Colossians,
that he might know their estate, and comfort 4.8. He could not rightly apply
the Word to their comfort (no more could he do to the exhorting or reproving of
them) till he knew their estate.

Secondly, he had need be himself of an unblameable life, a godly man, 1. Tim.
3.2. A Bishop must be blameless. Take heed to your selves (says Paul to the
Elders of Ephesus, Acts 20.28.) and to the flock. For, 1. no man can feelingly
and conscionably reprove sin in others, that does not fear and hate sin in
himself, Matthew. 7.5. Hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own
eye, and then shall thou see clearly, how to cast out the mote out of thy
brothers eye. 2. If he could reprove sin well, yet till he have by his
conversation, gained authority in the hearts of the people, his reproves will
do little good. Tit. 2.15. These things speak* and exhort, and rebuke, with
all authority; let no man despise thee. They will despise him, and his
reproves, that takes upon him to control and rebuke them, before he has
gained authority in their hearts. Reproof prevails not, nor is wont to be
well taken, but from the mouth of a righteous man, Psalm. 141.5. Let the
righteous smite me, and it shall be a kindness, let him reprove me, it shall
be an excellent oil.

Thirdly, He had need be a wise man. Therefore it is said, 1. Cor. 2.^. the
word of wisdom, as to the Doctor, whose office is to interpret the Word,
and to teach doctrine, the word of knowledge. So when the Prophet Micah would
show how God by his spirit had enabled him to reprove sin, he says Micah 3.8.
He was by the spirit of the Lord, full of judgment, to declare unto Jacob his
transgression, and unto Israel his sin. He had need of judgment and
discretion, that should do this well. So he that should give the Lords
hou^hold their portion of meat in due season, must not only be a faithful,
but also a wise steward, Luke. 12.42. great wisdom is required to do this
well; specially to reprove sin, so as it ought to be reproved. A reproof
wisely given, is of great force, and likely to prevail, Eccle. 7.5. It is
better to hear the rebuke of the wise, then the song of fools, Prove. 25.12.
As an eare-ring of gold, and as ornament of fine gold, so is a wise reprover
upon an obedient ear. As if he had said, It is a greater grace and ornament to
a man, to have an obedient care, to receive reproof, then any care-ring or
jewel in the world can be; but what reproof? Surely, such as is given by a
wise reproover. The best ear that is, will hardly receive a reproof that is
foolishly, and undiscreetly given. Now this wisdom, and discretion that is
required in him that should reprove sin, consists in four things specially.

First, He must not be apt to note and reprove every thing that he sees to be
Pro. 19.11. The discretion of a man deferreth his anger: and it is his glory to
pass over a transgression. And 20.3. It is an honor for a man to cease from
strife, but every fault will be meddling. When Thomas out of his infidelity, and
coffeehouse had said, John 11.16, Come let us go, and dye with him our
Savior did not reprove him, nor seem so much as to have heard and observed
his speech.

Secondly, He must be able substantially to prove that to be a sin which he
Timothy, 2. Tim. 4.2. to reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and
doctrine. And says Tit. 1.9. that the minister must be able by sound doctrine,
both to exhort, and convince the gainsayers. Better were it a great deal,
that we would hold our peace, then cry out zealously against such things as we
cannot by sound doctrine, and proofs out of Gods word convince, and prove to
be sins. To such reprovers it may be said, as Job said to his friends that
reproved him for his hypocrisy, Job 6.25. How forcible are right words? but
what does your arguing reprove?

Thirdly, He must have due respect to the persons whom he does reprove. Tim.
5.1. Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a Father. The Prophets themselves
when they were to reprove Kings, showed this wisdom. When Daniel was to
interpret Nabuchadnezzars dream, and so to discover to him his fearful
estate, see how dutiful respect he showed to his place and calling, Dan. 4. in
three verses of that chapter, verse 19, 24, 27. And the Lord speaks of it, as
of a priveledge particularly belonging to himself to reprove Kings bitterly,
Job 34.18. Is it fit to say to a King, thou ar^ wicked? and to Princes, ye are
ungodly? 2. Obstinate sinners are more bitterly, and sharply to be reproved,
then such as sin of ignorance, and infirmity, Jude. 22.23. Of some have
compassion, making a difference; and others save with fear, pulling them out
of the fire. 3. In reproving such sins, as some of his hearers that fear
God, and have tender hearts, may be guilty of, he must so temper his reproof,
as they may not be discouraged, or wounded by it. This wisdom you shall see
the Apostle used, 1. Cor. 6.9.11. When he had said, neither fornicators, nor
adulterers, nor thieves, nor railers, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners shall ever go to heaven, he adds by way of a prevention, verse.
11. and such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye
are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. The
like you shall see, Heb. 6.9. Beloved, we are persuaded better things of you,
and things that accompany salvation, though we thus speak.

Mat. 9.6. When the times are so evil as they will not bear such matters to
be touched, the prudent servants of God will keep silence, or so deliver the
truth as Gods people may be edified, and not advantage given to the adversary.
Amos. 5 13. Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that time, for it is
an evil time. And for the second respect, for which a faithful minister may
forbear to reprove sin; that is, when he can see no hope of prevailing, or
doing good by it; we have also the example of our blessed Savior to warrant
it. He did utterly dislike the foolish ceremony, and custom the Jews had to
parisie and wash themselves so often, and yet at the marriage feast in Cana of
Galilee, where he saw six great water-pots containing two or three sirkins a
piece, set for that purpose, John 2.6. he found no fault with it. Why? He saw
no hope that his speech in that place, and at that time would do any good. And
for both these respects we have a notable example in Paul, who when he was in
Ephesus, where Diana was worshipped, and many got great wealth by that
Idolatry, yet was he never heard in his ministry to exclaim against Diana,
nor against that Idolatry, as the towne-clearke himself witnesses, Acts
19.37. Why? had he no zeal against so shameful idolatry? yes certainly; no
man more, as you may see Acts 17.16. His spirit was stirred in him, when he saw
the City of Ath^^ns wholly given to idolatry. Why then was he so silent at
Ephesus* Surely, 1. he saw such an invective would have done no good, 2. that
it would have presently abridged his liberty, and raised bitte^ persecution
against him And thus we have seen what wisdom a minister should use in
reproving of sin. Even the badnesse of the times may warrant the ministers
silence this way, Amos. 5.13.

Fourthly, The minister had need be a peaceable man, not given Tim. 5.8. 2
The Law, and the magistrates help for righting men in their wrongs, is Gods
ordinance, which a godly minister may lawfully seek unto; as is plain in
Paul's example, who Acts 25 11. who appealed unto Caesar. But the minister of
God, should not be a man given unto suits, and contentions with his people, he
ought to shun it as much as in him lies. All men should so do, Romans 12.18. If
it be possible as much as lies in you, be peaceable with all men; but
specially a minister, 1. Tim. 3.3. he must be a patient man, and no brawler.
When he reproves the sins of the people, he shall never have hope to
prevail, or do good, unless he can say with Paul. 2. Cor. 12.14. I seek not
yours, but you; and as he does in another place, when he had sharply reproved
them, Galat. 4.12. Brethren, I beseech you be as I am, for I am as ye are, ye
have not injured me at all. As if he should have said, think not I am so
vehement against you, because of any personal wrong ye have done unto me.
Moses that was so fierce and hot in Gods quarrel, as you may see Exodus 32 19,
^0, 29. was in his own quarrels and wrongs done to himself the meekest man in
the world. Numb. 12.3.

Fifthly, and lastly. He had need to love his people well, and approve by his
Rom 15.14. I am persuaded ye are full of goodness, able to admonish one
another; nothing fits a man better to this duty, then goodness does. No man
will take a reproof well from him that he thinks loves him not* Prove. 27.6.
Faithful are the wounds of a friend. Yea, even in reproving of sin, the
minister that would do good, must be careful to express his love unto them.
And therefore, 1. He must not reprove si^ in rage, and distemper of passion.
The good Surgeon when he is to cut off a member, is careful Nehemiah had heard
of the shameful extortion and oppression used by the rulers and rich men, he
was very angry, but he would not reprove them in a sudden heat and passion,
but paused and consulted with himself before he would do it, Nehe. 5.6, 7. And
great reason is given for this, James 1.20. The wrath of man works not the
righteousness of God.

Secondly, he must not reprove sin merrily, or in a flouting and girding Mar.
3.5. he was angry with them, but he was also grieved for the hardness of their
hearts, and Paul who speaking 2. Cor. 12.21. of his coming to reprove the
sins of that people, says, that the seeing of them would humble him, and he
should bewail their state. And Phil. 3.18. speaking of many among them, who
were enemies to the cross of Christ, he says he told it them weeping, he
took no pleasure in it.

Thirdly, He must so reprove his peoples sin, as (if it be possible) he may set
no brand of reproach upon the persons of the offenders. Indeed this Matthew.
18.15, 16. First, tell him his fault between thee and him alone, then take
with thee but one or two more. We count it a singular commendation in a
Surgeon, when he can cure a wound in a man's face, as he leaves no skar behind,
indeed some wounds are so great as this cannot be helped, yet is the skill of
the Surgeon greatly commended for this; so is it in a minister, when he can
reprove the faults of any of his people, and effectually too, and yet set not a
brand of ignominy, and reproach upon their persons.

Use 2.
Follows the second use of this Doctrine, and that is for exhortation, that
seeing the ministry that God has sanctified to convert sinners, and whereby
he has bin wont for to work most effectually, is such as applies the Word
particularly, such as boldly and plainly reproves sin; and that the very
life and power of preaching, consists in this. That therefore every one of us
would desire to enjoy such a ministry, as applies the Word, and brings it
home to our hearts, as pierces and searches most, as with greatest plainness
and power reproves sin. I say not only you should strive to be able to bear
it, and submit your selves to it, to suffer the word of exhortation. Heb.
13.22. David a great King did so here. But I say we should desire it, as David
also did, Psalm. 141.5. Let the righteous smi^e me. For, 1. the best have need
of it, David had as we see here. Till our sins be effectually discovered to
us, we will never seek salvation seriously, and in good earnest. This was it
that brought John's hearers to cry, Luke 3.10. What shall we do? as appears
verse 9. Now also is the axe laid to the root of the trees; Every tree
therefore that brings not forth good fruit, is bewen down and cast into the
fire; and this made those three thousand to cry to the Apostles Acts 2.37.
What shall we do? 2. It is a blessed sign of grace, when we can desire to
have our own special sins discovered, and beaten down, John 3.20, 21. He
that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds
should be reproved; But he that does truth (that is, sincere, and upright in
heart) comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are
wrought in God.

Use 3.
The third, and last use of this Doctrine, is for reproof of the general sin
and epedemicall disease of this age, that no man can now endure such a
ministry as Nathans was here to David. All men now adays take upon them to
limit, and gage Gods ministers, saying unto them as they did Esa. 30.10.
Prophecy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things. This age
cannot bear a plain and powerful ministry, Amos 7.10. but as it is said
Amos 5.10. they hate him that rebukes in the gate, (the judge that censureth,
and punishes sin) and they abhor him that speaks uprightly, the minister
that faithfully delivers the message of God unto them. Men can well endure to
hear a point of controversy, or of general doctrine learnedly handled, yea
to have sundry sins in a general manner eloquently inveighed against, but
their own sins to be particularly, and powerfully reproved, that they cannot
brook.

While our Savior preached the glad tidings of the Gospel, Luke 4 18, 19, 21.
all the congregation of Nazareth applauded his doctrine, and admired the
gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth, verse 22. but when he came to
apply the Word unto themselves, verse 24.27. they were filled with wrath
against him, thrust him out of the City, and would have cast him down
headlong from the brow of the hill. verse 28, 29. And from this humor in the
people (through Gods just judgment) it is come to pass, that this kind of
preaching is now grown much out of use; as if God had said in his wrath, as
Hos. 4.4. Yet let no man strive or reprove another: for this people are as they
that strive with the Priest. The reasons of it are, 1. Men love their sins as
their right hand, or eye, Matthew. 5.29. and therefore count him their enemy
that would put them from them. Have thou found me, O mine enemy? says Ahab
to Eliah, 1. Kings 21.20. And our Savior says, John 3.20. Every one that does
evil hates the light. 2. Such kind of preaching awakeneth their conscience,
and sets the worm thereof a gnawing of them, it tormenteth them, Revel. 11.10.
and makes them cry out with a loud voice, (as he did that had the spirit of an
unclean devil, Luke 4.33, 34.) saying, let us alone; what have we to do with
thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to destroy us? 3. God does manifest
his presence and mighty power in such a ministry, 1. Cor. 14.25. and the
nature of sin is to make men afraid of Gods presence, and to hide themselves
from him, as Adam did, Genesis 3.8. This made Peter fall down at Jesus knees,
saying, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man o Lord, Luke 5.8. And this made
the whole multitude of the Country of the Gadarenes to beseech Christ to
depart from them, Luke 8.35, ^7. For they were taken with great fear (says
the text) when they beheld his mighty power, in healing the man possessed with
devils. Now to discover to these men their folly and madness, I wish they would
seriously weigh and consider these four things.

First, that the minister in reproving some, does no more then he has
authority Tit. 2.15. these things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all
authority. It is a chief duty, and work of our ministry, if we do not this,
we do nothing to the purpose; as is plain by that charge Paul gives. 2. Tim.
4.1, 2. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge
the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom; preach the word, be
instant in season, and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long
suffering, and doctrine. A minister that has lost his gift in reproving sin,
is like a Be that has lost her sting, a drone, and good for nothing, Matthew.
5.13. Ye are the salt of the earth; but if the salt have lost his savor,
wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be
cast out, and to be trodden under feet of men. God has enjoined us to do this
upon pain of damnation, and says, if we do it not, he will require your blood
at our hands, Ezekiel. 3, 18 Alas, we are but messengers, servants, ambassadors,
2. Cor. 5.20. and what wise man will be angry with a servant, messenger, or
ambassador, for doing that he is charged to do by his master, and dares not
but do it?

Secondly, Consider that it is a dangerous sin, to hate or be offended with the
Chron 26.19. While Vzia was wrath with the Priests, the leprosy rose up in his
forehead.

Thirdly, It is a dangerous sign, God has determined the destruction of a
Prove. 15.10. He that hates reproof shall dye. 1. Sam. 2.25. Elyes sons
hearkened not to the words of their father, because the Lord would slay them.

Fourthly, That it is an extreme folly for men, to shun this kind of
preaching, Eliphaz speaks of the man, whom God in mercy humbles by his
corrections, Job 5.17.18. Happy is the man whom God corrects, therefore
despise not thou the chastening of the almighty; for he makes sore, and
binds up, he^ wounds, and his hands make whole. A divine power indeed is
manifested, and felt in this kind of preaching, but it is the power of God unto
salvation. Romans 1.16 Yea, Gods people may expect healing, and comfort by that
very ministry (if they wait upon God in it) by which they find themselves to
be much troubled and disquieted. For God has been wont to make choice of that
very hand to heal his people, by which he has wounded them before. Nathans
ministry that was Gods instrument to humble David, and cast him down, was
also his instrument to comfort, and raise him up. For he did not only assure
him upon his repentance that his sins were forgiven him, 2 Samuel 12.13. but
brought him also from God another comfortable message, that Solomon's name (whom
Bathsheba bare unto him) should be called Iedidiah beloved of the Lord, 2 Samuel
12.25. So Esayes ministry that was Gods instrument to humble Hezekiah, Esaias
38.1.3. was also his instrument to comfort him, verse 4, 5. So Peter that
pricked, and wounded those three thousand, Acts 37. was also the man by whom
God healed, and cured them, as you may see verse 38 -- 41. Whereas by shunning
to have thy heart troubled, by having thy sins discovered in the ministry of
the Word, thou can not avoid the sight of thy sins, and trouble of mind for
them. For God will certainly one time or other sooner or latter discover thy
sins unto thee, and trouble thy heart for them. Psalm. 50.21. I will reprove
thee, and set thy sins in order before thine eyes. And when God shall
discover thy sins to thee and wound thy heart for them by another means,
then the ministry of his Word, thou can have no such assurance to have thy
heart quieted again, as then may in those troubles that the Word works in
thy mind; those wounds will not be such as the Surgeon makes to cure thee,
but such as a butcher or enemy makes to kill, and destroy thee, so that in
shunning this kind of Preaching, thou do as the fish, that leapeth out of the
hot pan, into the fire. But there are certain objections which men usually
make against this kind of preaching, which I will briefly answer and so
conclude this point.

Object. 1
First, it is objected that some preachers in their invectives against sin, will
rail and give bitter, and opprobrious terms unto men; and a minister should
be patient no railer no brauler, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.3. It becomes not
a Minister to be so bitter in terms, as many of you are.

Answ.
I answer that in reproving obstinate, and scandalous sinners, it is no way
unlawful or unseemely for a Minister to be bitter, and sharp. For so was not
only John the Baptist when he called the Pharisees, and Saddu^es a generation
of vipers, Mat. 3.7. And Paul in speaking this to Elymas the sorcerer, Acts
13.10. O full of all subtlety, and mischief, thou child of the devil, thou
enemy to all righteousness. But our blessed Savior himself; who though he
was in his own quarrel so mild as the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 2.23. when he was
reviled, he reviled not again when he suffered, he threatened not; yet in
reproving obstinate sinners was most sharp, and bitter. He calls the ruler
of the Synagogue hypocrite to his face, Luke 13.15. and speaks thus to the
Scribes, and Pharisees, Mat. 23.33. Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how
can ye escape the damnation of hell? So speaks the Prophet, Esa. 1.10. Hear
the Word of the Lord, ye rulers of Sodom, give ear unto the law of our God,
ye people of Gomorrah.

Object. 2
Secondly, Oh but some of you in your heat when you are in reproving sin have a
most unseemely fashion of crying out, and stemping, and beating of the Pulpit
as if you were beside your selves; whereas a Minister should be grave, and
sober in his whole behavior, as the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 3.2. specially in
the pulpit.

Answ. 1.
I answer, 1. That though the power of the ministry consists not so much in
the extension of the voice nor in the earnest manner of delivery, as in the
doctrine it self and matter that is delivered. It is the law of the Lord it
self that converteth the soul, Psalm. 19.7. The Word of God it self is quick,
and powerful, and sharper then any two edged sword, Heb. 4 12. And 2 it is but
counterfeit, and ridiculous zeal when a preacher uses such great extension of
voice, 2.
and heat in his gestures, when the matter that he deals inforceth him not
to it, when he is as hot in his doctrine, as in his application in one point as
in another, when those shows of heat come not from the abundance of his
heart, but the lips are burning, and the heart naught (as Solomon speaks,
Pro. 26.23.) like a potsheard covered with silver dross. Yet is it a foul
error to think it unlawful or unseemely for a Minister at any time to use this
heat, and earnestness both in voice, and gesture* specially in reproving of
sin. Nay it is needful, and profitable for Gods people that their Ministers
should express their zeal, and fervent affections that way. When his Spouse
was a sleep Christ knocked, and bounced at the door of her heart, Cant. 5.2.
In which respect we shall find God has enjoined his Ministers to preach in
this manner, Esa. 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet,
and show my people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins: and
Ezekiel. 6.11. Smite with thy hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say alas for all
the evil abominations of the house of Israel. And admit there be some
indecency in it, yet know that matters of decency must always give place to
edification; and to further the edification of Gods people it well becomes Gods
servant even to forget himself, in a matter of decency. For this we have the
example of our blessed Savior, not only in making a scourge, and whipping the
buyers, and sellers out of the the temple, where the zeal of Gods house did
even eat him up, Ioh. 2.15. but even in this very case of preaching, Ioh.
7.37. In the last, and great day of the feast he stood up, and cried. And if
this make us contemptible in the eyes of any, as David's dancing and leaping in
a zealous joy before the Arc did him in the eyes of Michal, 2 Samuel 6.16. we
must answer such as he did her, 2 Samuel 6.21, 22. It is unto the Lord that we
do thus, and we will be yet more vile then thus, and will be base in our own
sight, and Gods people will esteem of us never the less for this, though such
as Michal was do despise us in their hearts for it.

Thirdly, Object. 3.
but such of you as are always chiding of us, and inveighing against us show
plainly you bear no love to us, nor think well of us, but count us as
reprobates, or as men profane, and void of all religion, and how can we love or
esteem well of you that think no better of us? or how can we profit by your
ministry when we are persuaded you love us not?

I answer, Answ.
that men are greatly deceived in judging thus, Gal. 4.16. Am I therefore
become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? Certainly there is no greater
argument a Minister loves his people well then this, when he does plainly
reprove their sins. Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy
heart, then shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon
him. For 1. Though we do think ill of you, and are persuaded you are not yet
in the state of grace, but profane, and void of religion (for how can we think
otherwise of a great many) yet may we love you unfainedly for all that, if we
pity your case, and pray for you, and use the best means we can to win you
to God. Our Savior did not think well of Jerusalem that killed the Prophets,
and stoned them that were sent unto her, and yet he loved Jerusalem dearly, as
appears by his pitying her case and weeping over her, Luke 19.41. He did not
think well of the Jews that crucified him, and judged them to be in a
fearful state, and yet he loved them for all that, as appears by his praying
for them, Luke 23.34. Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.
The Thessalonians that might not keep company with them that would not obey
the doctrine of the Apostles, declared by that, that they did not think well
of them, yet so long as they did admonish them, and use means to bring them
unto repentance, they did not count them as enemies, but loved them as
brethren, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14, 15. 2. We may not only love you well but also think
well of you, and judge you to be in the state of grace as well as ourselves,
and yet sharply reprove that that we see to be a miss in you. Our Savior
loved dearly his elect Apostles, and thoughtfull well of them, and often
pronounces them to be in a blessed estate. Luk* 6.20. Blessed are ye poor,
etc. and Mat. 13.16. Blessed are your eyes for ye see, etc. And of Peter, Mat.
16.17. Blessed art thou Simon Barjona. Yet did he reprove them often for that
that was amiss in them, and that very sharply, and bitterly, Mat. 16.8. O ye
of little faith; and 17.17. O faithless, and perverse generation. And to Peter
he says, Mat. 16.23. Get thee behind me Satan, for thou art an offense unto
me, for thou savourest not the things that be of God.

Object. 4.
Fourthly, I grant this is true that you say, a Minister may love his people and
think well of them too though he do reprove their sins. But then he should
deal with them in private, if he knew ought to be amiss in them, but when he
will cry out against them, and disgrace them publicly what love is there in
that? Who can take that well?

Answ.
I answer, 1. No faithful Minister dare publicly reprove or note or disgrace
any person for any sin, that is private. For he knows he is bound by the
commandment of Christ, Mat. 18.15. to tender the credit of the offenders; but
if any man's sin be publicly notorious, and scandalous he must not take it
ill to be reproved publicly; he must not from this argue that the Minister
loves him not. You doubt not (I dare say) but Paul loved Peter well at all
times, yet when he saw that he sinned scandalously, and by his example drew
Barnabas, and others to dissemble he reproved Peter (not secretly but) before
them all, Gal. 2.14. And we have a plain commandment for this, 1 Timothy 5.20.
Them that sin (he means openly, and with scandal) rebuke before all, that
others also may fear. 2. To have any sin that thou art given unto to be
sharply, and publicly reproved (so that thy person be not noted, nor the fault
that was private before made public, and notorious by the manner of reproving
it in the public ministry) is no wrong or disgrace to thee at all. Yea if we
knew all the sins that any of you are given unto, and did in every Sermon that
we make, meet with them, and sharply reprove them, this were a great argument
of our love to you, and care of your souls and would be a great benefit unto
you. Or else David was deceived when he prayed, Psalm. 141.5. Let the righteous
smite me, for that is a benefit: and Solomon when he said Pro. 6.23. Reproves
of instruction, are the way of life. 3. O that men were so willing as they
pretend to be admonished privately. Alas few are so, most men will be ready as
those dogs that our Savior speaks of, Mat. 7.6. to turn again, and bite,
and rent them that shall offer to perform this office of love unto them. But
if you were so willing as you pretend, yet is it not always fit that we should
in private admonish or charge you with the faults we hear and suspect to be in
you; because in personal reproves, we must be able to convince you not only
that it is a sin, we hear to be in you, but also that you are guilty of it. In
personal reproof of sin we must have better proofs then hearsay, and
strive to be like unto Christ our Master of whom it is said, Esa. 11.3. He
shall not reprove, after the hearing of his ears.

Object. 5
Fifthly, admit all this be so; yet many of you that are Ministers blemish your
selves much and loose the hearts of your people by this that you are so apt to
hearken to tale-bearers, and pickethankes, and then to broach in the pulpit
whatsoever you hear. So that we can do nothing in our houses but we shall be
sure to hear of it in the pulpit; and who can take this well? These
tale-bearers are the odiousest people in the world (say they) and the only
make-bates between the Minister and his flock; as Solomon says, Pro. 26.20.
Where there is no talebearer the strife cease.

Answ. 1.
I answer, First, it were surely a great fault in the Minister if he should
believe, or if he should reprove you upon every light hearesay. He that would
go to heaven must not take up (or receive easily) a reproach against his
neighbor, Psalm. 15.3.

2.
Secondly, this has been of old falsely laid to the charge of Gods servants; as
it was to Ieremiahs, Ier. 43.3. Baruch the son of Neriah sets thee on
against us, for to deliver us into the hand of the Caldeans, that they might
put us to death.

Thirdly, 3.
it may fall out that we in our ministry may meet with such faults of yours
particularly as we never heard you were guilty of, nor ever suspected you of;
this has often fallen out; and when you find it to be so, you must therein
acknowledge the divine, and searching power of Gods Word, and not imagine that
some talebearer has been with us, Heb. 4.12. the Word is said to be a
discerner (a discoverer, and a judge) of the thoughts, and intents of the
heart. And the unlearned man, and unbeleever that came to hear the Prophet,
finds himself reproved for such faults, and such secrets of his met with all
in their ministry, as he knew well the Prophets themselves could never know,
none but the Lord could be acquainted with, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.

Fourthly, it is not always unlawful to reprove your sins even upon hearesay.
So did Ely, 4.
1 Samuel* 2.23. Why do you such things for I hear of your evil dealings. And
Paul, 1 Cor. 11.18. I hear there be divisions among you, and I partly believe
it. It is like some wicked men would be apt enough to say then, to Ely and Paul
what talebearer what pickthanke has been with you? Do you know or see any
such matter in us your selves? Yet do they reprove them, even upon that they
had heard of them.

Fifthly, we may lawfully reprove in our ministry the faults we hear to be in
you though we be not certain of it, 5.
nay though we hope better of you. Because the reproof may do good to others
that be guilty of them, and to your selves also though you be not guilty, to
make you the more fearful to fall into them. So the Apostle speaks of the
sin against the Holy Ghost, and of universal Apostasy to the Hebrews though
he were fully persuaded they were not guilty of that sin, as he says, Heb.
6.9. We are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany
salvation. Nay it were a benefit to you, if we were so fully, and particularly
acquainted with all your ways that in every Sermon we might meet particularly
with your errors, sins, weaknesses, and tentations. We could in nothing show
our love to you more then in this. When Christ spoke in the greatest assemblies
he was wont to aim in his doctrine, chiefly at them whom he loved best, Luke
12.1.

LECTVRES ON PSALM. LI. 1, 2.
Lecture X. on Psalm LI. 1, 2. December XXVII. MDCXXV.
1. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness; according
unto the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions.

2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.


THE last day we finished the Title of this Psalm, it follows now that we
proceed to the Psalm it self. Now the matter, and substance of the Psalm is
a prayer of David. 1. For himself to the end of the 17. verse. 2. For the
Church (the good estate whereof he had greatly hazarded and endangered by his
sin) in the two last verses.

The prayer he makes for himself consists of two petitions: whereof the 1
concerns his justification consisting in the forgiveness of his sins, and
the imputation of Christ's righteousness unto him; and the 2 his sanctification
consisting in the mortifying of his corruption, and the renewing of his heart
by the spirit of God; both which are amplified by certain arguments, whereby
he does confirm his faith in both these petitions.

These two verses which contain the sum, and effect of his first petition
have two principal things to be observed in them. 1. The ground of his faith,
and hope, in this his request, what gave him hope to obtain the pardon of his
sin? Surely the knowledge he had of the mercy of God, he pleads nothing but
mercy, Have mercy upon me O God. Why but what ground of hope could he have that
ever God would have mercy, upon such a wretch as he was, that had sinned in so
heinous, and odious a manner, and had hardened his heart so long in his sin?
Surely none other but the knowledge he had of the Lords gracious disposition.
1. Of his loving kindness, whereby he was apt to show mercy to his people, of
his own free grace without all respect to any desert that may be in them. 2.
Of the tenderness of his mercies, and those bowels of compassion that are in
him whereby he is apt to be affected, and grieved with the misery of his
people, and moved even thereby without any other respect to show mercy to them.
3. Of the multitude, and infiniteness of Gods mercies whereby he is apt to
pardon the sins of his people, though they be never so many though he has
forgiven them never so often already. The knowledge (I say) that David had of
these three things in the Lords gracious disposition, gave him hope to find
mercy with God, for the pardon of his sin, though it were so great, and
heinous. Have mercy upon me O God according to thy loving kindness; according
unto the multitude of thy tender mercies. The second thing to be observed in
these two verses, is the vehement, and earnest manner of propounding, and
expressing this his request to God, for the pardon of his sins, which
appears. 1. In the aggravating of his sins. 1. He was guilty of offenses of
all sorts and kinds, transgressions, iniquities, and sins. 2. His sins were
debts written, and recorded in Gods debt-booke, and such things as made him
filthy, and loathsome in Gods eyes, and his own; so as he was utterly undone,
if God showed not mercy on him. 2. By iterating his request so often, blot out,
wash me, cleanse me. 3. By the extent, and measure of this mercy he craved;
Wash me thoroughly, or multiply thy washings, and rinsings, and scourings of
me. As if he had said* I am so filthy that once washing, a little washing, will
not serve to cleanse me.

Now the words being thus opened we have this first to observe in them; Nota.
that David being now in extreme anguish of soul, his sins were ever before
him, verse 3. sleeping, and waking, wheresoever he was, whatsoever he was
doing, he could never look of them: he had lost the joy of Gods salvation,
verse 12. all comfort in assurance of Gods favor; he was so tormented inwardly
as a man that has all his bones broken, verse 8. yet does not be despair nor
seek help any other way, but flies to God by prayer, and seeks comfort
that way, which teaches us,

That Gods people when they are in any distress, Doct. 9.
must fly to God by prayer and seek comfort that way. For so did David here,
and so have Gods people always done in the like case. Thus did David at
another time, Psalm. 120.1. in my distress I cried unto the Lord. And Psalm. 107
6. They cried unto the Lord in their trouble.

Three cases there be wherein Gods people, have been most distressed.

First, when some outward affliction has been upon them in extremity, or
David's choice, 2. Sam. 24.13, 14.

Secondly, when they have been troubled with some strong and violent tentation
Paul, Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body
of this death? Much more when God has sent Satan to stand at their right hand
as Psalm. 109.6. that was a thorn in Paul's flesh, 2 Cor. 12.7. For he is an
enemy to be feared much more then any mortal man; as we may see by that
comparison Paul makes, Ephesians. 6.12. We wrestle not against flesh, and blood,
but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness
of this world, etc.

Thirdly, when their consciences have been wounded with the sense of Gods Pro.
18.14. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity, but a wounded spirit
who can bear?

Now in all these cases Gods people have sought, and found comfort by flying to
God, and seeking to him by prayer.

Iehoshaphat, and the people of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. Iehoshaphat feared, and
set himself to seek the Lord, and cries thus to God, verse 12. We have no
might to stand against this great company that comes against us, neither know
we what to do, but our eyes are upon thee. This course took David when he had
many enemies in the Court of Saul, that by informing the King against him, did
seek his life, Psalm. 109.4. For my love they are mine adversaries, but I give
my self unto prayer. Thus Job fought comfort, Job. 16.20. My friends scorn
me, but mine eye powers out tears unto God. And so did Ann:, 1. Sam, 1.10.
She was in bitterness of soul, and prayed unto the Lord* and wept sore.

Paul, who when the messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him. 2. Cor. 12.7.
ran to God by prayer for help and comfort, as he says ver. 8. For this thing
I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.

David's example here, and Psalm. 18.5, 6. The sorrows of hell compassed me
about, the snares of death prevented me. In my distress I called upon the
Lord, and cried unto my God. Yea, we have for this a greater example then
David, even our blessed Saviors, who, when he was in far greater anguish of
soul, then ever all the men of the World were in, through the apprehension and
sense of Gods curse, and fierce anger due to the sins of all the elect, he
sought and found comfort this way, Heb. 5.7. He offered up prayers, and
supplications with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him
from death, and was heard in that that he feared.

The grounds of this Doctrine, and the reasons why Gods people in all their
distresses, have bin wont to fly to God by prayer, and to seek comfort this
way, are principally four.

Reason. 1
First, They knew that in every distress they were in, of what kind soever, God
had a chief hand. It is so. 1. In all outward afflictions. Esa. 45.7. I form
the light, and create darkness, I make peace, and create evil, I the Lord do
all these things. 2. In all Satan's tentations, he could not disquiet us with
any of them, if the Lord sent him not, and appointed him not to do it. Paul
says, the messenger of Satan that buffetted him, was given unto him, 2. Cor.
12.7. 3. In the affliction and wound of conscience, it is God that makes that
wound, as Job speaks, Job 23.16. God makes my heart soft, and the almighty
troubles me. And they that know this, must needs hold it the wisest course in
all their distresses, to seek unto him for help and comfort. For who can take
of his hand? Who can cure the wounds that he has made? Who can yield us any
help and comfort, while he remains angry with us? Deuteronomy 32.39. I kill, and I
make alive, I wound, and I heal, neither is there any that can deliver out of
my hand. Therefore all Gods people should resolve in their distresses, as Hosea
6.1. Come, let us return unto the Lord (and fly to him) for he has torn,
and he will heal us, he has smitten, and he will bind us up.

2.
Secondly. They knew the Lord was able to yield them help and comfort, in all
their distresses, seemed their case never so desperate, Psalm. 68.20. He that is
our God, is the God of our salvation, and unto God the Lord belong the issues
from death. For he is able (as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 3.20.) to do
exceeding abundantly, above all that we are able either to ask or think. This
reason is given, why our Savior when he was in his agony, and his soul was
heavy unto death, did fly unto God, and cry so unto him Hebr. 5, 7. He knew he
was able to deliver him from death.

Thirdly. They knew the Lord himself had prescribed this course unto them, if
they would have comfort in any of their distresses, 3.
to fly to him by prayer. This is a help and remedy of Gods own prescribing,
James 5.13. If any man be afflicted ((...) what kind soever) let him pray. Luke
2^.40. Pray that ye enter not unto tentation.

Fourthly and lastly, 4.
They knew that the Lord was ready to be found this way. He is ready to be
found at all times by the prayers of his people, Psalm ^47.18 The Lord is nigh
unto all them that all upon him, to all that call upon him in truth. Matthew. 7
8. Every one that asks receives; and he that seeks finds; and to him
that knocks, it shall be opened. But he is never so ready to be found of them
in prayer, as then, when they are in greatest distress, Psalm. 46.1. God is our
refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. yet he has promised
Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble (any trouble whatsoever) and I
will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. And no marvel, for 1. the Lord
bears to his people, the affection of a father. Psalm. 103.13. Like as a father
pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. And what father
is there that shows not most love to his child, and readiness to help him
when he is in greatest misery? 2. Gods people are then most humbled, and think
most basely of themselves, and that is a great furtherance to the success of
their prayers, 1. P^t. 5.5. God resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble, 2. Chron. 7.14. If my people shall humble themselves and pray -- then
will I hear from heaven. 3. Then Gods people use to pray heartily, and
fervently, 2. Sam. 22.7. In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto
my God, and he did hear my voice. So says Anna of her prayer. 1 Samuel 1.15. I
am a woman of a sorrowful spirit, and have powered out my soul before the
Lord. And this God greatly delights in. Iam. 5.16. The effectual fervent
prayer of a righteous man avails much. And this readiness they knew to be in
the Lord, to hear their prayer at such a time specially has been the chief
thing that has encouraged them to seek to him in their distress, Psalm. 65.2.
O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. and 86.7. In the
day of my trouble will I call upon thee, for thou will answer me.

This Doctrine concerns every one of us, Use.
for there is not one of you that hear me this day, but you are in some
distress or other, or have been, or at least may be. And it serves. First,
for reproof, for the wickedness and Atheism of our hearts is in no nothing
more discovered, then in this, that in our distresses we have no mind to seek
to God. Hos. 7.14. They have not cried to me with their hearts, when they
bowled upon their beds. Three sorts chiefly are to be reproved by this Doctrine.

First, such, as so long as they can think of any means to help themselves
by Luk 15.16, 17 This was Asaes foul sin, 2. Chron. 16.12. When his disease
was exceeding grievous, yet he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians.
Whereas (alas) no sound comfort can be found in any means, till we have first
sought to God, and appeased his anger* If God will not withdraw his anger
(says Job. 9.13.) the proud helpers do stoop under him. All means men seek
to, may say as that counterfeit Samuel (indeed the devil) whom the witch that
Saul sought to for comfort in his distress (as too many wretches do in these
days) raised up, did say unto him, 1. Sam. 28.16. Wherefore do thou ask of
me (or seek help of me) seeing the Lord is become thin^ enemy?

Secondly, such as are most destitute of all means, to help themselves in
David. Psalm. 142.4, 5. I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was
none that would know me, refuge failed me, no man cared for my soul, I cried
unto thee, o Lord, and said, thou art my refuge and my portion. So says the
Apostle 1. Tim. 5.5. She that is a widow indeed and desolate, trusts in God,
and continues in supplications, and prayers, night and day. But (alas) we find
that no people under the heaven, pray less, seek less to God, care less for
God, then the poor and miserable people do. Miserable indeed, in this
respect, more then for any outward want that they do endure. They cry out by
reason of the arm of the mighty (says Elihu, Job 35.9.10) but none says,
where is God my maker that gives songs in the night?

David's at this time, do not as David does here, seek to God for help and
comfort. But 1. either seek to hide themselves, and fly from God by keeping
themselves carefully from all such means as might touch upon that sore, as Adam
did, Genesis 3.8. Or, 2. betake themselves to mirth, and all such means as may
lull them asleep, and cause them to forget their sins, and Gods anger, and
make them senseless of those inward gripings, and stings; as Saul did, and
found ease by it for a short time. 1. Sam. ^6.23. but (alas) his fitts and
terrors returned, and became the more extreme, and violent afterward, as you
may see, 1. Sam. 18.10, 11. or else 3. fall into utter desparation of Gods
mercy, as Judas did, who when his conscience was deeply wounded with sense of
sin, could go to the chief Priests, and Elders, and confess his sin to them,
but could not go to Christ himself to seek mercy of him. Matthew. 27.3.

Lecture XI. On Psalm 51.1, 2. Ianu.. 3.. 1625.
Use. 2.
THe second use now follows, which is for exhortation to stir us up in all
our distresses, to seek for help and comfort from God by prayer. It is the
Apostles exhortation James 5.13. Is any man afflicted? let him pray. We all
have need of this exhortation. For (as we heard the last day) there is not one
of us here, but either we are, or have bin, or may be in that distress (either
through outward or inward affliction and anguish) that we are ready to cry with
Iehoshaphat. 2. Chron. 20.12. We know not what to do. O that we could be
persuaded when we are in that case (though not then only) to fly unto God. One
would think there needs no motives to be used to persuade us to this. What
needs any man persuade a poor wretch, that has not bread at home, to seek
abroad for relief; be he never so bashful, his necessity will persuade him to
it sufficiently. The poor speaks supplications, says Solomon, Prove. 18.23.
You shall hear nothing from him but bewailing his wants, and humble
entreaties, and supplications for help and relief, to such as are able to do
him good. But (alas) our hearts are so estranged from God, even from the very
womb, as David speaks, Psalm. 58.3. that no necessity, no extremity, will
drive us to go a begging to him. We have need of strong motives to drive us to
it. Think therefore seriously of the four reasons I gave you of this Doctrine
the last day, and consider further.

Motive 1
First, That this was the course that David and all the worthy servants of God,
yea Christ himself took, and wherein they found comfort in all their
distresses, Luke 10.37. Go and do thou so likewise. Such examples are worth
the following, they are like the cloud that guided Gods people through the
wilderness, as the Apostle calls them, Heb. 12.1. We should mark which way
they went, and follow their footsteps, Go thy way sorth by the footsteps of
the stock says Christ to his spouse, Cant. 18.

2.
Secondly, This is the opportunity, and time above all others, wherein Gods
people may be sure to find him. For such promises to speed well in their
prayers they have at no time, in no case as in this. Exodus 22.23. If they cry
at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry, Psalm. 9.9. The Lord will be a
refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble, and 22.24. He has not
despised, nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted, neither has he hid his
face from him, but when he cried unto him he heard. But the most effectual
means to persuade you to this duty, is by removing four principal
impediments that keep men from it, and answering four objections that they
are apt to make against it. 1. The extremity of their affliction. 2. The sense
of their own unworthiness. 3. The want of ability to this duty. 4. The little
good they have got by it.

First, Object. 1
I am in great distress (says one) and would feign seek to God by prayer for
comfort. But 1. I am overwhelmed with extremity of affliction, and weary of my
life, yea 2. the Lord is so angry with me, and I have so many tokens of his
indignation upon me, that I have no hope to speed; nay 3, I am afraid I shall
provoke him farther, even by presuming to pray unto him. This has been the
case, not of desperate wretches only, such as Cain and Judas, but even of Gods
dearest children.

First, They have been overwhelmed with the extremity of affliction, and
David complains Psalm. 142.3. His spirit was overwhelmed within him. They have
even been like drunken men, that have lost the use of their understanding for
a time. Psalm. 60.3. Thou have made us to drink the wine of astonishment. Esa.
51 21. Thou afflicted and drunken, but not with wine. Yea, they have been like
distracted persons. Psalm. 88.15. While I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted.
Yea, they have had such fits of impatiency, that they have been weary of their
lives, Job 7 15. My soul chooses strangling, and death rather then my life.

Secondly, the tokens of his indignation that have been upon them, have even
Chron. 21.30. David could not go before the altar that was at Gib^on to
enquire of God, for he was afraid, because of the sword of the Angel of the
Lord.

Thirdly, they have been afraid God would be further provoked against Psalm.
80.4. How long will thou be angry against the prayer of thy people.

Take therefore an answer to this objection, Answ.
and a defensative against this tentation in four points.

First, Consider the examples of Gods people that have bin in this case, that
Jacob as an enemy, and smote him so on the hollow of his thigh, that he lamed
him, Genes. 32.25, 26. yet Jacob prayed still for all that, Hos. 12.4. He w^pt
and made supplication unto him. When Job was by the extremity of his
affliction tempted to think God hated him as an enemy, Job. 16.9. He teareth
me in his wrath, who hates me; he gnasheth upon me with his teeth, mine enemy
sharpeneth his eyes upon me, yet he prayed much to God for all that, and
resolves still to do it, Job 9.15. I will make supplication to my judge. What
greater extremity could a man be in, or what greater evidence could he have of
Gods indignation then Jonah had when he was cast into the Sea; and devoured by
a Whale, yet prayed he for all this. Jonah 2.2. Out of the belly of hell cried
I, and thou heardest my voice, verse 4. Then I said, I am cast out of thy
sight, yet will I look again toward thine holy Temple; and verse 7. When my
soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord, and my prayer came in unto
thee. When Christ had said of the woman of Canaan, he was not sent to such as
she was. Mat. 15.24. Yea when he had called her dog, verse 26. yet she prayed
to him for all that, verse 25.27.

Job 9.4. He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength, who has hardened
himself against him, and has prospered? Neither can we fly from him, Psalm.
139.7. Whither shall I go from thy spirit, or whither shall I fly from thy
presence? There is therefore no struggling with God, our only way is to stoop,
and yield, and humble our selves to him, to cast our selves down at his feet,
as 2. Sam. 15.26. If he thus say, I have no delight in thee: behold, here I am,
let him do to me as seems good unto him. It is the counsel Solomon gives,
for the wisest course that can be taken by a subject when he is fallen into the
displeasure of his Prince, Eccles. 10.4. If the spirit of the ruler rise up
against thee, leave not thy place, neglect not thy duty, or as he says,
Eccles. 8.3. Be not hasty to go out of his sight (as if he had said, fling not
from him in a chase) for yielding pacifieth great offenses. And by a debtor,
when by suretiship he is fallen into the hands of his creditor, Prove. 6.2. When
thou art come into the hands of thy friend, go humble thy self. How much more
must this course be taken when God is offended, when we are in his hand. Ps.
73.28. It is good for me to draw near to God. For this is the only way to
pacify him when he is angry, Iam. 4.8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh
to you.

If I say, I will speak thus (says David Psalm. 73.15.) I should offend
against the generation of Gods children. For 1. they that have been dearest
unto God, and most highly in his favor, have drunk deepest of this cup. All
the day long (says David. Psalm. 73.14.) have I been plagued, and chastened
every morning. As many as I love (says Christ, Revelat. 2.19.) I rebuke and
chasten. 2. The Lord has often dealt very sharply with his children, when he
has had no purpose therein to take vengeance of them for any of their sins;
nor bin angry with them at all, but only to try their faith, and obedience; and
when he has purposed to do them most good, he has prepared them for it this
way; as is evident in the case of his wrestling with Jacob, and laming of him,
and in his dealing with the woman of Canaan. When Moses speaks of his dealing
with Israel in the wilderness, and of all the hardness they endured there. Deuteronomy
8.16. he did it (says he) that he might humble thee, and that he might prove
thee, to do thee good at thy latter end.

Hos. 5.15. I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their
offense, and seek my face, in their affliction they will seek me early. For as
God for his part greatly desires to see his children often, and delights to hear
their prayers. Cant. 2.14. Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice,
for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely. So we for our part are
apt (like the prodigal Lu. 15.16, 17.) to neglect our father till extreme
need and misery drive us unto him. So that to conclude the answer to this first
objection. No affliction or token of Gods anger how extreme soever, should
cause us to despair of help from God, or discourage us from seeking comfort
from him by prayer, but we should resolve with Job. 13.15. Though he slay me
yet will I trust in him.

Secondly, I am in great distress (says another) and I would fair seek to
God for help and comfort by prayer, Object. 2
but (alas) I am so vile a sinner, and so unworthy that I dare not, I know God
bears not sinners. Job. 9.31.

And certainly this keeps many from prayer. This is a natural effect of of
sin to make men afraid to go to God, and to stand before him; as appears in
that example of Adam, Genesis 3.8. Adam, and his wife hid themselves from the
presence of the Lord. Conscience of sin will stop our mouths, and make us
unapt to speak to God, as appears by David's prayer here, Psalm. 51.15. O Lord
open thou my lips. It will make us unable to look up unto God. Psalm. 40.12.
Mine iniquities have taken hold upon me so that I am not able to look up. O
that men would think of this, and it would have great force to restrain them
from sin.

Now for answer unto these that are kept from prayer in their distress by
sense of their own unworthiness, Answ.
I have four things to say.

First, others of Gods servants that have been as deeply touched with sense
David's example in this Psalm; and 40.12. My sins are more then the hairs of
mine head, therefore my heart fails me. Yet prays he for all that, verse
13. Be pleased O Lord to deliver me: O Lord make have to help me. And so did
Ezra 9.6. O my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God;
for our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up
unto the heavens. Paul also had as deep a sense of his sins, and unworthiness
as any man could have. For he says, 1 Timothy 1.15. he was the chief of all
sinners, and Ephesians. 3.8. he was less then the least of all Saints yet he was
given much to prayer, yea even then when the sense of his sins did most afflict
him, Act 9 12 Behold he prays.

Secondly, the more, and more heinous our sins are, the more need, the more
Mat. 9.12. They that be whole need not a Physician but they that are sick.

Thirdly, the sense of our sins, and unworthiness (if it be sincere, and
unfeigned) Heb. 4.16. None have ever been so welcome to God, nor have found so
much mercy with him as they that have come to him in deepest sense of their
own unworthiness. Five notable examples we have for this. First, In the woman
that Christ cured of the bloody issue, that was so humbled in the sense of her
unworthiness, that she durst not presume to speak to Christ but Mar. 5.27.
came in the preasse behind, and touched his garment. And when she perceived
Christ knew what she had done she came fearing, and trembling, and fell down
before him, verse 33. Secondly, In the Centurion, Luke 7.6, 7. who thought
himself not worthy that Christ should enter under his roof, nor that he
should presume to go to Christ himself. Thirdly, In the Prodigal that
thought not himself worthy to be called a son, Luk 15.21. Fourthly, In the
Publican who thought not himself worthy so much as to lift up his eyes to
heaven, Luke 18.13. Fifthly, in the woman of Canaan, that judged her self no
better then a dog, Matthew. 15.27. Who could have deeper sense of their own
unworthiness then these? or who did ever receive greater mercy, and comfort
from God in their prayers then these did? So that it is certain, it is not
true humility, and sense of our unworthiness that keeps any from prayer. They
that are truly poor in spirit, and do mourn for that, will hunger, and thirst
after righteousness, and seek it by all means, Mat. 5.3, 4, 6. It is privy
pride, that keeps men from prayer, as it does that poor wretch that being in
extreme want will rather sterve, and pine himself then he will seek unto, or
be beholden to any that is able to succor, and relieve him.

Fourthly, whereas thou pretendest that the sense of thy sin, and of thine
unworthiness our Savior, John 16.9. He will reprove the world of (...),
because (...) not in him.

Lecture XII. On Psalm 51.1, 2. January 10. 1625.
Object. 3.
THE third Objection follows; that is that they are (...) to pray. For thus is
many a poor soul apt to say. I am in great distress, and would feign seek to
God by prayer for help, and (...), but alas I cannot. I want the spirit of
prayer for I have no faith, and the spirit of prayer in the spirit of adoption,
that persuades us of Gods fatherly (...), and witnesses to our spirits that
we are his children, Romans 8.15, 16. Now I have no such witness in me. My
heart is so oppressed with sorrow that it is even utterly dead, and indisposed
to prayer. Certainly this has been the case, of many a good soul. A
tentation indeed it is, but (...) one as the best either have, or may be
subject unto. The Apostle acknowledges it in the name of all the faithful.
Romans 8.26. We know not what to (...).

Answ.
For answer to this objection I have two things to say (...). What we are to
judge of them that are in this estate. 2. What (...) they are to take that are
in this case. For the first we must know two things.

my father and my mother, Esa. 8.4. For this is given by the Holy Ghost as the
common badge to know all Gods servants by, that they are able to pray. Thus
Paul discribeth Gods people, 1 Cor. 1.2. All that in (...) place, call upon the
name of Jesus Christ our Lord. And 2 Timothy 2.12. For (...) righteousness --
with them that call on the Lord with a pure heart. (...) 4.6. Because ye are
sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts, crying
Abba father. So that I may reason thus with the weakest of Gods servants, that
are in this case; thou art poor in spirit, and (...) for nothing more,
therefore thou have truth of saving grace on thee; for Christ calls thee
blessed, Matthew 5.3, 4. Thou love such as are godly even because they are
godly, therefore thou have truth of grace in thee; For so says the Apostle, 1
John 3.14. We know that we have p^^^ed from ^^^th to life, because we love
the brethren. Thou art afraid to do any thing that might offend God, therefore
thou have truth of saving grace in thee; For the Holy Ghost says, Psalm
128.1. Blessed is every one that fears the Lord. Why then from hence thou
may undoubtedly conclude, thou have in thee the spirit of prayer. And whereas
thou (...) than thou have it not, because thou feel not in thy self the
spirit of adoption, thou feel (...) in thy self. I answer, 1. Thou may
leave says though thou seek it (...) for a time. neither may thou judge of
thy state by thy feeling. In the Churches (...) her beloved had with drawn
himself, and (...) gone, Cant. 5.6. Nay in Christ^ own feeling, his father
had forsaken him, Matthew. 37.46. ^. Thou have said though thou feel it not; 1
If thou mourn for nothing (...) thou for the (...) of it, as that poor man
did, Mar 9.24. as the (...) that cries was not borne dead; or the man that
feels himself sick, has life in (...). If there (...) nothing so much as to
believe, and to be rid of thy infidelity. For Christ says such are blessed,
Mat. 5.6. which they could not be, if they had not says. Even the will is of
grace, Phil. 2.13. As lusting after a woman is adultery, ^at. 5.28. so on the
contrary lusting after faith, is faith.

pray most effectually, and acceptably when in his own feeling, his heart is
(...) indisposed unto prayer; when he is to overwhelmed with grief, and his
thoughts to distracted, and troubled that he is unable to utter, or conceive a
prayer in any fit words or method at all; this is evident both by examples, and
by reason also. When D^vid^ spirit was overwhelmed, when he was so troubled,
that he could not speak, as he complains, Psalm. 77.3, 4. yet even then he
prayed and prayed most effectually as he says, verse 1. I cried unto God with
my voice, even unto (...) with my voice, and he gave care unto me. How could
that he (...) ^^ such, verse 4. he was so troubled that he could not (...). He
(...) could not do it distinctly, and orderly, but he could cry to God, (...)
make a noise, as he says, Psalm. 38.8. I have rowed, (...) o^ my heart, and
55.2. I mourn in my complaint, and make a noise; yet God gave care to that
prayer. When Hezechiah was so oppressed with sorrow that he could not speak he
could but chatter like a (...) mourn like (...) as he complained, Esa. 38 14.
yet eve^ then, the spirit of prayer was in (...) and (...) effectually in him,
that chattering, and mourning of his, was a prayer and (...) unto God, as
appears by verse 5. I have heard the prayer. (...) apostle tells us, Romans
3.26, 27. that the spirit it self makes (...) in according to the will of
God, when we are in that case that we know not what to pray, when we can do
nothing but sigh, and groan unto God, and can utter no requests unto him. And
David even when he had strong motions unto despair prayed yet most acceptably,
Psalm. ^1.22. And to (...) for the Lord is able enough, to understand our
desires though we express them not to him in words. You that are tender mother
(...). Do you never understand what your little ones, do (...), and what they
would have? Do you never relieve nor succor them till they can speak to you?
O the Lord does as much, and (...) more (...) you this way, then you do the
Dragons, and Ostriches. This made (...) thus to God, Psalm. 38.9. Lord, all my
desire is before thee; and (...) not hi^ from thee; and (...) 7 Lord thou have
heard the desire of the (...) 145 19. He will (...) of them that fear him*
(...) cry, and will save them. (...) you that are tender (...) moved with the
groans, (...) of your children, (...) is with the Lord; the (...) of his
children (...) much more, and give in (...) to our prayers then any (...) we
can (...). The Lord is said Psalm 102.20. to (...) the groaning of the (...).
And when Hezechiah in his prayer could but chatter, God (...) him word not
^^ely that he heard that prayer, but tells him what it was that made that
prayer so effectual with him, Esa. 5^.5. I have seen thy tears. (...)
faithful themselves have had more comfort, and confidence in their (...) in
their prayers they could (...) unto God) then in any words (...) use in prayer,
Psalm 39.12. Hold not thy peace (...). My friends scorn me, but mine eye
(...) is he prayed, and that way sought comfort (...) expressed the desires of
his heart to God by (...) by words. O happy souls that can express the
desires of their hearts. God (...) way, for God makes precious account of
their (...) of his children, (...) one of them shall fall to the ground, Psalm.
56.8. (...) are they not in thy (...)? And this is the first part of mine
answer to this (...) objection.

Now (...) show you what they must do that we in this case, that find their
spirits so (...) with sorrow, and their hearts so deadred, as they are utterly
indisposed, and unable to pray. Two things we must do when we are in this case.

David does, Psalm. 119.25. My soul cleaves to the dust, quicken thou me
according to thy Word: and verse 159. Quicken me o Lord, according to thy
loving kindness. Complain to Christ the heavenly Physician of this thy
disease, he is able to help thee: For 1 Cor. 15.45. the last Adam is made a
quickening spirit. Cry to him when thou art most indisposed, and unable to pray
as his Disciples did, Luke 11.1. Lord teach me to pray. Nourish in thy heart
the feeling, and sense of this thy disease, so as thou can mourn for it, and
bewail it to God, and thou art safe, Mat. 5.4. Blessed are they that can
mourn for this for certainly they shall be comforted.

Mat. 6.9. after this manner pray ye; but even for them and to say, tying
themselves to the very words of it, as appears, Luke 11.2 When ye pray say
our father, etc. By which answer of our Savior to his Disciples it may also
appear that John taught his Disciples to pray by giving them forms of prayer
to say; yea even in secret prayer, Mat. 6.6. 2. All the best reformed Churches
do now, and ever have used even in public, Leiturgies, and prescript forms
of prayer, and have judged them of great use, and necessity for the edification
of the Church. And surely this argument is not to be contemned by any sober
Christian, as appears by the Apostles speech, 1 Cor. 11.16. If any man seem
to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God. So
does he again press the example, and practice of all the Churches of the
Saints, 1 Cor. 14.33. 3. This is no stinting nor hinderance to the spirit of
prayer in any of Gods people no more then the singing of praise to the Lord in
the words of David is now, and was in Hezechia's time, 2 Chronicles. 29.30. or the
joining in heart with the words that another utters, in conceived prayer;
which yet is Gods ordinance, 1 Cor. 14.16. Though this (I say) be lawful, and
may be used for a help; yet seeing every Christian even the meanest, and
weakest has the gift and spirit of prayer, I may say to every one of you in
this case as the Apostle does in another to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect not
the gift that is in thee; and 2 Timothy 1.6. Stir up the gift of God, that is in
thee. When thou feel thy self most indisposed to prayer, yield not to it,
but strive and endeavor to pray, even then when thou think thou can not
pray. If we should never pray but when we feel our selves apt to it, alas how
seldom should many of us pray? Therefore when thou feel thy self most
indisposed to prayer, yield not to this cursed humor, but strive, and
endeavor to pray even then when thou think thou can not pray. The Church
complains, Esa. 64.7. that no man stirred up himself to take hold of God; we
should stir up our selves to this work. For I we must take notice of this,
that Satan has a chief hand in hindering us from prayer, in causing this
deadness, and indisposition of our hearts unto it. When Iehoshua stood before
the Angel of the Lord Satan stood at his right hand to resist him, Zach. 3.1.
And which of Gods servants find not this to be true in their own experience?
This I say we should take notice of, that he get not advantage of us by our
yielding unto him; as Paul says, 2 Cor. 2.11. Lest Satan should get an
advantage of us; for we are not ignorant of his devices. The more Satan hates
this duty, the better we should love it, the more basie he is to hinder, and
interrupt us in it, the more earnestly should we bend, and set our hearts unto
it. Iam. 4.7. Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you. 2. Consider how
much God is delighted in the labor of our love, Heb. 6.10. God is not
unrighteous that he should forget your work, and labor of love; that is those
duties which out of love to him we perform with labor, and striving. Think
not (beloved) that those prayers only, are pleasing to God wherein we please
our selves best, or which we perform with most facility, and aptness of mind,
and speech. No no, when we can perform this duty in obedience unto God even
against our own disposition, and the mighty conflicts, and oppositions that we
find in our own hearts against it, these are the prayers that are most
acceptable to God. As Abraham's obedience was in offering up his son; of which
the Lord says, Genesis 22.12. Now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have
not withheld thy son, thine only son from me. 3. By using, and exercising
that little grace, that small ability to pray that thou have, thou shall
increase it, and grow more able to do it with comfort. For so runs the
promise. Mat. 25 29. To every one that has (that is by employing, and
exercising of it, does show that he has; for otherwise the unprofitable
servant had a talent also) shall be given, and he shall have abundance. Let us
therefore do as they that (through sickness, and weakness) have lost their
appetite, yet by eating provoke and recover their appetite, one morsel drawing
down another: so let us carefully, and conscionably exercise those small
abilities, that God has given us in prayer, and we shall find that by using
they will greatly increase.

Lecture XIII. On Psalm. 51.1, 2. January 24. 1625.
Follows the fourth, and last impediment that keeps men from flying to God,
and seeking help, and comfort from him by prayer in their distresses, and that
is a conceit that it is to no purpose for them to pray. This conceit as it
prevails with wicked men, and castawayes, and keeps them in a continual
neglect of this duty. What profit should we have (say they) if we pray to him?
Job 21.^^. So have Gods dearest servants been often troubled with it, and for a
time kept from this duty by it. And have been apt to resolve as David does of
all the duties of piety in general, Psalm. 73.13. Verily, I have cleansed my
heart in vain; so of this duty in particular, certainly it is but lost labor
for me to pray. And as Satan will always pretend reason for whatsoever he
suggesteth to us (so did he with our first parents, Genesis 3.5. God does know
that in the day ye eat thereof then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall
be as Gods, knowing good and evil. And his chief strength, still to keep out
Christ, and his grace, lies in the thoughts, and imaginations, in the reasons
that he suggesteth unto men, to object against goodness, and to defend sin,
as is plain, 2 Cor. 10.5.) so has he put four reasons into the hearts of men
to confirm them in this conceit, that it is to no purpose for them to pray.
Let this short sum of the four reasons suffice in the first propounding of
them, and the larger laying of them down, reserved to the place where they are
to be answered particularly. 1. That many do well enough that never pray. 2.
That the use of the means with discretion, will serve the turn without
prayer. 3. That God knows our necessities well enough, and has both decreed
what to do for us, and is apt enough of himself without seeking to. 4. That
themselves have used it long to no purpose.

Now before I come to answer these reasons in particular this I must say of
them in general; that if any of Gods people (such as I must judge all you to
be that hear me now) be troubled at any time with these thoughts (as surely as
I have already told you they may be) they must resolve thus with themselves;
Certainly this is but a tentation this comes of the evil one. For it
tends directly to atheism, and is high blasphemy against God. Those thoughts
that tend to the restraining of men from prayer tend directly to the casting
off of all true fear of God. Thou castest off fear, (says Eliph^z, Job
15.4.) and restrainest prayer before God. The man that is once persuaded not to
call upon God has learned to say in his heart there is no God, Psalm. 14.1.4.
And of them that said Mal. 3.14. It is in vain to serve God, the Lord says
verse 13. that their words had been stout against the Lord. Pour out thy fury
(says the Prophet, Ier. 10.25.) upon the heathen that know thee not, and upon
the families that call not on thy name. 1. The persons, the families that use
not to pray know not God, are no better then Atheists. 2. God will pour out
his fury upon such. And seeing this is so what must they do that are troubled
with this tentation? Surely They must 1 Put on a resolution to resist it,
harden thy heart against it, withstand it, defy it, Iam. 4.7. Resist the
Devil, and he will flee from you. Say as our Savior did when he was tempted
by Satan to such a foul sin, Mat. 4.10. Get thee hence, avaunt Satan. Yea
in a tentation far less then this, when Peter tempted him but to favor
himself, and shun the cross. Mat. 16.23. He turned, and said to Peter, get
thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me. 2 By prayer, and crying
unto God for strength against it, they must resist even this tentation against
prayer. For that is a chief remedy against all tentations, Luke 22.40. Pray
that ye enter not into (and be delivered into the power of) temptation. As
Christ did for Iehoshuah when Satan stood at his right hand to resist him,
Zach. 3.2. The Lord rebuke thee o Satan, even the Lord that has chosen
Jerusalem rebuke thee. 3 They must make use of the sword of the spirit (whereby
Christ our captain did drive away the tempter, Mat. 4.4, 7.10. It is written)
by weighing with themselves, how directly this tentation opposes the whole
tenor of the holy Scripture. And say thus with themselves. Shall I yield to
this conceit that it is to no purpose to pray? Why how often has God commanded
us to pray? Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble; and Mat, 7.7 Ask,
and it shall be given you; and 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Pray without ceasing. How
frequent, and constant have all the Saints, even such as God has given
greatest testimony unto, been in prayer? Even the wisest of them; as Daniel
who would not give over his constant course in prayer, no not for the saving of
his life, Dan. 6.10. Nay our blessed Savior was so himself, even he was
frequent in this duty, Mar. 1.35. In the morning a great while before it was
day, he went out, and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed. And
shall I suffer Satan to persuade me that it is a needless thing to pray?

But let us now consider the reasons whereby Satan persuades men to this
Atheistical, divellish conceit.

Reason 1
And to the first. That they that never use to pray, do as well as those that
are most given unto it. A^sw.
I answer that this is most false, they do not so well. For 1. The blessings
they receive are but temporal, and such as are no testimonies of Gods special
love, Mat. 5.45. He makes his sun to rise on the evil, and on the good; and
sends rain on the just, and on the unjust. Whereas they that pray shall have
better things then these, Luke 11.13. Your heavenly father will give the holy
spirit to them that ask him. 2. They that pray not, can have no assurance to
enjoy, no not these temporal blessings, neither to have them when they want
them, nor to hold them when they have them. For they have no word nor promise
of God for them, Job 21.16. Lo their good, is not in their hand. Whereas they
that pray may be sure to have so much even of these things as shall be good for
them. For they have a promise that they may build upon. Psalm. 34.10. They that
seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. This promise certainly (to them
that can believe it) is more worth then a thousand pound land a year. So that
he that can pray, may be secure for outward things, and need not disquiet his
heart with carking cares, Pro. 16.3. Commit thy works (thy labors, and
endeavors) unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established. 3. They that
pray not, though they might be never so sure of these temporal blessings, yet
have they no just cause of comfort in them. For they have them not with the
blessing, and favor of God; 1. They come not rightly by them, but like robbers
break into Gods storehouse, and steal away his goods. The richest man that
is, is bound to seek even his bread of God every day, Matthew. 6.11. Give us
this day our daily bread. He has no comfortable title to his food, to his
wealth that does it not, but is in Gods account a spiritual usurper, and
thief. 2. Besides he can have no comfort in that he has; because it is not
sanctified unto him, it shall do him no good, it shall do him much hurt rather.
A man may have these outward things, without Gods blessing, Hos. 13.11. I gave
thee a king in mine anger; and then they will be his bane, it had been much
better for him, to have been without them. Was not Goliahs strength, 1 Samuel
17.9. Ahitophels wisdom, 2 Samuel 17.23. and Herod's eloquence, Act. 12.23. so?
and yet all excellent gifts of God, but they had them not with his blessing,
they were not sanctified unto them. O that we had not too much experience of
this daily in many, that men may have abundance of these earthly blessings from
God and have them with his curse; as if God should have said as Pro. 1.32. The
prosperity of fools shall destroy them. On the other side they that pray have
just cause of comfort in these outward things, be it little or much that they
enjoy. For 1. They have a blessed title to that they have, they come honestly
by it, it is their own, they break not into Gods treasury, but by the key
that God gave them, they opened the door, and hold them by his gift, 1 Cor.
3.22. All things are yours. 2. That that they have is blessed, and sanctified
unto them. 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. Every creature of God is good to them that believe,
and know the truth, for it is sanctified by the Word of God, and prayer. And
thus have I answered the first reason.

Now to the second reason; Reason 2
that it is needless to pray Because the good success of all things depends
upon, and is to be ascribed (not to prayer but) to second causes and means God
uses to work by; and unto the reason, will, and endeavor of man. The Lord
(say they) has set a constant course in nature, and given a natural force to
sundry means, and second causes to do us good. There is a covenant of God for
the day, and night, (mentioned, Ier. 33.20.) that they shall continue their
courses which cannot fail. So is therefore other ordinary means. God has
given a natural force to our meat to nourish us, and to our clothes to keep
us warm. A good diet, a good air, and exercise, we see will keep men in
health though they never pray. And as for wealth, if men take pains in their
calling, and have also wisdom to order their affairs, there is not one of a
hundred but they prosper well enough. In all labor (says Solomon Pro. 14.23)
there is profit. And Pro. 16.20. He that handles a matter wisely, shall find
good. Shall we think (say some) that the fasts that were kept so long and the
prayers that were made were the cause why the plague ceased? No no there is a
natural cause (say they) to be given of it, till the air was purged by the
coldness of the season, all your fasting, and praying could do no good.

This reason and persuasion of the sufficiency that is in the means and in our
own endeavors, has in all ages marvellously prevailed to draw men from
depending upon God, and seeking unto him for help and comfort by prayer, and
does certainly at this day. And that not only with such as have been
infidells, and openly wicked. By the strength of mine hand have I done it
(says the King of Assyria, Esa. 10.13.) and by my wisdom, for I am prudent,
and Habac. 1.16. They sacrifice to their net, and burn incense to their drag,
because by them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous. But even such
as have lived in Gods Church, as we may see at large Esaias 22.8 -- 11, Yea Gods
own dear children have received much hurt by it, as we may see in the example
of Asa. 2. Chron. 16.12. In his disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the
Physicians.

Answ.
For answer therefore unto it, some things are first of all to be granted, that
is, 1. That God uses not to help men without means, as Josh. 5.12. He fed
them no longer with Manna from heaven, when they came to Canaan, where they
might get corn. So when God would deliver Peter out of the hand of Herod, he
caused the iron gate that lead unto the City, to open of his own accord, and
so he went out, Acts 12.10. 2. That God does usually work with, and bless the
ordinary means, Acts 9.19. When Paul had received meat, he was strengthened.
And so are the places to be understood, Prove. 14.23. In all labor there is
profit, and 16 20. He that handles a matter wisely, shall find good. 3. That
it is folly, and sin for us to expect that God should help us when we neglect
the ordinary means, Matthew. 4.7. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Exodus
14, 15. The Lord said to Moses, why cryest thou to me? Speak unto the
children of Israel, that they go forward. He blames him for resting upon
prayer, with the neglect of the means. Gods blessing may be confidently
expected upon our endeavors, in the use of lawful means, 1. Chr. 22.16.
Arise, and be doing (says David to his son) and the Lord will be with thee.
But all this is no sufficient cause to keep us from prayer. For 1. God is the
author and giver of all means, when he intends to help us, and do us good,
he will give us the ordinary means to receive good by, when he intends the
contrary, he will withold the means. Job 38.28, 29. Has the rain a father?
or who has begotten the drops of the dew? Out of whose womb came the Ice? and
the hoary frost, who has gendered it? and Psalm. 104.3. He walks upon the
wings of the wind. It was he only that sent that goodly season in the beginning
of winter, which these men say, was the cause why the plague ceased. 2. The
virtue that is in any means to do us good, comes wholly from God. He is the
Lord of nature, Though he have given to man the faculty of reason, and freedom
of will, in civil, and moral actions, and to our food, and other creatures a
natural virtue to do us good, yet that we are able to use this faculty that we
have, or the creature to put forth that virtue that is in it, to the good of
man, comes wholly of God. He keeps the raines in his own hand, Ephesians. 1.11.
He works all things. See this, 1. In the use of our reason and will, Prove.
21.1. The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, he turns it whithersoever
he will. No King can incline his own heart which way himself lists. Man
has reason indeed, but he cannot use it to his own benefit, Prove. 3.5. Lean
not to thine own understanding. 2. In the senses Prove. 20.12. The hearing
ear, and the seeing eye, the Lord has made even both of them. As the faculty
that is in the ear and eye, is of God; so the ability to use and exercise, it
is of him also, 3. In our labors and endeavors, they are to no purpose further
then God is pleased to bless them. 1. Cor. 3.7. Neither is he that planteth
any thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives the increase. Psalm.
127.1, 2. Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it;
except the Lord keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain. It is vain
for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows. 4. In
our food Matthew. 4.4. Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God; there is a secret word, and commission God
has given it to nourish us, or else it could do us no good. For the Lord can
call in this commission, when he will, and restrain, and withold the
natural force he has given to the second causes when it pleases him; as we
see Hag. 16. Ye have sown much, and bring in little, ye eat, but ye have not
enough: ye drink, but ye are not filled; ye cloth you, but there is none
warm. Therefore all good success is ascribed to God, Ezra. 7.6, 7. The King
granted him all his request according to the hand of the Lord his God upon him.
N^he. 2.8. The King granted me according to the good hand of my God upon me.

In these two respects we shall find that the servants of God have been wont
to depend wholly upon him, and to seek to him by prayer for his direction, and
blessing in all the actions, and occasions of their life; not in spiritual
things only, but even in such matters wherein all have freedom of will, and
wherein they wanted neither ordinary means to help themselves, nor wisdom,
and understanding to use them well. 1. In making of marriages, Thus did
Eleazar, Abraham's steward, though he were a wise man, and was able to make such
a report of his masters estate, as he had small cause to doubt of good
success, yet does he most zealously seek to God for direction and success by
prayer, Genesis 24.12. 2. In taking of their journeyes, then which, what can be
more in the power of man's will, Romans 1.10. Paul made request that he might have
a prosperous journey, by the will of God to come to the Romans, yea, see how
servent he is in prayer in this case, 1 Thessalonians. 3.11. Now God himself and our
father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way unto you. 3, In receiving of
their food, though there be therein a natural virtue to nourish us. For this
we have the example of our blessed Savior, not only when he desired an
extraordinary, and miraculous blessing upon the creatures, as when he sed about
five thousand with five loaves, and two fishes, Matthew 14.^9. and four thousand
with seven loaves and a few little fishes. Matthew. 15.36. But even when he
desired no more then that which was natural, and ordinary, as Luke 24.30. As
he sat at meat with them, he took bread and blessed it. Where it is also to
be observed, that by the prayer we use at our meals, our meat is blessed unto
us, it is not blessed otherwise. 4. In entering upon their houses, and
dwellings, Ps. 30. title, A Psalm and song at the dedication of the house of
David. But what need we instance in more particulars, and stand upon examples
in this point, seeing we have so express commandments for it? Prove. 3.6. In
all thy ways acknowledge him (his hand, his providence, and so depend upon
him) and he shall direct thy paths. And Phil. 4.6, 7. In every thing by prayer
and supplication, let your requests be made known unto God, and the peace of
God shall keep your hearts, and minds. This is the way to true peace, to
depend upon God by prayer, for direction, success, and for a blessing in every
thing that we take in hand.

Lecture XIIII. On Psalm 51.1, 2. January 3. 1625.
THE third reason they give, Reason. 4
why it is to no purpose to pray, is taken from the nature of the Lord, unto
whom we pray. 1. God knows well enough what our wants are, and needs not to
have them made known unto him by us, Matthew. 6.8. Your father knows what
things you have need of, before ye ask him. 2. He has appointed in his
eternal decree, what shall befall every one of us, and what he will do for us,
which all the prayers in the world cannot alter, Ephesians. 1.11. He works all
things according to the counsel of his own will. 3. He is of so gracious a
disposition, that he is apt enough of himself to give us, what he sees to be
good for us, without asking, or seeking unto. Our Savior we know (when he was
upon earth) healed and helped many that never sought unto him; as you may see,
in the man that had the withered hand, Mark. 3.3. and in the impotent man, John
5.6. and in many other places. And the Lord is pleased to compare himself for
this, to the father of the prodigal, who prevented his son, and before ever
he made any suite unto him, when he was yet a great way off, his father saw
him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck and kissed him as we
read, Lu 15.20

Answ.
To this I answer, that all these three things they speak of God, are most
true; but that which they would infer upon them, is most weak, and unsound,
and has no coherence with them, the premises or anticedent of their reason is
good, but the consequence is stark naught. For, 1. Though God know our wants
full well, yet his will is, we should make them known, and open them
particularly unto him our selves. Phil. 4.6. In every thing by prayer, and
supplication, let your requests be made known unto God; as when blind
Bartimeus had cried out earnestly, and vehemently unto Christ, Jesus thou son
of David, have mercy upon me: he would have him speak, and tell him in
particular, wherein he would have him to show mercy on him, Mar. 10.51. What
will thou that I should do unto thee?

Secondly, As God has determined in his own counsel, what he will do for
any of us; so has he also in his counsel determined, that prayer shall be the
mean whereby we shall obtain it, Ezekiel. 36.37. Thus says the Lord God, I will
yet for the be enquired of (and sought unto) by the house of Israel, to do it
for them. Yea this is made a certain sign God has determined to do us some
great good, when he stirs up our hearts to be earnest with him in prayer,
Ier. 31.9. They shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I lead
them, and 29.12, 13. Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go, and pray
unto me, and I will hearken unto you, and ye shall seek me, and find me when
ye shall search for me with all your hearts. How earnest was Daniel with God in
prayer for this, immediately before the return from the captivity? Dan. 9.

Thirdly, this does nothing derogate from the glory of Gods goodness, and
graciousnesse, that he will not do us good till we seek to him for it by
prayer, as may appear in these three things. 1. It is a sufficient
demonstration of his goodness, that he will give us all good things upon our
asking; when he says to us, Matthew. 7.7. Ask and have, Deuteronomy 4 7. What nation is
so great, who has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things
that we call upon him for? Esa. 30.19. He will be very gracious unto thee at
the voice of thy cry, when he shall hear it, he will answer thee. 2. It is he
alone that stirs us up to pray to that end that he may do us good, Psalm.
1^.17. Thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear. 3.
The reason why he will have us pray first before he gives, argues his exceeding
love to us. For it is 1. out of the delight he has to hear this work of his
own spirit in us, which makes us thus to speak, and cry unto him, Cant. 2.14.
Let me hear thy voice, for it is sweet. Even you that are parents, delight
much to hear your little ones speak, but nothing so much as God does to hear
his children. 2. Because he knows his blessings will be sweeter to us, when we
have got them by prayer. So we see how David joyed in the deliverances and
favors he had received, because he had obtained them by prayer. Psalm. 30.1,
2. I will extell thee o Lord, for thou have lifted me up, etc. O Lord my God, I
cried unto thee, and thou have healed me. and 116.1, 2. I love the Lord,
because he has heard my voice, and my supplications, because he has inclined
his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live.

Reason. 4
The fourth, and last reason whereby Satan laboreth to persuade men, that it is
to no purpose to pray, is from the experience themselves have had of the
fruitlesnesse of their own prayers. That themselves have long used to pray,
and have found no comfort, no benefit by it. This reason has greatly prevailed
with wicked men, they cannot abide to attend long upon God; but though their
prayers be indeed nothing worth, yet are they apt to quarrel with God, if they
have not a present answer, as Esa. 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted say they, and
thou see it not? Wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou take no
knowledge of it? And thereupon they resolve to leave praying. Malac. 3.14. It
is in vain to serve God, and what profit is it unto us? and 2. King. 6.3^.
What should I wait on the Lord any longer? Yea, this has also greatly troubled
many of Gods dearest ones, they have often complained that they got no good by
their praying. Job 30 20. I cry unto thee, but thou do not hear me: I stand
up, and thou regardest me not, Habac.1.1. O Lord how long shall I cry, and thou will not hear? Yea, they have thought that they were the worse for praying.
Ps. 80.4. O Lord how long will thou be angry against the prayer of thy people?
And thereupon they have even grown weary of praying, and ready to resolve to
give it over, as you may perceive, Psalm. 69.3. I am weary of my crying

Now for my answer to this reason, Answ.
it shall consist of two parts, 1. I will show you how we are to judge of this
case, when we pray, and pray often, and ^^nd our selves never the better for
it, 2. What a Christian is to do in this case.

And for judging aright of this case, two things you must understand.

First. That it is no argument that God neglects us, regards not us, nor our

First. It may be he sees it is better for thee to want it, then to have it;
we Psalm. 34.10. They that seek the Lord* shall not want any good thing. and
Matthew. 7.11. How much more shall your father which is in heaven give good
things to them that ask him?

Secondly. It may be he sees it is not good for us to have it yet. The Lord
3.11. He best knows which is the fittest time to do any thing for us. When
he may have most honor by that which he does for us. Zachary had prayed for a
child, while he and his wife were young, but God granted not his request till
they were both old. Luke 1.7.13. because he might have more glory by it then.
Christ would not comfort Martha and Mary, by helping their brother Lazarus,
while he was sick, though he loved them dearly, but delayed to help them of
purpose, John 11.5, 6. Why? that he might have the more glory by that work.
verse 15. I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, to the intent that ye
might believe. And verse 4^. Said I not unto thee, that if thou would
believe, thou should see the glory of God? He best knows also, when that
he does for us, will do us most good, he watches the time, and will not delay
us one moment longer, Esa. 30.18. The Lord will wait, that he may be gracious
unto you. He sees it good for us to be delayed a while (and how long, he only
best does know, Acts 1.7. It is not for us to know the times or seasons, the
father has put them in his own power.) 1. to humble us further. Let patience
have her perfect work, says the Apostle. James 1.4. He meant to heal Miriam
at Moses request, but not so soon as he would have had it, she must be better
humbled first under the hand of God, Numb. 12.14. And the Lord said unto Moses,
If her father had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days?
Let her be shut out from the camp seven days, and after that, let her be
received in again. As if the Lord had said; it is too soon for her to be
healed yet. So he meant to take from Paul that messenger of Satan that
buffetted him, but not so soon as he would have had it; he was not yet
sufficiently humbled, but in danger to have bin pussed up with the revelations
he had received, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8. As if he had said, It is too soon for thee
Paul to be rid of that thorn. 2. To make us more fervent, and importunate with
him, It troubles great men to have suitors importunate, ever following them
with petitions, and crying at their gates, Luke 18.5. The widow troubled the
unjust judge with her importunity. But this is a thing that the Lord is highly
pleased and delighted with. Christ meant to grant the woman of Canaans suit,
but he put her off, and (...) strangely of purpose, to make her more
importunate, and earnest (...) him, Mat. 15.25, 28. 3. To cause us to esteem
better of the good things we beg of him when we have obtained them. The good
things that are easily and readily come by, are usually lightly esteemed. The
diseases that are easily cured, men do not greatly fear, nor are very
careful to preserve themselves from them; as experience teaches us in that
filthy French disease. And surely this is one cause why God hides his face so
long from many of his dear ones, even that they might learn thereby, to prize
the sense of his favor the better. When the Spouse had lost her welbeloved
long, it is said, Canticles 3, 4. when she found him, whom her soul loved,
she held him, and would not let him go. 4. To keep us from conceiting that
our prayer, how fervent soever, meriteth ought. Daniel 9.17, 18, 19. Cause thy
face to shine upon thy Sanctuary, that is desolate, for the Lords sake; we do
not present our supplications before thee for our righteousnesses, but for thy
great mercies; defer not for thine own sake, O my God.

Dan. 10.12, 13. From the first day that thou did set thy heart to
understand, and to chasten thy self before thy God, thy words were heard, and
I am come for thy words; but the Prince of the kingdom of Persia withstood me
one and twenty days. And though they perceive it not. 1. Sometime their
heedlesnesse and negligence, is the cause they perceive it not; they put up
their petitions, and never enquire after Gods answer, whereas we should hearken
after it, as Benhadads servants coming to sue for mercy did. 1. Kin. 20.33.
They did diligently observe whither any thing would come from him, and did
hastily catch it. Psalm. 85.8. I will hearken what the Lord God will say, for he
will speak peace to his people. And 2. sometimes anguish and trouble of mind is
the cause of it. They pray to God, and he hears them, and they cannot believe
it; as Job speaks of himself in the extremity of his anguish, Job 9.16. If I
had called, and he had answered me, yet would I not believe that he had
hearkened to my voice. David's sin was pardoned so soon as ever he repented,
and the Prophet Nathan in the name of God, assured him of so much also. 2. Sam.
12.13. and yet it is evident by his earnest suit he makes in these two first,
and diverse other verses of this psalm, that he did not perceive nor feel it
to be so. Gods people in Egypt prayed, and cried to the Lord, and he heard
their cry, and sent them a gracious answer by Moses, Exodus 6.5. But it is said,
ver. 9. they hearkened not unto Moses (they could not receive Gods answer) for
anguish of spirit. So it is certainly with many of Gods best servants, he
hears them graciously, and answers their prayers also, and they through
anguish of spirit cannot perceive it. Now for the better understanding of this,
you must know there be diverse ways whereby God uses to give answer to the
prayers of his people.

First. When he grants them the thing they have begged of him in prayer, As
he did to Hannah, she begged a child of God, and he gave her one, 1. Samuel
1.27. For this child I prayed, and the Lord has given me my petition which I
asked of him. And as he did to Abraham, he prayed for Abimelech, and God healed
him, Genes. 20.17. Manoah prayed that the man of God might come again, and God
hearkened to the voice of Manoah, and the Angel of the Lord came again, Judges
13.8, 9. Solomon prayed for an understanding heart, and God gave it him, 1.
Kin. 3.9, 12. He asked life of thee, and thou gave it him. Psalm. 21.4.

Abraham beggeth of God that Ishmael might live before God, Genesis 17 18. he
denies him that, but grants him a better thing, verse 19. that he should
have a son by his own wife with whom he wo^ld establish an everlasting
covenant, and with his seed after him. David prayed that his child begotten in
adultery might live, 2. Sam. 12.22. God denies him that, but grants him a
better thing, he lost not his prayer, for 1 He saved the soul of that child as
appears by David's words of him, 2 Samuel 12.23. I shall go to him. And 2 he
gave him another son by Bathsheba, and such a one, as of whom he assured him
by the Prophet, that he was beloved of the Lord, verse 24, 25.

Thirdly, when though he neither grant us the thing we have begged, nor a David
speaks, Psalm. 138.3. In the day when I cried, thou answeredst me; and
strengthenedst me with strength in my soul. So of our blessed Savior it is
said, Heb. 5.7. that he was heard in that prayer which he offered up with
strong crying, and tears unto him that was able to save him from death. Yet
did not God save him from death but the divine power supported him, and made
him able to bear the burden of that cursed death, which otherwise had been
intolerable. So though God did not take of the messenger of Satan that
buffeted Paul according to his request, 2 Cor. 12.8. yet did he answer his
prayer graciously for he gave to him strength to bear it, verse 9. My grace is
sufficient to thee. So long as God supporteth thee by his grace, and makes
thee able to bear the want of that that thou have prayed for, though thou have
thought thou art undone if thou have it not (though he set thee feel thine own
weakness, so far as thou art even ready to sink, and faint) say not, that
thou have lost thy labor in praying.

Fourthly, when though thou can not find that thou have by thy prayer
obtained Chron. 7.1. When Solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came
down from heaven, and consumed the burnt offerings. And 1 King. 18.24. The God
that answers by fire let him be God. And as God was wont to answer his
people, and to testify his approbation, and liking of their prayers, and
service by fire; so does he now use by his holy spirit (which was typified, and
resembled by that fire, Mat. 3.11) to testify that he is well pleased with the
prayers of his people, warming and comforting their hearts thereby, Ioh. 16.24.
Ask, and ye shall receive that your (...) may be full. This is that that David
means when he says, Psalm. 35.13 His prayer returned into his own bosom.
This is the meaning of that promise that is made to the prayers of Gods people,
Phil. 4.6, 7. In every thing by prayer, and supplication, let your requests be
made known to God, and the peace of God which passes all understanding shall
keep your hearts and minds. From hence it is that the faithful have begun
their prayers with great heaviness, yet before they had ended them, have found
unspeakable comfort, as Psalm. 6.8 -- 1^.

Fifthly, when though the Lord do not either grant us the good things we have
Romans 8.26. It is the spirit, that thus helps our infirmities, and makes
intercessions for us. And God cannot but hear, and regard the voice of his
own spirit, verse 27. He that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind
of the spirit. So long as thou can pray specially with such striving, and
labor is not possible thou should be neglected of God. Psalm. 10.17. Lord
thou have heard the desire of the humble thou will confirm their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear.

Lecture XV. On Psalm. 51.1, 2. February 7. 1625.
IT follows now that we proceed to the second part of that answer, I told you
was to be made to the fourth, and last reason that men are taught by Satan, to
allege to prove that it is a needless thing to pray, namely their own
experience that themselves have prayed long, and found no comfort nor benefit
by it. Answ. 2.
And in this second part of mine answer, I must show you what we are to do in
this case, when we have used prayer for some blessings, and comforts we want
for our selves or others, and are never the better for it. Now in this case
three things must be done by us. 1. We must take this to heart, and be affected
with it. 2. We must pray still. 3. We must examine well what the cause should
be, why we obtain not our suits, why we receive no answer from God to our
prayers.

Job 30 20. I cry unto thee, and thou do not hear me; I stand up, and thou
regardest me not. Psalm. 22.1, 2. My God my God why have thou forsaken me? why
art thou so far from helping me, and from the words of my roaring? o my God
I cry in the day time but thou hear not, and in the night season, and am not
silent. ^am. 3.8. When I cry, and shout be shuts out my prayer. They have
not only complained of this, that they could not obtain of God the help, and
comfort that they stood in need of, but this has troubled them most, that God
gave them no answer, showed no respect unto their prayer. You shall see how
this troubled David, Psalm. 28.1. Unto thee will I cry, o Lord my rock, be not
silent to me, least if thou be silent to me, I become like them that go down
into the pit; as if he had said, I am but a dead man if thou give me no answer.
Certainly It is our great sin that we are so careless and void of regard, in
this case. 1. We never observe how our prayers speed whether God answer them or
not. 2. Though we evidently discern, that God has has showed no respect to
the prayers we have long made unto him for our selves, or for the Church of
God, it never troubles us. I told you the last day we should hearken after our
prayers how they speed* two benefits we should receive by it. 1. If we find
that the Lord gives a gracious answer unto them, it would greatly increase our
faith and encourage us to depend upon him, and to ply him with our prayers,
Psalm. 116.1, 2. I love the Lord because he has heard my voice, and my
supplications, because he has inclined his care unto me, therefore will I
call upon him as long as I live. In which respect it is good for Gods people to
keep records, and remembrances of the success they have had in their prayers.
So did Sampson in giving a name to that fountain, that God upon his prayer had
opened unto him, when he was ready to perish with thirst, and calling it
Enbakkore the fountain of him that prayed, Judge. 15.19. And Hannah in calling
her son Samuel begged of God. 1 Samuel 1.20. So does David often call to mind the
comfort he had found in prayer, Psalm. 18.6. In my distress I called upon the
Lord, and cried unto my God, he heard my voice out of his temple, etc. And
120.1. In my distress I cried unto the Lord, and he heard me, and in many
other places. The second benefit, we should receive by observing how our
prayers speed would be this, that if we find we have received no answer from
God it would humble us, and make us careful both to enquire into the cause of
it, and to pray better that we may speed better, then yet we have done. This
good Israel got by observing that they had twice sought to the Lord, for
success against the Benjamites, and prevailed not, it caused them to humble
themselves more deeply before the Lord, and pray more fervently, and in a
better manner then they had done before, as we shall read, Judge. 20.26. And so
much shall serve to be spoken of the first duty that is to be performed by us
in this case.

The second thing we must do is this when we have prayed long, and have
Continue in prayer, says the Apostle, Col 4.2. Ephesians. 6.18. Pray always
watching thereunto, with all perseverance. To this end our Savior gave us the
parable of the unrighteous judge, and the widow, to teach us that we ought to
persevere in prayer, and not wax faint, Luke 18.1. When the woman of Canaan
had cried unto Christ for mercy, and he answered her not a word, Mat. 15.23.
that did not discourage her but she prayed, and cried still to him for all
that. Mark what effectual motives the Scripture gives us to persuade us unto
this.

First, it is a duty, and service God requires of us that in all our
necessities, These. 5.17. Pray without ceasing. Phil. 4.6. In every thing by
prayer and supplication, let your requests be made known unto God. That which
God commands we must do though we see no likelihood that any good will come
of it; yea that is the best obedience of all others. God commands Abraham to
sacrifice his own son, and he obeys, Genesis 22.3. and Mordec^i openly to
deny to Haman the Kings favorite that honor that all other men did unto him
and he obeys, Est. 3.2.5. What good could either of them hope would come of
this? Surely none at all but the contrary, yet in obedience unto God they both
did that that was enjoined them. It belongs to us to pray; to hear, and give
answer to our prayers that belongs unto God; we must do our part, and duty,
and leave to the Lord that that belongs to him. We must in this case say as
Ioab does in another case, 2 Samuel 10.12. Be of good courage, and let us play
the men, and the Lord do that which seems good unto him. And certainly even
this (the doing of our duty in obedience unto God) will yield us much comfort,
though we get no other good by our prayers. So says Paul* 2 Cor. 1.12. that
the testimony that his conscience gave him that he had done his duty, was his
rejoicing. So that a Christian in this case has just cause to say, though I
have long begged such a thing of God, and have not obtained it, yet I thank
God that (in conscience of my duty, and in obedience unto God) I have prayed,
and can pray for it still.

Secondly we may be sure that (though God do not grant us the things we Acts
9.11. Arise Ananias, and go to Saul, for behold he prays. 2. Yea he takes
great pleasure in them; they are compared to sweet odours. Rev. 5.8. and that
sweet incense that was used in the Temple, Psalm. 141.2. To whom are they so
sweet? Who accounts so of them? Surely not themselves, but the Lord. 3. Yea he
will doubtless at one time or other reward (and that openly, so as not
themselves only but others shall take notice of it) every prayer, that any
faithful soul pours out unto him, Mat. 6.6. Enter into thy closet, and when
thou have shut thy door, pray to thy father which is in secret, and thy father
which sees in secret shall reward thee openly.

Psalm. 34.15. His ears are always open to their cry; and 65.2. O thou that
hear prayer unto thee shall all flesh come. 2. And as he is apt to hear, so
is he to give answer, and to grant the suits of his children. Sometimes he has
done it so soon as ever they had done their prayer, as Act, 4.31. When they
had prayed, the place was shaken where they were assembled together, and they
were all ^illed with the Holy Ghost. Sometimes before they had done praying,
Dan. 9.20, ^1. While I was speaking, and praying, yea while I was speaking in
prayer, the man Gabriel came, etc. Sometimes before they could speak a word,
when it was but in the purpose of their hearts to pray, God has prevented
them, and granted them that that he knew they would have begged of him. Esa.
65.24. Before they call I will answer. 3. Yea he has bound himself by promise
to grant us whatsoever we ask that is good for us, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. If ye seek
him, he will be found of you. Ps. 145.19. He will fulfill the desires of them
that fear him; he also will hear their cry, and will save them. Esa. ^0.19.
He will be very gracious unto thee, at the voice of thy cry, when he shall
hear it he will answer thee. 1 Job. 5.14, 15. This is the confidence that we
have in him that if we ask any thing according to his will he hears us. And
if we know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the
petitions that we desired of him. Upon these promises we may safely build our
assurance that in praying we shall not beat the air, and loose our labor, an
answer will come in due time, Esa. 45.19. I said not to the seed of Jacob;
seek ye me in vain. God would never by so many commandments have enjoined us
this duty, and by so many promises allured us to it, if he had meant we should
have lost our labor in it.

He that believes shall not make have* says the Prophet, Esa. 28.16. He that
believes these promises you have heard of, will be content to tarry the Lords
leisure. It becomes not us to appoi^t the Lord his time, when he shall answer
us, nor the means how he shall help us. Beggars must be no choosers. It is
noted for one of the chief sins of the Jews that they limited the holy one of
Israel, Ps. 78 41. There are diverse wa^es whereby men take upon them to limit
the Lord; and this is one. Who will appoint me the time? says the Lord, Ier.
49.19. It becomes us I say to wait and attend upon the Lord. Rest in the Lord,
and wait patiently for him, says David, Ps 37.7. And Lam. 3.6. It is good that
a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. That
speech of Iehoram 2 King. 6.33. What should I wait for the Lord any longer? was
the voice of an Atheist, and not of a Christian. The faithful have been wont
to speak after another fashion. Psalm. 40.1. I waited patiently for the Lord,
and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry. Nothing is lost by waiting upon God,
his promises shall certainly be performed in the sit season. Though it
tarry (says the Prophet, Hab. 2.^.) wait for it, because it will surely come,
it will not tarry, not a moment, after the fittest season. They shall not be
ashamed (that is disappointed of their hope, says the Lord, Esa. 49.23) that
wa^^e for me. And thus have I declared to you the second duty that belongs to
us, when we pray long, and can receive no such answer as our soul desires.

Saul had sought unto God and he answered him not that day, he called all the
chief of the people together to know and see whose sin had been the cause of
it, 1 Samuel 14.37, 38. He was none of the best men but certainly in this case,
his example is worth the following. For though the Lord may have other reasons
secret to himself, for which he does deny or delay our suits, yet if we
receive not answer from him in any of these five kinds that I told you of the
last day: it is our part to lay the fault upon our selves, and to impu^e it to
our sins; and to say with the Prophet, Esa. 59.1, 2. The Lords hand is not
shortened, that it cannot save: neither is his ear heavy, that it cannot hear,
but our iniquities have separated between us and our God, and our sins have
had his face from us that he will not hear. And Ier. 5.25. Our iniquities have
turned away these things, and our sins have withholden good things from us.
Surely (should every one of us say) somewhat has been (...), or in my
prayers, or else the Lord who is so ready to hear, and (...) the prayers of his
people, would have returned me some answer to my prayers before now. I ask,
and receive not because I ask amiss, Iam. 4.2. Now the Lords (...) to our
prayers should cause us to examine well what has been the faith of our
prayers, that we amending that fault may hereafter find more comfort in prayer.

And for your help that way, I will show you some of the principal faults
that use to blemish, and weaken our prayers so as they become not acceptable,
and effectual with God.

First, it may be when thou prayedst thou had not first repented thee of, and
forsaken every known sin; and that man whose conscience tells him somewhat Job
11.13, 14. If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands toward
him, if iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away and let not wickedness
dwell in thy tabernacles. If I regard iniquity in my heart (says David, Psalm.
66.18. any iniquity, any known sin) the Lord will not hear me. The promise
of audience with God is made only to such as fear him, Psalm. 145.19. He will
fulfill the desire of them that fear him; he also will hear their cry, and
will save them.

Secondly, it may be that the prayers that thou have used to make, have not
been according to the will of God, Romans 8.27. And upon this does the success
of our prayers greatly depend. 1 Ioh. 5.14. This is the confidence we have in
him that if we ask any thing according to his will* ^e hears us. As if he
should say, we can have no confidence he will hear us, but when we pray
according to his will. But you will say how may we pray according to the will
of God? I answer, 1. When we pray more for spiritual then for earthly things,
Mat. 6.33. First seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you. 2. When we can crave spiritual blessings
more importunately, (this is a prayer according to Gods will, Luke 12.32. It is
your fathers good pleasure to give you the kingdom; and 1 Thessalonians. 4.2. This is
the will of God even your sanctification) but in craving of temporal blessings
(yea and of the measure also of spiritual graces) we can submit our selves to
the will of our heavenly father. Mat. 26.39. O my father if it be possible let
this cup pass from me, nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. 3. When
we in our prayers do more importune God for the pardon of our sins, then for
the removing of any punishment of sin. Thus Peter taught Simon Magus to pray,
Acts 8.22. Pray that the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee; but he
prayed otherwise, ver. 24. Pray to the Lord for me, that none of these things
that ye have spoken come upon me. 4. When in our prayers we can desire the
favor of God more then any of his blessings either corporal or spiritual.
Thus prayed David, Psalm. 4.6. Many say who will show us any good (blessings,
and good things many can desire* and pray for) but Lord lift thou up the light
of thy countenance upon us. Till we have learned out of Gods Word to pray thus
according to his will, our prayer is but the sacrifice of fools, Eccles. 5.1.
And as Elihu speaks, Job 35.13. Surely God will not hear vanity, neither
will the Almighty regard it.

Ps. 2.11. Serve the Lord with fear: and 5.7. In thy fear will I worship
toward thine holy temple. Our hearts must be fixed, and settled upon him and
upon the words we utter unto him, and not rove, and wander up, and down. Such
a disposition of heart as David found in himself when he would praise God we
must strive to have when we pray. My heart is fixed o God (says he, Ps. 57.7.)
my heart is fixed, I will sing, and give praise. The sense of the Lords
greatness must keep us from speaking any thing rashly without understanding,
and attention of heart, from speaking we wot not what, as if we were in a
dream. This charge is given us, Eccl. 5.2.3. Be not rash with thy mouth, and
let not thine heart be hastly to utter any thing before God* for God is in
heaven, and thou upon earth* therefore let thy words be few. For a dream
comes through the multitude of business, and a (...) voice is known by the
multitude of words. We must rouse up our hearts both before, and in our prayers
from drowsinesse, and cry unto them as Deborah does unto her heart, Judge. 5.12.
Awake awake Deborah; awake awake, utter a song. And as David, Ps. 108.2. Awake
Psaltery, and harp: I my self will awake early.

Romans 8.35. We have received the spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba father.
The prayers of Gods people are compared to incense, Psalm. 141.2. and the
incense sent up no sweet favor till the fire that came down from heaven came
to it, Number. 16.46. It is the fervent prayer only that is effectual with God,
Iam. 5.16. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much. Ps.
3.4. I cried to the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy hill.
Ps. 119.145. I cry with my whole heart, hear me o Lord. For so runs the
promise, Ier. 29 13. Ye shall seek me, and find me when you shall search for
me with all your heart

Moses himself for Miriam, till she were further humbled, Nu. 17.13.14. 1.
Humiliation arising from the sense of our own unworthi^^s is a great furtherer
of the success of our prayers, 2 Chro. 7.14. If my people shall humble
themselves, and pray, then will I hear from heaven. This was that that
furthered the success of Manasses prayers, 2 Chr. 33.12, 13. In his affliction
he besought the Lord, and humbled himself greatly, and prayed, and the Lord
was entreated of him. 2. Some judgments will not be removed by ordinary prayer,
Mat. 17.24. This kind goes not out, but by prayer and fasting; so some
blessings will not be obtained by ordinary prayer. The children of Israel could
not prevail against Benjamin till they had kept a fast, Judge. 20.26. they
should have fasted as well as prayed, for the further humbling of their souls
in such a case. 3. Take heed therefore that you yield not to that conceit to
think your selves wronged when you have prayed for any thing thus, and thus
long, and yet cannot speed like those hypocrites, who are brought in thus
expostulating the matter with God, Esa. 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou
see not? wherefore have we afflicted our souls, and thou take no
knowledge? But judge your selves ever unworthy to be heard; and when you go to
pray, strive to be as humble as that worthy Centurion, Luke 7.6, 7. that when
he sued for mercy from Christ, thought not himself worthy that Christ should
come under his roof, no not to go to Christ. And as the Prodigal, Luke 5.21.
that said to his father I am no more worthy to be called thy son. Ascribe it
only to Gods mercy in Christ, if he vouchsafe to show any respect to thee, or
thy prayers, Colos. 3.17. Do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks
to God the father by him.

Sixthly, and lastly. It may be thou have not prayed in faith, 1. We should in
David. Psalm. 1^9.147. I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried, I
hoped in thy Word. These we may (with a reverend boldness) allege to God in
our prayers, and bind him with his own word, which he can no more deny, then
cease to be God. Thus does David, Psalm 143.1. Hear my prayer o Lord, give
ear to my supplications, in thy faithfulness answer me, and in thy
righteousness. 2. We should in our prayers set before us, the worthiness of
our advocate, and high Priest, who sits at his Fathers right hand, to present
our prayers unto him, and make them acceptable in his sight. Heb. 4.1^, 16.
Seeing that we have a great high Priest, that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus
the Son of God; let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of Grace, that
we may obtain Mercy, and have Grace to help in time of need. And remember the
promise, John 16.23. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father
in my Name, he will give it you. Unless we come in this faith thus grounded
upon the promises of God, and upon the all sufficiency of our Mediator, we can
have no hope to speed well in our prayers. He that would ask any thing of God
(says the Apostle, Iam. 1*6, 7.) let him come in faith, nothing doubting;
otherwise, let him not think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord.

Lecture XVI. On Psalm 51.1, 2. Febru 21. 1625.
WE have already heard that in these verses, three things were to be observed
principally. 1. That David in his great distress, and anguish of heart, flies
unto God, and seeks comfort and help from him by prayer. 2 What was the
chi^fe thing, that in this his prayer he beggeth of God; that is to say, the
remission and pardon of his sin,. 3. Upon what ground he did build this his
hope to obtain this suit of God; that is, the mercy of God, and nothing but
that. The first of these three points, we finished the last day, and are now to
proceed unto the second.

We must therefore observe here, 1. That this is the only thing he beggeth Nota:
The Lord had denounced against him by Nathan. 2. Sam. 1^.10 -- 12. very heavy
and grievous judgments. 1. That as he had taken away Vriahs wife, and
committed filthiness with her; so would he take his wives, and give them to
one that should defile, and abuse them; by filthy whoredom he had sinned, and
by filthy whoredom he should be punished. 2. That as he had slain Vriah with
the sword, of the children of Ammon; so should the sword enter into his own
house; by the sword he had sinned, and by the sword and blood he should be
punished. 3. That as he had brought dishonor upon God, and his holy religion,
by giving great occasion to the enemies of the Lord, to blaspheme; so would God
bring open shame, and reproach upon him, before all Israel, and before the
Sun. 4. That the instruments God would use to afflict him by in this manner,
should be them of his own house, his own children whom he had too dearly
loved. I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house. 5. That
these grievous plagues should be upon him, not for a day, or a week, or a
month, or a year, but all the days of his life. The sword shall never depart
from thine house. Yet in this whole prayer of his, ye shall not find one
petition, one word for the removal or putting by of these judgments, all his
suit is only for the pardon of his sin.

Quest. 1
Why (may you say) might he not lawfully have prayed against these temporal
judgments? Answ.
I answer, yes; verily he might. For so did Abraham when God had threatened
destruction to worse people then these, yet he prayed against it, Genesis 18.32.
Yea so did David himself for the life of the child that was begotten in
adultery, 2. Sam. 12.16.22. And at another time. Psalm. 39.10. Remove thy stroke
away from me, for I am consumed by the blow of thine hand.

Quest. 2
What then (will you say) made he no reckoning of these judgments in his wives
and children, so long as himself was spared?

Answ.
I answer, yes doubtless; for he was as tender hearted, and good natured a man
as ever lived. He loved his wives dearly, as may appear by the care he had to
provide for them, even after they had bin ravished, 2. Sam. 10.3. He loved his
children dearly, as may appear by the extreme passions he was in for the
death of two of them, though they had bin both of them extremely lewd, and
unworthy of his love. For Amnon first. 2. Sam. 13.36. he wept very sore; and
then for Absalom, 2. Sam. 18 33. He was much moved, and went up to the chamber
over the gate, and wept; and as he went, thus he said, O my son Absalom, my
son, my son Absalom, would God I had dyed for thee, O Absalom my son, my
son.

Quest. 3
If ye ask me yet further, why then prayed he not against these judgments? Had
he not hope to have prevailed in such a suite? Had God reveiled to him that his
decree concerning these things was irrecoverable? Had he said of them as Ezekiel.
14.18. Though these three men (Noah, Daniel, and Job) were in it, as I live
says the Lord God, they shall neither deliver sons, nor daughters?

Answ.
I answer, that I cannot say so neither. For there is hope in Israel (and among
Gods people) concerning this, as Shechaniah speaks, Ezr. 10.2. Temporal
judgments that have bin as peremptorily denounced as these were, have yet by
the repentance and prayers of the parties been kept of, as we see in the case
of Hezechia, Esa. 38.5. I have heard thy prayer, behold, I will add unto thy
days fifteen years.

But why prays not he against these judgments? will you say.

Quest. 4
I answer. Surely his sins now took up all his thoughts and affections; he
could now think of nothing else; he counted these judgments nothing in
comparison of his sins; he thought himself a happy man, if his sins might be
pardoned, though all these judgments did light upon his house. And this is the
first thing is to be observed in this suit. But then observe secondly, how
earnest blot out my transgressions, wash me from mine iniquity, cleanse me from
my sin. And then verse 7. again Purge me with Hysope, wash me, and I shall be
whiter then snow. And again ver. 9. Hide thy face from my sins, blot out
mine iniquities. 2. It is not his whoredom and murder only that troubled him,
or that he desired pardon of, that would not serve his turn. Wash me
thoroughly, or multiply thy washings upon me: and verse. 9. Blot out all mine
iniquities; as if he should say, Let not one spot of any of mine iniquities
abide on me. Now from these things thus observed. 1. That he desires not so
much the removal of so heavy judgments, Answ.
as the pardon of his sins. 2. That he makes no suit for that, but for this
alone. 3. That he presses God in this suit, with such importunity and
earnestness; we have this Doctrine to learn.

Doct. 10
That pardon of sin is more to be desired, then deliverance from the greatest
judgments that can befall us. Observe the proof of this doctrine in four
points, all exemplified here in the person and practice of David, a man after
Gods own heart.

First. The man that truly knows what sin is, whose heart is rightly David
now was in great perplexity and anguish of soul, which he compares to that
anguish a body is in, that has all his bones broken, verse 8. If Nathan should
have come to him now, and asked him, why, where is thy pain David? Where art
thou sick? What is it that troubles thee so? Is it the fear of that open
shame I told thee God will bring upon thee in thy wives? Is it the fear of the
sword I told thee God would bring into thy house? Is it any such matter? His
answer would have bin; No, no Nathan, it is nothing but my sin that paineth and
troubles my soul: those things trouble me, nothing so much. Nothing is so
much to be feared, nothing will so trouble and humble the heart, as sin will
do; when once God shall charge it upon a man, it will bite like a Serpent, and
sting like an adder, as Solomon speaks, Prove. 23.32. When the poor man that
had an incurable palsy was brought to Christ, the first word that Christ spoke
to him was this, Mark^ 2.5. Son, thy sins be forgiven thee. He saw that the
poor man's sins troubled him much more then his palsy did. All bodily diseases
are but as flea-bitings, in comparison of that anguish that sin will put the
heart unto. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity (says Solomon,
Prove. 18.4) but a wounded spirit who can bear? When the Angel tells Joseph
that Christ should be called Jesus, a Savior, a deliverer, and Redeemer of his
people, he gives this for the reason of that name, Matthew. 1.21. For he shall
save his people. From what? not from poverty, nor sickness, nor shame, nor
persecution, but from their sins. Sin is the greatest misery and evil, that
a man can be saved or delivered from.

Secondly. That man that truly knows what sin is, accounts the pardon David
was now in great anguish of soul, as I told you, he stood in great need of
inward comfort, and that was his earnest desire, as you may see ver. 8.12. Make
me to hear joy and gladness, restore to me the joy of thy salvation. Which
way sought he to come to comfort? what made he the maine ground of all his
comfort? surely the pardon of his sin. If once he might obtain that, he knew
he should have comfort enough, without that, he looked for no comfort.
Therefore is this often mentioned as the justest, and soundest ground of all true
comfort. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people says your God (it is the Lords
speech to his servants and messengers, Esa. 40.1, 2.) speak ye comfortably to
Jerusalem. How should we do that, may Gods servants say? Cry unto her, that her
warrefare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned. No sound comfort can
be had till then; and when once that is known, nothing can make a man's state
uncomfortable. So speaks our Savior to the poor man that had the palsy,
when he saw him dejected in mind, and uncomfortable, he says not, son, be of
good comfort, thy palsy has left thee; and thou that could not have come
hither, if four men had not brought thee. Mark 2.3. shall be able to take up
thy bed, and walk home without any help, but how does he comfort him, Matthew.
9.2. Son be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. So when he would
comfort Mary Magdalene, that was so full of trouble of mind, and sorrow, that
she was able with her tears to wash his feet, Luke 7.38. he says unto her,
verse. 48. Thy sins are forgiven thee. As if he had said, thou have no such
cause to weep so, thou have cause to be comfortable, and cheerful, for thy
sins are forgiven. This peace of God (that is the comfort and joy that rises
from the knowledge of the pardon of our sins and reconciliation with him) is
said, Phil. 4.7. to pass all understanding. No heart can conceive how
comfortable, and blessed a thing that is, but that which has felt and enjoyed
it.

Thirdly. The man that truly knows what sin is, desires and longs after
nothing so much as the pardon of his sin, is not so earnest and importunate
with God in any suit as in this, If God should now have said to David, as after
he did unto his son Solomon, 1. Kings 3.5. Ask what I shall give thee.
Certainly this should have been his petition. Lord, that my sins may be
forgiven; yea, see how earnest he is here with God for this. To such men Christ
(who is our propitiation, and only means to procure, and purchase our pardon)
is precious as the Apostle speaks, 1. Pet. 2.7. To you that believe, he is
precious; yea so precious, that in comparison of him, and of Gods favor
through him, they esteem basely of every thing else, Phil, 3.8. I do count all
things but dung, that I may win Christ.

Jacob when he was sure Joseph was still living, Genesis 45.28. It is enough. Yea
he counts himself to be a happy man if once he have obtained this. So we see
David here makes this his only suit; and says in another place, that this is
enough even to make a man happy, Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed is the man whose
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered; blessed is the man unto whom
the Lord imputes not iniquity. Nothing can make that man miserable, whose sins
are forgiven.

Reason.
Now the reasons and grounds of this Doctrine, are principally two, being taken
from the true, and sound consideration of the nature of sin. And for the
nature of it, we will go no further then to that description that David makes
of it in these two verses, and to those two comparisons, whereby he does here
resemble it.

Blot out my transgressions. Our sins are our debts, as our Savior teaches us
to call them, and account of them in the fifth petition of the Lords prayer,
Matthew. 6.12. Forgive us our debts.

First. The obedience God requires of us in his Law, is no more but just, and
due debt, we are bound and ought to perform it; and in case we perform it
not; the penalty and curse which the law inflicteth, is most justly due unto
us. We stand bound to perform either the one or the other. To this obligation
every man's conscience has set his hand and seal, and will acknowledge it, and
say Amen unto it one day. God requires in his Law, that so soon as his people
should come into the land of Canaan, the curses of this law (this bond and
obligation) should be read in the hearing of them all, men, women, and
children, and that all of them should say Amen to it, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed is he
that confirms not all the words of this Law to do them, and all the people
shall say Amen. The copy and counterpane of this bond between God and us,
every man has in his own conscience, which will acknowledge it to be most
true, and just; as the Apostle speaking even of heathen men, says, Romans 2.15.
which show the work of the Law, written in their hearts.

The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob (says the Prophet Amos 8.7.)
Surely I will never forget any of their works. He keeps a debt book,
wherein he has set down in writing every one of them. Esa. 65.6. Behold, it
is written before me. And our own conscience also scores up every one of our
sins, and sets down the time and place, when, and where we committed them,
and so came into Gods debt further, and further. And though it be like a
sealed, and clasped book for a time, that we cannot look into it, (which
makes us think we are little or nothing in Gods debt) yet these books will
one day be opened. Revelation 20.12. I saw the dead, small and great, stand
before God, and the books were opened -- and the dead were judged out of those
things which were written in the Books, according to their works; and then it
will appear, our debt books agree fully with Gods debt books, our scores
with his scores. According as the Apostle says, Romans ^15, ^6. that the
consciences of men shall bear witness with God, in the day when God shall
judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ.

Thirdly. These debts of ours (if we get not in time a discharge, and Qui^^
from them) will be exa^t^d every one o^ them at our hands. The Lord (I tell
you) is such a creditor, as will look to have his own, Eccles. 1.9. Know
thou, that for all these things, God will bring thee to judgment, And 1^.14
The Lord shall bring every work into judgment with every secret thing,
whether it be good or evil.

Fourthly, these debts of ours are grown to such a huge sum, as we are never
Matthew. 18.24. a sum, which there was never any merchant or King in the World
so rich, as was able to pay it.

Fifthly. Now consider well of this reason. To an honest mind, it is a heavy
Romans ^.8. (...) no man any thing. Mat. 5.2^. (...) qui^^^^, P^o. 6.4^. (...) to
thine eyes* nor ^tum^er to thine eyelids, deliv^r thy self as a Roe (with all
the speed thou (...)) from the (...) of the hunter. It is made the note of a
graceless man to be careless in this case, Es. 3^.21. The wicked borrows,
and pays not again. How heavy a thing is it th^n, to be thus in debt (...)
danger unto God, and always liable unto his arrest For 1. He has another
manner of prison to cast his debtors into, then all the prisons and dungeons in
the world are. Mat. 22.13. Bind him hand and foot, and call him in ^^^ter
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. 2. Here no hiding of our
heads, or keeping close will serve the turn. (...) 130.7. Whither shall I flee
from thy presence. 3 There is no hope of escaping his arrest or execution by
any rescue or strength we are able to make Job. 10.7. There (...) that can
deliver out of thy hand. And therefore no marvel thou (...), though he cry out
here so earnestly to God, to (...) them out of his debt book, and cross the
book, ver. 1. Blot out my transgessions, and ver. 9. Blot out (...)
iniquities. Certainly, so will every one of us do that truly knows, what it
is to be thus indebted unto God.

The second reason of the Doctrine, is contained in the second comparison,
David here resembles, and sets forth the nature of sin. He compares it to
filthiness, and uncleannes in these words of the second verse, With me
thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin So is all sin called,
not (...) Cor. 7.^. Let us cleanse our s^lves from (...) flesh and spirit. Yea,
sin for the filthiness of it, is compared to the excrement^ of a man, (...).

See the proof of this in two points, sin unrepented of, and unpardoned, 1.
defiles and polluteth a man himself, makes him most (...), and (...) some.
^. it makes every thing unclean and polluted unto him* so as he shall receive
no good, but hurt by it. for the first, Nothing so defiles a man, as sin does.
Mat. 15.19, 20. Out of the (...) proceed evil thoughts, murders, (...) the^is,
false witness, blasphemies, these are the things which defile a man. In which
respect, S^lo^^n says, Pro. 13.5* that a w^^^d man is lo^thsome. 1. Sin makes
a man loathsome to all good men, Psalm. 15.4. In whose eye^ a vile person 2^.^7.
An unjust man is an abomination to the just. He cannot in his heart esteem
him, he dares not be familiar with him. Psalm. ^6.5. I have hated the
congregation of evil doers, and will not sit with the wicked. 2. It makes a
man loathsome to all men; even to such as owe most duty unto him, that they
cannot reverence or esteem him, as otherwise they would, the father to the
child, the husband to the wife, the master to the servant, Lam. 1.8. Jerusalem
has grievously sinned, therefore they that honored her, despise her. And
though this be not fully seen in this World (and yet alas it is too much seen
every day in all places) yet in the end of the World, and the day of judgment,
it shall be perfectly seen. For then wicked men shall be an abhorring to all
flesh, as Esa. 66.24. Thirdly, sin makes men loathsome unto God My soul
loathed them, says the Lord. Zac. 11.8. Yea the best things that proceed from
them the Lord loatheth, Pro. 15.8. The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination unto the Lord. For he is of so pure eyes, that he cannot endure to
behold 1.13. 4. and lastly, Sin will make a man loathsome, even unto himself,
when God shall open the sink, he will feel such a filthy and loathsome sent,
to come from it, as will even overcome him, and make him unable to abide
himself. See the experiment hereof, not in Judas only, a castaway, who when
God discovered to him the loathsomeness of his sin, went and hanged himself,
Matthew. 27.3 -- 5. but in Gods dearest servants, in Job, who cries out, 42.6. I
abhor my self; and in those repentant Jews, of whom it is said, Ezekiel
36.31. Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and shall loath your
selves in your own sight for your iniquities.

But this is not all the filthiness that is in sin, to defile the man himself,
that committeh it, and make him loathsome. It does also.

Titus 1.15. To them that are defiled and unbeleeving, nothing is pure, Yea,
even the holy things of God, his Word, and Sacraments, Leviticus 16.16. The
Priest shall make an atonement for the holy place, because of the uncleanness
of the children of Israel, and of their sins. Hag. 2.13. If one that is
unclean touch any of the holy things, shall it be unclean? and the Priests
answered and said, it shall be unclean.

And therefore no marvel though David's sins did so trouble him, though he cry
out here so earnestly unto God, ver. 2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity,
and cleanse me from my sin. And Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is he whose transgession is
forgiven, and whose sin is covered. And certainly, so will every one do that
knows how filthy a thing sin is; how loathsome it will make him; and how it
will defile and poison every thing to him.

Lecture XVII. On Psalm 51.1, 2. Febru. 28. 1625.
Use. 1.
IT follows now, that we proceed to the uses of this Doctrine.

Whereof, the first of them is for reproof of them, that do not do as David
did here; And which of us all is it, that is not liable to this reproof? This
Martha. Lu. 50.41, 42. Martha, Martha, thou art careful, and troubled about
many things; how we may live, and live wealthily, and pleasantly, and in
credit, but one thing is needful. That one thing that is needful, and only
absolutely needful, the pardon of our sins, and Gods favor, we take little
thought for. And what are these things that we seek more eagerly then Gods
favor, and prefer before it? Surely, 1. They are uncertain, 1. Tim. 6.17.
Trust not in uncertain riches. 2. They can yield us no sound comfort, when we
have most need of comfort, or make us ever a whit the happier, Esa. 55.2.
Wherefore do you spend your money, for that which is not bread, and your
labor for that which satisfies not? 3. The more we have of them, with the
more difficulty shall we be saved, and go to heaven, Lu. 18.24. How hardly
shall they that have righ^s, enter into the kingdom of God?

Secondly, our sins do not trouble us, more then any thing else, we count them
Elihu speaks, Job 36.21. Thou have chosen iniquity, rather then affliction.

Thirdly. The greatest part of men count sin no evil, no misery at all, are
Sampson did with the gates of Gaza, Judges 16.3. Sin is no burden to them at
all; they are never disquieted in their minds, with remembrance of their sins,
but are fu^l of admirable peace; peace in life, and peace in death. Psalm. ^3.5.
Thou are not in trouble at other men, Luke 11.21. The strong man armed, keeps
his palace, and his goods are in peace. Nay none are so merry as they, yea
their sins make them merry, and they are never so j^^and and light hearted, as
when they have sinned most, Jeremy 11.15. When thou do evil, then thou
rejoycest. Surely the cause of this, is worthy to be enquired into, these men
certainly have diseased, and distempered souls, and the best way to cure this,
and every other disease, is to find out, and remove the cause of it. Let me
therefore enquire into the causes of this distemper, and to that end demand a
question or two of these men.

First, Quest. 1
Joseph was afraid to commit sin, though he were strongly tempted unto it, and
could have done it secretly enough, Genesis 39.9. How can I do this great wicked
us, and sin against God. And it is made a note of a godly man, that be fears
an oath. Eccles. 9.2. And why art not thou afraid to sin, to lie, to swear, to
be drunk to deceive thy neighbor, to commit any sin.

Secondly, 2.
Peter was so troubled for his sins, that he wept bitterly, Mat. 26.75. (...)
for (...) while, that Christ was feign first to appear to (...) to take great
pains to comfort him, John ^1.1^ -- 17. And (...) here, and Psalm. 33.4. Min^
iniquities are as an heavy burden, (...) me to bear. And so was the incestuous
person, 2. Cor. 2.7. ready (...) up with overmuch sorrow. And why art not thou
troubled in the mind at all for any of thy sins? Why countest^ thou them no
burden at all?

Thirdly, David has never done crying to God here, for the pardon of his sins,
3.
ver. ^^. O Lord blot out my transgessions, wash me thoroughly from mine
iniquity, and cleanse me from my sins. and ver. 9. Hide thy face from my sins,
and blot out all mine iniquities. And why do thou never use to cry heartily
unto God for the pardon of thy sins, nor seek after it?

First, Object. 1
thou will say, thou have no such cause to be troubled as David had, thy sins
are not so heinous as David's were, thou werr never murderer, nor adultery, ^^
either, thou thankest God. This was the cause why the Pharis^e when he came to
pray, made no suit at all for the pardon of his sins, they were no trouble to
him. Lu. 18.11. I think thee o God, I am not as other man, extertioners,
unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican.

But to this I answer, Answ. 1
1. Thou have cause enough to be troubled for thy sins for all that. For 1
others of Gods servants have been greatly troubled for small sins. Are thy
sins smaller then Jobs were? and yet he was marvellously troubled, and
afflicted in mind, for his sins: he even abhorred himself, and repented in
dust, and ashes, as he professes himself, Job 42.6. Are thy sins smaller then
those that Paul speaks of Romans 7.15. that which I do, I allow not: for what I
would, that do I not, but what I hate, that do I? And yet see what a burden
even this was to him, it made him cry out, verse 24. O wretched man that I am.
See thou not daily how heavily many of Gods best servants do walk, how they
complain, and cry out, some on their death beds, some continually almost; and
what be the sins that trouble them so? Are they gross sins? Are they more
heinous then thine? No no. They are even such as those of Paul's were; the very
combat betwixt their flesh, and spirit, they find in themselves puts them to
this pain, and makes them to cry, as Rebecca, Genesis 25.22. If it be so, why am
I thus? In her passion she was ready to say, it had been better for me to have
been barren still. And so are many of Gods poor servants in their passion apt
to say. O it were good for us to observe well this trouble of mind that many of
Gods dear ones are subject unto, and to be among these mourners, Eccl. 7.4.
The heart of the wise, is in the house of mourning. For when we see such
examples we should lay them to heart, and say to our selves. Lord if the sins
of such a one be so heavy a burden, what will mine be? Luke 23.31. If this be
done to the green tree what shall be done to the dry? 1 Pet. 4.18. If the
righteous scarcely shall be saved where shall the ungodly, and sinner appear?

David was, and that is such a burden, as no creature can bear, Gal. 3.10.
Cursed is every one, that continues not in all things which are written, in
the book of the law to do them. And have not thou then cause to be troubled?
Have not thou cause to seek earnestly for the pardon of thy sin? Would not
thou count that malefactor a mad man, that being condemned to die, should say I
have no such need to sue for a pardon as such, and such, my offense was neither
treason, nor murder as theirs was, I am condemned but for a burglary, or for a
robbery, etc.

David had. For 1. He committed these sins but once, the sins that thou
stand guilty of, thou have committed oftentimes. How often have thou
blasphemed, and been drunk, and unclean, and lied, and deceived thy
neighbor? I tell thee, smaller sins being multiplied, and often committed will
make as heavy a burden, as the heinousest sin that is but once committed.
Ier. 5.6. A lion out of the forest shall slay them -- because their
transgressions are many, and their backslidings are increased. As the sand
being the least thing that is, yet by number is made extremely heavy. My
grief (says Job 6.3.) would be heavier then the sand of the sea. 2. David
continued not in the filthy puddle of his sin above one year, and thou have
lain snorting, in such, and such sins of thine a great many years. How long is
it, since thou first began to be a blasphemer, a drunkard, an unclean person,
and given to such other sins? and in all this time thou were never soundly
humbled for them, never made thy peace with God. I tell thee continuance in
sin unrepented of, is a great aggravater of sin, the longer that sin
lies upon a man the fouler, and more loathsome it will make him in Gods sight,
the deeper stain, and die it will set upon his soul, Ier. 4.14. O Jerusalem
how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Hos. 8.5. How long will it
be ere they attain to innocence? 3. So that 1 If David became so filthy by
these sins but once committed, if his sins were so heavy upon his conscience
what will thine appear to be (when God shall open thine eyes, and restore to
thee thy sight) that have made sin thy trade, and practice all thy life long? 2
If there must be so much a do to make David clean, who had been clean many
years before, and now lay scarce one year in these sins, if the Lord must
bestow so much washing, and rubbing, and wringing upon him to get him clean
(verse 2. Wash me thoroughly, or multiply thy washings of me) will thou think
it a matter of no difficulty, a matter not worth the troubling of thy mind
about, to be cleansed from all thy sins? 3 If David cried so earnestly, and
was so fervent, and importunate in this suit, and desired nothing but that his
sins might be pardoned; will thou be so mad to think, that a cold cry God
mercy, and God forgive me, will serve thy turn, and that thou can so easily
get thy pardon when thou will thy self?

Thou will say again, Object. 2
Though my sins be many and great, yet there is no cause I should be so
troubled with them, nor keep such a do for the pardon of them as you speak
of; for God is merciful, and very ready to forgive.

To this I answer, Answ.
that touching Gods mercy thou can not say more then thou shall hear me
acknowledge, when I shall come to the next that is the third, and last part of
this Text. But for the present this I say

First, It is true indeed that Gods mercy is infinite. When David had spoken
Psalm. 106.1. he adds verse 2. Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? Who
can show forth all his praise? And there is a mercy of God that extends it
self to all his creatures, Psalm. 145 9. The Lord is good to all, and his
tender mercies are over all his works. And so I cannot deny but the leudest
man that is may taste, and does daily taste of the mercy of God. Job 25.3. Upon
whom does not his light arise? and Luk 6.35. He is kind to the unthankefull,
and to the evil. But this mercy that we now speak of, the mercy of God that
reaches to the pardon of men's sins, is not common to all, this is
restrained, and limited to a certain number. It is peculiar to the Catholic
Church; as we are taught in our Creed; and as the Prophet speaks, Esa.
33.24. The people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity. It is
restrained to them that fear God. Luke 1.50. His mercy is on them that fear
him from generation to generation. And Psalm. 103.11. As the heaven is high
above the earth so great is his mercy to them that fear him. And verse 17, 18.
The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear
him, to such as keep his covenant, and remember his commandments to do them.
This mercy is restrained unto such sinners as are humbled, and afflicted in
heart for their sins, Psalm. 25.16. Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon
me, for I am desolate, and afflicted. This mercy, God has threatened to deny to
some kind of men; that is, 1. To the brutish ignorant, Esa. 27.11. It is a
people of no understanding, therefore he that made them will not have mercy on
them, and he that formed them, will show them no favor. 2. To them that
despise, and scorn the means of grace, Pro. 1.27, 28. When your fear comes
as a desolation, -- then shall they call upon me but I will not answer, they
shall seek me early but, they shall not find me; Why? what was the reason?
that is given, verse 29, 30. For they hated knowledge, they would none of my
counsel they despised all my reproof. 3. To him that sins presumptuously,
and upon hope of mercy, and does bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall
have peace though I do walk in the stubbornness of my heart to add
drunkenness to thirst (that is sin unto sin, or unsatiablenesse in sin)
the Lord will not be merciful unto him, Deuteronomy 29.19, 20.

Now then, Applic.
thou that alleadgest this, for the reason why thy sins shall not trouble
thee, because God is so merciful, consider with thy self how small cause thou
have to trust to that. 1. Thou art not a member of the Catholic Church, for
that is holy and is a communion of Saints. 2. Thou art none of them that fear
to offend God. 3. Thou keep no covenant with him. 4. Thou never remembrest
his commandments to do them. 5. Thou art not humbled nor afflicted in heart
for thy sins. 6. Thou art void of understanding. 7. Thou art a despiser, and
scorner of the means of grace. 8. Thou incouragest, and blessest thy self in
thy sins upon hope of mercy. And therefore as Iehu said to Amazias servants, 2
King. 9.18, 19. What have thou to do with peace? turn thee behind me; So does
the Lord say unto thee what have thou to do with my mercy? Iona 2.8. They that
observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercy. And this is the first answer
I give to the second plea of these men.

heap up wrath unto a man against the day of wrath, when a man shall despise
the riches of Gods goodness, and forbearance, and long suffering, Romans 2.4, 5.
It is therefore said, Revel. 6.16. that wicked men shall cry to mountains and
rocks fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits upon the
throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. Of the Lamb? Why what cause have any
to fear the Lamb? He is so called in reference to the sacrifice of his body,
and soul that he offered to his father, for the sins of men. Job 1.29. Behold
the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. What need men be
afraid of the Lamb of God? O the more that Christ has done for sinners, the
more indignation, and wrath tribulation, and anguish will be upon every soul
that has despised so great mercy, and taken encouragement thereby to sin, and
has not been brought unto repentance by it. Say thou not then any more my sins
shall never trouble me, because God is so merciful, and Christ has died for
sinners; but rather let the looking upon him whom thou have pierced, cause thee
to mourn as one mourns for his only son, and to be in bitterness, as one
that is in bitterness for his firstborn; as the Prophet says it shall be
with all such as have the spirit, and any true knowledge, and assurance of Gods
mercy, Zach. 12.10.

Object. 3
There is yet a third cause why men are not troubled for their sins, no^ will
be disquieted in their minds with the remembrance of them, and that is examples
they have observed, and experience that they have had, of Gods mercy in others.
I have my self (will many a sinner say) known many that were worse men then
ever I was, that never had any trouble of mind for their sins in life nor in
death, in their healths, nor in their sickness, and yet God was merciful unto
them; they lived in Gods favor (for they lived in credit, and were well
thought of, and well beloved of their neighbors) and they dyed in Gods favor
(for they died most quietly, they showed no fear or unwillingnesse at all to
dye, and to go to God but had mavelous peace in their consciences, and
showed great comfort in the assurance of their salvation.)

Answ.
Now for answer to this plea I say in general as our Savior does, Mat. 18.7.
Woe be to the world because of offenses. Yea woe be unto the world even because
of this offense, for thousands have stumbled at it, even this that men
notoriously wicked, have died so peaceably, has hardened infinite numbers in
their sins, and made them to think there is no great danger in them. But to
answer this plea in particular.

the Lord sees not as man sees, as he tells Samuel, 1 Samuel 16.7. Men are
apt to applaud them that live wealthily and merrily whatsoever their life be,
Psalm. 49.18. Men will praise thee, when thou do well to thy self; But so
does not God; For as our Savior says, Luke 16.15. that which is highly
esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of God. 2. Men are bound in
charity to judge the best, 1 Cor. 13.5. Charity thinks no evil; and to be
afraid of judging, and censuring others. Be not many masters (controulers or
censurers says the Apostle, Iam. 2.3.) knowing that we shall receive the
greater condemnation; and to think of others according to the profession that
they make, and that they know by them, and not to take upon them to judge their
hearts. It was no fault in the Apostles that they thought so well of Judas, and
suspected themselves as much as him when Christ said one of them should betray
him, Matthew. 26.2^. 3. The man whom we have known, to have been a notorious
sinner, it may be has been foundly humbled for his sin, and shed many a
tear for it, though we know it not. For this may be done in secret, Zach.
12.14. Every family apart, and their wives apart.

Secondly, this is no good argument such sinners dyed in Gods favor, because
they died quietly, and without all fear, and seemed very comfortable, and to
have great assurance of their salvation. For 1. It is possible, for most wicked
men to die very quietly and without all fear. For of most wicked men it is
said, Psalm. 73.4, 5. There are no bands in their death; they are not in trouble
as other men. 2. It is possible even for most wicked men to be passing well
persuaded of their own estate and that God is their God. Mic. 3.11. Yet will
they lean upon the Lord, and say is not the Lord among us? 3. God does often let
wicked men escape scot free here, that he may reserve them to greater torment
in hell, 2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord knows how to reserve the unjust unto the day of
judgment to be punished; at that day he will manifest his wrath upon them. 4.
Though we may not presume, to judge of the final estate of any such man,
because the work of God in the conversion of a sinner is often times secret and
wonderful. Ioh. 3.8. The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the
sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes: So
is every one that is borne of God. And God is able to work saving repentance
in them, even after they are speechless, and cannot express their repentance
unto men. Yet is the example fearful when such as have had many witnesses of
their sins, have had no witnesses of their repentance; the example of such is
worthy to have a mark set upon it for others to take heed by; as in the case
of Absoloms death, they laid a very great heap of stones upon him, 2 Samuel
18.17. For 1 God does never pardon any man's sins in whom he does not work
repentance, Acts 5.31. Christ gives repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of
sins. 2 He first gives men the spirit of bondage before the spirit of adoption,
Romans 8.15. Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but the
spirit of adoption 3. God uses to work in those whom he gives repentance
unto, humiliation proportionable to the measure of their sins, as we see in
the case of Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33.12. He humbled himself greatly. And Mary
Magdalen wept so that she washed Christ's feet with tears, Luk 7.38. 4 Where
sin has been notorious there repentance also should be notorious, yea the
true penitent will be glad, and desirous to have as many witnesses of his
repentance as of his sins; as we see in David here. And in Paul, 1 Timothy
1.13. I was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious but I obtained mercy.
5 No judgment of God is so dreadful, as when he punishes sinners with
hardness of heart. This was the judgment whereby God plagued Pharaoh, of whom
it is said, that God raised him up of purpose, that he might show his power on
him, Romans 9.17.

Lecture XVIII. On Psalm. 51.1, 2. March 7. 1625.
Follows the second use of the former Doctrine, Use 2.
and that is for exhortation, to persuade, and stir us all up, to do as David
does here, even to seek for the pardon of our sins, and to seek for it as
he does here; that is, 1. To seek it above all other things, and to make it
our only suit as David does here; and as the Publican when he went to pray
begged nothing else, but this, Luke 18.13. Lord be merciful to me a sinner. 2.
Seek without delay to have this debt discharged; as Solomon advises the man
who is in danger for debt discharged; as Solomon advises the man who is in
danger for debt even to mortal man, Pro. 6.4, 5. Give no sleep to thine eyes,
nor slumber to thine eyelids deliver thy self as a Roe from the hand of the
hunter. 3. Seek it not coldly, and faintly but earnestly, and with all thy
might; as David here, and Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord,
and that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord; that is, his mercy, his
cheerful, and favorable countenance toward me, as Psalm. 90 17. Let the
beauty of the Lord our God be upon us.

Now for the better enforcing of this exhortation. I will first give you
certain motives to persuade you to seek for your pardon. 2. I will show you
the means how you may obtain it. 3. I will give you certain signs, and
notes whereby you may know, whether you have obtained it or no.

And for the motives to stir us up to seek, and sue out our pardon, 1 Some
of them have reference to the pardon it self; 1 Sort of Motives
and 2 Some to us that are to seek and sue for it.

Shec^niah says to Ezra, Ezra 10.2 there is hope in Israel concerning this
thing. There is not any sinner amongst us all (how many or heinous soe^e^ his
sins have been) but he may have hope to obtain the pardon of his sins if
he seek it aright. For this we have his word that cannot deceive us, Mat.
12.31. I say unto you all manner of sin, and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto
men. Matthew. 18.27. The Lord of that servant (that ought ten thousand talents)
was moved with compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt. And though
it be said of him that sins against the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 12.32. that it
shall not be forgiven him neither in this world, nor in the world to come; yet
the reason thereof is not because God cannot, or will not forgive so heinous as
a sin, but because he that is gone so far cannot return to God, and seek
his pardon, Heb. 6.6. It is impossible he should be renowned again unto
repentance. And this motive to seek for our pardon we have given us, Esa.
55.7. Let the wicked return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him,
and to our God for he will abundantly pardon.

Esa. 55.7. He does abundantly pardon. So that as Christ never cared any but he
made them perfectly, and every whit whole, Ioh. 7.23. so is it said of him that
he is able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, Heb. 7.25.
Whom he once washes, and cleanses, he makes them so clean that he leaves
no filth, no stain nor spot upon them, Esa. 1.18. Though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, though they be red like crimson they
shall be as wool, that never received any dye. Thus does God account of them,
that are once pardoned, Cant. 4.7. Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot
in thee. All Gods acquittances are general, not as men's only from the
beginning of the world to that day that the acquittance is made, but from the
beginning of the world to the end of it. When he pardons, he pardons not
sins past only, but even those that are future have a ground of pardon in it,
Psalm. 103.17. The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon
them that fear him. And Ioh. 13.10. He that is washed needs not save to wash
his feet, but is clean every whit. 2. This pardon where it is once given, can
never be revoked or canceled again. He forgiveth not as man does but when he
forgiveth our sins he forgets them also, Ier. 31.34. I will forgive their
iniquity, and I will remember their sins no more. To this mercy that
belongs which the Lord speaks, Hos. 13.14. Repentance shall be hid from
mine eyes. Whom God has once pardoned he never so forsakes that they shall
quite loose his favor again, Psalm. 37.28. The Lord forsakes not his Saints,
they are preserved for ever. Therefore we are but once baptized, and brought to
the laver of regeneration, Tit. 3.5. 3. This pardon sets us in as good state
before God as if we had never sinned, so as he thinks never the worse of us
for any sin, we have committed when once we have our pardon. Nay we become
much more dear unto him then if we had never sinned. As we see in the case of
the Prodigal, whose father showed much more kindness unto and delight in him,
then in his elder brother, Luke 15.32. And in the kind respect, our Savior
showed to Mary Magdalen, Mar. 16.9. He appeared first to her out of whom he
had cast seven devils. And to Peter, Mar. 16.7. more then to any Disciple that
ever he had. And this second motive, which has reference to the fulness of
this pardon, encouraged and moved David here to seek it so earnestly, as we
may see verse 7. Wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow.

Now for the second sort of motives which have reference to our selves; if we
respect our own selves, 2 Sort of Motives
there is great cause that we should above all things speedily seek for the
pardon our sins.

First, In respect had to our death. For if death should seize upon us, before
To him that is living there is hope (says Solomon, Eccl. 9.4.) for a living
dog is better then a dead lion. And Eccl. 11.3. In the place where the tree
falls there it shall be, there it lies, and will continue for ever. If a man
obtain not his acquittance, and discharge of his debt before he dies, there
is no way but one with him, to prison must he go, into that dungeon must he be
cast, whence he shall never get out till he have paid the uttermost farthing,
as our Savior speaks in another case, Matthew. 5.26. With such men hell
followed death at the heels, Rev. 6.8. The rich man (so soon as he was dead)
went into the torments of hell, Luke 16.22, 23. Now how soon, or how suddenly
death may seize upon us none of us can tell; All men lie not long sick before
they dye; nor are sick at all, Eccl. 9.12. Man knows not his time; as the
fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the
snare (while they are playing, and skipping and earing merrily) so are the
sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly on them. In
which respect they that have not their sins pardoned, must needs live in a
continual fear of death, whenever they think seriously upon it. As the
Apostle says, Heb. 2.15. Christ came to deliver them who through fear of
death were all their life time subject to bondage. Whereas the man that has
gotten his pardon need not fear death at all, but may die in peace, and say
with Simeon, Luke 2.29. Now Lord let thou thy servant depart in peace, for
mine eyes have seen thy salvation. Yea may even look him in the face when he
comes, and insult over him as 1 Cor. 15.55. O death where is thy sting?

Secondly, In respect had to the afflictions of this life. For 1. Till our sins
a certain fearefall expectation of judgment, as the Apostle speaks. Heb.
10.27. We have cause to look for the curse of God in our selves, and in our
children, and in our goods, and in our good name; in our bodies, and in our
minds. For so has God threatened by Moses, Deuteronomy. 28.19. If thou will not
observe to do all his commandments, and his statutes, all these curses shall
come upon thee, and overtake thee. 2. Till our sins be pardoned, every
affliction and judgment that does befall us, will be intolerable unto us,
will vex and disquiet us, so as we can with no patience, and comfort bear it.
Sin is like unto old age, that makes a man so weak, as even the grasshopper
will be a burden unto him, as Solomon speaks, Ecclesiast. 12.5. Or like a
bile upon a man's back or shoulder, that makes him unable to bear any thing.
This is the true cause of men's extreme impatience in every affliction; not the
burden or extremity of the affliction so much, as their own galled backs, the
biles, and sores that they have upon themselves, their own sins that are
unpardoned, and unsubdued in them. And that which the Apostle speaks of
death, 1. Cor. 15.56. the sting of death is sin, may be said of every
affliction, and cross, sin is the only thing that makes it sting, and pain
us so much as it does. Whereas on the other side, when once we have gotten our
pardon. 1. We may be secure, and void of the slavish fear of Gods judgments
before they come. As David when he had lifted up the light of his countenance
upon him says, Psalm. 4.8. I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep; and
91.5, 6. Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the arrow
that flies by day, nor for the pestilence that walks in darkness, nor for
the destruction that w^isteth at noone day. 2. When judgments and crosses do
come, we shall be able to bear them with patience and comfort, Prove. 18.14.
The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity. Romans 5.1. Being justified by
faith, we have peace with God. And then follows verse 3. we glory in
tribulations also.

Esa. 59.2. Your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your
sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. 2. Till our sins be
pardoned, we can have no sound comfort in any of these blessings that we do
enjoy, for we have them with Gods curse. Unto them that are defiled, and
unbelieving (says the Apostle, Titus 1.15.) is nothing pure Pro. 1 32. The
prosperity of fools shall destroy them. 3. Till our sins be pardoned, nothing
that we do can please God, Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is impossible to please
God. 4. Till our sins be pardoned, there can be no grace, nor goodness in us,
Ezekiel. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from
all your filthiness; then follows verse 26. A new heart also will I give
you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony
heart out of your flesh, and give you a heart of flesh; and verse 27. I will
put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes.

And these five motives are in themselves effectual, and forcible enough to
work in every one of us, a care to seek, and sue for the pardon of our sins,
and to seek it earnestly, and to seek it speedily, if God shall be pleased to
work with them. For that is an undoubted truth, confirmed by infinite
examples, in daily experience, which our Savior teaches, John 6.44. No man
can come to me, except my Father draw him. And I may say to you, as he does in
the next verse 45. Every one therefore that has heard these things, and has
learned of the Father, will come to Christ (the only purchaser, and disposer of
Gods pardons) to get his pardon

Means.
And now having finished the motives, I come to show you the means, how this
pardon may be obtained; which is the second general point I propounded for the
enforcing of this exhortation. And the means we must use are principally four.

First, The man that would obtain of God the pardon for his sins, must first
bring his heart to a sense of his sins; this is that, that prepares a man, and
makes him capable of a pardon. Thou that have lived the civillest life that a
man can lead, till thou can bring thy heart to be troubled, and pained with
fear, and heaviness for thy sins; can have no hope to get thy pardon.
Christ promises refreshing (nor indeed calls, nor gives encouragement to any
to come to him, but) only to such as are weary, and heavy laden, Matthew. 11.28.
And he prosesseth that he was sent to proclaim the Lords Iubile, and time of
general pardon, and release to none, but to the broken hearted, and mourners,
Esaias 61.1, 3. And comparing himself to a good shepherd, he says, Ezechiel
34.16. his office was to bind up that which is broken, and strengthen that
which was sick, but to destroy the fat and the strong, and to feed them with
judgment. For 1. None but such can heartily, and in good earnest seek for
their pardon, nor make any great account of it, Matthew. 9.12. The whole have no
need of a Physician, but they that be sick. And God makes more account of his
pardons, then to cast them away upon such as care not greatly for them. 2. None
but such can receive their pardon aright, nor believe it belongs unto them,
though Christ and his servants should offer it unto them, and persuade them to
receive it. Mark 1.15. Repent ye* and believe the Gospel. But what repentance
could that be that went before faith? Surely legal repentance, this which I
now speak of.

The second means is prayer. The man that would obtain of God, the pardon
Ier. 3^.9. They shall come with weeping and with supplications. 2. God has
himself directed us unto this course, Esa. 55.6. Seek the Lord while he may
be found, How shall that be? Call upon him while he is near. 3. This is a sure
way; for to it a promise is made, as we see in the case of the Publican Luke 18
^3. He went into the Temple to pray, and this was the whole sum and effect of
his prayer, God be merciful to me a sinner; and see the success, verse 14. I
tell you (says our Savior) this man went down to his house justified, rather
then the other; where by the word rather, we are not to understand, though
neither of them were justified, yet of the two, this rather then the other, but
that he went home justified, and not the other, as John 3 19. Men loved
darkness, rather then light and not the light, and 1. Tim. 1.4. Endless
genealogies minister questions rather then edifying, as if he had said,
questions, and not edifying. 4. Another promise we have for this, Romans 10.13.
Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. As if he should
say, Whosoever can pray and cry to God for the pardon of his sins, shall be
sure to obtain it. 5. Alas (will you say) how can we pray till our sins be
pardoned* and till we have faith? Romans 10.14. How can they call upon him, in
whom they have not believed? I answer. 1. As there is a legal repentance, so
there is a legal prayer, which though a man cannot have assurance that it
shall speed, yet is it, as the legal repentance a good preparative to faith,
and God has been pleased to show respect unto it. Of such a prayer read
Psalm 78.34. When he slew them, then they sought him; and returned, and
enquired early after God. Did these men pray in faith? No verily, as we may see
verse 37. for their heart was not upright with him. Yet had God a gracious
respect, even to this prayer, verse 33. He being full of compassion, forgave
their iniquity, and destroyed them not. 2. Men may have received some
beginnings of true faith, and saving grace before they know, and perceive that
their sins are pardoned, and such prayers are most acceptable to God, as we may
see, Zac. 12.10. first God powered upon them the spirit of grace, and
supplication* they cried unto God, and mourned for their sins, and then 13.1.
the fountain was opened unto them for sin and for uncleannes, and God uses not
to open this fountain unto any, but unto such only.

Benhadads servants did, when they came to Ahab to crave mercy, 1 Kin. ^0 32.
they came with sackcloth on their loins, and ropes about their necks, as men
professing themselves worthy to dye. In this manner came the prodigal to his
father. Lu. 15.18, 19. Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee,
and am no more worthy to be called thy son. In this manner the Publican prayed,
and confessed his sins, Luk 18.13. He stood afar off and would not lift up so
much at his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast. As if he should have
said, o wretched heart of mine, Lord, I am unworthy, I am unworthy to find
mercy. And you know what success they both had, when they came in this manner
to crave mercy, and how well they sped. And no marvel, for they that can come
thus, have a promise, 1. John 1.9 If we confess our sins, God is faithful,
and just, to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
And Mat. 2^.12. He that humbles himself, shall be exalted. The more we can
accuse and condemn; vilify, and abase our selves before God, the surer we may
be, that he will justify, and raise us up.

These are they (says one of the Elders to John, Revel. 7.1^) which came out
of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the
blood of the Lamb. Thus speaks our Savior to Mary Magdalene, Lu. 7.50. Thy
faith has saved thee; as i^ he should say, it is not thy tears, but they
faith that has obtained thy pardon, For 1. this is able to do it. For it is
the blood of Christ (and that only) that cleanses us from all sin. 1 John 1.7.
That is the fountain that i^ opened to all Gods people (that are thus
prepared, as you have heard) for sin and for uncleanness. 2. Nothing but
this, is able to do it Hebr 9.22. Without shedding of blood, is no remission.

And thus having finished the means we must use to get our pardon. I come to
show you the signs how we may know whether we have gotten our pardon or no,
which is the third and last point I propounded for the enforcing of this
exhortation. A point of as great use and necessity as either of the former were.

Pro. 13.7. There is that makes himself rich, and has nothing, and there is
that makes himself poor, yet has great riches. Many a wicked man is
confident, that he has cleared all in Gods debt-booke, his sins are pardoned,
Mic 3.11. Yet will they lean upon the Lord and say, is not the Lord among us?
And on the other side many a good man has his pardon, and knows not, nor can
be assured that he has it. It was so with David here. Nathan (upon his
repentance) had told him 2 Samuel 12.13. The Lord has put away thy sin, thou
shall not dye, and yet could he not believe it, nor be assured of it; And
therefore begs it here so earnestly. The elect Apostles had obtained their
pardon when Christ said to them, Ioh 12.10. Ye are clean And yet Christ taught
them to pray daily, Lu. 11.4. Forgive us our sins, the best had need daily to
seek for more assurance, that they have it.

Esa 54.9. As I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the
earth, so have I sworn that I will not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee.
Therefore has Christ annexed a reason to be a prop^^ to our faith in the fifth
petition, Mat. 6.12. and to none of the rest. Many of Gods dearest servants
find little assurance of the pardon of their sins, and they that have had it in
great measure, yet have not had it at all times. See how comfortable, and
confident David was at sometimes, Psalm 27.1. The Lord is my light and my
salvation, whom shall ^^^re? At another time he was far otherwise, Psalm.
88.1^, 15. Lord why ^^stest thou off my soul? Why hidest thou thy face from
me? While I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted. So Paul sometimes was most
assured, Rom 8 38, 39. I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
h^ight, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of God which is in Jesus Christ our Lord. Sometimes again he had his
inward terrors and fears, 2. Chr. 7.5. and was perplexed greatly, 2. Cor.
4.8. And this arises.

First, From the weakness of faith, that is in the best; and slownesse to
belief Luke 24 25 O fools, and slow of heart to believe. The greatness and
strangeness of the blessing, does even astonish, and amaze them so, as they
cannot be persuaded God should show mercy to such wretches, as they know
themselves to have been. As it is said of the Apostles when Christ appeared to
them, first after his resurrection, Luke 24.41 They believed not for joy, and
wondered. And Peter when he was brought out of prison by the Angel, Acts 12 9
Wist not that it was true that was done by the Angel, but thought it was but a
vision.

Secondly, Sometimes from the violence of tentation. For the faithful bruised
reeds, Matthew. 12.20. and tentations are compared to Winds, and Tempests, Matthew
7 5. now a reed (specially a bruise I reed) is easily shaken with the Wind,
Matthew 11.7. and if we had not a gracious promise of Christ, Matthew 17.25. A
bruised reed shall he not break, it were not possible but the strength and
violence of the tentations the faithful are subject to, would quite overthrow
their faith. It was tentation that deprived ^ob of his assurance, and made him
cry, Job 16.9 He teareth me in his wrath, who hates me; he gnasheth upon me
with his teeth, mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes upon me. It was tentation that
deprived David of his assurance when he cried, Psalm. 22.1. My God, my God why
have thou forsaken me?

Thirdly, Sometimes from this that they kept their pardon no better. That Cant.
5 6. Her beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone. Her sensuality was the
cause of it as you may see, verse 3. In her answer unto Christ. I have put off
my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them?

Yet as we have showed before that our pardon may be obtained, so may we even
in this life know and be assured, that we are pardoned, and cleansed from all
our sins, Job was assured of his salvation, and consequently that his sins
were forgiven, Job 19.25. I know that my redeemer lives: whom I shall see for
my self. And Paul speaks thus of all the faithful, Romans 5.11. Not only so
(we are not only reconciled to God, and shall be saved) but we also joy in God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement. And
indeed, though our sins be pardoned, yet unless we know they be pardoned, we
can have no sound comfort nor joy. That makes David cry thus to God, Psalm.
35.3. Say unto my soul; I am thy salvation: as if he had said. Let me know it
Lord, and Psalm 51.8. Make me to hear joy and gladness. As if he had said,
Nathan has told me so, but I cannot hear and believe what he says, Lord
make thou me to hear it, then I shall have joy and gladness, and never till
then.

This is therefore a matter worth the hearkening unto, how we may know our sins
are pardoned. How may that be known?

Prove. 28.26. He that trusts in his own heart is a fool. Prove. 30.12.
There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet they are not
washed from their filthiness.

Levit. 13.37. The Priest shall pronounce him clean. And therefore Christ when
he had cleansed the lepers, bad them Lu 17 14. Go show your selves to the
Priest. Even so may no man judge himself to be clean from his sins, till he
be such a one as God in his word has pronounced to be clean. And these notes
and marks are principally four. Signs.


First, If a man came by his pardon that way, and by those four means that
Applic:
How came you by this assurance? Did God so prepare you by an effectual sight,
and sense of sin, and of your wretched, and damnable condition by reason
thereof? Was thy heart thereby brought to cry fervently unto God for thy
pardon? Were thou made able humbly, and freely, and particularly to confess
thy sins, to accuse, and condemn thy self before God? Were thou brought
thereby to despair of all help and comfort any way else, but only in Christ,
and so to fly to him to obtain thy pardon? Then may thou have good hope
that thy sins are pardoned.

Micah. 7.18, 19. When he had said, Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons
iniquity: he adds, he will have compassion upon us, he will subdue our
iniquities, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you: for you are not
under the Law, but under grace. When Christ has once procured for a man the
pardon of his sin, he turns the heart quite from it, and works in him such
a change, as he becomes another man, Acts 3.26. God has sent his Son to
bless you, in turning every one of you from your iniquities. See some
examples, and experiments of this. What a mavelous change was wrought in
those converts of Ephesus, that had used curious arts? after God had pardoned
their sins, they did so hate that sin that they had lived in, that they burnt
the books that had bin the means, and instruments of that sin, though they
came to the value of 15000 pieces of silver, which was at the least eight
hundred pounds sterling. Acts 19.19. So after Peter's sin of denying Christ for
fear, was pardodoned: what a change was wrought in him? None of all the
Apostles so bold in confessing Christ, afterward as he was Acts 2.14.3.12.4.8.
So when Paul's sin of hating and persecuting of the Saints was pardoned; never
did any of Gods servants show that love to the Saints that he did. See how
many he sends special salutations to, and in how kind a manner, Romans 16. See
in what terms he expresses his affections to the Saints often times, Phil.
4.1. My brethren dearly beloved, and longed for, my joy, and Crown. And
Philem. 12. He calls Onesimus a poor servant his own bowels. Yea, where
sin is pardoned, not the outward man only, but the very heart is changed.
Ezechiel 36.25 -- 27. Then will I sprinckle clean water upon you, and ye
shall be clean from all your filthiness. A new heart also will I give you,
and I will put my spirit within you and cause you to walk in my statutes.

Thou therefore that art persuaded thy foul sins are pardoned, Applic.
try it by this note. Is thy heart now quite turned from these sins, that
above all other thou now hate them most; art most afraid of them, shunnest
the beginnings, and occasions of them? Yea thou that have been the civilest
man, do thou find a change wrought in thee, a new heart given thee? Then thou
may have a comfortable assurance that thou have indeed obtained thy pardon.

Thirdly, if a man feel that the knowledge of Gods love in pardoning his sin
Luke 7.47. Her sins which are many are forgiven her, for she loved much.
This property of a man whose sins are pardoned you shall see in David, Psalm.
116.1. I love the Lord because he has heard my voice, and my supplication; And
what was his supplication? Even for pardon of his sin as you shall see ver.
3, 4. The sorrows of death compassed me, the pains of bell gat hold on me, I
found trouble, and sorrow; then called I upon the name of the Lord, O Lord
deliver my soul. And in Peter whom when Christ would comfort, and assure that
his sin was pardoned, by what note does he labor to assure him of it? Job. 21
15. Simon thou son of Iona love thou me more then these? For indeed no man
can love the Lord, and obey him out of love, but he that first is persuaded of
Gods love to him in the pardon of his sins, 1 Ioh. 4.10. Herein is love, not
that we loved God, but that he loved us; and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins.

Have thou no love to God, Applic.
to his Word, and servants? Do thou all that thou do in his service out of
by-respects? Flatter not thy self thy sins are not pardoned.

Fourthly, If the love that we bear to God for the pardoning of our sins,
Mat. 6.12. but immediately after the end of the whole prayer, Mat. 6.14, 15.
For if ye forgive men your heavenly father will forgive you, if ye forgive not
men neither will your father forgive you.

Can thou not forgive thy greatest enemies? Applic.
Strivest thou not against the motions to revenge, and malice? Art thou not
humbled for them? Certainly thy sins are not yet pardoned, thou art still in
thy sins. An hypocrite can give much, and do many kindnesses to them that
never wronged him. A man may bestow all his goods to feed the poor, and yet
not have charity. 1 Cor. 13.3. Luke 6.32, 33. If you love them that love you,
and do good to them that do good to you, what thank have ye? For sinners
also do the same. But out of love to God to forgive them that have wronged us,
and love our enemies, that argues a man's sins are pardoned.

Lecture XIX. On Psalm. 51.1, 2. March 21. 1625.
WE have already heard that in these words there were three things principally
to be observed. 1. That David in the great distress he was now in flies unto
God by prayer, and seeks help; and comfort that way. 2. That in this prayer
wherein he seeks help, and comfort from God, he begs nothing but the pardon
of his sins. 3. That the only ground of his hope to speed well in this
prayer, and to obtain the pardon of his sins, was the knowledge he had of
the mercy of God. The two first of these we have already finished, it
follows now that we proceed to the third, and last of them.

Nota.
It is therefore here to be observed. 1. That seeking pardon of his sins at
the hands of God, he pleads nothing but mercy, hops to obtain it no other
way, makes that the only ground of his hope in this suit, and cries Have
mercy on me, o Lord. 2. That the thing that made him hope he should find this
mercy with God, was nothing he found in himself, but only the knowledge he
had of the Lords gracious disposition. Have mercy upon me, o God, according to
thy loving kindness, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies. As if
he had said, o Lord there is nothing else to move thee to have mercy upon me,
but only thine own gracious, and merciful disposition. 3. Yet had David
before his fall done many good works. Suffered great wrongs from Saul, with
wonderful patience and freedom from desire of revenge, 1 Samuel 24.5* 6. Showed
mavelous zeal for God in fighting his battles, 1 Samuel 25.28. Showed
mavelous love to the Word, and worship of God, Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I
desired of the Lord, and that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house
of the Lord all the days of my life, and 84.1. How amiable are thy
tabernacles, O Lord of hosts. And even at this instant when he makes this
prayer to God, there was a great deal of goodness, and grace in him. 1. He
confesses freely his sin unto God, verse 3, 4. 2. He was wonderfully humbled
for it, and grieved, and broken hearted, verse 8.17. 3. His heart was quite
changed, and turned from his sin unto God, he loved him unfainedly, and
desired his glory, verse 13, 14. 4 And all this he did in uprightness of
heart, verse 6. Yet now coming to beg pardon of his sins, he groundeth his
hope to obtain it, upon none of his former good works, upon none of the
goodness that he found now in himself, but only upon the mercy of God.

Now from these three points thus observed, in the Text, this Doctrine arises
for our instruction.

Doct. 11
That the best of Gods servants, have no other ground of hope to find favor
with God, for the pardon of their sins, but only in the mercy of the Lord.
Upon this Gods choicest Saints, have builded always; and in seeking pardon of
their sins have pleaded nothing but this. So does David here, and so does he
in many other Psalms Psalm. 6 2, 4. Have mercy upon me O Lord for I am weak;
return o Lord deliver my soul, o save me for thy mercies sake: and 25.6, 7.
Remember o Lord thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindnesses for they have
been ever of old, according to thy mercy remember thou me, for thy goodness
sake o Lord. So does Daniel in his prayer, Dan. 9.9. To the Lord our God belong
mercies, and forgivenesses. All pardons are mercies, and are obtained by mercy
only. Yea in all their prayers wherein they have sued to him for any blessing
this has ever been in their eye, and that which they have built all their
confidence upon, Psalm. 5.7. As for me, I will come into thy house in the
multitude of thy mercy. This shall ever draw me, and encourage me to come unto
thee. And 69.13. O God in the multitude of thy mercy, hear me; And 115.1. Not
unto us, Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory for thy mercy, and for
thy truths sake. But what should I heap up testimonies in so plain a case?
And yet because it is so useful, and comfortable a point, I will not pass
over it too slightly, but insist a while upon it so far as I shall judge
necessary for your edification. And before I come to the reasons, and grounds
of the Doctrine I will answer two maine objections, that the heart of man will
be apt to make against this Doctrine.

Object. 1.
First, How can our hope to find favor with God be grounded only upon the
mercy of God? How can the pardon of our sins, be ascribed to the mere mercy
of God, and to his free grace; when we obtain not this favor of God till it
was dearly bought, and purchased? 1 Cor. 6.20. Ye are bought with a price. Yea
sucha price as was (...) fully answerable in worth to the souls of all Gods
elect, and to that which God has given us, 1 Timothy 2.6. He gave himself a
ransom for all. The Lord forgave not one farthing of that sum wherein we
stood indebted to him, till he was fully satisfied for it. First, he Esa.
40.2. We have (in our surety) received at the Lords hand double for all our
sins. Secondly, he exacted and received fulfilled all righteousness. Matthew.
3.15. And so came we to the title and right, we have to the Kingdom of
Heaven. So that it may seem (not the mere mercy, and free grace of God, but)
Christ is the only ground of our hope, as he is called. 1. Tim. 1.1. The Lord
Jesus Christ is our hope, And 1. John 2.2. He is the propitiation for our sins.
Answ.


To this I answer. That the foundation of all our hope and comfort we have in
Christ, is in the mercy and free grace of God only. For although the pardon of
our sins and salvation of our souls, in respect of Christ our surety, was no
free gift, but a dear purchase; and the Lord showed no mercy at all to him,
but justice only, yea rigor of justice, Romans 8.32. He spared not his own
son, but delivered him up for us all. Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from
the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us. Look upon him when he was in
his agony and passion, paying our forfeiture, and there was nothing to be
seen from top to toe, soul and body, but the curse of God, he was all curse,
made a curse.

Yet do we obtain this pardon, and the salvation of our souls, not by
purchase, but by the free gift of God. Esa 9.^. Unto us a Son is given. Ioh.
4.10. If thou knew the gift of God. And the mercy, and free grace of God
never appeared so much to usward, in all the works that ever he did, as in
this work of redeeming us from our sins, by the blood of Christ. For thus
speaks the Apostle, Ephesians. 1, 7. In whom we have redemption through his
blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace; the
riches of Gods grace appeared in this.

Observe this (I pray you) in five points.

First, It was the wonderful mercy of God to us, and nothing else, that moved
fore-ordaine his own Son to be our propitiation. Romans 3 27. He purposed this
in himself. Ephesians. 1.9. And so the Lord indeed made satisfaction unto
himself, 2. Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself;
His love and mercy appeared more unto us in this, then if by his absolute
prerogative, he had forgiven us, without exacting any satisfaction at all John
3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son; And John
4.10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his
Son to be the propitiation for our sins.

Secondly, It was the wonderful mercy of God to us, and nothing else, that
John 17.6. Thine they were, and thou gave them me, and verse. 9. I pray not
for the world, but for them that thou have given me, for they are thine.

Thirdly, It was the wonderful mercy of God to us, and nothing else, that
moved him to give any of us the grace to receive Christ by faith, being offered
to us John. 6.44. No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me
draw him.

Fourthly, It was the wonderful mercy of God, and nothing else that moved free
promise. In which respect, all the Elect that shall have benefit by Christ,
are called heirs of promise, Hebr. 6.17. And therefore the Apostle says,
Ephesians 1.6. It was to the praise of the glory of his Grace, that he has
made us accepted in his beloved. As though he should say, the glory of his
grace is wonderfully set forth in this, that he will accept of Christ's
satisfaction for us.

Fifthly and lastly. It is his wonderful mercy, and nothing else that moves
Solomon to fall into that admiration. 1 Kin. 8.23. O Lord God of Israel, there
is no God like unto thee, in heaven above, or in earth beneath, who keeps
covenant, and mercy with thy servants, that walk before thee with all their
heart. As if he had said: It is the mercy of God that he keeps Covenant even
with such. And thus have I finished the answer to the first objection, and
showed you, that it does no whit derogate from the mercy and free grace of God,
but amplifieth, and advances it greatly, that we obtain pardon of our sins,
by the merit of Christ's blood, and no other way.

Object. 2
The second objection is. How can it be said; that we have no ground of hope
to find favor with God, and the pardon of our sins, but only in Gods mere
mercy and free grace? Will a man's good works do him no good in this case? Is
there no ground of hope, and comfort for us in that goodness, and grace, that
God has wrought in our hearts by his holy spirit? The Scripture teaches us,
that there be sundry graces, and good works, that may give us much comfort in
this case, and be good grounds of hope unto us, that we shall find favor
with God. As 1. If a man can find he does truly fear God, Proverbs 14.26. In
the fear of the Lord is strong confidence; and his children shall have a place
of refuge. 2. If a man can find he has bin of conscience toward God, given
unto works of mercy, Psalm. 18.^5. With the merciful, thou will show thy self
merciful; and 41 1. Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will
deliver him in time of trouble; and Iam. 2.13. Mercy rejoices against
judgment. 3. If a man can find that of conscience toward God, he can forgive
his enemies, Matthew. 6.14. If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly
Father also will forgive you. 4. If a man can find, that he is able with an
upright heart, to confess his sin unto God, even that is a good ground of
hope, that God will forgive it. For thus David reasons here, verse 2, 3.
Cleanse me from my sin, for I acknowledge my transgressions. 5. and lastly.
If a man can but humble himself, and mourn before God for his sin, even that
will give him good hope of comfort. For Christ says, Mat 5.4. Blessed are they
that mourn, for they shall be comforted. And the Publican doing so, went home
justified, Luke 18.14.

Answ.
My answer to this objection, shall consist of two parts. 1. I will show you how
much is to be ascribed unto good works, and to that goodness and grace, that
Gods children may find in themselves. 2. I will let you see that this does
nothing derogate from the truth of my Doctrine, concerning the reposing all our
hope in the mercy of God only.

Ezekiel. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean;
and then follows verse 26. A new heart also will I give unto you, and a new
spirit will I put within you. And thus speaks our Savior of Mary. Lu. 7.47.
Her sins which are many, are forgiven her, for she has loved much. As if he
had said, she could not have had this grace to love me, as she does; if her
sins had not bin forgiven.

Secondly. This grace and goodness, which a man finds in himself, may be a
ground of hope unto him, that God will respect his prayers, John 9 3. We^ know
that God hears not sinners, but if any man be a worshipper of God, and does
his will, him he hears. John 3.22. Whatsoever we ask, we receive of him,
because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in
his sight. The Angel tells Cornelius, Acts 10.4. thy prayers, and thine
alms, are come up for a memorial before God; Certainly his alms made his
prayers more effectual with God.

Thirdly. The goodness and grace which a man finds in himself, may be
Paul. 2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is this; even the testimony of our conscience,
that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, we have had our conversation in the
world. So was it to Job, the testimony that his own heart gave him of the
conscience he had made of all uncleanness, of dealing equally with his
servants, of his mercifulness to the poor, of his freedom from
covetousness, and maliciousness. Job 31. And of his hearts love to the Word,
and pure worship of God, Job 23.12. sustained and yielded him great comfort in
his extreme affliction, as you may see Job 31.35, 36. If mine adversary (man
or Satan) had written a book against me, surely I should take it upon my
shoulder, and bind it as a crown to me. So was it to Hezechiah, when he had
received from God the message of death. Esaias 38.3. Remember o Lord, I beseech
thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and
have done that which is good in thy sight.

Fourthly. These good works, this goodness, and grace that a man finds in
Hebr. 1.6. He that comes to God, must believe that he is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek him. Yea, a man may ground his hope upon this, to receive
the greatest reward and blessing of all, even eternal life. 1 Timothy 6.18, ^9
Charge rich men, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, laying
up in store for themselves, a good foundation, against the time to come, that
they may lay hold on eternal life.

Fifthly. I will say more then all this, when a man is to seek comfort, and
hope Romans 8.28 -- 30. of certain degrees, whereby the Lord works our
salvation, like the steps of Jacobs ladder, of which we read Genesis 28.12.
whereof the highest were in heaven, the lowest upon the earth. And although the
Lord in his work begin at the highest step, and so come downward 1. He
foreknoweth us, loves us, sets his affection upon us. 2. He predestinateth
us, 3. He calls us, 4. He justifies us, 5. He sanctifies, and glorifieth us
Yet in our work, when we would find comfort in the assurance of our salvation,
we must begin at the lowest step, and so go upward. We must as David did
Psalm, 77.6. Commune with our own hearts, and let our spirits make diligent
search, what sanctification, what goodness, and soundness of grace we can
find wrought in our own hearts. This sanctifying grace is called the Lords
earnest, and seal, which we have received, and have the keeping of our selves.
2 Cor. 1 22. He has sealed us, and given us the earnest of the spirit in our
hearts. Commune therefore with thine own heart, and search for this earnest,
this seal, and if thou find it, thou may boldly reason thus: I am
sanctified, therefore justified, justified, therefore called; called, therefore
predestined; predestined, therefore loved of God. And thus have I finished
the first part of my answer to this second objection, and showed you how much
is to be ascribed unto good works in this case.

Ephesians. 2.20. Revel. 21.14. like the fills you lay in the building of your
houses, that have a stronger foundation under them upon which both the weight
of them, and of the whole house does lie; the maine foundation of all the hope,
and comfort we can have in any of our good works, in any goodness that is in
us, is the mercy of God only. This will appear evidently to you in two points.

Phil. 2.13. It is God that works in you both to will, and to do of his good
pleasure. Who makes thee to differ from another (says the Apostle, 1 Cor.
4.7.) and what have thou that thou have not received?

Psalm. ^2.12. Unto thee o Lord belongs mercy, for thou renderest to every man
according to his work; and 130.4, 5. If thou should* mark iniquities (even
the blemishes, and foul stains of our best services) o Lord who shall stand?
But there is forgivenes with thee that thou may be feared, or served. And
that made Nehemiah 1^.22. to pray thus, Remember me o my God concerning the
also, and spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy.

Lecture XX. On Psalm 51.1, 2. March 28. 1626.
Reason.
NOw the Reasons, and grounds of this Doctrine, why the best of Gods servants
have no other ground of hope to fi^de favor with God, for the pardon of their
sins, but only the mercy of the Lord; why they have never pleaded their own
goodness but his mercy only, are principally two. 1. The utter insufficiency
that is in their own goodness to ground their hope upon it. 2. The all
sufficiency that is in the mercy, and goodness of God, to ground their hope,
and confidence upon it.

Cor. 2.11. Though he were in nothing behind the very chiefest Apostles; yet he
professes he was nothing. Three things there be, that will make it evident
that the best man that is, cannot trust to, or rely upon any goodness Esa.
64.6 All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags. He has no light, no truth of
grace that feeth not this. If we say that we have no sin (says the Apostle,
1 Ioh 1.8.) we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in Secondly, Though
himself knew no blemish in his good works, no evil by himself, yet he
knows the Lords pure eyes may, though he cannot. 1 Cor. 4.4. I know nothing
by my self (says Paul) yet am I not hereby justified; but he that judges me
is the Lord. This made David cry, Psalm. 143 2. Enter not into judgment with
thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. Luke 17.10.
When ye have done all those things that are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants; we have done that which was our dut^ to do. 2. There is
no proportion betwixt that goodness that is in us, and that which we look to
receive from God for it. What is all the money we can make (all that we can do
or suffer) toward the payment of a debt, of ten thousand talents? and such a
debt is our sin, Mat. 8.^4. What proportion is there between the service we
can do to God for a few years here, to the wages, and reward we look for,
the eternal happiness, and glory of the li^e to come? ^ Cor. 4.17. Our light
affliction which is but for a moment, works for us (fitteth, and prepares us
for) a far more exceeding, and eternal wright of glory. Romans 8.18 I reckon
that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared, to the
glory that shall be reveiled in us.

Now (for the second Reason) on the other side, the mercy of God is such, Psalm.
9.10 They that know thy name will put their trust in thee. They that know how
merciful the Lord is, cannot choose but put their trust, and confidence in
him. I will go no further for the setting of this forth unto you, then to those
three things which David here in my Text speaks of, and which he observed in
the Lords gracious disposition, and on which he grounded his hope. 1. There is
in the Lord loving kindness. 2. There are in the Lord tender mercies. 3. There
is in the Lord a multitude of tender mercies.

For the first, The Lord is of a gracious, and kind, and liberal disposition.
Joel 2.13. The Lord is gracious, and of great kindness. The love he shows,
the good he does to any of his people, is most free, and has no cause no
ground at all, but in himself alone. The love we bear to any, uses to have
some ground in the party that we do love, we see somewhat in the party, that
moves us to it at first. But the love the Lord bears to us, had no ground at
all in us but in his own goodness, and loving kindness alone. The Apostle
therefore calls it, 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. (...), The good pleasure of his goodness.
He set his love upon us, (as Moses says, Deuteronomy 7 7, 8) because he loved us. He
even rests in his own love (as the Prophet speaks, Zeph. 3.1.) and seeks
no further. So speaks the Lord, Exodus 3 ^^. I will be gracious to whom I will
be gracious, and I will show mercy, on whom I will show mercy. Nothing moved
him to be gracious, and merciful unto us but only his own good will, and
pleasure. So Esa. 43.25. I, even I am he that bl^^^eth ou^ thy transgressions
for mine own sake. So 2 Samuel 7.^1. For thy words sake, and according to thine
own heart thou have done all these great things. True it is, that after the
Lord has set his love upon us he works that in us by his grace that makes
us amiable, and beautiful in his sight, and so causes him to love us the
more. This is excellently set forth, Ezekiel. 16.9 -- 14. He anointed his beloved
one with oil, clothed her with broidered work, covered her with silk, de^ked
her with ornaments, put bracelets upon her hands, and a chain about her neck,
decked her with gold, and silver, made her exceeding beautiful (mark how
grace, and piety does beautify the soul in Gods eye) But when he first set
his love upon us, he saw nothing in us that did move him to love us; as is also
notably set forth in that 16. of Ezekiel. When the Lord first passed by his
beloved (as it is said, verse 8) and looked upon her, and her time was the time
of love; when he first loved her: what was there in her to move him to it? See
that verse 6. When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood,
I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, live, yea I said unto thee when
thou wast in thy blood, live. Mark how earnest the Lord is to persuade us, of
the freeness of his love to us, and how it grew not at all from any respect he
had, to any goodness was or should be in us, but from his own loving
kindness, and goodness alone. And this is the first thing that Davi^ here
considered in the mercy, and goodness of the Lord that made him to hope he
should find mercy with him for the pardon of his sin.

Secondly, In the Lord there are tender mercies, bowels of mercy, as the racham
which is here used does properly signify. For thus it has pleased the Lord
to condescend unto our capacity, and to make known unto us in his Word his
gracious disposition, by comparing himself unto a most tender hearted man or
woman, and attributing bowels unto himself. Esaias 63.15. Where is the
multitude of thy bowels, and of thy mercies toward me; are they restrained?
Luke 1.78. Through the bowels of the mercies of our God, whereby the day
spring from an high, has visited us. And this comparison stands in Mat.
9.36. When he saw the multitude fainting, and scattered abroad as sh^epe having
no shepherd, (...) his bowels yearned, or were moved toward them, (o that
the beholding of men in that misery, could move us so) and Hebr. 4.15. that he
is touched with the feeling of all our infirmities, he does (...) condole, and
grieve, and suffer with us when we do grieve, and suffer. So the Lord when he
sees any of his people to be in misery, he cannot but pity them, and be
moved with it, and grieve with them. Iam. 5.11. He is pitiful, and of tender
mercy. Exodus 22.27. When he cries unto me, I will hear, for I am gracious. So
it is said Judge. 10.16. His soul was grieved for the misery of Israel. And
Esa. 63.9. In all their affliction, he was afflicted. How can that be (will
you say) seeing himself was the author of all their affliction. Amos 3.6.
Object.
Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? How is it
possible that the Lord would so sharply correct his people, and bring them to
that misery, if it did so grieve him to see them in misery? I answer; 1. that
this is possible enough. Answ.
Did you never hear of a Judge that did shed tears, even in giving of
sentence of death upon a malefactor, and showed a fatherly affection toward
the poor wretch, even at that time? like Joshua to Achan. Josh. 7.19. My son
I pray thee give glory to the Lord God of Israel. Did you never know any father
so tenderhearted, as when he has whipped his child, he has done it with
tears in his eyes, yea, he could not contain, but must needs let his tears
fall, he has smitten, and wept, and been as apt to cry, even as the child it
self? Surely so it is with the Lord. Psalm. 103.13. As a father pitieth his
children, so does the Lord pity them that fear him; Even when he corrects
us, he pitieth, and his bowels yearne toward us. 2. He never afflicts us,
nor brings us unto misery, but when his love constrains him to do it; he
must needs do it, unless he would see us perish, and that his love to us,
will not suffer him to do. The Lords love to his children is not fondness,
like the love of many foolish parents; his pity is not like the pity that is
in many men; of which we have a proverb, foolish pity, marrs the City, that
may be called well, Crudelis misericordia. But the Lords love is guided by his
infinite wisdom, and judgment; he will correct the dearest of his children,
and that sharply too, rather then he will see them spoiled. 1. Cor. 11.32.
When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world. Yet takes he no pleasure in correcting them; but as
he does it, most unwillingly. Psalm. 103.8. He is slow to anger, Lament. 3.33.
He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men; so is he most
apt to repent him of the evil he is constrained to bring upon them, and to
be troubled with it. Therefore it is said of him, Joel 2.13. and in many other
places, that he repents him of the evil. Both which properties are most
pathetically expressed, Hosea 11.8, How shall I give thee up Ephraim? How shall
I deliver thee up Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee
as Zeboim? Mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together.
And this is the in misery, Mine eye affects my heart (says the Church,
Lamen. 3.51. because of all the daughters of my City, yea, the more the misery
is that he sees any man in, the more he will pity him, and be ready to help
him; as we see in the example of the Samaritan, Luke 10 33, 34, When he saw the
Jew stripped of his clothes, and wounded, and half dead, he had compassion on
him, and went to him, and bound up his wounds, etc. And in this respect, it is
often mentioned, as a duty we owe to them that are in misery to visit them, to
go and see them. Iam. 1.27. Pure religion, and undefiled before God, is this,
to visit the fatherless, and the widow in their affliction. But you will say,
is that enough? I answer, yes, he that does that (if he have a man's heart in
him) cannot choose but do what he can to help him. They have cut off my life
in the dungeon (says the Church, Lament. 3.53) and cast a stone upon me,
because they would not see my misery, and therefore that is noted for the
cause, why neither the Priest not the Levite helped the poor man; they could
not abide to look on him, but passed by on the other side, Lu. 10.31, 32. Even
so is it with our most merciful and tenderhearted Father, the very sight of
our misery without any other motive in the world, is sufficient to move him to
pity, and help us, yea the more our misery is, the more ready will he be to
succor us, Exodus 3.7 See how pathetically the Lord speaks. Surely I have
seen the affliction of my people, for I know their sorrows, and am come down
to deliver them. Jeremy 31.20. My bowels are troubled for him, I will surely
have mercy upon him says the Lord. Yea, the sight of the misery even of wicked
men, does work this upon his tender heart, Psalm 146.7, 8, 9. The Lord loses
the prisoners, the Lord opens the eyes of the blind; the Lord raises them
that are bowed down; the Lord preserves the strangers, he relieveth the
fatherless and widow. So again, Psalm 78.38. He being full of compassion,
forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not; yea, many a time turned he his
anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath; and yet these men were but
hypocrites, they never sought to God, but in their affliction, verse 34. and
36. They did but flatter him with their mouth, and lied unto him with their
tongues. And thus have you seen the tender mercies of the Lord.

Thirdly. In the Lord there is a multitude of tender mercies. He is abundant
^4.6. Plenteous in mercy, Psalm. 86.5. Full of compassion. Psalm 86.15. Rich in
mercy. Ephe. 2.4. Admire it we may, but no man is able to express, and utter
how great the mercy of the Lord is, Psalm 36.7. How excellent is thy loving
kindness? The mercies and kindnesses of all the men in the world compared to
it, are but as a drop of water, to the great Ocean. My thoughts are not your
thoughts, neither are your ways my ways (says the Lord. Esaias 55.8, 9.) For
as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways higher then your
ways, and my thoughts, then your thoughts. See this difference in three
points. 1. A man can forgive small wrongs, but the wrongs Exodus 34.7. Forgiving
iniquity, transgression, and sin. Matthew. 12.31. All manner of sin, and
blasphemy, shall be forgiven unto men. He is able to forgive a debt of ten
thousand talents, and not be undone, nay be never the poorer, Matthew. 18.27. 2.
A man can forgive one a great wrong, if David complains his were. Psalm 40.12.
3. A man is able once to forgive, yea to forgive (it may be) us. Matthew. 18.22.
Thou shall forgive him I say not unto thee, until seven times, but until
seventy times seven times. So that Gods children shall have no cause to say to
their heavenly Father, as Esau said to his father. Genesis 27.38. Have thou but
one blessing my father? Can thou forgive but once? yes he is able to forgive
the same offense often times, if it be truly repented of.

Use.
The use of this Doctrine, is first for instruction, even to teach, and assure
you, to testify unto you, as the Apostle did to Gods people. 1. Pet. 5.12.
that this is the true grace of God, wherein you stand, that the religion, and
Doctrine that is at this day, and has been (through Gods mercy, now many,
above sixty years without interruption) taught, and professed in the Church of
England (the Lord in mercy grant it may continue so to be) and which you have
received, and found comfort in, is the only true ancient Catholic,
Prophetical, and Apostolic faith. Because it gives the whole glory of man's
salvation, and of every degree, and piece of it, from the beginning to the end
to the free grace, and mercy of God, and to nothing else. Therefore the Apostle
in that place I last named. 1. Pet. 5.12. calls the true religion and
Doctrine of God (for that is it he means in that place) by a Metonimy, the
true grace of God, because the whole subject matter of it, was the grace of
God; it ascribed nothing to man, but all to God, and to his free grace and
mercy only Ephesians. 2.5. By grace ye are saved, and again, verse 8. For by
grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your selves: it is the gift
of God. A surer note to try the true religion, and the true teacher by, you can
never have. When our Savior would teach them to know whether his Doctrine were
of God, he gives them this note, John 7.18. He that speaks of himself,
seeks his own glory (humane Doctrines do all tend one way or other, to the
glory of man, and advancing of him) but he that seeks his glory that sent
him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him. In this religion be
resolute I pray you: 1 Cor. 16.13. Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you
like men, be strong. Make straight paths to your feet (as the Apostle speaks
Heb. 12.13) go steadily, go strongly, waver not, lest that that is halting,
be turned out of the way. If you will suffer your selves to be drawn to
stagger, and doubt of your religion, you will be in danger to be perverted,
and drawn from it. I will therefore give you for a preservative, that which
the Apostle speaks, Gal. 1.9. If any man preach any other Gospel unto you
then that ye have received, let him be accursed. Whatsoever Doctrine is brought
unto you, that does derogate in the least point, from the glory of Gods grace,
and ascribe any thing unto man, detest it, abhor it, whither it be old
Pelagianisme, or new Popery, and Semipelagianisme, detest it, abhor it; for
they are all adversaries to the grace of God, that teach as these men do.

If by grace (says the Apostle Romans 11.6.) then it is no more of works that we
are justified; otherwise grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then
it is no more grace, otherwise work is no more work. And Gal. 5.4. Christ is
become of none effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye
are fallen from grace.

Esa. 64.6. All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Luke 17.10. When ye
have done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable
servants, we have done that which was our duty to do; and the like might be
showed in all other points of Doctrine that derogate from Gods Grace and glory,
and therefore to be abhorred as contrary to the word of God.

Lecture XXI. On Psalm 51.1, 2. April 4. 1626.
NOw it follows, Use 2.
that we proceed unto two other uses, that this Doctrine serves unto; whereof
the first is for exhortation, the other for comfort.

For this Doctrine, if it be rightly understood and believed, has great force
to stir us up, 1. To sundry duties that we owe unto men, with whom we live,
2. And chief^ly to sundry other duties, that we owe unto the Lord himself.

Two duties there be, which we cannot choose but perform unto men, if we do
rightly understand, and believe this Doctrine; the one consists in forgiving
of them that have wronged us, the other, in giving to them that stand in need
of us.

For the first. Duty
Nothing has that force to make a Christian willing to forgive and to live in
charity with all men, as the knowledge, and true consideration of the Lords
mavelous mercy and goodness toward us, Ephesians. 4.32. Be ye kind one to
another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake
has forgiven you. Colos. 3.^3. Forgiving one another, if any man have a
quarrel against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. 1. Whatsoever
the wrong be, for so God does forgive us, Exodus 34.7. He forgiveth iniqui^y,
and transgression, and sin. 2. Whatsoever the party be that has wronged us;
for so does God forgive the unworthyest of all, Romans 10.21. All the day long he
stretches forth his hands to a disobedient, and gainsaying people; such as
he sought reconciliation with, and they scorned it, and despised it. 3. How
often soever we have forgiven him already. Matthew. 18.12. I say not until seven
times, but until seventy times seven times. For so does God forgive, as our
Savior shows, by inferring that parable, verse 23 Therefore is the Kingdom
of heaven likened unto a certain King, etc. If any man shall object, it is
impossible we should forgive, Object.
as God forgiveth? can there be that mercy and goodness in us, that is in the
Lord? Would I could forgive wrongs but as some men that I know can, to forgive
as God forgiveth, I shall never be able. I answer. Indeed thou can not. Answ.
But this is that that thou must aim at, and strive unto, this is the pattern
that God has given thee to work by. Our Savior therefore having spoken of
this very point of forgiving wrongs, infers. Mat. 5.48. Be ye therefore
perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. As if he had said,
Never think thou have forgiven as thou should, till thou have forgiven as
God forgiveth. And the force of the argument from this example lies in four
points.

First. That it is the example of our Father, whom we ought, whom we Ephesians.
5.1. Be ye therefore followers of God (in this he means, as appears by the
words immediately going before) as dear children.

Secondly. That our Father has in his word reveiled, and spoken so much of
John 13.15. I have given you an example (says our Savior) that ye should do
even as I have done unto you. This is evident in the whole drift of that
parable, Mat. 18.23 -- 35.

Thirdly. There is no proportion between that which the Lord forgiveth Mat.
18.29, 28. all that we have to forgive, is nothing in comparison of that.

Fourthly. That the Lord has thus far tied his mercy in forgiving us to can
know or hope that his sins are pardoned, that finds not himself able to
forgive men; whomsoever he forgiveth, he makes them also able, and willing to
forgive. Matthew. 6.14, 15. If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly
Father will also forgive you, but if ye forgive not men their trespasses,
neither will your Father forgive your trespasses. This point I will the rather
stand upon a while, because it is so seasonable for this time. And I do
acknowledge Gods good providence in directing my ministry so, as (in handling
of mine ordinary text) I should have so just occasion given me to fall upon
this point at this time. Look to it therefore you that intend now to
Communicate, or have lately Communicated at the Lords Table. When our Savior
was to press upon his Disciples this point of forgiveness, he uses a
strange preface, Luk 17.3. Take heed to your selves. As if he had said 1. It is
a matter of great moment that I am to speak of, you cannot possibly be saved,
unless you can forgive. 2. It is a matter of great difficulty, and such as
you will be apt to deceive your selves in; Take heed to your selves. But to
you that mean to Communicate, I may much more justly say, take heed to your
selves, take heed you come to it in Charity: be sure you purge out the old
leaven, before you come to eat Christ our Passover, that was sacrificed for
us, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 5.7. And what meant he by the old leaven?
he tells you in the next verse, it is the leaven of malice, especially, that
we must be careful to purge out. For certainly the blessed Sacrament will
be your Bane, if you come to it in malice. Nay, I dare confidently affirm, it
were a matter of less danger to you, to eat a morsel of Rats-bane, then to
eat that Holy Bread; to drink a cup of poison, then to drink of that Blessed
Cup, if you come to it in malice. I speak this upon good warrant, 1 Cor.
11.29. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks ((...) says
the Original, which the old vulgar Latin translateth, judgment, but Master
Beza, and the Geneva, and our new translation) damnation to himself.
Damnation, if he be a reprobate, and impenitent hypocrite, judgment though he
be regenerate, and a true believer. We read a notable example and experiment of
this in Judas, of whom it is said, Ioh. 13.2^. that after he had received the
Passover, Satan entered into him. How came this to pass? He had given place
to the Devil before, he came in malice to the Sacrament, as you may see, John
13.2. Satan had put in his heart to betray Christ. And by malice (specially)
men give place to the Devil. Ephesians 4 26, 27. Let not the Sun go down
upon your wrath; neither give place to the Devil. The meaning then is, that
after the receiving of the Passover, Satan got further power over him, he
became twofold more the child of hell then before. I pray you therefore let us
take heed to our selves by this fearful example. Certainly, somewhat has
been amiss in us, that many of us have so often received, and found so little
good by it; many of our people are fitly resembled. Esaias 29.8. It shall even
be as when an hungry man dreameth, and behold, he eats, but he awaketh,
and his soul is empty. Many dream they have in the Sacrament eaten the body
of Christ, and drunk his blood, but when their consciences shall be awakened,
they will find they were but in a dream. Is it possible to eat the flesh of
Christ, and drink his blood, and be never the better for it, receive no
increase of grace by it? He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood (says
our Savior, John 6.56, 57.) dwells in me, and I in him; he that eats me,
shall even live by me. Happy are they that discern, and can mourn for this,
that they receive no more good by the Sacrament; for 1. certainly, they are
not in a dream, the spirit of slumber is not upon them; 2. certainly, they
do receive good by the Sacrament, though they feel it not, and they shall
feel it in Gods good time. But it is much to be feared many have in the
Sacrament, eaten, and drunk judgment (if not damnation) to themselves, for
they grow as Judas did, worse, and worse after it, more profane, or more
senseless and sottish then before. And without doubt, one chief cause of all
this is, that men come hand over head to the Sacrament, and have no care to
purge out the old leaven out of their hearts, before they come thither.
Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap, says the Apostle, Galat.
6.7. If you did sow better in your care to prepare your selves before, you
would reap better in the fruit, and comfort of the Sacrament afterward. And
the chief part of the old leaven, as you have heard that sowreth the Sacrament
to us, is malice and uncharitableness that we bring with us to it.

Two sorts of men there be, to whom I will apply this Doctrine.

First. Applic.
I know some have ever been apt to abuse this Doctrine, and will keep
themselves from the Sacrament a year, or two, or three, and all because But
this wisdom is not from above, but is earthly, sensual, and devilish, as the
Apostle speaks, James 3.15. For, 1. these men show manifest contempt to
Christ, and his blessed Esaias 7.13. Is it a small thing for you to weary men,
but will ye weary my God also? That which the Apostle says. 1. Pet. 2.2, 3. of
the word may be applied also to the Sacrament, which is well called Visibile
Verbum, he that has tasted how sweet and gracious the Lord is, cannot choose
but as a newborn babe desire it. They that put Christ, and his ordinances
from themselves in this sort, they do even give judgment against themselves,
that they are unworthy of everlasting life, as the Apostle speaks to the
Jews. Acts 13.46. 2. These men profess they will live still Esaias 3.9. They
declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not, woe unto their soul, for they
have rewarded evil unto themselves. For if they had an unfeined desire to be
reconciled, they need not refuse to receive the Sacrament. 2. Corinthians. 8.12. If
there be first a willing mind it is accepted. Object.
Thou will object. I have a purpose to be reconciled, Answ.
but I cannot yet. I answer. If the letting of the Sun once go down upon
thy wrath, be a giving place to the Devil, Ephesians 4.26, 27. What place
have thou given to the Devil, that have let so many Suns go down upon thy
wrath, and resolvest there shall go more down upon it yet? 3. Why come thou
to Church to join with Gods people in prayer, and in the word, yea, how dare
thou pray or read it in private? James 1.2^. Receive with meekness the
engrafted word. 1. Peter 2.1, 2. laying aside all malice, as newborn babes
desire the sincere milk of the Word. And so will it thy prayers, as is plain
by that speech of our Savior, Mar. 11.25. When ye stand praying, forgive, if
ye have ought against any. Yea, when thou say the Lords prayer, thou
prayest God would stand affected to thee, as thou stand affected to thine
enemies. Mat. 6.12. Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us.

But to leave these; there is a second sort (and those the greater number Gal.
6.7. Be not deceived, God is not mocked. Know you have not to deal with men in
this case, whom you may easily deceive, but with God that cannot be mocked.
Take heed Satan fill not your hearts to lie unto the Holy Ghost; as Peter
speaks to Ananias, Acts 5.3. It is good for you therefore to try your hearts
well in this point; and for your help herein I will give you some notes
whereby you may know, whether you have indeed forgiven them that have wronged
you or no.

Romans 12.19. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves. Nay he dares not give
himself liberty to wish evil unto him, as Job professes of himself, Job
31.30. Nay he dares not rejoice in his hurt though himself have had no hand in
it, Pro. 24.17, 18. Rejoice not when thine enemy falls, and let not thine
heart be glad when he stumbleth, lest the Lord see it, and it displease him.
Have thou thus forgiven?

Romans 12.27. If thine enemy hunger, feed him, if he thirst give him drink.
Look to thy pattern, thus does thy father forgive. Luke 6.35. Love ye your
enemies, and do good, and ye shall be the children of the highest, for he is
kind to the unthankefull, and to the evil; and Ephesians. 4.32. Be ye kind to one
another, tender hearted, forgiving one another even as God for Christ's sake
has forgiven you. Will thou say thou have forgiven all the world, thou
malicest no body, and yet there be neighbors of thine that wronged thee (as
thou think) three, four, five, or six years ago, and thou have been
strange to them ever since, thou show them no kindness, but even in such
ordinary courtesies as thou do to the rest of thy neighbors thou balkest
them always, and leavest them out; so as all thy neighbors can witness thou
art not friends with them? Acts 5.3. Why have Satan filled thy heart to lie
unto the Holy Ghost?

Levit. 19.18. Thou shall not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children
of thy people, but thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Shemei knew
this, and therefore prays David 2 Samuel 19.19. that he would not remember what
he had done. In this manner does thy father forgive. Ier. 31.34. I will forgive
their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.

Psalm. 34.14. Seek peace, and ensue it. Romans 12.18. If it be possible as much
as in you is, have peace with all men. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. Study to be quiet, cast
about for it, strive earnestly for it (...). Yea 1 though he did the wrong, not
himself, Mar. 11.25. Forgive if ye have ought against any. 2 Though he be
inferior to himself. Genesis 13.8. Abraham said to Lot, etc. For so does our
father, he seeks to his enemies for peace. 2. Cor. 5.20. God beseeches you
by us to be reconciled. Now what means have thou used? What desire have thou
showed this way?

These. 3.14. Note such, and keep no company with them that they may be
ashamed; and we have our fathers example for this, Exodus 34.7. as merciful as
he is he will by no means clear the guilty. Yet does he that has truly
forgiven unfainedly desire that the worst man that is would mend, that he might
think well of him. He can therefore pray for such. Mat. 5.44. I say unto you
love your enemies pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you. 2 Thessalonians. 3.15. Count him not as an enemy but admonish him. So does thy father, he
unfainedly desires the amendment of the worst of his enemies. Ezekiel. 33.11. As
I live says the Lord I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that
he turn from his way, and live; turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for
why will ye die O house of Israel? Have thou this charity? I know thou
pretendest against such as thou hate he is a bad man, etc. And do thou
dislike him for his badnesse only. 1. Likest thou none that are as bad? 2. Can
thy heart witness thou have unfainedly desired his amendment? Gal. 6.7. Be not
deceived God is not mocked. Look to thy pattern, love as thy father loves.

Sixthly, and lastly, He that has forgiven, and is void of malice, if the party
Psalm. 120.6, 7. My soul has long dwelt with him that hates peace, I am for
peace, but when I speak, they are for war. But see how this troubled him,
verse 5. Woe is me that I sojourne in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of
Kedar. For as there is great comfort in love, Phil. 2.1. so is there great
vexation in variance to a good mind. Look to thy pattern therefore, and thou
shall find, thy Savior loved thus, he was grieved that his enemies would not
be reclaimed, Mar. 3.5. He mourned for the hardness of their hearts, and 8.12.
He sighed deeply in his spirit for them. And of our heavenly Father we read,
that he loved his enemies thus, Psalm. 95.10. Forty years long was I grieved
with this generation.

Can thou say, thou have loved thus? O happy thou then.

If any man shall object as John 6.60. this is an hard saying, who can hear
it? Object.
who can endure such Doctrine? Answ.
flesh and blood can never do this. I answer, 1. flesh and blood indeed
cannot, nor flesh and blood can never inherit the kingdom of God, 1. Cor.
15.50. If thou be not regenerate, and borne again, thou can not see the
kingdom of God. Ioh. 3.3. 2. Pray with the Apostle Lu. 17.5. Lord increase our
faith. If thou were well persuaded, how great the Lords love has bin to thee:
thou would easily do it,

Lecture XXII. on Psalm 51.1, 2. April 18. 1626.
IT follows now, Duty
that we proceed to the second duty that we owe unto men. This Doctrine
therefore, which has made known unto you the wonderful goodness, and loving
kindness of the Lord, and the infiniteness of his tender mercies toward poor
miserable sinners, that stand in need of his mercy, must stir up and provoke
us to be good and merciful to them that stand in need of us. Neither is there
any thing in the world, that will have that force, to make us willing to do
good, and to show mercy unto men, as the true knowledge, and consideration of
this, how good and merciful the Lord has been unto us, Luke 6.36. Be ye
merciful (says our Savior) as your father also is merciful, and Matthew.
18.33. Should not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow servants, even
as I had piety on thee? Yea, Mat. 5.45. our Savior teaching how bountiful and
good the Lord is to all sorts of men, persuades all his Disciples to be so
too, by this argument, that you may be the children of your Father which is in
heaven. As if he should say, there is nothing whereby you may better be known
to be the children of God, nothing wherein you can more resemble him, then in
this willingness, and readiness to do good, and to be beneficial unto others.

And there be four things principally commended to us for our imitation in
this example of our heavenly father. 1. He is full of the bowels of mercy, apt
to pity them he sees to be in misery. 2. He is bountiful; and ready to
help them, and do them good. 3. His bounty is altogether free, and respects
nothing in them that might move him to it, but only this that they are in
misery, and have need of him. 4. He is apt to do good, not only to them that
are in misery but to all, even to all his creatures.

Iam. 5.11. He is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. And so must we be, if we
will approve our selves to be his children. Ephesians. 4.32. Be ye kind one to
another, and tender hearted. 1 Pet. 2.8. Have compassion one of another, be
pitiful. Col. 3.12. Put on (as a beautiful garment that will greatly adorn,
and grace your profession) as the elect of God, holy, and beloved, bowels of
mercies. They are therefore certainly most unlike to our heavenly father.
Applic.
1. That are Deuteronomy. 15.7. Thou shall not harden thy heart from thy poor
brother. 1 Ioh. 3.17. He that shuts up his bowels of compassion from his
needy brother (as if he should say, when he finds his heart apt to be moved
with compassion, violently restrains himself from it) how dwells the love
of God in him? We should provoke, and force our selves to it (as we have heard)
and not against it. Pro. 21.13. He that stops his ears at the cry of the
poor (and striveth not to be affected with it) he also shall cry himself (God
can make the hardest hearted but he shall not be heard. And Pro. 11.17. He that
is cruel (to the poor) troubles his own flesh. 2. That do the works of
mercy without any mercy at all, without any compassion of heart, toward the
misery of them that they do relieve. But either 1 out of a respect to their
own credit, as the Pharisees, Mat. 6.1, 2. Or 2 out of hypocrisy as Judas,
Ioh. 12.5, 6. Or 3 out of a desire to be rid of them and freed from the noise
of their clamor; as the unrighteous judge relieved the poor widow, Luke 18.5.
Where as indeed the mercifulness of the heart, from whence that proceeds
which we do for the poor, is that which graceth our alms-deeds more then the
value of the thing that we give unto them. Mat. 5.7. Blessed are the
merciful, Esa. 5 8.10. If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, then shall
thy light arise in obscurity and thy darkness be as the noone day. Job. 30.25.
Was not my soul grieved for the poor?

Psalm. 146.7.9. He gives food to the hungry, he relieveth the fatherless, and
the widow. Yea he is bountiful in his goodness to such, James 1.5. He gives
to all men as need liberally, and upbraideth not. And so must we do if we will
approve our selves to be the children of our heavenly father. And surely there
was never any that did find the Lord to be merciful to them, in the pardon of
their sins that were not by the spirit of God made merciful to them that
stood in need of them. Psalm. 112.4, 5. The righteous man is merciful, and full
of compassion; a good man is merciful, and lends. And verse 9. He has
dispersed, he has given to the poor. Two things there be that do highly
commend Mic. 6.8. What does the Lord require of thee but to do justly, and to
love mercy? It is a duty that does greatly grace all other even the best duties
that we can perform. Acts 10.4. Thy prayers, and thine alms, are come up for
a memorial before God. Yea it is a duty more pleasing unto God, then any
outward duty even of the first table. Mat. 12.7. I will have mercy and not
sacrifice. 2. That it is a duty that God has made greater promises unto then
to any other, almost that a Christian can perform. Mat. 5.7. Blessed are the
merciful for they shall obtain mercy. In which respect Solomon says, Pro.
14.21. He that has mercy on the poor, happy is he. And three sorts of
promises there be which are made unto it. 1. That it shall Pro. 19.17. He that
has pity on the poor, lends unto the Lord; and that which he has given,
the Lord will pay him again. It will return again; yea it will return
again with advantage, and increase. In which respect it is compared, to the
casting away of your seed into the ground, 2 Cor. 9.6. He which sows
sparingly shall reap sparingly, and he which sows bountifully shall reap
bountifully. Admit thou do not find it again presently, certainly (if thou
give thine alms with a good heart) it shall not be lost, thou shall find it
again one day. Eccl. 11.1. Cast thy bread upon the waters; for thou shall find
it after many days. And Psalm. 37.26. He is ever merciful, and lends; and
his seed enjoys the blessing. Yea that that is thus given will bring Gods
blessing upon all that we have besides. Deuteronomy. 15.10. Thou shall surely give
him, and thine heart shall not be grieved when thou give unto him; because
that for this, the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy work^, and in all
thou put thine hand unto. Luke 11.41. Give alms of such things as ye have,
and behold, all things are clean unto you. This answers two objections that
usually men make to excuse their uncharitableness to the poor.

First, believe me I know not how soon I may want my self. I answer, Thou art
an infidel if thou say so, for God has said this is the way to keep thee
from want. Pro. 28.27 He th^^ gives unto the poor shall not lack.

Secondly, I have children to provide for. I answer, thy children shall not be
the poorer for this, if God be to be believed; but on the contrary thy
miserableness to the poor, is the way to bring Gods curse upon thy self, and
thy children too. Pro 11.24. There is that scatters, and yet increases, and
there is that withholdeth more then is meet, but it tends to poverty.

The second sort of promises that are made to this duty are these; that there
Psalm. 112.7, 8. He shall not be afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed
trusting in the Lord, his heart is established, he shall not be afraid, Iam.
2.13. Mercy glories against judgment. For 1 we have a promise there it will
give us hope to be delivered from them. Psalm. 41.1. Blessed is he that
considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble, or 2 that
God will give us strength and comfort in them, Isa. 58.10. If thou draw out thy
soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul, then shall thy light
arise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noone day. As if he had said,
the most uncomfortable estate thou can fall into, shall be comfortable to
thee. In which respect Solomon makes this a strong motive to the works of
charity. Eccl. 11.2. Give a portion to seven, and also to eight, (be liberal
in thine alms) for thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth. As if
he should say; how soon thou may loose all that thou have. And surely as
there is now much evil threatened to our state, by the power, and designs of
our bloody enemies, so if the wisest of Gods Prophets were now alive to direct
us, what to do to prevent these evils they would advise us (next to our
repentance our tears, and prayers unto God) unto this course as Daniel did
that great King, Dan. 4.27. O King, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee,
break off thy sins by righteousness (make restitution) and thine iniquities
by showing mercy to the poor, if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity.
As if he had said, if any thing will turn away the judgment, this will.

The third and last sort of promises that are made unto this duty are such as
Tim. 6.19. The laying up for our selves a good foundation against the time to
come, that we may lay hold on eternal life. And our Savior, Luke 16.9. Make
you friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may
receive you (as faithful witnesses of your faith) into everlasting
habitations. In which respect also in that great day of reckning, when every
man shall receive according to his works, there shall be principal regard had
to the works of mercy. Mat. 25.34 -- 36. Come ye blessed of my father, etc.
for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc. And so much for the second
point, I told you was to be observed, in this example of our heavenly father.



Some cautions I will premise before I prove this.

Jeremy spoke of them in his time. Ier. 5.4. they are fooli^h (or profane) they
know not the way of the Lord, not the judgment of their God. Pro 30.9. Least I
be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in vain; as if he had said,
so do usually poor men.

Solomon speaks of all children may specially be applied to the poor, and
their children. Pro. 22.15. Foolishnes is bound in the heart of a child but
the rod of correction (the house of correction) shall drive it far from him.

These. 3.10. If any will not work, let him not eat.

Gal 6.10. Let us do good to all men, especially to them that are of the
household of faith. Our heavenly father whom we must follow does so. 1 Timothy
4.10. He is the Savior (the preserver) of all men, specially of them that
believe. Such of the poor as fear God, though they seek not to us, we should
seek out them, as Onesiphorus did Paul, when he was prisoner at Rome. 2 Timothy
1.17. He sought me out diligently, and found me. For that that is done to the
least of these is done to Christ. Matthew 25.40. Verily I say unto you in as much
as ye have done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it to
me. And what a comfort may that be to thee to have releeved Christ? And we
may have more assurance of reward, in the least kindness done to such a one,
then in all that we do for other poor. Mat. 10.42. The least thing a man
gives to a poor man in the name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, (says
our Savior) he shall in no wise lose his reward. And the Apostle says, Heb.
6.9, 10. of them that have ministered to the Saints (in the name of Saints he
means) and yet do minister, that they have better things in them, then can
be in an hypocrite, and such as do accompany salvation. Yet though all these
things be so, the point I propounded remains true, that the wickedness of
the poor should not cause us to shut up our bowels, and be hard-hearted
toward them. Mark how the Apostle having spoken of sundry faults of the
poor. 2 Thessalonians. 3. infers this exhortation, verse. 13. But ye brethren be
not weary in well doing. As if he should have said, their lewdness will weary,
and dishearten you, if you take not heed. Let us therefore look to our
pattern. Luke 6.36. Be ye merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful. How
is that? verse 35. He is merciful to the unthankefull, and to the evil. 1.
Tim. 4.10. He is the Savior of all men. Their very misery is a sufficient
motive to him, though there be no goodness in them at all; and so should it
be unto thee, Exodus 23.5. If thou see the Ass of him that hate thee, lying
under his burden, will thou cease to help him? Mark, 1. a beast in misery
must be relieved, much more a man; 2. A beast of such a one as hates Gods
people (and that must needs be sure a very bad man) must be relieved, much more
the man himself.

Four things there be that may persuade thee to it. 1. These wretched Esa.
58.7. And it is a foul sin to hide thy self from thine own flesh. 2. They
may belong to Gods election for ought thou know. Destroy not him (by
withholding thy mercy says the Apostle, Romans 14.15.) for whom Christ dyed. 3.
Thou respectest not him in thine alms (if thou give Prove. 19.17. He that has
pity on the poor, lends unto the Lord. 4. Even that, thou give unto these
that are most unworthy (if thou give it with a good heart) shall not loose a
reward. Eccles. 11.1. Cast thy bread upon the waters, (be liberal toward all
that stand in need) for thou shall find it after many days. Now for this duty
I would I could say to all you, Applic.
as the Apostle did to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 9.12. As touching the
ministering to the Saints, it is superfluous for me to write unto you, for I
know the forwardness of your mind. Certainly, it is not superfluous for me,
but most needful to speak unto you of this duty, for I know no forwardness
in any almost unto this duty. First, it is the sin and shame of our times, that
many dying Romans 2.24. The name of God is blasphemed among the Papists, through
such men. I know they do better that give in their life time, and seldom do
they give well, that never give till they dye. Yet 1. It is a great increase of
sin to give, neither living nor dying. 2. It becomes them well, that have
given most in their life, to leave at their death also a testimony behind them
of their charity, as good Dorcas did, Acts 9.39. The widows that were weeping
for her, showed the coats and garments which she made while she lived, and
left behind her for the poor.

Secondly, It is the sin and shame of many that live among us, that they give
nothing to the poor; they count it a great privilege, and will plead for it
(as humbling unto him, to have nothing to give, and he will labor hard that he
may have something to give; according to that Ephe 4.28. Let him labor,
working with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to him
that needs. Thou workest, that thou may have to live, and to maintain thy
family, (o that many of you did so well) nay thou workest, that thou may
have to haunt the Alehouse, to game, to maintain thy pride, and where is the
poor man to be found that works to that end, that he may have to give unto
them that need?

Paul bids Timothy charge rich men, that they would be ready to distribute,
willing to communicate. 1. Tim. 6.18. and Romans 12.8. Let him that shows
mercy, do it with cheerfulness. 2. Cor. 9 7. God loves a cheerful giver.
For this Paul commended the Macedonians, 2. Cor. 8 4. They prayed Paul with
much entreaty, that he would receive their gift, for the poor Saints at
Jerusalem. Two things there be that do discover most men give not willingly.
1. It comes so hardly from them, they must be sessed to so much, they are so
late, and backward in their paiments* it comes from them as if their heart
should be taken out of their bellyes. They give as the Apostle speaks, 2.
Cor. 9.7. grudgingly, and as of necessity. If the law compelled them not, they
would never give. 2. Men give not according to their abi^ity, and that that we
give is nothing worth, unless it be proportionable to our ability. Acts
1^.^9. The Disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to send
relief to the brethren in Judea. They that are rich in this world, should be
rich in good works. 1. Tim, 6.18. And this is that, for which our Savior
prefers the gift of the poor widow before all that was given by others,
Luke 21.4. that she gave to the utmost of her abi^ity, and so did not they.

I would therefore have these men to consider, that in giving to the poor (if
they give with good hearts) they do themselves more good then they can do the
poor, if they gave much more then they do, A^t. 20.^5. It is a more blessed
thing to give, then to receive. Prove. 11.17. The merciful man does good to his
own soul. The more plentifully thou give, the greater shall thy reward be.
2. Cor. 9.6. He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly, and he that
sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully. Pray therefore with the Apostles,
Lu. 17.5. Lord increase our faith. Certainly, if thou had faith to believe
Gods promises it would be no such trouble to thee to give to the poor.

Now to shut up all, I must answer one objection that our men usually make,
for this hardness of heart in this kind. Object.
I could be content to give what I am assessed, Answ.
and more too, so I saw equallity used in sessements. To which I answer. 1.
That surely there ought care to be had of this, I mean not (says the Apostle
2. Cor. 8.13.) that other men should be eased, and you burdened They that have
to do in business for the poor, should deal faithfully, and impartially.
See the Apostles care in this matter, 2. Cor. 8 20, 21. he was very careful
that no man might blame him in that business. 2. But say there be a fault
this way, suffer not thou the sin of others, to hinder thee from doing thy
duty, or make thee do it grudgingly, and so to loose thy reward. Remember what
the Apostle says, Romans 12.21. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil
with goodness.

If any man shall think I stand too much on this point, let him remember. 1.
That it well becomes a minister of the Gospel, at all times, to plead for
the poor. When Paul took his leave of the chief Apostles, the only thing
they entreated of him, was this, that in his ministry, he would remember the
poor, the same which I also of my self (says he) was forward to do. Gal
2.10. 2. This is a time wherein officers are here, and in all other places
chosen to take care for the poor, and sessements are usually made for that
purpose; and therefore this is a seasonable doctrine for this time. 3. I speak
the more of it to stir you up at this time, to show your compassion, and
extend your liberality toward the poor of this Town. I have long thought it a
shame unto us, that such an assembly as this is, should so often meet together
to serve God, and no collection be made in it in all this time for the poor. I
could allege the example of other reformed Churches, to provoke us to this,
and name to you congregations in our own land, where collections are made for
the poor every month once, upon the Lecture day. But I pray you rather
consider the equity of that law of God. Deuterono. 16.16, 17. Three times in a
year, shall all thy males appear before the Lord thy God, in the place which
he shall choose -- and they shall not appear before the Lord empty, every man
shall give, as he is able, according the blessing of the Lord thy God, which
he has given thee. If it were for nothing else, even to profess our homage
to God, it is fit in our Church Assemblies, we should sometimes give somewhat to
the poor. I have hitherto forborne to do it, because of that willingness
many of you showed in your weekly contributions, while that fasts continued.
Now I hope it will not offend any of you that believe this, that you have heard
(as I doubt not but you all do) if once a quarter I crave this of you, that as
you are made here partakers of our spiritual things, so you will be content
to minister unto our poor, in these carnal things. Romans 15.27.

Lecture XXIII. On Psalm 51.1, 2. April. 25. 1626.
THe fourth and last thing we are to observe for our imitation in the

That the Lord is not only good and bountiful to them that are in misery, but
to all his creatures, to all men especially. Psalm. 119.68. Thou art good, and
do good. 1. Pet. 2.3. The Lord is gracious. Psalm. 145.9. The Lord is good to
all. We can look no way, but we shall see monuments of his goodness and
bounty. Psalm. 33.5. The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. And this
is noted of our Savior, that he sought not himself, but in every place where
he came did good. Acts 10.38. He went about doing good. Though he had many
in his time that were most lewd men, and did well deserve it, yet did he never
show his power in the destroying or hurting of any man, but all his miracles
still tended to the good, and benefit of all men, as himself answers his
Disciples, when they would have provoked him to command fire to come down from
heaven to consume the Village that refused to lodge him. Luke 9.^6. The son of
man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. And in this is he also
propounded by the holy Ghost, as an example to us, Phil. 2.4, ^. Look not
every man on his own things, but every man on the things of others also; As if
he had said, Labor to do good to others, Let this mind be in you, which
also was in Christ Jesus. And Romans 15.2, 3. Let every one of us please his
neighbor, for his good unto edification; for even Christ pleased not himself,
sought not himself. In this property, all Gods children do strive to resemble
their heavenly Father. They are not only harmless, peaceable, and quiet men,
such as will not wrong, nor wrangle, nor hurt any that they live with. In which
respect, David called them, Psalm 35.20. The quiet of the land. And this
Hamor, and Shechem, witnessed of Jacob, and his family, that while they lived
among them though contrary in religion to them, yet they lived peaceably with
them. Genesis 34.21. Esa. 11.9. They shall not hurt and destroy in all my holy
mountain. But they that are Gods children in deed, and not in show, and
profession only, will strive to be profitable, and to do good to the places
they live in, and the more good they do, the liker they are to their heavenly
Father. That which God says of Abraham, Genesis 12.2. Thou shall be a
blessing; belongs to all the true children of Abraham, they are a blessing to
the places they live in. Not only 1. by their prayers; as Elias was to Israel,
James 5.18. At whose prayer, the heavens gave rain, and the earth brought
forth her fruit. And Amos, likewise, Amos 7.3, 6. The Lord repented for this
(at his prayer) It shall not be, says the Lord. 2. Not only because the Lord
for their sakes uses to do good to the places where they live, Gene. 39.5.
The Lord bessed the Egyptians house for Joseph's sake. But even 3. In this
respect also, because they seek, and endeavor to do good to them with whom
they live; and that not in spiritual things only, but even in the things of
this life; yea he does this diligently, Prove. 11.27. He diligently seeks
good. A good Christian is not only Bonus vir, a good man, but Bonus civis, a
good Common-wealths-man, a good Townes-man also. It is said to the commendation
of Mordecai, Esd. 10.3* that he was accepted of the multitude of his brethren,
seeking the wealth of his people. This gained him love, and honor, in the
hearts of all the people, he sought the public good. And of Iehojada it is
said, he was greatly honored after his death for this. 2. Chron. 24.16. Because
he had done good in Israel. Object.
But you will say these were public persons, and great men, it became them
well to be such. Answ.
I answer, it is true, they were so, and indeed of such men this is chiefly
required. For the thing that God aimed at, in advancing of any, was only this;
that they might be Patres patriae, do more good to the Country and places
where they live, then men in meaner degree can do. Romans 13 4. He is the
minister of God to thee for good. and verse 6. For this cause pay you tribute
also; for they are Gods ministers. And surely this is the only thing that will
gain true honor, and esteem, and authority unto Gentlemen, and great men, in
the hearts of all that know them, not their birth, nor their lands, nor their
offices, nor their power, but their goodness, I mean the readiness that is
in them to do good to the places where they live, Luk 32.25. The Kings of the
Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, and they that exercise authority upon
them, are called benefactors. (...) This was it that gained them such authority
in the hearts, even of Gentiles, that they sought not themselves in these great
places, but the good of the people. But this belongs not to public persons,
and great men only; the poorest Christian that is, must not live to himself
alone, but strive to be profitable, and to do good to them he lives with.
See the commandment of God for this, Galat. 6.10. As we have opportunity, let
us do good unto all men. A notable direction we have for this, Jeremy 29.7.
Seek the peace of the city, whether I have caused you to be carried away
captives, and pray unto the Lord for it. For in the peace thereof, shall ye have
peace. Though that City were a most wicked place, yet (seeing God by his
providence, had brought them to dwell there) they were bound, not only to pray
for it, but to seek the good of it, the Wealth, and Peace, and Prosperity of
it by all means. Such as truly fear God, will not be backward in any work
that tends to the public good of the place they live in. Titus 3.14. Let
ours also learn to maintain good works for necessary uses, that they be not
unfruitful.

Applic.
Now if we apply this, that we have heard of this last point, that has been
observed for our imitation in the goodness, and bounty of the Lord, we shall
find there are very many, that are so unlike to our heavenly Father, in this
point, that we have no cause to judge them to be his children.

First. The Papists, who are notoriously known, to be so far from seeking
the peace and prosperity of their country, that they have for many years
uncessantly sought the utter ruin, and subversion of it, and the betraying of
it into the hands of strangers, yea, such strangers as are the worst nation,
Ezekiel. 7.24. most bloody enemies. And this is not the fault so much of the men
that profess popery, this is the fault of the religion it self. Their chief
teachers, the Jesuits, (the common incendiaries of the world) teach them, they
ought to do so, they shall merit heaven by doing so. Certainly this religion
cannot be of God, nor they that profess it. And was there ever such a religion
before in the world as this is? Other heresies, and religions there have bin
(perhaps) that were as pernicious to the souls of men as Popery; that is, of
the Gnostics, and Arrians of old, of the Anabaptists, and Antitrinitarians of
late; But a religion so pernicious to states, and Commonwealths, as popery is,
was there never heard of in all the world. They have another father mentioned,
John 8 44. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye
will do, he was a murderer from the beginning. He whose name is in Hebrew,
Abaddon, and in Greek, Apollyon, the destroyer mentioned, Rev. 9.11. is the
father of that religion, that teaches men to practice the ruin and
destruction of their own country. Three things they pretend for all their
practices against the state and Kingdom. 1. The wrongs Romans 12.19. Avenge not
your selves, but rather give place unto wrath, for it is written, vengeance is
mine, I will repay says Lord. And Mat. 5.44. I say unto you, love your
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, pray for
them that despitefully use you, and persecute you. And can this then be any
other religion then Antichrists, that teaches them to revenge themselves, yea,
to revenge themselves as cursed Haman did, Est. 3.6. But 2. they pretend James
and John, when they would have had fire to come down from heaven, to consume
those Samaritans, Lu. 9.54. But did Christ approve of that zeal? Look the
next verse 55. He turned and rebuked them for this zeal, ye know not what
manner spirit ye are of. So may we say to these men, certainly this is not the
spirit of Christ which descended upon him in a bodily shape like a Dove, Luke
3.22. this is not the spirit of Jesus the Savior of the World (whose name your
hypocritical teachers will needs bear) this is the spirit of Apollyon the
destroyer, that teaches men to do so. 3. They pretend the wickedness of our
nation, and of our religion also. Admit our religion were as bad as they can
imagine, Noveltie, heresy, Idolatry, Calvino-turcism, as they blasphemously
term it; Admit that in our Land they were oppressed, persecuted, kept in
extreme bondage, and servitude; Yet 1. our religion cannot be so bad as that
was in Babylon; 2. nor the oppression be so great, which they endure in our
Land, as those which Gods people endured in Babylon. 3. Our Land is their
native Country, wherein they and their ancestors were borne and bred, and
wherein they have (many of them) attained to great wealth, and state, the
meanest to many more comforts then ever Gods people did in Babylon, that
strange land, that land of miserable bondage, and captivity. And yet Gods
people might not, nay durst not conspire the destruction of Babylon, or the
betraying of it to a foreign enemy, but were bound to seek by all means the
peace, and prosperity of it, and to pray to God for it, as you have heard out
of Jeremy. 19.7.

Three things there be that move me to insist so much upon this point. 1. To
instruct you how to deal with such friends of yours as are addicted to Popery.
I know well that that prophecy is now fulfilled which you read, Rev. 17.2. the
Whore of Babylon has made the inhabitants of the earth drunk with the wine of
her fornication. It is vain thing to reason with, or seek to persuade drunken
men. But surely if there be any of your friends that have not yet drunk so
deep of that cup, that they have lost their wits, this will be as likely an
argument to persuade them that that religion cannot be of God, as Heb. 12.4. 3.
To warn you of the great danger we, and our nation do continually live in,
that have among us so mighty a generation of these vipers, that so we may be
made more careful to make sure our peace with God, and to cry instantly unto
him as David does, Psalm. 3.7, 8. Arise O Lord, save me O my God, salvation
belongs unto the Lord; thy blessing is upon thy people. Selah.

Esa. 59.7. Their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, wasting, and destruction
are in their paths. Mic. 2.1, 2. They devise iniquity, and work evil upon
their beds (there they hammer it) when the morning is light they practice it,
because it is in the power of their hands, they covet fields, and take them by
violence, and houses, and take them away, so they oppress a man, and his
house, even a man, and his heritage. These men I take the readiest way to bring
ruin upon their own houses. You know who it is that has said Esa. 5.8. Woe
unto them that join house to house, and field to field, till there be no
place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth; but what
follows, verse 9. In mine ears said the Lord of hosts, of a truth many
houses shall be desolate, even great, and fair without inhabitant. And Hab.
2.9. We to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he may
set his nest on high: Thou have (says the Lord, verse 10, 11.) consulted shame
to thy house, by cutting off many people, and have sinned against thy soul,
For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall
answer it. 2. Certainly let all oppressors, and cruel persons of what kind
soever, all usurers, and extortioners, that like great pikes devour all the
little fishes that come near them, pretend religion never so much, make never
so fair shows; Gods children they are not, they bear not his image, they are
nothing like him, his children they are whom they resemble in their
disposition, they are the children of Apollyon, the children of the destroyer.

Ier. 23.10. because of oaths the land does mourn; may be said of drunkards
also, and whoremongers, and idolaters, and profane wretches they will make the
place mourn they live in; they are as Jonah was in the ship they will endanger
all that live with them; they are as Achan was to the whole host of Israel,
Josh. 7.1. For Achans sake the anger of the Lord was kindled against the
children of Israel. Of them it may be said as Esa. 14.20. Thou shall not be
joined with them in burial, because thou have destroyed thy land, and slain
thy people. Zach. 7.14. For they laid the pleasant land desolate. Therefore 1
do what you can to keep such out, to get such out of your families, and towns
you live in. 1 Cor. 5.13. Therefore put away from among you such wicked
persons. 2 If you did believe this you would all join together to restrain,
and punish these lewd persons according to the exhortation of the Apostle, Heb.
12.15. Looking diligently, lest any root of bitterness springing up, do
trouble you, and thereby many be defiled.

Fourthly, Such as live idly, and without a calling or in such a calling as
Romans 3.12. They are together become unprofitable, there is none that does good
(...), that is profitable, and useful to others. And religion, and grace,
where ever it prevails, makes men profitable, as it did Onesimus Phil. 11.
The Papists dote much upon the monastical life, and count it a state of great
perfection, because in it men spend their whole time in prayer, and heavenly
contemplations. But the Scripture teaches us it is a state of greater
perfection, to live in such a calling wherein a man may be most profitable, and
useful to others. David counted it a great affliction, and matter of humbling
to him, Ps. 31.12. that he was (in the time of his banishment) like a broken
vessel that none could make any use of. And certainly the poorest servant,
and drudge that is, may have more comfort in his estate, then the greatest
Gentleman that does nothing but eat, and drink, and play; nay then the greatest
Scholar or Divine in the world, that does no good to others with the
knowledge, and learning that God has given him. 1 Cor. 12.7. The manifestation
of the spirit, is given to every man to profit with all. And that is the reason
why the Apostle prefers prophesying before all other gifts, because it
tends most to the benefit, and profit of others, 1 Cor. 14.4.

Fifthly, Such as are all for themselves, and have no care of the common good.
Cor. 10.24. Let no man seek his own; but every man another wealth. 2. That
the good men have done to others, and the care they have had that way, will
yield more comfort to their conscience, and give them more assurance that they
are now in the state of grace, and shall hereafter come to the state of glory,
then the care they have had, and pains they have taken to gather to
themselves. 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. Charge rich men that they do good, that they be
rich in good works ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in
store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may
lay hold on etrnall life. For the more good we do to others, the liker we are
to our heavenly father as we have heard now. 3. This will get us a good name,
and esteem both while we live, and when we are gone. For this was Iehojada so
honored at his death, 2 Chronicles. 24.16. because he had done good in Israel. And
a good name is more worth then all our wealth. Pro. 22.1. A good name is rather
to be chosen then great riches. 4. This is the best way to assure us of Gods
blessing even in these outward things. Ps. 37.3. Trust in the Lord, and do
good, so shall thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shall be fed.

Lecture XXIIII. on Psalm 51.1, 2. May 2. 1626.
NOw it follows that we proceed unto the second sort of duties that we are to
be exhorted unto, from the consideration of the infiniteness of Gods mercy,
and those are such as we owe unto the Lord himself. There be then two other
duties that from this Doctrine we are to be exhorted unto.

The first of them does most properly respect our selves; 1. Duty.
and I will propound it unto every one of you in the words that Eliphaz in
another case uses unto Job 5.27. Lo this, we have searched it, so it is, hear
thou it, and know it for thy self. Observe this well that you have heard of
the mavelous mercy of God toward poor sinners; it is a most certain truth,
as by diligent searching of the holy Scriptures we have made it evident unto
you; hear thou it (whosoever thou art) and know it for thy self believe it,
and apply it to thine own soul.

Seeing the Lord is abundant in loving kindness, so plenteous in mercy, labor
thou to know that he is so unto thee; that thou may be able to say as David
does twice in one Psalm. Psalm. 59.10.17. He is the God of my mercy. As if he
had said; his mercy is mine, it belongs unto me. Rest nor content till thou
find that his merciful kindness is for thy comfort as David prays, Psalm.
119.76. I speak not of the common mercy of the Lord. I know you can all, even
the most wretched creature of you all say, you have, and do daily taste of
that. Acts 17.28. In him we live, and move, and have our being. Lam. 3.22, 23
It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed; because his compassions
fa^l^ not, they are renewed every morning. And so does every creature the Lord
has made. Psalm. 145.9. The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are
over all his works; and 147.9. He gives to the beast his food; and to the
young ravens that cry. And this common mercy of God is that which most men
content themselves with, that they may live, and live long, and live in health,
and quietness, and pleasure; though this be no other mercy then the bruit
beasts enjoy as well as they. But the mercy that I exhort you to make your
own, to get assurance that it belongs to your selves, is the special mercy
of God, the mercy of David as Solomon speaks. 2 Chronicles. 6.4^. Remember the
mercies of David thy servant. The mercy that David obtained, the mercy that
David beggeth here, Psalm. 51.1. According to the multitude of thy tender
mercies, blot out my transgressions. That mercy that reaches unto the pardon
of thy sins, and salvation of thy soul, that is the mercy that thou should
labor to know it belongs unto thee. Rest not in, nor satisfy thy self with
any other mercy that thou have received, but seek carefully to make this thine
own.

Five notable differences there be, between this mercy of the Lord, and the
other: which may serve for so many motives, to provoke us not to rest in the
Genesis 36.31. Many Kings reigned in the land of Edom, before there reigned any
king over the children of Israel; But these are peculiar to Gods Elect, his
dearly beloved ones. In which respect Christ calls those not ours but others
goods, but these mercies he calls our own, peculiar unto us, Luke 16.12. If
ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who shall give you
that which is your own? And will thou content thy self with these mercies,
rest in them, dote upon them, which Cain, and Judas, and sundry others that
thou art persuaded were abhorred of God, and fry now in hell, had as great a
portion of as thy self? O do not so but cry as Psalm. 106.4. Remember me O Lord
with the favor that thou bear unto thy people; o visit me with thy
Secondly, Those mercies (though God bestow them on his elect also, and we could
not live without them, yet they) are in his account but trifles, and such as
(in comparison of these) he makes no reckoning of; like a little over-measure
that is given you when you have bought any thing, like to the brown paper, and
pack-thrid that the mercers give you for nothing, Mat. 6.33. these things shall
be added to you. But the^e mercies he makes precious account of, these are his
jewels, wherein he sets forth the riches and glory of his mercy, and
bounty. As Ahashuerus the King of the Medes, and Persians showed the riches of
his glorious kingdom, and the honor of his excellent majesty in that feast he
made to his princes, and servants, Est. 1.4. so does God much more set forth
the riches, and glory of his mercy, in bestowing these precious mercies upon
any; For as the Apostle speaks, Romans 14.17. The kingdom of God is not meat,
and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. These
mercies therefore are called Ephesians. 1.7, 8. the riches of his grace, wherein he
has abounded toward us. Therefore when Paul speaks of the mercy of God
toward him in the pardon of his sin, he says, 1 Timothy 1.14. that the grace of
God was exceeding abundant toward him. This is a mavelous mercy of God, that
he should pardon any of us our sins and give us eternal life, such a mercy
as we can never sufficiently admire, and wonder at. Show thy mavelous loving
kindness, o thou that savest by thy right hand, them that put their trust in
th^e, says David, Psalm. 17.7. And Paul 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. God shall be admired in
all them that believe in that day. Thirdly, Those things of this life, 1 Cor.
6.4. But these are everlasting mercies, and will out-last this life, and endure
unto eternity. Psalm. 103.17. The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to
everlasting upon them that fear him. Fourthly, Those mercies are uncertain
even in Tim. 6 17. Trust not in uncertain riches. But these are sure mercies,
not flitting or uncertain, if they be once gotten they can never be lost; and
are therefore called Esa. 55.3. the sure mercies of David. David's mercies, the
mercies he begged here, the mercies he made such reckoning of; the mercies
peculiar to him, and the elect of God, are sure mercies, and can never be lost.
Fifthly, and lastly, Those mercies a man may have and have them in There is a
sore evil which I have seen under the sun (says Solomon, Eccl. 5.13.)
namely, riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt. Luke 18.24. How
hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God? verse. 25. It
is easier for a Camel to go through a needles eye, then for a rich man to
enter into the kingdom of God. But these mercies of David never did any man
receive, but they made him a better man then he was before. No man ever
obtained this mercy to have his sins pardoned, but his heart was changed, and
he became a new man presently. Acts 5.3^. Christ gives repentance unto Israel,
and forgiveness of sins. So Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. I will sprinkle clean water
upon you, and ye shall be clean, a new heart also will I give you, and a new
spirit will I put within you. Labor therefore to make this thine own to get
assurance that these mercies of David do belong to thee; that in the time of
thy need thou may have the benefit, and comfort of these mercies. Else will
this one daily heavy upon thy heart, that there being so much mercy in the
Lord, such a fountain, yea such a sea of mercy, yea thou knowing so much, and
having seen in the ministry of the Gospel this fountain opened unto thee as
the Prophet speaks, Zach. 13.1. yet thou art not washed in it, thou art not
cleansed from thy sins, thou art never the better for it. That there is mercy
enough in the Lord to pardon David's sins, and Manasses sins, and Peter's
sins, and Mary Magdalens sins, yea all manner of sin, and blasphemy, as
our Savior speaks, Mat. 12.31. yet thy sin remains still unpardoned. And
all because thou have despised these riches of the goodness of God, as the
Apostle speaks, Romans 2.4. Thou have esteemed much more of those common
mercies of God, then of these, like the Prodigal who so long as he could get
enough to fill his belly (though it were but hogs-meate) never thought of
returning to his father, and seeking for his favor, Luke 15.16, 17. O this is
it, this despising of the Lords special mercies, is that that will treasure,
and heap up wrath to a man against the day of wrath, as the Apostle speaks,
Romans 2.5.

Object.
Now if any man shall say I would feign know that this mercy of God belongs to
me; but how may I come to be assured of it?

Answ.
To that man I answer there be five things which may be both as signs and notes
whereby thou may know it belongs to thee; and as means also to bring thee
unto this assurance that thou desire.

Jeremy 29.13. Ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me with
all your heart. Psalm 69.32. Your heart shall live that seek God. Other
mercies thou may long for, and sue earnestly for, and never obtain them; but
these spiritual mercies (without which thou can not be saved) thou may be
sure to obtain if thou can thus desire, and seek for them. Luke 11.13. How
much more shall your heavenly father, give the holy spirit to them that ask
him? Psalm. 105.3. Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord. So that if
thou want these the fault is in thy self. Ye have not (says the Apostle Iam
4.2.) because ye ask not.

David seek for mercy here as you may see, verse 3, 4, 5. I acknowledge my
transgression, and my sin is ever before me; Against thee, thee only have I
sinned, and done this evil in thy sight; behold I was shapen in iniquity, and
in sin did my mother conceive me. So does he likewise Psalm. 25.16. Turn thee
unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate, and afflicted. They that
seek to God for mercy must judge themselves unworthy to find mercy, as
Benhadads servants did when they sued to Ahab for mercy they went with ropes on
their heads, and sackcloth about their loins, 1 King. 20.32. The Lord is
plentiful in promising his mercy to such miserable, humble, and dejected
souls, Psalm. 9.12. He forgets not the cry of the humble; and 10.17. Lord
thou have heard the desire of the humble; Therefore is this title given to the
Lord he is called a God that comfort the abject, 2 Cor. 7.6.

Luke 1.50. His mercy is on them that fear him, from generation to generation.

Fourthly, If thou can trust in his mercy, and rely, and rest upon it,
certainly David pray thus, Psalm. 33.22. Let thy mercy o Lord be upon us
according as we do hope in thee; and 147.11. The Lord takes pleasure, in them
that hope in his mercy.

Heb. 9.7. 2. He might not upon pain of death, presume to come before the
mercy-seat to obtain mercy for Gods people, without incense which signified
the intercession of Christ. Levit. 16.13. The cloud of the incense must cover
the mercy-seat, that he die not. 3. He must not come before the mercy-seat
without the blood of the sacrifice (which signified the blood of Christ) Heb.
9.7. Into the second Tabernacle went the High Priest alone not without blood,
which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the people. Levit. 16.14.
He shall take of the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it with his finger
upon the mercy-seat. No hope of comfort at Gods mercy-seat but only through
the merit of Christ's blood; who is therefore called our hope, 1 Timothy 1.1. But
having him for our High Priest we may go boldly to the throne of grace, and
may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need, as the Apostle
speaks, Heb. 4.16. And so much shall serve to be spoken of the first duty
which concerns the Lord himself; Seeing the Lord is so infinite in mercy
labor thou to know that he is so unto thee.

Lecture XXV. On Psalm. 51.1, 2. May 16. 1626.
NOw for the second duty, Duty 2.
which concerns the Lord himself; it is that which the Prophet exhorts us
unto, Psalm. 29.2. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name; that is,
carry your selves toward him accordingly, give him his due. If we know, and
believe indeed that God is so gracious, and merciful (specially if we know,
and believe he is so unto us) how can we choose but love him, and fear to
offend him, and cry shame upon our selves that we are no more willing, and
desirous to serve and please him? Therefore does the Apostle pray for the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.18, 19. that God would make them able to comprehend with
all Saints, what is the length, and breadth, and deapth, and height; and to
know the love of Christ which passes knowledge, that they might be filled with
all the fulness of God; as if he should say. If once you fully knew this love
that God has borne to you in Christ, it would even fill you with all the
fulness of God, that is, with all the sanctifying, and saving grace of God.
Many deceive themselves miserably in this point; and challenge to themselves an
interest in Gods special mercy, without any ground at all. I will therefore
show you five notable effects that the true knowledge of this mavelous mercy
and goodness of the Lord, must needs work upon them that have it. Whereby (as
by certain notes) you may try your selves, whether you do indeed believe and
know, that this special mercy of the Lord does belong unto you.

First, It will make men afraid to offend him. Nothing has that force to work
Psalm. 130.4. There is mercy with thee that thou may be feared: and Hos. 3.5.
They shall fear the Lord, and his goodness in those days. And that is the
right fear of God, which the knowledge of Gods mercy does breed in us.

Secondly, He must needs grieve, and be troubled when he has offended Zach.
12.10. I will pour upon them the spirit of grace (that is, the spirit of
adoption which shall persuade them of my fatherly love toward them, as it is
called Romans 8.15.) and they shall look on him whom they have pierced, and then
they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his only son. And what was it
that made Mary Magdalen weep so abundantly for her sins, Luk 7.38? Our
Savior tells us, verse 47. it was her love that grew from the consideration
of Gods mavelous mercy in pardoning her so many foul sins.

Thirdly, He must needs take delight in the service, and worship of God. As for
me (says David, Psalm. 5.7.) I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy
mercy. That is that, that shall draw me to thy house, and make me love it; and
Ier. 31.12. They shall come, and sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow
together to the goodness of the Lord. So David gives this for the cause, why
he begged so earnestly of God that he might dwell in the house of the Lord all
the days of his life. Psalm. 27.4. to behold the beauty of the Lord; that is,
how amiable, and gracious the Lord is: As if he should say. I can no where
behold, and see that so well as in his house; and that is the thing that makes
me so far in love with the house of God. O if men knew the sweetness, and
infiniteness of Gods mercy they would love his house, and delight more in it
then they do.

Pet. 2.2, 3. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye
may grow thereby, if so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. As if he
had said; else you cannot, and then you cannot choose but do it. So Psalm.
119.64. The earth o Lord is full of thy mercy, teach me thy statutes; and verse
68. Thou art good, and do good, teach me thy statutes. As if he had said; Who
would not seek to know the will of so merciful, of so bountiful a God as
thou art? and what may best please thee?

Thy loving kindness is before mine eyes; and I have walked in thy truth,
says David, Psalm. 26.3. And the Apostle Romans 12.1. I beseech you brethren by
the mercies of God, to present your bodies as a living sacrifice unto God. As
if he should say, if this will not move you to it nothing will. The love of
Christ constrains us (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.14) because we thus judge
that if one dyed for all, then were all dead; and who can do too much for him
that has so dearly loved him? The goodness, and mercifulness, and
bountiful disposition we discern in some men, o what force has it to draw,
and knit our hearts unto them? For a good man some will even dare to die, says
the Apostle, Romans 5.7. And what is the goodness, and mercifullnesse of any
man, if it be compared to the goodness, and mercy of the Lord? Surely not so
much as one drop of water compared to the maine Ocean. And thus have I finished
this use of exhortation, and showed you what the duties are both toward men,
and toward the Lord himself that this Doctrine does most effectually stir
us up unto.

Use 3.
It follows now that we proceed to the third, and last use of this Doctrine
which is for comfort. For this Doctrine serves most effectually for the
comfort 1 of all men how wicked soever they have been if now they desire to
repent: 2 and chiefly of Gods own people that have already repented.

Cain did, Genesis 4.13. My sin is greater then can be pardoned. This was the
maine thing that made those wicked Jews to resolve, that they would walk
after their own devises, and every one do after the imagination of his evil
heart (as the Prophet says, Jeremy 18.12.) because they said there was no
hope. And on the other side, Nothing has that force to encourage a man to
repent, and turn unto God, as if he can be persuaded of this, that (how vile a
sinner soever he has been) yet he may hope to find mercy with him, if he can
seek unto him for it. The Rebel, or Pyrat, that knows there is a
proclamation out against him, will never come in, but if he once hear, and can
believe, that there is a Proclamation of pardon, yea, and of some great
advancement, if he will yield himself, and come in, this, and nothing else
will cause him to come in, and change his course, and become a faithful and
legal subject. This is that which the Apostle teaches, Romans 2.4. The goodness
of the Lord (if it were rightly known and believed, not drives, and draws
as his terrors do, but) leads men willingly unto repentance. Insomuch, that
as Benhadads servants persuaded him by this argument to seek peace, and
reconciliation with Ahab, when he had highly provoked him, 1. King. 20.^1.
Behold, we have heard, that the Kings of the house of Israel are merciful
Kings. So have Gods Prophets and servants, sought to persuade the most heinous
sinners, to seek peace with God, and to turn unto him by this argument,
because he is so merciful a God. Four notable proofs I will give you for
this and no more. First, thus does the Prophet Esaias persuade all sorts of
sinners. Esaias 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon
him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Secondly, thus does
Hezechiah persuade the ten tribes that had deeply revolted, unto repentance, 2
Cor. 30.9. For the Lord your God (says he) is gracious, and merciful, and
will not turn away his face from you, if ye return unto him. Thirdly, thus
also speaks the Lord to Israel, even after their captivity, when their case
seemed most desperate, and irrecoverable. Ierem. 3.12. Go, and proclaim these
words toward the North, and say, return thou backsliding Israel says the Lord
-- for I am merciful says the Lord. And fourthly, thus does the Apostle Peter
persuade with those Jews that had been the betrayers, and murderers of the
Lord of life, when they were even almost in despair, and knew not what to do,
Acts 2.38, ^9. Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus
Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy
Ghost, for the promise is to you, and to your children, and to them that are
afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. So that I may boldly
say to him amongst you all, that has been the most notorious sinner, if God
have now given thee a heart desirous to forsake thy sins, and to turn unto
him, be not discouraged, thou needst not doubt of finding mercy with him, if
thou can seek unto him.

Two maine objections there be, whereby some kind of men are kept from turning
unto God, and seeking to him for mercy, specially at such times as they stand
most in need of mercy.

First. Object. 1
Though God be merciful, yet he is also just, yea, a most severe, and terrible
judge to take vengeance on such wicked men as I have bin, Exodus 34.7. He will by
no means clear the guilty, and Psalm. 5.5. He hates and abhors all the
workers of iniquity.

I answer. Answ.
This is not meant of such as feel their sins, and desire to repent, as thou
do; but of such as love their sins, Psalm. 11.5. The wicked, and him that
loves violence; does his soul hate. Of such as go on in their sins, Psalm.
68.21. God will wound the head of his enemies. Who are these? He answers in
the next words, which are an exegesis, or interpretation of the former, such as
go on in their trespasses. To such do all the curses of the law, all those
sentences of the holy Scripture, that set forth the severity of God, belong;
not to such as feel their sins to be a burden to them, and desire to turn
unto God, 1. Tim. 1.9, 10. Know this, that the Law is made, (the curses of the
Law are written, and appointed) for the lawless, and disobedient, for the
ungodly, and for sinners, for the unholy and profane, etc.

Object. 2
The second objection is this; Though God be infinite in mercy; and his common
mercies be over all his works, yet his special mercy belongs to none but to
his elect, and they are but a few; Mat. 20.16. Many are called, but few are
chosen. The greatest part of men are vessels of wrath, as the Apostle speaks,
Romans 9.22. predestined, and ordained unto damnation, Jude 4. And I have so
lived as I see cause to fear, I am of that number, at least I cannot be sure
that I shall find mercy with God, though I should turn unto him.

Answ.
I answer. That though 1. the Lord did indeed in his eternal counsel
predestinate some unto life, and some unto perdition, 2. and that the number of
the Elect be small in comparison of the reprobate; yet has no poor sinner
that desires to turn to God, any just cause given him to be discouraged from
it by this Doctrine. This I will prove to you by three reasons.

These. 1.4, 5. and by his spirit also, Romans 8.16. The spirit it self bears
witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God. 1. John 5.10. He
that believes in the Son of God, has the witness in himself. But Gods
spirit never testified unto any man that he is a reprobate. So that to every
man that is so conceited, we may say as Paul in another case does, Galat. 5.8.
This persuasion comes not of him that calls you. It comes not of God. And
as our Savior says, Matthew. 5.37. Whatsoever is more then this, comes of the
evil one. Besides, 2. God has hertofore, and may still call most wicked men
at the very last hour of their lives, and so declare them to be his elect, who
of all men in the world were most unlikely to be of his Elect; as we see in
the example of the thief, Luke 23.40.

God has not appointed them to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord
Jesus Christ, as the Apostle speaks, 1 These. 5.9. For those whom God has
made vessels of wrath; are fitted unto destruction; as the Apostle says, Romans
9.22. They go on still in the way that leads unto destruction, and are
hardened in their sins. Though the greatest part of men shall not find mercy
with God, yet the cause of this is not in the Lord, it is in themselves only,
because they seek it not, Hos. 13.9. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self.
God shows himself ready enough to receive even such unto mercy, but they
care not for it. So speaks Christ even of Jerusalem, though she had killed
and stoned his Prophets. Matthew. 23.37. How often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as a Hen gathers her chickens under her wings* and
ye would not. That sinner therefore that finds God has wrought in him a
desire to get under Gods wings, a desire to repent, and to turn unto God, is
in the way that leads unto life, God is preparing, and fitting him for glory,
and therefore he has just cause to judge, that he is no reprobate, but a
vessel of mercy, Romans 9.23.

Deuteronomy. 29.29. The secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but those things
that are reveiled, belong to us, and to our children for ever. We may not in
this case, pry curiously, nor enquire into the secret counsel of God, but
reverently admire it; and cry with the Apostle, Rom, 11.33. o altitudo, o the
depth. Remember what befell the men of Bethshemesh. 1. Sam. 6.19. God smote
above fifty thousand of them for looking into the Ark of God. Look thou, and
enquire thou into the reveiled will of God, and there thou shall find enough to
encourage thee to turn unto him, and to assure thee that thou need not
doubt to find mercy, and grace with him, if thou can now seek it.

First, God has reveiled in his Word, that he does not desire nor take
pleasure Peter 3.20. with Gene. 6.3. He gave Pharaoh, and the Egyptians
warning of the plagues they enforced him to bring upon them, that by their
repentance they might prevent them. And in giving them warning of the fiery
hail, he expressly says, he did it to that end that they might save their
servants, and their cattle from that destruction. Exodus 9.19. Send therefore
now, and gather thy cattle, and all that thou have in the field, etc. When his
people had so deeply provoked him, to bring them into miserable captivity, and
he had assured them by his Prophets, that he would do it; yet how often was his
heart turned within him, and his repentings kindled together? as the Prophet
speaks, Hosea 11.8. How often, and how earnestly does he warn them of it? How
many means does he use to persuade them, that by their repentance they would
prevent it; See for proof of this, Jeremy 26.2, 3. And 36.2, 3, 6, 7. And if
he take no pleasure in the destruction of the bodies of wicked men, is it
possible he should delight in the destruction, and damnation of their souls?
No, no, hearken how deeply he protests against this, Ezekiel. 33.11. Say
unto them, as I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked. Yea, he protests this so deeply, even for this very purpose, that
he might encourage every poor sinner to turn unto him. I have no pleasure in
the death of him that dies says the Lord God, Ezekiel 18.32; wherefore turn
your selves* and live ye.

Secondly, God has reveiled in his Word, that he does earnestly desire the
repentance and salvation of the most wicked man, and takes great pleasure
Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live says the Lord, I have no pleasure in his death, but
that he turn from his way, and live; turn ye, turn ye from your evil
ways, for why will ye dye o house of Israel. And this thou had heretofore,
and have this day experience of in thy self. How earnestly, and how mightily
has God labored with thee this way? Yea, he beseeches thee, and prays thee
to be reconciled to him. 2. Cor. 5.20. Yea, there is nothing would so much
delight him, as to see thee repent; as is set forth in the father of the
prodigal, o what mirth and joy made he when he returned to him? Luke 15.23, 24.

Thirdly, God has reveiled in his Word, that Christ with all his merits,
should be in the ministry of the Gospel offered unto all that feel
themselves Number. 21.9.) unto thee as well as unto any other is he offered, and
thou art commanded to believe he dyed for thee. Mar. 16.15. Preach the Gospel
to every creature. And what is it to preach the Gospel to him? Surely, to say
to him as Lu. 2.11. Unto you is borne this day, in the city of David, a Savior
which is Christ the Lord. So Christ inviteth all. Ioh. 7.37. Jesus cried
saying, if any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. And of his
invitation of sinners in this sort, the Lord says, Esa. 45.19. I said not in
vain seek ye me, I the Lord speak righteousness. If a poor sinner being
thus invited, should come to Christ for grace, would he reject him? No, in no
wise. Ioh. 6.37. All that the father gives me, shall come unto me, and him
that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out.

Ps. 41.11. By this I know that thou favourest me, because mine enemy does not
triumph over me; that he feeds and cloatheth thee, Deuteronomy. 10.18. He loves the
stranger in giving him food and raiment; that thou sleep so safely, and
quietly on nights, Object.
Psalm. 127.2. He gives his beloved sleep. Thou will say, these are but common
mercies.

Answ.
I answer. True, yet concerning them, observe four things. 1. That to the
faithful, these are pledges of his special love, as these places have proved.
2. That they are arguments of his goodness, even toward all men that enjoy
them. For so says the Apostle, Romans 2.4. And if any man should have done this
for thee, saved thy life but once, when thou were in danger to have lost it,
delivered thee out of debt, and danger, maintained thee with food, and raiment
all thy life, thou would not doubt but he loved thee unfainedly. Thou
would count it a foul sin to suspect or doubt of his love, or to entertain
such a thought, o but for all that he has done this for me, I doubt I have not
his heart, I doubt he has purposed in himself to be my destroyer in the end.
And is it nothing for thee to suspect this of God? 3. Though these be but
common mercies, yet it is a great sin to despise or set light by them. Romans
2.4. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and long
suffering? 4. Thou depisest them if thou be not by them led, and encouraged to
repent, and turn unto God Romans ^.4.

Lecture XXVI. on Psalm 51.1, ^. May 23. 1626.
David complains he was in, Psalm 88.15. While I suffer thy terrors, I am
distracted. Yea, 2. many of them continue a long time in this case as David
complains, Psalm 38.6. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning
all the day long, and Heman, Psalm. 88.15. I am afflicted and ready to dye, from
my youth up, while I suffer thy terrors. And upon this ground grows all this
trouble of mind, and terror, that they are subject unto, that they cannot be
persuaded that they are in the favor of God, and that his special mercy, and
loving kindness belongs unto them. This Heman expresses to have been the
cause of all his trouble. Psalm 88.14. Lord, why castest thou off my soul,
why hidest thou thy face from me. Now before I speak any thing to the comfort
of these poor souls, I think it necessary to give you some reasons, why I
insist upon this use. For I know well, that many of you will think this a
needless labor, and be little or not at all affected with this Sermon. Pro.
27.7. The full soul loatheth the honey comb. 1. I know well, the most of you
stand in no need of comfort, you have much more need of humbling then of
comfort a great deal. The secure sinner that never felt yet, what it was to
be troubled in mind for sin, has more need to hear of the terrors of the
Law, then of the comforts of the Gospel. The Law was made (says the Apostle,
1. Tim. 1.9. that is appointed and ordained of God) for the lawless, and
disobedient, for the ungodly, and for sinners. These comforts that I am to
speak of, are the childrens bread, and it is not meet to take the childrens
bread, and to cast it to dogs, as our Savior speaks, Matthew 15.26. I know
well, that such kind of men will be likely to take hurt, by this that I shall
teach, by turning the Grace of God, into lasciviousness, as many did in the
Apostles days, Jude 4. To such, Christ, and the Doctrine of Gods mercy is a
stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, as Peter speaks. 1. Peter 2.8. 2.
I know Matthew 9.12. the whole have no need of a Physician, but they that are
sick. And you have just cause to desire rather that Doctrine, that may search,
and pierce, and wound your hearts, then that that should comfort them, and to
pray with David, Psalm 141.5. Let the righteous smite me, that is, let him
reproove me, that shall be a benefit, and a kindness unto me. The fat, and
the strong (among Gods sheep, and such are the most of you) should be fed with
judgment, as the Lord speaks, Ezekiel. 34.16. 3. I His Candle shines upon your
head, as Job speaks, 29.3. You know the joyful scund (and can take comfort
in his word and promises) you walk in the light of Gods countenance, and of
you I may say, as Ethan does, Psalm. 89.15. Blessed is the people that know the
joyful sound; they shall walk O Lord in the light of thy countenance. But
though I know all this concerning three sorts of you, that hear me now, yet
dare I not pass over this use of comfort.

First. Because I am sure that some of you that hear me now, have present Romans
8. when he had spoken of the dangerous state of the natural man, ver. 8 They
that are in the flesh cannot please God; he adds verse 9. But ye are not in
the flesh, but in the spirit. And writing to the Church of Corinth (which was a
congregation very loose, and disordered) very sharply; and namely; 1 Cor. 6.9,
10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God; be
not deceived, neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor wantons, nor thieves, nor
drunkards, nor revilers, shall inherit the kingdom of God. He adds by way
of prevention (because he knew that even in that congregation, there could not
choose but be some humbled sinners) verse 11. And such were some of you, but
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, etc. Sundry
other such places I could allege for this purpose.

Secondly, there is none of you that hear me this day, but though you be for
the you must look to drink of the cup of inward trouble, and affliction of
mind which the rest of your brethren, and sisters have begun to you in, sooner
or later in one measure or other (it may be ye shall not pledge them in the
same glass that Job or David began to you in, the Lord it may be out of
respect to your weakness will call for a lesser glass for you, but) pledge
them you must, and pledge them in the same wine in one measure or other, ye
know not what your measure will be; and you must not choose your glass your
selves, the cup is in the Lords hand, and he mixeth it, and he powers it out,
as Asaph speaks (for I have not taken this comparison, and allegory from the
wretched fashion of your drunkards in drinking of healths, but from the sacred
Word of God) Psalm. 75.8. Certainly we must look for an evil day as the
Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 6.13. And we have no reason to think or hope we may
avoid it, if we consider 1. That this has been the case not of some, or of a
few good men, but of the whole Church the mother of us all, who is in that
short book of the Canticles reported twice to have been in that case, Cant.
3.1. and 5.6, Her welbeloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone. 2. That our
blessed Savior had experience of this tentation, and affliction, that in his
own sense for the present his father had forsaken him, Mat. 27 40. and we are
all predestined to be conformed unto his image in affliction, Romans 8.29. 3.
We all have the same adversary that other of Gods people have had that will
buckle, and wrestle with us one day. This reason the Apostle gives the
Ephesians why they must look for an evil day, Ephesians. 6.12. For we wrestle not
against flesh, and blood, but against principalities, against powers, etc. And
if ever he assault us, these are the tentations he is most likely to assault
us by; and if thou be free from them thou art not of God, thou art an
hypocrite, thou have no part in Christ, Gods mercy belongs not unto thee. For
these are his chief, his fiery darts, as the Apostle calls them, Ephesians.
6.16. 4. That we all give the Lord as just cause daily by our carnal security,
and neglect of our watch to humble, and afflict us, as ever any other of his
people have done. Insomuch as I may say to every one of you as the Prophet Oded
did to the Israelites, 2 Chronicles. 28.10. Are there not with you, even with you,
sinners against the Lord our God? And this is a chief scourge that the Lord
uses to afflict his people for their security by, even by withdrawing, and
hiding himself from them. As Christ served his Church when she grew lazy, and
was loath to rise and put on her clothes, and defile her feet to open unto him,
he withdrew himself, and went away, Cant. 5.3, 6. So that you that have the
most cheerful, and comfortable hearts have cause to hearken to this that I
shall say for the comfort of Gods afflicted servants, because your selves may
have use of it hereafter. We have the wit now in summer to provide for winter;
and often to train our soldiers and to try their armor aforehand; let us
learn to be wise for our souls, and to get our armor in a readiness against
the day of conflict, we are like to have with Satan. In which respect I may use
to you the words of the Prophet, Esa. 42.23. Who among you will give ear to
this? who will hearken, and hear for the time to come?



Elisha, 2 King. 4.27. who had tender respect to the Shunamite when her soul
was vexed within her. Yea of Christ, who is (...) the chief shepherd, and
pastor who professes this to be his chief care. Ezekiel. 34.16. I will bind up
that which was broken, and will strengthen that that was sick. And that this
was the chief work God appointed him to when he sent him to preach, Esa.
61.1, 2. He has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, and to comfort all that
mourn in Zion; And gave an experiment of this in Peter, and Mary whom (because
they were afflicted in conscience) he showed more care of after his
resurrection then of all the rest of the Disciples, Mar 16 9. 1 Cor. 15.5. Ioh.
21.15.

Secondly, the charge and commandment of Christ which he has given all Esa.
40.1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God; speak ye
comfortably to Jerusalem. And in that charge to Peter, Ioh. 21.15. Feed my
lambs.

Thirdly, as these poor souls have need to be comforted, and have this evil
their soul^ usually refuses comfort when they are in this case as David
speaks, Psalm 77.2. So the ministry of the Word (being ordained to this very
end, 1 Cor.: 4.3.) has more force, and God shows his power more in it this
way then in any private means; According to that Esa 57.19. I create the fruit
of the lips, peace peace, to him that is far off, and to him that is near
says the Lord, and I will heal him. Now therefore hearken unto me so many of
you as fear the Lord, and yet are much subject to trouble of mind, and
heaviness of heart; and (to use the words of the Evangelicall Prophet, Esa.
51.1.) heark^n unto me, ye that follow a^^^r righteousness ye that seek the
Lord. Stir up your hearts, to admit of the word of consolation.

Four things I have to say to you for your comfort.

First. It is the will of God that such as you are should be cheerful, and
comfortable Psalm. 32.11. Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous, (so I
would will thou say if I were so, but mark what follows) and shout for joy
all ye that are upright in heart. Yea Psalm 105.3. Let the heart of them
rejoice, that seek the Lord. Yea Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always; and
again I say rejoice. To omit many other places as Psalm
2.11.33.1.48.11.68.4.97.12.149.2.5. Matthew. 5.12. Luke 10.20. Romans 12.13. Phil.
3.1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.26. By all which you may perceive this, that God greatly
delights to see you cheerful, and comfortable.

Secondly, I must entreat you to consider the mischief that comes by Numb
1^.32. It was a land that devoured the inhabitants of it; alienated the hearts
of the people from it, and made them murmur against Moses, and Aaron, Numb.
14.2. It is said Acts 9.31. that while the faithful walked in the fear of the
Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, they multiplied. That is the way to
add to the Church, and gain others to it when Christians walk cheerfully,
and comfortably; and so the contrary is a stumbling block to keep men from
it. 2. By yielding to this heaviness you give advantage to Satan, and make
your selves less able to resist his tentations. Neh. 8.10. Be not so
sorrowful, for the joy of the Lord is your strength. 3. By yielding to this
heaviness, and fear ye make the duties, and services ye do to God less
acceptable unto him. For as God loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.7. so does
he a cheerful worshipper. Psalm 100.2. Serve the Lord with gladness. The
Lord would have us call the Sabbath a delight, Esa. 58.13. And threatens
captivity even for this, Deuteronomy. 28.47. Because they served him not with
joyfullnesse and with gladness of heart.

Psalm. 128.1. Blessed is every one that fears the Lord. 1. You are the people
to whom the kingdom of heaven does belong, Mat. 5.3. Blessed are the poor in
spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. And all things that befall you
shall certainly tend to the fitting of you for it, and therefore you have just
cause of joy. Fear not, little flock (says our Savior, Luke 12.3^.) it is
your fathers good pleasure, to give you the kingdom. Romans 8.28. All things
work together for good, to them that fear God. Romans 5.2. We rejoice in hope
of the glory of God. Yea we glory in tribulation also, verse 3..2. You are the
people whose sins are forgiven, and for whom Christ has fully satisfied the
justice of his father, so as though you may be chastised sharply for them,
punished you shall never be. In that day there shall be a fountain opened to
the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin, and for
uncleanness, Zach. 13.1. In what day? See that Zach. 12.10. when God shall
pour upon them the spirit of grace, and supplications so as they should look
upon him whom they had pierced, and mourn for him. And therefore thou have
just cause of joy. Esa. 40.2. Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem and cry unto
her that her warfare is accomplished (the battle is fought, and victory
obtained against all her enemies) that her iniquity is pardoned, for she has
received of the Lords hand double for all her sins. 3. You are the people
that (how ever men esteem you, or you think of your selves) are precious in
Gods sight, and of high account with him above all the princes in the world.
Psalm. 147.11. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him. He has
appointed the glorious Angels to be your servants. Mat. 18.10. Take heed you
despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, that in heaven their
Angels do always behold the face of my father. You are more gracious with him,
and may prevail more with him in prayer, and a wise Christian had rather to
have one of you to pray for him, then all the learned, and eloquent men in the
world. Psalm. 145.19. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him; and
10.17. Lord thou have heard the desire of the humble. Your prayers, and
services (how poor and unperfit soever they seem to your selves) he will take
in good part. Mal. 3.17. I will spare them as a man spares his own son that
serves him. He will not be rigorous to observe what is amiss in your
services. Mic. 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? And in this
respect you have just cause to be comfortable. Romans 8.31. If God be for us who
can be against us; at least to hurt us? 4. You are the people whom Christ (as I
told you before) has more care of, then of all the world, nay then of all his
Church besides, whom he graciously and earnestly inviteth to come unto him, and
promises ease unto Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy
laden, and I will give you rest. And therefore you have cause to rejoice; And I
may say to you as they did to Bartimeus, Mar. 10.49. Be of good comfort, arise,
he calls thee. 5. And lastly, you are the people that have special interest
in all Gods mercies. If there be any goodness any mercy in the Lord (as you
have heard from this Text there is an infinite multitude of them) they are all
yours. Luke 1.50 His mercy is on them that fear him, from generation to
generation.

You therefore that fear God know 1 that you ought to be comfortable, that it
is your sin that you are not, learn to check your selves for it, and say as
Psalm. 42.11. Why art thou cast down o my soul? and why art thou disquieted
within me? 2* Pray to God that he would make thee cheerful, as David does,
Ps. 51.8. Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones that thou have
broken may rejoice; and 86.4. Rejoice the soul of thy servant For he, and he
only is able to comfort them that are cast down. Esa. 51.12. I even I am he
that comfort you.

Lecture XXVII. On Psalm 51.1, 2. May 30. 1626.
THe fourth, and last thing that I am to say to these poor servants of God

The first, Object. 1.
and chief objection, they make against themselves, is this. Alas I cannot be
assured of the favor of God, or that I have any part in Christ, or in his
special mercy, but am rather persuaded God has rejected me, and makes no
other reckoning of me then of an enemy, and a castaway, and how can I then be
comfortable, and cheerful? Now my answer unto this so dangerous an objection
shall consist of two parts. For I will show you 1 how they that are in this
case must stay and comfort themselves while they continue in this tentation,
that they may not faint, and sink under it, and 2 how, and by what means they
may recover themselves out of it, and get the victory over it.

For the first, Answ. 1.
There be five considerations that are of great force to support Gods poor
servants, that are in this case.

First, Thou must consider that thou have no cause to give credit unto this
persuasion. Tim. 1.15. that this is a true saying, and by all means worthy to
be received, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. That (above
all others) such as thou art, that are heavy laden are invited by Christ to
come to him, and promises that he will give them rest, Mat. 11.28. That this
is Gods commandment that we should believe on the name of his son, 1 Ioh.
3.23. That Gods mercy belongs to them that fear him, throughout all
generations, Luke 1.50. And what spirit then must that needs be, that would
persuade thee, that thou have no part in Christ, nor in the mercy of God?
Certainly it must needs be the spirit of Satan who is called our adversary
(...), 1 Pet. 5.8. an enemy, and a slanderer, a liar and the father of lies,
^oh 8 44. And will thou believe him. 2. But thou say thine own heart
persuades thee so. I answer, thy estate is not to be judged of as thou
speak, and think of thy self. For as there is that makes himself rich,
Pro. 13.7. (full of peace, and joy from assurance of his salvation, and of Gods
favor to him) that has nothing (not one jot of true peace, and joy, no favor
at all with God; so) there is that makes himself poor (persuades himself
to be in a most wretched estate) and has great riches is highly in Gods
favor, and has great store of saving grace. It is not therefore safe for a
man to judge of his own estate according to the persuasion he has of
himself, specially for a Christian that is in this tentation, that is in the
case of spiritual desertion, to judge of his estate toward God according to
the persuasion he has of himself. As in time past, there was much infidelity,
malice, covetousness in thee and yet thou did not think so nor could be
induced to believe it; so there may be now much grace in thee, and yet in this
astonishment of thy soul thou can not see it to be so. Thy estate is not to
be judged of, according to that that thou speak and think of thy self
being in this case. For thou art now sick, and sick of such a disease as
deadneth, and distempereth thine understanding, Matthew. 9.12. Have ye not
known many that in burning fevers, and such like diseases have had such
thoughts, and speeches as in their health they would have abhorred? And of such
a one, we are apt to say, alas it is not he but his disease that makes him
speak, and think so; and so should thou say of thy self now, as Asaph did
being in this very case, Psalm. 77.10. I said this is mine infirmity. God
forbid, he should judge of thee as thou do of thy self, in this case. No,
no, he knows thee better then thou know thy self. When my spirit was
overwhelmed within me (says David* Ps. 14^.3) then thou knew my path. 3.
Oh, but thou will say; Is it possible I should be in Gods favor, and in the
estate of grace, and not perceive it my self, feel no comfort in it? I
answer; yes, this is possible enough, David's sin was forgiven (and
conseqvently) he was in the favor of God so soon as ever he repented, and
Nathan in the name of God assures him of so much. 2. Sam. 12.13. The Lord has
put away thy sin, and yet he perceived it not, nor felt the comfort of it of a
good while after, as appears by this Psalm, specially ver. 8. Make me to
hear joy and gladness, and ver. 12. Restore to me the joy of thy salvation. As
our Savior after his resurrection appeared to Mary Magdalen, was with her, and
spoke to her, and yet she sought for him* and wept because she could not find
him, inso much as Christ said to her, Woman, why weepest th^^? He was with
her, and spoke to her, and she knew it not. John 20.14, 15. So to the two
Disciples that went to Emaus, Christ appeared, was with them, and talked with
them, and yet they were sad, and full of heaviness, Luke 24.15, 16. Why? He
drew near to them in a most gracious manner, and went with them, and yet they
knew it not; for so says the text. Their eyes were holden that they should not
know him. And even so it may be with thee. It is one mercy to have our sins
pardoned, to be received into Gods favor, and to have saving grace bestowed
upon us, and another mercy, to have the knowledge of this, to perceive, and
feel we are in this case. The former sundry of Gods servants, have received,
and yet have spent sundry years in Gods service, before they could attain
unto the latter. At that day (says our Savior, meaning after his ascension,
Ioh. ^4.10.) ye shall know, that I am in my father, and you in me, and I in
you. Christ was already in them, and they in him, but they knew it not yet,
they had no feeling nor comfort of it to speak of. A man may be you see in
Gods favor, though he perceive it not himself, we may not judge our own
estate by our feeling. Nay, this is the praise, and commendation of faith in
Gods account when we can believe, and rest upon his word and promise, even when
we have no sense nor feeling of his favor, when he seems to frown upon us,
to hide and turn away his face from us And that which our Savior says of
sight, may be said of all sense and feeling also, Ioh. 20.29. Thomas because
thou have seen, thou have believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and
yet have believed. And this is the first consideration, that may stay and
comfort a poor soul that is in this estate.

Job was in this case, Job 13.24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me
for thine enemy? And Heman was Psalm 88.14. Lord why castest thou off my
soul, and hidest thy face from me? And Asaph was Psalm 77.3. I remembered
God, and was troubled, I meditated, and my spirit was overwhelmed. And David
complains, Psalm. 109.22. His heart was wounded within him, he had a wounded
spirit. And Paul, 2 Cor. 7.5. that he had not only fightings without, but
terrors within. And the Blessed Virgins soul was pierced through, as with a
sword, Luke 2.35. But what speak I of particular members of Gods Church, that
were in this case? The whole Church, the whole mystical body of Christ, is
brought in by Solomon, in his Song of songs, complaining that she was in this
case, Canticles 5.6. Her beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone from
her, she sought him, but could not find him, she called upon him, but he
gave her no answer. Esaias 49.14. Zion said, the Lord has forsaken me, my God
has forgotten me. And Lament. 3.18 the whole Church complains, my hope is
perished from the Lord. Yea, what speak I either of particular members, or of
the whole body of the Church of God? our blessed Savior himself, who never
committed sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, as the Apostle speaks,
1 Pet. 2.22. even he in the days of his flesh, had experience of this
tentation, and was deprived for a time of the sense of Gods favor, when he
cried out in bitterness of his soul, Matthew. 27.46. My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? This second consideration has great force to sustain the
heart of any poor servant of God, that is thus troubled. And so it is spoken
of, 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. Your adversary the devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about,
seeking whom he may devour, whom resist steadfast in the faith, knowing that
the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world.
As if he should say, Let him roar, and show his malice, and rage against any
of you never so much, your case is no worse for this, then other of Gods
servants has bin, and therefore faint not, yield not to him, but resist him
manfully. For from hence thou may thus infer, and reason with thine own
heart. 1. That a man may be dear unto God, and highly in his favor, and yet
be for a time deprived of the sense of it. For so was Job certainly, and David,
and Paul, and the Blessed Virgin, and our blessed Savior. And say therefore to
thine own soul, as Psalm 73.15. If I should judge otherwise, behold, I
should offend against the generation of thy children. 2. That no child of God
should think it strange, if they fall into this affliction, nor hope to be
exempted quite from it, but look, and prepare for it. Beloved (says the
Apostle, 1 Peter 4 12.) think it not strange, concerning the fiery trial, as
though some strange thing had happened unto you. Nay a man should reason thus
with his own soul rather, if I should always remain like these confident
fools, that never had any doubtings, nor fears, which I see all the best of
Gods servants, yea, the whole mystical body of Christ, yea, Christ my Savior
himself were so much subject unto; what should I think of my self? If I
should be without this chastisement always, whereof all are partakers, then
were I a bastard, and no son, as the Apostle speaks, Hebr. 12.8.

The third consideration that may stay us, and keep us from sinking, and being
Esa. 45.7. so in this especially, the Lord has a special hand, it is the
Lords doing. It is he that hides his face from thee, that withholds from
thee the feeling of his favor, and thy spiritual comfort, Ps. 30.7. Thou
did hide thy face, and I was troubled. This consideration is forcible to
quiet the heart that has grace in any affliction, and to keep us from
murmuring, and till we can humbly acknowledge this sovereignty of the Lord, and
stoop unto it, our heart can never find rest in any, specially not in this
inward affliction, till we can say with Ely, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, let
him do what seems him good, Why do thou strive against him? (says Elihu to
Job, 33.13.) for he gives not account of any of his matters. God is not bound
to give thee a reason of his proceeding, why he deals thus with thee, rather
then with such, and such; but thou art bound to submit thy self to his will,
because he can do thee no wrong, and may do with his own what pleases him.
Who has enjoined him his way? (says Elihu, Job 36.23.) or who can say, thou
have wrought iniquity? thou have done wrong. If therefore the Lord should be
pleased all the days of our life, to hide from any of us the light of his
countenance, (though this were indeed a most heavy affliction) nay if he
should indeed (not in our feeling only) cast us away for ever, yet does it
become us to bear it patiently, and not to murmr against him for it, but to
put on David's resolution, and to say as he does, 2 Samuel 15.26. If he do
thus say, I have no delight in thee; behold, here am I, let him do to me as
seems good to him.

Fourthly. Thou must consider that the Lord in hiding his face from thee, good
by this means. He chastises us for our profit, says the Apostle, Heb. 12.10.
And of thy infirmity I may say, as our Savior did of Lazarus his disease, Ioh.
11.4. This sickness is not unto death. But even as thou see the wise, and
careful Physician makes his patient by some vomits, and potions much more
sick, in his own apprehension then he was before, and the surgeon lanceth, and
makes deep wounds, of purpose to cure him of the mortal disease, and sore he
sees him in danger of; So does thy heavenly Physician, and Surgeon deal with
thee, he makes thy heart sick, and wounds thee thus of purpose that he may
save thy soul, and work a perfect cure upon it, and make it more sound, and
healthful then ever it was before.

Sundry are the benefits that God procures to his children by this kind of
affliction; six of them I will show you, which may serve for so many reasons
why he does deal thus with them.

Cant. 3.1. and 5.2, 3.

gives them these thorns in their flesh, these messengers of Satan to buffet
them, that by humbling them thus, he may prevent, and keep them from sin that
he sees them in danger to fall into; and thus did he deal with the Apostle, 2
Cor. 12.7.

As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.5) so
our consolations also abound in Christ. For the Lord our God delights for to
work by contraries. As in the work of creation he caused light to shine out of
darkness as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 4.6. and in the work of redemption
by Christ's death he brought us to life, by his extreme shame, and ignominy he
brings us to glory, by his stripes he heals us, as the Prophet speaks,
Esa. 53.5. and in that miracle that Christ wrought by anointing the blind man's
eyes with clay, he restored him to sight, Ioh. 9.6. So in the work of grace, he
uses to bring his servants by hell to heaven, by doubting to faith, by much
inward anguish and terror to abundance of peace, and consolation in Christ. By
what means did the Lord bring Mr. Bradford, Mr. Glover, and sundry other of
the blessed Martyrs to that strength of faith, and inward comfort, as even
quenched the violence of the fire as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 11.34? (for
though the Apostles words be there happily to be understood literally, yet may
the phrase be fitly applied to this also) surely they were men that had bin
much exercised with inward affliction of mind, as we may read in their story.
And how did the Lord make Jacob so strong in faith, that whereas before he was
afraid of his brother Esau as he complains in his prayer to God, Genesis 32.11.
I fear him lest he will come, and smite me, and the mother with the children;
now he became bold as a lion, and met him without fear, going on to meet him
before the rest, Genesis 33.3. Nay he was so full of confidence, and comfort in
God, that he gloried, and boasted he had seen God face to face, and therefore
called the name of the place Penuel the face of God, Genesis 32.30. Surely before
he came to this comfort, God had wrestled with him as an enemy, Genesis 32.24. and
made him (out of the sense he had of Gods displeasure) to pray, and weep
bitterly he wept, and made supplication to him, says the Prophet, Hos. 12.4.
And few there be that ever came to see God face to face, to behold the light of
his countenance clearly, and manifestly as Jacob did, with whom God has not
been wont to wrestle sometimes as he did with Jacob.

Lecture XXVIII. On Psalm. 51.1, 2. June 13. 1626.
FOurthly, By this means God weaneth his children from the love of this Luke
15.16, 17. If we should always possess that outward peace, those sweet joys
and comforts, which the light of the Lords countenance and sense of his favor
works in our hearts, we should have our heaven upon earth, and be too ready
to say and think as Peter did (when he was ravished with joy in beholding the
light of Christ's countenance shining as the sun) Mat. 17.4. Lord it is good for
us to be here, and to abide here still. These vicissitudes, and changes,
these interruptions of our peace, and spiritual desertions we meet with here,
are a most effectual mean to make us think of home, where we shall be out of
the reach of Satan, and all his tentations, where we shall never weep more nor
be troubled with these terrors, and sorrows that so much disquiet us, where
all tears shall be wiped from our eyes, and there shall be no more sorrow, nor
crying, nor pain as John speaks, Revel. 21.4. These sorrows we meet with
here in this place of our pilgrimage, as David calls it, Psalm. 119.54. this
foreign country where we are many times a long while, before we can hear
from our father, and the letters, and love tokens, he sends us are often
intercepted by one or other, are most effectual means to make us long to be
with our father in whose presence (and no where else) is fulness of joy, and
at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore, as the Prophet speaks,
Psalm. 16.11.

Fifthly, by this means above all others the Lord works his people to a more
Cant. 3.1 -- 4. For thereupon 1. She fought him 1 in her bed by secret prayer,
and meditation; 2 when that would not serve, she went about the city in the
streets, and sought him by the help of the conference, and prayers of Gods
people; 3 when she could not yet find him, she went to the watchmen, and
Ministers of the Church, and sought him by the help of that ordinance of God;
she neglected no means she could possibly use to recover her comfort. That was
the first effect I told you of. 2. When she had found him she held him, and
would not let him go. And certainly by daily experience we find this. 1. That
none so thirst after Christ, none so esteem of the means of grace, none take
such pains for them, none use them so diligently, and constantly. 2. Christ,
and his Gospel is not so sweet to any, none have so tender consciences, so
fearful to offend God in any thing, as those are, that have had experience of
this affliction; according to the old proverb the burnt child will dread the
fire. They that were stung by the fircy serpents (and none but they) made high
account of the brazen serpent, no body needed to persuade them to run to it and
fix their eyes upon it, Number. 21.9. and so it is in this case. And (above all
other men) he that has once tasted how gracious the Lord is, and has felt the
sweetness, and comfort that the assurance of Gods favor yields unto the
soul, let him be deprived of it a while, and he would give the whole world, if
he had it to recover this comfort again. He will be ready to cry as David,
Psalm. 63.1, 2. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee, my soul
thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, to see thee so as I have seen
thee in thy sanctuary. And when God shall have restored to such a soul, but
the least glympse of the light of his countenance, o how he prizeth it? How
sweet is Christ, and his Gospel to him. That which the Apostle speaks Romans
10.15. is the voice of such a one, and of none other. O how beautiful are the
feet of them which preach the Gospel of peace?

Colossians. Col. 2.7. that they may be rooted, and built up in Christ, and
established in the faith. And Peter for those he wrote to, 1 Pet. 5.10. that
God would make them perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle them. And God has no
such way to bring his people to this, as by exercising them sometimes with
these spiritual desertions. They that have laid their foundation upon the
rock, did digg deep first. Luk 6.48. That even as we see the winds, and
storms, and frosts, that trees, and plants are subject unto, make them take
deeper root, and so to be more fruitful in due time; even so it is with the
Lords plants also, none are so steady, and constant in a Christian course, none
so full of the fruits of righteousness, as those that have tasted deepest of
this cup of inward affliction. And this the Prophet gives for a reason, why
the Lord does break the hearts of his people, and make them mourn so, and
gives them the spirit of heaviness, Esa. 61.3. that they might be called
(that is known, and acknowledged even by others apparently, and notoriously)
trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified.
So that that which the Apostle speaks of all affliction, may be most truly
said of this. Heb. 12.11. This chastisement for the present, seems not to be
joyous, but grievous. (less comfort it has in it, then any other affliction,
more bitter, and grievous it is then any other) nevertheless, afterward it
yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness, unto them which are exercised
thereby.

Psalm. 37.24. Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down for the Lord
upholdeth him with his hand. Deuteronomy. 33.27. The eternal God is thy refuge, and
underneath are the everlasting arms. So that I may boldly say to thee that art
in this case, as Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall
sustain thee. Yea, this affliction shall certainly have a comfortable issue,
and end in much joy. Psalm. 126.5. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy,
and Ioh. 16.20. Your sorrow shall be turned into joy.

And thus have I finished the first part of mine answer to the maine objection
that Gods people that are in distress of conscience, are apt to make against
themselves. I have showed you five props, that God in his word has given them
to stay them from being overthrowen by these winds, and storms, and floods,
that beat upon them.

Answ 2.
Now follows the second part of my answer, wherein I must show you how, and by
what means they that are in this case, may recover their comfort, and get the
victory over this tentation. And here I must deliver to you, 1. certain
caveats, and tell you what you must take heed of, and not do, 2. certain
directions, and show you what you must do, if you desire to recover the
comfortable assurance, and feeling of Gods favor, when you have lost it. The
caveats are two.

First, take heed thou seek not to ease, and deliver thy self out of this
distress by unlawful means. And there be three false ways, whereby men are
wont to seek ease in this case, and to put God and their own spiritual
estate out of their mind. 1. By shunning that ministry, that did use to touch
them to the quick, and to pierce their hearts. Thus did Ahab shun Micajah, 1
Kin. 22.8. I hate him, for he does not prophecy good concerning me, but evil.
And Felix Paul, Acts 24.25. Go thy way for this time, and when I have a
convenient season, I will call for thee. 2. By giving over their private duties
of reading and prayer, saying in their hearts, with that desperate Pursevant,
whom Ioram sent to apprehend the Prophet. 2. Kings. 6.33. What should I wait
for the Lord (serve the Lord) any longer? 3. By giving themselves over to
carnal mirth, to drinking, and gaming, and good fellowship, according to the
counsel Saul's Courtiers gave to him. 1 Samuel 16.16. Seek out a cunning
player on a Harp,; and when the evil spirit from God is upon thee, let him
play, and thou shall be well. But take thou heed of seeking ease to thy soul
any of these ways, hate them, abhor them that give thee this counsel, and
say with Job 21.16. Let the counsel of the wicked be far from me; and with
David, Psalm. 119.128. I hate every false way. For 1. they that take this
counsel, make Satan their Physician to cure them, when God has made them
sick, their Surgeon to heal the wounds that God has made in their souls.
And certainly all his medicines, and salves, have deadly poison in them; the
wounds he seems to heal, he makes far more incurable. The wounds that God
makes, none but God can cure. Job. 5.18. He wounds, and his hands make
whole. Gods means which they shun, though they do make them sad for a time,
yet they have in them, the seed, and root of comfort, and will bring the heart
to comfort in the end, if they be constantly, and conscionably used, the
sadness that they cause, makes the heart better, as Solomon speaks,
Ecclesi. 7.3. That ministry that pierces most, is of a healing, and
comforting nature, compared therefore to an excellent oil and balm, Psalm.
141.5. And of Religion, and religious duties, Solomon says, Proverbs 3.17. All
her paths are peace. Where as Satan's means on the contrary, though they seem
to give ease, and joy to the heart for the present, yet indeed they do the
heart no good, they can work no sound cure on a wounded spirit, Ecclesiast.
2.2. I said of mirth, what does it? Nay, it makes the wound in the end, worse
then it found it. Proverbs 14.13. The end of that mirth is heaviness.

2. They that take this course, do seek to hide themselves from God, as Adam
did, Genesis 3.8. 1. And what madness is it for a man to think he can be
able to do so? A child or a servant may run away from his father, or Master,
when they are angry or threaten them, but who can run away, or hide himself
from God? Psalm 139.7. Adam thought to have hidden himself, but he could
not, Genesis 3.9. 2. Admit one could do so, yet is not that the way to recover
his favor, by hiding our selves, or running from him, Draw near to God (says
the Apostle, Iam. 4*^.) and he will draw near to you.

The second caveat I must give you is this, take heed you yield not unto this
James 4.7. Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you. When so foul a
tentation as this is, to be persuaded that God hates thee, and has rejected
thee, and is thine enemy, that thou have no part in Christ, nor in Gods mercy,
is suggested into thy mind, reject it with detestation, as our Savior did the
like, Matthew. 4.10. Get thee hence Satan. But how should I resist it? will thou
say. The Apostle tells thee, 1. Peter. 5.9. Whom resist steadfast in the
faith. Two things thou must do in this case. First, consider what God in his
word has said, concerning such as thou art. Search into the word, acquaint thy
self with Gods promises. Thus did Christ resist Satan, Matthew. 4.4, 7, 10. This
is the sword of the spirit. Ephesi. 6.17. Resolve therefore thus with thy
self, as David does, Psalm. 85.8. I will hearken (not what Satan, or mine own
heart says, but) what the Lord God will say of such as I am. Say to thine
heart as our Savior does to the Lawyer, Luke 10.26. What is written in the
Law? how read thou? It is written, Psalm. 103.17. The mercy of the Lord is
from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him. And such a one thou
can not deny thy self to be. It is written, Prove. 28.13. He that covers
his sins shall not prosper, but who so confesses, and forsakes them, shall
have mercy. It is written, Ps. 105.3. Let the heart of them rejoice that seek
the Lord. It is written, Romans 5.20. Where sin abounded, there grace did much
more abound. There is no comparison between the multitude, and heinousness of
thy sins, and Gods mercy, or Christ's merit. It is written, John 6.37. Him that
comes to me (desires unfainedly to have benefit by me, and to believe in
me) I will in no wise cast out; and such a one thou can not deny thy self to
be. And many other such comfortable promises are written in Gods word.
Acquaint thy self with them, o they may stand thee in great stead one day,
David found this, Psalm. 119.93. I will never forget thy precepts, for with them
thou have quickened me.

David, Psalm. 56 3, 4. When I am afraid, I will trust in thee. Why so? In God
will I praise his word, in God have I put my trust. As if he had said; though
I be full of fears, and consequently void of comfort, and feeling, yet I have
Gods word and promise, and that I will trust to. For we live by our faith, and
not by our feeling; Hab. 2.4. The just shall live by his faith. It is the
nature of faith, to give credit unto, and rest upon the word, though we see,
or feel nothing to rest upon. Hebr. 11.1. Faith is the evidence of things not
seen. So that look what the Apostle says of hope. Romans 8.24. We are saved by
hope, but hope that is seen, is not hope; the same may be said of faith, We
are saved by faith, but faith that is seen, is not faith. Indeed that, and
that only is true faith that is grounded, not upon any outward, or inward
signs of Gods favor, not upon any thing we see or feel, but upon the word
and promise of God only. According to that of David, Psalm. 119.114. Thou art
my hiding place, and my shield, and in thy word do I trust. We must learn to
believe and trust God, upon his bare word and promise, without any of these
pledges, and pawnes of his, that are in our own possession, else we deal no
better with him, then the most wretched usurer that is, will deal with the
veryest beggar, or bankrupt, yea, the falsest, and dishonestest man in the
world, he dares not trust him on his word, nor on his oath, nor on his bond
neither but upon a good pawn, and pledge he dare trust him. And for a most
e^fectuall motive unto this, consider how fearful a sin infidelity is, not to
give credit to the word, and promise of God, to doubt of Gods love and mercy to
thee in Christ. John 16.9. He shall convince the world of sin, because they
believed not on me. No sin in all the world, is so heinous as Moses and Aaron,
that if they would speak to the rock in the sight of the people, it should
give forth water enough to satisfy the whole congregation, and their cattle
too (a most unlikely, and incredible thing) yet because they did but doubt of
this, God would not let them enter into the promised land. Numb. 20.8, 12. God
had promised Zachary, he would give him a son, by his wife Elizabeth (a thing
most unlikely, in regard of the age of them both, and her barrenness) yet
because he doubted of it, the Lord made him dumb, Luke 1.20.

Secondly, Consider the nature of this sin. As by faith we greatly honor Romans
4.19, 20. we sanctify and hallow his name, as the Lord speaks, Number. 20.12.
Ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel. So
by infidelity, we rob God of his glory, and do him the greatest dishonor and
reproach that can be, 1 Ioh. 5.10. He that believes not God, has made him a
liar.

Thirdly. Consider the odiousnes of this sin in the effects of it, which are
three.

First, as faith is that that makes us, and all our services acceptable, and
pleasing By faith (says the Apostle, Heb. 11.4.) Abel offered a more excellent
sacrifice then Cain. And he that would pray, must conceive of God as of his
father. Mat. 6.9. Yea, whatsoever ye do in word or deed (says the Apostle,
Colos. 3.17. if ye would have God to accept of it) do all in the name of the
Lord Jesus (that is, in this persuasion that through Christ God is well pleased
with you) giving thanks to God the father by him. So infidelity makes us, and
all our actions, prayers, preachings, alms, etc. odious unto God. Heb. 11.6.
Without faith it is impossible to please God.

Secondly, As faith purifieth the heart, keeps it in a care to please God, in
a Acts 15.9. So infidelity defiles the heart, makes it less fearful to
offend him, less careful, and willing to do him any service, less to hate
sin, and to love goodness, in a word more apt to decline, and fall from God
any way. This is plain by that caveat that the Apostle gives Heb. 3.12 (which
it were good for Gods people that are in this tentation often to think upon)
take heed brethren lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in
departing from the living God. Mark 1. that it is infidelity that makes the
heart evil, and naught. 2. It is that, that makes us apt to depart, and fall
away from God.

Thirdly and lastly. As faith is the only Antidote, and defensative against all
Satan's shield that will quench all his fiery darts, Ephesians. 6.16. So infidelity
makes us naked, and lays us open unto every tentation. He that wavereth and
doubts (says the Apostle Iam. 1.6.) is like a wave of the Sea, driven of the
winds, and tossed, So that to conclude this second caveat, I must say to every
one of Gods children that is under this tentation, as the Apostle does, Heb.
10.35. Cast not away thy confidence, which has great recompense of reward. And
as the Prophet does, Esa. 50.10. Who is there among you that fears the Lord,
that walks in darkness, and has no light? let him trust in the name of the
Lord, and stay himself upon his God. As if he had said, If thou be of the
number of them that fear to offend God, though thou have no comfort, no
feeling of his favor, no light, nothing but darkness, yet trust in God still for
all that, and because of his word and promise resolve that thou will believe,
and be persuaded of his love, and put thy trust in him, though he do withdraw
the signs, and sense of his favor from thee, and say with Job. 13.15. Though
he stay me, yet I will put my trust in him.

Now if any shall object, Object.
and say. How can we resolve that we will believe, and be persuaded of Gods
love? Is that in our power? Do you not teach we have no freedom of will at
all to that that is good?

I answer, and I speak it confidently upon clear and certain evidence of the
word of God 1. Answ. 1.
That there is no more freedom of will in any natural man to that that is
spiritually good, then there is in a dead man or in a stone to move it self.
In Adam when he was created, we all had it, in Adam when he fell, we all lost
it. But 2. I say, that by the second Adam, we have recovered it again, and he
by his spirit, does work in all the regenerate, a freedom of will, and
ability to move our selves to that that is good; so as they can say, as Paul
does Rom 7.8. To will is present with me. And as David Psalm. 119.115. Depart
from me ye evil doers, for I will keep the commandments of my God. And
certainly there is great force in this to preserve us from any tentation, if
we would thus beforehand set our wills, and (as it were) harden our faces
against it, by resolving with our selves, we will not yield unto it, as David
did. Psalm 119.57. O Lord I have said that I will keep thy words, and stick
to it, and verse 106. I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep
thy righteous judgments.

Lecture XXIX. On Psalm 51.1, 2. June. 20. 1626.
Follows, that we now come to the directions, I promised to give, and to show
you what Gods servants that are in this case of spiritual desertion, are to
do to receive their comfort. And these directions are six principally.

David took this course in a grievous famine. 2. Sam. 21.1. David enquired of
the Lord. What he did enquire, may appear by Gods answer, that is to say, what
the special sin was, that he or his people had committed, that provoked God
to this. It is for Saul (says the Lord) and his bloody house, because he slew
the Gibeonite. But in this kind of affliction of mind, this course is specially
to be taken. This course Saul (before he fell away from that goodness, he
had learned by being brought up in Gods Church) took when he had sought unto
God, and could receive no answer from him. 1. Sam. 14.37, 38. Draw ye near
hither, all ye chief of the people, and know, and see wherein this sin has
bin this day. As if he should say, Certainly, some sin of ours is the cause,
why the Lord refuses to answer us, let us find it out, and remove it. Thus did
Job when he was in this case we now speak of when he had lost the feeling of
Gods favor (for that was doubtless his chief affliction) he beseeches God
to help him to find out the cause of it in himself. Job 10.2. Show me
wherefore thou contendest with me. And 13.23. Make me to know my transgression
and my sin. For 1. though not always, yet usually this is the cause even of
this affliction; either some sin they have fallen into (as in this case of
David) or some secret corruption they nourish in themselves, that choketh their
peace and comfort, and like a thick fog, or filthy vapor, rising up in their
souls, keeps the light of Gods countenance from shining on them; according
to that Esaias 59.2. Your iniquities have separated between you and your God,
and your sins have hid his face from you. Now this, this special sin must be
found out, Lam. 3.40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto
the Lord. 2. This is a sure way to recover our comfort, when we can mourn
more for this, that by sin we have departed from God, then that God has by
this spiritual desertion departed from us, and so by repentance return to him
again, he will certainly return then to us, and restore to us our comfort.
For this is his promise* Mal. 3.7. Return unto me, and I will return unto you
says the Lord of hosts.

Abba Father; of which the Apostle speaks, Romans 8.15, 16. Examine thy self
well, rub thy memory, and call this to mind. This direction the Apostle gives
the faithful Hebrews, when he would persuade them to hold fast their
confidence, and not to cast it away, Hebrews 10.35. Call to remembrance (says
he verse 32.) the former days, in which after ye were illuminated, ye endured
a great sight of affections, and what joy you found in your selves then, verse
34. Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your goods. This course David took in
this very case, Psalm 77.5, 6. I have considered the days of old, the years
of ancient times, I call to remembrance my songs in the night, I commune with
mine own heart, and my spirit made diligent search, and verse 10. And ^ said,
this is mine infirmity, but I will remember the years of the right hand of the
most High. By remembering the years of the right hand of the most High, that
is, of the comforts he had found in the assurance of Gods favor, he came to
perceive, that it was but his infirmity to be thus dejected now. This course
he also took at another time, when he was in this case, Psalm 143.45. My
spirit is overwhelmed within me, my heart within me is desolate, I remember
the days of old. Observe (beloved) and take notice therefore I pray you, of
the working of Gods grace in your selves, of the sweet comforts you find at
any time, in the light of Gods countenance and assurance of his favor, in the
hearing or reading of his Word, in receiving the Sacrament, in your prayers,
and specially in your afflictions. Yea, do as David did. Psalm. 85 8. I will
hearken what the Lord God will speak, for he will (certainly at one time or
other) speak peace to his people and to his Saints. Keep a Register of these
times, because the remembrance of them may stand you in stead, when a change
shall come. For you may write (as we say) and build upon this; if ever thou
were in Gods favor, thou art still, if ever God by the spirit of adoption did
say unto thy soul, I am thy salvation, thy God, thy father, Christ is thy
Savior, his body was broken for thee, his blood was shed for thee, he is so
still.

The spirit of God in the holy Scripture teaches this expressly, John 5.14.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that hears my word, and believes on him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but
is passed from death unto life; And Romans 11.29. The gifts and calling of God,
are without repentance; that is, such gifts, and such a calling, as God
vouchsafed to the fathers. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, (for of those the Apostle
had spoken) the gifts of Election, justification, santification, effectual
calling, God never repented him of. This the Apostle James also teaches, James
1.17.18. that in those gifts of God that are good indeed, and perfect gifts,
perfectly good, (such as he instanceth in the next verse, the gift of
regeneration, to be) there is no variableness, nor shadow of turning in the
Lord. Thus the Lord answers his people that were in this very tentation,
Jeremy 31.3. The Lord has appeared to me of old, say they (so it is to be
read, as in the Geneva; As if they had said, but now he hides himself, and
has forsaken me) Yea, (says the Lord) I have loved thee with an everlasting
love, therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee. As if he should have
said, I would never have drawn, and effectually called thee to be my people,
If I had not loved thee with an everlasting love, If I had meant ever to cast
thee off again. So that 1. this should make us all in love with Grace.
Wisdom is the principal thing (says Solomon, Pro. 4.7.) therefore get
wisdom, and with all thy getting, get understanding. For riches, and honor,
are with her, yea, durable riches, and righteousness. Pro. 8.18. and 2. thou
that have ever felt the work of grace, and comfort of Gods spirit in thy
self, may boldly from thy former experience conclude as David does. Psalm
23.^. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life, and I
shall dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. John 8.35. The servant abides
not in the house for ever, but the son does. Though my love to God be
changeable, yet Gods love to me is not. Esa. 64.5. In those is continuance, and
we shall be saved. Though therefore the comforter have withdrawn himself from
thee for a time, be sure he will return again, and therefore wait for him.
And that which the Prophet says of his vision, may fitly be applied to this
purpose. Hab. 2.3. Though it tarry, wait for it, for it will surely come, it
will not tarry; he means, one moment longer then the appointed time, the
fittest time. Resolve with thy self, as the Prophet does, Esaias 8.17. I will
wait upon the Lord, that hides his face from the house of Jacob (even from his
own chosen people sometimes) and I will look for him. Certainly, of this
sickness of thy soul I may say to thee, as Christ did of Lazarus, John 11.4.
this sickness is not unto death, thou shall surely recover it, thy sorrow
shall be turned into joy, as our Savior has promised. John 16.20.

John 2.17. The anointing which ye h^ve received of him, abides in you, and
3.9. Whosoever is borne of God, does not commit sin (that is, as other men
do, or as himself did before) for his seed remains in him. Examine thy
heart well, and thou shall find evident notes of this. First. Thou art afraid
to do anything that thou know would offend God, and whence comes that?
from flesh and blood? No, no, of every natural man, the Apostle pronounces,
Romans 3.18. There is no fear of God before his eyes. Secondly* Thou love all
that fear God, and this is a certain sign Gods spirit abides in thee. 1
John 3.13, 14. Marve^ not my ^rethren, though the world hate you, we know that
we have passed from death to life, because we love the Brethren. Thirdly,
even in this case, wherein now thou art, thou prayest still, and dare not
neglect that duty, as David did, Psalm 31.22. I said in my have, I am cut off
from before thine eyes, nevertheless, thou heardest the voice of my
supplications, when I cried unto thee. Even then I plied thee with
supplications, and 61.2. From the end of the earth will I cry unto thee, when
my heart is overwhelmed. And whence comes this I pray you? Surely these
prayers of all others, proceed from the spirit, as the Apostle teaches. Romans
8.26. The spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not what we should pray
for as we ought; but the spirit it self makes intercession for us, with
groanings which cannot be uttered. Fourthly, thou love God, though he do
hide his face, and frown on thee, yea, this very sorrow, and anguish thou art
in, is a certain Symptom, and sign of thy love to God, that is the cause,
that is the root of it, thou could not be troubled, as thou art with this,
that thou want the sense of Gods love, if thou did not dearly love him.
Certainly, thou art sick of love, as the Church was, Canticles 2.5. When
Christ withdrew himself a while from her, and she sought him so carefully,
she bewrays, and could not conceal this to be the cause of her grief. Cant
3.1, 2, 3. I ^ought him whom my soul loves. I will go into the city, and
seek him whom my soul loves. I said unto the watchmen, saw ye him whom my
soul loves? And whence came it that Mary wept so, Luke 7.47. She loved much.
And whence comes this I pray thee, that thou so love the Lord? From flesh
and blood? No, no, this can come from nothing, but from Gods spirit and saving
grace; as is plain by that question thrice moved to Peter. Ioh. 21.15 -- 17.
Do thou love me? And by that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.3. If any man love God,
the same is known of him. Fifthly and lastly. Thou do at the least unfainedly
desire to fear God, and to love him, and to call upon him, and to love his
children, and it is a great grief, and trouble to thy heart, that thou can
not do it better. To will, is present with thee, as the Apostle speaks, Romans
7.18. Certainly, this change that is wrought in thy will, these unfeigned
desires of grace, do prove evidently, that the spirit of God dwells in thee,
Phil. 2.13. It is God that works in you, both to will, and to do, of his
good pleasure. And Nehe. 1.11. Nehemiah proves himself to be Gods servant,
even by this note, because he desired to fear Gods name. Now from these five
notes of Gods spirit dwelling in thee, thou may infallibly infer these
conclusions, for the recovering of thy comfort. 1. That thou have faith, and
art thereby united unto Christ. 1 John 3.24. Hereby we know, that he abides
in us, by the spirit which he has given us. And 4.13. Hereby we know that we
dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit. As the
natural spirit is in no member that is not united to the head; so can the
spirit of sanctification be in none, that is not by faith knit unto Christ our
head; as the Apostle applies this comparison, Ephesians. 4.16. And our
Savior, John 15.4. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, unless it
abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me. 2. That thou have
just cause to be comfortable, thou have the root, and ground of sound comfort
in thy self, Psalm 32.11. Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous, and
shout for joy, all ye that are upright in heart. 3. That it is thy great sin,
for which thou have just cause to check, and blame thy self, that thou art
not more thankful, that thou rejoycest no more in thine estate. Is it
think thou (...) blessing, or a common blessing to have Christ, to have Gods
spirit dwelling in thee? to have this blessed change wrought in thy soul? Paul
gives thanks for this, Romans 6.17. God be thanked, that ye were the
servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart, that form of Doctrine,
that was delivered unto you. And 1 Thessal. 3.9. What thanks can we render to
God again for you, for all the joy wherewith we rejoice for your sakes before
our God. Yea, he professes. 2. Thessalon. 1.3. that he was bound to give
thanks to God always for them. And were not they (think you) much more bound
to be thankful to God themselves, and to rejoice in their estate? Certainly,
Christians offend God much in this, and hinder not only their own comfort,
but their growth in grace too, that they are always poring, and musing upon,
and mourning for their wants, and failings, and never cast an eye upon any
grace God has wrought in them, never joy in it, nor lift up their hearts to
God in thankfulness for it. 4. and lastly. That seeing Gods spirit dwells
in thee, certainly the comfort, and feeling of Gods favor, though it be gone
for a time, will come again. Psalm 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold
the upright; for the end of that man is peace. And Malac. 4 2. Unto you that
fear my name, shall the Sun of righteousness arise, with ^ealing in his
wings. All your darkness, fears, discomforts, shall be dispelled, all the
wounds, and sores of your souls, shall certainly be healed one day. For it
is the title, and most proper effect of the spirit, to be a comforter. Ioh. 14*
5, 16. and an oil of gladness. Heb. 1.9.

Lecture XXX. on Psalm 51.1, 2. June 27. 1626.
THe fourth direction I must give you for the recovering of your comfort, is
this If thou can not by this threefold examination of thy self, find Cant.
3.1 -- 3. When she could not find him whom her soul loved, by her secret
prayers, and meditations, or such like endeavors, she went abroad to seek
him, and came at length to the watchmen that went about the city. In this
direction for the help of your understanding and memory, observe four points.

Elihu speaks in another case, Job 3^.19, 20. My belly is as wine that has
no vent, it is ready to burst like new bottells, I will speak that I may be
refreshed. It is not good for a Christian in this tentation, to keep Satan's
counsel, it is good to bewray and utter it to some, not to wrestle with him
alone hand to hand too long. In this case is that saying of Solomon found most
true. Eccl. 4.9, 10. Two are better then one, for if they fall, the one will
lift up his fellow but woe to him that is alone when he falls; for he has
not another to help him up.

Cor. 2.11. What man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man
which is in him? In this case he may; we have a proverb, that a stander by,
may sometimes see more then a gamster can. Passion of grief and fear will
blind the judgment, and make it unable to do his office. When Naaman was in a
passion, his servants could judge better what was sit for him to do then
himself. 2. Kin. 5.12, 13.

John Careless a poor weaver, did in a letter he sent him, absolve Master
Bradford, who was much subject to affliction of conscience; and pronounced in
the name of Christ that all his sins were forgiven; and Master Bradford
professes he received more comfort by that letter, then he had had in all
the time of his imprisonment before. And no marueil: for this is also Gods
ordinance, that private Christians should yield help one to another, and
receive help one from another in this case. 1 These. 5.14. I exhort you
brethren, comfort the feeble minded; and James 5.16. Confess your faults one
to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. (He speaks to
them that were sick, and in their sickness had trouble of mind for sin) The
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man (be he Minister or private
Christian) avails much.

James 5.14. Is any man sick, (such sick folk he means, as were also
troubled in mind for sin, as appears verse 15.) let him call for the
Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him. For the conscience of him
that is in distress, may more confidently rely upon the testimony, and
sentence which according to the word they give of his estate, then upon the
testimony and sentence of any other man. 1. Because they have their senses
better exercised to discern of good and evil, as the Apostle speaks, Hebr.
5.14. 2. Because of the special authority and commission God has given them
in this case, John 20.23. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto
them. As it was in the case of Leprosy; As Mat. 8.4. The Priest must pronounce
him that had been leprous, to be clean before he could be cleansed, though one
would have though another might have done it well, there being so particular
directions given in the Law. Levit. 11.2, 3.37 49 and 14.2.

Samuel when the people had exceedingly grieved him, by rejecting not his
government so much as the ordinance of God. 1 Samuel 8.6. he betook himself to
prayer. So David. Psalm. 109.4. For my love, they are mine adversaries; but I
give my self unto prayer. So in this inward affliction of mind, (which is
strange) even when they have lost the feeling of Gods favor, and that sweet
peace, and comfort, that they formerly found in God, they have sought comfort
by prayer also. Psalm. 61.2. From the end of the earth will I cry unto th^e
when my heart is overwhelmed. Five notable encouragements Gods poor people may
have, to seek comfort by prayer (as in all other afflictions so) in this
especially.

First, The very opening of their grief unto the Lord will be a great ease
Haman that wretched man, when he was full of heaviness for the honor that
was done to Mordecai, to ease his heart that way: Est. 6.13. He told Zeresh
his wife, and all his friends every thing that had befallen him. In which
respect great Princes have esteemed it a chief part of their happiness, to
have some special bosom friend, whom they might make use of this way. Such a
one was Hushai to David. 2 Samuel 15.37. and Zabud to Solomon, 1 King. 4.5. Now
there is no such friend in the world for this purpose as the Lord is: Trust in
him at all times, (says David, Psalm. 62.8.) ye people power out your hearts
(open your greifes) before him; God is a refuge for us. Thus Anna the mother of
Samuel told Ely that she had done. 1. Sam. 1.15. I am a woman of a sorrowful
spirit, and have powered out my soul before the Lord. Thus did Samuel her son
seek to ease his heart when it was full of heaviness. 1. Sam. 8.21. He
rehearsed all their words in the ears of the Lord; he made his moan to God.
Thus did Job; My friends scorn me, (says he) Job 16.^0 counted him an
hypocrite* Oh heavy affliction for a man in his case to be so judged of, and
censured by such men as they were: but mine eye (says he) powers out tears
unto God; as if he should say, That is all the help I have. Thus did
Hezechiah, when he was in that pain, and anguish of spirit as the poor mother
in travel, whose child is even come to the birth, and she wants strength to
bring it forth; as he complains to the Prophet, Psa. 37.3. He takes
Rabshakehs blasphemous letter and goes up to the house of the Lord, and
spreads it before the Lord ver. 14. As if he had said, Behold Lord what he
has written. O that we would acquaint our selves so with the Lord, that we
might make him our bosom friend, and make this use of him in all our sorrows.

Secondly, The Lord is able, and none but he to yield us help in this case,
He makes sore, (says Eliphaz Job 5.18.) and binds up, he wounds, and his
hands make whole. This is the Lords peculiar prerogative to comfort a soul
that is any distres. He is the father of mercies and God of all comfort as the
Apostle speaks, 2. Cor 1.3. I, even I am he (says the Lord, Esa. 51.12.)
that comfort you. And therefore David when he had lost his feeling, and
comfort, cries often earnestly to God to restore it to him, Psalm. 51.8. Make me
to hear joy and gladness. As if he had said, though never so much be
delivered to me for my comfort, by the skilfullest of all thy servants, I shall
be utterly incapable of it, and remain still deaf of that ear, till thou
make me able to hear it. And verse. 12. Restore to me the joy of thy salvation.
And 86.4. Rejoice the soul of thy servant, for unto thee do I lift up my
soul. And thus should every one of us cry unto God for help and comfort, when
we are in the like case.

Thirdly, The Lord as he is able, and none but he to revive such a soul, so he
is very pitiful, and of tender mercy; as the Apostle speaks, James 5.11.
specially to his servants who are wounded in spirit: yea, he has bound
himself by promise to help such. Psalm. 34.18. The Lord is nigh to them that
are of a broken heart, and saves such as be of a contrite spirit: and 147.3.
He heals the broken in heart; and binds up their wounds: and Esa. 57.19. I
create the fruit of the lips; peace, peace to him that is far off and to him
that is near says the Lord, and I will heal him. So that we may boldly go
to God and seek to him for comfort, and even challenge him upon these promises
that he has made unto us; and say unto him as Psalm. 85.6. Will thou not revi^e
us again: (but let us remain so dead hearted) that thy people may rejoice in
thee?

I will go and return to my place (says the Lord Hos. 5.15.) till they
acknowledge their offense, and seek my face; in their affliction they will
seek me early. And this was the cause why our Savior was so harsh with the
woman of Canaan, and carried himself so strangely toward her a great while,
even to try her faith, and increase her fervencie and importunity in seeking
to him by prayer. Mat. 15.22.28.

Fifthly and lastly, Gods servants that have been in this case have recovered
Probatum est upon it. When David was in that case that he said in his have he
was cast out of Gods sight, Psalm 31.22. Nevertheless (says he) Thou
heardest the voice of my supplications, when I cried unto thee; as if he had
said, By prayer I found comfort: and thereupon he infers verse 23. O love
the Lord all ye his Saints; as if he should say, Who would not love so
gracious a God that is so ready to be found of them that seek him, though it
be in so weak a manner as I did. So Psalm. 77. when he was in that case that he
said verse 3. he remembered God, and was troubled, he complained, and his spirit
was overwhelmed within him; yet even then he found comfort by prayer ver. 1. I
cried unto God with my voice, even unto God with my voice, and he gave ear
unto me.

The sixth and last direction that I am to give to them that being afflicted

Object.
if God be no otherwise good to me, if he love me no otherwise then he loves
them, what comfort can that yield me? O say not so: for the holy Ghost in the
Word has often commended this to us for a help to our faith, and bids us
observe how good the Lord is to all his creatures, and even to wicked men, for
the confirming of our own hearts in the assurance of his love to us. So says
our Savior to his elect disciples. Mat. 6.26. Behold the fowls of the air,
and ver. 18. Consider the lillies of the field. Yea, one chief cause of that
patience and goodness that God shows to all his creatures, and to the vilest
men, is that his own people might have visible and palpable demonstrations of
his special love and goodness toward themselves, 2 Cor. 4.15. all things are
for your sakes. And therefore David thus concludes that 107. Psalm wherein he
had at large discoursed of the goodness of God toward all sorts of men that
are in distress. verse 43. Whosoever is wise, and observes these things even they
shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. And from thence Gods child,
that is in distressed of conscience, may confidently conclude thus. If God be so
good to them, then sure he will be much more good to me, and respect me that
through his mercy have obtained grace to fear him, and to desire to please
him. Thus our Savior teaches his Disciples to reason. Matthew. 6.26.30. Are not
ye much better then they? Shall he not much more cloth you, o ye of little
faith? And 10.31. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value then many
sparrowes. So when David had spoken of the general goodness of the Lord,
extended to all men, Psalm. 145.14 -- 16. The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and
raises up all that be bowed down, the eyes of all wait upon thee, thou
satisfiest the desire of every living thing; He inferreeth from thence verse
18.20. The Lord is nigh to all that cast upon him, he will fulfill the desire
of them that fear him, the Lord preserves all them that love him.

Secondly, consider the goodness of God toward thy self in thy first
conversion, when thou were in thy blood, the Lord said unto thee, live, as he
speaks, Ezekiel. 16.6. When thou had no mind at all to look toward God, but
carriedst thy self toward him as an enemy, he cast a gracious eye upon thee,
and changed thy heart, as he did upon Peter, when he was renouncing, and
forswearing him, Luke 22.61. when thou soughtest not to him at all, nor had
any care of thy salvation, he did seek thee with great earnestness and
patience, as he speaks, Romans 10.21. All the day long have I stretched out my
hands unto a disobedient, and gaine-saying people. Yea, when thou were running
away from God in the broad way that leads unto destruction, he ran after
thee, and cried to thee with great affection and love, as Cant. 6.13. Return,
return, o Shulamite, return, return. And from this consideration, thou
may thus reason with thine own soul; did the Lord so love me, when there
was no goodness in me, and shall I think he hates me now, that by his grace
he has wrought some desires in me to fear him, and to make conscience of my
ways? That cannot be; for certainly the righteous Lord loves
righteousness, Psalm 11.7. Did the Lord so seek after me, when I ran as fast
as I could from him, and was he found of me when I sought him not, as he
speaks Esa. 65.1. and will he now reject me, and not be found of me when he
has given me a heart to seek him? That cannot be, For, for that I had promise,
but for this I have, 2. Chron. 15.2. If ye seek him, he will be found of you.

Thirdly and lastly. Observe, and mark well the testimonies of Gods special
in his wrath he remembers mercy toward thee. For how falls it out, that thou
art not overcome of this so dangerous a tentation? thou still seek to God,
and art afraid to offend him? thou have bin often brought to the very brinke of
desperation, yet thou art not fallen into the gulf? Thou art perplexed, but
not in despair, cast down, but not destroyed; as the Apostle speaks, 2. Corinthians. 4.8, 9. Thou have been as the bush that Moses saw. Exodus 3.2, 3. that
burned with fire, and yet was not consumed. What has kept thee from falling
into that gulf, from being overcome of Satan, from sinking utterly under this
intolerable burden of a wounded spirit? Certainly, certainly, thou art kept
by the power of God, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Peter 1.5. the Lord does uphold
thee. This is that, that David says, speaking of such a one as thou art,
Psalm 37.24. Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord
upholdeth him with his hand. And as Moses speaks, Deuteronomy. 3^.27. The
everlasting arms have been under thee. Certainly God never showed more love
to thee in all thy life, then thee does now. He lets thee see, and feel
thine own weakness, and readiness to sin, that thou might have the
better proof of his mavelous power, and love in upholding thee. Thus dealt
he with blessed Paul, 2 Corinthians. 12.9. My grace is sufficient for thee, for my
strength is made perfect in weakness. As we see sometimes a tender father,
that perceiving his child loves to be too near the fire, or water, will make
as though he would fling him in, but then takes he fast hold on him, least
he should fall in indeed; even so deals the Lord often with his dearest
children, he never holds them faster, then when he seems even ready to
cast them into hell, and into the gulf of desperation. So as (to conclude) if
thou could observe the Lords dealing with thee now thou would find cause
to cry unto him with David, Psalm 73.22, 23. O how foolish have I bin, and
ignorant (to doubt so of thy love, to hearken so much unto Satan) I have been
as a beast before thee, nevertheless (though I am apt to think thou have
quite forsaken me, yet I find) I am continually with thee, thou have holden me
by my right hand.

LECTVRES ON PSALM. LI.3.
Lecture XXXI. on Psalm LI.3. July XI. MDCXXVI.
For I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me.
WE have already heard, that in the first part of David's prayer in this
Psalm, which is for the pardon of his sins, two principal things were to be
observed. 1. The manner of expressing this his suit and request. 2. The
arguments whereby he does confirm his faith, and upon which he does ground
his hope to speed well, and obtain this his suit at the hands of God. And the
first of these grounds, and arguments we have heard, was the knowledge he had
of the Lords mercy and goodness, in the two former verses. It follows now,
that we proceed unto the second, and that is the grace that God had wrought in
him, that he was able to confess, and acknowledge his sin, and this is set
down. 1. more generally in this verse that I have now read, and 2. more fully,
and particularly in those three that follow. Now in this verse, wherein he does
it more generally, three things are to be observed. 1. That David does
acknowledge, yea, he professes that he does acknowledge, confess, and lay
open his transgression, yea his transgressions, he desired not out of favor to
them, to hide or conceal any of his sins. 2. What it was that moved him unto
it, His sin was ever before him, he could not forget it, he could not but
think of it, he could not be quiet for it. 3. The inference or conclusion he
gathers from hence, employed in this word, For, which coupleth this verse with
those that went before, have mercy upon me, blot out my transgressions, wash me
thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin, for I acknowledge my
transgressions. As if he had said, therefore have mercy upon me, or rather
therefore I am emboldned to crave mercy and pardon, therefore I am persuaded
thou will have mercy upon me, and blot out my transgressions, because I
acknowledge my transgressions.

Now then the first thing we are to observe here, Nota.
is this, that David seeking to God for mercy and pardon, confesses freely his
sin, amplifieth, and aggravateth it before God, and men, yea, makes this a
ground of his hope and assurance in prayer for pardon, and mercy that he could
so do.

From whence this Doctrine arises for our instruction.

Doct. 12.
That he that truly repents, cannot hide nor cloak his sins, but will be
ready to confess and lay them open; and this willingness, and readiness that
he finds in himself to confess, and discover his sins, will give a man
great hope, and assurance to find mercy with God for the pardon of his sins.

Two branches there be of the Doctrine, which I will distinctly confirm unto
you.

Branch 1
First. The man that truly repents, will be ready to confess, and bewail his
sins. This will appear in three notable examples in the new Testament. The
first is of the Prodigal, who so soon as he came to himself, and God had
wrought a saving change, showed it first of all by this fruit of repentance,
Lu. 15.17.19 he resolved he would go to his father, and say unto him, father,
I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be
called thy son. The second example is, that of the hearers of John Baptist,
who declared the effectual work of Gods grace in their hearts, by John's
ministry, this way, Matthew 3.6. They were baptized of him in Jordan,
confessing their sins; his ministry powerfully discovered their sins unto them
and brought them to repentance, and they feeling the burden of their sins, and
repenting, could not contain themselves, but openly, and publicly, they must
needs discover, and lay open their sins unto him. The manner of it may be
gathered from the resolution they sought, and answer they received. Luke 3.10
14. The people came and cried out, o Sir, we have been unmercifull to the
poor, seeking our selves only without all care of the good of others The
Publicans came and cried, o Sir, we have been worse then so, for we have
been shameful extortioners, and under color of Law, and pretense of right,
we have gotten men's goods, unjustly from them. The soldiers came and cried,
o Sir, we have been worse then all these, for we have by violence without
all color of right, spoiled many. The third and last example, is of those that
were converrted by Paul's ministry at Ephesus, Acts 19.18. where we read that
many that believed, came, and confessed, and showed their deeds. And what kind
of persons were they that did so? It appears verse 19. among others, many
that were very rich men, and very learned men did it, and what were the sins
they confessed? The practice of curious arts; they came in this manner to Paul,
o Sir, we have bin most grievous sinners, we have used to cast figures, to
calculate nativities, to practice judicial Astrology, and Necromancy. etc. And
how did they confess these sins? did they it in Paul's ear secretly? No no,
their sins lay so heavy upon their hearts, that they stood not upon terms of
shame, or credit; they discovered their sins, and burned their books before
all men. Such force there is in the grace of true repentance, to draw men, and
make them willing to confess their sins. So Jonah confessed his sin even to
the mariners. Jonah 1.10.

Branch 2
Now for the second branch of the Doctrine. This willingness, and readiness,
that a man finds in himself to discover, and confess his sins, will give a
man great hope and assurance to find mercy with God, for the pardon of his sins
See the proof of this in five points.

Numb. 5.6, 7. Where God prescribing a course, how sinners should make their
atonement, it is thus written, When a man or a woman shall commit any sin
that men commit, to do a trespass against the Lord, and that person be
guilty, then they shall confess their sin which they have done. This is the
first thing that is to be done, before restitution, or the offering of his
sacrifice, he must confess his sin. So Jeremy 3.12, 13. Return, thou
backsliding Israel says the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon
you, for I am merciful says the Lord. But how must they return and make
themselves capable of Gods mercy? That follows in the next words, Only
acknowledge thine iniquity. As if he should say, no hope else of finding
mercy; yea, do it fully, and freely, confess that thou have transgressed
against the Lord thy God, and have scattered thy ways to the strangers under
every green tree. Yea, this is the course, God would have us to take, when we
are to be suitors to him for mercy in the behalf of others, even to confess
their sins unto God. In which respect, he commands James. 5 16. Confess
your faults one to another, and pray one for another. As if he should say.
None can be able to pray for you so effectually to your comfort, as those that
know your sins well, and so can confess them unto God. The Lord himself
has directed men to take this course, to obtain mercy.

Secondly. The Lord has bound himself by his promise to them that can Levit.
26.40.42. If they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their
fathers, with their own trespass which they have trespassed against me, and
that they have also walked contrary unto me (their own personal sins they must
stand most upon, and bewail in this their confession) then will I remember my
covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with
Abraham, (the manner of expressing this promise of mercy, is very emphaticall)
As if he should say, I will remember how many ways, and how often I have bound
my self to them. Another promise we read of Job 33 27, 28. He looks upon
men, and if any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it
profited me not; he will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his
life shall see the light. Another promise we have. Prove. 28* 13. He that
confesses, and forsakes his sins (confessing goes before forsaking) shall
find mercy. Another promise is in that known place, 1 John 1.9. If we
confess our sins, God is faithful, and just, (see the certainty of this
promise, and how we may build upon it) to forgive us our sins, and cleanse
us from all unrighteousness. See the extent and largeness of this promise, he
will forgive and cleanse such from all unrighteousness.

Thirdly. Gods Prophets and ministers (to whom as I told you the last day, the
Job. 20.23. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted) have bin wont
confidently to assure men of mercy and pardon upon their unfeined confession of
their sins. Thus did Samuel when the people had fully, and particularly
confessed their sins, 1 Samuel 12 19. We have added to all other our sins,
this evil, to ask us a King. presently he comfort them, and gives them
assurance of mercy, verse. 20.22. Fear not (says he) for the Lord will not
forsake his people, for his great names sake; because it has pleased the Lord
to make you his people. So dealt Nathan with David, 2 Samuel. 12.13. David said
unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord (that was the sum and breviate of
his confession, uttered no doubt in that manner as gave Nathan just cause to
judge it was unfeined) and Nathan said unto David, the Lord also has put away
thy sin, thou shall not dye.

The fourth proof is the experience of Gods servants, that by taking this
course Publican when out of shame, and compunction of heart, he had cried, God
be merciful to me a sinner, Luke 18.13, 14. (which was a short indeed but a
most unfeined, and effectual confession of his sin) he went down to his house
justified, he obtained mercy. The like experiment we have of this in the
prodigal son. Luke 15.18 -- 20. who when he did but fully resolve, and purpose
with himself, to go and confess his sin unto his father, before he could do
it, he found mercy, his father prevented him, when he was yet a great way off,
his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and
kissed him. But the most famous experiment of all others, is that of David,
Psalm. 32.3.5. Being in distress of conscience for sin, he professes that till
he took this course, he could find no comfort, but upon the taking of this
course, he found ease presently. And it is a thing very observable, even the
difference that was between Saul and David. The sin of Saul mentioned, 1.
Sam. 15. was nothing so heinous as that of David's, mentioned, 2 Samuel 11. and
12. And yet Saul after he committed it, could never find mercy with God, but
the spirit of the Lord (the common gifts of the spirit) departed from Saul, and
an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him. 1 Samuel 16.14. and he waxed worse
and worse ever after. But David found mercy with God, and grew in grace
exceedingly. And the special difference that is noted by the holy Ghost
between them is this. David, when God had used an effectual means to
discover his sin to him, confessed it freely, and unfainedly, 2 Samuel 12.13.
Saul, though he had as effectual means to discover his sin to him, as David
had, 1 Samuel 15.16 -- 19. yet could not unfeinedly, and freely confess his
sin, but did what he could to hide it, and deny it, and cloak it, and
extenuate it, 1. Sam. 15.20, 21. and though he seemed at length to confess it,
verse 24. yet was that extorted, not free and voluntary; the loss of his
Kingdom and of his honor, and dignity, troubled him more then his sin, as
appears verse 30.

David's example is most observable. He makes this here a ground of his hope
in prayer, Have mercy upon me, blot out my transgressions, for I acknowledge
my transgressions. And 2. Sam. 24.10. David said unto the Lord, I have sinned
greatly, in that I have done; and now I beseech thee o Lord, take away the
iniquity of thy servant, for I have done very foolishly. Yea, Psalm 32.5. He
mentions nothing else that he did to find mercy with God, when he was in
distress, but this only, I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity
have I not hid; I said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord. Did he
not also make petition for pardon? Surely, either expressly, or intentionally
he did; but the chief thing that he did, and that that he greatly relied
his hope upon, was the hearty confession he made of his sins. And this course
Gods servants have taken in seeking to find mercy with God, even for others.
Look whom they have been suitors for, their sins they have been wont to
confess to God. So did Moses in that vehement and extraordinary suite he made
for Israel, Exodus 32.31. Oh this people (says he) have sinned a great sin,
and have made them gods of gold. So did Aaron, when in the solemn feast he
was to make atonement between God and the people, Leviticus 16.21. Aaron shall
confess over their sacrifice, all the iniquities of the children of Israel,
and all their transgressions in all their sins. See how large and full a
confession it must be. So did Nehemiah in his private fast he kept for the
Church, I confess (says he Nehemiah 1.6, 7) the sins of the children of
Israel, which we have sinned against thee, we have dealt very corruptly
against thee, etc. Yea, in their public fasts, wherein they have been most
importunate suitors for others, their prayers have been sometimes almost
wholly spent, in confession of their sins. As we shall see in a private fast
that Daniel kept, Daniel 9. where his prayer consisting of sixteen verses,
fourteen of them were spent in confession of sin. And in the public fast
mentioned Nehemiah 9. where it is not only said verse 2. that the sum and
effect of that whole days work was a confession of their sins, and the
iniquities of their fathers, but the prayer that was used that day; consisting
but of thirty and two verses, (verse 6.37) one and thirty of those verses, you
shall find were spent in the confession, and aggravating of the sins of that
Church, and Nation.

And thus have you heard the Doctrine confirmed to you in both the branches of
it. Now for the grounds, and reasons of it, they are worth the enquiring into;
why have Gods servants been wont thus to confess their sins, and that so
fully, and at large unto God? Yea, why has God required them thus to do it and
delighted in it? Surely the Lord knows all our sins, better then our selves,
and need not have them discovered to him by us. O God (says David, Psalm
69.5.) thou know my foolishness; and my sins are not hid from thee. And 1
^9.2 -- 4. Thou art acquainted with all my ways, there is not a word in my
tongue, but thou know it altogether, thou know my thoughts afar off;
And why have Gods people so openly before men, discovered their own shame,
seeing we are bound to have a care even of our neighbors good name, and not
to publish his faults, Matthew 18.15 Tell him of his fault between thee and
him alone, much more are we bound to have care of our own credit?

I answer. Three reasons principally have moved Gods people to do this.

First. Reason 1.
The fullness and abundance of their hearts. Their hearts have been so full
of the sight, and sense of their sins, that they could not contain
themselves, they must needs give a vent to their heart, by confessing of them.
Out of the abundance of the heart (says our Savior, Matthew. 12.34.) the
mouth speaks. This appears to be one reason why David here bursteth forth
in this confession, his sin was ever before him. And this was one reason
doubtless, why John Baptists hearers, could not hold, but must needs in so
public an assembly burst forth into a confession of their sins. Matt. 3.6.
Affection if it be full, and vehement, cannot be kept close, but it will out;
as we see in the example of Joseph, Genesis 45 1. He could not refrain
himself before all them that stood by, but he must utter his affection to his
brethren.

Secondly. They have done this, and God would have them do it to testify the
sincerity and unfeinednesse of their repentance. Reason 2
For as it is a sign a man loves his sin, and it is sweet to him when he
hides it under his tongue, and spares it, as Zophar speaks, Job 20.12, 13.
So is this a good sign a man hates his sin and is desirous to leave it,
when he is willing to disclose, and confess it freely. The sick man that
will not be content to tell his Physician, what the meat was that he
surfetted of, never means to forsake that meat, and that is the very cause
why he will not discover it. So is it in this case. Men by nature are full of
self-love, and cannot abide to hear any evil of themselves, from their
dearest friends, much more to speak any thing to their own disgrace. And this
hypocrisy, and self-love, is a chief cause of men's unwillingnesse to
confess their sins. So Tremellius and others, render that clause of Jobs
words, Job 31.33. Hiding (out of the love of my self) my sins. So that this
argues, a man has more in him then nature, when he can freely confess his
sins. This is David's meaning, Psalm 32.2 Blessed is the man in whose spirit
there is no guile. As if he should say, While I kept silence, I had a false
heart, my spirit was full of guile, but when I became able, fully to
acknowledge my sin, then was my heart purged from that guile, and hypocrisy
that was in it before. So Job reckons this among the best arguments of his
sincerity, and uprightness of heart, that he could freely confess his sins,
Job. 31.33. He covered not his transgressions as Adam did, hiding his iniquity
in his bosom.

Reason. 3
Thirdly and lastly, They have done this, and God has required them to do it,
that they might give glory unto God. This reason Ioshuah gives to Achan, Josh
7.19. My son, give I pray thee glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make
confession unto him, and tell me now what thou have done, hide it not from me.
1. In confessing our sins to God, we give glory to him. For we acknowledge
the righteousness, and equity, both of his commandments, and threatenings, and
this reason David gives, verse 4. why he does thus confess his sins here.
That thou might be justified when thou speak, and clear when thou
judge. 2. In confessing our sins before men, we give glory to God. For he is
greatly glorified by our profession of repentance, when just occasion serves,
Matthew 5.16. And therefore when Luke had said, Act. 19.17. that the Name of
the Lord Jesus was magnified in Ephesus, he brings this for the proof of it,
verse 18. And many that believed, came and confessed, and showed their deeds.

Lecture XXXII. On Psamel 51.3. July 18. 1626.
IT follows we proceed to the uses that are to the be made of it, which are
principally two, 1. To exhort us to seek for this grace, 2. To direct us how
to try and examine our selves, whether we have yet attained to it or no.

The first use I say, is to exhort us, to seek for this grace that is here
commended to us in the example of David, Use 1.
he when God effectually touched his heart, with true sight and sense of his
sins, did break forth into a free and full confession of it; so shall we be
ready to do, if ever we attain to true repentance, he took this course to
find mercy with God, in the pardon of his sins, and so must we do, if ever
we will hope to obtain mercy, and comfort.

Three sorts of con^ession of sin.
Now in this example of David, we have three sorts of confession of sin
propounded, and commended to us for our imitation. 1. He confessed his sin to
Nathan. 2. Samuel 12, 13. David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the
Lord. 2. He confessed his sin to the congregation, and Church of God, for he
directed this Psalm that contains the discovery and confession of his sin to
the chief Musician, for the use of the Temple, verse 1. and publishes it for
the use of the Church, to the end of the world. 3. He confessed his sin
chiefly, and most fully to the Lord himself, as appears verse 4. and sundry
other verses of this Psalm.

For the first, Why did he confess his sin unto Nathan his own subject, and
servant? Why did he not rather when his sin was effectually discovered unto
him, betake him unto some secret place, and confess and bewail his sins unto
God? I answer. He saw it necessary to do it. 1. To make known, and approve his
repentance unto the Prophet, who was better able to judge of it then himself.
2. That he might receive comfort from the Prophet in the distress, and
anguish of his conscience. And surely every Christian, when he is in David's
case, must (if he be wise) do as David did. Concerning this confession of our
sin in private unto the minister, because, not the Papists only, but some
others among our selves also blame us, and note it as a great defect in our
Churches, that we use it not; I will therefore show you how far forth we
hold it to be lawful, fit, and necessary to be done.

And this order I will observe in speaking of it. 1. I will show you that it is
not so necessary as the Papists, and some others hold it to be. 2. That it is
more necessary then most professors of the Gospel do take it to be.

The former of these will appear in five points.

First. Every man is not bound to confess his secret sin in private unto any
David was at that time, when he went so to Nathan. As a man will not, need not
discover the nakedness, and shame of his body unto another, unless some such
infirmity in those parts, as requires the help of another that is more
skillful then himself, compel him to it.

Secondly. Every man that is in distres of conscience, is not bound to confess
David at another time, when he was in great distress Psalm 32.5. I acknowledged
my sin unto thee -- I said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord,
and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.

Thirdly. The man that is in distress of conscience, and cannot recover
comfort Aaron was to make atonement for the people, he was to confess over
their sacrifice, all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their
transgressions in all their sins, Levit. 16 21. In the confessions that were
made to men, no such exact search, no such full examination of all their sins,
was either enjoined by the Lord, or practiced of his people. When the people in
Samuels time were in great fear and distress, and came to him for comfort,
they confessed their sins to him, but did not particularize all their sins, but
that special sin whereby they had most offended, and which did most trouble
their conscience. 1 Samuel 12.19. We have added (say they) to all our sins, this
evil, to ask us a King. When Peter saw Gods people in great distress for
their sins, and coming to him for comfort, Acts 2.37. he saw what was the
special sin that troubled them, he requires not of them a particular
acknowledgement of all their sins. When the penitent Ephesians came to Paul for
comfort, Acts 19.18. they came, and confessed, and showed their works; all the
sins of their thoughts and affections, they discovered not The Papists
therefore in pressing upon the people, that upon pain of damnation, they must
discover every one of their mortal sins, that they can possibly call to mind,
with a^l the circumstances thereof, unto the Priest; yea, urging the necessity
of this particular numbering of sins, much more in the confessions that are made
to the Priest, then in those that are made to the Lord himself, have indeed
provided most politikely for the strength of their own Kingdom (for by this
means, they cast a snare upon men, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 7.35. they
know the hearts and affections, and dispositions of all men, and know well how
to make use thereof, for their own purpose) but in this they have provided
very ill, for the comfort of the conscience of the poor sinner which must
needs be cast into great perplexity, when he believes and considers this,
that his confession is nothing worth, but he is still in his sins, and in the
state of damnation, unless he have confessed all his mortal sins, with all
the circumstances of them, unto the Priest: whereas no man is able to do it
according to that of the Prophet, Psalm. 19.12. Who can understand his errors.

Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and
drink of that cup. and Gal. 6.4. Let every man prove his own work, and then
shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another. Yea such as can
resolve themselves sufficiently in their own doubts, if they would take a
little pains with their own hearts, should make conscience of troubling their
Pastors unnecessarily; and to such a one it may be said as Mar. 5.35. he said
to Iairus, Why troublest thou the Master any further?

Numb. 19.18, 19. In which respect, the Apostle directs such as have need of
comfort in this case, not to the Elders of the Church only, but even to
private men, James 5.16. Confess your faults one to another, and pray for one
another. As we find in the diseases of the body, men run not always to the
Physician, but receive that counsel and medicine sometimes from a neighbor,
that has had experience of the same infirmity, that does him more good, then
he could have received from the most learned Doctor: So in the wounds and
distempers of the soul, that help may sometimes be found from a private
Christian that has had experience of the same tentation, that cannot be had
from many a learned and godly Minister. All Gods people have received comfort
from the hand of God in their tribulation, that they might be able to comfort
others that are in the like case with the comfort wherewith themselves were
comforted of God, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 1.4. None so fit to comfort
him that is in any tribulation, as he that has had experience of the same
tribulation in himself.

And thus having showed you, that some make this laying open of our spiritual
estate, and confessing our sins in private, to men more necessary then indeed
it is, it follows that we should now learn how far forth it is necessary,
and fit. And this will appear in two cases.

David had a purpose to build a Temple, and doubted whether he stood not
guilty of great sin in neglecting it so long, he consulteth with Nathan, and
seeks to be resolved by him, 2 Samuel 7.2. yea it appears by Nathans speech
unto him 1 King. 1.27. that he was not wont to undertake any weighty matter,
but he would advise with him about it, to know how it might stand with the will
of God. Is this thing done by my lord the King, (says he) and thou have not
showed it unto thy servant? And of this mind was Iehoshaphat King of Judah, he
used to enquire of the Lords Prophets. Is there not here a Prophet of the
Lord? says he, 1 King. 22.7. and 2 King. 3.11. Is there not here a Prophet of
the Lord? So when Gods people after the captivity were doubtful about the
continuance of their fasts, they sent to the Priests and Prophets that were in
the house of the Lord, to be resolved in this doubt. Zach. 7.3. So they that
by Peter's ministry, were brought into great perplexity, touching their
spiritual estate, Acts 2.37. come to Peter and the rest of the Apostles for
direction, and satisfaction, and say, Men and brethren what shall we do? 2.
The Lord himself has directed his people unto this course. The people should
seek the Law at the Priests mouth: (says the Lord, Mal. 2.7.) for he is the
messenger of the Lord of hosts, and Hag. 2.11. Ask now the Priest concerning
the Law. This God typified unto his people in that law, wherein he commanded
that the man that was cleansed of his leprosy must go to the Priest to
approve of the cure, Mat. 8.4. Go show thy self to the Priest. Gods people
should make use of their Ministers, not at Church only, but at home, not of
their public ministry only, but of their private advice, and help also in
resolving the doubts of their consciences if need so require. 3. The testimony
of a faithful minister should be of great authority with every good Christian,
as for the staying, and terrifying of him from any evil way, Galat. 5.2.
Behold, I Paul say unto you, If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you
nothing; so for the satisfying, and comforting of him in the doubts he has
concerning his spiritual estate: thus Paul comfort the godly Hebrews, Heb.
6.9. Beloved we are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany
salvation: So Anna was greatly comforted, when Ely approved and was well
persuaded of her, 1 Samuel 1.18. She went away, and did eat, and her countenance
was no more sad. If any shall object, Object.
That the examples of the Prophets, and Apostles that were extraordinary men,
and of the Priests (especially the high Priests that were types of Christ) are
impertinently alleged, and tell me there is not that respect to be given to,
nor comfort to be received by that testimony we can give of any man's
spiritual estate, Answ.
as there was to theirs. I answer, 1. There may be much, and more then to any
private man's testimony, and approbation, though not so much as to theirs. 2.
Though our persons be far inferior to the Prophets and Priests, our function
is greater, and more to be respected, Mat. 11.11. Notwithstanding, he that is
the least in the kingdom of heaven, (that is the new estate of the Church) is
greater then he. 3. The holy Apostles themselves, do often gain authority to
their exhortations, and consolations they deliver to the Churches, not from the
title of their Apostleship only, but from this also, that they were the
servants of Christ, Romans 1.1 Tit. 1.1. yea, sometimes they leave out that, and
mention this only, that they were the servants and Ministers of Christ, Phil.
1.1. James 1.1. And this is the first case, wherein the discovering and opening
our estate in private unto a Minister, is profitable and fit.

The second case is this, When a Christian is troubled in conscience for sin,
Samuel, 1. Sam. 12.19. thus did David to Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.13. thus did John
Baptists hearers to him, Mat. 3.6. And there be three reasons that may make it
evident, that it is fit Gods people that are in this case, should take this
course for their comfort.

First, In respect of the gifts and abilities God has given his faithful
Ministers The Lord God has given me the tongue of the learned, (says our
Savior the chief Pastor, Esaias 50.4. but not for himself only, but for such
as he sends to be in his stead, Ephesians. 4.8.) that I should know how to speak a
word in season to him that is weary.

Secondly, Because Gods faithful Ministers have a special commission from 2
Cor. 5.19. He has committed to us the word of reconciliation. John 20.23.
Whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them. Why how do Ministers
remit sins? I answer, by assuring them out of Gods word, that believe, and
repent that their sins are forgiven. Why. So much every private Christian may
do: I answer, True it is, he may. But, 1. It is evident this promise is
peculiar to the Ministers of the word, this power is specially appropriated to
them, both in this place, and Mat. 16.19. and 1^ 18. 2. The meaning thereof
must needs be this, that Christ promises that he by his spirit will give
more efficacy to the word of his Ministers in this case then to the word of any
private man, as in their public Ministry, so in this case also; according to
that promise, Mat. 28.10. Lo I am with you to the end of the world.

Abimelech to Abraham with this reason, Genesis 20.7. He is a Prophet, and he
shall pray for thee and thou shall live. Therefore Hezekiah in that great
distress himself and his people were in, sends to the Prophet Esaias with
this request, Esaias 37.4. Lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left. And
the Apostle directs to this help, James 5.14. Is any man sick among you?
let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him. See the
respect God had to the prayers of the Priests and Levites, Ier. 27.18. If they
be Prophets, and if the word of the Lord be with them, let them now make
intercession to the Lord of hosts. and 2 Chronicles. 30.27. The Priests the Levites
arose, and blessed the people, and their voice was heard, and their prayer came
up to his holy dwelling place, even unto heaven.

Lecture XXXIII. On Psalm 51.3. July. 25. 1626.
IT follows now that we make some application of that that has been said,
and it serves to admonish, 1. my self, and my brethren of the ministry, 2.
you all that are Gods people.

First, It serves to admonish us: For if Gods people must depend on us not
only for public instruction, Appli. 1
but for private direction also, in all the doubts and troubles of their
consciences that they cannot otherwise be resolved, and comforted in; if God
have committed to us the word of reconciliation, and the keys of the kingdom
of heaven, if our prayers should prevail more with God for his people, then
any other man's; alas what manner of persons had we need to be? Have we not
just cause to cry out with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.6. and who is sufficient for
these things? When Elihu speaks but of one of these works, that is to say,
the comforting of a man that is afflicted in mind, he says he had need to be
a rare man, one among a thousand that should do it well, Job. 33.23.

Romans 15.14. 2. Of full assurance and certainty in themselves, of the truths
they should inform others in, Prou. 22.20, ^1. 2 Timothy 3.14. 3. We had need
plye our books, and study hard, and not suffer our selves to be distracted
with other cares, 1 Timothy 4.13, 15. 4. We had need have our knowledge not in our
books only, or in our brains, but in our lips also, Mal. 2.7. and be ready
Scribes in the Law of God, Ezra 7.6. 5. We had need have ability to inform
others, in that that we know our selves, Ioh 33.23.

Secondly, We had need be rare men for our lives and conversations: the Tim.
3.17. We should not only be free from open blemishes, that men may note us
for, (according to the meaning of that Law, Levit. 21.17.) but we had need
inwardly and unfainedly to fear God; Exodus 19.22. Levit. 22.3. 1 Cor. 9.27.
For 1. he that has no care of his own soul, can never heartily and tenderly
take care for the souls of others, 1 Timothy 3.5. 2. Admit he could be careful,
he shall never be able to do it sufficiently, Psalm. 25.14. 3. Admit he were
both able and willing to do Gods people good, yet he can have little hope
that God should work with him, and bless his endeavors. For as the success
of our endeavors depends not upon our goodness, but upon the blessing of God
only. Neither is he that planteth any thing, (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.7.)
nor he that waters, but God that gives the increase: so God uses to bless,
and work with them that do unfainedly fear him, God blessed Levies Ministry
so as he did turn many away from iniquity, Mal. 2.6. and the Lord gives this
for the reason why he did so bless his labors verse 5. It was for the fear
wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my name. So it is said of
Barnabas, Acts 11.24. much people were added to the Lord by his Ministry, and
this is given as a reason of it, for he was a good man, and full of the holy
Ghost, and of faith. And thus Iehoshaphat encourages the Levites to their
duty, 2 Chronicles. 19.11. The Lord shall be with the good. Think not therefore
that when we teach this Doctrine of your dependence upon us, that we seek our
selves in it, and do it to magnify our selves, or out of a desire to be
sought unto; no, no, were it not for your sakes, and that it is profitable and
necessary for you, to know this, we would never teach it. This Doctrine
tends not to puff us up, but to abase and humble us, to work fear and
trembling in us, 1 Cor. 3.3. For who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor.
^.16. Certainly there is no godly Minister that rightly considers this, but
it ministers to him matter of great fear and humbling: this made Moses and
Jeremy, and many a good man more, so fearful, and unwilling to enter upon
this function: Nay, the Apostle says, Heb. 5.4. No man (he means no godly
man, no man that is well advised, and knows what he does) takes this honor
upon him, but he that is called. And our Savior bids us pray to the Lord of
the harvest that he would thrust forth ((...)) laborers into his harvest: as
if he had said, He will never have faithful laborers else, Mat. 9.38. And
thus have I finished that part of the admonition which concerns us, which I
have been the briefer in, because I see there are but few of my brethren here
at this time.

Now for that part of the admonition that concerns you, Appli. 2
something I must say unto you by way of exhortation and advice, and something
by way of reproof. And there be three things I must exhort you unto.

First, Esteem reverently of our calling, and take heed you despise it not.
This, this is that that I exhort you to take heed of; let nothing cause thee
to despise our calling and function, for that is certainly worthy of reverence

First, In respect of the dignity of it in it self, it is a calling that the
Son of God himself did not disdain to live in, Luke 4.18. He has anointed
me to preach the Gospel. It is a calling great and honorable in Gods sight, as
the Angel Gabriell said of John Baptist, Luke 1.15. He shall be great in the
sight of the Lord. And yet his calling was not so great as ours is, Mat. 11. He
that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater then he. It is a calling so
great, as the best and holiest man that lives, should think himself unworthy
of, John Baptist thought so of himself, Mark 1.7. The latchet of his shoe I
am unworthy thought so of himself, 1 Cor. 15.9. I am not worthy to be called
an Apostle.

Secondly, It is worthy of all reverence in respect of the necessity of it:
there is a saying, Honor the Physician because of necessity, or because of the
use you may have of him; and surely there is no calling under heaven so
useful, so necessary as the Ministry is. All the good you receive by any
other calling in the world is but in humane and carnal things, for the welfare
of your body, but the good you receive by this calling, is in spiritual and
divine things for the salvation of your souls, Heb. 5.1. We are ordained for
men in the things pertaining to God. 1. From us you receive the means whereby
God has ordained to bring you to salvation; To us is committed the word of
reconciliation, and we are his ambassadors sent with commission and authority
about the weightiest business that ever was taken in hand, even the concluding
of a peace between God and your souls, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5.19,
20. To us is committed the administration of the Sacraments, and we are the
keepers of Gods seals, so as you cannot have them but from our hands, 1 Cor.
4.1. Let a man so account of us, as of the stewards of the mysteries of God;
yea to us are committed the keys of the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 16.19. We
have that authority from God to assure you in his name (upon your faith and
repentance) of the pardon of those sins that do trouble your consciences, as
no man in the world has besides. Yea, 2. This is not all the good you receive
by us, (though these be great things) for you do not only receive the
outward means of your salvation from us, but (that which is a great deal
more) by us God gives you his spirit, and saving grace also, and conveyeth it
into your hearts. God has made us able Ministers (says the Apostle, 2 Cor.
3.6.) of the new Testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit: insomuch as I
may confidently say unto every one of you; that if you be regenerate. If you be
converted, if there be any truth of grace, any faith, any repentance in you,
some minister or other was the spiritual father to beget it in you. Observe
what grounds I have to be so confident. One is in that speech of the Apostle to
the Galathians. 3.2. This only would I learn of you (says he) how came you
by the spirit? Was it by any other means, then by the hearing of faith? The
other is in that strange speech of the same Apostle, Romans 10.14. How shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a
preacher? And this is the first of those things I told you I would exhort you
unto, In any case esteem reverently of our calling, take heed ye despise it
not. The other two I will be briefer in because I will hasten unto the
reproof.

David's resolution, Psalm. 23.6. that he would dwell in the house of the Lord
for ever; and 27.4. that it should be his only suit to God in which he would
have no nay, that he might dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of his
life. And what was it that made the house of the Lord so amiable unto him, and
other of Gods servants? Surely we shall find in that speech of Abiam against
Jeroboam. 2 Chronicles. 13.10, 12. it was the sound, and faithful ministry that was
to be enjoyed there. Resolve with thy self therefore that what other comforts
soever thou want, thou will not live without a faithful Minister whom thou
may depend upon, whom as thy spiritual father thou may reverence and
obey, whom thou may boldly acquaint with the secrets of thy soul. If thou
have such a one, count it a singular blessing, and be thankful for it: For
certainly he lives without God in this world that has not such a Minister to
depend upon; as Azariah the Prophet says unto Asa, 2 Chro. 15.3 Now for a long
season has Israel been without the true God, and without a teaching Priest,
and without the Law.

resorting to us in public, by hearing us (for so does many a one that has no
such relation to us, as to count us their fathers in Christ) but 1. In
receiving, and admitting that spiritual authority that God has given him over
thee, without which, it is impossible thou should receive all that benefit
by him that thou ought. Receive us, says the Apostle, 2 Corinthians 7.2.
he has authority to deal particularly with thee, either by admonition or
reproof, receive him in this, Hebrews 13.2^. I beseech you suffer the word of
exhortation. He has authority to examine, and enquire into your sprituall
estate, receive him in this. See how willing Hezekiah the King was to be
examined by the Prophet, Esaias 39.3, 4. 2. Make use of thy faithful ministers
gifts in private, as well as in public, by moving the doubts of thy conscience
unto him, as conveniently thou may. It is said of the Queen of Sheba (and
our Savior commends her for it, Matt. 12.42.) that hearing of the knowledge,
and wisdom that was in Solomon, she came a great way to make use of it, and
when she was come (says the text, 1 Kings 10.2.) she communed with him of
all that was in her heart. 3. In approoving thy repentance, and thy spiritual
estate unto him, Gods people are bound to live as their ministers may discern
their obedience, and the fruits of their labors in them, and be encouraged
thereby. Hebr. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your
selves; for they watch for your souls, that they may do it with joy. And it
is noted for a sin in Zedekiah the King, 2 Chronicles 6.12. that he did not
humble himself before the Prophet Jeremy; who as he was a witness of his
sin, so should he have approved his repentance to him especially. 4. and
lastly. In resting upon, and receiving satisfaction from that which he shall
in Gods name, and by warrant of his word deliver unto thee; as Anna did in the
testimony of Ely, 1 Samuel 1.18. Whosoever (says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 18.19.) will
not hearken to my words, which the Prophet shall speak in my name, I will
require it of him.

How little the testimony that Gods faithful ministers do give of our ways is
regarded, Appli.
may appear in many particulars, which by evidence of Gods word they declare
to be sins.

And seems it nothing to you, to do a thing that all Gods faithful servants
do testify, and inveigh against, by warrant of his word in so earnest manner.
Well be you assured of this. 1. That what we all with so unanimous consent
say of the heinousness of any sin, and of the vengeance that will light upon
you, if you continue in this sin, God will ratify it in heaven, and make it
good upon you, Matthew 18.18, 19. 2. That if you shall after you have heard so
much spoken against it upon such clear warrant of the word, and in such a
manner, still continue in it, you shall make your selves a great deal more
liable to the wrath of God then you were before, Jeremy 44.4, 6. Nehemiah 9.^9
30. And this is that, that I have to say unto you by way of exhortation.

Now in speaking to you by way of reproof, I might be, and should be indeed

First. Few or none of you, no not of the better sort of you, do in your hearts

Secondly, Many of you care not what ministry you live under; you will not
commit your beasts, nor your sheep, nor your swine, to any to keep or tend,
but you will know him to have some skill, and some care to look to them; only
your souls you are indifferent what he be that takes charge of them; If he
be a good one, so it is, if he be a bad one, you are well enough content, and
never seek further.

according to that power that God has given them for your edification, and not
for destruction, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Corinthians. 13.10. O how snappish are
you, how apt to quarrel with them.

Lecture XXXIIII. on Psalm 51.3. Sept. 5. 1626
IT follows now, that we come to the second kind of confession that has bin
commended unto us in this example of David, he made public confession of his
sin to the congregation, and church of God. For we see in the title of this
Psalm, 1. that he committed this Psalm (that contains the acknowledgement
of his sin, and profession of his repentance) to the chief musician to be
published in the Sanctuary and Temple. 2. That in this publication of his
repentance, he hides not from the Church his sin, nor cloaketh it at all,
but expresses in particular the special sin, that he had been so troubled
for, when he made this Psalm, he made it when Nathan the Prophet came unto
him, after he had gone in to Baths^eba. 3. He makes this publication of his
sin, and repentance, not to the Church, that then was only (though first and
chiefly to that) but to that, that should come after him, and commits it
therefore to the chief Musician, to be kept in the Temple as a monument of
his repentance, for the use of the Church, to the end of the World.

Quest.
And why did David this, may you say? Why was he being so great a King, so
careless of his honor, and reputation among his subjects?

Answ. 1
I answer. First. His sin was become public, and notorious, for being a
King, the eyes of all Israel were upon him, as it is said in another sense, 1.
Kings 1.20. That which our Savior says of Ministers, Matthew. 5.14. may be also
said of Magistrates, and all men in eminency, they are as Cities set upon an
hill, their actions cannot be hid, or concealed. Besides, it is expressly
said by Nathan, that the enemies of God took notice of these sins of his* and
blasphemed God for them* 2 Samuel 12.14.

2.
Secondly. He had offended, and wronged the whole Chruch by his sin, and that
two ways.

The reproaches of them that reproached thee, are fallen upon me, says the
Prophet, Psalm 69.9. Secondly, By endangering the whole Church of God, and
making it obnoxious to the wrath of God through his sin. For the Lord has
often for the sin of one member, plagued even whole Churches and congregations.
Thus speaks Phinehas to the two Tribes and an half, Ioshuah 22.20. Did not
Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in the accursed thing, and wrath fell
on all the congregation of the children of Israel, and that man perished not
alone in his iniquity. Specially for the sins of a King, (as David was) God
has been wont to plague a whole nation, and Kingdom, as is plain in the
example of David himself, whose one sin in numbering of the people, was the
death of seventy thousand of his Subjects, 2 Samuel ^4.15. And in Jeremy 15.4.
I will cause them to be removed into all kingdoms of the earth; because of
Manasseh the son of Hezekiah King of Judah, for that which he did in
Jerusalem. See how just cause Gods people have to pray, not formally only, but
heartily for their Kings and Princes. And this consideration certainly wrought
much upon David, when he made this Psalm, and made him willing thus to
publish his repentance, as appears by his prayer for the Church, verse 18.
Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion, build up the walls of Jerusalem. As
if he had said, Lord, let not thy wrath fall upon Sion, let not Jerusalem fare
the worse for my sin. He feared that the whole Church under his government,
should smart for his sin.

We have then from this example of David to learn.

That they, Doctr.
whose sins God has detected, and brought to light, whose sins are public,
and notorious scandalous, and offensive to the congregation where they live,
ought to be willing to confess their sins publicly, to make their repentance
at public and notorious as their sin is.

Now before I come to the proof of this point, three things must be premised
to prevent the mistaking of it.

First. That this public confession of sin unto a congregation, though it
carry show of a far greater measure of selfe-denyall, and mortification; then
Judas we read, that he attained unto this, that voluntarily (not dragged to
it by any authority of man) he did open penance, and made public, and
particular acknowledgement of his sin, Matthew. 2^.3, 4. but he never had the
grace to go to God in secret, and lay open his sins before him.

Secondly. This public confession of sin to a congregation, is not of that
absolute Prove. 28.13. He that covers his sins shall not prosper; but who
confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy. Yet can we not say, but many a
one whose sins have been public, and notorious to the congregations where
they have lived, have truly repented of these sins, and obtained assurance of
the pardon of them, though they never made public confession of them unto the
Church. The sins of that woman of whom we read, Luke. 7. were public and
notorious; all the town where she lived, took notice what the lewdnes of her
life had bin, as appears verse 37.39. and that woman certainly did repent, as
appears by the tears that she (out of love to Christ) shed so abundantly,
verse 38. and she attained also to sound assurance of the pardon of her sins,
for our Savior gives his word for that, verse 48. and verse 50. tells her,
her faith had saved her, and bids her go in peace. Yet we find not, that
either she ever made public confession to the congregation, or that our
Savior enjoined either her, or that woman taken in adultery, John 8.11. or
Zacheus Luke 19.9. or any other penitent sinner that he did convert, to go and
make this public confession of their sins, which doubtless he would have
done, if this had bin of absolute necessity, and that without it, there could
be no true repentance, nor comfortable assurance gotten, of the pardon of such
public and notorious sins.

Thirdly. It is not fit and expedient, that any should make, or offer himself
done decently, and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40. And there are masters of the
assemblies appointed of God, Ecclesi. 12.11 according to whose direction all
things are to be ordered that are done in the public assemblies, and not
according to the spirit, and devotion of any private man. And this may seem to
be the reason why our Savior enjoined not this public confession unto those
notorious sinners I told you of before, because through the extreme corruption
of those times, and neglect of the discipline of the Church, it was not
required, but grown out of use in those days.

All this notwithstanding, the point I taught you, does remain a certain and
undoubted truth, that they whose sins are public, and notorious, scandalous,
and offensive unto the congregation, ought to be willing to confess their sins
publikly, when they shall be required to do it by the discipline of the
Church, (yea, I say more) they ought to desire that they may do it, they
should desire to make their repentance as public, and notorious, as their
sins have been.

Proof.
The truth of this will appear, 1. By the practice of sundry of Gods servants.
2. By the reasons that moved them to do it, and upon which, this their practice
was grounded.

And for the first, we have the example first of three public persons, two
great Kings and an Apostle, such as of all others were most bound to be tender
of their reputation, and good name; such as because they were subject to no
superior power, that could enjoyne it unto them, took it upon themselves, and
did voluntarily make public acknowledgements of their sins to the Church of
God. David was one of these Kings, whose example we have in this Psalm. And
Solomon his son was another, who after he had fearfully, and scandalously
fallen, made the book called Ecclesiastes, wherein he does as publicly
profess his repentance to the whole Church; as his father did in this Psalm.
The Apostle that did thus, was blessed Paul, who does often take occasion
publicly to confess his sin. This he did before a great multiude, Acts
22.4. I persecuted this way unto death, binding, and delivering into prisons,
both men, and women. Thus he did again in every solemn audience, before
Festus and Agrippa, Acts 26.11. I punished them often in every Synagogue, and
compelled them to blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against them, I
persecuted them even unto strange Cities. Thus he did again in that Epistle
he wrote unto the Corinthians, 1 Corinthians 15.9. I am not worthy to be
called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God. And in that to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.13.15. I was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, the chief of
all sinners. You see he cared not. 1. How many witnesses he had of his
confession, and repentance. 2. Nor what manner of persons they were, great or
small, good or bad, friends or enemies. 3. He thought he could never make this
public confession too often. 4. Nor that he could disgrace himself too much
in it, or speak too odiously of his sin. And these are the three public
persons I told you of

We have also an example of a private person, which though it be not of so
great authority as the other three, yet it is in this respect, as fit as any of
them, to give us direction in this case, because he made his public profession
of his repentance, being enjoined to do it by the authority of the Church, or
rather by authority of the Apostle, who gave order to the Church in this case,
by that Divine Commission, and warrant, he had received from God. This man I
speak of, was the incestuous person in Corinth, who being for his scandalous
sin censured, and excommunicated by the Church according to that direction the
Apostle gave. 1. Cor. 5.4. did give that satisfaction to the Church by the
profession of his repentance, as the Apostle was feign to entreat them to
forgive, and receive, and comfort him, as you may see, 2. Cor. 2.6.8.

Reason.
Now the reasons that have moved Gods people thus to publish their repentance
even before men for their public and scandalous sins, have bin principally
three. They have done it 1. Out of a respect unto God. 2. Out of a respect unto
themselves. 3. Out of a respect unto other men.

First. They have done this out of a respect unto God, and his glory, whom
Ioshuah pressed Achan with, Ioshuah 7.19. when he persuaded him to make open
confession of his sin, not only to the Lord, but also to him, and to the whole
congregation, My son, I pray thee give glory to the Lord God of Israel. For
as by our sins we dishonor God (specially by the sins committed in the
Church, 2 Samuel 12 14.) and the more open, and notorious our sins are, the
more we dishonor him, Ezekiel. 24.7, 8. She has set her blood (her bloody
sins) upon the top of a rock, she powered it not on the ground to cover it
with dust; that it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance. So by our
repentance we do honor and glorify God. Phil. 1.11. All the fruits of
righteousness, are by Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God. And the
more open, and notorious our repentance is, the more is God honored by it,
Matthew 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your father which is in heaven. This consideration has
been of great force, to make Gods people forward unto this duty, and has
armed them against the chief impediment that uses to hinder, and keep men
from it; that is to say, the carnal respect to their credit, and reputation
among men. When Michal had told David, how he had disgraced himself, by
leaping, and dancing before the Arc, he answers her, 2 Samuel 6.21, 22. It
was before the Lord, and I will be more vile then thus, and will be base in
mine own sight; and of the maidservants which thou have spoken of, of them
shall I be had in honor. Two parts there are of his answer. As if he had
said. 1. What tellest thou me of disgracing my self, I did it in honor to
God; and to gain honor to him, I will be willing to endure any disgrace
among men. 2. I know well, that by disgracing my self in this kind, I shall
loose no manner of credit or reputation at all; nay this is the only sure way,
unto true honor, and reputation, even with men. For thus God has bound
himself by promise, 1 Samuel 2.30 Those that honor me, I will honor. And
Luke 14.11. He that humbles himself, shall be exalted. And that which our
Savior says of our life, may be said also of our credit, and good name.
Matthew 16.25. Whosoever will save his credit, shall loose it, and whosoever
will loose this credit for my sake, shall find it.

Secondly, Gods people have bin thus forward to publish their repentance Daniel
9.7. O Lord, to us belongs confusion of face; open shame. And again, verse
8. O Lord to us belongs confusion of face, to our Kings, to our Princes, and
to our fathers, because we have sinned against thee. And the Apostle makes
this a note of true repentance, 2 Cor. 7.11. when a man is willing to take
revenge upon himself; which is no way better done, then by taking shame upon
our selves in this sort. 2. This shame is not only a sign of true repentance,
but a a great help and furtherance to the increase of it. And therefore the
Apostle speaking of the end he aimed at, in enjoining that public penance to
the incestuous person, says, 1. Cor. 5.5 it was for the destruction of the
flesh, (mortifying of his corruption) that the spirit might be saved in the
day of the Lord. And surely this respect to themselves, even to the peace and
comfort of their own consciences by testifying the truth of their repentance,
and furthering it this way, has mightily prevailed with many of Gods people,
to draw them even to a voluntary confession of their sins, and profession of
their repentance in public. This was it that drew John Baptists hearers to it,
Matthew 3.6. and Paul's at Ephesus. Acts 19.18. and in the time of the ten
persecutions, so many to public confession, that the Church was feign to make
a law to restrain them from it. They could not satisfy their consciences,
unless they had done it, they found much peace in doing of it. And this peace
of God passes all understanding, as the Apostle speaks. Phil. 4.7. and is
such a jewel, as they that want it, will not stand upon terms of reputation,
but will be content to redeem it with the loss of their reputation among
men, or with enduring any disgrace can be put upon them in the world.



Hebr. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves,
for they watch for your souls; and Matt. 18.17. If he neglect to hear the
Church, let him be to thee as an heathen man, and a Publican. Esteem him no
Christian, no member of Christ's Church, that will not obey the Church in all
lawful things.

Secondly. In showing their care to edify others, by this their good example,
Them that sin (says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.20. he means that sin
scandalously, and to the offense of others) rebuke before all, that others also
may fear.

Against thee, thee alone have I sinned, but as for the congregation, I have
done them no wrong, nor no satisfaction will I give them. For by sins of this
nature, not the Lord only, but the Church, and congregation wherein they are
committed is wronged. For 1. they give all Gods people just cause of grief and
fear. Lots righteous soul was vexed from day to day, by the sins of the place
he lived in. 2 Pet. 2.8. And the Apostle tells the Corinthians. 1 Cor. 5.2.
that they ought to have mourned for the sin of the incestuous person. And David
complains Psalm. 119.53. Horror has taken hold upon me, because of the
wicked that forsake thy law. 2. They are of a contagious, and infectious
nature, and if they be not publicly repented of, they will increase unto more
ungodliness, and spread over the whole body of the congregation, like a
Gangreene. This the Apostle puts the Church of Corinth in mind of, 1 Cor.
5.6. Know yea not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump? And alas a
woeful experience have we of the truth of this, both in this town, and in many
other places? 3. They put the whole congregation in danger of Gods wrath, and
heavy judgments. Did not Achan the son of Zerah (says Phinehas. Josh.
22.20.) commit a trespass in the accursed thing, and wrath fell on all the
congregation of the children of Israel, and that man perished not alone in his
iniquity? So that you see by these kind of sins, there is an offense and wrong
done to the whole congregation, where they are committed. And when by our sins
we have offended, and wronged men, it is not sufficient to confess our sins
unto God, and seek reconciliation with him, but we must endeavor to give
satisfaction unto men whom we have wronged. To God we can make no
satisfaction, to men whom we have offended, we may, we must make
satisfaction, yea, without willingness, and desire to do it, there is no hope
of finding mercy with God. This is evident by those two Laws, Levit. 6.5, 6.
and Numbers. 5.6.8. where God plainly taught his people, that their trespass
offering which they brought to him to seek pardon of any sin, whereby they had
wronged any man, should not be accepted, till they had first made satisfaction
to the party to whom the wrong was done. And lest we should think those laws
concerned the Jews only, our Savior himself gives this in charge, Matthew
5.23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy
brother has ought against thee; leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go
thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
And if there be such necessity of making satisfaction to any one brother, that
has ought against us before we can get assurance of our reconciliation with
God, what necessity is there of making satisfaction to a whole Church and
congregation, that we have given just cause of offense unto? In this case it is
not sufficient to approve our repentance and truth of heart to God, we must be
willing also, and desirous to appoove it to the congregation and Church of God,
that we may say as the two Tribes and half said; Josh. 22.22. The Lord God of
Gods he knows, and Israel be shall know.

Lecture XXXV. On Psalm 51.3. October. 3. 1626.
IT follows that we make some application of this point. Appli.
For it serves for the just reproof of three sorts of men. 1. Of such as
neglect to do what lies in them, to bring open shame upon open, and
scandalous offenders by detecting them unto such as have authority to censure
them. 2. Of such as having authority to censure such offenders, when they are
detected, neglect to enjoyne them public repentance for the satisfying of the
congregation. 3. Of such as being for public offenses, enjoined to give
public satisfaction to the congregation, refuse to do it.

In the first of these ranks come to be reproved, not those officers only
which every congregation has, and who stand bound by oath to do this, but
many others also. Many are guilty of this sin. This is a point so needful in
these days and in this place to be insisted upon, that I have willingly
suffered my meditations to enlarge themselves in it, and pray you to give
diligent, and conscionable attention to that which I shall say.

It is the general complaint of all men, that sin did never more abound then
it does now. That in these times of so great light, and in the places where the
Gospel is most plentifully preached, blasphemy, drunkenness, whoredom, and
such like gross sins are more common, and grown to a greater height then
ever. Three great mischiefs grow from hence.

First. It makes the preaching, and professing of the Gospel, odious to
Papists, Jacob says of Simeon, and Levi, Genes. 34.30. Ye have made me to
stink among the inhabitants of the land.

Secondly. It hinders the fruit, and success of all the endeavors, that
either Never had nation more experience of the benefit of fasting and prayer,
then we have had the last year in the marveilous staying of the pestilence,
and this year in the no less marveilous stay of unseasonable weather, and
preventing the dearth that was generally feared. But the fasting and prayers of
Gods people had certainly prevailed much more, had it not been for this, that
these foul sins do so much abound every where. There be many good things
Gods people cannot yet obtain; many great evils they cannot yet get remooved.
Yea, though Noah, Daniel and Job were in this land to fast, and pray for it, it
is much to be feared they should not be able to prevail for it, as the Lord
speaks, Ezekiel. 14.14. And why so? The Lords hand is not shortened that it
cannot save, (as the Prophet speaks, Esa. 59.1, 2) neither is his ear heavy
that it cannot hear, but our iniquities have separated between us and our
God, and our sins have hid his face from us, that he will not hear. This
huge increase of gross sins every where stands up as a wall of partition
between us and our God, that the prayers of Gods people cannot fully prevail
with him. Though Ioshuah himself pray for the good success of Gods people in
their battles against such enemies as were under Gods curse, and pray never so
fervently, fast and pray, as we see he did, Josh. 7.6.9. yet received he this
answer from God, verse 13. O Israel thou can not stand before thine enemies,
till ye take away the accursed thing from among you.

Jerusalem, and that whole nation, the Gospel was more plentifully preached
then ever before, Mat. 24.14. This Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached to
all the world for a witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come. And
Revel. 6. before the red, black, and pale horses (which signified the sword,
and famine, and pestilence, that God would bring upon the world) went forth; we
read in verse 2. that the white horse (which signified the preaching of the
Gospel) was sent forth conquering and to conquer, the Gospel was preached with
great evidence and demonstration of the spirit. And the Apostle tells us,
Heb. 6.7, 8. that the earth that drinks in the rain that falls often upon at
and brings forth thorns and briars, is near unto cursing. There is
therefore just cause that we should all take to heart this great increase of
all gross sins amongst us. David did so, and we are sure he did no more in
it then he was bound to do, Psalm. 119.53. Horror has taken hold upon me,
because of the wicked that forsake thy Law. Phinehas, and all Gods people with
him did so, Josh. 22.18. Ye rebel to day against the Lord, and to morrow he
will be wrath with the whole Congregation of Israel. And mark the reason,
verse 20. Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in the accursed
thing, and wrath fell on all the Congregation; and that man perished not alone
in his iniquity.

Object.
If any man say, How can this stand with the justice of God, to punish us for
other men's sins, to lay to our charge the drunkenness, blasphemies and
whoredoms committed by other men in the town and country where we live?
Considering what Abraham says to the Lord, Genesis 18.25. Far be it from thee
to stay the righteous with the wicked, and that the righteous should be as the
wicked that be far from thee; shall not the Judge of all the world do right?

Answ.
I Answer, God never punishes any for the sins of others, but when they are
some way or other guilty of other men's sins. A man may make himself partaker
of other men's sins, though he commit not those sins himself. Be not partaker
of other men's sins, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.22. Yea, we shall find that a
whole town, nay, even a whole land is often in Scripture said to be guilty of a
sin, and defiled with it, that was committed but by some private man that lived
in it. So it is said of murder, Number. 35.33. Blood defiles the land, and the
land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of
him that shed it. And again, Deuteronomy. 19.13. Thine eye shall not pity him, but
thou shall put away the guilt of innocent blood from Israel. So when the Lord
had reckoned up many great sins that were committed by the inhabitants of
Canaan, Levit. 18. he bids his people they shall not do so: for by these
(says he verse 25.) the land is defiled. So it is said of the man that would
take again the wife that he had once put away, and another man had married
her, Deuteronomy. 24 4. He may not take her again after that she is defiled for that
is abomination before the Lord, and thou shall not cause the land to sin. The
whole town and country you see, may become guilty of a sin which one man
has committed in it. And surely this is a just cause of fear, that we shall
all smart for these foul sins committed amongst us, because we have drawn
upon our selves the guilt of these sins, we have made them our own and that
five ways especially.

First, By applauding and loving men the better for these sins. He that never
Romans 1.32. They not only do these things, but have pleasure in them that do
them. But are there any so wicked? Surely there have been such even in Gods
Church, Mic. 3.2. that hate the good, and love the evil, even eo nomi^^,
because they are good they hate them, and because they are evil they love
them. And (alas) some such there be still in every place that take great joy
and solace in the sins of others, Hos. 7.3. And on the contrary, there are some
to whom it is meat and drink, to mock at goodness, Iere. 15.17. I sat not
in the assembly of the mockers nor rejoiced.

Secondly, By not shunning but maintaining unnecessary familiarity, and Cor.
5.10. 2. I know the joining with them in Gods service makes us not guilty of
their sins, as some have erroneously conceited. For the faithful continued
daily with one accord in the Temple, and worshipped God there, Acts 2.46 though
a great number of those that joined with them were Pharisees and Sadduces, and
such as had betrayed and murdered the Lord of life. But to be too familiar with
such men, to converse as much with them as with any other, to be as merry in
the company of such as of any other, (as many of you are) does doubtless make
you partakers of their sins. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works
of darkness, (says the Apostle Ephesians. 5.11.) but rather reproove them. A
companion of fools shall be destroyed, says Solomon Pro. 13.20. and 2 John
11. He that bids him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds. I will not
sit with the wicked. (says David Psalm. 26.5, 6. and what follows) I will
wash mine hands in innocence, and so will I compass thine Altar. As if he had
said, If I should sit and converse with lewd men, I could not be innocent, and
free from their sin. Jeremy takes great comfort in this, that he had not sat
in the assembly of the mockers. Ier. 15.17. For this greatly hardens them in
their sins: because they see no man likes the worse of them for it. If all
honest men would shun their company, certainly it would be of great force to
make them ashamed of their sins, and so to bring them to repentance: for this
is Gods ordinance, 2 These. 3.14. Have no company with him, that he may be
ashamed.

Solomon makes this a note of them that keep the Law, Pro. 28.4. that they
will set themselves against the wicked. And Christ commends it as a singular
grace in the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Reu. 2.2. that he could not bear
with them that were evil men. They that do not so, make themselves guilty of
their sins, Jacob thought he should have been guilty of the sin of Simeon
and Levi, and been esteemed with God as one of their counsel, if he should
not have professed his detestation to it, Genesis 49.6. I hate the work of them
that turn aside, (says David, Psalm. 10^.3) It shall not cleave to me. As if
he should say, If my heart rise not against such sins, if I should not hate
them and show my dislike to them, certainly they would cleave to me, I should
become guilty of them. And when the Lord describes them, that were not
partakers in the sins of Jerusalem, and should not be partakers in their
plagues, though they lived there, he describes them by this property, that
they did not only inwardly mourn, but cry out exclaim, and protest against
the abominations that were done in the midst thereof, Ezekiel. 9.4. And where is
the man that shows dislike to these foul sins that are committed among us.

Mark 8.12. See it also in his servants, Deuteronomy. 9.18, 19. 2 King. 18.37.19* 12.
Ezr. 6.3. Psalm, 119.1^8, ^59. 2 Cor. 2.4. Ier. 23.9. None of us can doubt but
that these men did well, and therefore we may be sure that we ought also to
be thus affected, and though we cannot attain to that measure of grace that
was in them, yet we should endeavor and strive after it. I showed you at the
last Fast, that no man ever mourned sincerely for his own sins, and out of a
respect to God, that could not mourn for the dishonor that is done unto God
by the sins of other men. I say more now, he that cannot grieve for the
dishonor that is done to God by the foul sins of others, makes himself
guilty of their sins. Why was not Lot consumed in the destruction of Sodom?
though he sinned greatly in leaving Abraham's family, and going to dwell in so
wicked a place, yet the righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and
hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day, with their unlawful
deeds, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 2.8. And why were not the gross sins
of Jerusalem immediately before the captivity imputed to the faithful that
lived there at that time? They were such as used to sigh, and mourn for all
the abominations committed in it, as we have heard, Ezekiel. 9.4. We read, 1
King. 21.12. of a Fast was proclaimed in Iezreel upon occasion of a foul sin
Naboth was charged to have committed there. I know this came from the devilish
policy of Iezabel that wicked woman: but surely that pretense of holiness that
she then made, argues it had been a custom in Israel, for Gods people when
any had sinned among them, in any outrageous and extraordinary manner, to
humble themselves in this extraordinary manner, to put away from themselves the
guiltiness of such a sin. And if this were ever a just cause for Gods people
to keep a Fast, how can Gods servants wheresoever they live, want just
occasion to keep fasts in these days? It is a chief reason (as we have
heard) why open and notorious sinners should make open and public
acknowledgement of their sins, and profession of their repentance, that the
Congregation and people of God whom by their sins they have grieved and
offended, might have satisfaction given unto them. But, alas, if there were no
other reason for it but this, this public repentance might well enough be (as
it is for the most part) quite laid down now a days. For where shall we
find a Congregation or any members of it almost that are offended or grieved
at these things, that have any need of satisfaction to be given unto them, such
a coldness and deadness of heart is fallen upon us, as no dishonor that we
see done to God, does trouble us at all. Well, let every one of us labor to
recover our selves out of this fearful disease. If we do not grieve
unfainedly for these sins that break out among us, we make them our own. If
we can grieve unfainedly for them, God will not impute them unto us. Many have
made scruple to be present in our Church assemblies, where the Minister has
worn a surplice, or used the sign of Cross in Baptism, because they have
thought their presence has been an approbation of these things, and so a
partaking in those supposed corruptions. And some there are that do applaud
these men in this, and say, they are far honester men then such as disliking
these Ceremonies, will yet join in Gods worship with our Congregations that
use them. But both these are greatly deceived. For admitting these Ceremonies
which the Minister does use to be monuments of Idolatry, and as great
corruptions in Gods worship, as any man can imagine them to be, admit I say
this, yet so long as the worship I go unto, is (for the substance of it) pure,
and according to Gods ordinance, and such as I am bound by the commandment of
God to use, the corruptions and sins which another brings into it, cannot
defile it unto me, nor shall be imputed unto me at all, so long as I show my
dislike unto them so far as I may, keeping my self within the compass of my
calling; and do unfainedly grieve and mourn for them. This is evident in the
example of Elkanah and Anna the parents of Samuel who did constantly worship
God in the Tabernacle at Shiloh, when Hophne and Phinehas were Priests there, 1 Samuel 1.3.7 who not only were themselves most wicked men, 1 Samuel 2.22. but did
also bring into the very worship of God (as you shall find 1 Samuel 2.13 -- 16.)
such corruptions, and direct violations of the Lords ordinance as were far
greater then (thanks be to God) any of our ceremonies are supposed to be, even
in the judgment of them that are greatest adversaries unto them. I pray you
therefore hold fast this truth that another man's act (which is not in thy power
to hinder) specially in the worship of God (which is not left free to thee to
use or not to use) can never defile thee, so long as thou professest thy
dislike to it and mournest for it. And that which the Prophet speaks to them
that for some blemishes, and faults they discerned in their wives would put
them away, and give them a bill of divorce, Mal. 2.16. The Lord God of Israel
says, that he hates putting away; may by good proportion be truly said of
this leaving any part of the true worship of God, or any true Church for those
corruptions, wherein other men only are agents, not we our selves, The Lord
God of Israel says that he hates this separation, and never gave the least
allowance to it. But in any case nourish in thy heart a sorrow for all such as
are corruptions in deed, (specially in the worship of God) and profess also
outwardly upon all just accasions thy dislike unto them, or else thou will be
in danger to be defiled by them, as the Apostle tells the Church of Corinth,
1 Cor. 5.6. that the whole lump was in danger to be leavened, because they did
not mourn for the sin of the incestuous person, and for the want or neglect of
the discipline of the Church in that case; as appears in the fourth verse.

Lecture XXXVI. On Psalm 51.3. October 10. 1626.
Ely that the Lord pronounced him guilty of all those foul sins which his sons
Hophny and Phinehas had committed, 1 Samuel 2.29. Wherefore kick ye at my
sacrifice, and at mine offerings, to make your selves fat with the chiefest of
all the offerings of Israel my people. How could that be? was Ely so profane
himself? No, but because his sons did so, and he brought them not to that open
shame and punishment which their foul sins deserved, God imputes their sins
to him.

Object.
If any man shall object, and say, What it that to us? Ely was a Judge, and
magistrate, he judged Israel, 1 Samuel 4 18. and therefore had power to have
restrained them from these sins, by deposing and punishing them; This the Lord
charge him with, 1 Samuel 3.13 His sons made themselves vile, and he restrained
them not. He had a calling to do it; but we are no magistrates, we have no
power to restrain or punish these lewd persons; we are private men, we have
no calling to do it. There are officers that have a calling, and are bound by
their oath to present such offenders; let them look unto it. It is through
their negligence and default that these sins do so much abound amongst us.

Answ.
My answer unto this objection, that has (as you see) great color of reason in
it shall consist of two parts. 1. I will grant that these officers are indeed
in greatest fault or this, and show you reasons why it must be so. 2. I will
show you, that not they alone are in fault for this, but that Christians of all
sorts are deeply guilty this way.

First therefore, they that by their office, and oath stand bound to detect
unto Ier. 5.28. that they did overpasse the deeds of the wicked; they winked
at them, and made no reckoning of them; and what follows in the next verse
29. Shall I not visit for these things says the Lord? Shall not my soul be
avenged on such a nation as this? See the heinousness of their fault in three
things.

Deuteronomy. ^9.9, 10. So shall thou put evil away from among you; and those which
remain shall hear, and fear, and shall henceforth commit no more any such
evil among you. The sparing of those whom God would have to be punished, is a
great wrong to the whole town and country where they live, even a means to
bring Gods wrath upon it. This is plain, Number. ^5.4. Take all the heads of the
people, and hang them up, that the fierce anger of the Lord may be turned away
from Israel; and verse 11. Phinehas has turned away my wrath from the children
of Israel (while he was zealous for my sake among them) that I consumed not the
children of Israel in my jealousy. And how can they be punished* and brought
to open shame, if these officers wink at them, and present them not?

sp^cially to confess their sin, and profess their repentance publicly, is a
means appointed of God to bring them unto repentance, and so to obtain of God
assurance of the pardon of their sins. That which Solomon says of one kind,
may be said of all kinds of correction which God has sanctified, Pro. 22.15.
Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child, but the rod of correction will
drive it away. And of the censures of the Church which Christ has appointed,
it may most truly be said as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 5.5. They tend to
the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord. In winking therefore at such offenders, they deprive them of the means
ordained of God for their repentance, and so for the salvation of their souls.
And what love call you this? This is indeed hatred, and not love, Levit. 19.17.
He hates his brother in his heart, that lets his sin to lie upon him.

Thirdly and lastly, They sin against God, and against their own souls, in
bound themselves by an oath that they would neither eat nor drink till they
had killed Paul, Acts 23.12. An oath must not be Vinculum iniquitatis. 2. When
any man has bound himself by oath to do that that is evil, let him repent
of that sin, and not double it by keeping that oath. When the wise men had
bound themselves to Herod if not by an oath, yet by a very solemn promise
certainly (for Herod said they had mocked him, and was in exceeding rage for
that, Mat. 2.16.) to bring him word where Christ was; yet perceiving afterward
that the performance of that oath or promise was against the will of God, and
tended to the hurt of Christ, they durst not perform it, Mat. 2.12. And when
Herod had unadvisedly taken an oath, which afterward he perceived tended to the
destruction of one whom in his conscience he knew to be a good man, it is
noted to have been his great sin, that he made such conscience of keeping that
oath, Mat. 14.9. For we ought not to do any thing to the open hurt of those
whom God has commanded us to be a shelter and a covert unto, Esaias 16.3.4 Hide
the outcasts, bewray not him that wandereth, What outcasts means he? Let
mine outcasts dwell with thee Moab, be thou a covert to them from the face of
the spoyler. Let all men therefore take heed what oaths they take; let no man
think himself tied in conscience to do any thing that is evil, because he
has bound himself by an oath to do it: but when a man has bound himself by
his oath to do that that is lawful (as to detect, to present to those in
authority such as he knows to be offenders) let him take heed how he break
that oath. Every lawful oath is a great bond unto the conscience, Numb. 30.2.
If a man swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond. David makes this one
of the special marks to know him by that shall go to heaven, Psalm. 15.4. He
that swears to his own hurt, and changes not. Though after he has taken
his oath he shall perceive that the keeping of it will procure him such enemies
as may do him much hurt, yet dares he not change his mind, but will keep
his oath. And Solomon makes this a special note of a godly man, that he
fears an oath, Eccles. 9.2. which words are not to be understood of private
and voluntary oaths only, but chiefly of those oaths that are taken before
a magistrate, for they are the greatest and heaviest oaths, a godly man is
afraid of such oaths, afraid to take them, and afraid to break them when he
has taken them. See a notable example of this, both in Abraham's servant, who
as much as he loved and respected his master, before he would take the oath that
his master ministered unto him is careful first to know, and consider with
himself whether he might be able to keep it, or no, Gen, 24.5-9 And in those
spies that Ioshuah sent to view Jericho who would not bind themselves by oath
to Rahab rashly (though she had saved their lives) till they got her consent
to such an interpretation, and to limit it with such conditions, as they might
be able to keep it. Josh. 2.17.21. See also an example of this fear to
break their oath after they had taken it, Josh. 9.20. And alas if this be a
note to know a godly man by, how few godly men have we then in these days?
What cause have we to complain with David, Psalm 12.1. Help Lord, for there
is not a godly man left? How many oaths are ministered daily to Churchwardens,
Constables, jurors, and witnesses, at every Assise, and Sessions, in every
Court, Baron, and Leet, in every Commission, whereby men bind themselves to do
things that are lawful enough, yea, often such as tend much to Gods glory, and
the good of the Commonwealth, and no man regards them any more then the
taking up of a straw; they think it is no more then the laying on the hand,
and kissing of the book. Tush thinks every man the taking of these oaths is a
matter of nothing, all my neighbors have taken them before me, and made no
reckoning of them. O but remember, that the holy Ghost says, he that has any
goodness in him, will fear these oaths. And there is great reason for it. An
oath is not to be esteemed of according to the matte^ wherein it is taken (which
in our account may seem sometime trivial, and small) nor according to the
person of the man, unto whom or before whom it is taken (though whatsoever the
person be that ministers the oath unto us, the authority to minister an oath,
is derived to him from the supreme magistrate) but according to the
greatness, and dreadful majesty of God, in whose name, and before whom in a
special manner (for the magistrate is his Deputy, and in his stead, 2 Chronicles.
9.8.19 6. ( Romans 13.4. and the judgment and course of justice is the Lords,
Deutero. 1.17.) the oath is given. Therefore an oath (specially taken by a
magistrate) is called an oath of the Lord, Exodus 22.11. 1 Kings 2.43. For
every oath has a curse employed in it. And the Hebrew word Alah, that
signifies an oath, signifies a curse also, an oath with a curse. Therefore it
is said of Gods people, when they bound themselves by an oath, Nehemiah 10.29.
they entered into a curse, and into an oath to walk in Gods Law. So Judges
21.18. The children of Israel had sworn, saying, Cursed be he that gives a
wife to Benjamin. When you therefore take an oath (specially before a
magistrate) you wish that if it be not true which you speak (in an oath
assertory) if you perform not that which you speak (in an oath promissory)
Gods curse may light upon you and pursue you. And be you sure of this, that if
you perform not your part, God will perform his; if you do not that which
you bind your selves to do by your oath, God will bring that curse upon you,
which you have wished to your selves, as he did bring upon the Jews that
curse which they wished to themselves, Matthew 27.25. All the people said, his
blood be upon us, and upon our children, and his blood (we see) has lain
heavy upon all that people, and nation ever since. When Zedekiah had broken his
oath to the King of Babylon, see what the Lord says of him, Ezekiel 17.15.
Shall he prosper? Shall he escape that does such things? Shall he break the
covenant, and be delivered? And verse 18. Seeing he despised the oath, he
shall not escape. Know you therefore that these oaths which you make so light
account of, will lie heavy upon you one day. They will bring Gods curse into
your houses, Zachary. 5.4. I will bring forth the curse says the Lord of
hosts, and it shall enter into the house of him that swears falsely by my
name; and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it with
the timber thereof, and the stones thereof. Yea, these oaths so commonly
taken, and broken in all places, have brought, and will further bring Gods
curse upon the whole land Iere. 23.10. Because of swearing, the land mourns.
And thus have I finished the first part of my answer to this objection, and
showed you that they that by office and oath are bound to enquire and present
to the magistrate these lewd offenders, and do it not, are chiefly guilty of
their sins.

But now for the second part of my answer, Answ. 2.
I say that these are not only guilty of the blasphemies, and whoredoms, and
drunkenness, whereby God is daily dishonored and provoked amongst us, but this
contagion is spread farther then so, there are very few or none of you that
have not this way drawn upon your selves the guiltines of these sins, and made
them your own, because you have neglected to do that that in you lies, to
bring these offenders to open shame, and punishment. Notable good laws have
been made of late years against swearing, breach of the Sabbath and
drunkenness, but they do little or no good at all, because nobody will have any
hand in detecting these offenders to the magistrate, and in furthering the
execution of these wholesome laws, no, though the whole benefit of the penalty
do accrue to the poor in every parish, and so every member of the parish
should have some ease by it. Yea, some that are very bote and open-mouthed
against others, for not observing some Canons and constitutions about matters
of less moment, and urge the execution of the Law against them, pretending
this for the ground of their earnestness against them, that they will not
observe the Kings Laws. Some men I say that are so zealous for those laws,
have no zeal at all for these Laws that his majesty has enacted against
Idolators, swearers, refusers to come twice of a Sabbath to Church, followers
of lewd sports and pastimes on the Sabbath day, drunkards, alehouses that
keep disorder in them, for these laws (I say) they have no zeal, they like
no man the worse for breaking of these laws, they never urge the execution of
the law against them. Those are good subjects and good neighbors though they
daily provoke God to wrath against the Town, and against the Land. I speak
nothing against any Canon, or constitution of the Church, but wish with all my
heart, many of them were better observed then they are, but this I say, there
is no man that has the heart, and face of a Christian, but he will esteem
more of those Laws that are made for the observation of Gods own express
commandments, then of those that are made for the observation of the
constitutions of men, how lawful or convenient soever they be.

But you will say unto me. What would you have us that are private men to do
in this case? Object.
What can we do for the punishment of these offenders? What calling have we
to meddle with them? Would you have us to be promoters, and enformers? It is an
odious thing for a Christian to be a busie-body. Let none of you suffer (says
the Apostle. 1 Peter 4.15.) as a busi-body in other men's matters.

I answer. Answ.
This is very true, but I require no more of you then you may do, then you
ought to do, then you have a calling to do.

First. Every man has a calling to oppose himself to sin, and to do what he
can Pro. 28.4. Such as keep Gods law, set themselves against wicked men,
contend with them, and are willing to show themselves against them. Specially
such gross sinners, as by their sins endanger not themselves only, but the
whole town where they live. As when a fire is begun in a town that threatens
danger to the whole town, every man has a calling to do what he can to
quench it.

Secondly. Every man has a calling from God to reprove sin that is committed
Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, thou shall in any
wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him.

Thirdly. Every man may, and must, and has a calling to bear witness (being
required) even before a magistrate, against a gross, and incorrigible sinner.
Leviticus 5.1. If a soul sin, and hegare the voice of swearing, and is a
witness whether he has seen, or known of it; if he do not utter it, then
he shall bear his iniquity. If a man should hear the words of treason against
the Prince, and not to utter it to some magistrate within four and twenty
hours, he becomes guilty of treason himself. And is there no danger think
you in concealing words of treason and blasphemy against the Majesty of the
most high? Surely there is as you shall find, Prove. 29.14. Who so is partner
with a thief, hates his own soul; he hears cursing, and bewrays it not.
Mark in these words. 1. It is a sin to be an eare-witnesse of blasphemy, and
not to be willing to bewray it. 2. That he that does so, makes himself
partner with that sinner whom he so bears with. In which respect, God made a
law. Levit. 24.14. that all that heard the blasphemer should lay their hands
upon his head, before he was to be stoned, as the manner was to do upon the
sacrifices that they brought. Why did they so? Surely they did so discharge
upon himself the guiltiness of his sin, which otherwise they had contracted
by hearing of him, if they had not witnessed against him, and brought him to
punishment.

Esa. 59.4. that none called for justice. It is sometimes the part of a
discreet Christian to inform against, and complain of wicked men, either to
the minister or to the magistrate, or to any such as have more power then our
selves, to reform or punish them. There were some in Corinth, and in
Thessalonica too, that did inform the Apostle of the disorders that were among
their neighbors, in those Churches, 1 Cor. 11.18. 2 These. 3.11. and he blames
them not for it. And Joseph informed his father of his brethrens faults, Genesis
37.2. Yea, every man has received a commandment from Christ, to inform the
governors of the Church, of such a brother as cannot otherwise be reformed,
Mat. 18.17. Tell the Church.

Neither shall a private Christian, not tied by office and oath, in doing this,
need to fear the odious name of a busie-body, a pick-thanke, a talebearer, if
in doing it he observe these four rules.

Eccles. 7 21. Take no heed to all words that are spoken.

Matthew. 18.15, 16.

Cloe were, when they informed Paul of the disorders that were in Corinth. 1
Cor. 1.11.

Iehu (though he were a magistrate, and seemed to show wonderful zeal
against the sins of Ahab and Iezebel) no better then of a murderer, and says
Hosea 1.4. I will avenge the blood of Iezreel, upon the house of Iehu. To
conclude, what pretense soever men make for this, why they will do nothing to
further the punishment of sin, I will show you the true cause of it.

Cain, Genes 4.9 Am I my brothers keeper? Or as the chief Priests to Judas,
Mat. 27.4. What is that to us? see thou to that.

Secondly, they will do nothing, because there is in their heart no hatred of
any Psalm. 36.4. He abhors not evil.

Thirdly. They will do nothing, because there is in them no love to God, nor
Ps. 97.10. Ye that love the Lord hate evil. For thus stands the stipulation,
and contract between God, and his people that are in covenant with him. God
binds himself on his part, that he will be a friend to our friends, and an
enemy to our enemies, Exodus 23.22. I will be an enemy to thine enemies, and an
adversary to thine adversaries. So do Gods people for their part bind
themselves to God, that they will love them that he loves, and hate them that
he hates, Psalm. 139.21, 22. Do not I hate them O Lord that hate thee, and am
I not grieved with those that rise up against thee, I hate them with a perfect
hatred, I count them mine enemies.

Fourthly and lastly. They will do nothing to further the punishment of lewd
Nineveh so zealous in reforming their land? Ion. 3.8. Let every man turn from
his evil way, and from the violence that is in his hands. The reason is given
ver, 5. The people of Nineveh believed God, that which he had threatened
against the land by the ministry of Jonah. And what made good Josiah so
zealous in reforming his land? 2 Chr. 34.33. He took away all the abominations
out of all the countries that pertained to the children of Israel. The reason
is given verse 27. That when he had heard what curses God in his law had
threatened against the land for such sins, his heart was tender, and he did
humble himself before God; he undoubtedly believed Gods word and threatening.
And doubtless (on the other side) the infidelity, and atheism that is in men's
hearts, is the cause why no man shows any zeal against sin, no man seeks to
have it punished.

Lecture XXXVII. on Psalm 51.3. October. 17. 1626.
THe second sort that are to be reproved by this doctrine are such as having
authority Can. 26.) straightly charge every minister, that he shall not in any
wise admit to the communion, any of his flock which be openly known to live
in sin notorious without repentance. And the book of common prayer, in the
Rubricke before the communion, commands that if any be an open, and notorious
evil liver, so that the congregation by him is offended, the minister shall
call him, and advertise him in any wise, not to presume to the Lords table,
till he has openly declared himself to have truly repented, that the
congregation may thereby be satisfied, which were asore offended. So that you
see the laws and discipline of our Church, require that open and scandalous
sinners should do open and public repentance, yea give power to the minister
to repel and keep back such from the communion that refuse to do it. Where is
the fault then, may you say? Surely in the covetou^snes, and corruption of
those officers that are put in trust with the execution, and exercise of the
discipline of our Church, who when they seek themselves only, and not the
reformation of any thing that is a miss among Gods people; and by their
illegal commutations of repentance, do neglect the use of public repentance
in the Church of God. Of such that abuse the trust committed to them by our
Church, to their own gain, we may justly complain as the Lord does, Hosea
4.8. They eat up (that is, feed on, and live by) the sins of Gods people,
and lift up their soul (as it is in the original, that is, earnestly desire,
and long after, for so much that phrase signifies, as we shall find Ier.
22.27. Deuteronomy. 24.15.) unto their iniquities. They earnestly desire, that sin may
increase among the people, that so their fees, and gain may increase. See the
foulness of the sins of these men in three points.

Esaias 5.2. he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof. If Gods Vineyard
have no fence, but every swine, and dog may approach to the holy things of God,
to the Sacraments, and privileges of Gods people without restraint, if these
stones of offense, these scandalous sinners, be not taken out, how should the
Lords Vineyard be fruitful unto him? Certainly the neglect of discipline is
the cause, why these stones do multiply as they do, why sin does so increase
in all places. For the hope of impunity has great force to encourage, and
embolden men in sin, Ecclesi. 8.11. Because sentence against an evil work is
not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in
them to do evil, and for pecuniary punishment, it has no such force to
reform them and bring them unto repentance, at least to restrain from sin, as
the bringing of them to open shame has. It is open punishment, of which the
Lord speaks so often in his law, Deuteronomy. 22.21.22, 24. (and elsewhere often) so
shall thou put away evil from among you. And this is noted for a chief use,
and benefit of Magistrates, Judge. 18.7. to put to shame for sin. Fill their
faces with shame (says David, Psalm 83.16.) that they may seek thy name, O
Lord.

Mark 7.11. It is Corban* that is to say, a gift by whatsoever thou may be
profited by me; as if he should say, I have given to the treasury, and
therefore look for no duty from me; so these men teach gross sinners to say to
the ministers, and congregations that require satisfaction from them by their
public repentance; I have satisfied the Court, and to you I will give no
satisfaction at all. If in any other Court of justice it should be said to any
that were impleaded for wrong done to any one man in his body, or goods, or
good name, give somewhat to the Court, and care not for the party that thou
have wronged, he shall have no satisfaction from thee, all men would cry out,
and say, this were extreme wrong and injustice; and is it no sin think we for
any man to wrong a whole Church and congregation thus?

Antichrist did traffic in Revelation 18.13. He made merchandise of the
souls of men. And thus have I done with the second sort of men that are to be
reproved by this Doctrine.

The third and last sort, that by this Doctrine of public confession are to be
reproved, are such as having sinned publicly, and scandalously, refuse to make
public acknowledgement of their sin, and profession of their repentance, when
they are required to do it. It is strange to see what pains men will take,
yea, what cost and charges they will be at to avoid this. And that not the
richer sort only, but even the poorest and basest of the people. Now these
poor men in doing thus, offend three ways.

First and chiefly, against the Lord in refusing to give glory unto his name,
Ioshuah to Achan, Ioshuah 7.19. And it is his ordinance, that you should obey
them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, he means the
ministers and governors of the Church. Heb. 13.17.

Secondly, they sin against the Church, and people of God, in refusing to give
Peter, without any just cause of offense given unto them, when he had by the
commandment of God gone to Cornelius, and there conversed with the Gentiles,
see how that great Apostle does not scornefully resolve them, and ask them
what had they to do with his actions, but is very careful to give them
satisfaction, and to recover their good opinion, by showing them at large the
reason why he did so. Acts 11.4. It is a perilous sign of an ungracious
heart, to make no reckoning what Gods people think of him. Do you not know
(says the Apostle, speaking of this very sin, even of making light account of
the judgment of Gods people. 1 Cor. 6.2.) that the Saints shall judge the
world. It is a great means of peace to our consciences, when we can approve
our selves, our repentance, and conversion not unto God and our own
consciences only, but unto the Church and people of God, Show unto them (says
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8 24. that is to Titus, and the brethren that are with him)
and before the Churches, the proof of your love. And (on the other side) it is
a great trouble to the heart that has grace in it, to have the censure, and
hard opinion of Gods people. So it was to Anna, to be ill thought of by Ely, o
how careful was the poor soul to give him satisfaction, 1 Samuel 1.15, 16. And
it was a great trouble to that good woman that powered the box of precious
ointment on Christ's head, when she saw that the Apostles were much offended
with her for it. Why trouble ye the woman? says our Savior, Matthew. 26.10.
And should it not then trouble any such sinner, as has grieved all Gods people
in the congregation by his sin, and caused them to think ill of him? Will he
not desire, if he have any grace in him, to recover their good opinion by
making known unto them his repentance? If thou have given offense to any one
of thy neighbors (even the meanest of them) thou art bound in conscience to
make him satisfaction, and to seek reconciliation with him, Matthew. 5.24. Go
thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, etc. Neither is he bound to
think well of thee again, till thou have professed thy repentance unto him.
Luke 17.4. If thy brother that has trespassed against thee, turn again to
thee, saying, I repent, thou shall forgive him. And are not men much more bound
to give satisfaction to a whole congregation whom they have offended, and to
seek reconciliation with it, then with any one man? Is the congregation bound,
or can it think well of him that has given public offense unto it, till he
turn again unto it, and profess his repentance? This despising of the
congregation, and the people of God is a greater sin then most men are aware
of. Take heed (says our Savior, Mat. 18.10.) that ye despise not one of
these little ones. What (says the Apostle speaking of a particular
Congregation, 1 Cor. 11.22.) despise ye the Church of God? for the contempt
done to Gods people thus, rests not upon them, but reaches unto Christ
himself; as the Apostle plainly teaches, 1 Cor. 8.12. When ye sin so against
the brethren, ye sin against Christ.

Ion. 2.8.) forsake their own mercy; that is, the means to assure them that
notwithstanding their sins, the mercy of the Lord belongs unto them. For 1.
no man can ever obtain the assurance of the pardon of his sin till he have
repented, Luke 24.47. Repentance and remission of sins must be preached in
Christ's name. And this repentance must not be such a one as we fancy, and
frame to our selves, but such as God in his word has appointed, and that is,
(as we have heard) that for public sins, we repent publicly. He that refuses
to do this, forsakes (you see) his own mercy. 2. In the offenses we have
done to men, we can have no benefit of Christ's sacrifice for the pardon of
them, till we have first endeavored to give satisfaction unto them, whom we
have offended. This is plain by that law, Levit. 6.5. and by the speech of our
Savior, Matt. 5.24. Leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way,
first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come, and offer thy gift. He then
that refuses to satisfy the Congregation that he has offended, and to seek
reconciliation with it, does in this respect also forsake his own mercy, and
barreth himself from having benefit by the sacrifice of Christ. Thus have I
showed you how heinous the sin of these men is, now let me endeavor to remove
the maine impediment that keeps men from this duty; and that I will do
briefly, and so conclude.

Object.
I could be content to do this, but that it will be such a shame and reproach
unto me. Can any man, that has the spirit and heart of a man in him be willing
to make himself a gazing and laughing stock to a whole Congregation? And
surely it is lamentable to see how the devil, who made men impudent and
shameless, when he tempted them to sin, overwhelmeth them, and stops their
mouths with shame, when they should confess their sin, and so find mercy
with God. Certainly this is Satan's work, and till God be pleased to deliver
men from the power of Satan, it will never be better with them. But as it is
said of the man that was possessed with a dumb spirit, Luke 11.14. When the
devil is once gone out of them, the dumb will speak, and speak so freely and
frankly in the acknowledgment of their sins, that men will wonder to see it.

Answ.
I answer. 1. It will be no reproach unto thee at all. 2. If it were, yet must
thou be willing to do it.

Genesis 3.7.10.) nor make it open that was secret before, but thy repentance
only; and that is a work of Gods grace, no matter of shame, but of glory. The
spirit of glory and of God rests upon you, says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.14.
Indeed ungracious men are ashamed of nothing so much, as of religion, to be
thought to have any piety or grace in them; but what a height of wickedness is
this? Certainly religion will be a glory to him that has it. O ye sons of
men (says David Psalm. 4.2.) how long will ye turn my glory into shame? 1.
Admit some lewd men will mock thee for it, all good men will esteem the
better of thee for it. When Gods people saw Paul's repentance, they never
reproched him for his former blasphemies, but glorified God for it, as he
speaks, Galat. 1.24. Yea, there is more joy in heaven (where God and Christ,
and the elect Angels, and the blessed spirits are) over one sinner that
repents, then over ninety nine just persons that need no repentance, as our
Savior himself assures us upon his word, Luke 15.7.3. It is not possible thou
should loose any credit and reputation by obeying God, and so honoring him.
Who thinks the worse of Moses, or David, or Peter, or Paul for the foul sins
that they were guilty of? And who is the author of all true credit and
reputation, even with men? Is it not the Lord. Both riches and honor come of
thee, says David, 1 Chronicles. 29.12. and Psalm. 33. Thou o Lord art my glory, and
the lifter up of my head. And God has bound himself with promise that no man
shall loose but gain reputation and credit by serving him and doing his will,
1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor me I will honor; especially that no man shall
loose credit and estimation, by humbling and taking shame upon himself in the
way of unfeigned repentance; as our Savior promises upon occasion taken from
his speech of the humiliation of the Publicane, Luke 18.14. He that humbles
himself shall be exalted.

Secondly, I answer, that admit thou could not thus publicly confess If
any man will come after me (says our Savior, Luke 9.23.) let him deny
himself. While we are so far in love with our selves, our own reason, our
own will, our own pleasure, or profit, till we can cross our selves, in that
that is so dear unto us, as our credit is, and with the four and twenty
Elders, Reu. 4.10. cast down our crowns before the throne of God, and at his
feet, till we can say with David 2 Samuel 6.22. I will yet be more vile then
thus, and will be base in mine own sight, we can never know what true
repentance means. 2. Thy peace with God, the peace of thy conscience, is more
worth then thy credit with all the men in the world. Take the blessed Apostle
for an example in this point who having spoken Phil. 3.4 -- 6. of many
privileges he had to glory in, that tended greatly to gain him credit in the
world, professes verse 7, 8. he counted them all loss, that is, he was
contented to loose them all for Christ. For whom (says he) I have suffered the
loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ.
Certainly thy credit will be a loss unto thee, but thou shall be a greater
looser by the bargain, if for love of it, thou loose thy peace with God. O how
hard penance will many of the poor seduced Papists endure to pacify their
consciences (they will go bare foot and bareleg to Tyburne, etc.) and yet it
is but a false peace that is gotten that way, all their labor is spent upon
that that satisfies not, as the Prophet speaks, Esaias 55, 2. And shall we be
unwilling to cross our selves a little in submitting our selves to that course
of repentance which God himself has prescribed, and which will therefore
certainly procure to our hearts that peace of God which passes all
understanding, as the Apostle speaks, Phil. 4.7?

Lecture XXXVIII. On Psalm 51.3. October. 31. 1626.
IT follows now that we proceed to the third and last kind of confession
which we are to be exhorted unto, from the example of David, if we desire to
find mercy with God as David did; we must above all things be willing and
ready to confess our sins unto the Lord himself. Of all the three kinds of
confession that have been commended unto us in the example of David, this is
the principal, this all Gods people must strive to make most conscience of.
This is that kind of confession of sins, that Gods Saints have most practiced,
and found comfort in. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, (says David Psalm.
32.5.) I said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord. I will arise
(says the prodigal Luke 15.18) and go to my father, and will say unto him,
Father I have sinned against heaven, and before thee. This is the confession
which the holy Ghost in Scripture does most urge, and commend unto us, and for
one word he speaks of the other two kinds, he speaks twenty of this. Which
is worthy to be observed, that even by this one point we may discern, how
contrary the doctrine of the Church of Rome is unto the doctrine of the spirit
of God in the holy Scriptures: For what is that confession of sins that the
Papists speak so much of in all their Catechismes, which they urge as a matter
of so great necessity, which they call a Sacrament, which they make one of the
three essential parts of true repentance, without which they say no man can
receive absolution and remission of his sins, nor entrance into the kingdom of
heaven? Surely it is not the confession of sins that is made unto God, but that
which is made in the ears of a Priest; unto which they ascribe all this. And
though they cannot deny but that inward confession of our daily sins unto God
is good, yet neither do they account it sufficient for any man's salvation, nor
do they urge it as a matter of so great necessity, or profit as the confession
of sins to a Priest is.

Tim. 2.1. and enjoined us in the fifth petition of the Lords prayer, Mat. 6.12.
as that indeed that makes all the rest of our prayers the more acceptable unto
God. This is that kind of confession that is mentioned by Nehemiah 9.2 and
enjoined by Ezra 10.11. with this in our Liturgy (according to the direction
of the holy Scripture) we begin our public prayers, and all Gods people that
desire the benefit of the prayers of the Congregation, should make conscience
of this, to come so soon to the Church, that they may join with the
Congregation even in that.

Mat. 6.6. When thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou have shut to
the door, pray to thy father which is in secret; and verse 18. Show thy self
to fast and to be humbled for thy sins to thy father which is in secret. And
this is that confession of our sins unto God, which we must labor to bring our
hearts unto, and even to exercise our selves unto it, according to that phrase
of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.7. Exercise thy self unto godliness. All other
outward exercises of mortification, as fasting, and setting taskes of devotion
unto our selves, of reading so much, saying over so many prayers, confessing of
our sins to a Priest, have no such force as this, to bring our hearts either to
mortification or comfort, but are like those bodily exercises of which the
Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 4 8. Bodily exercise profits little.

Now for the further enforcing of this exhortation, and working in us all more
conscience of this duty of confessing and bewailing our sins in secret unto
God. 1. I will give you certain motives to provoke you unto it. 2. I will show
you some helps and means whereby you may be enabled to do it. And the
motives shall be but three. 1. From the necessity of this duty. 2. From the
conveniencie of it. 3. For the fruit and benefit that is to be reaped by it.

And first for the necessity of it. We know that all men, the civilest yea the
Nehemiah, Neh 15. and Daniel, Dan 9.5.7.8. If we (says the Apostle 1 John
1.8. -- 10.) say we have no sin; that is, (as is plain by the antithesis
that he makes verse 9.) if we cannot in our prayers to God find in our selves
sins to confess unto him, we deceive our selves and the truth is not in us,
yea, we make him a liar, and his word (whatsoever profession we make of it) is
not in us; that is, in our hearts we receive it not, we believe it not. Yea,
no man can have hope God will pardon his sin, till he can bring his heart to
confess it unto God; nor have so comfortable assurance of the pardon of any
sin, that he never yet particularly confessed and accused himself of before,
as he may have of the other. For the promise of mercy (at least of the
comfortable assurance of mercy from God) is made upon this condition. Return
thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, ( ^^re. 3.12, 13.) and I will not
cause mine anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful says the Lord, only
acknowledge thine iniquity. This is plain in that prayer Solomon makes for
Gods people that should be in captivity. 1 King. 8.47. -- 50. If they shall
bethink themselves and repent, and make supplication unto thee, saying we
have sinned and have done perversely, we have committed wickedness, then hear
thou their prayer, and forgive thy people that have sinned against thee. And
thus runs the promise also, 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins. If we confess them we have
assurance of the forgiveness of them, but not else. Now every man has some
personal and particular si^s, that cannot be confessed in any of the prayers
that we make with others, either in public or private. If any other man be our
mouth to God, he cannot confess them, because he knows them not, 1 Cor.
2.11. What man knows the things of a man, but the spirit of man that is in
him? If we our selves do conceive the prayer, we will not (neither is it fit
we should) discover it before others, at least not aggravate it by the
circumstances of it; as we shall hear it is fit we should do. There is
therefore a necessity we should do it in secret.

The second motive is from the conveniencie of it. For we make confession

First, We may power out our hearts more fully and freely unto God in Zach.
12.12. that the husband should mourn apart, and the wife apart, they should
not disclose their sins one to another. But there is no such thing to stay or
hinder us from being free, and open hearted in secret. For 1. we can say no
worse by our selves then the Lord knows already, better then our selves;
according to that speech of David, Psalm. 69.5. O God, thou know my
foolishness, and my sins are not hid from thee. and 139.2, 3. O Lord thou
understandest my thought afar off, thou compassest my paths and my lying
down, and art acquainted with all my ways. 2. We may be sure he will not like
the worse, but the better of us for confessing and opening of our sins unto
him, if we accuse our selves he will be the readier to absolve us. According to
that we have heard, 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful, and
just to forgive us, and 1 Cor. 11.31. If we would judge our selves, we should
not be judged. Ye people (says David, Psalm. 62.8.) power out your hearts
before him; God is a refuge for us. As if he had said, ye have no cause to
fear, or be ashamed to open your hearts to him, the more you can lay to your
own charge, and accuse your selves of, the more ready you shall find him to
be a refuge and a comfort unto you. There is no cause of fear for an humbled
soul to go to him. Will he plead against me with his great power? (says Ioh
23.6.) no, but he would put strength in me. James 1.5. He gives to all men
liberally, and upbraideth not.

Job speaks of himself, Job 16.20. Mine eye powers out tears (that is
weepeth abundantly) unto God. Thus did Jacob when he was alone, Hos. 12.4. And
I tell you, even this makes our confession of sins the more effectual with
God, when we can do it with tears. As appears by that speech of God to
Hezekiah, 2 King. 20.5. I have heard thy prayer, and seen thy tears. And this
second respect may seem to have moved David when he fasted and prayed for the
child, to go in to do it 2 Samuel 12.16. and both other of Gods servants, and
our blessed Savior himself too, make choice of a secret place for their
devotions. So did Elizeus, 2 King. 4.33. So did Peter, Act. 10.9 So did our
Savior, Mar. 1.35. They knew they might have more liberty for voice and
gesture and tears there, then they could have had in the company of men.



First, This will give a man far greater assurance of the truth and
uprightness of his heart, when he can confess and bewail his sin in secret
unto God, Job proves himself to have bin no hypocrite (as his friends charged
him) because he had not been wont to cover his transgressions from God, as Adam
did, not to hide them in his bosom, but had been wont freely and ingeniously
to confess them unto God Job 31.33. This argues there is no guile in the
spirit when a man can acknowledge his sins unto God, and confess his
transgressions unto him, Psalm. 32.2, 3.5. And our Savior persuading his
disciples to take heed of hypocrisy in performing religious duties,
prescribes this for an antidote to preserve them from it, to learn to make
conscience of doing them in secret, Mat. 6.5, 6. Be not as the hypocrites, for
they love to pray in open places, where they may be seen of men, but thou when
(...) prayest enter into thy closet. For it is strange to see how far an
hypocrite may go in performing religious duties in the presence of others; as
our Savior there shows, they love to pray (says he) standing in the
Synagogues. They will seem to show great delight and zeal in good duties so
long as they have men to be witnesses of it. Yea in this very point of making
confession of their sins before men, hypocrites and graceless men have gone
very far. Pharaoh did this to Moses and Aaron sundry times, Exodus 9.27. and
10.16. and Saul unto Samuel, 1 Samuel 15 24.30. (auricular confession unto a
Priest you see a rank hypocrite may make) and Judas made confession of his
sin before the Priests and Elders publicly in the Temple. Yea, to the party he
has wronged an hypocrite will be able to confess his sin, as Saul did to David,
1 Samuel 24.17, 18. and 26.21. But of none of these you can read, that ever they
could go to God in secret and power out their hearts before him. So that you
see this is one benefit a man shall receive by it, it will give him a
comfortable assurance of the sincerity and uprightnes of his heart before God.

Secondly. It will give great assurance to a man of mercy from God, in the
pardon of his sins. Gods people have bin wont to find as great ease to their
consciences by confessing their sins to God, as ever stomach that was sick, and
oppressed did by casting up the meat that offended it; or sore that was
impostumated by giving vent to the filthy matter, that put it unto pain. David
professes of himself, Ps. 119.25, 26. that when his soul cleaved to the dust
(that it was quite cast down, and dejected, as one foiled, and wounded by his
enemy, and ready to give up the Ghost) he took this course to relieve
himself, and found comfort in it, he declared his ways unto God, and he
heard him. And in another place having spoken of his own experience in this
case, how he being in extreme anguish of mind, and unable to find case any
other way, by betaking himself to this course, found comfort, and assurance of
mercy from God, Ps. 32.5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity
(...) I not ^id. I said I will acknowledge my transgression unto the Lord, and
thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. He infers thereupon, ver. 6. For this
cause shall every one that is godly pray unto thee; that is, every one that is
godly that is truly humbled for his sin shall be encouraged by my example, to
seek the same way for mercy that I have done And what follows? Surely to the
floods of great waters, they shall not come nigh unto him. As if he had said,
He that takes this course, let his afflictions and sorrows be never so great,
he shall not be overwhelmed with them, he shall be sure to find comfort in
them. And it cannot otherwise be, but they take this course must needs find
comfort in it, for God has bound himself by promise to it, Pro. 28.13. H^
that confesses and forsakes his sins shall find mercy. 1 Ioh. 1.9. If we
confess our sins, God is faithful, and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from (...) unrighteousnes. So Ioh 33.27, 28. If any say, I have
sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not, he will
deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light.
Yea, he has bound himself by promise to his people, that though they be never
so much oppressed, and burdened in their minds either with the sense of their
sins, or with any judgments that for their sins are fallen upon them, though
they even pine away in their iniquity, as he speaks, Lev. 26.39. (foretelling
the case his people should be in, in the time of their captivity) yet says he
ver 40.42. If then they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of
their fathers, with their own trespass which they have trespassed against me,
and that also they have walked contrary unto me, then will I remember my
covenant. And as these promises are made to all Gods people that can confess
and complain of their sins unto him, so specially to such as can acquaint
themselves with God, and accustom themselves to do this in secret, according to
that speech of our blessed Savior, Mat. 6.6. Pray to thy father which is in
secret, and thy father which is in secret will reward thee openly, and ver. 18.
Show thy self to fast, and to be humbled to thy father which is in secret, and
thy father which is in secret, shall reward thee openly. I speak not thus much
to encourage any hypocrite that is apt to bless himself in his profane
neglect of praying with his family, and of joining with Gods people in prayer
either ordinary or extraordinary, and say, though I do not join with others
in these duties, yet I use to pray, and confess my sins in secret unto God
upon my bed, and that is the best of al. For to these I say as our Savior
does, Mat 23.23. This ought ye to do, and not to leave the other undone. And if
thou did indeed of conscience toward God, and in a conscionable manner pray
in secret, and cenfesse thy sins in secret, thou would also join with Gods
people in these duties, because God has as well commanded the one as the other.
For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty
of al, Iam. 2.10 But I have spoken all this to so many of you as fear the
Lord, that use to pray and confess your sins with your families, and join
with Gods people in the public co^fessions that are made in the congregation,
do so still in Gods name, but rest not in that; learn to do this duty in secret
also; get thee into thy closet to do this; yea, if thou have no place private
enough in thine house to do it in, do as young Isaac did, Genesis 24.63. and our
Savior, Luke 5.16. get thee into the field sometimes to do it; Do as David
did, Psalm. 22.2. in the nights upon thy bed. And when thou art alone, pour out
thy heart unto God, lay open thy sins before him in particular, and aggravate
them with the circumstances, whereby they are made more heinous, work thy
heart to do it with sorrow, and with tears, seek ease to thy heart, and
comfort this way, when thou art in greatest heaviness, remember the promises
God has made, to show mercy to them that can do so, stay thy faith upon them,
expect the performance of them, and challenge it as his hand, and doubtless
thou shall find comfort in it.

Lecture XXXIX. on Psalm 51.3. November. 7. 1626.
NOw it follows, that we proceed unto the means, whereby we may attain unto
this grace. And those are five principally.

Romans 3.20. By the Law comes the knowledge of sin, and Ephesians. 5.3. All things
that are reproved, are made manifest by the light. And though there be light
sufficient in nature to discover unto us some sins, specially in the outward
breaches of the second table, Romans 2.^5. The work of the Law is written in
their hearts, their consciences also bearing witness, and accordingly accusing,
or excusing them. Yet are there two defects in that light. 1. It will not
discover to us all our sins; nay there be many foul sins, and such as of all
other most provoke God against us, which the natural man cannot discern by
that light to be sins. The way of the wicked is as darkness (says Solomon,
Pro. 4.19.) they know not at what they stumble. That which Paul says of
concupiscence, the root of all sin, may be said of many other, Romans 7 7. I had
not known lust (that is to say, not to be sin) unless the Law had said, thou
shall not covet. 2. Those sins that it does discover to us, it does not
discover them effectually, so as to humble us, and drive us to God thereby, but
either dimly by the halves, so as they never affect or trouble us. As our
Savior speaks, Pro. 10.23. It is a sport to a fool to do mischief, or
else to make us inexcusable, and overwhelme us with despair, as Genesis 3.8.
But that knowledge of sin that is effectual to humble us, and drive us unto
Gods mercy-seat, comes not by the light of nature, but only by the word. It
is that only that does so convince a man of sin, and manifest to him the
secrets of his heart, as makes him fall down on his face, and worship God, as
the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. In which respect Paul says, Romans 7.7.
I had not known sin, but by the Law: As if he should say, I had not known
sin effectually (for doubtless, he did by nature know many sins) or to my
good and comfort, but by the Law. The word is a lamp unto our feet, and a
light unto our paths, as David calls it, Psalm 119.105. It is a glass that
will discover unto us, what manner of men we are, James 1.23, 24. Let us
therefore even for this cause, desire not only to live where we may have this
light, but to increase also in the knowledge of the Word. Let us therefore make
this use of the light we live in, and use the word as a glass that we may know
our sins better, the more light we have, the better we may discern what is
amiss about us. It is made the property of a wicked man to hate the Word for
this, and refuse to come at it, because it discovers to him his sins, John
3.20. Every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes be to it,
lest his deeds should be reproved. And on the contrary, it is said of every one
that has grace, that he loves the Word the better, even for this cause, John
3.21. He that does truth (that is, practices what he knows, and makes
conscience of his ways) comes to the light, that his deeds may be made
manifest

Secondly. He that would be able to confess his sins unto God aright, must
observe his own ways well, and bethink himself well before hand, or when he
does Pro. 4.26. Ponder the path of thy feet, and Hag. 1.5. Consider your ways.
And the godly man is described by this property, Pro. 14.15. The prudent
looks well to his going. Yea, this is spoken of, as a special mean, and help
unto repentance, Ps. 119.9. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? By
taking heed thereto, according to thy word; and ver, 59. I thought on my ways,
and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. And on the other side, this is made a
chief cause (why men commit many sins, and never see them, nor are troubled
with them, that they go rashly on in their ways, and at all adventures) Keri,
Levit. 26.21. that they never consider what they do, Esa. 1.3. that they
despise their ways, regard them not; as if they should never be called to
account for them, Pro. 19.16. And yet as light account as thou make of them,
know, God will reckon with thee for them one day, Matt. 12.36. If men would
think and consider what they do, it would either keep them from doing evil,
or when they had done amiss, they would be able to discern it, and make their
peace with God. Solomon says of the wise man, Eccl. 2.14. that his eyes are in
his head. and in your worldly businesses, when you buy or sell, or do any work
in your calling, you will mind that you go about, that you receive no hurt by
your carelesnes and want of taking heed. O that we could learn to be as wise
for our souls, to mind, and set our hearts upon every thing we do, least we
offend God by it. This is required of us, not only in our recreations, and in
the ordinary affairs of our calling, but even in the services we do unto God
Take heed how you hear, says our Savior, Luke 8.18. Take heed to thy foot
(says Solomon, Eccle, 5.1.) when thou entrest into the house of God. As if he
had said, Mark what thou do, and consider, whether thou perform thy service
to God as thou should do, and be more ready to hear, then to offer the
sacrifice of fools, for they consider not that they do evil. As if he
should say, this is the cause why most men offer such foolish sacrifices unto
God, they consider not what they do.

Thirdly. He that would be able to confess his sins unto God aright, must use
Lamentati. 3.40. Let us search, and try our ways, and turn again unto the
Lord. Psalm 4.4. Tremble, and sin not, examine your own heart upon your
bed. And on the other side, the neglect of it, is mentioned as a chief cause,
and sign of impenitency, Jeremy 8.6. No man repented him of his wickedness,
saying, what have I done? And as this examination of our selves is profitable,
and necessary, so the oftener we use it, the more profitable it will be. Three
notable benefits we shall receive by it, if we would accustom our selves to
use it every day. 1. It would be a good means to bridle us, and restrain us
from sin, when we considered this with our selves, this I must account with
God, and mine own conscience for before I sleep, As the daily thinking of the
general account we must one day come to, is most effectual this way, as is
plain in that speech of the Apostle, 2 Corinthians. 5.10, 11. so would the thought
of this particular account we bring our selves to, do us great good also. 2.
It would free us from the fear of sudden death, which may befall any of us,
and we would be prepared for it, when we suffer no sin to lodge with us all
night, that we have not repented of. Watch ye therefore (says our Savior,
Mark 13.35, 36.) for ye know not when the master of the house comes, lest
coming suddenly, he find you sleeping. When a man has made his peace with
God, he may sleep quietly, he need not fear death. Psalm. 4 8. I will both lay
me down in peace, and sleep. 3 By this means a man may remember his sins,
and the circumstances of them much better, and so, more fully, and effectually
confess them unto God. Whereas, if we suffer our selves to run long upon
the score, we shall be apt to forget much, and not be so sensible as when
our sins were fresh in memory. In this case we may say as Job. 13.12. (though
he speaks it there in another sense) our memories are like unto ashes.

Deuteronomy. 9.7. Remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst the Lord to wrath, in
the wilderness. Thus does David remember the sins of his youth, Psalm. 25.7.

James 1.17. Every good gift is from above. Therefore Job beggeth this of God,
Job 13.23. How many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my
transgression, and my sin.

Lecture XL. On Psalm 51.3. November 14. 1626.
IT follows now, that we proceed unto the second use and that is for
direction, to try whether we have yet attained to this grace or no. And this
is surely an use of as great profit, and necessity as the former. For if we
will call to mind, and consider 1. What promises God has made to them that can
confess their sins aright. 2. That no man can have assurance, and hope to
obtain pardon of his sins, till he confess them. 3. How far many hypocrites
have gone in making confession of their sins, as we have seen in the examples
of Pharaoh, and Saul, of Cain and Judas; it cannot be, but it will work in us
a desire both to learn how we may confess our sins in such a manner, as we
may not loose our labor in it, and how we may try and discern, whether we
have gone any further in this duty, and attained to more grace this way, then
ever any hypocrite was able to do. Now there be five properties whereby a
sincere confession of our sins may be differenced, and distinguished from that
which is counterfeit.



Sam. 7.6. We have sinned against the Lord. And that of the Publican, Luke
18.13. God be merciful to me a sinner. These words were very general, but
the great affection wherewith they were uttered, does argue, that in their
heart, and feeling Who can understand his errors? says David, Psalm 19.12.
and 40.12 They are more in number then the hairs of our Thirdly, For hidden and
unknown sins, a general confession may suffice to give a man comfort, and
assurance of the pardon of them; as we may see in that prayer of David, Psalm.
19.12. Cleanse thou me from secret faults. Yet does this remain a certain
truth, that one special property to distinguish the sincere confession from
the counterfeit, is this, that it is particular, and so is not the other. And
this will appear to you in four points. 1. All men are bound to do their best
endeavor to know, and find out their most secret sins, that so they may lay
them open in particular unto God. This is plain by that speech of the Prophet,
Lam. 3.40. Let us search and try our ways. What needs that, but to find out
sins that are unknown or forgotten? And in that speech of Elihu, speaking of a
sinner humbling himself in confession of his sins, Job 34.31, 32. Surely it is
meet to be said unto God, that which I see not, teach thou me. All men should
beg this of God, to discover to them their secret and unknown sins. 2. The more
particular a man can be in the confessing of his sins, the more of his sins
he can confess against himself, the more comfort he may have in his
confession. It is with us in our dealing with God in this case, as it is in the
clyent or patient, that deals with his Lawyers or Physician for counsel, the
more particularly (we know) that a man deals with his lawyer, in laying open
his case unto him, and with his Physician, in discovering his disease unto him,
the more good he may receive from him, yea, the concealing of some one
circumstance from them, may often times tend to a man's undoing. Even so it is in
our laying open our sins unto God, the more particular we can be, the better it
will be for us. This is plain by that direction the Lord gave to the high
Priest in the confession he was to make of the peoples sins, upon the day of
atonement* Lev. 16.21. Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live
goat, the sacrifice (that was to bear and take upon him all the iniquities of
Gods people, as it is said ver. 2. a most lively figure of Christ and of the
sufferings which he endured in his soul for our sins) and confess over him
all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in
all their sins. 3. Unless we can in our confessions, mention some particular
sins, wherein we have offended God, we shall never be able to perform this
duty feelingly, and to the purpose. See this in that commandment God gives
to his people for confession, and the manner of it. Iere. 3.13. Only
acknowledge that thou have transgressed against the Lord thy God, and have
scattered thy ways to the strangers under every green tree; as if he had
said, confess thine idolatry. See this property also in the confessions of
Gods people, commended to us in the holy Scripture, Judges 10.10. We have
sinned against thee, both because we have forsaken our God, and also served
Baalim. And 1. Sam. 12.19 We have added to all our sins, this evil to ask
us a King. In this manner also did David confess his sin in the time of the
great plague, 1 Chronicles. 21.17. Is it not I that have commanded the people to be
numbered? even I it is that have sinned. 4. and lastly. Though it be profitable
for us (as we heard the last day) when we would humble our souls in the
confession of our sins, to call to mind, and confess unto God some of our most
heinous sins. As Paul did, 1 Timothy 1.13. and at many other times. I was a
blasphemer and a persecutor. Yet (that we may be particular enough in our
confession) it must not content us to do so, but even those sins that seem
smallest, as our worldlines, peevishnes, aptnes to surmise, and speak evil of
others, passionatnes, choler, evil thoughts, formality in religious duties,
and such like) must also be remembered, confessed and bewailed before God.
David's heart smote him, 1. Sam. 24.5. even for cutting of the skirt of Saul's
garment. Cain could confess (when God had charged him with it) and cry out
upon his murder, and say his iniquity was greater then could be pardoned, Genesis
4.13 but his hating and envying of his brother, because he had more grace then
himself, his formality and want of faith, and feeling in the offerings he
brought to God, that he could not confess or complain of. So could Judas
confess and cry out of his gross and capital sin. Mat. 27.4. I have sinned in
betraying innocent blood, but his covetousnes, and his hypocrisy in coming
with a bad heart to the Lords passover, which were the roots of the other, he
could not confess and complain of. And indeed men's carelesnes in smaller sins,
is a great cause why God gives men over unto foul, and grosser sins, Ps.
19.12, 13. Cleanse thou me from secret faults keep back thy servant from
presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me; then shall I be
upright, and I shall be innocent from the great transgression.

They therefore that though they can say and confess in gross, and general,
that they are sinners, Applic.
yet cannot in particular say how or wherein they have sinned but are like to
Nebuchadnezar Dan. 2.5. that could say he had dreamed and was troubled with it,
but what his dream was he could not tell; may justly suspect their confession
not to be sincere but counterfeit.



I am vile says Job 40.4. See this in Solomon's prayer, 1 King. 8 47, 49, 50.
If they shall say, we have sinned, we have done perversely, we have committed
wickedness (as if they should say, o we cannot express how heinous our sins
are) then hear thou their prayer, and forgive them. Such a confession was
Paul's, Acts 26.10, 11. Many of the Saints did I shut up in prison, when they
were put to death I gave my voice against them, I punished them often in every
Synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme, and exceeding in madness against
them, I persecuted them (going beyond my commission) even unto strange cities,
and 1 Timothy 1.15. Of whom I am the chief. As if he had said, No man's Daniel, Dan
9.5.6. We have sinned and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and
have rebelled, neither have we hearkened to thy servants the Prophets. As if
he had said; we have sinned against great means of grace. So Ezech. 9.7 -- 9.
in his confession aggravateth their sins by this circumstance that they had
been committed against manifold experiments they had had both of the severity,
and also of the mercy of the Lord. So it is said of Peter, Mar. 14.72. that
weighing that with himself he wept. He could never have brought his heart to
be so deeply affected with and humbled for sin, if he had not weighed with
himself the circumstances, whereby it was aggravated. No more can any of us
certainly, unless we take the like Benhadads servants did unto Ahab, 1 King.
20.32. they came to him with ropes about their necks as men judging themselves
worthy to dye. Thus did Daniel make his confession, Dan. 9.7. O Lord
righteousness belongs unto thee but unto us confusion of faces. As if he had
said, thou art righteous in all that thou have done against us, yea, if thou
should confound us for ever, thou should be righteous in that also. So
did the prodigal confess, Luke 15 21. Father I have sinned against heaven,
and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.

Applic.
Now in this second property the hypocrite is also (for the most part) grossly
defective; for even when he seems most humbled, and most willing to confess
against himself his wickedness, yet has he a desire to hide somewhat to
cloak and extenuate his sin, and with the unjust steward, Luke 16.6. for an
hundred to set down fifty. Though he can confess himself to be a sinner, yet
that he is an heinous sinner, or in any great danger for any sin that he is
guilty of, that he cannot believe. Sundry conceits he has whereby he is apt to
keep his sins off from coming to near his heart, or lying too heavy upon it.
Some few of them I will name unto you. 1. Though I be a sinner (says he) and
have my faults, yet am I not so bad as such, and such, I thank God. This
conceit spoiled the Pharisee, Luke 18.11. God I thank thee I am not as other
men are. 2. Though I be a sinner, (says he) alas, I cannot help it, it is my
nature, I am flesh and blood as well as others, I am not the first that did so,
neither shall I be the last; who is it that does not sin, and for this he is
apt to pervert the Scripture to his own destruction, James 3.2. In many things
we offend all. 3. Though I have foully fallen sometimes, yet I thank God it
was not out of any disposition or liking I had in my self to that sin, it was
company that drew me to it. Thus said Adam even to the Lord himself, Genesis
3.12. The woman whom thou gave me drew me to it. 4. and lastly, If he can lay
the fault no where else, he will to extenuate his sin, lay it upon the devil,
as Eve did, Genesis 3.13. The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. Whereas
indeed, our sin is our own, and no body in so much fault for it, as our
selves. James 1.14. Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own
lusts, and enticed. From within (says our Savior, Mark 7.21.) out of the
heart of men proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, etc. But let us all take heed
of this subtilty of Satan, and of this deceitfulness of sin, and whenever we
go to confess our sins unto God, let us remember what is said, Pro. 28.13. He
that covers his sins, shall not prosper.

Thirdly, Sincere confession is hearty, it is made with feeling and affection,
O my God (says Ezra, Ezr. 9.6.) I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to
thee, for our iniquities are increased over our heads. So the Publican in that
confession which our blessed Savior gives such testimony unto, Luke 18.13.
for shame would not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven; and in indignation
against himself smote upon his breast. So did Job 42.6. I abhor my self, and
repent in dust and ashes. The true confessor feels his sin to be a burden to
his conscience. Mine iniquities (says David, Psalm. 38.4) are as an heavy
burden, too heavy for me to bear.

And surely this grief of heart for sin even without words, Applic.
is a more effectual confession in the sight of God, then all the most
excellent words in the world, without an humble heart. Such as was Mary
Magdalens, of whom it is plain by Christ's answer to her, Luke 7.48. He said
unto her thy sins are forgiven, that she had confessed and complained of her
sins, yet spoke she never a word, but wept and sobbed abundantly, verse 38,
And on the other side, this is that that makes the confessions the hypocrite
does make of his sins odious unto God; yea, that makes the confessions most of
us make, utterly fruitless and uncomfortable unto us, that they are verbal
only, and from the teeth outward, our hearts are not at all affected with that
we say. We declare our iniquities often unto God (as David said he would do,
Psalm. 38.18.) but we leave out the other, and I will be sorry for my sin. And
what man would not think himself mocked, and scorned by him that had done him
wrong, and will pretend a desire of reconciliation, and confess the wrong he
had done him, but without all show of sorrow for it?

Fourthly, The sincere confession is holy, and honest, joined always Shecaniah
makes, Ezra 10.2, 3. We have trespassed against our God, and taken strange
wives, now therefore let us make a covenant with our God to put away all these
strange wives. See this also noted by Elihu in the description that he makes
of a true confessor that humbles himself before God, Job 34.31, 32. Surely
it is meet to be said unto God, I have borne chastisement, I will not offend
any more, that which I see not, teach thou me, if I have done iniquity I will
do no more. This is also very observable in that antithesis that Solomon
makes, Pro. 28.13. The covering of sin, and not confessing it, is enough he
says to bring Gods curse upon a man, he that covers his sin, shall not
prosper: but the confessing of sin is not enough to obtain mercy from God, he
that confesses and forsakes them, shall find mercy.

Applic.
And on the other side this does greatly discover the hypocrisy of most men, in
the confessions they make of their sins to God. 1. They confess them but they
forsake them not; they return with the dog, (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet.
2.22.) greedily to those very sins which they seemed to loath and cast up. Thus
did Saul, he confesses his sin against David sundry times, and that with
tears, 1 Samuel 24.16, 17. and yet Chap. 26.2. he pursues him again as eagerly
as ever he did. 2. Yea, many a man emboldneth himself to sin the more freely,
even by this because he is persuaded that by confessing his sin, (as the
drunkard by his vomiting) he shall be eased of all, and freed from the burden
of his sin. This is the confidence that the dissolute Papist puts in his
confession, and I would that none did so but they. Surely the Lord in his
justice does use to punish an hypocritical confession of sin this way, even by
giving men up to sin with more greediness after it, then they did before. See
an example of this in Pharaoh. Ye read of an ample confession he made of his
sin, Exodus 9.27. but verse 34. of the same Chapter, you shall find he became
worse after that confession then ever he was before, he sinned yet more (says
the text) and hardened his heart, he and his servants.

Daniel in that large confession he makes, Dan. 9.9. To thee O God belongs
mercy and forgiveness, though we have rebelled against thee. Thus did
Shecaniah, Ezr. 10.2. We have transgressed against our God, and have taken
strange wives, yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. So the
prodigal, though he had so despised and provoked and forsaken his father as he
had done, yet goes in this manner, and with this affection of heart unto him,
Luke 15.18. I will arise, and go to my father, and will say to him, Father I
have sinned. And indeed it is the spirit of grace only that makes us able to
supplicate, and confess, and humble our selves in a right and kindly manner.
As you may see, Zach. 12.10. I will power upon them the spirit of grace, and of
supplications, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn.

Applic.
On the other side, If a man never confesses his sins but when it is extorted
from him by some judgment of God, by fear of death, and damnation; like the
traitor that will confess nothing but upon the rack; though he cry never so
much out of his sin then, (as you shall hear some on their death beds do) it
is a shrewd sign that it is but counterfeit. Thus did Pharaoh as we have
heard. Thus did cursed Baalam when he saw the Angel stand before him with a
drawn sword, Number. 22.34. cry out, I have sinned. 2. If a man confess never so
much against himself, and aggravate his sin, yet if he conceive not of God as
of his father, if he have not hope of mercy, his confession is counterfeit. So
was Cains, Genesis 4.13. And so was that of Judas, Mat. 27.4,

Lecture XLI. On Psalm 51.3. November. 28. 1626.
NOw follows the second part of the verse, the thing that moved David thus to
confess his sin, and to make supplication to God for the pardon of it. My sin
(says he) is ever before me. Nota.
Where we must observe. 1. That his sin was ever in his eye, he could not
avoid the thinking of it, nor put it out of his mind, night and day, at home,
and abroad, at all times, and in all places, it was ever before him. 2. That it
represented it self unto him now, not as it had done before, but in the true
proportion, in that shape as it troubled and disquieted his heart, and gave him
no rest till he had got further assurance of the pardon of it. This he
expresses thus, in another place, Psalm. 38.17. My sorrow is continually before
me. It was before him as a matter of sorrow. And Ps. 38.3. There is no rest in
my bones, because of my sin. And as a thorn in a man's joint will force him to
seek to some that may get it ont, so did his sin here, by vexing, and
disquieting his heart, drive him to God to confess and seek pardon of it. 3.
That his sin did thus represent it self unto him, and trouble him, after God
had pardoned it, and reveiled so much to him by Nathan the Prophet. The Lord
has put away thy sin (says Nathan to him, 2 Samuel 12, 13) thou shall not dye.
4. and lastly, How came this to pass? Surely his conscience being awakened by
the ministry of Nathan, did ever and anon, lay his sin in his dish, and put
him in mind of it, dogd him, and met him in the face, whither-soever he went,
and would give him no rest, till it had driven him to humble himself before
God, and to get further assurance of the pardon of it. Now from these points
thus observed, in this speech and example of David, we have this to learn for
our own instruction.

That they that have truly repented, Doct. 13
cannot easily forget their sins, but are apt to think often of them, and to be
much troubled for them. See the proof of this.

First. In the general profession, the Church makes, Esa. 59.12. Our sins
testify; whither-soever we go, whatsoever we are doing, they are ever with us.

Secondly. See it in sundry particulars, Job professes of himself, Job 13.26.
to possess the sins of his youth, he could not leave thinking of them, and
being troubled with them And of David we often read, not in this place only, but
in sundry other places, that he was often in this case, his sins were ever in his
eye and thought, ^sal. 38 3. -- and 40.12. -- and 25.7, 11, 13.

If any shall object, Object.
that these examples prove not the point, for these men were in trouble of
mind, who are apt to think more of their sins, then they should do.

I answer, Answ.
That even with such as God has been reconciled unto, and who have had a
comfortable assurance their sins have bin pardoned, it has bin thus, their
sins have been ever before them, they could not forget them See this in Paul,
who though he knew he had obtained mercy and pardon of that wrong he had done
to Gods people before his conversion, as himself professes, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14.
yet was that sin all the days of his life ever fresh in his memory, and would
not out, and therefore ever and anon, he does take occasion to speak of it,
Acts 22.4, 5 -- 26.10, 11. 1. Cor. 15.9. Gal. 1.13. Ephesians. 3.8. 1 Timothy 1.1^.
When the Lord upon their repentance does pardon the sins of his people, their
sins are then quite blotted out of his debt-booke, as the Lord speaks Esa.
43.25 and cast behind his back, Esaias. 38.17. he remembers them no more, Iere
31.24 but though they be pardoned, that blotteth them not out of their
remembrance, nor causes them to cast them behind their own backs, but they
keep them ^ti^l in mind, and cannot forget them for all that. So the Lord
says of his people, Ezekiel. 16.60, 61. that when he shall have stablished
with them an everlasting covenant, then they should remember their ways, and
be ashamed. and Ezekiel 36.27, 28, 31. when he had said verse 27, 28. I will
put my spirit within you, and ye shall be my people, and I will be your God,
he adds verse 31. Then shall ye remember your own evil ways and your
doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight for
your iniquities.

Object.
If any shall yet object. The sins of David and Paul, and of those people that
Ezekiel speaks of, were heinous and gross sins, no marvel though such
stuck long in their minds, and were before them. But it follows not from
thence that all Gods people should have their sins in their remembrance
always, and be troubled with them.

Answ.
I answer, That it has been thus not only with such as have been guilty of
gross sins, but even with them that have lived most unblameably, their sins
have been much in their mind, and have been ever before them, they have
thought of nothing more, nor have been troubled more with any thing then with
their own sins and corruptions. Take two examples for this. 1. John the
Baptist, who though he had the work of grace begun in him sooner then any
mere man we can read of, and were sanctified in his mothers belly, Luke
1.44. As soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe
leaped in my womb for joy; yet were his sins and corruptions ever before him,
he was never without sight and sense of his sins, or else he would never have
said unto Christ as he did, Mat. 3.14. I have need to be baptized of thee. 2.
Paul even after his conversion, had his sin ever before him, and was much
exercised with the sight and sense of his corruptions, as you may see in that
large complaint he makes, Romans 7.15. What I would that do I not, but what I
hate, that do I; verse 18. I know that in me (that is in my flesh) dwells no
good thing; and verse 23. I see a law in my members, warring against the law of
my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin; and verse 24. O
wretched man that I am. You see all Gods people of all sorts, such as have
been in affliction of mind, and such as have had most comfortable assurance
of Gods love, such as have been guilty of gross offenses, and such as had
lived most unblameably, yet all of them have known sin by themselves, and have
much thought of their corruptions, and been troubled with them.

Now if we shall enquire into the grounds and reasons of this, we shall find
three causes of it.

Reason.
The first is their own conscience which God has set in the soul, to be 1. A
faithful register to record all our doings, and is therefore compared to a
book Reu. 20.12. 2. To be a faithful witness against us, Romans 2.15. 3. To
be a controuler and censurer of us, to rebuke and scourge us for our sins. So
it was said that David's heart smote him diverse times, 1 Samuel 24.5. 2 Samuel
24.10. I speak not of all the offices of conscience, but of those that
concern this matter in hand. Now though every man has this faculty placed in
his soul; and most men are never troubled with their sins, though they have
more sins recorded in those books then Gods servants have, the difference
arises from this, that the consciences of most men are senseless and feared,
as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 4.2. but the consciences of Gods people are
sanctified, as Paul says of himself, 2 Timothy 1.3. Heb. 13.18. and the image of
God according to which they were first created is renewed in it, to do the
offices that God placed it in the soul for; their conscience is wakefull and
quick sighted, and tender as the apple of the eye. This we shall see in David,
his conscience was so wakefull, that the least knock would awaken it, so soon
as Nathan came to him, and knocks at his heart, though he had lain asleep so
long, yet his conscience wakeneth presently, and he cries out, 2 Samuel 12.13. I
have sinned. So soon as Gad came to him with a message from God about the
numbering of the people, his conscience awakened presently, and smote him for
it, 2 Samuel 24.10. And so was it with Peter, the very look of Christ wakened
his conscience, Luke 22.60, 61. And as the regenerate man's conscience is
wakefull, so it is quick sighted, and tender also, and can see, and be
troubled with that another man will not; as we see also in David, 1 Samuel 24 5.

The second cause of it is, Reason 2
that they are more subject to affliction then other men, and it is an usual
effect of affliction to bring men's sins into their remembrance that they had
forgotten before. As we see in the brethren of Joseph, whose troubles in Egypt
brought the sin which they had committed against him twenty years before, as
fresh into their remembrance as if it had been but newly committed, as you
shall find, Genesis 42.21. So it appears by our Saviors speech to the sick of
the palsy, ( Mat. 9.2. Son be of good cheer thy sins be forgiven theee)
that his sickness brought his sins to his remembrance.

The third and last cause of this, Reason 3
is the Lord himself, he has the chief hand in this; it is he that keeps
the sins of his people ever in their eye, and remembrance, and will not suffer
them to forget them. It was the Lord that awakened the conscience of David
hereby sending Nathan unto him, 2 Samuel 12.1. It was the Lord that awakened the
conscience of Peter by looking back upon him, Luke 22.61. It was the Lord that
made Job to possess the sins of his youth. Job 13.26.

And why deals the Lord thus, with those whom he most dearly loves, that of
all the people in the world they see most sins in themselves, Quest.
and are most troubled with them, he sets their sins ever in their sight,
and puts them in mind of them?

Surely he does this in much love, Answ.
Psalm. 25.10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto his own
people. He sees this to be good and profitable for them many ways. Six
principal benefits there are that Gods people receive by it.

First, It renews and encrreaseth their repentance. David did unfainedly
Nathan had dealt plainly with him, as we have heard, 2 Samuel 12.13. and yet
after that for many years God followed him with many grievous judgments, as
he threatened 2 Samuel 12.10, 11. and thereby did ever and anon bring those sins
into his remembrance, and put him in mind of them that he might repent better,
and more deeply for them. This reason the Lord gives, Ezekiel. 20.43. There shall
ye remember your ways, and all your doings wherein ye have been defiled,
and ye shall loath your selves in your own sight, for all your evils you have
committed. And this is certainly one great benefit that comes to us by the
remembering of our old sins. For we are all far short in repenting of them in
that measure as we ought; and according to the measure of our repentance shall
our comfort and the assurance of the pardon of our sins be in the end. As they
that sow in tears, shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126.5. Sound repentance and
sorrow for sin will bring sound joy; so proportionable to a man's seednes shall
his harvest be; plentiful repentance will bring plentiful joy; a scant
repentance, scantnesse of comfort.

Secondly, By this means God keeps us humble, and low in our own eyes, and
preserves us from pride, and too good a conceit of our selves. Thus Paul, 2
Cor. 12.7. Left I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of the
revelations, there was given unto me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of
Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure. And what was this
thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan? Surely some inward corruption that
Paul felt in his own heart, which Satan stirred up in him. And why did God
discover this corruption of his heart unto him? why did God keep him so long
in the sight and sense of this his corruption? he prayed thrice (that is many
times) to get it removed, and could not. He tells us (and repeateth it twice
in that verse as a thing worthy to be observed) Lest I should be exalted above
measure. This use the Church professes she made of it, Lam. 2.19, 20.
Remembering mine affliction, and my rebellions, (as Montanus, and Leo Iudae
render the word) the wormwood and the gall, that is, the bitterness and
sorrow that I found in it, my soul has them still in remembrance, and is
humbled in me. And surely this is no small benefit we get by being well
acquainted with our sins, and thinking much of our own corruptions. We are all
to apt if we be a little better in birth, or in gifts, or in riches, or in
beauty, or in knowledge, or in profession then others* to be proud of it. O
what Lucifers would we be, if the Lord should not now and then cast our own
dung into our faces, and effectually discover to us our sins? Surely God does
us in this a great favor, as he did unto Paul: for nothing would make our
souls more odious unto God then pride, nothing more amiable in his eyes then
humilty will do; according to that of the Apostle, James 4.6 God resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble.

David, what made him here to fly to God, and to cry to him so earnestly for
mercy? Why, he tells us here in the text, his sin was ever before him. This
effect had the knowledge and sense of sin in Paul at his first conversion, when
Christ had discovered his sin unto him, though it were in a most terrible
manner, it drove him to seek mercy of God by prayer, as Christ told Ananias,
Acts 9.11. Go to him, for behold he prays. And indeed none but they that
have an effectual knowledge and sense of sin, will go to God with any
constancy or fervency of spirit. How few, and how cold and formal will our
prayers be if we have no sense of our sins? When David had said, Psalm. ^4.17.
The righteous cry and the Lord hears them, he tells in the next words,
ver. 18. who be those righteous ones, that use thus to cry unto God in their
prayers, that is to say, those that are of a broken heart and contrite spirit.
This hunger and thirst after righteousness our Savior mentions as a
natural effect, and consequent of that poverty of spirit, and mourning for it,
that is in his people, Mat. 5.3. -- 6. This was that doubtless that made Paul
set such a price upon Christ, to count all things but dung that he might win
Christ, that he might be found in him, that he might know him and the power of
his resurrection, as he professes of himself, Phil. 3.8. -- 10. This was that
that made David to thirst, and long after Gods Sanctuary and ordinances as he
did, Psalm. 27.4. he made this his only suit, and 42.1, 2. he cries out, my
soul pants after thee, O God, my soul thirsts for God, for the living
God, when shall I come and appear before God. These men (as you have heard
were much exercised with the sight and thought of their sins and corruptions,
and this is certainly an inestimable benefit to have our stomach and appetite
to this food preserved in us. For so our Savior says of such, Mat. 5.6. that
they are in a happy case, and gives such a reason of it, as may put all out of
doubt: for they shall be satisfied.

Lu. 7.38. She washed his feet with her tears, she wiped them with her hair*
she kissed them, she anointed them; surely she loved Christ so dearly because
many sins were forgiven her ver. 47. her sins were still fresh in her
remembrance. This we may also see in the holy Apostle, who when he had
mentioned at large the knowledge and sense he had of his own corruptions, Romans
7.^5. he suddenly breaks forth in these words, I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord. As if he had said. O wretched man that I am, so full of sin
and corruption, what would become of me, were it not for Christ? What cause
have I to praise God for his mercy in Christ, for showing any respect unto me,
for preserving, and upholding of me? So when he calls to mind his old sin, 1 Timothy 1. see how he takes occasion thereby to magnify the mercy of God toward
him, 1. In the beginning of his speech, verse 12, 13. I thank Christ Jesus our
Lord, for putting me into the ministry, who was before a blasphemer, and a
persecutor. 2 In the conclusion of his speech, ver. 17. Now unto the King
eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory, for
ever and ever, Amen.

Fifthly. By this means, God keeps his children in awe, and makes them Cor.
7.11. This very thing that ye have bin sorrowful after a godly sort, see what
care it has wrought in you. Certainly the man that has a true knowledge, and
sense of his sins, will be afraid to sin again, the burnt child will dread the
fire. On the other side, a man that is past feeling (has no sense of sin) will
be ready to give himself over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleannes,
even with gredines, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4.19.

Sixthly, and lastly. The Lord by this means, makes his people charitable, and
Speak evil of no men (says the Apostle, Tit. 3.2, ^) but show all meekness
to all men, for we our selves were sometimes foolish and disobedient, deceived,
serving diverse lusts and pleasures. And our Savior tells us, Mat. 1.5.3.
that the cause why hypocrites are so apt to judge, and censure others, even
for-motes they spy in them, is because they discern not the beams that is in
their own eyes.

Lecture XLII. On Psalm 51.3. December. 5. 1626.
IT follows now, that we proceed to the uses that this Doctrine serves unto.
And they are principally two, Use 1.
1. For exhortation, and 2, For reproof. And for the first. The use of
exhortation. It serves to persuade us, that we would be afraid of sin, and
take heed of it. This is certainly a duty that we all need often to be put in
mind of, and exhorted unto. It would be a matter of unspeakeable use and
benefit unto us, if we could be afraid of sin. We shall never be able to keep
our selves from the danger of any sin; till we can esteem of sin, as of a
mortal enemy, and be afraid of it. The godly man is described by this
property, Eccle, 9.2. that he fears an oath, he is afraid of sin. Now there
is great force in this Doctrine, to persuade us to be afraid of sin, and to
take heed of it. Even the consideration of the after-thoughts we shall one day
have of our sins, and the trouble that our own consciences will put us unto
for them. The force that there is in this Doctrine to persuade us unto this
duty, will appear to us in four points.

First. Our conscience will be apt to bring our sin into our remembrance, to
this world, yet can we not be secure from the accusation of our own conscience,
we cannot be certain we shall never hear of it again. When we have done with
our sin, it will not have done with us, but when the pleasure of it is quite
gone, we know not how soon, nor how often our conscience will be apt to bring it
into our remembrance, to lay it in our dish, and upbraid us with it. Thus we
see it did with David here; his sin (he says) was ever before him. Thus it did
(as we heard the last day) with Joseph's brethren, twenty years after their sin
was committed, Genesis 42.21. Thus it did with Job, 13.26. he possessed the
sins of his youth.

David, 1 Samuel 24.5 and 2 Samuel 24.10. that his heart did smite him. When
our sin is thus brought into our remembrance, and set before us by our
conscience, it will appear unto us in another fashion, and shape, then it did
before, when we first knew it. When it first came unto us to tempt, and allure
us, it came like a friend, and did look amiably, and pleasantly upon us. It
promised us great pleasure, or great advantage, if we would yield unto it.
Sin deceived me (says Paul, Romans 7.11.) and so slew me. But when it shall
be brought again by our conscience into our mind, and set before us, it will
appear unto us, as an enemy, and a tormentor, and the sight of it will be
grievous, and terrible unto us. It is therefore fitly resembled by the harlot
Solomon speaks of. Proverbs 5.3, 4. The lips of a strange woman, drop as an
honey comb, there is the first coming of sin, when it comes to tempt, and
allure us, but what follows? Her end is bitter as worme-wood, sharp as a two
edged sword. There is the second coming of sin into our mind, when it comes
to accuse, and torment us. It is like unto those locusts John saw in his
vision, and whereby he does testify, and represent the Popish friars, and
Jesuits, Reve. 9.7.8.10. Their faces were as the faces of men, and their
hair, as the hair of women. There is the shape that sin appears in, when it
first represents and offers it self unto us; but their teeth were as the
teeth of Lions, and they had tails like unto Scorpions, and there were stings
in their tails. There is the latter coming of sin, and the bitterness, and
anguish it will put us unto, when our conscience shall set it before us, and
accuse us of it. And certainly, no pain or anguish in the world in comparable
to that, which the strokes, and wounds of the conscience will put a man unto. A
wounded spirit who can bear? Pro. 18.14. To have unquietnes at home, to have
her unquiet with thee, that is continually with thee at board and in bed, is
justly esteemed one of the greatest miseries in this life. Solomon compared it.
Pro. 19.13. to a continual dropping, that will wast the hardest stone in the
world. But to have our own conscience brawle, and exclaim, and be unquiet with
us, is a misery unspeakably greater then the former can be. O then, let us be
afraid to sin even in this respect, because our conscience will be so apt to
fall out, and be unquiet with us, if we do; so apt to cast it in our teeth, to
accuse, yea, to smite, and wound us for it,

Mark. 10.39. Ye shall indeed drink of the cup that I drink of. Now this cup
the Lord keeps in his own hana (as it is said. Ps. 75.8.) and he powers out
of the same, Every man shall drink of this cup, when the Lord sees good to
minister it, and he shall drink of it in that measure, as the Lord shall see
good to appoint. But no man has cause to look for any long truce with his
conscience, or that i will give him any long day. If thou do not well (says
the Lord to Cain. Genesis 4.^) sin (that is the punishment, and sting of sin)
lies at the door, that is, is near, even at the door as the same phrase is
rendered, Mat. 24.33.

Fourthly, and lastly. There is no comparison between the pleasure or profit
in the fa^e, rather then in the heart; as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5.1^.
There is no soundness in it, it is mixed for the most part with inward
gripings, Pro. 14.13. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful. But the sorrow,
and anguish that our conscience will put us unto, when it accuses, and smites
us for si^, o that is a soaking and deep sorrow, It is bitter, and reaches
unto the heart, as the Prophet speaks, Jeremy. 4.18. 2. The pleasure or
profit that any sin can yield us, is but momentany, and of very short
continuance. That made Moses make so light account of all the pleasures of sin,
because he knew they endured but for a season. Heb. 11.25. They are therefore
compared Eccl. 7.6. to the crackling and blaze that thorns make under a pot.
But the sorrow that sin will bring us unto, when our conscience shall charge us
with it, is durable, and no man knows how long it will last. That sin that
may be committed in an hour, or in far less space, may cost a man deep
sorrow and grief of mind all the days of his life after. For a conclusion
therefore of this first duty, that from this doctrine we are exhorted unto,
certainly if we could rightly consider of this work of our conscience, how apt
it will be when God shall awaken it, to bring our sins to our remembrance, in
this manner as you have heard of, it would make us afraid to sin. See the truth
of this in three notable examples The first is of Job. My righteousness (says
he Job 27.6.) I hold fast, and will not let it go; yea, he professes ver. 3,
4. All the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of God (...) in my
nostrils, my lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit. And
why so? My heart shall not reproach me so long as I live. As if he had fail, I
will not give my conscience occasion to brawle with me; whatsoever I do, I
will have care to keep peace there. The second is of Abigal, that wise and
gracious woman, who persuades David, not to revenge himself of her husband
Nab^l, by this argument, 1 Samuel 25.30, 31. It shall come to pass, when the
Lord shall have ap^ointed thee ruler over all Israel; that this shall be no
grief to thee, nor offense of heart unto my Lord, either that thou have shed
blood causeless, or that my Lord has avenged himself. As if she had said,
if thou should do it, thy conscience will be apt one day to check, and
smite thee for it, even when thou shall be King, and in thy greatest pomp; do
it not therefore, that thou may prevent the accusation of thy conscience. The
third is of Paul, who gives this reason, why he was so afraid of every sin,
whether it were against the first or second table, even the care he had to
keep his conscience clear, and quiet. Act. 24.16 Herein do I exercise my
self to have always a conscience void of offense toward God, and toward
men. And so much of the first use that this Doctrine serves unto.

Secondly, Use 2.
it serves for reproof of such as never think of never are troubled with any
of their sins, they could never say as David does here, my sin is ever before
me. Of this sort, the world is full in all places. Observe the truth of this in
three degrees.

First, the greatest part of men were never troubled in their mind for any sin
in all their lives; yea, the greatest sinners are of all men least troubled in
mind for They are not in trouble (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 73.5.) as other
men. Nay their conscience is so senseless, so fast asleep, as nothing will
waken it. Such thundering Sermons they often hear, as one would think, might
break the rockiest heart that is, and yet they never stir these men. But they
are like Judas, who though he heard Christ so speak of his sin, as made all
his fellows exceeding sorrowful, Mat. 26.22. though he heard him so
particularly apply his speech, as he could not choose but understand he was
the man he meant; for our Savior said, John 13.26. He it is to whom I shall
give a sop, when I have dipped it, and when he had dipped the sop, he gave it
to Judas. And when he asked Christ as the rest had done, Master is it I?
Christ said unto him, Thou have said. Mat. 26.25. Though he had heard Christ
with his powerful voice denounce that fearful woe against him, Mat. 26.24.
Woe unto the man by whom the son of man is betrayed, it had been good for
that man if he had never been borne. Yet did not all this move him one whit,
but he became worse, and worse after all this, John 13 27. After the sop Satan
entered into him. And alas, how many have we that are like to Judas in this
point? No sermon will move them, nay the Lord often times lays such strokes
upon them, scourges them with such afflictions, as one would think might
pierce the most seared conscience in the world, and bring their sins unto
remembrance, and yet you shall see these men when they are most vexed with
pains and diseases in their bodies, with troubles and perplexities in their
outward estate, yet as quiet in their consciences, as free from all remorse and
trouble of mind for sin, yea as confident of Gods love toward them in Christ as
the holiest man in the world. So God speaks of Israel, Hos. 8.2, 3. When they
had cast off the thing that is good, and for that cause the enemy the Assyrian
should pursue them, yet even then in that great affliction they should cry
unto God, My God we know thee. Certainly this is the case of many a man, no
afflictions will awaken their consciences even upon their death beds, you shall
not be able to perceive that any of their sins do trouble them, but even (as
Job speaks Job 21.23.) they are wholly at ease and quiet, that is wonderfully
quiet in their conscience. The strong armed man keeps the palace (as our
Savior speaks Luke 11.21) and all his goods are in peace.

Ephraim did, of whom the Prophet speaks, Hos. 12.7, 8, who though he were as
a false merchant, and the balances of deceit were in his hand, he used deceit
in his weights and in his measures, yet he justifies himself and says in all
my labors, and tradi^g they shall find none iniquity in me, which is sin. As
if he had said, Though I have done a little wrong sometimes to men in my
trading, in my weights and measures, and showed my self my crafts-master in
making my wares seem better then they were, tush that is nothing, all of our
trade do so, and must do so, or else we could not live, tush that is no sin.
Alas the world is full of such blind wretches, as being notorious sinners; yet
do secure and bless themselves in their estate, even upon this ground, that
they know nothing by themselves that deserves to be counted a sin, at least a
mortal sin. They are Papists in this (as in many other) point; either they
have no sin at all, or if any none but venial sins. These men's case is notably
set forth by the Lord, Ier. 2.34, 35. In thy skirts is found the blood of the
souls of the poor innocents. I have not found it by secret search, but upon
all these. As if he had said, Every thing that was about them, their garments,
their household stuff, their fair houses, etc. were monuments of and carried
the print of their oppression; see how gross sinners they were, and yet in the
next words mark their extreme blindness and security, yet thou say,
because I am innocent surely his anger shall turn from me. In times of
greatest danger they feared nothing, out of this conceit, that they were so
innocent. But what follows? Behold I will plead with thee because thou say,
I have not sinned.

Nay thirdly, The most men count it a great happiness to forget their sins,
and point, shunning all means carefully, that might bring their sins into
their remembrance, as Ahab did Micajahs ministry, 1 Kings 22.8. and Felix,
Paul's. Acts 24.25. and they greedily hunt after all the means they can devise
or think of, that they may put their sins out of their thoughts. According
to that speech of Solomon, Ecclesiast. 7.4. The heart of fools is in the house
of mirth.

Now unto these men I have three things to say.

First, If Job, and David, and Paul were in a blessed estate, then must the
case of Ps. 141.5. Let the righteous smite me, and let him reprove me. Yea,
they prayed to God for this, Job 13.23. Make me to know my transgression, and
my sin. And thou cryest, God bless me from such preachers that should so
disquiet my mind

Secondly, the blindness, and senslesnes of thy conscience, is no such benefit
as Ioh. 12.39, 40. Therefore they could not believe, because (as Esaias says)
he has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, left they should be
converted, and I should heal them. This is a judgment whereby God punishes
other grievous sins, and of all punishments the most fearful. Psalm. 81.11,
12. My people would not hearken unto my voice, Israel would none of me, so I
gave them up to the hardness of their hearts. As they did not like to retain
God in their knowledge (says the Apostle, Romans 1.28.) God gave them over to a
reprobate mind. This is of all the judgments of God the most admirable and
dreadful, to see what means God gives to wicked men to awaken their
consciences, and how senseless they remain still. To see men smitten of God, as
I showed you Judas was, whom no ministry could stir, or as Pharaoh, or
Jeroboam, whom no judgments could move. Thus speaks the Lord of this
judgment. Stay your selves, and wonder (says the Lord, Esa. 29.9.) Why what
should they stay themselves to consider, and wonder at? Surely at this
judgment that was upon the Prophets, and rulers, and people of that time. They
are drunken (says he) but not with wine; the Lord has powered out upon you the
spirit of deep sleep, and has closed your eyes. This is the admirable
judgment when all is done. Let no man therefore any longer account it a
blessing, to have a senseless conscience, that will never put him in mind of
his sins, nor check him for them; but account it a great favor of God, to
have a wakefull, and a tender conscience, and pray with the Prophet, Psalm.
13.3. O Lord my God, lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death, that
deep and deadly sleep of a benumbed and senseless conscience. Remember, and
believe that saying of Solomon, Pro. 28.14. Blessed is the man that fears
always, but he that hardens his heart, shall fall into mischief. David had
never (as we see here) humbled himself thus, and run to Gods mercy-seat, and
sued for pardon so fervently as he did, if his conscience being awakened had
not thus set his sins before him. Six great benefits I told you of the last
day, that Gods people receive by the wakefulnesse, and tenderness of their
conscience, that puts them often in remembrance of their sins.

You will object. Object. 1
It cannot (surely) be esteemed a mercy, but a judgment, and tentation, to
have mine old sins brought often into my remembrance, which I have long since
repented of, and obtained assurance of the pardon of.

I answer. Answ.
Yes, it is profitable to remember, and think often even of those sins (as we
heard the last day in the proof of the Doctrine) that thou may increase the
assurance of the pardon of those sins, both 1. by examining the truth of thy
repentance (for to have ceased long from those sins will not argue thou have
truly repented) and 2. By renewing and increasing thy humiliation for them.

Object.
But if we should much busy our selves with calling our sins to mind, and
musing of them, it would bring us to despair, and deprive us of all comfort.

Answ.
I answer, 1. the sight of thy sins (how heinous soever they have been) and
sorrow for them, may stand well enough with true faith, and confidence in Gods
mercy; many have had deep sense of their sins, that have also had sound faith.
A man may see in himself abundant matter of sorrow and fear, and yet
discern even at that time more matter of comfort and joy in the Lord. Thus
Daniel did, Dan. 9.8, 9. O Lord to us belongs confusion of face, to our King,
to our Princes, and to our fathers, because we have sinned against thee; to the
Lord our God belong mercies, and forgivenesses though we have rebelled
against thee. Serve the Lord with fear (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 2.11.) and
rejoice with trembling. And it is said of the two Maryes, Mat. 28.8. that they
departed quickly from the sepulcher with fear and great joy. 2. Yea a man is
never so fit to admire and take comfort in the mercy of God, as when he sees
the multitude and odiousness of his own sins. Never did Paul so rejoice in
Gods mercy as when he had most sense of his own sins, as is evident, 1 Timothy
1.12.-15.3 The sight of thy sins, so long as it is joined with a godly sorrow
and hatred of them, a desire of reconciliatio^ with God, so long as it drives
thee to acknowledgement and humbling thy self before God, is not the way to
desperatio^, but unto sound comfort. It is the unwillingnesse of men to see and
acknowledge their sins, that brings despair, and not their willingness to
do it, as we may see in David, While he kept silence, his bones waxed old,
through his roaring all the day long, Psalm. 32.3. But what course took he to
find comfort? See ver. 5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity
have I not hid: I said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and
thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. It is a man's putting of his mouth in the
dust, that gives him hope of mercy, Lam 3.29. The afflicted and poor in
spirit trust in the Lord Zach. 3.12.

Object. 3
But how can this be (will some say) that it should be such a blessing to have a
tender conscience, that is so apt to put a man in mind of his sins, seeing the
conscience when it accuses a man uses also to smite and wound him, as it was
with David, 1 Samuel 24.5. and that there is no pain or anguish in the world
comparable to that which the strokes and wounds of the conscience put a man
unto, Pro. 18.14. A wounded spirit who can bear?

Answ.
I answer, 1. If thou would waken thy own conscience by a due examination of
thy own ways, and calling thy sins to thine own remembrance, it would be
less bitter and painful to thee, then if by this neglecting thy self, thou
put the Lord to do it. 1 Cor. 11.23.31. Let a man examine himself, for if we
would judge our selves, we should not be judged. It is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the living God. Heb. 10 31. 2. I answer that it is true
indeed a tender and wakefull conscience will put a man to pain and trouble,
but the pain and trouble that drives a man to God (as David's did here) is a
wholesome and medicinable pain, a means to keep us from those pains and
sorrows that are everlasting. Of this kind of chastisement which the
conscience gives us, that may be said which Paul says of all Gods
chastisements. Heb 12.11. No chastisement for the present seems joyous but
grievous, nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
righteousness to them that are exercised thereby.

The third and last thing I have to say to these senseless men is this, that
the state they are now in, will not last always. Certainly that conscience
that is now so dead asleep, will one day awaken, and do his office, by
setting thy sins before thee, either to drive thee to God by repentance, as it
did David here; or to drive thee to the Devil by desperation, as it did Cain
and Judas. That which Moses said to the two tribes and the half, Number. 32.13
may be said to every secure and dead hearted sinner. Ye have sinned against
the Lord, and be you sure your sin will find you out. Thine own wickedness
shall correct thee (says the Lord by the Prophet Jeremy 2.19.) and thy
backslidings shall reprove thee; know therefore and see, that it is an evil
thing and bitter; that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear
is not in thee, says the Lord God of hosts. Be thou sure, conscience will
find thee out, and reprove thee sharply for thy sins, sooner or later, at one
time or other. Shall Gods people (think we) and his dearest servants be the
only men whose sins shall be set before their eyes, who shall be vexed and
disquieted with the sense of their sins, whose consciences shall accuse and
smite, and wound them for sin? No, no, if David, and Job, and Peter have bin so
troubled, and put to such anguish of mind for their sins, be ye sure the
reprobate, and sinner shall feel much more, If this be done to the green
trees, that had much sap of grace, and goodness in them, what shall be done to
the dry? As our Savior speaks, Lu. 23.31. The sorrow that Gods people endure
for their sins, it is nothing if it be compared with that that the reprobate
shall feel. The dregs of the cup of the Lords wrath, all the wicked of the
earth shall wring them out, and drink them. as the Psalmist speaks Psalm.
7.5, 8. As senseless, and benumbed as Judas his conscience was, before he had
betrayed Christ, so as Christ's powerful ministry (as you heard) could not
awaken it, yet did it not always continue so, but presently after he had
committed his sin, it was awakened with a witness, and did his office upon
him, as you may see, Matthew. 27.3, 5. This the Lord threatens to such sinners
as have been least troubled with their sins, and most confident of his love,
Psalm 50.21. These things have thou done, and I kept silence, thou thoughtest
that I was altogether such a one as thy self, but I will reprove thee, and set
them in order before thine eyes. And when God shall set thy sins before thee,
thou shall not be able to avoid the looking, and thinking of them no more then
Belshazzar was the hand writing upon the wall. Dan. 5.5.

And when will God do this, may you say? When shall the consciences of all
wicked men be awakened? Quest.


I answer. Answ.
1. God can do it even in the time of our best health, and greatest jolitie, as
he did with Belshazzar. 2. He does it usually in the time of sickness, or some
sharp affliction, as he did with Joseph's brethren, Genes. 42.21. And 3 If thy
conscience do not awaken before, certainly, so soon as thou come to
judgment, either general or particular, thy conscience will then awaken, and
do his office upon thee, even the office of an accuser, of a witness, and of
a tormentor. At the day of the declaration of the just judgment of God, the
conscience of every man will do his office, as the Apostle speaks, Romans
2.15, 16. Then the books shall be opened, Revelat. 20.12. Every man's
conscience wherein (as in a book) all the actions of his life, and words of
his mouth, and thoughts that have been in his heart, are faithfully recorded;
and which were in many men all the days of their lives, like such a clasped,
or sealed book, as is spoken of Esa. 29.11. that they could never read nor see
what was written in it; shall then be laid open before him, that he may read,
yea, he shall then be compelled to read what is written in it. Then will the
Lord bring the hidden things of darkness to light (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Corinthians. 4.5.) and will make manifest the counsels of men's hearts unto them.
Then shall all men clearly see, not only what they have done, but also
whether it have been good or evil, lawful or unlawful that they have done.
The eyes of their consciences are now so blind, that they cannot see, nor
perceive by the clearest light of the Word, in the plainest ministry that is,
that to neglect prayer in secret, and in their families, to spend the greatest
part of every Sabbath irreligiously, to neglect the hearing of the Word upon
the Lecture day, upon every trifling occasion, to live in malice, to use fraud
in their dealings with men, to spend their time unprofitably, etc. are any
sins; but when that day comes, the scales will fall from the eyes of their
consciences, and they shall clearly see, that they are sins, and grievous
sins too. Then their conscience will bear witness according to the work of
the Law that is written in their hearts. Romans 2.15, 16. And that which he
says of the knowledge of the Elect in that day, is true also of the knowledge
that the reprobate shall have then, 1 Corinthians. 13.12. Now they see but as
through a glass, darkely, but then face to face; now they know but in part,
but then they shall know, even as they are known. And as the Lord speaks in
another case, Ier. 23.20. it may be said unto all men in this case, In the
latter days ye shall understand it plainly (which now you cannot be persuaded
of) that these are sins.

LECTVRES ON PSALM. LI.4.
Lecture XLIII. on Psalm LI.4. December. XII. MDCXXVI.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight; that
thou might be justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou
judge.
We have heard that in the former verse David makes confession of his sin in
general; it follows now that we proceed to show how he does it in this and
the next verses more fully and particularly. For 1. He makes confession of
the special actual sin that he had offended God by at this time, and which
Nathan had charged him with in this verse, I have done this evil. 2. He
amplifieth and aggravateth this his sin by three arguments. 1. By the person
against whom this sin was committed in this verse, Against thee, thee only
have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. 2. By the fountain and root
from whence this sin did spring, that is to say, his natural corruption verse
5.3. By the knowledge and truth of grace that he had received from God, before
he fell into this sin, in the sixth verse.

Now in this verse that I have now read, there are two things principally to be
observed. 1. How David accuses himself before God here, and amplifieth his
sin against himself in these words, Against thee, thee only have I sinned,
and done this evil in thy sight. 2. The reason why he does so in the last
words of the verse, Nota.
That thou may be justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou
judge.

Now then, (to begin with the first part of the verse) for the opening of the
words, that the Doctrine may the more clearly arise from them for our
instruction, Quest. 1
and lest he should seem by this manner of speech, to extenuate rather then to
aggravate his sins, four questions must be briefly resolved.

First, was this foul act that he committed an offense against God only, was
it not also an offense against man? Answ.


I answer, Ceatainely it was a grievous offense even against man, and not
against the Lord only.

First, Against himself, against his own body. He that commits fornication
sins against his own body. 1 Cor. 6.18. Against his own peace, and the
comfort of his life; for because of these sins, the sword never departed from
his house, God raised up evil against him out of his own house, as the Lord
threatened by Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.10, 11. But chiefly against his own soul, Pro.
8.36. He that sins against me, wrongeth his own soul. O what wounds did he
give to his own soul by these sins?

Vriah in an high degree, by the adultery he committed with his wife. He that
commits this sin does his neighbor greater wrong then if he had robbed and
spoiled him of all other his goods, and possessions whatsoever. In which
respect, the Lord has in the Decalogue placed the commandment against
adultery, as a greater commandment, before that against theft. Exodus 20.14,
15. And Solomon Pro. 6.30 -- 35. makes the adulterer a far worse man then a
thief; and gives this reason for it among other, that the thief may make
satisfaction to a man for the wrong he has done him, so cannot the adulterer
do. 2. He wronged the whole Commonwealth by endangering it, and laying it
open to the wrath of God by his foul sins. For thus has the Lord been wont
for the sins of Kings and Princes to plague all their subjects grievously. See
what a famine God brought upon the whole land for the sin of Saul, 2 Samuel 21.1.
So Ahaz by his sins is said to have brought Judah low, and to have made it
naked, because he transgressed sore against the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 28 19. So the
evil that Manasseh did in Jerusalem is said to be a chief cause of the
captivity, Ier. 15 4. though Manasseh himself were dead and buried long
before, yea, though he had unfeinedly repented before he died. But what need
we to seek further for examples to clear this point then to David himself?
What a plague did he bring upon the whole land by a far less sin of his
then these were, that he had now committed, even by his commanding the people
to be numbered. 2 Samuel 24.15. And to these very sins that now he committed all
the blood of his own subjects that was shed, and all the civil war and
sedition that was raised both in the rebellion of Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.12. and
18.7. and of Sheba the son of Bichri 2 Samuel 20.2.14. was to be imputed. So
great cause have all Gods people to pray heartily unto God for their Princes,
according to the example of the Church, Ioh. 1.17. Psalm. 20.1. -- 4. and 72 1.
and the express commandment of God, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. And so great cause have we
also to give hearty thanks unto God, for giving us good Kings and governors
that rule us in the fear of the Lord, as Huram did for Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 2.11,
12. 3. Besides this, he had by his murder in a higher degree wronged not Vriah
only, and those that were slain with him, 2 Samuel 11.17. but all their friends
also, and kinsfolk that were left alive, who were bound in conscience to
esteem this such a wrong, as they might take no satisfaction for it, as is
plain, Numb. 35.31. 4 and lastly. The sin that he committed reached not only
to the murdering of the bodies of many men, but to the destruction of the
precious souls of all them that were drawn into fearful sins by his means.
1. Of the soul of Bathsheba whom he drew to whordome, 2 Samuel 11.4. 2. Of the
souls of all those servants of his, whom he used as his panders and bawdes for
the effecting of his lust, 2 Samuel 11.4. 3. Of the soul of Io^b, whom he made
his instrument for the murdering of Vriah and the rest, 2 Samuel 11 15.16. 4. Of
the souls of those enemies of the Lord to whom he gave occasion to blaspheme
his most holy name. 2 Samuel 12.14. For though all these that by his means were
drawn to these foul sins, did not perish eternally, (for of Bathsheba it is
certain that she repented) yet was that no thank to him, who had given their
souls a mortal wound, and cut the throat of them, though the mercy and skill
of the heavenly Surgeon kept them from perishing of those wounds.

Thirdly and lastly, The sins that he committed were so far from being an
offense against the Lord only, that indeed they were not directly and
immediately committed against the Lord, but against man only; for they were
sins not against the first, but against the second table of the commandments
of God.

Then the second question is this. Quest. 2
Did he then think, that though by these sins if they had been committed by
an other person, great offense had been done unto men, yet being done by him,
no man could complain, because a King has that absolute power as whatsoever
he does to men, he can do them no wrong?

I answer, No verily David was far from all such conceits. Such thoughts might
well beseem such a Princess as Iesabell was, Answ.
who though her husband Ahab was no King unless he might do what he list;
unless he might by force contrary to law take away Naboths vineyard, 1 King.
21.7. Do thou now govern the kingdom of Israel? But David was not such a
Prince. He knew well enough the charge that God had given in his Law concerning
the King that should reign over his people, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20. 1. He must
have the book of the Law ever with him, and acquaint himself well with it. 2.
He must govern his subjects according to Law, and not turn aside from it
either to the right hand or to the left. 3. He must take heed his heart be not
lifted up above his brethren, to despise them or think he might use them as
he listed. He was not ignorant of that charge that God had given unto him in
particular, when that he was first made King, which he mentions, 2 Samuel 23.3.
The God of Israel said, the rock of Israel spoke to me, he that rules over
men, must be just, ruling in the fear of God. He knew therefore full well
that notwithstanding any royal prerogative he had, that which he had done to
Vriah, and the rest, though they were his subjects, was a shameful wrong, as
Nathan also in his parable had showed it to be. 2 Samuel 12.4.

The third question is, How then if he knew his sin was a wrong, and offense
against man, Quest. 3
and not against the Lord only, did it not in that respect trouble him at all
at this time, now he seeks pardon and peace with God, or are these words thus
to be understood, as if he should say, Against thee, thee only have I sinned;
as for any offense I have committed against men, or wrong I have done to them,
I regard it not, that never troubles me.

I answer, Answ.
No no, it was far from him to think so. The wrong he had done to men by
these his sins, did trouble his conscience at this time exceedingly, as
appears in the 14. verse. Deliver me from blood-guiltinesse O God, thou God
of my salvation. From bloods, it is in the original in the plural number. The
blood of Vriah, and of all that were slain with him lay heavy upon his
conscience. Nay he knew full well he could have no hope to find mercy with God
at this time by his prayer, if he had not been troubled in conscience for the
wrong he had done unto men by his sin, nay if he had not unfainedly desired
to the utmost of his power to give them satisfaction, and make them amends for
the wrong he had done unto them. We know the rule of Christ which is
doubtless a moral law, and was well known to David, and written in his
heart, Mat. 5.23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thy gift
before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then
come, and offer thy gift. He knew full well that the wrong that is done to the
basest subject, or tenant, or servant that any man keeps will cry to God for
vengeance against him, and that God will not be appeased till satisfaction be
made (or at the least endeavored to be made) to the party that was wronged by
him. When the blood of the poor Gibeonites was unjustly shed by Saul, God
would not be appeased with the land till the Gibeonites (though they were but
poor snakes and slaves) had satisfaction given unto them, as you may read, 2 Samuel 21.1. -- 3.

Quest 4
Now follows the fourth and last question. Why then does he say here that he
had sinned only against the Lord? Why doubleth he his speech thus
pathetically, Against thee, thee only have I sinned.

Answ.
I answer, His words are to be taken as spoken not simply, but comparatively. As
if he had said, Though by my sins I have many ways offended against man and
wronged him, yet the wrong I have done in this to any man, is nothing in
comparison of the wrong, the dishonor, the contempt I have done to thy
Majesty. Though I be deeply wounded for the wrong I have done to men by my
sin, yet the grief and trouble of mind I conceive for that, is nothing in
comparison of that anguish, I find in my soul for my despising of thee, and
that light account of thee, and of thine eye that has been upon me. By the
like phrase the captivity is called, Ezekiel. 7.5. An evil, an only evil; that
is the greatest evil that ever befell that nation.

So then the Doctrine that arises from these words thus opened is this.

Doct. 14
That the offense we have done to God by our sin, though it be not the only,
yet it is the chief thing above all other that should make us to hate sin, and
to mourn for it.

Two branches you see there are of this doctrine, and both of them grounded
upon that which you have now heard observed unto you in this example of David.
1. It is not the only cause why sin is to be hated and mourned for. 2. It is
(yet) the chief cause of all other.

Branc. 1
The former branch shall be confirmed unto you in two points.

David professes it was so with him. Psalm. ^19.120. My flesh trembles for
fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments. Josiah is commended of God
even for this, 2 King. 22* 19. Nay it is no evil sign to be afraid of sin,
and troubled with fear and grief for it* by the thoughts we have of our
death, and of the judgment to come, and even of hell it self. Knowing the
terrors of the Lord, (says Paul, having spoken of the judgment to come, 2
Cor. 5.11.) we persuade men, and are made manifest unto God. And our Savior
charge us to fear God, even out of this consideration, that he has power to
cast both the body and soul into hell. Luke 12 5. Neither is it unlawful to
mourn for sin, even because of those scourges and corrections we receive from
the hand of God for it in this life. All our afflictions should bring our sins
into our remembrance and humble us for them. Our sins are the only things that
keep good things from us, as the Prophet speaks, Ier. 5.25. Our sins are the
only causes of all miseries we are subject unto, how bitter and extreme soever
they be. Because thy sins are increased (says the Lord, Ier. 30.15.) I have
done these things unto thee. All the evils therefore that we endure should
work upon us as they did upon Gods people, Lam. 5.15, 16. The joy of our heart
is ceased, our dance is turned into mourning, the crown is fallen from our
head, woe unto us, that we have sinned. And it is certainly a grievous sin,
and an argument of a strange stupidity and hardness of heart in us, that the
Lord scourging us so often, one way or other by his judgments, we mourn no more
for our sins, that are the causes of it. By every judgment and affliction God
calls us to sorrow for our sin. In that day (says the Prophet, Esaias 22.12.
did the Lord call to weeping, and to mourning. And Mic. 6.9. The Lords voice
cries to the City (and so unto the town, to the family, to the person whom he
smites with any of his corrections?) And what does it cry? Surely the effect
and sum of that cry is set down, Lam. 3.39..40. Man suffers for his sin,
and therefore search and try your ways, and turn again to the Lord. He is
therefore a wise and happy man that stops not his ear at this cry, but
hears the rod, and who has appointed it.

Secondly, The consideration of the hurt we have done unto others by our sins
David's heart, when he saw what a pestilence he had brought among his subjects,
1 Chronicles. 21.17. Let thy hand I pray thee o Lord my God be on me, and on my
fathers house, but not on thy people, that they should be plagued. And see how
long and how heavily the wrong that he had done lay upon Paul's conscience, he
could never forget it. 1 Timothy 1.13. I was a persecutor and injurious. And so it
will do upon every one of our consciences one day, if we have bin injurious to
any man, howsoever we slight it now, and make nothing of it, upon pretense
either of the baseness, or of the badnes of the parties we have done wrong unto.
Remember what I told you of the Gibeonites; and how David's heart smote him for
wronging Saul, as bad a man as could live, 1 Samuel 24.5. But of all the hurts
and wrongs we have done unto men by our sins, the hurt that we have done them
in their souls, if we have bin any way the cause of their eternal perdition,
that may be to us a just cause of sorrow, and trouble of mind for our sins. O
the blood of souls which we have destroyed by our sins, will lie heavy, and
give an intolerable weight to our sins, when God shall charge us with it. And
that we may, and many do make themselves guilty of diverse ways. Not only 1.
by drawing and forcing others to sin, by our authority; as David did here, both
the messengers he sent to bring Bathsheba unto him, 2 Samuel 11,4. and Ioab whom
he commanded to make away Vriah, 2 Samuel 11.15. and as Absalom did his servants,
to murder Amnon, 2 Samuel 13.28. and as Paul had done, upon whose conscience this
lay a long time, that he had compelled many to blaspheme, Act. 26.11. And 2. by
drawing others unto sin, either by our example, or persuasion; as David and his
messengers did Bathsheba here, 2 Samuel 11.4 and as full many a one daily does,
by being the authors, and beginning of sin unto others, as the Prophet
speaks, Mica. 1.13. But even 3. by withholding from any the help and means
that God has charged us to afford them, for the preserving of their souls
from perdition. As you all will account that nurse that famisheth the child, by
withholding the breast, and food from it, to have bin a murderer of it, as
much as if she had poisoned, or cut the throat of it. And surely many of us
have just cause to fear, God will one day say to us concerning the souls of
any that have perished in our flocks, that are ministers, or in our families,
that are parents or masters, as he does to the Prophet Ezekiel. 3.18. His blood
will I require at thy hand.

Now for the second branch of the Doctrine. Branch 2
Though our sins may justly trouble us in all these respects, yet the chief
thing above all others, that should move us to hate sin, and to mourn for it,
is the consideration of that offense, we have committed by our sins against the
Lord our God. Observe the proof of this in three points.

First, This is that, that has had chief force in keeping Gods people from
sin, Joseph, Genes. 39.9, How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against
God? He considered not so much the wrong he should do his master (though that
he knew was very great) as the offense he should commit against God. So David
professes Ps. 19.11. I have hid thy word in mine heart, that I might not sin
against thee. The cause why he loved Gods word so much, and took such pains
by meditation, and prayer, to make it his own; was, that he might be kept
from sinning against God.

Secondly. This is that that has broken the hearts of Gods people, and caused
them to melt in sorrow for sin after they have committed it, that they have
done the thing that God is displeased with, that he is grieved, and
dishonored by. This was David's maine grief here. And so in the confession he
makes to Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.13. I have sinned against the Lord. And Psalm. 41.4.
Lord be merciful unto me, heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee. This
was the maine thing that troubled the prodigal child that he had displeased his
father, Lu. 15.18. I will go to my father, and will say unto him, father, I
have sinned against heaven, and before thee. Against thee, thee only have I
sinned, and done evil in thy sight.

Chron. 25.2. Amaziah did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but
not with a perfect heart. The main thing that approves the truth, and
sincerity of our obedience, is this, when in doing the good things we do, we
respect the Lord himself; we do that that we do, because we would not offend
him, because we desire to please and honor him. When we live not to our
selves, but to the Lord, Romans 14.7, 8. Thus the Apostle proves the sincerity
of heart that was in those weak Christians that did make conscience, both of
using, and not using the meats prohibited by the law of Moses, that both of
them did it to the Lord, Romans 14.6. So an hypocrite may be able to mourn deeply
for sin, and wish with all his heart, it were undone, in respect of the
mischief and punishment of sin, that either he feels or fears. As we see
in the examples of Cain, and Saul, and Ahab, and Judas. But this is a certain
note of Gods child, when the chief thing that makes us mourn for sin, is,
that we have displeased and grieved our father by it. Therefore is true
repentance called by the Apostle, Act. 20.21. Repentance toward God. Such a
repentance as the respect we have unto God has wrought in us. And the sorrow
for sin that causes repentance unto salvation, is called, 2 Cor. 7.10. A
sorrow that is according to God. So it is said of Gods people, that they
lamented after the Lord. 1 Samuel 7.2. This sorrow proceeds not from self
love, as the other does, but from love to God, when though a man know himself
to be reconciled to God, and delivered from the wrath to come; yea because he
does so, and has the spirit of grace that assures him of Gods favor;
therefore he mourns, and is troubled in heart, that he has by his sins
offended, and grieved so good a father. This is that sincere sorrow that God
promises to work in the hearts of his people. Zac. 12.10. I will power upon
the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace,
and of supplications, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and
they shall mourn for him (not for themselves) as one mourns for his only
son.

Lecture XLIIII. On Psalm 51.4. December. 26. 1626.
Reason
IT Follows now that we proceed unto the grounds and reasons of the Doctrine,
and so unto the uses that are to be made of it. Now the grounds, and reasons of
the Doctrine are principally two. The one taken from the consideration of the
nature of sin, the other from the consideration of the nature and attributes of
the Lord himself. And in the nature of sin two things are to be co^sidred. 1.
that every sin is a transgressio^ of the law of God, 2. that every sin is a
contempt done unto God

Paul says to Christian servants, Colos. 3.23, 24. Whatsoever ye do, do it
as to the Lord, and not unto men, knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the
reward of the inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ. So no wrong I can do
to any man, is a sin, but in respect of the disobedience, and contempt I show
unto God and his Law, by doing of it. This is plain, Lev. 6.2. If a soul sin,
and commit a trespass against the Lord, and lie unto his neighbor in that
that was delivered him to keep, or in fellowship, or in taking away by
violence, or has deceived his neighbor. No sin can be more directly committed
against our neighbor, then cosenage, and theft, and robbery are, and yet ye
see, that that makes a man a sinner in these things is this, that in doing of
them, he has committed a trespass against the Lord. Thus the Apostle when he
had said every one that has a true hope to be saved, and to go to heaven, does
purify himself from all sin and corruption, and so makes himself fit to go
thither, gives this for the reason of it, 1 Ioh. 3.4. because sin is a most
heinous and dangerous thing, and why so? Whosoever commits sin,
transgresses also the law, for sin is the transgression of the law. That that
makes sin so dangerous a thing, that that makes Gods people so fearful to
sin, so careful to purify, and cleanse themselves from their corruptions, is
this, that by sinning, they transgress the law of God. So the Apostle Paul
teaches us, 1 Cor. 15.56. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin
is the law. What is it that makes death so painful and terrible as it is unto
men? Surely nothing but sin, that gives the sting unto it, and what is it that
makes sin so strong to condemn them and cast them into hell, to sting and
torment the conscience as it does? Surely nothing but the law that gives the
strength to sin, that the law of God has bin transgressed by it. This is the
plain meaning of that which the same Apostle says, Romans 4.15. The law works
wrath, for where no law is, there is no transgression. What is it that brings
Gods wrath upon man in this life, or in the life to come, that stingeth the
conscience with the sense of it? Why sin (you will say) and in saying so, you
say truly, for so says the holy Ghost. Ephesians. 5.6. Because of these things
comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Yea, but what is
the cause that sin brings the wrath of God upon man? Surely nothing but this,
because by it, Gods law is transgressed, the law works wrath, says the
Apostle.

Secondly, this is also to be considered in the nature of sin, that by every
sin that we commit, we do not only transgress Gods law, but we also despise
him and do an Jeroboam, 1 kin. 14.9. But even of his own people, when they sin
against his law. So he tells David twice, that in committing these sins of
adultry, and murder, 2 Sa^. 12.9, 10. he had despised his commandment, he had
despised him. So he tells Ely that in neglecting to show that severity to his
lewd sons, that he ought to have done, he despised him, 1 Samuel 2.30. And he
tells Moses, and Aaron, that they had rebelled against him. Nu^. 20.24. And
so much for the first reason and ground of the doctrine.

The second reason is taken from the consideration of the nature and attributes
of God, Reason. 2
the person, whose law is transgressed by our sins. Four attributes there be
in the Lord, which if we consider well, we shall easily believe that we are to
hate our sins, and mourn for them out of this respect chiefly, that we have
offended God by them.

The first is his omnipresence, and omniscience, he is present with us
whersoever we are, his eye is upon us, he beholds us, whatsoever we are
doing. Can any hide himself in secret places, that I should not see him says
the Lord? ( Ier. 23.24.) do not I fill heaven and earth says the Lord?
Attribute 1
and Pro. 15.3. The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil
and the good. This was a main thing Nathan laid to David's charge, and whereby
he aggravated his sin, 2 Samuel 12.9. Wherefore have thou despised the
commandment of the Lord to do evil in his sight? And this was it that at this
time lay so heavy upon David's conscience, O Lord I have done this evil in thy
sight. As if he had said, all my care was to be secret, to hide my sin from the
eyes of men ( thou did it secretly says the Lord to him. 2 Samuel 12.12) but
all this while, thine eye was upon me; when for the committing of my filthiness
I had shut all out of my chamber, I could not shut out thee, when I did it in
the dark, the darkness hid me not from thee (as he speaks, Ps. 139.12.) but
the night shines as the day, the darkness, and the light are both alike with
thee. This is that that did even fill his heart with shame, and sorrow, when he
considered that he had done so lewdly, the Lord being by, the Lord looking upon
him. And surely so will this work upon every one of us also, when God shall be
pleased to awaken, and touch our hearts as he did his. It is a matter of
extreme shame, and trouble of mind, even to most wicked men, to know that any
man has seen them, and bin privy to that which they have done. If one know
them (says Job 24.17) they are in the terrors of the shadow of death. How much
more must it trouble the heart of Gods child, when he considers the Lord saw,
and was an eye-witnes of all the foulest sins, that ever he committed. All men
by nature would be much restrained from many sins, if they knew of any body,
though it were but a child that were by them, to see what they did. And thus
the murderer, and adulterer, are brought in by Job 24 5. emboldening
themselves, No eye shall see me. As if he had said, If they knew there were any
eye to see them, they durst not do it. And they are noted for men grown to an
extraordinary height in sin, that fear not at all, nor are restrained from
sinning by the eye of man, that are so impudent, as they care not who see, or
know, what lewdnes they do, Esa. 3.9. Such as declare their sin as Sodom, that
hide it not. Such as are like Absalom, who spread his tent upon the top of the
house, and went in to his fathers concubines, in the sight of all Israel, 2.
Sam. 16.22. And will not this appear to the child of God, when God shall open
his eyes, a far greater impudency, and height of sin, that he in sinning,
regarded not, nor feared the Lords eye, that he durst do such, and such things,
when the Lord looked upon him? Surely to David it did here. O Lord I have done
this evil in thy sight. And so it will do to every one of us, when God shall
be pleased to give us such hearts as he did unto David. For thus does the Lord
often aggravate the sins of men. Esa. 65.12. Therefore will I number you to the
sword, and you shall al bow down to the slaughter, because when I called, ye did
not answer, when I spoke ye did not hear, but did evil before mine eyes, and
did choose that wherein I delighted not.

The second attribute of God, the consideration whereof, sets forth the
hainousnes of sin is his infinite holiness, and the dislike he bears unto sin.
This is a chief attribute of his, and that wherein his glory does principally
consist. This is plain, Attribute 2
by that song of the blessed Angels, Esa. 6.3. Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of
hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory. And in the first petition of the
Lords prayer, where when our Savior would have us to pray, that Gods name may
be glorified, he teaches us to express it in these terms. Hallowed be thy
name, let holiness be ascribed unto thee. Now the Lord being thus infinitely
holy, 1. He hates and disliketh sin, there is nothing so contrary, and
opposite to his nature, as sin is. No man does hate any thing in the world, no
man's heart does so much loath or rise against any thing, as the Lords does
against sin. Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can
not look on iniquity. He cannot abide to look upon it, Ier. 44.4. I sent unto
you all my servants, the Prophets rising early. and sending them, saying, do
not this abominable thing that I hate. The Lord in the ministry of all us his
servants, does in the most patheticall manner he can, persuade and entreat you
to be afraid to sin, to repent of your sin, even for the Lords sake, even for
this cause, because his soul does so much hate and loath sin, Oh do not this
abominable thing which I hate, 2. Because the Lord is infinitely holy, he must
David complains often of it, and prays against it. Ps. 119.22. Remove from me
reproach and contempt. But never was man so much grieved to see himself
despised, as the Lord is to see men despise and slight him, as I told you we
all do, when we sin against him. Grieve not the holy spirit of God, by your
corrupt communication says the Apostle. Ephesians. 4.30. As if he had said, Because
he is holy, sin must needs grieve him. 3. Because the Lord is infinitely holy,
sin must needs anger, disquiet, and vex his spirit. Nothing in the world can
so much provoke a man unto anger, nothing can so cut him to the heart, so vex
and disquiet his mind, as the Lord is provoked, cut to the heart, and vexed
with our sins, Esa. 63.10. They rebelled, and vexed his holy spirit. and Eze.
16.43. Thou have fretted me in all these things. Now when Gods child does
consider well of this, his sin must needs trouble him more in this respect,
that he has done that, that God so loatheth, and hates, that he has grieved
and vexed him so much by it, then in respect of any evil, or punishment he
has brought upon himself by it. So did it David here, Against thee, thee only
have I sinned. And so will it the senslessest heart here, when God shall touch
him as he did David here. O that we could consider how God may complain of us
as Ps. 95.10. Forty years long was I grieved with this generation. How long
have we grieved the Lord, some of us by living in one sin, and some in another.
O that we could say to our own hearts, as the Prophet does to Ahaz, Esa. 7.13.
o my soul is it a small thing for thee to grieve men by thy sins, that thou will also grieve my God?

The third attribute of God that sets forth the hainousnes of our sins,
Attribute 3
is the infinite greatness and majesty of the Lord Great is the Lord (says
David Ps. 145.3) and greatly to be praised, his greatness is incomprehensible.
And indeed this is the beginning and foundation of all religion, and piety to
esteem the Lord to be higher then the highest. Eccl. 5.8, and to acknowledge in
our hearts this infinite greatness and majesty of the Lord, Ascribe ye greatness
to our God, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.3. And thus did the blessed Virgin, Lu. 1.46.
My soul does magnify the Lord. Every transgression even among men, is more or
less heinous, according as the person is, against whom it is committed. He
that does smite his father or his mother, or but curse and revile them, shall
surely be put to death, says the Lord in his Law. Exo. 21.15, 17. Whereas the
reviling, yea, or wounding, or maiming of another man, was not so great a sin,
nor to be punished in so severe a manner, as you may see in the same chapter,
Exodus 21.18.22, and this is that, that makes all sin so heinous as it is, and
worthy of infinite, and eternal punishment, because it is committed against,
and is a contempt done unto a person that is of infinite, and eternal majesty.
That any of us poor mortal wretches, worms rather then men, of whom the
Prophet says, Ps. 39.5. Verily, every man at his best state is altogether
vanity, and who are counted to him less then nothing, and vanity, as the
Prophet speaks, Esa. 40.17. should be so desperately mad, as to provoke, and
despise this glorious God, to make light account of any of his commandments, in
whose hand is our breath, and all our ways, as Daniel tells a great King.
Dan 5.23. whose glorious greatness is such, as the Angels cover their faces
before him. Esa. 6.2. In whose sight no creature can stand when he is angry,
Ps. 76.7. This, this is that that does greatly aggravate our sins. Woe unto him
that striveth with his maker, let the potsheard strive with the potsheards of
the earth, says the Lord. Esa. 45.9. Do we provoke the Lord unto wrath? (says
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.22.) are we stronger then he? And yet thus have we done
every one of us, and the consideration of this ought to lie heavy upon our
hearts, as it did upon David's, when he cried, against thee, thee only have I
sinned.

Lecture XLV. On Psalm 51.4. January 9. 1626.
Attribute 4
Follows now the fourth, and last attribute of God, that sets forth the
hainousnes of our sins, and that is the infinite goodness, and bounty of the
Lord. This the Lord expresses daily toward all his creatures, and we can
look no way, but we must needs behold evident proofs, and demonstrations of
it, Psalm. 145 9. The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all
his works. And the consideration even of this bounty of the Lord, toward all
his creatures, though it did not extend it self toward us more particularly
should much affect us. So it did David, Psalm. 119.68. Thou art good, and do
good, teach me thy statutes. If we know, or hear of a man that is a good
housekeeper, a bountiful man, ready to do all men good, we all esteem
highly of such a one, and speak well of him, and would be ready to do him any
kindness or service, though we never drunk of his cup our selves, nor
received any benefit by him; nay, though we never saw his face: so amiable a
thing is this property of goodness and bounty in our eyes, wheresoever we behold
it. For a good man (says the Apostle, Romans 5.7,) peradventure some would even
dare to die. But alas, such is the vile corruption of our nature, that the
common mercies of the Lord, whereby he does express the goodness, and
bountifulnes of his nature, do little affect us. Let therefore every one of us
consider how he has expressed his goodness and bounty to our selves in
particular. And of this before I begin to set it before your eyes, and put you
in mind of it, I may say with the Prophet, Ps. 40.5 Many o Lord my God, are the
wonderful works which thou have done, and thy thoughts which are to usward,
they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee, if I would declare and speak of
them, they are more then can be numbered. Yet let us consider (I pray you) as we
are able, the mavelous goodness, and bounty the Lord has showed toward
every one of us in particular. 1. In the things that concern our bodies, and
this mortal life. 2. In the things that concern our souls, and our
everlasting happiness.

Act. 17.28. In him we live, and move, and have our being. In his hand is our
breath, and all our ways. Dan. 5.23. 2. It is he alone that maintains us in
this health, and strength, and vigor of body, and mind, that we do enjoy in
that soundnes of limbs and senses, and keeps us from those weaknesses, and
pains, and diseases of body, and from that impotency of mind, that we see many
others subject unto. The Lord is the strength of my life says David, Psalm.
27.1. and Exo. 23.25. He shall bless thy bread, and thy water, and I will take
sickness away from the midst of thee. 3. It is he alone that while we see many
others to beg their bread, and to feed upon scraps, provideth so plentifully
for us, makes us to be able to be helpful unto others, to entertain at this
time our friends, and neighbors, makes us able to make merry together, and
furnishes our table with such variety, and plenty of all good things. Thou
preparest a table before me (says David, Ps. 23.5.) in the presence of mine
enemies, thou anointest my head with oil, my cup runs over. and Act. 14.17.
He left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain,
and fruitful seasons filling our hearts with food and gladness. And it is our
extreme blindness and sottishnes, if we ascribe this our plenty and prosperity
unto any thing else, but the Lords goodness alone. Hos. 2.8. She did not know
that I gave her corn and wine, and oil, and multiplied her silver and gold.
4. Whereas we see and hear of many others that are undone some by fire, and
some by thieves, and some by witchcraft, how comes it to pass that we and
our children, and our cattle, and goods are kept in such safety by day and by
night, at home and abroad. Surely the Lord has made an hedge about us, and
about our houses, and about all that we have, as Satan confesses of Job, 1.10.
The Lord is thy keeper says David, Psalm. 121.5. If he did not continually
watch over us, it could not be with us as it is. 5. Whereas we have every one
of us, often times been in sundry great adversities, and dangers, as well as
other men, what has been the cause that we have comen off so well, when
others by the very same diseases, by the same afflictions, have been swallowed
up and destroyed? Surely this is to be ascribed to the goodness, and mercy of
the Lord alone. And we have all cause to say with David, Psalm. 18.2. The Lord
is my deliverer, and verse 16. He sent from above, he took me, he drew me out
of many waters. And 68.20. He that is our God, is the God of salvation, and
unto God the Lord belong the issues from death. 6. and lastly, Whereas we must
all look for a change, and expect trouble and affliction, Job 5.7. Man is
borne unto trouble, what refuge have any of us to fly unto in any distress,
for help and comfort, but to the Lord only? Psalm. 20.7. Some trust in charets,
and some in horses, but we will remember the name of the Lord our God. And
62.8. Trust in him at all times, ye people, power out your hearts before him,
God is a refuge for us. Gods people have no other refuge to fly unto in all
their distresses, but him alone. Yea, nature has taught this to all men; as
we may see both in Scripture, Ion. 1.5. and in daily experience, how the worst
will look toward God in their extreme sickness, and send for the minister
then to pray for them. For that which Solomon says of riches, Prove. 11.4. may
be said of pleasures, and friends, and all other things we have most set our
hearts on, they will not avail us in the day of wrath. Lo, thus good and
gracious the Lord has been to every one of us, even in the things that
concern this mortal life, but 2. he has showed much more goodness to our
souls, then all this comes to. For as our souls are far more excellent
then our bodies, the father of spirits, Heb. 12.9. and has doubtless a
fatherly care of them in a special manner. Let me therefore say to you as the
Prophet does, Ps. 6^.^6. Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will
declare what he has done (not for my soul only, but) for every one of your
souls. Neither will I speak of those bounties of the Lord, that are peculiar
to some choice servants of his, but of those that are common to all that do
unfeinedly fear him, even to the meanest of them. Nor of all them neither, but
of three of them only, which may sufficiently serve to demonstrate this point.

First. When we had lost our selves by the voluntary transgression of our John
3.16. So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son: that
whosoever believes in him, might not perish, but have life everlasting. And
how did he give him? The Apostle tells us, Romans 8.32. He spared not his own
son, but delivered him up for us all. He did not remit unto him the least jot
of those torments that were due in his justice to our sins, but made him a
curse for us, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 3.13. He drank at the hand of the
Lord, the cup of his fury (as the Prophet speaks in another case, Esa.
51.17.) He drunk the dregs of the cup of trembling, and wrung them out. This
amplifyeth greatly the goodness, and bounty of the Lord to his people, that
this ransom was paid for them, in a special manner, Esa. 53.5. He was
wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, and verse
12. He hare the sins of many. He prayed not for the world, John 17.9. Oh what a
goodness of God was this to us, that passing by, and neglecting the greatest
part of the world, he should think upon us in a special manner, to pay such a
ransom for us. Oh what cause have every one of us to admire this mercy of the
Lord, and to say with Job 7.17. What is man that thou should magnify him,
and that thou should set thine heart upon him? What was I, that thou
should make so precious account of me, that thou should pay such a
ransom to redeem my soul?

Cantic 6.13. Return return o Shulamite, return return, that we may look
upon thee; He besought us to be reconciled to him, as the Apostle speaks, 2
Cor. 5.20. stood long at our door, and knocked, Rev. 3.20 waited long and
endured many a repulse from us, as he says, Romans 10.21. All the day I have
stretched out my hands unto a rebellious and a gain saying people; and at last
overcame us with his kindness, changed and converted our hearts, and made us
new creatures. When the Apostle had said, Ephesians. 2.5. Even when we were dead
in sins he quickened us; he adds, by grace ye are saved. Nothing but grace,
nothing but the goodness of God was the cause of it. He wrought such a change
in us, as is mentioned, Esaias 11.6. The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and
the leopard shall lie down with the kid, and the calfe and the young lion and
the fatling together, and a little child shall lead them. And this also does
greatly amplify the goodness of God toward us in our conversion, if we shall
consider how rare a mercy it is. 1. How the Lord vouchsafes not so much as
the outward calling in particular to the greatest part of the world by far.
He shows his word unto Jacob (says the Psalmist Psalm. 147.19, 20.) his
statutes and his judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any nation,
and as for his judgments, they have not known them. 2. How few of those that
the Lord vouchsafes the outward calling unto, receive grace to believe, and
obey the truth; as our Savior speaks, Mat. 22.14. Many are called, but few
are chosen. How many our selves may observe of our own kindred, of our own
neighbors, of them that have as long as we obtained the same means, of our
betters every way, of them whose lives have been far more civil and
unblameable then ours, whom yet God vouchsafes no such grace unto. So that I
may say to you as the Apostle does, 1 Cor. 1.26. You see your calling brethren,
how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are
called. This consideration was the thing that bred such zealous love in David's
heart toward the Lord, 2 Samuel 6.21. It was before the Lord (says he to
scoffing Michall) which chose me before thy father, and before all his house,
to appoint me ruler over the people of the Lord, over Israel, therefore will I
play before the Lord. This was that that moved our blessed Savior to rejoice
so in his spirit, in the behalf of the faithful in his time and ascribe it
all merely to the free grace and goodness of the Lord. Luke 10.21. Thou have
hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes.

we are kept by the power of God unto salvation, as the Apostle speaks, 1
Pet. 1.5. he will not suffer his to take such falls as shall break their
necks, or to fall into such pits, as we should never get out of again. He
will keep the feet of his Saints from such falls, as Hannah speaks, 1 Samuel
2.9. He has beat us for falling, and happily for our carelessness, left us to
take such falls as have bruised us fore, or broken an arm or a leg of us, but
he has taken us up again, and set us on our feet. Nay though we have given
him just cause a thousand times to cast us off, and dishinherit us, to leave us
to our selves, and Satan, yet has his love been so unchangeable toward us,
that nothing could move him to cast us off. Nay he has given us assurance by
his spirit, Romans 8 38, 39. that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love
of God in Christ Jesus our Lord. So that we have just cause to say as the
Prophet Mic. 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage, that ret^ineth not
his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. And this is also that that
greatly amplifieth the goodness of God in this point, that it is so rare. If
we would consider how many have fallen, some to Popery and other heresies, some
to profanesse, some to the utter hatred of Religion, some to worldliness, that
were once far before us in knowledge and in profession, how many that were
first are become last, Mat. 19.30. How many there are, whom we may daily look
upon, that are like those the Apostle speaks of, 2 Pet. 2.18.22. that once
were clean escaped from them that live in error but now with the dog are
turned to their own vomit again, and as the sow that was washed to their
wallowing in the mire. Many that are like unto Saul, who though he had received
excellent gifts of Gods spirit, even another heart 1 Samuel 10.6.9. and never in
his life fell into so gross sins as David did, yet he fell away quite from
God, and lost all grace, and was quite forsaken of God 1 Samuel 16.14. and 28.15.
whereas many of us that like David have had far stronger corruptions, yet are
still kept in the state of grace, be it that none of those that have thus quite
fallen away, were ever truly regenerate, and we may say of them as 1 John 2.19.
They went out from us but they were not of us, for if they had been of us,
they would no doubt have continued with us. But what is it that has made us to
stand when so many that seemed much stronger then we have fallen quite away?
Surely nothing but the mere grace and goodness of the Lord. It is not of him
that wills (says the Apostle, Romans 9.16.) nor of him that runs, but of
God that shows mercy. And thus have I (in some measure) put you in mind of
the infinite goodness and bounty the Lord has showed to every one of us that
are his people.

Now the consideration of this mavelous goodness and bounty of God toward
us does greatly aggravate our sins, and make them out of measure sinful. There
is no sin we have committed, no commandment of God that we have transgressed,
but we have thereby slighted and despised, showed contempt unto, grieved and
dishonored that God that has been so good and gracious a father unto us.
Thus does the Lord aggravate David's sin, 2 Samuel 12.7. -- 9. I anointed thee
King over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, and I gave thee
thy masters house etc. and if that had been too little, I would mereover have
given thee such and such things, wherefore have thou despised the commandment
of the Lord. Thus did God plead with Israel, Mic. 6.3. -- 5. O my people what
have I done to thee, and wherein have I wearied thee? (that thou make so
slight account of offending me) testify against me; and then in the two next
verses he puts them in mind of the great goodness he had showed toward
them, that by that means he might bring them to a consideration and feeling of
their sins. Thus does the Lord aggravate the sins of his people, Deuteronomy. 32.6.
Do ye thus requite the Lord, o foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy father
that has bought thee? has he not made thee and established thee? This was
that that made Mary Magdelene weep so abundantly, Luke 7.38. she had a deep
apprehension of Gods goodness toward her, verse 47. This was that that lay so
heavy upon David's heart here, Against thee, thee only have I sinned. Nay, it
is not possible that any should ever have a true assurance and sense of Gods
fatherly goodness wrought in his heart by the spirit of God; but it will have
this effect in him. Zach. 12.10. I will power out upon the house of David, and
upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace, and of supplications,
and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for
him as one mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him as
one that is in bitterness for his first borne. Why do our sins trouble us no
more? Surely we are not soundly persuaded of Gods fatherly goodness and love
toward us, the spirit of grace was never powered upon us. I know 1. That the
most men make the less account of sin, because they say they know the Lord is
so gracious and merciful, nothing does so much keep them from being troubled
for their sins as this; they cannot think it possible God should like much
the worse of them for any of their sins, because he is still so good and
bountiful unto them; but are ready to say to their souls with the Epicure,
Eccles. 9.7. Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a
merry heart, for God now accepts thy works. 2. Yea they embolden themselves
to sin by this more then by any thing, because they know and are peswaded the
Lord is so infinite in goodness and mercy, they turn the very grace of God
into wantonness, Jude 4. If a child should thus resolve with himself; rush I
know my father bears that affection to me, that though I be never so
stubborn, and rebellious against him, though I grieve and dishonor him never
so much, yet he will never cast me off, and therefore I care not for offending
him: all men would say, that wretch had lost all natural affection, and had
not the nature or heart of a child in him. No more has that man certainly any
true or sound assurance of Gods fatherly love and goodness toward him, that
does not hate sin, that is not afraid of sin, that cannot mourn for sin, out
of this respect above all others, that by his sin he has offended and grieved
and dishonored, so good and gracious a father as the Lord has been unto him.
Lay aside (says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.1.3.) all malice, and all guile, and
hypocrisies, enuies, and evil speakings, because ((...)) ye have tasted
(known with feeling) that the Lord is gracious.

Lecture XLVI. on Psalm 51.4. January 23. 1626.
IT follows now that we proceed to the uses that are to be made of this
point. And those are four principally. 1. For instruction. 2. For the trial
and examination of our selves. 3. For exhortation. 4, For reproof.

Use 1.
And first for instruction, To teach us how to judge of the heinousness of sin,
that no sin is small or light to be accounted of, every sin even that that we
think to be the least is a dead work, as the Apostle calls it, Heb. 6.1.
deserves eternal death. This is a point of great use. 1. To work in us more
fear of sin, and to arm us against a conceit that usually emboldneth us to
many sins and hardens us in them, because we think that they are but small
ones. 2. To confirm us against the error of the Papists, who to maintain many
other of their false doctrines the better, their doctrine of possibility to
keep the whole Law, their doctrine of merit, their doctrine of Purgatory, and
such like; do teach that all sins are not in their own nature mortal, nor
do deserve eternal death, but that some transgressions of the Law of God are
only venial sins.



First, Consider the father that begets and engenders it in us, and that is
the devil, who is the father of every lie, not of the pernicious lie only,
but of every lie, Ioh. 8.44. and of every vain and petry oath, Mat. 5.37.
Whatsoever is more then these (that is then yea in affirming any thing, and nay
in denying) comes (...) from the wicked one; that is from the devil, as the
same phrase is used, 1 John 3.12.

have no cause to doubt but that they were reprobates, as upon Saul who for
sparing of Agag, and saving the fattest of the oxen, and of the sheep for
sacrifice was utterly rejected of God, 1 Samuel 15.23. and upon Ananias and
Saphira, who for dissembling in a small matter were suddenly stricken dead,
Acts 5.3. But even upon such as we have no cause to doubt, but they were his
elect children; as upon Lots wife who for looking back (out of a loathnesse to
leave the profits and pleasures of Sodom) was turned into a pillar of salt,
Genesis 19.26. 2. Upon fifty thousand men of Bethshemesh who were slain for
looking into the Arc, 1 Samuel 6.19. 3. Upon Vzzah for touching and staying the
Arc when it was in danger to have fallen, 2 Samuel 6.7.5 4. Upon the young
Prophet, who being deceived by the old Prophet, did but eat and drink in
Bethel, which God had forbidden him to do, 1 King. 13.24. 5. Upon the man that
was slain by a lion for refusing to smite a Prophet of the Lord, when God had
commanded him, 1 King. 20.36. 6. Upon Moses himself whom God would have slain
in the Inn for delaying the circumcision of his child, Exodus 4.24. 7. Upon many
of the elect Corinthians, that for this very cause were smitten with death,
because they came unpreparedly unto the Lords table. 1 Cor. 11.30.

If any man shall object that these examples of Gods mavelous severity upon
men for small sins, Object.
prove not that every small sin deserves eternal death. For we are not to
think that any of these seven sorts, that have been brought for examples died
eternally.

I answer, Answ.
It is true. But these corporal deaths that the Lord smote them with in this
manner, were evident documents and demonstrations that every one of them were
worthy of eternal death for these sins. For so the Apostle proves that
infants that never committed actual sin are worthy of condemnation, because
they also do die, Romans 15.14 -- 16. And indeed this is the due desert of all
sin, Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death. What death? That appears by the
other member of the verse, But the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus
Christ our Lord. And thus runs the sentence of the most righteous law of
God, Galat. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that
are written in the book of the law to do them. The least breach of the Law,
the least omission of any duty commanded in it, makes men liable to the curse
of God. And to all that are under the curse of God, eternal death belongs;
according to that, Mat. 25.41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire
prepared for the devil and his Angels.

Thirdly, Consider the price whereby we are redeemed from the punishment that
is due unto us for the least offense that ever we committed against the the
blood of Christ that cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 17. from the least
as well as from the greatest. And therefore Gods people under the Law that had
committed any sin against any of Gods commandments, though they had done it
ignorantly, must bring their sacrifice unto the Priest or else there could be
no atonement made between God and them, Levi. 5.17, 18.

Fourthly and lastly, Consider the reason of this, which has been at large
and authority of the person that does command or forbid the thing. So when Saul
thought that that he had done, if it were any fault was but a very small one,
Samuel tells him, 1 Samuel 15.23. Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and
stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry. As if he should say, Thou will
acknowledge witchcraft and idolatry to be very heinous sins, and I tell thee
Saul thy rebellion, and stubbornness against Gods Law is no less a sin then
that. Why, but Saul might have said, alas I did not this out of a rebellious
and stubborn mind, wilfully to offend God, I did it out of a good intent, and
the people persuaded me to it, and I thought it a shame for me to be less
forward and zealous to provide for Gods worship then they. Yea, but says
Samuel thou had the commandment of God to the contrary, thou have slighted,
and set light by Gods commandment, and the Lord accounts this neglect of his
commandment, no less then rebellion, and stubbornness, then witchcraft and
idolatry.

Object.
You will say then that by this doctrine all sins are alike. He that to relieve
his extreme necessity steals a sheep, breaks Gods commandment, as well as
he that kills his own father. And is there no difference between these sins?

Answ.
I answer, Yes verily, some sins are far greater then others are 2 King. 3.2.
Iehoram the son of Ahab wrought evil in the sight of the Lord, but not like
his father, and like his mother. His sins were great but not so great as
theirs. Our Savior tells the Pharisees that some sins in comparison of
others are like gnats, and some like camels, Mat. 23.24. And though the least
in it own nature do deserve eternal torments, and foolish man cannot
comprehend how there can be any degrees any* Magis or Minus more or less in
those torments, that are eternal and infinite; yet the eternal God knows
how to make degrees and differences even in those eternal torments. And though
the torments that the least sinner shall endure in hell be infinite, and such
as no tongue can express, no heart can conceive how great and intolerable
they will be; There shall be nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth, Luke
13 28. There the worm never dies, nor the fire never goes out, Mar. 9.44.
Yet will the Lord inflict greater torments on such whose sins have been like
camels, and lesser upon those whose sins have been like gnats. He knows how
to beat the servant that knew his masters will and did it not with many
stripes, and him with fewer that did it not, because he knew it not Luke 12.47,
48. to make the torments of Chorazin more intolerable then those of Tire and
Sidon, Mat. 11.22. Some sins ye see then are greater then other some. But what
is it that puts the difference between sins? What are the weights and
balances wherein sins are to be weighed, if we would know which are the
heaviest, and which are the lightest sins. Not the opinion of men, of the
world, of the multitude, of the time; nor the censure and punishment that men
do pass, and inflict upon sin. For so in times past it should have been a
greater sin to eat flesh upon a friday, then to break many of the
commandments of God, and in any man not to keep the day of Christ's birth holy
in a solemn manner should be a greater sin then to break any one of Gods
commandments, as than to steal, to commit adultery, or idolatry, or blasphemy
either. These are therefore false weights and balances to judge of the
greatness or smallness of sins by. But by the weights of the Sanctuary, by
the word of God only this is to be judged of. And this is the rule that Gods
word gives us to judge which are the greatest sins. The more directly any sin
is committed against God, the more contempt is done to God by it; the greater
the sin is. As the sin against the holy Ghost is the greatest sin of all sins,
because it is most directly committed against God, he that commits it
sins of mere malice and despite against God. He does despite unto the
spirit of grace, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 10.29. So every other sin, the
nearer it comes to it, the more directly it is committed against God, the
greater the sin is. And from this general rule, these three particulars will
follow.

First. That the sins of the highest degree against the first table, are
greater Samuel speaks of witchcraft, and Idolatry, as of the greatest sins, 1 Samuel 15.23. Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as
iniquity and idolatry. So our Savior calls the first table, the first and
the great commandment. Mat. 22.38.

Secondly. That sins committed against knowledge are greater sins then those
James 4.17. To him that knows to do well, and does it not, to him it is sin.
As if he had said; to him it is sin with a witness. See it also in sins of
commission, Paul's blasphemy and persecution was in respect of the deed it
self, a far greater sin, then the sin of that man was, that gathered sticks
upon the Sabbath day. And yet Paul found mercy with God, because he did it
ignorantly, as himself says, 1 Timothy 1.13. Whereas the other found no mercy
with God, as we see, Numb. 15.35. because he did it against his knowledge
presumptuously. How may that appear will you say? Surely he, and all the
congregation, knew well how strictly a little before God had enjoined a precise
rest, even from gathering of Mannah upon the Sabbath day, Exo. 16.23. yea from
doing any work even about the making of the tabernacle, yea, or kindling a
fire in any of their tabernacles upon the Sabbath day, Exodus 15.^, 3. And yet
would he do this; he sinned against his knowledge, he sinned presumptuously.
Therefore is this story brought in by the holy Ghost, immediately upon the law
that God had made against presumptuous sinners, Applic.
as a sanction, and ratification of that law, Numb. 15.30, 32. O think of
this, you that at this day do so presumptuously profane the Lords Sabbaths, not
by gathering a few sticks, but by following your profits, and pleasures on that
day, with the neglect and contempt of Gods house and worship. The spirit of God
wrought that love in David's heart to the house of God, that he professes Psalm.
84 10. He had rather be a doore-keeper in the house of his God, then to dwell
in the tents of wickedness. And what spirit is it that makes you to hate and
loath the house of God as you do? that makes you so far in love with the
tents of wickedness, I mean the alehouses (the most of which, if any houses
under heaven may well be called the tents of wickedness) as you are, that you
cannot be drawn from these tents of wickedness, into the house of the Lord, no
not upon the Lords day? you cannot pretend ignorance for your sin, no more then
he that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath day could, you sin against your
knowledge, as he did, you sin presumptuously as he did; yea your sin is worse
then his was. 1. We read not that he did this in the time of Gods public
worship as you do. 2. He spent not his time so ill in gathering sticks, as you
do in swilling, and gaming upon the Sabbath day. 3. He drew not other lewd
companions to join with him in his sin, as you do. And yet God met with him,
he died without mercy, as you have heard for his sin, and be you sure the Lord
will meet with you also one day, and unless you repent, and forsake this sin,
you shall find no more mercy with God, then he did. Well, because I see many of
you my neighbors here now, whom I know to be faulty this way, and whom it may
be I shall not see here this twelve-moneth again, I have the more willingly
enlarged my self in the application of this point, and though I see small hope
to prevail with any of you, for the belly has no ears, and the
Ale-house-haunter is usually a scorner, and derider of Gods Word; yet because I
know that that is unpossible with men, is possible with God; as our Savior
spoke in a case not much unlike to this Luke 18.27. and God has often wrought by
a Sermon, as great wonders as this comes to, I will conclude my speech to you
with that prayer that Noah once made for his sons, Genesis 9.27. God persuade
Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Sem. The Lord persuade you to shun and forsake
these tents of wickedness, to love and frequent better the assemblies, and
congregations of his people, where his ordinance, and service is to be found.

Romans 2.9. Tribulation, and anguish, shall be upon every soul that does evil,
upon the Jew first, and also upon the Gentile. Why upon the Jew first, rather
then upon the Gentile? Because God received more contempt and dishonor by the
sins of such, then of other men. The name of God is blasphemed among the
Gentiles through you, says the Apostle, Romans 2.24.

Use 2.
The second use that this Doctrine serves unto, is for the examination of our
selves, and for the trial of the truth, and soundness of our repentance;
which it highly concerns us to know, and to take heed we be not deceived in
it. 1. It is no good argument to prove we have truly repented, because we have
sometimes found deep remorse, and trouble of mind for our sins; For so had
Ahab, and Judas, as we have often heard. 2. Neither is it a good argument we
have truly repented, because we have now left the sins we were heretofore
given unto; For the Apostle speaks of certain hypocrites that were clean
escaped from them that live in error, that had escaped the pollutions of the
world, even through the knowledge of the Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ. 2 Pet.
2.18.20. By what notes may we then judge of the truth and soundnes of our
repentance? surely by these two principally. 1. When we can grieve for our
sins, hate and forsake them, chiefly out of this respect, because the Lord is
offended, grieved, and dishonored by them, when our sorrow is according to
God, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 7.10. when our repentance is repentance
toward God, as the same Apostle calls it, Acts 20.24. 2. When our sorrow for
sin, our hatred and forsaking of it, grows from faith; and when the knowledge
and persuasion we have of Gods fatherly goodness, and mercy, rather then of
his power, or his justice, and anger against sin, can make us to mourn for our
sins, to hate and forsake them. For so is true repentance described. Zac.
12.10. I will power upon them the spirit of grace, and of supplication -- and
then they shall mourn, as one mourns for his only son. And in 1. Pet. 2.1
-- 3. Lay aside all malice, and guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and evil
speakings -- if so be that ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. Would we
therefore know the true cause why our hearts are so hard and senseless; why we
cannot grieve and mourn more for our sins; why we cannot more willingly
forsake and cast off many of our sins; surely the Lord has not yet powered upon
us the spirit of grace, nor given us thereby a sound assurance of his mercy,
and fatherly love toward us in Christ. We have not yet tasted (though it may
be we know it, and can acknowledge it with our tongues, and discourse
learnedly, and eloquently of it) nor have we attained to a particular, a lively
and comfortable assurance that the Lord is gracious. For if we had, certainly
nothing would be so effectual, to work in us a sound grief of heart for sin,
nothing would cause us so much to hate, and abhor sin as this, that we have
thereby offended, and grieved, and made so light account of so good, and so
gracious a father, as the Lord is unto us. This was that that above all things
so much troubled and afflicted the heart of David here. Against thee, thoe
only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight.

Lecture XLVII. On Psalm 51.4. Ianu. 30. 1626.
Follows the third use that this Doctrine serves unto; Use 3.
And that is for exhortation to persuade every one of us, that forasmuch as
every sin is an offense against the Majesty of almighty God, a contempt done
unto him, and a despising, and sleighting of his commandment, that therefore we
would take heed how we give our selves liberty, either to commit the smallest
sin that we are tempted unto, or to make light account of any sin that we have
committed upon this conceit, that it is but a small one. Certainly we are bound
to take notice of, to be humbled for, and to strive against the very least of
our corruptions; the very least transgression of the law of God; even our
passionatnes, and aptnes to be angry without cause, and to exceed therein; even
of our mispending of our time, and trifling it out, both when we are alone, and
in company, yea, even on the Sabbath day, and our formality in Gods worship,
and of our unprofitablenes, that we do so little good, and of that delight we
take to hear, and speak of the faults of others, and of the unsanctifiednesse
of our thoughts, yea, even of our very dreams that savor of corruption, as it
may appear by the equity of that law we read of, Deuteronomy. 23.10, 11.

Three special motives there be (besides the reasons you have heard of the
last day in the use of instruction) that may be effectual to persuade us unto
this.

First. He that gives liberty to himself in the smallest sins, will be in
danger A little leaven (says the Apostle, Gal. 5.9.) leaveneth the whole
lamp. And this is that that our Savior teaches us, Mat. 5.19. Whosoever
shall break one of the least commandments, and shall teach men so (that is,
justify, defend, and allow himself or others in it) he shall be called the
least in the kingdom of heaven; that is, he shall be of no worth, of no
reckoning for grace among the people of God. Dead flies (says Solomon. Eccle.
10.1.) cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a stinking savor; so
does a little folly, him that is in reputation for wisdom, and honor.

And this must needs be so, 1. Because in giving our selves liberty in the
least thing that we know God has forbidden, we break the bond and cord that
should restrain us from any sin, namely the conscience of the commandment of
the Lord against it. If this yoke be once shaken off, if once this bond be of
no force with us, but we grow in the least thing to say, as Psalm. 2.3. Let us
break their hands asunder, and cast their cords from us, what can be of force
to hold us fast to the Lord, or to bind or restrain us from the foulest, and
grossest sins? 2. Because it is the natural effect of sin (specially being
wittingly committed) to make a man apter to sin, to go further in sin. Romans
6.19. You have yielded your members servants to uncleannes, and to iniquity
unto iniquity. 3. Because God in his just judgment is wont to punish sin by
sin, to punish men's carelesnes, and loosenes, and security in smaller sins, by
leaving them to themselves, and giving them up to grosser sins, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10,
11. Because men received not the love of the truth (professed it formally, but
joyed not, took no comfort in it; a common sin (God knows in these days,
and such as most men count a very small sin (if any sin at all) for this cause
God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie; For this
God gives men up to popery: The surest way then for a man to keep himself
from falling into gross sins, is to be afraid of, and make conscience of the
smallest sins. This is plain in that prayer of David, Psalm. 19.12, 13. Cleanse
thou me from secret faults, keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins,
let them not have dominion over me, then shall I be upright, and I shall be
innocent from the great transgression. So Job to preserve himself from
fornication, and adultery, made a covenant with his eye, and with his thought
also, bound them to the good abearing, Job 31.1. resolved with himself to make
conscience of, and to abstain from all wanton looks, and thoughts also; and
so long as he did so, he was safe enough from falling into those gross sins.
On the contrary David giving himself liberty in idleness, and wanton looks,
2. Sam. 11.1, 2. was left to himself to fall to those foul sins, he so much
bewaileth and complains of in this psalm. This is then the first motive to
persuade us to make conscience even of the smallest sins, because else we shall
be in danger to fall into gross and most heinous sins.

Mat. 21.31. Verily I say unto you, that the Publicans and the harlots go into
the kingdom of God before you.

Iam. 2.10, 11. Because he that said, do not commit adultery; said also, do not
kill. He that said, Levit. 24.16. He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord,
shall surely be put to death, swear not great oaths, has said also, Matt.
5.34. Swear not at all. He that has said, Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate
thy brother in thy heart; has said also, Col. 3.8. Put away anger, yield not
unto, please not thy self in this, that thou art so apt to be angry. He that
has said, Exo. 20.10. on the Sabbath thou shall do no manner of work, has
said also, Esaias. 58.13. Thou may not follow thy pleasures on my holy day --
nor speak thine own words. He that has said, we must use to pray, and God
will power out his wrath upon the families that call not on his name, Jeremy
10.25. has said also, John 4.24. God is a spirit, and they that worship him,
must worship him in spirit, and in truth and Exodus 20.17. The Lord will not
hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain. He that has said, Esaias
1.16. Cease to do evil, do nothing that is evil, do no hurt to any, has said
also in the next verse, Esaias 1.17. Learn to do well, and Matthew 25.30. Cast
the unprofitable servant (him that has done no good, whose life has been no
way useful nor profitable unto others) into utter darkness, and Ephesians. 5.16.
Redeem the time, make conscience of spending it unfruitfully. Lastly, He that
has said, 1 Pet* 1.15. Be ye holy in all manner of conversation; that is, in
all outward actions and words, has said also, Prove. 2.23. Keep thy heart with
all diligence. So that if a man make no conscience of his thoughts, how vain,
wanton, malicious, worldly they be, that never troubles him, certainly he is
not restrained from any wicked speeches, or actions out of conscience to Gods
commandment, but out of some other respects, and consequently there is no
truth of heart in him.

Object.
One thing there is that our foolsh hearts art apt to object against this
exhortation. We are apt to think that this preciseness, this strictness to
watch, and take heed to our selves, that we offend not in the least thing,
puts such a yoke upon a Christians neck, as no man is able to bear, makes
the life of a Christian, a mere drudgery, a most painful, and uncomfortable
life. We have an old proverb, Qui medice vivit misere vivit If a man have so
crazy a stomach, that if in eating or drinking, he swerve never so little from
the rules of Physic, or from his ordinary diet, he will straight be much out
of temper, surely that man's life must needs be very uncomfortable unto him. And
so many men think it is with them whose consciences are so tender, and nice,
that the least sin will trouble them. Answ.


To this I answer. 1. That a Christian life is certainly very painful to flesh
and blood, and if we will admit of no duty to be enjoined us, but that which is
easy, we must never look to come to heaven. We know who it was that said,
Matthew. 7.14. Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life,
and few there be that find it. And though it be an evil temper and
constitution of the body, to be too tender; yet cannot the conscience be too
tender: the best temper and constitution of the conscience, is to be sensible
of the least sin. Keep my law (says the Lord, Proverbs 7.2.) as the apple of
thine eye. The conscience of Gods child toward Gods commandments, is as
tender a thing as the apple of the eye, the least thing will offend it. 2. This
precisenes in making conscience of the least sin, will not make a Christian
life wearisome and uncomfortable unto him; nay, it is the only way to make our
lives comfortable unto us indeed, if we could bring our hearts to this, to make
conscience of the least sin. It is a certain truth which Solomon speaks of
all the ways of true piety, Prove. 3.17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness,
and all her paths are peace. Certainly, every yoke of Christ is easy, and
every burden that he lays upon us is light; as he tells us that cannot
deceive us, Matthew. 11.30. His commandments are not grievous, says the
Apostle, 1 John 5.3. The strictness, and preciseness of obedience that the
Lord requires of us in this case, is not a legal strictness, and
preciseness of obedience, but an Evangelicall, 2 Cor. 8.12. If there be first
a willing mind, it is accepted. God requires no more of us, but that we
wittingly give not our selves liberty in the least sin, but that we do our
unfeined endeavor to keep our selves from the least sin, and not to suffer
the least of our corruptions to pass without a censure, no not a thought, no
not a dream that favors of corruption, as it appears by the equity of
that law which we find. Deuteron. 23.10, 11. This preciseness (and nothing
without this) will give us assurance of the uprightness of our hearts, and
this assurance will breed that peace, and soundness of joy in us, as nothing
in the world besides is able to do. So it is said of the people in David's
time, 1 Chronicles. 29.9 The people rejoiced, for that they had offered willingly,
because with a perfect heart they had offered willingly. This is that that
works true confidence, and security in the conscience of a Christian, as
David speaks, Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect
unto all thy commandments. Such need not fear their sins, nor the curse of
the law due to sin; For against such there is no law, as the Apostle speaks,
Gal. 5.23.

The fourth and last use that this doctrine serves unto, Use 4.
is for reproof of such as blame many of Gods servants, for nothing more then
this, that they are so precise in trifles, in matters of very small moment.
This they tax them for, as for a very foul fault. They love (say they) to be
singular, and to show themselves more holy then all other men in matters of
nothing. Forsooth they will not do as other men do. Nay, they will not speak
as other men speak. O, they may not swear, no not by faith and troth. This
ridiculous precisenes in toys and trifles (say they) we cannot abide. And this
is certainly one chief ground of all the contempt and hatred that most men do
bear unto the servants of God, they esteem us all to be no better then
hypocrites because of this. Now unto these men, I have three things to say, 1.
That there is a kind of precisenes in small matters, that is indeed to be blamed
as a certain note of hypocrisy. 2 That all precisenes is not so. 3. How men
should carry themselves toward such as they so much mislike.

And for the first, I will give you two notes to try it by. 1. Why men are
strict, and precise, and place religion and holiness in such things as God
has given no such commandment nor direction for in his word. The strictness,
and preciseness of the Pharisees in observing their purifications our Savior
calls hypocrisy; because they had no ground for their conscience therein,
but only the commandment and traditions of men, Matthew. 7.6, 7. The
preciseness of the Papists in keeping their Lent, and abstaining from meat,
upon opinion of holiness, the Apostle calls hypocrisy, because there is no
warrant for it in the Word. For every creature of God is sanctified, (and the
use of it allowed unto us) by the Word, 1 Timothy 4.2.5. And certainly there
are a world of such Popish hypocrites, that are exceedingly scrupulous, and
precise, and zealous in observing the traditions of men; that do observe
sundry rites, and customs of the Church, not only out of obedience to the
authority, whereby they are enjoined, but even out of conscience, to the things
themselves, and persuasion that neither of the Sacraments would do them or
their children good, if they should be received without those ceremonies that
the Church has enjoined; their fear toward God, is taught by the precepts of
men, as the Prophet speaks, Esa. 29.13. that will urge and press their
ministers much more for the observation of these things, then either for
preaching, or any other duty of his ministry, that God has enjoined him.
These precisians are gross hypocrites certainly. 2. Admit we have a
commandment of God against these things that we are so scrupulous, and precise
in, yet if we make more conscience of the commandments of God, touching these
smaller things, then we do of the greatest and weightiest of them, this is
also a certain note of an hypocrite. For so our Savior proves the Pharisees
to be hypocrites, because they were so precise in tithing of Mint, and Annise,
and Cummin (which yet they had a commandment from God to do) and yet omitted
the weightier matters of the law, as judgment, and mercy, and fidelity; they
strained at a gnat, and swallowed a camel. Mat. 23.23, 24. And this is the
first thing I have to say unto these men; there is a kind of preciseness in
small matters that is no better then hypocrisy.

Daniel was precise even in a matter of ceremony, Dan. 1.8. H^ purposed in his
heart, that he would not defile himself, with the portion of the Kings meat.
Our Savior was so precise, even in a matter of circumstance in Gods worship,
as that because God had commanded the passover should be celebrated upon the
fourteenth day of the first month, Numb. 9.3. he was content to be singular,
and to differ in his judgment, and practice from the whole Church, rather then
he would swerve from Gods commandment even in so small a matter. And for this
cause, though the whole Church did put of the passover that year, from the
fourteenth, to the sixteenth day of the first month, because that was the
Sabbath (and by a tradition of the Elders, they were forbidden to keep two
such festivities so near together) yet durst not our Savior do so, but kept
his passover two days before them, as appears, Ioh. 19.14. the day that he
was crucified on (which was you know the day after his passover) was the day
before theirs, the day of the preparation of the passover. The last example is
Mordecayes, of whom we read, that he durst not do the smallest thing, no not so
much as yield a formal complementall courtesy to Haman (being forbidden of
God) no not to prevent the destruction of the whole Church, that was likely to
have ensued upon it, as you may see Ester 3.2.6.

The precepts, and rules we have in Gods word to guide us in this case, are
likewise three. 1. We may not commit the least sin for the preventing of the
greatest danger that may possibly ensue, if we do it not. We may not do evil,
that good may come of it. Romans 3.8. 2. We may not wittingly commit, or consent
to the least sin, no not for the preventing of a far greater and fouler sin.
Neither can Lot be excused, who to keep the Sodomites from committing the sin
against nature, offered them his two daughters to commit adultery withal.
Genes. 19.8. There can be no such necessity laid upon Gods child at any time,
that he must needs do either the smaller sins or the greater. But in these
two cases of exigency, when there seems a necessity of sinning for the
preventing of danger, or for the preventing of greater sin, we must follow the
counsel of the Prophet, Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy way to the Lord, trust also in
him, and he shall bring it to pass. Rest upon the power, and promises of God,
who can deliver us out of these perplexities, without the help of any of our
sins. As Peter persuading Christian women from vanity, and pride in their
attire, answers a secret objection they might make against this; Alas* our
husbands being infidels will hate us, and misuse us, yea, and be ready to fall
to a liking of other women, if we do not platt our hair, and make our selves
as brave as we can, and paint us, and follow every fashion: to this he
answers by propounding to them the example of holy women of old time, and
tells them how they armed themselves against this; they trusted in God, and
were not afraid of any amazement, and so do you, 1 Pet. 3.5, 6. Thirdly, and
lastly. We may not dare to do any thing that we see cause to doubt that God
has forbidden it to be done, Romans 14.23. He that doubts is damned if he
eat. As if the Apostle had said; even this is sufficient to condemn a man (if
he repent not of it) that he has given liberty to himself, to do that that
he doubted was unlawful, and forbidden of God.

The third and last thing I have to say unto these men, is to advise, and warn
David, Psalm. 119.63. I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them
that keep thy precepts. But if you shall find, that through their weakness
and ignorance, they mistake their grounds, and have no good warrant for that
they do, but are more scupulous, and doubtful in these things, then they have
just cause to be; yet pity them, instruct them with meekness, and show them
their error; persecute them not, nor hate them for the error of their
judgment, but bear with them, till they may be better informed. We that are
strong (says the Apostle, Romans 15.1.) ought to bear with the infirmities of
the weak, and not to ple^se our selves. And though they be in error, yet love
them for this, that they dare not do anything, that they doubt would offend
God. Certainly this is a thing not to be derided and scorned, but to be
beloved, and commended, whersoever we see it. For this the Apostle loved the
Jews in his time, and professes Romans 10.1, 2. that his hearts desire, and
prayer to God for them, was that they might be saved: because he saw, and hare
them record, that they had the zeal of God, though it were not according to
knowledge. Take heed of hating any for this, for this is a part of the image of
God, and work of his spirit, and therefore to hate this in any (though I dare
not say it is the sin against the holy Ghost) yet do I confidently affirm,
that it is a near neighbor unto it; and though it be not impossible, yet will
certainly be found a very difficult and rare thing, for any to be renewed by
repentance that shall fall so far.

Lecture XLVIII. On Psalm 51.4. Febru. 6. 1626.
NOw follows the reason, why David professing his repentance, and suing to
God for mercy in the pardon of his sins, does make confession of his sin, and
accuse himself before God for it, not only in general terms, but in
particular; and the reason is contained in these words. That thou might be
justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou judge. For these words
have reference, not to those that go immediately before them in this verse, as
if his meaning should be, I have therefore sinned against thee, and done this
evil in thy sight, that thou might be justified when thou speak, etc.
But these words have reference to the third verse, and his meaning is this. I
acknowledge my transgressions, and accuse my self in this manner, that I may
justify thee, and give glory unto thee and acknowledge thy righteousness,
both in that which thou have spoken and threatened against me by thy servant
Nathan, and in those judgments also which thou have already executed upon me,
in taking away my child, and which thou shall also hereafter be pleased to lay
upon me for my sin.

So that you see there be two parts of this reason, why David does thus
confess his sin. 1 That God might be justified in whatsoever he had spoken.
2 That God might be cleared in the judgments he had already, or should further
execute upon him.

Nota.
So that the first thing we have here to observe, is this; that though the
message the Lord had sent unto him, that which he had spoken to him by Nathan,
were in it self very sharp and doleful; as you shall see it recorded, 2 Samuel
12.10 -- 12. namely, 1. That the sword shall never depart from his house, 2.
That he would raise up evil against him out of his own house, 3. That his
wives should be defiled, and abused by his own son, and that before his own
eyes, that is, himself should know it, 4. That all this should be done openly,
all Israel should take notice of it; yet does David 1 justify the Lord in all
this, yea 2 he professes here that he did therefore thus accuse himself,
that he might justify the Lord, in all this that he has said against him.

From whence this Doctrine arises for our instruction.

Doct. 15
The Lord must be justified in whatsoever he has spoken. The man that it truly
humbled for his sins dares not gain say or murmur against any thing, that
the Lord has spoken, but is apt to justify him in it. Before I come to the
confirmation of the Doctrine the terms of it must in a word be explaned by
answering two questions.

Quest. 1
First, How does the Lord speak unto men?

Answ.
I answer, In old time God spoke to his people. 1. Sometimes openly by a lively,
and audible voice; thus he delivered to them the ten commandments the sum of
the law; In which respect they are called lively oracles, Acts 7.38. 2.
Sometimes secretly by dreams and visions, Acts 18.9. God spoke to Paul by
night in a vision. Now also God speaks to his people but after another
manner. 1. By the holy Scriptures, for by them the spirit of God is said to
speak to the Churches, Rev. 2 7. They are therefore called the Oracles of God,
Heb. 5.^2. 2. By the ministry of his servants that speak to us by authority,
and commission from him, and by warrant of his word. As that which Nathan spoke
here, David says God spoke. So says our Savior, Luke 10.16. He that hears
you, hears me.

Quest. 2
Secondly, How may men be said to justify the Lord in whatsoever he speaks*

Answ.
I answer, 1. When they believe it to be true, and give credit unto it. 2. When
they yield consent to it, and allow it to be just, and equal. 3. When they
take it to heart, and submit themselves unto it. Thus must God be justified in
whatsoever he has spoken, in every part of his word. The word of God we shall
find consists of four parts. 1. There is the word of Doctrine, and history,
sundry truths are delivered, and affirmed in the holy Scripture, that are
neither precepts, nor promises, nor reproves or threatenings. 2. There is the
word of precept or commandment. 3. There is the word of promise. 4. There is
the word of reproof and denunciation of Gods judgments against sin.

First, We must undoubtedly believe, and give credit to whatsoever God Heb.
11.3. Through faith we understand (know, and are fully persuaded) that the
worlds (this, and that that is to come) were framed by the Word of God. And
that the bodies of all men howsoever they died, shall rise again at the last
day, Job 19.26. I know (and am fully persuaded) that though after my skin the
worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh I shall see God. See it 2 in the word
of precept. What a strange commandment was that that Abraham received from
God, Genesis 22.2. to sacrifice his own son, and that that Paul received, that
he that had been so bitter a persecutor, and so infamous for it, throughout
the whole world should go and preach the Gospel both to the Jews, and
Gentiles? How many reasons might they have alleged against these
commandments? yet when God had once spoken it, they were fully persuaded they
must do it, and went about it presently, without all reasoning or disputing
against it. And as Paul says, Gal. 1.16. Immediately (so soon as I had
received this commandment) I conferred not with flesh, and blood. See this
also 3 in the word of promise. What a strange promise was that which God made
to Abraham when he was an hundred years old that he would give him a feed and
posterity that should be as innumerable as the stars in the firmament, Genesis
15.5. and that by Sarah an old, and a barren woman, Genesis 17.16. How many things
might they both have objected against this? Yet they did not, but undoubtedly
believed it should be, even as God had spoken, they justified the Lord when he
had spoken the word. As Paul says of Abraham, Romans 4.20, 21. He staggered not
at the promise of God through unbeleefe but was strong in faith, giving glory
to God, and being fully persuaded that what he had promised, he was able also
to perform. And of Sarah he says, Heb. 11.11. She judged him faithful who
had promised. 4 and lastly, See a proof of this first degree in the word of
reproof, and threatening (which most directly suiteth with my Text here,
though the words be so general, as they may not be restrained to that only)
What likelihood was there in that reproof, and threatening which God delivered
to Noah, and would have him to preach, and publish to the whole world. Genesis
6.13. The end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with
violence through them; and behold I will destroy them, with the earth? And how
would God destroy them? By a flood, verse 17. I even I do bring a flood of
waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh. How unlikely, how impossible would
this seem to all wise men in the world? How would they scorn and deride Noah's
preaching of such a doctrine as this? Yet did Noah verily believe this and
preached this, 2 Pet. 2.5. Why? Because God had said it, he justified the Lord
in that he had spoken. As the Apostle says, Heb. 11.7. By faith Noah being
warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an arc.
So what likelihood of truth was there in the reproof and threatening of
vengeance that Jonah preached to the Ninivites, Jonah 3.4. He cried and said
yet forty days and Niniveh shall be overthrown. Yet because God had said this
(though he spoke this to them not immediately, nor by an Angel neither, but by
a man, a stranger, a weak man) they verily believed it would be so, if they by
extraordinary repentance, and humiliation did not prevent it. For so it is
said, Jonah 3.5. So the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast.
Thus you see the confirmation of the doctrine in the first degree of proofs;
we must believe whatsoever God has delivered to us in his word without all
reasoning against it; we must justify the Lord, in whatsoever he has spoken.

Psalm. 19.9. The judgments of the Lord (by which he means the whole word,
not the law only as appears plainly by the effect of them mentioned verse.
10.) are true (and not so only but) righteous altogether. According to that
which the Lord speaks of them, Pro. 8.8. All the words of my mouth are in
righteousness, there is nothing that is froward or perverse in them. There is
not one Doctrine taught, nothing appointed, but it is most holy and pure, and
good. Thus must we justify the Lord, in whatsoever he has spoken. 2 In the
word of precept, even those commandments of God which are most against us, and
those corruptions that are strongest in us. So speaks David, Psalm. 119.128. I
esteem all thy precepts concerning all things, to be right. And Paul Romans
7.12. The law is holy, and the commandment is holy, and just, and good. 3 So
must we also justify the Lord in all his reproves, and threatenings how sharp
soever they have been. So did the King, and Princes of Judah when they were
sharply reproved and menaced by Semajah the Prophet they replied not, nor
fretted against the Prophet but confessed 2 Chronicles. 12.6. The Lord is righteous.
And Hezekiah when Esaias dealt roundly with him in the name of the Lord, for
showing all his treasures to the King of Babilons Ambassadors, 2 King. 20.19.
Good is the word of the Lord, which thou have spoken. Yea the Lord requires
this of all his people, that they say Amen, and set their seal to every curse
of his law, and that upon pain of his eternal curse. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed be
he that confirms not all the words of this law, and all the people shall say
Amen.

John's hearers, Luke 7.29, 30. All the people that heard him and the publicans
justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John, (they took to heart
the things that God spoke by him, and submitted themselves to Gods ordinance in
his ministry) but the Pharisees and Lawyers (that did not so) rejected the
counsel of God against themselves. See this 1 in the word of doctrine. Of
Peter's hearers it is said that they received the Word with gladness, Acts
2.41. they found sweetness in it. Every truth revealed in the Word, is sweet
to a good heart, Psalm. 119.103. O how sweet are thy words unto my taste? yea
sweeter then any honey unto my mouth. 2 See it also in the word of precept.
Though we be not able to obey some commandments of God exactly, and in all
points, yet must we love all Gods commandments, and delight in them, and be
glad God has given us such laws to curb our corruptions, and to guide us; and
we must endeavor to keep them. As Paul speaks of himself, Romans 7.22. I
delight in the law of God, in my inner man. 3 See this in the word of promise.
We must not only believe every promise to be true, but we must be affected
with Gods promises, and take comfort in them. So Paul speaks of the
faithful, Heb. 11.13. Having seen the promises (concerning Christ) a far
off, and being persuaded of them, they embraced them (...) kissed them, and
hugd them. 4 and lastly. See this in the word of reproof, and threatening; we
must be moved and affected with the rebukes, and menaces of the word. So it is
said of Noah when God had revealed to him his purpose for the destruction of
the world. Heb. 11.7. He was moved with fear and prepared the arc for the
saving of his house. And of Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.27. That his heart was tender,
and he did humble himself before God when he heard the law but read, and what
God had threatened to bring upon that place.

The reasons, and grounds of this Doctrine why we should in this manner
justify the Lord in whatsoever he speaks even by his servants, and
Ministers, to believe it as most true to allow of it, and subscribe to it as
most just, and righteous, and consequently to take it to heart, and submit our
selves to it; are two

The first respects the speaker himself. Reason 1.
It is the Lord, says Ely, 1 Samuel 3.18. when Samuel a child declared to him,
what God had threatened to bring upon him, and his house. As if he had said, It
becomes me to believe this, it becomes me not to murmur against it, it
becomes me to humble, and submit my self unto it It is the Lord. In every
truth that is taught us, in every commandment that is pressed upon us, in
every reproof that is given us, in every threat that is denounced against us,
if it be done by warrant of the Word (whosoever the messenger be) it is the
Lord that speaks unto us; as David here acknowledges in that that was
spoken by Nathan. It is God that cries out against us, and our sins in the
ministry of his Word, the preachers are but his voice as John the Baptist
says, John 1.23. And it becomes us all to justify God when he speaks. How
shall we escape (says the Apostle, Heb. 12.25.) if we turn away from him that
speaks from heaven?

The second reason respects the things themselves that are spoken. Reason. 2.
For whatsoever the Lord has spoken in his Word, be it doctrine or
commandment, or reproof, or threat, it is spoken in love to all his people,
and it is for our good, that he has spoken as he has done. Do not my words
(says the Lord, Mic. 2.7.) do good to him that walks uprightly? As if God
should say, Is there any thing in all my Word that is not wholesome, and
profitable unto my people? This moved Hezekiah to receive that sharp message
so well, 2 King 20.19. Good is the Word of the Lord which thou have spoken.

The use that this Doctrine serves unto is for reproof principally. Use.
For this is a common sin, yea a mother sin, and cause of most other
sins, that men do not justify God when he speaks, give not that honor to
the Word of God that is due unto it. Four sorts of men especially there be,
that offend this way.

First, Such as though they hear, and read the Word ordinarily yet give not

First, A man is not bound to believe every thing, that comes under the try
before you trust in this case, examine how we ground that we teach upon the
Word, before you believe us. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things: and then hold
fast that that is good. It was a noble disposition (as the Holy Ghost says,
Acts 17.11.) in the men of Berea that they were not so servi^ely addicted to
any teachers, how excellent soever their gifts were, as to receive any thing
upon their credit but they searched the Scripture daily to see whether the
Doctrine were sound, and true which they did teach, and yet they are said to
have received the Word with all readiness of mind for all this. God requires
no greater readiness then this of any of his people, in receiving or believing
his Word.

Luke 1.34. How shall this be seeing I know not a man? This questioning, and
moving of doubts was used in the Church of the Jews, and our blessed Savior
approved it by his own example, Luke 2.46, 47. He sat in the midst of the
Doctors, and both asked them questions, and answered the questions they
propounded unto him. This was the course the Apostles much practiced, they
moved questions to the people, and gave them liberty to propound their doubts
unto them. So it is said of Paul, Acts 17.2. that he reasoned with the Jews,
out of the Scriptures. A happy thing it were, if Gods people now adays were
more given then they are, to these doubts, and questions.

Mat. 4.6. and to fall down, and worship the devil, Mat. 4.9. And they may
come sometimes from the corruption of our own heart. And such evil motions
the holy Apostle was subject unto, 2 Cor. 12.7. he felt a thorn in his flesh;
which he calls the messenger of Satan, because he stirred up this corruption
of his heart, and furthered it. Neither is it an argument of an heart void of
grace, to be borne down for a time by the violence of these motions of
infidelity and suddenly to yield unto them. For Sarah was so, Genesis 18.12, 13.
when she laughed within her self and said, Shall I that am so old have a
child? And David was so when Psalm. 116.11. he said in his have, all men are
liars. These Prophets will lie as well as other men. Provided always that they
that have these motions of infidelity 1 Do abhor them, resist them, and not
yield unto them. For so did our Savior, Mat. 4.10. Get thee hence Satan. 2 Do
mourn and are humbled for them as for a great affliction, and judgment of God
upon them. For so did David when he had a motion of Atheism to doubt of Gods
providence and to think Psalm. 73.13. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain.
This did so trouble him that he says verse 21. His heart was greeved, he was
pricked in the reins. And so did Paul when he felt the evil motions of his
flesh it was unto him as a thorn in his flesh, it pained and grieved him
exceedingly, he besought the Lord thrice that it might depart from him, 2 Cor.
12.7, 8. Yea he says that this was given him of God of purpose to humble him.
And so may I say to every child of God that is thus troubled with these motions
of Atheism and blasphemy, certainly they are given thee of God to humble
thee; be of good comfort, God intends to do thee good by them.

But now to come to these that I told you were to be reproved by this Doctrine,
that man that cannot believe nor give credit to the Word of God, nor be
certainly persuaded of any truth, that is clearly revealed in it, can never
grow to any certainty in religion, cannot justify the Lord when he speaks,
and is never troubled for this, never striveth to believe, never prays
against his infidelity; as (alas) this is the case of most men; and he is
certainly in a most dangerous, and damnable estate. For thus our blessed
Savior speaks of such, John 8*46. If I say the truth, why do ye not believe
me? Then he adds, verse 47. shall I tell you the cause? Ye therefore hear
not (that is believe not) because ye are not of God; and 10.26. Ye believe not
because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you; and 12.39, 40. Therefore
they could not believe, because he has blinded their eyes, and hardened their
hearts.

The second sort that are to be reproved by this Doctrine, are such as give
Tim. 6.3, 4, 5. Of these men that consent not to wholesome words, even the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to
godliness, he says that they are proud, and know nothing, but dote about
questions and strife of words, etc. The man that has truth of grace, and has
felt the saving power of Gods Word in himself, has his thoughts captivated,
as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 10.5. and will say as 2 Cor. 13.8. We can do
nothing against the truth, but for the truth. And is apt to say of Gods Word as
David does of Gods corrections, Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, and opened not my
mouth, because thou have spoken it. No man should dare to oppose, or reason
against any truth that God has in his Word taught, and revealed, but it
becomes all men to lay their hands upon their mouths in this case; according
to the speech of the Prophet, Hab. 2.20. Let all the earth keep silence before
him.

And with these disputers we may fitly rank the most of our people that can
well endure to hear the religion they profess, any truth of God that they
have heard, and received to be gainsaid and contradicted; that have no greater
delight then this, to hear any point of religion wittily opposed, and disputed
against by any man be he Papist, or Anabaptist, or whatsoever he be. Whereas if
we ever learned to justify God when he speaks, and to believe undoubtedly
that which God has revealed and to receive it with love, it would be a matter
of extreme grief and trouble of mind unto us to hear any thing that should
give us cause to doubt of our religion; as it was to the two Disciples that
went toward Emaus, Luke 24.17. Yea, and although difference in judgment about
smaller matters ought not to cause that alienation of affection, and
strangeness either among Ministers or people, as with many it does; to the
great hinderance of the growth of the Gospel; yet toward such as oppose
themselves against the truth in main, and fundamental articles thereof,
Christians are bound to show themselves strange, to shun all voluntary, and
unnecessary familiarity with them, to show them no countenance. If we shall
receive such into our houses, or bid them God speed we make our selves
partakers of their sins, 2 John 10, 11. Such we are bound to show our
detestation unto and to hold them accursed, though they had the gifts of
Angels, Gal. 1.9. If any man should go about to touch or undermine you in your
freehold, and to find holes in your leases or evidence whereby you hold your
lands, your hearts would rise against him, and you would count him as your
utter enemy, that seeks your undoing. And he that esteems not more of his
religion, and of the truth of God, the evidence whereby he holds his interest
to heaven, and his eternal salvation, did never yet find any sound comfort in
it. According to that saying of David, Psalm. 1^9.111. Thy testimonies have I
taken as an heritage for ever, for they are the rejoicing of mine heart.

The third sort that are to be reproved by this Doctrine are they that cannot
though their sins be reproved with never so good warrant and evidence from the
Word of God, yet cannot submit themselves to it, nor justify the Lord in that
which he speaks against them, but storm, and rage against the Minister, and
cannot abide him for it. This was wont to be counted a dangerous sin, This
people (says the Prophet, Hos. 4.4.) is as they that strive with the Priest.

Ier. 5.22.29. and Number. 35.31.33. and Ier. 17.27, etc. yea those that God has
threatened against such sins as themselves live in, as Zac. 5.4. and 1 Cor. 6.9,
10. and Mat. 11.24. and Rev. 21.8. do not move them at all to humiliation, to
sorrow or fear, or to any care to make their peace with God.

But these two last sorts I do but point at, the time being past I must leave
them to be enlarged in your own meditations.

Lecture XLIX. On Psalm 51.4. Febru. 20. 1626.
IT follows now that we proceed unto the second reason why David does in this
manner confess his sins, accuse, and condemn himself before God which is
contained in these words, And be clear when thou judge.

Nota.
Now for the understanding of the words, four questions are to be briefly
propounded, and answered.

Quest. 1
First, How is the Lord said here to judge any? To which I answer, that (not to
trouble you with any other acception of this word) by Gods judging David here
means Gods correcting of men; Answ.
So that his meaning is, as if he should have said, that thou may be clear
when thou correctest. And so is this word used, 1 Cor. 11.32. When we are
judged we are chastened of the Lord, and 1 Pet. 4.17. Judgment must begin at
the house of God.

Quest. 2
The second question is this. What correction or chastisement of God has David
special reference unto, in this place, wherein he desires to clear the Lord?

Answ.
Whereunto I answer, That he means. 1. That correction which the Lord had
already taken of him, both in smiting the child he had begotten in adultery,
with grievous sickness first, and then in taking it away by death, 2 Samuel
12.15.18. 2. Those fearful plagues, God had told him by Nathan he would bring
upon him afterward; which I mentioned unto you the last day out of 2 Samuel
12.10, 11. Yea 3 howsoever God should be pleased to judge him (for he limits
not his speech either to that, that the Lord had already done upon the child,
or to that that Nathan threatened he would further do, but speaks
indefinitely) as if he should have said, Whatsoever thou shall inflict upon me,
thou art clear when thou judge me.

Quest. 3
The third question is, How is God said to be clear when he judges?

Answ.
I answer, 1. He is clear in himself from the least spot, or stain, or mixture
of injustice in any of the judgments or corrections he lays upon men. Ps.
119.137. Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy judgments. 2. He will
be cleared, and acknowledged to be righteous in the judgment of all men, even
of them that are most apt to cavil at his judgments. For so the Apostle
cites this place, and interprets the meaning of it, Romans 3.4. That thou
might be justified in thy sayings, and might overcome when thou art
judged.

Quest. 4
Then the fourth, and last question is, How could David by confessing his sin
here, make the Lord clear from al injustice in his judgments, Answ.
and correctio^s upon him?

I answer, He could not thereby make the Lord ever a whit more clear from
injustice; for though he had not confessed his sin at all, though he had
continued, and been hardened in it, the Lord should have been nevertheless
clear, and pure in judging of him. And thus do the Angels of God profess of
the plagues that God prophesies he would bring upon the bloody Papists, and
persecuters of his Saints, Rev. 16.5.7. Thou art righteous O Lord -- because
thou have judged thus, for they have shed the blood of thy Saints, and
Prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink for they are worthy; and I
heard another out of the altar say, even so, Lord God Almighty, true, and
righteous are thy judgments. But yet David by accusing himself thus, and
confessing his sin may be said to clear the Lord, that is to acknowledge the
Lord to be clear when he judged him; for this made him able heartily and
unfeinedly to acknowledge the righteousness of God in correcting him, when he
considered his sins, and what he had deserved thereby. And indeed till men see
their sins, and can confess them, and be soundly touched and humbled with the
sense of them, they can never heartily acknowledge Gods righteousness in
correcting of them, but from the teeth outward; till we can accuse our selves
we can never justify the Lord. So it is said 2 Chronicles. 12.6. The Princes, and
King of Judah were humbled in themselves before they could acknowledge the Lord
is righteous. Nay till a man be soundly, and thoroughly humbled for his sin, he
can never soundly, and thoroughly acknowledge Gods righteousness in his
corrections upon him, specially if they be sharp indeed, and more then
ordinary; but there will be still in him some doubting of Gods righteousness,
some secret murmuring, and repining against him. This is plain in the Lords
speech to Job 40.8. Will thou also disanull my judgment? will thou condemn me
that thou may be righteous? How could Job be charged to do thus? He was in
some measure humbled and did confess his sin as appears verse. 4. Behold I am
vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth. But he had
not yet done it so thoroughly, and sufficiently as after he did, Job 22 1 -- 6.
He had in himself a secret conceit that he was not so sinful as to deserve
such afflictions as he had endured. And all this while he did not clear the
Lord but disanulled his judgment; and did indeed condemn the Lord to have
dealt unjustly with him. Thus therefore David did here by confessing his sin
clear the Lord, thereby he was brought heartily to acknowledge Gods justice in
correcting of him. And when we do in this manner acknowledge the Lord to be
just, we are said in the Scripture phrase, in Gods acceptance to justify, and
clear him, to make him just, and clear. So Gods people are said to sanctify
the holy one of Jacob, Esa. 29.23 and to glorify him, Mat. 9.8 and to magnify
him in their soul, Luke 1.46. and to justify his wisdom, Luke 7.35.

The words then being thus opened, this Doctrine arises from them for our
instruction.

That the man that truly knows his sins, Doct. 16
and it humbled for them will be ready to clear the Lord from all injustice,
and cruelty, from all aspersion of rigor, and extremity in any of his
judgments, executed either upon himself or others. Thus did David here; And
this is often noted in the holy Scripture for a fruit, and sign of true
humiliation, and repentance, in other of the servants of God, as well as in
David here. This is that passive obedience that God requires of all his
children; and whereunto he brings all such as unto whom he has effectually
discovered their sins; whose hearts he has conquered, subdued, and humbled by
his Word, and Spirit, he makes them apt to clear him when he judges them.
See the proof of this in these four degrees.

First, They have bound themselves to silence in this case, so as they durst
not Who will say to him (says Job 9.12.) what do thou? And as David says,
2 Samuel 16.10. Who dare say wherefore have thou done so? See an example of this
in Aaron when God had executed a very strange judgment on his two eldest
sons that were Priests, and that for a very small sin, as a man would have
thought; because they had offered incense with strange fire, God devoured them
suddenly with fire from heaven. How did Aaron their father brook this? The
text says, Levit. 10.3. Aaron held his peace; not a word durst he speak
against this. See another example of this in Job, whose afflictions you know
were very strange, and such as as much exception might have been taken against
Gods righteousness in them, as in any we can ever read of. And indeed so
extreme they were, that they wrung from him some speeches of impaciency; but
he pleased not himself in it, but blamed himself for, and strove against it
as a great corruption, as you may see, Job 40.4, 5. I will lay mine hand upon
my mouth, once have I spoken, but I will not answer; yea twice, but I will
proceed no further. See a third example of this silence in David, when some
affliction was upon him, that was so grievous, as that he cries out unto God,
Ps. 39.10. Remove thy stroke away from me, I am consumed with the blow of
thine hand. Yet even then he professes, ver. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my
mouth, because thou did it. Nay we must not only bind our tongues to silence,
from daring to speak impatiently against the Lord, when he corrects; but our
hearts also from inward fretting, and repining a against any thing the Lord
does. Truly my soul (says David, Psalm. 62.1.) keeps silence unto God.

David, Psalm. 119.75. I know o Lord that thy judgments are right, and that
thou in faithfulness have afflicted me. The Babilonish captivity was the
heaviest judgment that ever God had inflicted upon any people under heaven, as
appears by that which is said of it, Lam. 1.12. and Dan. 9.12. yet the Church
speaking of it professes, Lam. 1.18. The Lord is righteous, for I have
rebelled against him. and Neh. 9.33. Thou art just in all that is brought upon
us, for thou have done right, but we have done wickedly.

Esa. 50.6. that in obedience to God, he gave his back to the smiters, and his
cheeks to them that plucked off his hair, he hid not his face from shame, and
spitting. and Ioh. 18.11. Shall I not drink the cup that my father gives me?
So must all the members of Christ, in their measure, willingly drink the cup,
that their heavenly father gives them, acknowledge it is never a whit too
much, nay not so much as they have righteously deserved. So it is said of Gods
people Lev. 26.41. when their uncircumcised hearts are humbled, they shall then
accept of the punishment of their iniquity. See an example of this in Job, who
when he had received those grievous losses in his goods and children, and that
in so strange a manner, he was so far from repining, that he bursteth forth
into these words, Job 1.21. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away;
blessed be the name of the Lord. And mark what the holy Ghost says of him for
this, verse 22. In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. As if he
should say. If he had not thus willingly accepted of Gods correction, if he had
not thus kissed the rod when his father did thus beat him, he had sinned, he
had charged God foolishly. See also an example of this in the Churches speech
mentioned. Mic. 7.9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him. And in that of Ezra, who speaking of the extreme judgment
of God upon his people in the Babylonish Captivity, says Ezra 9.13. Thou our
God have punished us less then our iniquities deserve. And Lamenta. 3.22. It
is of the Lords mercies, that we are not consumed (utterly from being a
people) because his compassions fail not. You see Gods people have discerned
and taken notice of some mercy, some mitigation of the rigor of justice, some
cause of thanksgiving, and of admiring rather his indulgence toward them, then
of repining against him, even in the most extreme afflictions that have
befallen him. And from hence it is that they have grown to that pitch of
blessed resolution, not only to submit themselves, and bear the cross that
presently lies upon them, how heavy soever it be, but as David here limiteth
not his speech to the judgment he had felt in the loss of his child, nor to
those that Nathan had told him should befall him, but speaks indifferently,
that thou may be clear when thou judge, whenever, or howsoever thou
shall judge and correct me. So have Gods people that have bin soundly humbled,
professed a resolution to bear whatsoever God should further be pleased to
lay upon them, whatsoever it should be. So speak the people of God, Judge.
10.15. We have sinned, do thou to us whatsoever seems good unto thee. And
Ely, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. And David
when he fled from his son Absalom, when he was in extreme danger both to loose
his kingdom and his life, 2 Samuel 15.26 If the Lord shall thus say, I have no
delight in thee, behold, here am I, let him do to me, as seems good unto
him. As if he should say, Though he cast me into hell, I shall have no just
cause to say, he does me any wrong.

Hitherto I have showed you three degrees of that passive obedience that every
one of us are bound to yield unto God in our afflictions. And there is never a
one of these, but they are hard, yea, impossible for flesh and blood to do,
till the mighty arm of God has tamed our hearts, and subdued, and humbled
them (...) can never thus clear the Lord, when he judges us. A hard thing it
is to hold our peace, when God corrects us, not to utter words of discontent,
and impatiency specially not to fret and repine in our hearts against the Lord.
A harder (...) acknowledge heartily and unfeinedly, that God deals most
justly with (...) when he corrects us. But the hardest thing of all it is, to
submit our selves to Gods correcting, and willingly to bear it; to be
persuaded that that we endure is nothing so much as we have deserved; to admire
his fatherly indulgence, and love to us, even when he corrects us most
sharply.

But the fourth and last degree, of this obedience which I must now proceed Thy
judgments (says David, Psalm. 36.6.) are a great deep o Lord, no man can dive
to the ground, and bottom of them. And Romans 11.33. How unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out? Now this is the fourth degree of
obedience required of us, that we must not only clear the Lord in those
judgments that we can discern the cause and reason of, but even in those that
we can conceive no reason of; we must resolve with David, Ps. 119.137.
Righteous art thou, o Lord, and upright are thy judgments. and 145.17. The
Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. Admiring with
the holy Apostle, and adoring that which we are not able to comprehend, Romans
11.33. O the depth both of the wisdom and knowledge of God.

Now for the reasons, Reason 1
and grounds of this Doctrine, they are principally two, the one of them
respects the judge himself, and the other, them that are judged by him.

For the first. It is not possible that the Lord should do wrong to any of his
creatures, or that any thing he does should be unjust, Deuteronomy. 32.4. All his
ways are judgment, a God of truth, and without iniquity, just, and right is
he. Does God pervert judgment (says Bildad, Job. 8.3.) or does the almighty
pervert Justice? As if he should say, that is impossible in the judgment of
every man's conscience. Shall not the judge of the whole world do right? says
Abraham, Genes. 18.25. This reason the Apostle gives for this doctrine, Romans
3.5, 6 Is God unrighteous who takes vengeance? God forbid (says he) for then
how shall God judge the world? This was that that stopped Elyes mouth, that he
had nothing to say against that grievous judgment God threatened against him,
and his house, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.
And why is it not possible, the Lord should do wrong to any of his creatures?
1. In regard of his Sovereignty, and Supreme, and undependant power he has
over all things that he has made, even as the potter has over his clay. This
similitude the holy Ghost uses, Romans 9.20, 21. Shall the thing formed, say to
him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the potter power over
the clay, of the same lump, to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto
dishonor? Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? says
the Lord of the vineyard. Matthew. 20.13. In respect of this Sovereignty, and
Supreme power of God, Elihu says. Job 33.13. that God gives not account of
any of his matters. His manner is not, neither is he bound to give men account
of his decrees, or of his judgments. 2. In regard of his will, it is not
possible that he should wrong any of his creatures, for his will is the rule
of all righteousness, and every thing is therefore just, and right, because
his will is so. Thus the Apostle proves, it was no unrighteousness in God to
love, and choose Jacob, and to hate and reject Esau, before either of them had
done good or evil, even before they were borne, because his holy will was so.
Romans 9.14, 15. What shall we then say, Is there unrighteousness with God? God
forbid. For he says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and
I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion. And this is the first
ground and reason of the Doctrine taken from the consideration of the Judge
himself.

Reason 2.
The second, respects them that are judged, and corrected by the Lord. We must
needs clear the Lord from wronging any man, in any of his judgments; because
he never judges, nor punishes any man, before he has deserved that, and much
more then that, that God lays upon him. This reason Elihu gives Job 34.10,
11. Hearken unto me ye men of understanding, far be it from God, that he
should do wickedness, and from the almighty that he should commit iniquity,
for the work of a man shall he render unto him, and cause every man to find
according to his ways. And the Apostle, Romans 3.19 That every mouth may be
stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God. As if he should have
said; Seeing all the world is guilty before God, and liable to his curse for the
transgression of his Law, every mouth must needs be stopped; if not, yet
certainly at the day of the Lord, no man shall be able to open his mouth
against, or charge him with injustice, in any of his judgments upon men.

Now this Doctrine serves unto two uses especially. 1. For instruction, and
the informing of our judgments. 2. For exhortation and working upon our will,
and affections.

For the first. This Doctrine serves notably for convincing of an error that
has too much place in the minds of most men. Use 1.
All men by nature are apt (at least secretly in their hearts) to question the
righteousness of God, in many of his judgments. When the Apostle had made
this objection. Romans 3.5. Is God unrighteous who takes vengeance? He adds
presently these words, I speak as a man says he. As if he should say; Every
natural man is apt to speak and think so. This appears evidently by the
general opposition that is made against the doctrine of predestination, which
both our Church, and other reformed Churches have long taught, and received by
clear warrant of the word of God. For not only the Papist, and the
Anabaptist, and the Pelagian, but every natural man in the world is apt to
cavil against this Doctrine, and to account it a most absurd, and unreasonable
Doctrine, and all because they cannot conceive how it can stand with justice,
that God should make such a decree as that is. But the Doctrine you have now
heard, and the reasons of it being well understood and believed, will stop
their mouths, and convince their error in this point.

This will be evident unto you if you will but observe these four points.

First, God had done no wrong, if in his eternal decree he had chosen no Romans
11.35. Who has first given unto him, and it shall be recompensed to him again?

Secondly, God never condemns any, nor did decree to condemn any but he will
render to every man, according to his works, Romans 2.6. So that if any man be
damned the Lord is not the cause of it but himself. Thou have destroyed thy
self, says the Lord to the wicked Jews, Hos. 13.9. And we have more cause to
admire the mercy of God, that he has ordained to save any, when he did foresee
that all would cast away themselves; then to doubt of the justice of God in
appointing some to destruction, which he did foresee they would by their
voluntary, and wilful transgression most justly deserve.

Thirdly, Though God did foresee that such and such would by their sins As I
live, says the Lord God ( Ezekiel. 33 11.) I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked. But the thing that moved God to make that decree, and the end he
intended, and aimed at in it, was the manifestation of his own glory, Pro.
16.4. The Lord has made all things for himself, yea even the wicked for the
day of evil. 1. The manifestation of his glorious justice and wrath against
sin, upon the reprobate, Rom 9.22. 2. The manifestation of his glorious mercy
toward his elect, which could never have been so glorious, if it had been
common to all mankind. And this reason also is gven by the Apostle, Romans 19.23.

Fourthly, The Lords decree as it is not the cause of the damnation of any but
Iam. 1.13, 14. So that to conclude this first use. Let every one of us strive
to suppress and to reject with detestation, and trembling all thoughts that
shall rise in our hearts to call into question the righteousness of God, in
any of his decrees or judgments. According to the example of the Apostle, Romans
3.4. who when he had but (by occasion of this doctrine of reprobation)
mentioned this objection, Is there unrighteousness with God? abhors it
presently, and rejects it in this manner, God forbid, says he. And if we be
not able to comprehend how any thing that the Lord has decreed, or done, can
stand with equity, and justice, let us ascribe it rather to our own weakness
and shallowness of understanding, then impute the least shadow of injustice
unto the Lord, and check our selves in that manner, that holy Job did, Job
42.3. I have uttered that I understood not, things too wonderful for me, which
I knew not.

Lecture L. On Psalm 51.4. Febru. 27. 1626.
IT follows now that we proceed unto the second use that this Doctrine
serves unto. Use 2.
And that is to stir up every one of us, that we should strive, and labor
for this grace to be able to do as David does here, when it shall come to be
our own case; to yield this passive obedience unto God in all the degrees of
it that we have heard of, whenever, or howsoever the Lord shall be pleased to
judge, and correct us. The necessity of this exhortation will appear to us in
three things.

God judges the righteous, (says the Prophet, Psalm. 7.11.) and is angry with
the wicked every day. And our Savior, Mat. 6.34. Sufficient for the day is the
evil thereof. Every day (for the most part) brings with it some evil, and
affliction, some cross, and occasion of grief or other. Specially this
falls out to be so, with them that live in the Church of God, and profess
his truth. The just God (says the Prophet, Zeph. 3.5.) is in the midst
thereof; every morning does he bring his judgment to light; he fails not.
Yea the better proceedings that any of us have made in Christ's School, the
more grace is in us, the more sure shall we be to meet with crosses every day.
All the day long (says David, Psalm. 73.14) have I been plagued, and chastened
every morning. So that in this respect, you see this exhortation unto patience,
and submitting our selves humbly to the will of God, in all his corrections, is
of daily use for every one of us.

Ier. 6.4. Woe unto us, for the day goes away for the shadows of the evening
are stretched out. Many signs there be that our day will not last long, that
our night approaches apace. In the morning (says our Savior, Mat. 16.3) ye
say it will be soul weather, for the sky is red, and louring; O ye hypocrites
ye can discern the face of the sky, but can ye not discern the signs of the
times? Certainly our sky is now red, and louring, and he is a senseless, and
secure hypocrite that does not expect some great storm, and tempest. In this
respect therefore we have also need of this exhortation every one of us. It is
wisdom in summer to provide for winter; as the Lord teaches us by the example
of the Pismire, Pro. 6.8. She provideth her meat in the summer, and gathers
her food in the harvest; and to get our weapons in a readiness, and skill also
to use them well, before the time of war do come, as the Apostle teaches,
Ephesians. 6.13. Take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
withstand in the evil day.

No chastening (says the Apostle Heb. 12.1.) for the present seems to be
joyous, but grievous. It is no easy thing, when we shall feel Gods stripes to
smart indeed, to keep down our unruly passions, and to bear them without
some repining, and murmuring against God. Our afflictions are called our
infirmities, 2 Cor. 11.30. the best are apt to bewray weakness in them. Even
where the spirit is most ready, the flesh will show it self to be weak, as
our Savior speaks, Mat. 26.41. Specially it will be hard for such as we are,
that have enjoyed so long peace, and ease, and prosperity to endure any sharp
affliction, such as our poor brethren in the Palatinate, Bohemia, Germany, and
France have done. This made the cross a great deal heavier to the Church then
otherwise it would have been, as she complains unto God, Psalm. 102.10, Thou
have lifted me up, and cast me down. As if she had said, If thou had not
lifted me up so high, with many favors, and blessings of thine that I did
enjoy, my fall would not have been half so painful unto me as now it is. We
have therefore all need of this exhortation to patience under Gods corrections,
of what kind soever they shall be, in these three respects as you have heard;
yea we have need to have it pressed upon us in the most forcible, and
effectual manner that may be.

And to this end I will endeavor to force it upon my self, and you all. 1. By
showing the notes, and properties of true patience whereby it may be discerned
from that, that is counterfeit. 2. By giving you certain motives that may
stir us up, and persuade us to seek for this grace. 3. By directing you to
the means that are to be used for the attaining to it. For the first then, I
must give you seven notes, whereby we may know what true patience is and
whether we have yet obtained this grace.

First, True patience is a fruit, and effect of repentance, and humiliation for
David. If then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, (says the Lord, Levit.
26.41,) and they then accept of the punishment of their iniquity. It is not a
sign of true patience to be unsensible under Gods judgments; though many
please themselves greatly in this, they have had such, and such crosses, and
they never murmured (they thank God) nor were disquieted with them. This is a
great sin not to take notice of Gods judgments when they light upon us. Esa.
42.25. He has poured upon Jacob the fury of his anger, and the strength of
battle, and it set him on fire round about, yet he knew it not; and it burned
him, yet he laid it not to heart. When God shows himself to be angry with us
by smiting, and correcting us, shall we think this a virtue in us, not to be
affected with it. Oh no, this is a grievous sin. Ier. 5.3. Thou have stricken
them, but they have not grieved. If our mortal parents should show themselves
displeased and angry with us, would it not trouble and humble us? Number. 12.14.
how much more when God shows himself so? This is an extreme height of
rebellion, to despise Gods judgments, Esa. 22.12 -- 14. The man that is truly
patient is very sensible of Gods strokes, and of his sins that made God to
strike him, and yet he bears them patiently; and therefore he bears them
patiently, because he knows his sin is the cause of them. See an example of
this in the mirror of true patience, blessed Job, even when he showed his
patience most, and could say Job 1.21. Naked came I out of my mothers womb,
and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away,
blessed be the name of the Lord; Yet was he deeply humbled with the strange
judgments of God; verse 20. He rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell
down upon the ground, and worshipped God.

Secondly, True patience is a fruit of faith. 2 Thessalonians. 1.4. Paul gloried of the
And he desires the Hebrews, Heb. 6.12. that they would be followers of them
that through faith, and patience inherit the promises. And Iam. 1.3. The trying
of your faith, works patience. True patience rises out of this persuasion
that the cross that befalls us, is from God, that he has a special hand
and providence in it. This was the root of David's patience, 2 Samuel 16.10. The
Lord has said to him, curse David. Yea that this God that sends the cross,
is our God, and loving father in Christ, and that makes the child of God bear
it patiently. John 18.11. The cup which my father has given me, shall I not
drink? The man that wants this faith though he be never so quiet under any
cross, yet if his quietness grow from this conceit it is but his ill fortune,
and destiny, as the Philistines said, 1 Samuel 6.9. It was a chance that happened
to us, he cannot be said to be truly patient.

Thirdly, True patience is a fruit of our obedience unto God, and of an Phil.
2.8. He humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death. Because he knew
it was the will of God he should suffer those things, though he were deeply
sensible of them, how grievous, and intolerable they were, therefore he did so
patiently endure them. His patience was a willing subjecting of his own will,
to the will of his father, Mat. 26.39. O my father, if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. So then,
that quietness, and temper that many show in great afflictions which rises
only out of a natural courage, and stoutnesse of heart, and out of this manly
resolution I see no way to avoid this cross; sorrowing and fretting at it is
but a childish, and womanish thing, and will do no good at all, and therefore I
must, and will endure it (as the Jews are said to speak, Ier. 10.19. Truly
this is a grief, and I must bear it) this hardening of a man's self in sorrow
as Job speaks, Job 6.10. this patience perforce as we use to call it, without
all reference to the will of God, and respect of their obedience unto him,
deserves not the name of true patience.

beggars must be no choosers. If we be truly patient we must learn to bear
our own cross. If any man will come after me (says our Savior, Luke 9.23.)
let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily. I have learned (says the
Apostle, Phil. 4.11) in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content. They
therefore that will be their own carvers, and can say if my cross were but as
such or such a ones is, I could well bear it, but alas no man is in my case,
none could endure that that I do, are far from true patience. He that is
truly patient, will do the Lord that honor, as to judge that the fittest, and
best cross for him, which he thinks good to lay upon him. And resolve with
Moses, Deuteronomy 32 4. His work is perfect (it could not have been better done)
for all his ways are judgment.

Let patience have her perfect work says the Apostle, Iam. 1.4. We should be
of Jacobs mind, Genesis 32.26. we should be unwilling that God, when he has been
wrestling, and striving with us by his corrections, should depart from us, till
he have left a blessing behind him. No wise man will desire to get from under
the Surgeons hand, till he be cured of his wound or past all danger. That which
the Prophet says Esa. 28.16. He that believes, shall not make have, may fitly
be applied even unto this case. This was Asas sin, 2 Chronicles. 16.12. he sought
to the Physicians to be cured of his disease, but not to the Lord to be cured
of his sin, which was the cause for which that disease was laid upon him.

Antiochus in the days of the Maccabees, says of them, Heb. 11.35. that they
would not accept of deliverance (he means upon unlawful conditions) that
they might obtain a better resurrection. And we have a notable example of this
in David, 1 Samuel 26.8 -- 11. who when God had delivered Saul his enemy into his
hand, and Abishai offered him with one blow to have eased him of him, and all
the extreme miseries he endured by his means, would by no means accept of it
but answers him thus, verse 10, 11. As the Lord lives the Lord shall smite
him, or his day shall come to die, or he shall descend into battle, and
perish; the Lord forbid, that I should stretch forth my hand against the Lords
anointed. And what patience is there then in those men that (how quiet soever
they seem in their afflictions) will neglect no means that either themselves
can think of or others shall suggest unto them (though it be by a witch or
wizard, that is, by the devil himself) to help themselves by, as Saul did,
who in the height of his impiety (as the greatest sin that ever he committed)
sought to the witch of Endors devil and familiar spirit for help and comfort,
1 Samuel 28.7.

Seventhly, and lastly. True patience whereby we obediently submit our Peter
2.23. Who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he
threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges righteously. The
Apostle persuading unto patience, has these words, Iam. 5.9. Grudge not one
against another brethren (he says not rage not, rail not, revenge not) lest
ye be condemned; behold, the Judge stands before the door. See two notable
examples of this in David; The one Psalm. 38.12, 13, 14. When they that sought
after his life, laid snares for him, and they that sought his hurt, spoke
mischievous things, and imagined deceits all the day long: yet was he as a
deaf man that heard not, and as a dumb man that opened not his mouth; he was
as a man that heard not, and in whose month there was no reproves. The other
example of his, is that in Shemeies case, 2 Samuel 16.10, 11. O how meek was he
toward that wretched man? he would not be revenged of him, he would not
suffer him to be chidden or reproved for that he did. And what was the cause
of this his mildness of spirit toward such enemies? Certainly his patience,
and humble submission of heart to the will of God in these judgments, was the
only cause of it. They therefore that pretend they acknowledge God to be
righteous in all their afflictions, and patiently submit themselves to his hand
in them, but they can bear nothing at the hands of men, they are apt to break
out into choler and wrath, into rage, and fury against men, that shall do them
the least wrong, they give themselves liberty to nourish in themselves desire
of revenge and implacable hatred toward them; these men (I say) do miserably
deceive their own souls, if their hearts did indeed patiently submit
themselves to the will of God, in any of the crosses that are upon them, they
would then be more patient toward men, who are but the Lords instruments, and
rods, whereby he afflicts them. Thus spoke David of the worst enemies he
had, Psalm. 17.13, 14. Deliver my soul from the wicked, which is thy sword,
from men which are thy hand O Lord. Certainly it is the rebelliousnesse of our
hearts toward God, that we cannot stoop to him, nor humble our selves under
his mighty hand, in his judgments that are upon us, that makes us so froward,
and impatient toward men, so desirous to be revenged of them that have done
us any wrong. And these are the properties whereby true patience may be known,
and discerned; these are the notes whereby we may try whether we have yet
obtained this grace, whether we have yet learned to clear the Lord, when he
judges us.

Lecture LI. On Psalm 51.4* March 6. 1626.
NOw for motives that may persuade us, to submit our selves patiently to the
will of God in all things, that may befall us, there be very many, but I will
insist but upon these three considerations only. 1. The unavoidablenesse of
affliction. 2. The hurt we do our selves by impatiency, and the good that
comes to us by patience. 3. The hand that God has in all our afflictions.

For the first. Every child of God must look for affliction, even for much
affliction; it should not seem strange to us, when it comes upon us, it
should rather seem strange to any of us, that we have been so long free from
any great affliction. This motive the Apostle Peter uses, 1 Pet. 4.12.
Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial -- as though some
strange thing happened unto you. It cannot be avoided but (if we belong to God)
we must endure affliction, at one time or other, in one degree or other. This
was the Doctrine that Barnabas and Paul taught in all Churches, and whereby it
is said they did confirm the disciples souls (that is, prepare them for
trouble, and arm them with patience to bear it, when it should come) Acts
14.22. that we must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God.
1. The way to heaven is through tribulation; 2. Yea through much tribulation.
3. Yea, we must, a necessity is laid upon us, either that way we must go to
heaven, or we These. 3.3. No man should be moved by these afflictions, for
your selves know, that we are appointed thereunto. Peter 5.9. Knowing that the
same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world. Yea
the best and choicest of them, and those that have bin most dear to God, have
gone to heaven through many tribulations. Take my brethren (says the Apostle
James 5.10.) the Prophets who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an
example of suffering affliction, and of patience. So that indeed we have so
small cause to be dismayed with our afflictions (which be they what they can
be, are but flea-bitings in comparison of those that the choicest of Gods
servants have endured) that on the contrary side, we should have just cause to
doubt, and suspect our own estate, if we were not subject to them. If ye be
without chastisement (says the Apostle, Heb. 12.8.) whereof all are partakers,
then are ye bastards and not sons. As they that desire to find Christ in this
life, where he seedeth, where he lies at noone, must go their way forth by
the footsteps of the flock, as our Savior directs his spouse, Cant. 1.8. So
they that would go to heaven, must go also by the footsteps of the flock,
they must go in that way that Christ's faithful flock and people have trodden,
and beaten before even the Captain of our salvation (as the Apostle speaks,
Heb. 2.10.) was made perfect (that is, brought unto glory) through sufferings.
And God has decreed, that all his members should be conformed, and made like
unto him in this point, as the Apostle teaches, Romans 8.29. Whom he did
sore-know, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his son.
So that in these three respects, it must needs be, that through much
tribulation, we must enter into the kingdom of God.

When the people complained (says Moses, Numb. 11.1.) it displeased the Lord,
and the Lord heard it, and his anger was kindled, and the fire of the Lord
burnt among them. And ver. 10. Moses heard the people weep (tears they were,
not of repentance, but of coffeehouse, and murmuring) throughout their
families, every man in the door of his tent, and the anger of the Lord was
kindled greatly. Rebellion (even this kind of rebellion) is as the sin of
witchcraft, in the sight of God, 1 Samuel 15.23. Secondly, on the other side, by
our patience we may lighten our crosses and afflictions, and make them more
easy and tolerable to our selves.

First. This is the way to possess our own souls in any affliction, how
grievous Lu 21.19. In your patience possess ye your souls, says our Savior
to his disciples, when he foretells them of great troubles, that should
befall them. The man that wants patience, will be ready to loose, or sell his
soul in his bodily afflictions, that is, the peace, and comfort of it, the
faith, and holiness that seemed to be in it; but he that can in his
afflictions yield, and submit himself patiently to the will of God, shall
keep his soul in his own power, and possession still.

Secondly. This is the way to become conquerours in all our afflictions, and
Romans 8 37. Nay in all these things (And what were those things? that we shall
see verse 35. Tribulation, distress, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril,
and sword, in all these things says he) we are more then conquerours, through
him that loved us. Why how were they conquerours of whom he says, verse 36.
that they were killed. For thy sake are we killed all the day long? Yes, though
they were killed, yet they were conquerours, yea, because they were killed, and
willing to lay down their lives for the Lord, and his truths sake, and so to
confirm and seal with their blood, the truth of God; therefore were they
conquerours, yea more then conquerours over their enemies. So it is said of the
faithful, R^vel 1^.11. that they overcame the devil, the great dragon, the
old serpent with all his instruments, the persecuting Emperors, and Popes of
Rome. And how did they overcome him? Surely by the blood of the Lamb, and by
the word of the testimony, and they loved not their lives unto death. They that
love not their lives unto death, but can be willing to suffer even unto death
it self, for the truths sake, they shall be conquerours over the proudest
enemy that Satan can stir up to persecute, and oppress them. Thus did the
blessed Martyrs in Queen Mary's days overcome all their bloody persecutours;
it was not Boner, nor Gardener, but they and the truth of God which they
suffered for, that prevailed, that won the field, and got the day, according to
to that old saying. The blood of the Martyrs, became the seed of the Church of
God.

Thirdly. This is the way even to overcome the Lord, and to put an end to our
afflictions, when our hearts are by it subdued, and we can thus stoop, and
Ahab (a man cruel, and fierce enough) toward Benhadad a mischievous enemy of
his, 1 Kin 20.31, 32. And the Lord our God is a thousand times more ready to
relent toward us, when we have most provoked him to afflict us, if he see his
corrections have mastered, and subdued us; that we are willing to yield our
selves to his will, he has done. Turn unto the Lord your God (says the
Prophet Joel 2.13.) for he is gracious, and merciful, flow to anger, and of
great kindness, and repents him of the evil. Ye have heard (says the
Apostle, James 5.11.) of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the
Lord. (What was that? why so soon as Job was subdued, saw his own folly in
the impatiency he had showed, and yielded himself unto God, as we may see Job
40.4, 5. and 42.5, 6, the Lord made an end of correcting him presently) And
what reason does the Apostle give for this? Surely this, that the Lord is very
pitiful, and of tender mercy. Yea, there is a gracious promise made to them
that are willing to suffer for his Name, that they shall suffer never a whit
the more, but the less for that Luke 9.24. Whosoever will save his life (and
resolve with himself he will suffer nothing for religion, or any other
righteous cause, but whatsoever times shall come, he will be sure to save one,
he will yield to any thing, rather then he will loose either life, or liberty,
or goods) this man (says our Savior) shall loose it, (he means he shall
either loose the thing he so resolves to save, or the comfort of it, which if
he do loose, he were as good to loose the thing it self) but (on the other
side says our Savior) whosoever will loose his life for my sake (that is, is
unfeinedly willing to suffer the loss of all, even of life it self, rather
then he would forsake me) the same shall save it; not only eternally, and in
the life to come, as our Savior speaks, John 12.25. He that hates his life
in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal (in which sense the promise
never fails) but even in this world oftentimes he shall, by his willingness to
suffer loose of life, or liberty, or goods, in obedience unto God, save his
life, and liberty, and goods, according to which sense of this promise our
Savior speaks, Mar. 10.29, 30. There is no man that has left house, or
brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for
my sake and the Gospels, but he shall receive an hundred fold, now in this
time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands,
with persecutions, and in the world to come, eternal life, Certainly the
suffering of any thing in obedience unto God, is not the way to undo a man, or
to make him miserable, it is the way to lighten our crosses, and make us less
miserable, even in this life.

Affliction (says Eliphaz, Job 5.6.) comes not forth of the dust, neither
does evil spring out of the ground. Shall there be evil in the City (says
the Prophet, Amos 3.6.) and the Lord has not done it?

This consideration has bin of great force, to quiet the hearts of Gods
people. 1. From extreme fear of misery and trouble, before it comes. 2.
From being too much dejected with it when it does come.

Esa. 52.7. Say unto Zion, thy God reigns, when all is done. Wicked tyrants
may threaten us, and brag of their power, what they can do unto us, as Pilate
did to our blessed Savior, Job. 19.10. Speak thou not to me? (make thou
no more reckoning of me) Know thou not that I have power to crucify thee,
and I have power to release thee? They may threaten I say, and brag what they
can do, but they can do nothing of themselves. And so our Savior answered
Pilate there, John 19.11. Thou could have no power at all against me, except
it were given thee from above. Thus does our Savior teach his disciples, to
arm themselves against the fear of trouble, that might come to them through
the malice of men, Mat. 10 29.31 Not one sparrow falls to the ground without
your father, but the very hairs of your head are all numbered, fear ye not
therefore, for ye are of more worth, then many sparrowes.

Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord. And Job 1.21. The Lord has given and the
Lord has taken away. And David, 2 Samuel 16.10. The Lord has said to him, curse
David. And Ps. 39.9. I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, because thou did
it.

Will you see the ground of this? I will not mention now neither 1. his
sovereign power he has over us, to do with us what pleases him, nor 2. his
justice whereby it is impossible he should do us any wrong, nor 3. his wisdom
whereby every thing that he does, must needs be so well done, that it cannot be
bettered (these points you have heard of, in the handling of the doctrine) I
will give you but this one ground, why the knowledge of Gods providence, and
the hand that he has in all our afflictions, should quiet our hearts, and
cause us to bear them patiently, because, though to our feeling it does not
always appear so, yet to our faith it does, that whatsoever he does to any of
his children, he does it in love unto them. All the paths of the Lord (says
David, Psalm. 25.10.) are mercy, and truth, unto such as keep his Covenant and
his testimonies. In which respect, David professes this as a maine ground of
his patience in all his afflictions, Psalm. 119.75. I know o Lord that thy
judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me. This
will appear to us in five points principally.

First. He does not afflict any of his people willingly, he takes no pleasure
in He will not afflict, says Elihu, Job 37.23. he has no will to it. He
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men. Lamenta. 3.33. He
(of his own disposition) delights in mercy, as the Prophet speaks, Mic.
7.18. It is not with him, as with earthly parents, they often correct their
children for their pleasure; but so does not our heavenly father at any time,
as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 12.10. he has no such pleasure, his pleasure and
delight is rather to be showing mercy, then to execute judgments upon them.
How can that be will you say? If he be not willing to afflict us, how can it
be with us as it is? Who can compel him to it? Surely the need he sees we
have of it, and his love to us compels him to afflict us. Now for a season
(says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.6.) if need be, ye are in heaviness through many
tentations. As if he should say; you should never be in heaviness, no not for
the shortest season, if need did not require it. Unless he would see us
perish everlastingly, he must needs a flict us. When we are judged, we are
chastened of the Lord, that we should not he condemned with the world, says
the holy Apostle, 1 Corinthians. 11.32. See this unwillingnesse of the Lord to
afflict his (but only that the need he sees we have of it, and his love to us
compels him to it) notably expressed, Iere. 9 7. Thus says the Lord of
hosts, behold, I will melt them, and try them, for how shall I do for the
daughter of my people? As if he should have said; how shall I save them? how
should I keep them from perishing everlastingly, if I should not correct them?
and this is the first point wherein his love in afflicting us does appear. And
who would not bear patiently the stripes of such a father, that is so
unwilling to beat us, that never beats us, but with tears in his eyes;
according to that Esaias 63.9. In all their affliction, he was afflicted.

Secondly. The end he aims at in afflicting us, is to do us good, yea some
special Heb. 12.10. He chasteneth us for our profit, that we might be
partakers of his holiness, and 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light affliction which is but
for a moment (in comparison) works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory Every cross will bring with it some blessing or other, if the
fault be not in our selves; yea the greatest cross will bring the greatest
blessing. And experience has proved this to be true, that such of Gods
servants, as have been most exercised with afflictions, have usually abounded
in more holiness and comfort then any other. As the sufferings of Christ abound
in us (says the Apostle, 2. Cor. 1.5. so our consolation also abounds by
Christ. 2. True it is indeed that this fruit of affliction does not presently
appear always in Gods children, while the cross is upon them (though in
hypocrites, all the good that affliction does them, appears presently, and
vanishes as soon as the cross is gone, as you may see, Psalm. 78.34.)
nevertheless afterward (says the Apostle, Heb. 12.11) it yields the
peaceable fruit of righteousness, unto them that are exercised thereby. The Lords
manner is to leave a blessing behind him, as the Prophet speaks, Joel 2.14.
He humbles us, to do us good at our latter end; as Moses speaks, Deuteronomy. 8.16.
In which respect it may be said by the Lord, to every child of his, whom he
does correct, as it was said by Christ unto Peter, when he would wash his feet
Ioh. 13.7. What I do, thou know not now: but thou shall know hereafter. Let
the Lord alone till he have done his work upon thee, and thou shall know it
will be for thy good, that he does thus afflict thee. 3. Admit thou could
never be able to discern, how thy afflictions have done thee any good, yet is
it enough for thee, that the holy Ghost so often has said, that the afflictions
of the faithful shall certainly do them good, Job. 5.17. Behold, happy is the
man whom the Lord corrects: therefore despise not thou the chastening of the
almighty. And Psalm. 94.12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest O Lord. And
Iam. 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures tentation. And 5.11. Behold we
count them happy that endure. Object not thou then, that thou can perceive no
such thing, learn thou to walk by faith, and not by sense, 2 Cor. 5.7. And
know assuredly the Lord by afflicting thee, intends to do thee good, if thou
be his, and will do thee good in the end certainly. This way of teaching us;
and bringing us to grace, and glory, is of such necessity, as few or none ever
attained to it any other way Who teaches like him? says Eliphaz, Job 36.22.
There can be no good expected, when there are no rods walking. This is noted to
be a cause of the ungraciousnes of many, that they have had no affliction. Ps.
55.19. Because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God. And on the
other side of the faithful it is said. Esa. 43.10. I have chosen thee (that is
approved, declared thee to be one of my chosen) in the furnace of affliction.
And of David himself it is said, that though he had bin well taught from his
youth. Ps 71.17. O God thou have taught me from my youth; yet had even he need
of affliction, and learned by it much better to know God and himself, then he
could have done without it, as he professes, Ps. 119.71. It is good for me
that I have bin afflicted: that I might learn thy statutes. And this is the
second point wherein the Lords love in afflicting us, does appear, he
afflicts us for our own good; And who would not willingly endure some pain
for his own good?

Joel 2.25. I will restore unto you the years that the locust has eaten.
Hereupon the Church grounded that prayer, Psalm 90.15. Make us glad according to
the days wherein thou have afflicted us, and the years wherein we have seen
evil. And so speaks David, 2. Sam. 16.12. It may be the Lord will look on
mine affliction, and that the Lord will requite good for his cursing this day.
God has been wont in this kind of restitution, to keep a just proportion to
pay them again in good measure. Luke 6.38. Insomuch as he has used to
recompense extraordinary afflictions, with extraordinary comforts, and
blessings in the end. See two examples of this, in the case of the people of
Israel. Great was their oppression in Egypt, but observe the manner of their
deliverance, and you shall find it was recompensed to the full. 1. They went
out like conquerours in a triumphant manner, Exodus 14.8. -- and 13.18. 2. They
went away with the ^poiles of their enemies, laden with their silver, and gold,
and principal jewels, Exodus 12.35, 36. 3. Their oppressors sued to them,
requested, and urged them to be gone, Exodus 12.33. 4. They grew to be in great
credit, and high favor with their enemies, before they went, Exodus 11.3. 5.
They saw all their enemies lie dead upon the sea shore, Exodus 14.30, 31.
whereas there was not one sick or feeble person in all their tribes, Psalm.
105.37. So likewise, great was the fear and perplexity that all Gods people
were brought unto by the decree that Haman had procured against them; but mark
their deliverance, and you will say that the Lord made them full restitution
and satisfaction for it. 1. By the strange honor, and advancement that
Mordecai was raised up unto, Est. 6.11. and 8.2.15. 2. In the shamfull end God
brought Haman their proud enemy unto, Est. 7.10. 3. In the hand they had over
all the rest of their enemies, Est 9.2, 3. 4. In the abundant joy and comfort
that God gave to all his people, Est 9.18, 19. Yea the Lord has been wont to
restore with great advantage, all such losses as they have sustained by the
afflictions that he has laid upon them. For your shame you shall have double,
says the Lord to his people, Esa. 61.7. And thus dealt he with Job 42.10. The
Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before. And upon this promise did David
ground his prayer, Psalm. 71.20, 21. Thou which have showed me great, and sore
troubles, shall quicken me again, and shall bring me up again from the
depths of the earth; thou shall increase my greatness, and comfort me on every
side. And this is the third point wherein Gods love in afflicting his people
does appear. And who would not be willing to endure the loss of any comfort,
from the hand of such a God as is both able, and willing so abundantly to
recompense whatsoever loss we sustain from his hand; as the Prophet told
Amaziah the King of Judah which took thought, how he should do for the hundred
talents he had disbursed upon the Israelites, 2 Chronicles. 25.9. The Lord is able
to give thee much more then this.

The fourth point wherein God shows his love in afflicting his people is Ye
shall have tribulation ten days, Rev. 2.10. Yea he has set the very hour
both for the beginning, and ending of them. John 7.30. His hour was not yet
come. As also for the measure, and quantity of them. The cup is in the Lords
hand, Psalm. 75.8. He corrects them not in his anger but in judgment, and
discretion, Ier. 10.24. Proportioning his corrections by the strength of the
party, that he does correct; laying greatest trials upon them whom he has made
strongest to bear them, 1 Cor. 10.13. For he knows the weakness of any of
his servants, Psalm. 78.38, 39. He did not stir up all his wrath, for he
remembered that they were but flesh. And 103.13, 14. Like as a father pitieth
his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him, For he knows our
frame, he remembers that we are dust. He will so correct his children, as he
will not lose the weakest of them, either through the continuance, or the
extremity of any affliction, he lays upon them, Psalm. 125.3. The rod of the
wicked shall not rest on the lot of the righteous: lest the righteous put forth
their hand unto iniquity. I will sist the house of Israel (says the Lord, Amos
9.9.) even as corn is sifted in a sive, yet shall not the least grain fall
upon the earth.

Fifthly and lastly, The Lord when he has brought his people into the briars I
will be with him in trouble, says the Lord, Psalm 91.15. And how will he be
with them? 1. To take notice of their wrongs, and miseries, his eye is then
specially upon them to that end, Acts 7.34 Psalm. 56.8. Psalm. 31.7. 2. To assist
and strengthen them that they may not be overcome of them, Psalm. 37.24. Esa.
41.10, 13, 14. and 43.2. So as though they may be moved and shaken with their
afflictions, they shall not greatly be moved, Psalm. 62.2. 2 Cor. 4.9. And
though God do discover their weakness to them, and they feel themselves
ready to faint yet even then he will strengthen them, Esa. 40.29. He gives
power to the saint, and to them that have no might, he increases strength.
Insomuch as they have been able to say they never felt his strength more in
susteining them then when they have felt themselves most weak, 2 Cor. 12.10.
3. To comfort them in all their distresses, and heaviness, Acts 23.11. Mica
7.8. 2 Cor. 7.6.

Lecture LII. On Psalm. 51.4. March 20. 1626.
IT follows now, that we proceed unto the means that God in his Word has
directed us to use, for the obtaining of this grace to bear the cross
patiently to bear all kind of affliction patiently and comfortably,
whenever God shall be pleased to exercise us by it. And those I find to be
eight principally.

Job 14.14. All the days of my warfare (for so I render it with Arias
Montanus) will I wait, till my change come. He thought of, and looked for a
change continually. Neither did he thus only in the time of his misery, look
for a change and alteration of his estate into the better, but when he was in
greatest prosperity he lived in continual expectation of trouble, and of a
change of his estate; as he professes, Job 3.25. The thing which I greatly
feared in come upon me, and that which I was afraid of, is come unto me. Gods
people should in the time of their best health think often of death, in the time
of their greatest peace and prosperity think often of trouble. O that they were
wise, (says the Lord of his people, Deuteronomy. 32.29.) that they would understand
this, that they would consider their latter end. This is an high point of
wisdom. To this purpose tends that counsel of Solomon, Eccle. 11.8. If a
man live many years, and rejoice in them all, yet let him remember the days
of darkness (the time that he must spend in the grave, and in the state of the
dead) for they shall be many. A longer time by far then he has spent in this
life (in which respect we call our grave, our long home) and therefore it is
fit we should often think of our future estate. True it is these thoughts of
death, and of trouble will breed fear, and heaviness in the hearts of men, as
you heard they did in Job 3.25. But the fear and heaviness that these
thoughts breed is very wholesome and profitable for us. In which respect Solomon
says, Eccl. 7.2, 3, 4. It is better to go into the house of mourning, then to
go to the house of feasting; for that is the end of all men, and the living
will lay it to his heart. Sorrow is better then laughter: (this sorrow he
means that grows from the thought of our death) for by the sadness of the
countenance, the heart is made better. And thereupon he infers, The heart of
the wise is in the house of mourning (even when his body cannot be with them,
that mourn for the sickness or the death of their friends, for the miseries
they are subject to through persecution, banishment, imprisonment, war, yet
his heart is with them, he thinks often of them) but the heart of fools is in
the house of mirth.

Judas only but the rest of the Disciples were much troubled, for to see such
wast, and superfluity, Mat 26.8. Mar. 14.4, 5.) at this great, and sumptuous
feast I say our Savior fell into a meditation, and speech of his death and
burial, Job. 12.7, 8. to teach us, that thoughts of our death, thoughts of the
troubles, and miseries that Christ in his members does endure, thoughts of our
own dangers, and of the troubles our selves have cause to look for, are very
seasonable, even at our greatest feasts. In which respect the Prophet notes
this for a great sin in his time, Amos 6.6. that at their feasts they drunk
wine in bowls, and anointed themselves with the chief ointments, but had no
thoughts of the miseries of Gods Church, they were not grieved for the
affliction of Joseph. This benefit it appears Joseph of Arimathea made of the
meditation, and remembrance of his death. The Sepulcher that our blessed
Savior was buried in, was his (as you know) he had newly made it for himself
as you may read, Matthew. 27.60. But where made Joseph this honorable man his
tomb? Even in his garden the place of his delight, and pleasure, and
refreshing as you shall find John 19.41. And so had other great men done before
him, 2 King 21.18. And why in their gardens? Surely that when they were taking
their pleasure, delighting and refreshing themselves, they might be put in mind
of their death, and so kept from exceeding in that kind.

The second benefit we may receive, by thinking often of our death, and of the
Moses, Psalm. 90.12. Teach us so to number our days (that is to consider how
few they are) that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. And on the other side,
Nothing has more force to corrupt our hearts, and lives, then the putting out
of our mind, all thoughts of our death, and of the evil day. When David
discribeth the most wicked man, of whom he says God is not in all his
thoughts, he is a very Atheist toward God, his ways are always grievous, he
is an oppressor, and tyrant toward men, Psalm. 10.4, 5. He gives this for the
reason of it, verse 5, 6. Thy judgments are far above, out of his sight. He
never discerns nor thinks of any judgments of God that are approaching. He
has said in his heart I shall never be moved, I shall never be in adversity.
And thus speaks the Prophet also, Amos 6.3. The putting far away the evil
day was the cause why they approached to the seat of violence.

The third, and last benefit we may receive, by thinking often of our change of
Pro. 6.15. His calamity shall come suddenly, suddenly shall he be broken,
without remedy. And 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. When they shall say peace and safety: then
sudden destruction comes upon them. So our Savior having foretold the
destruction of Jerusalem, and of the Temple, charged his Disciples (of whom he
did foresee some should live unto that day) to take heed Luke 21.34. that that
day came not upon them at unawares. Therefore also he so often foretells them
of his death, and of the heavy times and troubles they were to look for.
Matthew. 24.25. Behold, (says he) I have told you before. And why did he
foretell them? Surely that this knowing, and thinking of them before, might
make them the less grievous unto them when they should come. John 16.4. These
things have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may remember that I
told you of them.

And surely this is to be acknowledged as a great mercy of God, Applic.
that he strikes us not suddenly with our deadly stroke; but has given us
many warnings, he has threatened us often, and shaken his rod at us fearfully;
he has long given us, and does daily give us so palpable signs of a
desolation approaching, as every natural man that has any brains in his
head, can take notice of it himself, and speak of it to others. But what is
the use that we should make of all these warnings, and of all these signs that
God gives us? Surely, we should so think of the evil times that are at
hand, that we may prepare our selves for them, and fit our selves to bear
them with patience, and comfort when they shall come. According to the speech
of the Holy Ghost, Pro. 22.3. A prudent man forseeth the evil, and hides
himself; provideth for his own safety, and comfort in the evil day. And how
that may be done you shall hear in those seven directions that follow.

If any man will come after me, (says our blessed Savior, Luke 9.23. and the
Text says, he said these words to them all) let him deny himself, and take up
his cross daily, and follow me. The denying of our selves, and taking up of
our daily crosses will make us fit to follow Christ through thick, and thin,
and even to endure the fiery trial for his sake. It is good for a man (says
the Church in their miserable captivity, Lam. 3.27.) that he bear the yoke in
his youth; that he have been accustomed before great troubles come, to bear
small crosses, to cross, and deny himself in his earthly contentments. The
holy Apostle professes of himself, 1 Cor. 15.31. that he did die daily; by
the daily crosses he did endure and willing forsaking of the comforts of this
life, he did learn to die, and to part with them all willingly. And he
counsels Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.3. To endure hardness, as a good soldier of
Jesus Christ. Nothing makes us so unwilling to die, or to suffer any thing for
Christ's sake, or to endure any great affliction, as the overmuch love that we
do bear, unto these earthly things. Therefore we shall find that our blessed
Savior, when he would prepare his Disciples for those heavy times that
should come upon them after his death, did beat upon no point so much, in all
his Sermons as this, Mat. 10.37. He that loves father or mother more then me,
is not worthy of me; and he that loves son or daughter more then me, is not
worthy of me. And Luke 14.26. If any man come to me, and hate not his father,
and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own
life also (that is love them not less then me, or carry himself not toward
them, when they prove draw-backs from me, as he would do toward the thing he
most hates) he cannot be my Disciple. True it is we cannot be without these
earthly comforts. Your heavenly father knows that ye have need of all these
things, says our Savior, Mat. 6.32. The Lord allows us the use yea the
liberal use of them, 1 Timothy 6.17. He gives us richly all things to enjoy. But
the love of these things, is a deadly enemy to grace, specially to this grace
of Christian patience. The love of money (says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.10. and
that which he speaks of the love of money, may be said likewise of the love
of any worldly thing, as appears by comparing with this place that of 1 John
2.15. The love of peace, of ease, of pleasure, of credit, of friends, of good
cheer, and good clothes) is the root of all evil, which while some have
coveted after, they have erred from the faith, fallen quite from religion,
rather then they would suffer any thing for it.

Applic.
If we would therefore make our selves fit, either to die willingly, or to
endure persecution, and trouble patiently and comfortably, we must take heed of
setting our hearts upon any earthly comfort, of admiring and affecting it much,
and labor to bring our hearts to a more mean conceit of these things, to be
more indifferently affected toward them. If riches increase, set not your
heart upon them, says David, Psalm. 62.10. And describing the man that shall go
to heaven, he says, Ps. 24.4 he is such a one as has not lift up his soul to
vanity. No man that warreth (says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.4.) entangleth
himself with the affairs of this life. And 1 Cor. 7.31. They that use this
world must take heed of over-using it, they must not be (...) for the fashion
of this world passes away. We must part with all these things, and the faster
our hearts do cleave, and are glued to them, the more painful will it be unto
us to part with them. In which respect certainly, as it may be said of our
whole land that if the Lord should bring these miseries upon us, which the
Palatinate, and Bohemia, and Germany have long endured, we should be far
worse able to bear them, then they or any other nation under heaven, because
we are so tender and delicate by the long peace, and abundance of all things
we have enjoyed. So may I say to every one of you that are rich, and to you
that are given to ease and to pleasure, that the cross, and persecution, the
troubles, and afflictions we have cause to look for, will be more heavy and
intolerable to you, then to others of Gods people. If Moses had not learned to
make light account of riches, and of pleasures, he could never have so
willingly, and patiently endured to suffer affliction with the people of God,
as the Apostle observes, Heb. 11.25, 26.

Thirdly, He that would be able patiently, and Christianly to endure troubles,
Whatsoever things were written asore time (says the Apostle, Romans 15.4.) were
written for our learning (what learning may you say? What is it that God would
have us learn by them?) that we through patience, and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope. Many of the Philosophers have given in their
writings excellent rules, and grounds of patience, but that (...) and patience
that was wrought in men by their precepts, and rules was stupidity, and
senslessenesse rather then true patience; the patience, and comfort of the holy
Scripture is the only true, and Christian patience. In which respect our
Savior gives this title to his holy Word, he calls it the Word of his
patience, because (says he, Rev. 3.10.) thou have kept the Word of my
patience, I will also keep thee from the hour of temptation. The holy
Scriptures are fitly resembled, and typified by that tower of David (mentioned,
Cant. 4.4.) builded for an armoury, wherein there hang a thousand bucklers
(under which a man may without fear, and with great safety encounter with the
strongest, and fiercest temptation, and affliction that can assault him) all
shields of mighty men; all armor of proof, such as all the Lords Worthies (
Job, and David, and Paul, and the rest) have had good proof, and trial of in
all their afflictions. Hear what Job says of this armor, Job 23.12. I have
esteemed the words of his mouth, more then my necessary food. As if he should
say, No food (no not my necessary food) did ever so sustain, and strengthen
me, so refresh, and revive my fainting body, as the Word of God, has my soul
in all my afflictions. Hear what David says of this (who was also a man of
sorrows, one that was much exercised with afflictions of all kinds) Psalm.
119.50. This (that is to say, the Word of God of which he had spoken in the
former verse) is my comfort in my affliction, for thy Word has quickened me.
And verse 92. Unless thy law had been my delights: (he speaks in the
plural number, As if he had said instar omnium in stead of all manner of
delights unto me) I should then have perished in mine affliction. And verse
143. Trouble, and anguish have taken hold on me, yet thy commandments are my
delights. As if he should say, In my greatest trouble in the extremest anguish
of my soul, thy Word yielded comfort unto me. Therefore also you shall find he
cries for nothing so earnestly in all his affliction, as for understanding,
and knowledge in the Word. Psalm. 119. When he had spoken verse 143. of the
trouble, and anguish he was in he cries in the next verse, Give me
understanding (in thy testimonies he means) and I shall live. And verse 169.
Let my cry come near before thee, O Lord; give me understanding according to
thy Word. And verse 171. My lips shall utter praise, when thou have taught me
thy statutes. See also the proof that Paul had of this armor, of the
patience, and comfort of the Scriptures in all his afflictions. For speaking 2
Cor. 6.4, 5. that he, and all the rest of the Apostles did in all things
approve themselves as the Ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions,
in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumules; he
tells how, and by what means he attained unto this grace to endure so much
misery with so great patience, he reckons verse 6, and 7. this for a
principal, by knowledge (says he) and by the word of truth.

Applic.
And surely 1 if there were nothing else to breed in our hearts an high esteem
of the Word of God, to cause us to seek the knowledge of it, to exercise our
selves with delight in the reading and hearing, and meditation of it, this were
sufficient to do it, even the patience and comfort it will yield us in all our
afflictions. The remembrance of one sentence of holy Scripture, will be more
effectual to yield us comfort in the evil day, in the hour of temptation,
will have more force to repel Satan in his fiercest assaults, then is in all
the wisdom of the world, in all the counsel of our friends, that shall be
then about us. For it is the sword of Gods spirit; as the Apostle calls it,
Ephesians. 6.17. It is the only weapon whereby Christ our Savior, the Captain of
our Salvation, did overcome the devil, and drive him away as you may see in
the story of his temptations, Matthew. 4.4, 7, 10. Therefore also our Savior
when he promises his Disciples to send them the Comforter, after his departure
from them, he tells them how, and by what means he should comfort them, John
14.26. He shall teach you all things, and bring all things unto your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. By giving them understanding in
the Scriptures, and bringing the Word unto their remembrance, he should be
their Comforter. 2. And for a conclusion of my speech touching this third
means of patience, let me say to such as are despisers of the Word, that have
not so much as a Bible in their houses; or if they have, take no delight in the
reading or hearing of it, but say unto God in their hearts with the Atheist in
Job 21.14. Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways; if
persecution should come, and the sword of the enemy, with what patience, and
comfort will you suffer that have no grounded knowledge out of the Word,
whether the religion you profess be the truth or no? No man can with comfort
suffer for the truth, that is not certain it is the truth. When Paul prays
for the Colossians that their hearts might be comforted, Col. 2.2. he prays
that God would give them all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to
the acknowledging of the mystery of God. He that is fully assured, with
understanding that that is the truth of God that he suffers for, he may
suffer with comfort, and none but he. Nay I will say more unto you, what
patience or comfort can such as you, that make no more reckoning of the Word,
have on your death beds whenever that hour shall come? Certainly none at
all, for (as you have heard) there is no true patience, nor comfort, nor hope
to be found, but in the knowledge of the Scriptures. And therefore it is spoken
of as the very upshot of the misery of a wicked man, Pro. 5.23. He shall die
without instruction. O they are in a miserable case that die without
instruction; and (alas) how many thousands are miserable this way? Let me
therefore say to every one of you, as Solomon does, Pro. 19.20. Hear counsel,
and receive instruction, that thou may be wise in thy latter end. If nothing
else will cause you to esteem of the Word, yet let this do it, that you may
die with comfort, that you may finish your course with joy.

Fourthly, He that would be able patiently and meekely to bear afflictions, I
will bear the indignation of the Lord, (says the Church, Mic. 7.9) Because I
have sinned against him. This is also plain in the order of the three first
Beatitudes, Mat. 5.3 -- 5. Blessed are the poor in spirit, and then blessed
are they that mourn, and then blessed are the meek. Poverty of spirit, sight,
and sense of sin will cause mourning, and humiliation, and these two will make
us as meek as lambs under the corrections of the Lord. It is the privy pride
of our hearts, and the having too good a conceit of our selves, that is the
chief cause of all our impatiency and murmuring under the crosses that lie
upon us. If we knew our sins well, and were truly humbled for them, we would
easily acknowledge, that that which we endure is nothing to that that we have
deserved at Gods hands, we would say with David, Psalm. 103.10. He has not
dealt with us after our sins; nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. And
with holy Ezra 10.13. Thou our God have punished us less then our iniquities
deserve. It was the sense that David had of his sins, that made him thus to
clear the Lord when he so sharply judge, and corrected him, and to bear it so
patiently as we have heard he did. Let us all therefore when Gods judgments
lie heavy upon us, hearken to that counsel which the Church in her extreme
affliction from her own experience does give us. Lam. 3.39, 40. Wherefore does
a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? Let us search,
and try our ways and turn again to the Lord.

But some will object. Object.
This is bad counsel certainly. If when the Lord has cast me down by any of
his judgments I should also cast down my self by calling my sins to
remembrance, this were the way to bring me to despair; to make me utterly
unable to bear any thing, to make me to faint and to sink under mine
affliction. And from this conceit it grows, that men cannot abide (no not
upon their death beds) that either themselves or their friends, should be put
in mind of their sins.

But to these I answer, Answ.
that the sight of sin when it is joined with true sorrow and humiliation of
soul for it, is not the way to despair, it is the only way to bring us unto
true comfort. He is worthy to be believed that said so, Mat. 5.4. Blessed are
they that mourn (for the poverty of their spirits he means, for that want of
grace, and abundance of corruption they find in themselves) for they shall be
comforted. God that comfort those that are cast down (says the Apostle, 2
Cor. 7.6.) comforted us.

Let me apply this (in a word or two) to you all that are now shortly to go to
the Lords Table. Applic.
This holy Sacrament is a Feast wherein every Christian soul may receive more
sound joy, and comfort then by any means that God has given us under heaven
besides. It is said that at the receiving of the Passover in Hezekiahs time, 2 Chronicles. 30.25, 26. all the congregation rejoiced, and there was great joy in
Jerusalem. And yet that Sacrament was not so effectual a mean to breed joy and
comfort in the hearts of Gods people, as ours is. It is also said of the noble
Eunuch that he found great comfort in the Sacrament of Baptism, Acts 8.39. He
went away rejoicing. And yet there is not so much comfort to be received by
that Sacrament neither as by this. This is the Supper of the Lord wherein the
Body and Blood of our blessed Savior is represented, and exhibited by the
elements of Bread, and Wine, creatures that God has given (above all things)
to strengthen and make glad the heart of man, Ps. 104 15. But (alas) how few
are there that receive any sound comfort by this holy Sacrament, or that go
away rejoicing from it? Would you know the true cause of it? Certainly this it
is, we go not to it with souls humbled and mourning for our sins, and how then
should we go away comforted from it? Christ was anointed, and appointed of God
to bind up the brokenhearted to comfort such as mourn, Esa. 61.2, 3. and not
such senseless creatures as we are. He bids such to come to him as labor,
and are heavy laden, Matthew. 11.28. and promises to give them rest. He never
promised to give rest, and comfort to such as we are, that when we come to him
never feel our sins, to be any burden unto us. In time of Popery at this
time of the year all men held themselves bound in conscience to confess all
their sins to the Priest, and they had directions given them to help them in
calling to mind their sins. I know God required no such thing at their hands,
and it was but a counterfeit humiliation, and repentance that was wrought that
way. But surely they did not so much offend in superstition then, as we do in
profanesse now. No man holds himself bound now to call his sins to
remembrance, and make a particular confession of them unto the Lord, before he
goes to the Sacrament, and that is the cause why we find no more comfort in
it. I therefore heartily pray every one of you, that desire to receive Christ
in the Sacrament to the comfort of your souls, that you would hearken unto and
make conscience to do as the Apostle charge you to do, 1 Cor. 11.28. Let
every man examine himself. And verse 31. If we would judge our selves, we
should not be judged of the Lord. If you would receive comfort by it, you must
examine your selves, and find out your special sins; you must judge and
afflict your own souls for your sins; if you will not do this, you shall
be so far from receiving comfort by the Sacrament, as you shall become the
worse by it, God will judge and afflict you for coming unworthily unto it.

Lecture LIII. On Psalm. 51.4. April 3. 1627.
Fifthly, He that would attain unto this grace of true patience, and be able to
David does here) when he shall judge him, to bear patiently and comfortably
whatsoever troubles, and afflictions God shall be pleased to exercise him
withal, must (before that time comes) get a true, and a lively faith, even a
comfortable assurance of his reconciliation with God through Jesus Christ. This
power that there is in faith, to make a man able patiently, and comfortably to
bear afflictions, of what kind or degree soever they be; is plentifully taught
in the holy Scriptures, and confirmed to us by the experience of the Saints of
God. The holy Apostle speaking of all the parts of the Christian armor, and
among the rest of that whereby the feet and legs are to be defended, he calls
it Ephesians. 6.15. The preparation of the Gospel of peace. His meaning is, that
when once we are assured of our peace and reconciliation with God, which is
wrought by the Gospel, then are we prepared to follow Christ through thick
and thin, through the most hard and stony, the most sharp and thorny way, of
any persecution, and trouble whatsoever. Being justified by faith (says the
same Apostle, Romans 5.1.) we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus. And
what follows upon that? Why when once we are justified from our sins, and
have peace with God, then verse 3. We glory in tribulations. And so does the
Apostle make this the ground of the strange patience of the Saints in the days
of the Maccabees, when they were tortured, and were tried with mockings, and
scourgings, with bonds and imprisonment, when they were some stoned, and some
sawne in sunder. What made them able to endure such things, and not to accept
of deliverance when it was offered unto them if they would have yielded a
little? Surely their faith as you shall find Heb. 11. 33.37. by faith they
attained to this strength, to this measure of patience. I showed you in the
handling of the Doctrine, that Gods servants and Martyrs could not be overcome,
nor made to yield unto adversaries, when they endured such torments as were
impossible for flesh and blood to endure, but became conquerours yea, more then
conquerours in them all, as the Apostle speaks Rom 8.37. But would you know
how they came to this valor, to this admirable strength to hear, and to
overcome such intolerable torments? Surely it was their faith, whereby they
were assured of their peace with God, that made them able to do it, as the
Apostle speaks in the same place, and in the very next words. For I am
persuaded (says he verse 38, 39.) that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities -- nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. He that is so confidently
persuaded of Gods unchangeable, and everlasting love toward him in Christ, no
marvel though no affliction be ever able to overcome him, though he become
more then a conqueror in the greatest tribulations that can befall him, So
when it is said of the holy Martyrs, Rev. 12.11. that they overcame the great
Dragon, in all the bloody, and extreme persecutions that he raised up against
them, under the cruel Emperors, and Popes of Rome, the means is also
mentioned whereby they got such strength, and patience to endure, and overcome
him. They overcame him (says the holy Ghost) by the blood of the Lamb. The
faith they had in the blood of Christ, which was sprinkled upon their hearts,
made them able to bear, and overcome so bitter torments as they did endure;
and so will it certainly do any of us in the like case. This is the victory
that overcommeth the world, even our faith, says the Apostle, 1 John 5.4. And
this is the promise of God, we shall find Psalm. 91.9. Because thou have made
the Lord which is my refuge, thy habitation, mark what follows ver. 13. thou
shall tread upon the Lion, and adder, the young Lion, and the Dragon thou shall
trample under thy feet.

You see what testimony the holy Scripture gives to this fifth means, that is
to say, that faith will work patience, and make a man able to endure any
thing; consider also three effects of it, and you will easily discern it must
needs ^ee so.

For first. Faith works in the heart that has it, a light esteem of all
worldly By Christ (says the Apostle, Galat. 6.14.) the world is crucified unto
me. They in whose hearts Christ dwells by faith, the World becomes base
and contemptible unto them, they feel the love, and high esteem of worldly
things, decayed in them.

Secondly. Faith certifieth the heart that has it, of Gods love, and he that
is Job stop the mouth of his impatient and foolish wife. Job. 2.10. What (says
he) shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?
Shall we that have enjoyed so many months, and years, of great prosperity and
comfort, think much to endure affliction, and trouble for a few days? We that
have received so many demonstrations of Gods fatherly and unchangeable love,
shall we think much to receive correction from him? Thus did our blessed
Savior confirm his own heart in patience, against those intolerable
sufferings he was to endure for us, John 18.11. The cup which my father has
given me, shall I not drink? When we are once assured God is our father, we
shall be made well content to take the bitterest potion from his hand. And thus
does the holy Apostle reason, Romans 5. for when he had said, that being
justified by says, we are able even to glory in tribulations, he gives this
for the reason of it verse 5. Because the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts, by the holy Ghost that is given unto us. As if he had said; When once
the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, and soaketh into them, so as we
have a comfortable sense and feeling of it, how can we choose but bear
tribulations patiently, and even glory in them?

Heb. 12.10 He corrects us for our profit. And 2. that in the mean time, he
will not forsake us in them, but assist and support us, Psalm. 91.15. I will be
with him in trouble, I will deliver and honor him. These promises (I say)
faith makes the heart certain of, Heb. 11.1. Faith is the evidence of things
not seen. And he that is sure of these promises, how can he choose but bear
affliction patiently? And say with David. Psalm. 56.4. In God will I praise his
word (as if he should say, I will praise God for his word and promise) And what
follows in the same verse? In God have I put my trust, I will not fear what
flesh can do unto me.

Let me apply this briefly, 1. By way of exhortation. 2. By way of comfort.

Applic. 1
First. Seeing faith will stand us in that stead in the evil day, and yield us
that strength and comfort in all afflictions, it stands us upon, to get it in
time, and to look well to our selves, that that faith we think we have, be
such as will abide the trial in the furnace of affliction, such as will not
deceive us in the evil day. It is the exhortation of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.5.
Examine your selves whether you be in the faith: prove your own selves. For,
alas, if we have no true faith, no sound assurance that we are in Christ, when
death shall come, when the troublesome time of persecution, when the sword of
the bloody enemy shall come, what shall we do? How shall we be able to bear
it? What patience, what comfort can we look to have in that day? 1. Extreme
affliction is wont to awaken the conscience, and set it on work, to bring a
man's sins to his remembrance, that he never thought of, nor was troubled with
before. As you have heard from the example of Joseph's brethren. Genesis 42.21. And
what will quiet the conscience when it falls on brawling, and exclaiming upon
a man? Certainly nothing but faith that sprinkleth the blood of Christ upon it,
as the Apostle teaches us, Heb 9.13, 14. 2. In the evil day, Satan will be
apt to cast into men's souls, his darts of desperation, his fiery darts, as the
Apostle calls them. And what is it that will quench these darts? Surely
nothing but faith, as the Apostle teaches, Ephe. 6.16. Above all, take the
shield of faith, whereby ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of
that wicked one. Let us therefore look well to our faith, since our patience and
comfort in affliction depends so much upon it. Two notes I will give you to
try it by.

says come by hearing. Romans 10.17. Can thou say, that before ever Christ
came into thy heart, John Baptist came before him to prepare his way? Mark.
1.2. That the ministry of the law, that effectually discovered thy sins and
miserable condition unto thee, was thy schoolmaster to bring thee to Christ?
Gal. 3.24. That before the Lord spoke peace to thy heart, by the still soft and
sweet voice of his Gospel, he prepared thy heart to receive it, as he did
Eliahs, 1 Kin. 19.11, 12. by great terror? This is certainly the ordinary way,
whereby God brings his elect to faith; If thou came not to thy faith this
way, but in some other more extraordinary manner (as I do not deny but it is
possible thou might, for who can limit the holy one of Israel, Psalm. 78 41.
or tie him to certain rules?) thou have the more cause to suspect it, and to
try it the more diligently by the second note, and that is this.

Secondly. Try it by the effects of it in thy self. How has thy faith thou
say thou have in Jesus Christ, wrought with thee? What change has it made
gravel between our teeth one day, as Solomon speaks in another case. Prove.
20.17. that cup we drunk of there, will be as a cup of deadly poison unto us.
As therefore I exhorted you the last day to examine your selves well before you
went to the Lords table, so do I now exhort you to an after examination of your
selves. Have thou Indeed by faith fed upon the Lord Jesus so lately? Then
certainly 1. Thou shall find some abatement of the strength of thy corruptions,
and lusts. Where Christ is by faith received, he will purify the heart, Act.
15.9. The woman that had the bloody issue, when she had by faith touched but
the border of his garment, she felt such virtue coming from him, as dried up
and stanched the issue of blood, as you shall find, Luke 8.44. And is it
possible that we should have by faith, not only touched his garment, but eaten
and drunk his very body and blood, and yet feel no virtue at all come from
him to dry up the fountain of our corruption, but it runs as fresh and
freely, as ever it did? 2. If thou have by faith fed upon the Lord Jesus, some
increase of spiritual strength to resist tentation, and to walk in Gods
ways, is wrought in thy foul by it. Did thou ever with a good appetite eat
thy corporal food, but thou receivedst some refreshing, and strength by it?
Arise and eat (says God to Eliah the second time, 1 Kin. 19.7, 8.) for thou
have a great journey to go, and he arose, and did eat, and drink, and went
in the strength of that meat, forty days, and forty nights. And is there not
as much virtue in the body and blood of Christ being fed upon by faith, to
give, and increase strength in the soul, as ever there was in any corporal
food to strengthen the body? My flesh is meat indeed (says our Savior, Ioh.
6.55, 57) and my blood is drink indeed; he that eats me, even be shall live
by me. Will thou say then thou have fed on Christ, that have received no
strength by this food to resist tentation, that have not bin able to go in the
strength of that meat forty days, nor forty hours? No, no, trust not to such
a faith as this, this will never abide the furnace of affliction, nor bear
thee up in it.

Secondly, Let me apply this to the comfort of the weakest soul among you;
Mar. 9.24. 2. This weak faith of thine has drawn virtue from Christ, whereby
the issue and fountain of thy corruption begins to be dried up, and is not
so strong as once it was; and whereby also thou have received some strength even
to resist tentation, as Joseph did, Genesis 39.9. Be thou of good comfort,
certainly if thou have the least measure and degree of true faith in thee, thou
shall be able to bear troubles when they come, much more patiently, and
comfortably then thou think. For be thou assured. 1. That Christ will not so
overcharge thee with trials, and afflictions, as to smother and put out those
weak beginnings of grace, that he has wrought in thee, but will tender and
nourish them, Mat. 12.20. 2. The strength whereby any of Gods people are enabled
to stand in the day of trial, is not their own, but the Lords only. Be strong
in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephe. 6.10. In the deepest sense of
thine own weakness, learn to fly out of thy self, and to rely wholly upon the
Lord, and on the power of his might. Know his grace is sufficient for thee, 2
Cor. 12.9. Yea, thou shall be holden up, for God is able to make thee to stand.
Romans 14.3.3. Remember the promises God has made unto his people in this case,
Ps. 29.11. The Lord will give strength to his people. The Lord delights to
show his might most in them that are weakest in their own sense, 2 Cor. 12.9.
Gods power is made perfect in weakness. So it is said of the holy Martyrs, in
the days of the Maccabees, Heb. 11.34. that by faith out of weakness they were
made strong. And that made the Apostle say from his own experience, 2 Cor.
12.10. When I am weak, then am I strong. And if Peter had bin weaker in his
own sense beforehand, he had had more strength in the day of trial, then he
had, Mar. 14.31.

Lecture LIIII. On Psalm 51.4. April. 17. 1627.
Hope. He that would with patience, and comfort, stand in the evil day, must
get assurance beforehand, that when he dies, he shall go to heaven. He that
knows not what shall become of this soul when he dies, whether it shall go
to heaven or to hell, can never endure any great afflictions, and troubles,
with patience and comfort. Such men must needs be through fear of death (as
the Apostle speaks, Hebr. 2.15.) all their life time (but specially when any
great troubles shall come upon them) subject unto bondage, and miserable
slavery. But on the other side, he that knows death is the worst that can
befall him, in the most troublesome times, and that death will make him a happy
man, he that can say to his soul, as Pro. 23.18. Surely there is an end, and
thine expectation shall not be cut off; that man must needs be patient and
comfortable in any affliction that can befall him. We rejoice even in
tribulations (says the Apostle, Romans 5.23.) in hope of the glory of God. And
12.12. Rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation. What makes Gods people, not
only so patient, but even so comfortable, and full of joy in all tribulations?
Surely the hope they have of the glory that is prepared for them, they know the
end will pay for all. This made Moses to choose rather to suffer affliction
with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, and to
esteem the reproach of Christ, greater riches then the treasures of Egypt. For
(says the Apostle, Hebrews 11.25, 26.) he had respect to the recompense of
the reward. Heaven was ever in his eye, and that made him to endure the
reproach of Christ so comfortably. And of the faithful Hebrews he says
10.34. that they took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in
themselves (inwardly, assuredly, feelingly) that they had in heaven, a better,
and an enduring substance. In which respect, this hope of heaven is compared to
an helmet. Ephe. 6.17. that defends the head, and keeps us from the most
Capital tentations, and dangers. Heb. 6.19. The Apostle calls it, the anchor
of the soul, both sure and steadfast. It will stay the soul, and make it
steady against all waves, and tempests. And in the same chapter, verse 18. he
compares it to a place of refuge. We have strong consolation (says he) who
have fled for refuge, to take hold upon the hope that is set before us. If a
poor man that had all his wealth about him, should fall into the hands of
thieves, and be robbed, and rifled by them, he must needs cry, and take on
pitifully, for alas he is clean undone, he has nothing left at home to
succor him and his family withal. But a rich man that has store of money at
home safe locked up in his chest (unless he be a base and miserable wretch)
will never complain much, nor be disquieted, when he has twenty or forty
shillings taken from him. For worldlings to rage and take on, when they must
loose their life, or their peace, or their wealth, it is no marvel; for alas,
when these things are gone, they have nothing left, they are quite undone; But
a Christian that knows, and considers what he is borne unto, and what he
shall enjoy when he comes home, so soon as he dies, he cannot do so. O
then (to apply this in a word) as we desire to endure with patience, and
comfort, the troublesome times that are at hand, let us in time make this sure
to our selves, that when we shall dye, we shall go to heaven. I know most men
will say, they hope well to do so, but it stands us upon, to examine our
hope, whether it be such as will abide the trial, when we shall come into the
furnace of affliction. The hypocrites hope shall perish in that day, as Bildad
speaks, Job 8.13. Yea, the hope of every wicked man shall perish, says the
holy Ghost. Proverbs 10.28. But of true hope it is said, Romans 5.5. that it
makes not ashamed, it will not deceive nor disappoint him that has it, when
he shall have most need of it. A few notes I will give you to try your hope by.

First. He that has true hope, got it by the Word, and the ministry thereof.
Romans 15.4. That by patience and comfort of the Scriptures, we might have hope.
The holy Scriptures are the breeders of true hope. Yea of hope it may be said,
as it is of says, Hope comes by hearing. When he had spoken, Col. 1.5. of
the hope they had of that happiness that was laid up for them in heaven, he
shows the means whereby it was wrought in them, Ye have heard of it before
(says he) in the word of the truth of the Gospel. He calls it therefore,
verse 23. the hope of the Gospel.

Alas then, Applic.
such as never received good by the word, never felt any power or comfort in
it, never regarded nor took delight to read or hear it, are not acquainted
with it, nor exercised in it at all; what sound hope can they have to go to
heaven when they die? No, no, their doom is set down, Ps. 119.155. Salvation
is far from the wicked, sor they seek not thy statutes. They that care so
little for Gods Word, are far off from any true hope of salvation.

Secondly. True hope is grounded upon true faith in Christ. For Christ is our
as the Apostle calls him, 1 Timothy 1.1 the only ground we have to hope we shall
go to heaven. And Col. 1.27. Christ is in you, the hope of glory. Till Christ
be in us by faith, we can have no hope of glory. And Romans 15.13. The God of
hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope
through the power of the holy Ghost. Without faith, no hope, as faith
abounds, so will hope also.

O then, Applic.
they that talk much of their hope, and yet (with Papists) hold it presumption
to say they are assured that Christ died for them, and that their sins are
forgiven them, will be found in the time of trial to have no true hope in
them. They that are without Christ, have no hope, says the Apostle, Ephesians.
2.12.

Thirdly. He that has true hope, cannot choose but think often of heaven, and
mind Where the treasure is (says our Savior, Mat. 6.21) there will the heart
be also. Gods spirit is compared unto fire, Mat. 3.11. and will cause the heart
it dwells in, to mount upward, and to think often of heaven. Our Savior in
that perfect form of prayer he has given us, teaches us, we can never pray
well, unless our thoughts be in heaven. For he teaches us to direct our
prayers to our father which is in heaven. Matthew. 6.9. to lift up our hearts to
heaven when we pray; yea, he teaches us to pray to God that his kingdom may
come, ver. 10 to desire and look after the glory, and happiness of the
kingdom of heaven. And these should be our thoughts, not only when we pray,
but at other times also. Set your affections (says the Apostle, Col. 3.2, 3.)
on things above, not on things on the earth, for your life is bid with Christ
in God. He that is persuaded his life, and happiness is in heaven, cannot choose
but have his thoughts, and affections much set upon the things above. Thus the
Apostle says of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Heb. 11.15, 16. that they were not
mindful of that country from whence they came out, but desired a better
country, that is an heavenly (al their mind was of that) wherefore God was not
ashamed to be called their God (because they minded heaven so much) for he had
prepared them a City.

He then that never speaks, nor hears, nor thinks of heaven with any
delight, Applic.
that feels in himself no desires, nor longings that way, but all his
thoughts and affections are ever groviling upon the earth, certainly has no
true hope in himself to go to heaven when he dies. For of them that mind
earthly things (only or chiefly) the Holy Ghost has given sentence, Phil.
3.19. that their end is destruction they shall never go to heaven.

Every one (says the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 3.3.) that has this hope in him,
purifieth himself, as he is pure. He knows no unclean thing must come
there. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? (says David, Psalm. 24.3,
4.) and who shall stand in his holy place? He (and none but he) that has
clean hands, and a pure heart, who has not lift up his soul unto vanity, nor
sworn deceitfully. 2. He exercises himself in those things that may be of
most use to him, when he comes there. Lay up for your selves (says our
Savior, Mat. 6.20.) treasures in heaven Seek to be rich there. Our Merchants
that trade into Turkey or Persia or such far countries, count it good
husbandry, to lay out their moneys here before they go upon such commodities
as they know will be of best esteem and sell best in those countries. And so
will the wise Christian do, that hops to go to heaven. Our trading, that we
busy our selves in, (...) is for heaven, says the Apostle, Phil. 3.20. This
is that that our Savior means, Luke 12.33. Give alms, and so provide your
selves b^ggs that wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that fails not. As
if he should say, that that is so bestowed, will prove more to your advantage
when you shall come there, then all that you keep by you, or lay out
otherwise. Our works will follow us, Rev. 14.13. yea they will be there before
us, Luke 16.9. Certainly the hope we have to go to heaven, if it be sound, will
have great force to restrain us from sin, and work in us a care of a godly
life. When Paul had spoken at large of the assured hope, and longing desire
that was in him, and all the faithful of their going to heaven, he concludes
thus, 2 Cor. 5.9. Therefore we labor that whether present, or absent (living
or dying) we may be accepted of him. And 2 Pet. 3.14. Wherefore (beloved)
seeing ye look for such things, (such happiness and glory in heaven) be
diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless.

Applic.
Alas then, what hope can most men have to go to heaven, when they die, that
have no care at all to prepare themselves, for that place, while they live. Be
not deceived (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.) neither fornicatours, nor
thieves, nor covetous persons, nor drunkards, nor railers, nor extortioners,
shall inherit the kingdom of God. They that will not, or cannot forsake their
sins, how can they hope to go to heaven? They that spend all their time in
providing for this life, but make no provision for heaven, have no care to do
that, that may yield them profit and increase, when they shall come thither,
what hope can they have to go to heaven when they die? Be not deceived, (says
the Apostle, Gal. 6.7, 8.) God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man sows that
shall be also reap; he that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap
corruption, but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap
everlasting life.

Ye have shamed (and dashed out of countenance, says the Lord, Psalm 14.6.) the
counsel of the poor (and humbled Christian) because the Lord is his refuge.
And Esa. 59.15. He that departs from evil (and dares not do as other men
do) makes himself a prey; every body will be apt to do him wrong But shall we
think that piety will never stand a man in more stead then thus even in this
life? Yes yes beloved. When the evil day shall come the godly man shall find
his labor has not been in vain, he shall certainly find more strength and
comfort in that day then any other man can do. Riches profit not in the day of
wrath (says Solomon, Pro. 11.4.) but (righteousness does) righteousness
delivers from death. Unto the upright (says David, Psalm. 112.4.) there
arises light in the darkness; comfort in time of greatest heaviness. Thy
light shall rise in obscurity (says the Lord, Esa. 58.10. When there shall be
a palpable darkness in all the land of Egypt, Gods people shall have light in
their dwellings, Exodus 10.22, 23.) and thy darkness (thy trouble and
affliction) shall be (for comfort, and joy) as the noone day. The Apostle
mentioning the means, whereby he was enabled to bear with such patience such
afflictions, necessities, distresses, stripes, and imprisonments; among others
reckons this, 2 Cor. 6.7. by the armor of righteousness, on the right hand,
and on the left. And speaking of all the parts of the Christian armor, Ephesians.
6.14. he calls this the breast plate. Certainly the testimony that our
conscience shall give us that we have endeavored in all our ways to please
God, will be as armor of proof unto us in the evil day. It will be so, to us
that are Ministers, as we shall find in two notable examples. The first is
Ieremies, Ier. 17.16, 17, I have not hastened from being a pastor to follow
thee (as Jonah did) neither have I desired the woeful day, (this woeful
captivity that thou have caused me to denounce) that which came out of my lips,
was right before thee. As if he had said, I have dealt faithfully in my
ministry. And what follows? Be not a terror unto me, thou art my hope in
the day of evil; God will not be a terror to such Ministers, but their hope,
and comfort in the evil day. The other example is Paul's, 2 Cor. 1. Who having
spoken of the troubles he had in Asia, wherein (says he, ver. 8.) we were
pressed out of measure, above strength, insomuch that we despaired even of
life; tells you verse 12. what it was that yielded him comfort, in that great
distress even the testimony of his conscience, that in simplicty and godly
sincerity, not in fleshly wisdom (as the flaunting Corinthian preachers did)
he had exercised himself in his Ministry. And as this will be a great
supporter to us, that are Ministers in all our afflictions, so will it
certainly be to you that are Gods people also. See this in the example of good
Hezekiah who when the doleful message was brought him from God, by the
Prophet, to set his house in order for he must die and not live, comfort
himself in this testimony of his conscience, Esa. 38.3. Remember now, O Lord,
I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart. This will comfort a man on his death bed. And so our Savior assures
us, Matthew. 7.24, 25. that he that hears the Word, and does it (makes
conscience to practice what he knows) is like the wise man that built his
house upon a rock, and though the rain fall, and the winds blow, and the
floods beat upon him, that is, the most sore and violent tentations or
afflictions come that can come, yet shall he be able to stand, and abide them
all.

O think of this, Applic.
you that are so careless of your practice, careless of your consciences,
whose religion stands only in hearing and in a profession of the truth;
certainly when the evil day shall come, you will be found to be foolish
builders that have built upon the sand, when the rain shall fall, and the
winds blow, and the floods beat upon you, when great troubles and afflictions
shall come upon you, you will never be able to stand out you must needs fall,
and sink under them, and your fall will be great as our Savior speaks
there, Matthew. 7.26, ^7.

The eight, and last means whereby this grace of Christian patience, to bear
If any man lack wisdom (says the Apostle, Iam. 1.5. and by wisdom he means
patience in that place) let him ask of God that gives to all men liberally,
and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. Here is a plain promise you
see. And the Apostle when he had exhorted the Romans, Romans 12.12. to be
patient in tribulation, he adds immediately continuing instant in prayer.
Instant and earnest prayer and continuing in it, is the means to make us
patient in tribulation. So speaking of the complete armor whereby a Christian,
may be made able to bear and stand out in the evil day, he names this as a
principal part of it, Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always (not by fits and starts)
with all prayer, and supplication (according as our own, and the Churches
various necessities shall require) in the spirit (fervently, not formally and
with lip labor only) watching thereunto (against distractions and wandering
thoughts) with all perseverance; holding out, and not giving over, when we
speed not at the first. This was the way whereby Job sought strength to bear
his afflictions, Job 16.20. My friends scorn me: but mine eye pours out
tears unto God. And David when many of his mortal enemies compassed him
about, but I give my self unto prayer, says he, Psalm 109.4 Nay this was the
way, whereby our blessed Savior sought strength to bear his extreme
sufferings, Heb. 5.7. He offered up prayers, and supplications, with strong
crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard
in that he feared; though the cup were not removed, yet strength was given him
to bear it with patience.

Applic.
Let me apply this in a word or two. 1. Would you know the true cause you have
so little patience, surely it is because you do pray so little. 2. Let the
signs God gives us every day of mavelous troublesome times that are at
hand, make us all more frequent, and fervent in prayer. 3. We should call upon
and exhort Gods people to fasting and prayer. Is there any such means either
to stand in the gap, and keep out Gods judgments, or to prepare us with
patience and strength, to bear them as fasting and prayer is? Well take this
for a conclusion to your comfort which you shall read, Act. 2.20, 21. When the
Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, when the darkest,
and saddest times shall come, that can come, yet it shall come to pass, that
whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. He that can
pray shall do well enough.

LECTVRES ON PSALM. LI. 5.
Lecture LV. On Psalm LI. 5. April XXIIII. MDCXXVII.
Behold I was borne (or brought forth) in iniquity; and in sin did my mother
conceive me.
WE have already heard that David in suing unto God for the pardon of his
sins, does make confession of them unto God; And not content to have done it
generally in the 3. verse; he does it in the former verse, in this that I have
now read and in that which follows more fully, and particularly. I have done
this evil that Nathan has charged me with. Yea he amplifieth and aggravateth
his sin, by these three considerations. 1. Of the person against whom he had
sinned, in the fourth verse, Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done
this evil in thy sight. 2. Of the fountain and root whence these his sins
did spring in this verse. 3. Of the knowledge and truth of grace that he had
received from God, before he fell into these sins, in the verse following.

Now for the better opening of the words of this verse, Nota.
(that so the Doctrine contained in it, may more naturally arise) two questions
are to be moved, and resolved concerning this, what David means by the
iniquity and sin that he here complains he was borne, and conceived in.
For the Anabaptists, and such others as gainesay the Doctrine of original sin,
and deny that infants stand guilty of any sin in the sight of God, object two
things against the proof that is brought out of this most pregnant place,
against them.

First, Object. 1
The word iniquity (say they) that David says he was borne in, is not to be
taken properly in this place, for sin but for the punishment of sin; and his
meaning is no more but this; as if he should have said, I was borne in thy
displeasure, and in the punishment which thou did justly inflict upon all
women for the sin of Eve ( Genesis 3.16. I will greatly multiply thy sorrow, and
thy conception, in sorrow thou shall bring forth children) in this punishment,
in this sorrow, was I borne. And two reasons may be pretended for this
interpretation. 1. That the word iniquity and sin is often in Scripture taken
not properly, but by a metonymie for the punishment of sin; as Genesis 19.15.
Least ye be consumed in the iniquity of the city, that is in the punishment of
the city. And Numb. 14.33. Your children shall wander in the wilderness forty
years, and bear your whordomes; that is, the punishment of your whordomes. 2.
That the word Cholel that David here uses, signifies to bring forth with
pain, and trembling, and comes of the root Chol which signifies to sorrow,
and tremble, whereby it may seem that David had in this word respect to the
pains, and sorrows his mother felt in her travel when he was borne, rather
then to any iniquity that himself then stood guilty of.

Answ. 1.
Now for answer unto this cavil I say. First, That though the word iniquity, be
sometimes taken in Scripture not for sin but for the punishment of sin; yet
it follows not, that it is so taken here, but by that that you shall hear
in my further answer to this cavil, and in the handling of the Doctrine, it
shall appear unto you, it cannot be so taken in this place.

2.
Secondly, Though the word Cholel that David uses here do in the primitive
sense signify a bringing forth with sorrow, and trembling, such as women have
in their travel, yet it is far more often and commonly used in the
Scriptures, to express any kind of making or bringing forth of things, even
without such sorrow or pain at all. As Job 26.13. His hand has formed the
crooked serpent. And the son of God speaking of his eternal generation says,
Pro. 8.24, 25. When there was no depth, I was brought forth, before the
mountains I was brought forth. So Deuteronomy. 32.18. Thou have forgotten God that
formed thee. And Psalm. 90.2. Before thou had formed the earth. And when the
birth of man is spoken of, without all reference or respect to the sorrow and
painefullnesse of his birth, Job 15.7. He says, Wast thou made before the
hills? And Esa. 45.10. Woe to him that says to his mother, what have thou
brought forth? So that it may well be that David here speaks of his birth,
without any respect at all to his mothers pains, and sorrows in it.

3.
Thirdly, The iniquity that he speaks of here, he mentions for his further
humiliation before God, that is the scope he aims at, in this place; as we
have heard. Now he would never have mentioned the sorrows, and pains his
mother endured in his birth (as a punishment, and sign of Gods displeasure
upon that sex for the sin of Eve) for to further his humiliation before God, at
this time. The mentioning of those judgments God by Nathan threatened to bring
upon himself, had been much more effectual to that end, then those that were
upon his mother (specially so ordinary, and common to all women as that was)
yet forbeareth he in this Psalm, to speak of them, at all. Nothing but sin
troubled him at this time; he complained not of any punishment, he knew to be
due to sin, but of his sin only.

4.
Fourthly and lastly. The iniquity he speaks of here he confesses unto God,
and craveth mercy of God for the pardon of it, he desires God to wash him
thoroughly, and to cleanse him from it. It is therefore certainly the sin he
was borne in, and not any punishment of sin that he complains of in this
place.

Quest. 2.
The second question (rising from a second objection of the Anabaptists against
this place) is this. Was it not the sin of his parents in begetting and
conceiving of him that he here complains of, rather then any sin of his
own, that he was guilty of in his first conception? And does not the word in
the original imply so much, And in sin did my mother being in heat (of lust
as Genesis 30.38, 39, 41. that which is translated conceiving is in the original
being in heat) conceive me.

Answ.
I answer, no. It was not his parents sins, but his own, that he here
confesses marriage it self is no filthy and sinful estate but reverend and
honorable; according to that speech of the Apostle, Heb. 13.4. Yea it is
commanded of God to them that have not the gift of continency, 1 Cor. 7.2. To
avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have
her own husband. So neither is the use of it in the marriage bed a filthy or
sinful act, but honorable, and undefiled as the Apostle there speaks, Heb.
13 4. Yea commanded also of God, 1 Cor. 7.3 -- 5. And though original
corruption be derived by it unto the child, yet is not the pollution and sin
the parents, so much as the child's own; neither do the parents so much defile
and pollute the child in the begetting and conceiving of him, as the child does
the parents. In which respect there was no such uncleanness by the ceremonial
law imputed to the man or woman, that had known one another in lawful
matrimony as there was to the woman that did bear and bring forth a child,
Levit. 12.2.

Secondly, Admit that his parents had sinned in begetting and conceiving of
Ezekiel. 18.20. The soul that sins it shall die; the son shall not hear the
iniquity of the father. It is therefore his own sin and corruption, that he
bewaileth certainly; and not the sin of his mother, that conceived him.

Now the words of this verse being thus cleared two things are principally to
be observed in them. 1. The doubling of the words of this complaint, he makes
of his natural corruption. I was borne in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me. As if he had said, so soon as I was borne; yea before that, so
soon as I was conceived, or had any being in my mothers womb I was a wretched
sinner, I had in me iniquity and sin, that is all manner of sin, the seeds of
all sin were in me. 2. The word and note of attention, he sets before this
acknowledgement of his original sin, and natural corruption, Behold. As if he
should say, this, this is it that abaseth, and humbles me most of all, that
does much aggravate both my adultery, and my murder that they proceeded from so
filthy and corrupt a fountain; that I have not only thus sinned against thee,
and done this evil in thy sight, but that I have been wholly corrupted from
the very womb of my mother, and brought with me into the world a very fountain
of all sin and corruption.

And the Text being thus opened does offer unto us three special points for
our instruction. First, That the youngest infant is guilty of sin. 2. That the
sin that the infant is guilty of is derived to it by the parents. 3. That this
sin that every infant is guilty of, and which it derived from the parents, is
the chief sin of all others, and that that makes us most odious unto God.

The first Doctrine that we have to learn from hence is this.

That the youngest infant originally, Doct. 17
so soon as it is borne or conceived is guilty of sin in the sight of God, and
deserves to be damned. Every infant is even by nature a filthy loathsome
creature, and in himself by reason of his sin odious unto God.

Now before I come to the proof of this point, three objections must be
answered and removed that may breed in you a prejudice against it.

First, Object. 1
All infants (even the infants of idolaters, and most wicked men) are called
innocents in the holy Scripture. For the Prophet Ier^my speaking of those
infants whom their parents being wretched idolaters, offered in sacrifice to
Baal and Molech says, Ier. 19.4. They have filled this place with the blood of
innocents.

I answer, Answ.
They are so called, not because they were without all sin in the sight of God;
but First, In respect of men that shed their blood for they had deserved Psalm.
105.38. They shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and daughters,
whom they sacrificed to the Idols of Canaan. So the Scripture calls all such
innocents, and their blood innocent blood that men have put to death without
just cause. And not only such as private men have slain so, Pro. 1.11. Let us
lurk privily for the innocent without cause; but even such as the Magistrate
has unjustly put to death, Exodus 23.7. The innocent, and the righteous slay
thou not. And so we say of sundry that have been unjustly condemned, and
executed for murders or robberies that they never committed, that they died as
innocents, though they were otherwise most lewd, and wicked men.

Matthew. 18.2, 3. Jesus calls a little child to him, and sets him in the
midst of them, and said, Verily I say unto you, except ye be converted, and
become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. And
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.20. bids us to be as children in maliciousness. 2. Sin
in them, is but in the seed, or bud, in us, it is grown to further ripeness
and perfection. And it is a greater degree of sin, to break forth into bad
words, and actions, then to have evil thoughts only, Pro. 30.32. If thou have
thought evil, yet lay thy hand upon thy mouth. 3. The sins that we commit,
are in one degree or other, against knowledge. We hold the truth in
unrighteousness, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 1.18. We violently and
unrighteously suppress, and smother the light that God has given us. So do
not infants; of them it is said, Deuteronomy. 1.39. that they have no knowledge
between good and evil.

Object. 2.
Secondly. The infants of the faithful, yea, where but one of the parents is a
believer, are said, not to be unclean but holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your
children unclean, but now they are holy.

Answ.
I answer. They are so called, not because they are without sin, but because
(in the judgment of the Church) they are to be esteemed, not infidels, as
other children of Pagans, but Christians, and believers, and holy, and true
members of the Church of God, even because their parents are believers. Thus
Paul speaks of himself, and the rest of his countrymen, Gal* 2.15. That
they were Jews (that is, members of the true Church) by nature, and not
sinners of the Gentiles. And in this respect also the infants of believing
parents, have two privileges above all other infants.

First. So soon as they are borne, they have title to the seal of Gods
Covenant, Jews. Genesis 17.12. He that is eight days old, shall be circumcised
amongst you. And of the infants of Christians also. The Apostle Peter, when he
had exhorted the three thousand converts, to be baptized, he gives this for
the reason, Acts 2.39 For the promise (whereof baptism is a seal) is unto
you, and to your children; to all your children, not only to the males, but to
the females also; not only to them that were eight days old, but to all. And
why may not the Church deny baptism to any child of a believing parent? Surely
because the Church is bound to esteem every such child, not an infidel, but
rather a believer, and a true Christian. For a Turk or an infidel, the Church
may not baptize. Well, this is (I say) the first privilege that the children
of believing parents have in this life, they have title to the Sacrament of
Baptism, the seal of Gods covenant.

David of his child, though it dyed, when it was but seven days old (and
consequently before it was circumcised, yea though he knew it was begotten in
adultery) 2 Samuel 12.23. I shall go to him, says he. Which he would never
have said, if he had doubted of the salvation of the child. But you will
(happily) reply upon this answer I have given to the second objection. Must the
Church esteem the infants of believing parents, to be holy, if they be not
holy indeed? And if they be holy indeed, as the Apostle calls them, how say
you then in your Doctrine, that every infant is guilty of sin, and deserves to
be damned; that it is a most filthy* and loathsome creature, and odious unto
God? I answer. 1. The Church is bound so to judge of these infants, by reason
of the covenant God has made with the believing parent, which we shall read
of Genesis 17.7. I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed
after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto
thee, and to thy seed after thee. 2. Though the Lord through his free, and
gracious covenant do account, and make them holy, yet are they in themselves,
and by nature, such as the Doctrine speaks of, even most filthy and loathsome
creatures, and odious unto God.

Thirdly, Object. 3
Of some infants it is said, that before they were borne, they were in the
state of grace. For of Jacob God said before he was borne, Jacob have I loved,
Romans 9.11, 13. And of John the Baptist, that before he was borne, he had true
faith in Christ. For as soon as the voice of Maryes salutation sounded in his
mothers ear, he leaped in her womb for joy, Luke 1.44.

I answer. Answ.
That though the Lord in his eternal decree, has purposed to call many
infants out of this cursed estate, and draw them out of this filthy puddle,
that they were plunged into, and do also indeed often execute this his gracious
decree upon them, by working faith, and sanctification in them, through his
immediate power, or by applying Christ, and his merits unto them, yet are they
by nature, such as the Doctrine has described them unto us, even most filthy
and loathsome creatures, and odious unto God.

Let us therefore now see the proof of this Doctrine. 1. By the plain
testimony of the holy Scripture. 2. By the judgments, whereby God has from
heaven revealed his wrath even upon infants for their sin.

And for the first, Proof 1.
we have here David's own testimony, that he was even by nature guilty of sin,
and consequently worthy of eternal death; ye was he (we know) the Elect child
of God. And what infant can be thought to be in better state by nature, then he
was? So speaks the Lord of all men. Genesis 8.21. The imagination of man's heart,
is evil from his youth; or childhood. For the root from whence in the
original the word that is here translated youth, is taken, is used for a babe,
Exodus 2.6. This is that also that Job means, who when he had spoken of man's
birth, he breaks out into these words, Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing
out of an unclean? As if he should have said, It is not possible, but man
should be filthy and unclean, even in his birth. So speaks Solomon, Prove.
22 15. foolishness (which in Solomon's phrase, is nothing else but wickedness
and sin) is bound in the heart of a child, as a fardle or pack on a horse
back, which he can never of himself shake off. And lastly, thus speaks the
Lord of the whole nation of the Jews, which were then the only Church he had
in the World. Esaias 48.8. Thou wast called a transgressour from the very womb.
And as these five places prove, that every infant stands guilty of sin so
soon as it is borne; so this sin it stands guilty of, is such as makes it
odious unto God, as is plain by the Apostle, who speaking of himself, and the
rest of Gods Elect, says Ephe. 2.3. We all were by nature the children of
wrath, as well as others.

Now for the second kind of proofs, Proof 2.
we shall find, that God has been very terrible in his judgments, even upon
infants. See three notable examples of this, 1 Samuel 15.3. God commanded Saul to
slay the very infants and sucklings of the Amalekites, and forbad him to spare,
or show pity to any of them. And Psalm. 137.9. the Lord pronounces him happy,
that shall take the little ones of the Babilonians, and dash out their brains
against the stones. And Genesis 19.25. we shall find that in the destruction of
Sodom, none of the inabitants were spared, no not the infants and sucklings,
but God rained down fire and brimstone even upon them. The like we shall find
in these places also, Numb. 16.27. Eze. 9.6. Josh. 7.24, 25.

If any shall say, Object.
these were the children of most lewd men, Amalekites, Babilonians, Sodomites;
and God forbid but there should be a difference made between our children and
theirs, or that ours should be as odious to God as theirs were.

Answ..
I answer. 1. Many heavy judgments have befallen the infants even of Gods own
people; have not many of them bin born natural fools, or deaf, or blind? as
we see John 9.1. have not many of them been smitten with many grievous and
strange diseases? as David's child was, 2 Samuel 12.15. 2. The infant of a
Christian, yea, the elect infant is by nature no better then the infant of a
Sodomite, as we heard out of Ephesians. 2.3. 3. The sin of those infants that they
stood guilty of, was the cause why the Lord, the righteous judge, did thus
deal with them, Romans 5.12. And he hates sin as much in our infants, as in
theirs, without all respect of persons, Psalm. 5.5.

Object. 2
If any shall say, yet these were but temporal judgments that fell upon those
infants, and do not prove that any sin that is in infants, does make them
odious unto God, or does deserve eternal death, Eccle 9.2.

Answ. 1.
I answer. 1. That even those temporal judgments are in themselves fruits of
the wrath of God, and part of that curse that is due to sin, Ephe. 5.6 And God
even by these judgments upon infants, has reveiled from heaven, that his wrath
is due unto them, Romans 1.18. 2, Upon infants they are more certain evidences
of his wrath against their sin, then upon his people, that are in years. For
to them they are sometimes only for trial, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. Sometimes only as
chastisements, to reform and better them, Ps. 119.67, 71. but they cannot be
so to infants though I deny not but there may be an evasion for infants out of
the cursednes of these judgments, 3. It is evident that God has witnessed his
wrath against the sin of infants, not only by hating their sin, but even their
persons also. Romans 9.11.13. And not only by inflicting temporal punishments
upon them, but even by casting them into hell. For of those that perished in
Sodom and Gomorrah, it is expressly said, Jude 7. that they were not only
consumed with fire and brimstone, but that they suffered the vengeance of
eternal fire. And the Apostle proving infants to be sinners by this argument,
because death reigns over them, Rom 5.14. shows plainly, he means not a
temporal death only, but such as he calls condemnation, ver 16. Such as he
opposes to justification verse 16. and to eternal life, verse 21.

The reasons and grounds of this Doctrine are two.

Reason 1.
First. Every infant so soon as it is borne, stands guilty of the first sin
of Adam, in whom (says the Apostle Romans 5.12. for so is that place to be
rendered) all have sinned. Adam being then not as one particular person, but as
the common stock, and root of all mankind, that that he received by his
creation, he received not for himself alone, but for all mankind; and that
which he lost by his fall, he lost not from himself alone, but from all
mankind. Therefore is this sin imputed unto all mankind, Esa. 43.27.

Reason 2.
Secondly. Every infant has originally from the very birth and conception, a
sinful nature, which consists in three points. 1. They have in them by
nature no seeds, no inclinations unto any thing that is good indeed, I know
(says Paul, Rom 7.18) that in me (that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing.
2 Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our
selves. 2. There is in them a natural untowardnes unto every thing that is
good, yea an averseness from it, and pronesse to shun and dislike it. The
wicked (says David, Ps. 58.3.) are estranged from the womb. Being alienated
(says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4 18.) from the life of God. 3. and lastly. There is
in them a natural pronesse, disposition, and inclination to every thing that
is evil; as there is in the youngest whelpe of a Lion, or of a Bear, or of a
Wolf, unto cruelty, or in the very egg of a cockatrice, before it be
hatched, which is the comparison that the holy Ghost uses, Esa. 59.5. And from
hence it comes that the imagination of man's heart (as the Lord speaks, Genesis
8.11.) is evil from his very youth; and that (as David speakeh Psalm. 58.3.)
men go astray so soon as they be borne.

Use 1.
Now the use that this doctrine serves unto is. First, for confutation of the
Anabaptist, who to maintain his error, that infants should not be baptized,
holds (with the Pelagians of old) 1. that they have no sin. 2. that there is
no Original sin at all. 3. that no sin comes by nature, but it is
learne^ only by example, and imitation of others. 4. that all that die in
their infancy shall certainly go to heaven. Against these damnable errors,
you have heard it evidently proved. 1 That all infants are sinners, and deserve
damnation. 2. That many infants have bin vessels of wrath, and firebrarnds of
hell. 3. That all sin is not learned by example or imitation (for what example
had Cain to teach him to be an hypocrite in Gods service, or to murder his
brother?) but our very nature carries us unto it. Insomuch, as if it were
possible to keep children from ever hearing a lie, or seeing the practice of
any filthiness, or cruelty, yet their very nature (upon occasion offered)
would carry them to these sins.

The second use of this Doctrine is for instruction; Use 2.
to teach us what great need there is, that infants should be baptized; for
this makes greatly for the confirmation of the faith, and comfort of their
parents for the present, and of their own afterward, that as they are by
nature so filthy and loathsome in the sight of God, so the Lord has in the
blood of Jesus Christ (whereof the water in baptism is a sign and seal)
provided a laver to wash and cleanse them in, even the laver of regeneration,
as the Apostle calls it, Tit. 3.5. yea, a fountain opened (as the Prophet
calls it, Zac. 13.1) for sin, and for uncleannes, sufficient to cleanse them
from all this filthiness, and corruption of their nature.

The third use that this Doctrine serves unto, is both for exhortation, and
humiliation also; Use 3.
to persuade us to observe and take notice of the sharp and heavy judgments
that often light upon little ones; yea, to take them to heart, and to be much
affected with them, as with most evident demonstrations of Gods wrath against
sin, even against the sin of our nature. We read of our Savior, that when he
was to cure the man that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech, Mark.
7.34. he sighed to behold that judgment of God, and sign of Gods anger upon
man for sin. How much more does it become us to do so in this case? The Lord
in his judgments upon us, that are of years, may have other ends and respects
(as we heard even now) but in those upon infants, he can have no other (if we
respect the infants themselves, and without consideration of Gods covenant) but
only to make known upon them, his wrath against sin. Gods people were wont in
certain extraordinary cases, to bring their infants and sucklings with them,
and made them to keep fasts, 2 Chronicles. 20.13. Joel 2.16. though these little
ones were most unable, and unfit to do it, that by beholding what was due even
to the poor infants, and what misery they were in, through want of food,
themselves might be more affected with, and humbled for their own sins. And
surely this use should we make of the miseries we see poor infants in
oftentimes. For thus should every one of us reason with our selves, if God be
so angry for the sin of the infant; alas, what measure of wrath is due to me,
that besides the sin of my nature, wherewith I am every whit as much defiled as
it can be, have so many actual sins to answer for, and have sinned in a far
more odious manner, then this infant has done? If this be done to the green
tree (says our Savior Luke 23.31) what shall be done to the dry?

Fourthly and lastly, Use 4.
this Doctrine serves for reproof of such as think it folly to be offended,
or troubled with the sins of little ones, with their lying, or swearing, or
cursing, or profanesse in the time, and place of Gods worship. They are wise
men (say they) that will be troubled with childrens faults. O beloved, the
very original sin of the infant, the sin of his nature, before it does thus
burst forth, deserves damnation (as you have heard) and makes him odious unto
God; how much more will these cursed fruits of the same do it? See in an
example, how odious the sins even of little ones are unto God in those forty
that were devoured by Bears, for mocking of the Prophet. 2 Kin 2.23, 14.

Lecture LVI. On Psalm 51.5. May 1. 1627.
IT follows now that we proceed to the second Doctrine that arises from the
words of this verse; for from this, that David says here, In sin did my mother
conceive me; this Doctrine does arise for our instruction.

That the sin which every infant is guilty of, and whereby it is (by nature)
made so loathsome a creature in the sight of God (as we heard the last day) is
derived unto it from the parents. Doct. 18
The parents infected it. Of the actual sins that men, and women commit, there
may be other causes assigned. 1. Themselves may be said to be the causes of
their actual sins, Iam. 1.14. Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of
his own lust, and enti^ed. 2. The world; that is, the evil examples and
allurements they receive from other men, is a great cause why men are so bad as
they are, 1 John 2.16. The lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, is not of the father, but is of the world. This is plain by the
Prophets complaint. Esa. 6.5. I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell among a
people of unclean lips. As if he should say. How should I. how can I be
better, that live in such an age, among such a people. 3. Satan is a cause of
their sins, men could not be so bad as they are, if they were not led to it by
the devil, if he did not reign in them, if they were not his captives and
slaves. It is he that now (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.2. of his time, and so
may we say of our age, now, and never more then now, he) works in the
children of disobedience. And as he says, ^ Tim. 2.26. They are taken by him
captives at his will; they are wholly at his will and commandment, or else
they would never do as they do. Yet of the Original sin, and natural
corruption that is in infants so soon as they are borne and conceived, no
other cause can be assigned, no root, no fountain but this, that they received
it from their parents. So speaks David here, In sin my mother conceived me.
And Job when he would give the reason, why man, every man, young as well as old,
is not only subject to so many troubles in this life, but also so filthy and
sinful, alleges none but this, Job 14.1. Man that is borne of a woman, he is
born of a woman, and therefore must needs be so. So again, Job 15.14. and 25.4.
And though the mother only be named by Job and David, yet is this corruption
derived to the child, not from the mother only, but from the father as much as
from the mother. In which respect it is said Genesis 5.3. that Adam after his fall
begat a son in his own likeness, after his image; sinful, and corrupt, as
himself was. And the Evangelist making an opposition between the causes, from
whence corruption and grace comes, says John 1.13. the one comes from
blood, and from the will of the flesh, and from the will of man, but the other
comes from God alone. And from hence it has come to pass, that there was
never any that had parents (a father to beget him, and a mother to conceive
him) that was free from this original sin and corruption of nature; no not such
as had the godliest parents that ever lived. Two evident demonstrations there
be for this. 1. That the most holy parents that ever were, have had children
that have bin most ungracious, as Noah Abraham, Isaac, David, Iehoshaphat. 2.
That the best of their children had need of circumcision, Genesis 21.4. which
signifies, the cutting away of the filthy foreskin of their hearts, this
original corruption, as the Prophet expounds it, Ier. 4.4. Insomuch as it
was necessary that our blessed Savior (who could not have been a fit high
Priest for us, if he had not been, even in respect of his humanity, holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, as the Apostle speaks, Heb.
7.26.) it was necessary (I say) that he (though he were very man, and the
son of Adam as well as we, as the Evangelist calls him, Luke 3.38.) yet
should not become man in the same manner, nor be begotten and borne of parents
as we are, but conceived of the holy Ghost, and by him made of the substance of
the blessed Virgin, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 4.4. because otherwise,
though she was a most holy woman, yet could he not have bin free from original
sin.

The reasons and grounds of the Doctrine are two. Reason 1
First, all parents are themselves tainted with sin, they have a poisoned, and
infected nature, and therefore cannot choose but infect the children that are
begotten and conceived by them. As the brood of vipers, toades, and spiders
must needs resemble them, and have poison in them. A corrupt tree (says our
Savior, Mat. 7.18,) cannot bring forth good fruit. Who can bring a clean
thing (says Job 14.4.) out of an unclean? Not one. This reason our Savior
gives, why all that is in man by nature is flesh, that is corrupt, and
sinful, because he is borne of the flesh, that is of corrupt parents, John
3.6. That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh. And that is Jobs meaning, Job
14.4. No man can beget a child that is clean from sin, himself being unclean.

Secondly, Reason 2
Though many parents be themselves holy, and have their hearts purified by
faith, yet do they also infect their children, and derive unto them this
corruption of nature; as Isaac was borne with his foreskin, though his father
were circumcised when he begat him; and as the corn that grows from the
cleanest and purest seed, rises not without straw and chafe. Because we can
derive nothing to our children in their natural birth, but that that was our
own, and was natural unto us, as we heard of Adam, Genesis 5.3. He begat a son
in his own likeness, after his image. Now that grace that is in us, is not our
own, not natural unto us, but wholly from God, and supernatural, Iam. 1.17.
Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from
the father of lights.

Now before I come to the use, that this doctrine serves for, I must first
prevent the abuse that may be made of it. For, from this Doctrine it may seem
to follow. 1. That such as are children (of what age soever they be) are not
much to be blamed for any of their sins, seeing their parents have bin the
first authors of them. 2. That they have no great cause to reverence, and
respect their parents, that have done them so much wrong, as to poison and
infect them with so corrupt a nature. But they that gather such conclusions
from the Doctrine do not make a right use of it, but abuse it rather.

For first. Wicked children may not extenuate their sins, nor lay all the blame
Ezekiel. 18.2. The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are
set on edge; nor say to their parents when they reprove them for any of their
sins, I pray whence had I this corruption of my nature? may I not thank you
for it? Woe be to him (^aith the Lord Esa. 45.10.) that says unto his father,
what begettest thou? or to the woman, what have thou brought sorth? For 1. they
are themselves the authors of their own destruction. Hosea 13.9. O Israel thou
have destroyed thy self. And Ezekiel 18.20. The soul that sins, it shall
dye, the father shall not bear the iniquity of the son. The sins for which
they perish, and are plagued of God, are their own, nothing is so properly
their own, as their sins are, Pro. 1.31. They shall eat the fruit of their own
way. Yea, this very original sin, and corruption of nature that is in them
(though they received it from their parents) is their own, Iam. 1.14. Every
man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust. 2 They have by their
actual sins, made themselves much worse then they were, when they came from
their parents, Mat. 23.15.

Secondly. Children may not take occasion hereby to despise their parents,
their hearts and to be every way dutiful unto them for all this. Four
examples I will give you for this. 1. Solomon showed a great deal of duty, and
reverence to his mother, 1 King. 2.19. 1. He rose up to meet her, 2. He bowed
himself unto her, 3. He set her upon his right hand. And yet he knew well,
what she had done when she was Vriahs wife. It is no disparagement to the
greatest that is, to show reverence to their parents, though they be never so
much inferiors in estate, and degree unto themselves. 2. Sem, and Iaphet are
blessed for this, because they would not behold the nakedness of their father
when he lay like a drunken beast) uncovered in his tent; and Ham their brother
is cursed of God, because he did otherwise, Genesis 9.22, 23. A child is bound
(upon pain of Gods curse) to be unwilling to hear, or see, or know any thing
by his parents, that may diminish that reverent opinion he ought to bear them
in his heart. 3. Judah was extremely importunate to have his brother Benjamin
back again out of Egypt, upon this ground especially, Genesis 44.31. that else he
should bring his fathers gray hairs with sorrow to the grave, which he
protests, verse 34. he could not endure to see. It should trouble a child, to
do any thing that might grieve his parents and he is bound in conscience, to
do what he can, to keep his parents from sorrow and grief. 4 Though David
complain here of the corruption of nature, he received from his parents, yet
yet did not that minish at all, his dutiful respect unto them, but in the time
of his own greatest distresses, he had always a great care to relieve, and
provide for them, as we shall see 1 Samuel 22.3. Let my father and my mother I
pray thee (says he to the King of Moab) come forth, and be with you, till I
know what God will do for me. Every child is bound to relieve and provide for
his parents if they stand in need, and to account them worthy of double honor,
even that way also. And no marvel, for children have received such benefits
from their parents as by all the duty they can perform to them they are never
able to requite. Let children (says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.4.) learn first to
show piety at home, and to requite their parents: for that is good and
acceptable before God. Mark 1 kindness and bounty is to be showed to our
parents first before all others. 2 He calls this piety, religion, a service
done to God. 3. This is a chief good work that God delights in. 4 This is
but a requital of the good, we have received from them. Yea certainly it is a
requital, far short of the benefits we have received from them.

Let me show you in a word or two the benefits that every one of you, have
received from your parents, even you whose parents, have been never so poor.

Psalm. 112.2. The generation of the upright shall be blessed. And Pro. 20.7.
The just man walks in his integrity: his children are blessed after him.
Psalm. 103.17. The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon
them that fear him; and his righteousness unto childrens children. And this
blessing that thou art borne to, by being the child of Godly parents, reaches
not only to temporal and outward things; according to that speech of David,
Psalm. 37.25. I have not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging
their bread. But even to those that are spiritual and eternal. And that not
only in this respect, that by this means thou were borne in the Church of God
(which is no small privilege, Psalm. 87.4, 5.) and did enjoy the means of
saving grace, the Word and Sacraments (a high privilege certainly, Romans 3.2.)
had the benefit of a religious education, of the prayers and good example of
thy Christian parents (a means of great efficacy and power, Pro. 31.1, 2.) but
in this respect principally, that by this means thou may have more hope to
obtain saving grace and eternal life (if the fault be not in thy self and if
thou apply thy self to the means of grace) then any other, even for this
cause, because thou art the child of such parents as fear God. For thou have
the promise and covenant of God for this. Genesis 17.7. I will be thy God, and
the God of thy seed. And Esa. 44.3. I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and
my blessing upon thin offspring. So as thou may in thy prayers, put the Lord
in mind of the promise, made to thy parents, and even make claim unto it as
Moses did, Deuteronomy. 9.27. Remember thy servants Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
look not to the stubbornness of this people. And Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 6.16. O
Lord God of Israel keep with thy servant David my father, that which thou have
promised him. And this is the benefit thou have received from thy parents if
they be godly.

But admit thy parents be not religious, yet do thou receive that benefit by
Esa. 1.2. I have nourished, and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me) but this I say. 1. Thou had thy life and being from them, in this
world, without which thou could never have come to eternal life, in the
world to come; according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.46. that was not
first which is spiritual, but that which is natural, and afterward that which
is spiritual. That is the end, that God aimed at in giving us life, and
breath, and all things (says the Apostle, Acts 17.25, 27.) that we might seek
the Lord. 2. Thou have from thy parents thy well being in this life. For as the
blessing of well being, and living comfortably in this world, is promised to
them especially that are dutiful to their parents; according to that Ephesians.
6.2, 3. Honor thy father and mother: that it may be well with thee, and that
thou may live long on the earth; So has God given power and authority to
thy parents (how poor soever they be, yea though they have no grace, nor can
pray for themselves) to bless thee, that is to pronounce and bestow this
blessing upon thee. And the blessing that they (from the comfort they receive
by thy dutiful carriage toward them) shall give thee, God will ratify in
heaven; For so are the words of the fifth commandment to be read, Exodus 20.12.
Honor thy father and thy mother* that they may prolong thy days, in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Now having thus prevented the abuse of this Doctrine, let us come to show the
right uses that it serves unto; And those are two. 1. For humiliation. 2. For
exhortation.

And the use of humiliation concerns 1 all of us in general; Use 1.
2 such of us as are parents.

For the first, This Doctrine teaches us, that none of us have cause to glory
Pet. 1.24. All flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man, is as the flower
of grass, the grass withers and the flower thereof sadeth away. 2. We have
received (as we have heard in this Doctrine) that contagion and corruption of
nature from our parents (how noble soever they were) as makes us base and vile
in Gods eyes, and will make us miserable for ever, if we be not borne again,
verily verily (says Christ to Nicodemus, John 3.3. and that which he says to
Nicodemus, he says to every soul that is here) I say unto you, except a man
be borne again, he can never see the kingdom of God. If we get not a better
birth, then we had from our parents, it may be said of us as it is said of
Judas, Matthew. 26.24. It had been good for us if we had never been borne. 3.
and lastly, The greatness of thy birth and parentage through thy corruption
makes thee more incapable of grace and salvation, then other men are, that are
not so nobly borne as thou art. You see your calling, brethren, (says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.26. and surely so may we now) how that not many great men,
not many noble are called. Even greatness of birth, and nobility is a bar
oft-times to keep men from salvation and life eternal; though (blessed be
God) some great men are called, yet they are but few. O then the madness of
them that rest, and glory in their first birth, in this that they were borne of
such parents, and never seek to be borne again, to be borne of God. That
receive honor one of another (as our Savior speaks, Ioh. 5.44, glory in the
titles of Gentlemen, and Squires. etc.) and seek not the honor, that comes
from God alone. Why what is that honor that comes from God? Whom does he
account to be honorable? I answer 1. 1 Samuel 2.30. They that honor God them
will God honor. 2. They that are Gods favorites, Esa. 43.4. Since thou wast
precious in my sight, thou have been honorable. 3. They that love the Word
and obey it, Acts 17 11. They of Berea were more noble then they of
Thessalonica in that they received the Word with all readiness of mind.

A foolish son (says Solomon, Pro. 10.1.) is the heaviness of his mother; and
17.25. A foolish son is a grief to his father, and bitterness to her that
bare him. Yea certainly it ought to be so, we should bewail it before God. 1.
In respect to our children themselves. For the root from whence all this their
lewdness springs, they had it from us. We were they that first infected and
poisoned them. If any parents should see their child loathsomely consumed with
the French disease which he had received from them in his birth, would it not
(think you) be a matter of much shame and humbling to them to behold it? If
any of us in the time of the great plague should (at unawares) have brought the
infection into our house, and set it upon all our children would not this have
been a mavelous affliction unto us? And yet we have all done worse to our
children then so; we have set upon them a far worse more dangerous, more
deadly infection (we know) then either the French disease, or the pestilence,
They endanger but the body and this mortal life, these the souls of our
children everlastingly. And shall not this then be a matter of shame and
humbling before God? 2. In respect unto God. The Lord was angry with the
Serpent and laid his curse upon it, because it was but an instrument used by
Satan, for the corrupting of our first parents, though it were no cause at all
of it, Genesis 3.14. And may not the Lord much more be angry with us, and lay his
curse upon us, that have not only been the instruments to convey this cursed
poison and corruption of nature into our children, but the principal agents,
and causes of it?

Lecture LVIII. On Psalm 51.5. May 22. 1627.
Follows the second use that this Doctrine serves unto, which is the use of
exhortation, Use 2.
to exhort, and stir us up that are parents, to do the uttermost of our
endeavor to work grace in our children, and so to cure that deadly wound,
that we have given them, and to preserve them from perishing by that poison,
and infection that we have conveyed into them. Now for the better enforcing of
this so necessary an exhortation. 1. I will give you certain motives, that may
provoke us all to this care. 2 I will show you the means that we must use, to
this purpose. And for the motives they are of three sorts: 1. Some of them
respect our children and our duty toward them, 2. Some of them our selves, and
our own comfort, 3. Some of them concern our duty toward God, and the
respect we should have unto his glory. Of the first sort of motives, there are
two principally.

First, First sort of Motives.
Our love to our children binds us to it. Nature moves us to love them, and
has given bowels of pity and compassion toward them, when we see them in any
misery. Insomuch, as the Lord has been pleased to set forth his mercy and
compassion toward his children by this. By the compassion of Esa. 49.15. Can a
woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son
of her womb? And by the compassion of a father. Psalm. 103.13. Like as a father
pittieth his children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him. He is worse
then a beast that loves not his children and grieveth not to see them in
misery. Lam. 4.3. Even the sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to
their young ones. And the Apostle teaches us, Romans 1.31. that they that are
without this natural affection have extinguished in themselves the very light
of nature, and are in Gods just judgment given up unto a reprobate mind. And
what love can we bear to our children if we have no care of their souls? the
nature of true Christianity is to seek the good of their souls whom we love,
Charity edifieth, 1 Cor. 8.1. See how Abraham expressed his love to Ishmael,
Genesis 17.18. O that Ishmael might live in thy sight. Thus did Solomon's parents,
Pro. 4.3, 4. I was my fathers son tender and only beloved in the sight of my
mother, He taught me and said unto me, Let thine heart retain my words; keep
my commandments and live. Nay this is the only way to express true love to
their bodies and their outward estate also. No lands or possessions we can
leave th^^, can give us that assurance that they shall live comfortably even in
this life, as this will do, if we can be a mean to breed saving grace in their
hearts. For 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness has the promises even of this life.

Secondly, Admit we were not bound to love them above others, yet are we bound
in justice to make them amends for the wrong we have done them. Exodus 21.19. He
that smote him shall pay for the loss of his time, and shall cause him to be
thoroughly healed. How much more are we bound, to take care that our own
children may be thoroughly healed of that wound that we have given them in their
souls, of that filthy disease that we have infected them with?

Now for the motives that concern our selves, Second sort of Motives
and our own comfort they are three principally.

First, It will be a matter of singular comfort unto us, to see the corruption
of their nature healed, and saving grace wrought in them, specially if it be by
our Ye are our glory and joy, says Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 2 20. I have not greater joy
(says the Apostle, 3 Ioh. 4.) then to hear that my children walk in the
truth. But this must needs be much more comfort to a parent to see this in his
own child. A wise son (says Solomon, Prove. 10.1.) makes a glad father And
23.24, 25. The father of the righteous, shall greatly rejoice, and he that
begets a wise child, shall have joy of him, thy father and thy mother shall
be glad, and she that bare thee shall rejoice.

A wise son (says Solomon, Prove. 15.20.) makes a glad father. How? by his
dutiful and respectfull carriage toward him; this is his meaning there, as
appears by the last words of the verse, but a foolish man despises his
mother. Se this in the sons of Isaac Esau cared not for grieving his parents,
by matching with the daughters of Heth, but Jacob did, Genesis 26.34, 35. and
27.46. See it also in the sons of Jacob, of all his sons, Joseph that had most
grace, was also the most loving and dutiful child unto him. Genesis 45.11.
This will make a man love him dearly, that otherwise was a mere stranger unto
him, if he were the means to win him to God. As we see in the affection of
the Galathians toward Paul, Galat. 4.15. I hear you record, that if it had
bin possible, you would have plucked out your own eyes, to have done me good.

Abraham, Genesis 18.19. of Joshua, Josh. 24 15. of Zacheus, Luke 19.9. of the
Nobleman of Capernaum, John 4.53. of Cornelius, Acts 10.2. of Lydia, Acts
16.15. of the Iaylour, Acts 16.33, 34. of Crispus the chief ruler of the
Synagogue, Acts 18.8. Therefore the Lord in his law forbade any Proselite, to
be admitted to the passover (though he were himself circumcised, and did
outwardly profess the faith) unless all the males in his house were
circumcised also; and did profess the faith as well as himself. Exodus 12.48.
And in the condition of that promise he makes to his people, for delivering
them out of the captivity, which he foretells he would bring them into for
their sins, he requires not only that they themselves should return unto the
Lord, and obey his voice, but their children also. Deuteronomy. 30.2, 3. If thou shall
return unto the Lord thy God, and shall obey his voice, thou and thy children,
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, then the Lord thy God will turn
thy captivity, etc. As if he should say, Thou do not turn to the Lord thy
self unfeinedly, with all thy heart, unless thy care be, that thy children
may do so also. Bat (alas) if that law were now in force, that none should be
admitted to the Lords Supper, that had any in their family, that did not make
at the least an outward profession of religion; how few communicants should we
have? If none may be accounted unfeinedly religious themselves, whose children
and servants do not live in an outward conformity and obedience to the Word;
how few sound-hearted Christians will there be found in this age?

The third sort of motives.
The third and last sort of motives, do concern our duty to God, and the
respect we should have unto his glory, and they are two principally.

Ezekiel. 16 20. Thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou have borne unto me, thou
have taken and sacrificed. And as we have begotten and borne them for him, so
has he charged us, to educate and bring them up for him. And that with such a
charge, as the Prophet tells Ahab in a parable, that he had received for the
keeping of a man committed to his trust in the battle. 1 Kings 20.39. If by
any means he be missing, thy life shall be for his life. If the child's soul
perish (through the parents default, whom God put in trust to keep, and look
to it) the parents soul must dye for it. For this is the righteous sentence of
God, against them whom he has charged with the souls of others, Ezekiel. 3.18.
He shall dye in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hand. If
any shall object, that that is spoken of the charge God has given to Prophets,
and Ministers, concerning their flocks, not of that that he has given to
parents, concerning their children. I answer That every parent is as deeply
charged by God, with the souls of his children, as any Pastor is with the
souls of his flock, and more deeply too. You call our congregations that we
are set over, our charge; and you say well, for so they are; and you can cry
shame of us, if we either by idleness, or worldliness, show our selves
careless of our charge; and you have indeed just cause to do so. But in the
mean time you forget that your children, and family, are your charge also, you
make no scruple of neglecting all duty, all care of the souls of your own
charge. Know you therefore for certain, that you are as much, yea much more
charged with the souls of your families, and of your children especially, then
any Pastor is with the souls of his flock. And hearken to your charge I pray
you. 1. You are as often, and as expressly charged to use the means to save
your childrens souls, and to breed grace in them, as any Minister is, Exodus
13.8. Thou shall show thy son the meaning, the end, and use of the Sacrament
of the Passover, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. These words which I command thee this day, thou
shall teach them diligently to thy children Psalm. 78.5. He established a
testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel, which he commanded our
fathers, that they should make them known unto their children. Ephesians. 6 4. Ye
fathers bring up your children in the nurture, and admonition of the Lord. No
Minister is more straightly charged of God, to teach and catechize his flock,
then you are to instruct your children. 2. Parents stand obliged to their
children, by more and stronger bonds, then any Pastor can be to his flock, as
we have heard in the first sort of motives. 3. Parents have more means and
opportunities, to prevail with their children, then any Pastor can have to do
good upon his flock. The interest they have in their childrens love and
affection, is a great matter; and so is the advantage they may take of their
childrens tender years; and so is their continual conversing with them; and
so is their authority also. None have such opportunities to instruct, and bring
others to goodness, as parents have. This was that that good Hezechiah meant
in his prayer, Esa. 38.18, 19. The grave cannot praise thee, death cannot
celebrate thee, The living, the living he shall praise thee (and who among all
the living?) the father to the children shall make known^ thy truth. In which
respect we have seen in those eight examples that I mentioned unto you, how
soon godly masters of families have prevailed with all that were under them,
to bring them unto an outward profession, and conformity in religion. And
Joshua is bold, ^4.15. to undertake for himself, and his house, that they
shall serve the Lord. Some might have said to him, soft Ioshuah, speak this
for thy self and that is well too; Nay says he, and that before all the
people, I will undertake this also for my whole house. And in this respect also
it is, that the childrens sins are said to be a blemish, and reproach to the
parents, Prove. ^8.7. Yea the Lord does often impute the sins of the children unto
the parents, and lays them to their charge, 2 Chronicles. 22.3. Ahaziah was a
wicked man, for Athaliah was his mother. And the Apostle commands, that such
only should be admitted to the ministry, as govern well their own houses, and
keep their children in subjection. 1 Timothy 3.4, 5. as have faithful children,
not accused of riot, or unruly. Tit. 1.6. which he would not have done, if
parents were not chargable with their childrens sins, if they were not a
chief cause of them; if it lay not much in their power, to prevent the
ungraciousnesse of their children. Let us all that are parents seriously think
of this Motive, namely how God has charged us with our childrens souls; and
consider that it will be a most heavy reckoning, that we must make unto God
for them, if any of them shall perish through our default. And (on the other
side) it will be a matter of unspeakable comfort to us at that day, if we can
be able to say of our children unto the Lord, as our blessed Savior speaks,
Ioh. 17.12. Those that thou gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost.

Josh. 2.24, 25. We have done it (set upon this altar) for fear of this thing,
saying, in time to come your children might speak to our children, saying,
what have you to do with the Lord God of Israel? So shall your children make
our children cease from fearing the Lord. Concerning which you must understand,
that there is no man does so much desire to have a posterity, and to provide
for posterity as the Lord does. And as it is accounted a great honor to a man
to have a great posterity, Pro. 17.6. Childrens children are the crown of old
men. So is this spoken of as a great honor to Christ, that he shall have a
great posterity, Esa. 53.8. Who shall declare his generation? And verse 10.
When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin he shall see his seed. And
surely this is the means, whereby the Lord may have a seed, and posterity
raised and preserved; this is the means to derive religion unto posterity,
when Parents are not only religious themselves, but are careful to provide
that their children may be so also. This is the Seminary of Gods Church. This
was the cause of that commandment, Deuteronomy. 4.9. Take heed to thy self and keep
thy soul diligently, left thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen,
and lest they depart from thy heart, all the days of thy life, but teach them
thy sons and thy sons sons. This is noted by the Prophet, Mal. 2.15. to have
been the cause why the Lord at the first institution of marriage appointed but
one woman for one man, and did so restrain promiscuous lust that he might
seek a seed of God; that is, that he might provide for the continuance of his
Church. And this is made by the Prophet, Psalm 22.29, 30. one principal end
God has respect unto in converting of us Gentiles, unto the Gospel, and men
of all sorts among us poor and rich that our seed might serve him, and might
be accounted unto the Lord for a generation; that God might have a posterity,
and a people to serve him when we are gone.

So that to conclude the motives, if either we respect our children, or our own
comfort or the glory of God, we must be careful to do our best endeavor that
the corruption of nature, that we have conveyed into them may be healed, and
that saving grace may be wrought in their hearts.

Lecture LIX. On Psalm 51.5. May 29. 1627.
NOw it follows that we proceed unto the Means that God has in his Word
directed parents to use, Means.
for the saving of their childrens souls. And those are five principally.

First, If we desire to save our children, and to heal their natures, we must
Exodus 20.12. this is made the sum of all the duties the child owes to his
parents, Honor thy father, and thy mother, because this is the chief duty of
all others, yea this is the root, and fountain of all other duties, a child
can perform. If he do not in his heart honor and reverence them, he can do no
duty to them well. A son honors his father (says the Lord, Mal. 1.6.) if
I be a father where is mine honor? And Deuteronomy. 27.16. Cursed be he that sets
light by his father or mother. It is not sufficient for a child to love his
parents, but he must also (out of this inward reverence and honor he bears
them in his heart) stand in awe of them, and be afraid to offend them. Levit.
19.3. Ye shall fear every man his mother and his father. See how fearful
Jacob was to grieve or offend his father, though he were an old blind man, Genesis
27.12. My father will peradventure feel me, and I shall seem to him as a
deceiver, and I shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing. And no marvel
though this honor and reverence be due to the parent; For our parents by being
the means and instruments of our being, are unto us in Gods stead, and (as his
lieftenants) have had his power communicated unto them (for he only is
properly and absolutely our father, and the author of our being, Mat. 23.9.)
And in this respect that which the Apostle speaks of husbands, 1 Cor. 11.7.
and so of all superiors may be said of them, they bear the image and glory of
God. In honoring them we honor God, in despising them we despise the Lord.

Now this authority and pre-eminence that God has given us over our children,
we must be careful to maintain, we must take heed we loose not this honor
and inward reverence that is due unto us from them. That which the Lord
requires of a minister toward his slock, Tit. 2.15. that he should speak and
exhort, and rebuke with all authority, and see that no man despised him; He
should take heed, that he do not by his looseness either in life or doctrine,
loose his honor and authority in the hearts of his people; for if he do there
will be little hope his doctrine shall ever do good, be his gifts never so
excellent. That is every whit as much required of parents toward their
children; and to every parent the Lord Likewise says maintain thine
authority, take heed thy children despise thee not. We shall find it noted by
the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.4. for a great blemish in a Christian, and such a one as
(be his gifts otherwise never so excellent) makes him incapable of the honor
of the ministry if he cannot rule in his own house, if he keep not his
children in subjection. Every father must be a ruler in his own house, every
child must be kept in subjection. Our blessed Savior was subject unto his
parents, Luke 2.51. Yet his father Joseph was but a poor carpenter, and his
mother so poor that she could get no better room in Bethlem then a stable to
be brought to bed in. It is not sufficient for you that are parents to advise,
and wish and admonish your children to leave any lewd course, you see them to
hold ( Ely did so much. 1 Samuel 2.23, 24. and yet we know God was highly
offended with him, because he did not enough) parents must do more then so,
they must with authority charge and command and compel them to do it. I know
(says the Lord of Abraham, Genesis 18.19) that he will command his childen, to
keep the way of the Lord. And Deuteronomy. 32.46. Ye shall command your children to
observe, and do all the words of this Law, and I charged every one of you
(says the Apostle. 1 Thessalonians. 2.11.) as a father does his children. If parents
maintain not this authority, if they become haile-fellow well met, with their
children, if they loose their honor and reverence in their children hearts (as
certainly now adays most have done) 1. They shall dishonor their head (as
the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 11.4.) the dishonor and contempt reaches unto
God, whose Image they bear, whose person they represent, as we have heard. 2.
They undo their children, and disable them from profiting, by any means they
shall use for the reforming of them, or saving of their souls.

Quest.
Surely this were an excellent thing (will you say) if parents could maintain
their authority, and honor in the hearts of their children; but how may this
be done? This is such an age, as there is little or no possibility of it?

Answ.
I answer. It is true, that this falls out sometimes through the just
judgment of God, that do parents what they can, some children will be
stubborn, and rebellions, sons of Belial, that will bear no yoke. It is
foretold by the holy Ghost, 2 Timothy 3.2. as one of the chief mischiefs and
diseases, that should reign and rage in these last days, and should make
these times so perilous, that men should be disobedient to parents. It cannot
be avoided, it must be so, that the Scripture may be fulfilled. And it is
foretold as a sign and forerunner that does presage the ruin of a state and
nation. Esa. 3.5. The child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient,
and the base against the honorable. Yet it is also certain, that parents
themselves are (for the most part) the cause why they have no more honor, and
reverence in the hearts of their children; when they maintain not, but loose
that authority that God has given them over their children. And that two ways.

Solomon by the spirit tells us, Prove. 11.16. that a gracious woman retains
honor, and that that is there said of a woman, even of a mother, may likewise
be said of a gracious father, he retains honor. The true fear of God will
procure reverence, and esteem to a man, even in the hearts of such as have no
grace in them. Mark. 6.20. Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man,
and an holy, and he observed him. For 1. this image of God carries such a
Majesty in it, as a man cannot choose but honor it, in whomsoever he sees it;
It is called therefore by the Apostle, the spirit of glory, 1 Pet. 4.14.2
Besides, the Lord has bound himself by promise, to give honor to them that
honor him. 1 Samuel 2.30. them that honor me, I will honor. If any man serve
me (says our Savior, John 12.26.) him will my father honor. Certainly, if
parents did fear and honor God in their hearts, and express in their whole
conversation, their children must needs honor them, they could not despise
them. On the other side, if parents fear not God themselves, their children
cannot honor them. If children see their parents to be irreligious, malicious
against religion, filthy and drunken persons, how can they honor them? I know
they should be unwilling to see any such thing in their parents, they should
with Sem, and Iaphet, cast their mantle over them, but it is not possible for
them to do it. That which is said of Jerusalem, may be said of all men, Lam.
1.8. All that honored her, despise her, because they have seen her
nakedness. They that thus see the nakedness of them, whom by nature they
ought most to honor, cannot choose but despise them. I told you, all parents
do bear the image of God, but these foul sins do so deface it, as men can
discern no glory in it, men cannot honor it. God has said, they that despise
me, shall be lightly esteemed. 1 Samuel 2.30. And when God will have men to be
despised, when he powers contempt upon them, when he says of any as he does
of Ninivie, Nah. 3.6. I will cast abominable filth upon thee, and make thee
vile, who can then honor them in their hearts? And this is one cause why most
parents have no reverence in their childrens hearts.

Secondly. Another is this, because they did neglect to keep their children
The fathers of our flesh (says the Apostle, Heb. 12.9.) corrected us, and we
gave them reverence. As if he had said; If they had not corrected us, we
should not have reverenced them so much. And it is expressly noted for the
cause why David lost his honor in the heart of his son Adoniah, 1 Kings 1.6.
His father had not displeased him at any time, not so much as in saying, why
have thou done so?

I grant that those parents govern best, that can maintain their authority,
and keep their children in awe with little or no sharpness and severity; and
many parents are too apt to offend in too much rigor this way; else would not
the Apostle have given this charge twice unto parents, Ephesians. 6.4. Colos. 3.21.
Ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath, exasperate them not. But this
is also certain, that the best children when they are young, are of a servile
disposition, more moved with fear then love. The best man's heir, as long as
he is a child (says the Apostle Gal. 4.1.) differs nothing from a servant,
though he be Lord of all. And Solomon observes, Prove. 29.19. that a servant
will not be corrected by words. No parent may hope to weaken and destroy the
corruption that is in his child's heart, though he teach him never so well, and
use all the allurements he can, to draw him to goodness, if he do not also
correct him, and use the rod sometimes. The Lord himself who is both the
wisest, and the best father, and who loves his children a thousand times more
then any of us can love ours he takes this course with his children, yea,
resembles himself therein unto all wise parents, Deuteronomy, 8.5. Consider in thine
heart, that as a father chasteneth his son, so the Lord God chasteneth thee.
And Heb. 12.6, 7. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son
whom he receives. If you endure chastening, God deals with you as with
sons, for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not? This is a special
means commended to us by the holy Ghost, and sanctified to this end, even to
abate the strength of natural corruption in children, and to make them capable
of saving grace. And therefore it is to be observed in the law, that no child
was to be reputed graceless, and past hope, till he had showed himself, not
only unteachable, but incorrigible also, till his parents had used means to
reform him, not only by counsel, instruction, and reproof, but by
correction, and chastisement also, and all in vain; That would not obey the
voice of his father, nor the voice of his mother, and that when they have
chastened him, will not hearken unto them. Deuteronomy. 21.18. He that spares the
rod (says Solomon, Prove. 13.24) hates his son, but he that loves him,
chasteneth him betimes. Thou say it is nothing but love that makes thee to
bear with thy child; and would you not have me love my child say thou?
Alas, who could find in their heart to beat so sweet a child? But the holy
Ghost says thou lie, it is not love indeed, it is hatred. We love not our
children, we hate them, if we correct them not; nay we love them not, we
hate them if we correct them not betimes, while they are such pretty ones.
Again, Prove. 19.18. Chasten thy son while there is hope (that is, while he is
young, then there is great hope of doing him good by it, and small hope
afterward, if it be neglected then. O but thou will say, I cannot endure to
hear him cry; But what says the holy Ghost in the next words?) and let not
thy soul spare for his crying. It is a strange thing to observe, how the holy
Ghost speaks of the efficacy, and fruits of this, and how he meets with
all excuses that foolish parents are wont to pretend for the neglect of it.
Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child (says Solomon, Prove. 22.15.) but
the rod of correction will drive it far from him. But would you have me
cruel to mine own child say thou? Nay says the holy Ghost, this is no
cruelty, thou art unmercifull to thy child, if thou do not correct him. Prove.
23.13. Withold not correction from thy child, for if thou beatest him with
the rod, he shall not dye. He will dye, he will perish if thou correct him not,
and art not thou cruel if thou will not do what thou can to keep thy child
from perishing? O but thou will say, alas, childrens faults are nothing, their
stubbornness, lying, cursing, swearing, profanes^e. But what says the holy
Ghost, Prove. 23.14. Thou shall beat him with the rod, and deliver his soul
from hell. He will go to hell, if thou let him do what he list, thou may
keep him from hell by correcting him. O but this were the way to make my child
hate me, yea, and to make him a dullard, so as I should never have comfort of
him. No (says the holy Ghost) there is no such danger in it, Prove. 29 17.
Correct thy son, and he shall give thee rest, yea, he shall give delight unto
thy soul.

Applic.
To conclude this first means. O that parents would see their sin in the
neglect of this. 1. They loose that inward honor, reverence, and subjection
also, that their children own unto them. 2. They spoil and undo their
children, and make themselves the authors of all their ungraciousnesse. For the
best natured child in the World, if he be not kept in awe, if he be suffered
to do what he list, must needs run riot, Prove. 29.15. A child left to
himself, brings his mother to shame; yea, and his father too; though the
mother be there only named, because she usually is most too blame in this
kind. 3. They dishonor God, and quite pervert his ordinance. For whereas by
Gods ordinance, their children should honor them, they honor their children,
as the Lord told Ely, 1 Samuel 2.29. Thou honor thy sons above me. And
whereas by Gods ordinance, their children should fear them, and be afraid to
displease them, they are afraid to displease their children, as the holy Ghost
says of David, 1 Kin. 1.6. he durst not displease his son Adoniah, no not so
much as by a cross word, or by saying unto him, why have thou done so?

Lecture LX. On Psalm 51.5. June 12. 1627.
Means 2.
THe second means all parents must use to destroy corruption of nature in their
children, and to breed grace in them is Instruction. We heard in the motives,
that parents are as expressly, and as often, and as straightly charged by God,
to teach their children, as any minister is to teach his flock. Yea, this
domestical, and parently instruction God has appointed, and sanctified for a
special means to propagate religion, and to restrain and weaken the
corruption of nature, and to prepare the heart, and make it more capable of
grace. According as we heard from that speech of Hezekiah. Esa. 38.19. The
living, the living, be shall praise thee, as I do this day, the father to the
children shall make known thy truth. Four ways there be, whereby you that
are parents may, yea must do this.

Solomon says when he was young and tender his father taught him, Pro. 4.3.4.
Yea that his mother did so too, Pro. 31.1. And he often puts Gods people in
mind, not only of the instruction and charge they received from their
fathers, but also of the law or doctrine of their mothers, Pro. 1.8.6.20. which
shows plainly, it was the practice of Gods Church then, that even mothers
were teachers of their children; even when they were very young and under their
government, they were wont to teach them good things. Yea there is an express
commandment for this, not only that we should teach our children, but that we
should teach them even when they are very young. Teach a child in his way,
says Solomon* Pro. 22.6. that is, that way that is fit for him, according to
his capacity, as he is able to receive it, by a little at once, as you pour
liquor into narrow mouthed bottells. As you do when first you begin to feed
their bodies with the spoone, so must you do when first you begin to feed their
souls with instruction.

Secondly, You must betimes acquaint them with the practice of religion, as
Mat. 21.15. that the little children had learned of their parents, to sing
Hosanna part of the 118. Psalm to the praise of Christ. Yea more then this,
parents should endeavor to restrain their children from evil and to breed in
them a conscience of sin even while they are very young. You know the fourth
commandment enjoyneth us, that not our selves only rest from all our own
works on the Sabbath but that our children do so too, Exo. ^0.10. Ezekiel
professes unto God, Ezekiel. 4 14 that from his childhood (from his infancy as
some read it) he had not eaten any thing that Gods law had forbidden. His
parents had taught him even then (and yet then we know the appetite to meat is
most strong, and unruly) to make conscience of it. Parents therefore must join
instruction with corrections, that may breed in their children a knowledge and
conscience of the sin for which they correct them. Reproves (or corrections)
for instruction (says Solomon, Pro. 6.23.) are the way of life. Without
instruction, correction will do little good. And one fault amended by a child
out of conscience, that it is a sin, is worth the amending of an hundred out of
the fear of the rod only. That which David says of Gods corrections, may
fitly be applied to this, Psalm. 94.12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest
O Lord, and teach him out of thy law. Few or none, are the better even for
the Lords rods, if they be corrected only by him, if they be not instructed
also.

Thirdly, You must bring them with you to the Church to the public worship
Moses told Pharaoh, Exodus 10.9 they must have their little ones with them to
the solemn worship they were to do unto God in the wilderness; and would not
accept of liberty for all the rest, unless they might have their little ones
with them. And when Ioshuah (according to Gods commandment) read the law of
God solemnly to the Congregation of Israel, Io^^. 8.35. they had their little
ones with them, in that solemn assembly. And when Christ was preaching in the
Congregation, the people brought their little children unto him, Mat. 19.13.
that their little ones might have the benefit of his prayers.

Fourthly and lastly, You that are parents must examine your children how Moses
requires the people, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. to teach that to their children, which they
had heard of him. They might have objected, what needs that, seeing they
being present in the congregation, heard what thou taughtest as well as we?
Yes, but thou must teach it them again says he for all that, more plainly,
more familiarly. Teach these things diligently to your children, says he;
yea, when and sharpen them upon your children (for so the word there
signifies) that is, so repeat, and make things plainer to them, as you may
apply them also, and labor to bring them to some feeling, and conscience of
that that is taught them.

Applic.
O how would Religion flourish, how would knowledge and grace grow in your
children, if you that are parents would thus do your duty, would be teachers
as well as we, and lay to your helping hand to this work? And the best
ministry in the world will do little good while you hang off, and will do
nothing.

Two objections there be, that some parents are apt to make against this.

Object. 1.
First. It is an absurd thing (say they) to teach children religion, for them to
meddle with the Scriptures, or for them to be taught to say either their
Catechism, or prayers, or grace. A Parrat may as well be taught these things,
as a little child. For (alas) they have no capacity to understand, and be
sensible of such matters, and therefore it is but a taking of Gods name in
vain, to teach them such things.

Indeed, this has ever been the conceit of carnal men. Pharaoh could not
abide to hear Moses say they must have their little ones with them to serve
God, Exodus 10.10. And Matthew. 21.15. When the high Priest and Scribes heard the
little children meddle with the Psalm, and sing Hosanna, they were sore
displeased. Yea, when the disciples themselves; Mar. 10.13 (carnal men also in
this, as appears by the rebuke they received for it from their master, ver.
14. he was much displeased with them for it) when they saw men bring their
children to Christ, they rebuked them for it. But this is but a carnal
conceit, as shall appear by three things that I have to answer unto it.

Answ. 1.
First. Children when they are very young, are capable of the seeds and
beginnings of regeneration, and saving grace. See a notable proof for this, in
the example of John Baptist, Luk 1.44. As Soon as the voice of thy salutation
sounded in mine ears (says his mother to Mary) the babe leaped in my womb
for joy. There were certainly in that babe the seeds; and beginnings of saving
knowledge, and faith; of saving grace, both in his understanding, and in his
will and affections also. But (you will say) that case was extraordinary and
miraculous, I grant it was so indeed, yet is it to the purpose for all that.
For it shows that the youngest infant is not so incapable of saving grace,
but that God is able to work it even in them. And that this should encourage
us, to use all the means we can to breed grace in them betimes, because we
know not how soon God may be pleased to work with the means, and bless
them unto them. According to that of Ecclesi. 11.9. In the morning sow thy
seed, and in the evening withold not thy hand, for thou know not whether
shall prosper, either this or that. But hear now some other examples to prove
this, that are not so extraordinary, as that of John Baptist was. First, for
saving knowledge we have the Apostles testimony of Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15. that
he had known the holy Scriptures, (...), from his childhood, yea, from his
infancy, as the word properly signifies. And for the seeds and beginnings of
holy affections, see them in the little children of Gods people at Tire, Acts
21.5. they showed their love to the Apostle, and went with their parents, to
bring him on his way unto the sea shore. And for conscience of sin, and fear
to offend God, see it in Daniel. 1.8. He resolved with himself that
(whatsoever came of it) he would not defile himself with the portion of the
Kings meat, nor with the wine that he drank. And if you consider how long he
lived after this (in the reigns of four Kings, Nebuchadnezzar, Evilm^rodach,
Belshazzar, and Darius) it will appear plainly, he was very young when he
made this conscience of sin.

2.
Secondly, I answer. That childhood is the fittest age of all to be wrought
upon this way; children of all others, are the fittest to have the seeds and
beginnings of saving grace wrought in them. That which the Prophet says by way
of exprobation to the Jews, may fitly be applied unto this purpose. Esa.
28.9. Whom shall he teach knowleage? and whom shall he make to understand
doctrine? Them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts.
They are not indeed fit to feed themselves, nor capable of strong meat, but
they are the fittest of all other to be fed, and dieted by others, to be fed
with milk. That is a comparison that the Apostle twice uses. 1 Cor. 3.2. Heb.
5.12. Your children while they are young, are like soft wax, apt to receive any
impression, like little twigs, which you may bend and bow, which way you will.
There is not in them that stubbornness, that spirit of contradiction, neither
in their reason, nor will, to oppose and reason against good things, as you
shall find in them of more years. In which respect our Savior tells us,
Mar. 10.15. we must all be like unto them. Verily, I say unto you, whosoever
shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter
therein.

Thirdly and lastly, 3.
I answer. That admit that your children have no understanding at all, nor
feeling of the good things you teach them, while they are so young, admit no
seeds, no beginnings of grace be wrought in them thereby then; yet will that
which you teach them then, do them good afterward, and prepare, and make them
fitter to receive good by the ordinary means of grace afterward, when they
shall come to more understanding and discretion. We baptize our children when
they are infants, though they have for the present, no feeling nor
understanding of it. It is twice noted of our Saviors Disciples, John 2.22.
and 12.16. that the things which they understood never a whit at the first,
when Christ taught them, did them great good afterward. And the same is noted
also of the disciples of John, John 10.41, 42. And parents may well think they
have not lost their labor, but done a good, and blessed work, if they have by
their teaching prepared their children to receive good by the public ministry
of the Word. And thus have I answered the first objection.

The second objection they make is this. Object. 2.
Admit that children by the teaching they have, may attain to some beginnings
of knowledge and grace, yet is there (say they) no heed to be taken of the
good things that be in children, they will quickly loose all again. Many a
young Saint has proved an old Devil.

But to these that object this, Answ.
I answer with the words of our Savior to the Sadduces (for they are
certainly little better then Sadduces, and Athiests, that say, or think thus)
Matt. 22.29. Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, and the power of God. For,

First, the Scripture teaches us, that a great guess may be made what Pro.
20.11. Even a child is known by his doing, whether his work be pure, or
whether it be right. For then they cannot dissemble, but will more freely
discover their inclinations, then they will do when they are grown in years.
And as experience has proved in a number of lewd men^, our old proverb to be
true, soon it pricks, that thorn will be, they did when they were young
discover a most ungracious disposition; so it has also proved this true, of
many worthy men, that the great towardness and inclinations unto good, that
appeared in them, while they were very young, did presage what they would prove
afterward. And parents shall do well to observe this, not only that they may
know thereby what callings to fit and prepare their children for; but also what
vices they should chiefly labor to prevent in them, and what good things above
others they should principally nourish in them.

Secondly. The Scripture teaches us, that by teaching our children good Pro.
22.6. Teach a child in his way, and when he is old, he will not depart from
it. And experience in all ages has confirmed this, that as a vessel will long
keep the savor of that liquor it was first seasoned with, so do men the
instructions they have learned in their childhood. The seeds of knowledge and
grace, which were sown in Moses heart, by his mother, while she nursed him.
Exodus 2.9, 10. could never be gotten out of him, by all the pleasures, and
honors, and examples he had in Pharaohs Court.

Joseph, and Moses, and Obadiah, 1 King. 18.12. and Jeremy, and Daniel, and
John Baptist, and Timothy, and many more. They that proved such excellent
Saints, when they were old, were Saints when they were young. And on the other
side; as of all that we read were possessed with evil spirits, the divill was
most hardly gotten out of him, whom he had possessed from his childhood, Mark
9.21, 29. so we find by experience, that the most of them that are old divills
in their age, were also young devils in their childhood, bewrayed much
ungraciousnesse, even when they were very young. And thus have I finished the
second means, that you that are parents must use to heal your childrens
natures, and breed grace in them, you must instruct them betimes, even while
they are very young.

Means 3.
The third means, is good example. You that are parents must careful to give
good example unto your children; cause it to appear unto them in your whole
conversation, that your selves do unfainedly fear God, and love good things.
See three notable presidents, and examples of this care. 1. In Abraham, of whom
God gives this testimony, Gene. 18.19 that he knew him that he would command
his sons, and his house after him, to keep the way of the Lord, he would go
before them himself in that way. 2. In Joshua, I and my house (says he. Josh.
24.15.) will serve the Lord. 3. In David. Ps. 101.2. I will walk in the
uprightness of mine heart, in the midst of mine house. Without this, neither
your commandments, nor correction, nor instruction, will do them any good.
Therefore Paul requires this even of Timothy, and Titus, men of such rare and
extraordinary gifts, to see they gave good example, as well as teach well. 1
Timothy 4.12. Be thou the example of the believers. And Titus 2 7. In all
things, show thy self a pattern of good works. As if he had said, you shall
hardly do good upon the people by your doctrine, if they shall not discern in
your lives, that your selves do believe, and make conscience of that which you
teach, and persuade them unto. On the otherside, there is great force in
example to draw others either to good or evil. See the force of a good
example, even in an inferior, specially such a one as we love. They that obey
not the word (says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3.1.) may without the word be won by
the good conversation of the wives. And the example of a superior, of one whom
we not only love, but reverence in our hearts, is of more force then any
inferiors can be. The Apostle says, Galat. 2.14. that Peter by his example,
compelled the Gentiles to do as the Jews did. But domestical examples,
specially the example of parents, is of more force with their children, to do
them either good or hurt, then all other examples are. See the force it has to
draw our children to goodness, at least in outward conformity, in three
notable examples. It is said of Amazia King of Judah, 2 Kin 14.3. He did that
which was right in the sight of the Lord, yet not like David his father, he did
according to all things as Ioash his father did, And of Azaria (or Vzziah) his
son, ^ Kin. 15 3. He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord,
according to all that Amaziah his father had done. And of Iotham his son, 2
Kings 15.34. He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, he did
according to all that his father Vzziah had done. And on the other side, see
the force that the parents example has to corrupt their children in three
other examples. The first of Zacharia, the King of Israel, of whom it is said,
2 Kings 15.9. He did evil in the sight of the Lord, as his fathers had done;
he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, he would be of his fathers
religion. The second is of the Samaritans, of whom it is said, 2 King. 17 41.
These nations feared the Lord (made some kind of profession of the true
religion, as the ten tribes had done) and served their graven Images too, both
their children, and their childrens children did thus; as did their fathers, so
do they unto this day. The example of their fathers, drew them unto that
idolatry, and rooted them in it. The third is of the kingdom, and Church of
Judah of which we read, Iere. 17.1, 2. that the maine reason why they were so
settled in their idolatry, that there was no hope of reclaiming them, it was
graven upon the table of their heart, as with a pen of Iron, or with the point
of a Diamond, the reason of it I say, is rendered to be this, that their
children remembered their altars, and their groves by the green trees upon the
high hills.

And certainly so it is also in these days; Applic.
A chief cause why profanesse, and impiety does so cleave to the hearts of
most men, that no means are powerful enough to reclaim them, is the evil
example of parents. O think of this, you that are parents, and if nothing else
will reclaim you from lewdness, and make you careful to take heed to your
ways, yet let your love to your children do it, that you may not corrupt them
by your evil example. Is it not wrong enough that you have done unto them, in
conveying into them so corrupt and cursed a nature, but will you also by your
evil example make them twofold more the children of hell, then they were by
nature?

The fourth means parents must use for the saving of their childrens souls,
Means 4.
is this, They must take heed how they dispose of them, when they place them
abroad from them. And as every true Christian will be careful of placing of
himself, that however he do for other commodities, and conveniences, he will
not live where he shall want the means of grace, but resolves with David.
Psalm. 23.6. I will dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days of my life. So
will he in placing of his children, be careful that they may do so too. They
must take heed what schoolmasters and tutors they send them to, what
services, and what marriages they place them in 1. The Apostle Paul reports
Act. 22 3 that he was sent by his parents to Jerusalem, the best school, the
best University, the best college, and to Gamaliel the best teacher, the best
tutour there, where he was was taught according to the perfect manner of the
law of the fathers, and learned to be to zealous toward God. 2. As for
services, it is threatened as a great curse to Gods people, that their children
should serve the greatest Noble man, yea, the greatest Prince in the world, if
he be a wicked man, and enemy to God, yea, though they serve him in the highest
offices that may be. Thy sons that shall issue from thee (says the Lord to
Hezechiah, Esa. 39.7.) shall be Eunuchs in the palace of the King of Babylon.
3. For marriages, we see the care of Abraham first, Genesis 24.3, 4. and of
Rebecca after, Genesis 27, 46. that their children might by no means match with
the Canaanites.

Certainly in this point, Applic.
most parents do evidently bewray, they have no care at all of their childrens
souls. In placing of their children any of these three ways, they aim at
nothing but this, that they may get that that may make them able to live, and
to live in credit, but as for living under the means of grace, for living so
as they may live eternally, that they have no respect at all unto. Whereby they
show themselves to be wholly sensual, not having the spirit, as the Apostle
speaks, Jude 19.

The fifth and last means, Means 5.
without which all the former are to no purpose, is prayer. Parents must be
earnest with God, in prayer, for their children. Solomon's mother calls him
the son of her vows, Pro. 31.2. she had been wont to pray much for him. They
should not only use these means, but pray earnestly to God to give them
wisdom, to know what they may do to destroy corruption, and breed grace in
their children. They should pray as Manoah did, Judge. 13.8. Lord teach me what
I shall do to the child, that thou have given me. We should do as the woman of
Canaan did. complain to God of the corruption that is in our childrens
natures, and desire him to heal it. Have mercy on me O Lord (says she, Mat.
15.22.) my child is miserably vexed with a devil. And as Job did, Job 1.5.
offer sacrifice daily for them, pray daily for them, that God would forgive
them their sins.

Applic.
Now to conclude all this that I have said, touching the Means that parents are
to use for the restraining and weakening of that corruption in their children,
which they have infected them with, and to breed grace in them. Though I cannot
assure you that if you use these means, you shall see the effect and fruit of
them, in every one of your children; but you may justly object that many
parents that have been as careful as is possible in the use of these means,
have had as ungracious children as any others (for the Lord is the God of all
grace and the only author of it, 1 Pet. 5.10. and he gives success and fruit
to all means thereof, 1 Cor. 3.6. and he works herein most freely, according
to the good purpose of his own will; as the wind blows where it lists, Ioh
3.8. he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth, Romans 9.18.)
Yet have I two things to say for your encouragement and comfort that are
Christian parents, 1 None have more cause to expect and with patience to wait
for a blessing from God, in the use of the means of grace toward any, then
you have toward your children, because of the promises God has made to you
concerning your children, Genesis 17.7. Psalm. 22.29, 30. Esa. 44.3. And the fruit
of your labor may appear hereafter, though it do not yet; as experience has
proved in many good men's children, that for a long time lived most
ungraciously. 2. Admit God be never pleased to vouchsafe a blessing to your
labors, in your children, yet shall your labors and the fruit of them rebound
into your own bosom, Psalm. 35.13. For 1 you highly please God in doing your
duty, and he accepts your work nevertheless, Esa. 49.4. 2 Cor. 8.12. which
will yield you unspeakable comfort, 2 Cor. 1.12. 2 You have hereby delivered
your own souls so as the sins and damnation of your ungracious children,
shall never be imputed unto you, Ezekiel. 3.19.

Lecture LVII. On Psalm 51.5. May 15. 1627.
WE have already heard that from these words being opened and cleared from the
cavills of the Anabaptists, these three doctrines do naturally arise. 1. That
every infant so soon as it is borne and conceived stands guilty of sin
before God, and is by nature the child of wrath. 2. That this sin that every
infant stands guilty of by nature, and whereby it does deserve eternal
damnation, is derived to it from Adam by the parents. 3. That this sin which
every infant is guilty of, and which is derived to it from Adam by the parents
is the chief sin, and that which above all others may make us odious and
abominable unto God. The two former of these doctrines we have already
finished, it follows now that we proceed unto the third and last of them.

Nota.
We must therefore observe, that David does not mention here the sinfullnesse
and corruption of his nature wherein he was borne and conceived, to lessen or
extenuate the murder and adultery that he had committed; as if his meaning had
been, to say unto God, Lord there is cause thou should pity me and have
mercy on me, and not lay these sins to my charge, seeing I could do no
otherwise, I did but my kind, the corruption of my nature which I received from
my parents was the cause of it; No no, he has no purpose at all here to minse
or lessen his sin, to excuse or defend himself before God; but for his further
humiliation and abasing himself before God, he aggravateth his sin, and
ascends in his confession to an higher step and degree of it. As if he had
said, I have not only sinned against thee, and done this evil (of adultery
and murder) in thy sight, but I have done it out of the corruption of my vile
nature; I was not drawn to it, through the violence of any sudden tentation
but mine own filthy nature drew me to it, I am not only guilty of this
adultery and murder, but I am more vile then so, for I have in me, and had so
soon as I had any being, a fountain of all sin for which thou may justly
abhor me, and I loath my self much more, then for my other sins; For when
they are repented of, and I am delivered from the guilt and power of them, yet
this cursed root of all sin that is in me, will never be destroyed till I be
destroyed my self. This is the meaning of David here; And therefore 1. He
doubleth the words of this complaint, which he makes here unto God, of his
original sin the corruption of his nature I was brought forth in iniquity, and
in sin my mother conceived me. 2. He sets before this his complaint of
the corruption of his nature, this word of attention behold; as if he should
say, this, this is it that humbles me, most of all. And from these words then
wherein David does in this manner complain unto God of the corruption of his
nature, we have this doctrine to learn for our own instruction.

That our original sin, Doct. 19
that corruption of nature wherein we were borne and conceived is the sin of
all others, fro which the Lord may most justly abhor us, and for which we
should be most humbled, and abased in our selves.

See the proof of both the branches of this doctrine distinctly.

First, Branc. 1
That this is the sin for which the Lord may most justly abhor us. Man
(says Eliphaz, Job 15.16.) that is every man (which must needs be understood
in respect of his nature) is filthy and abominable in his sight. And the
Apostle, Ephesians. 2.3. We are even by nature the children of wrath. As if he had
said, If we had no other sin but that, the very sinfullnesse of our nature,
makes us worthy of Gods wrath and odious unto him. This truth the Lord
shaddowed out to his people under the law, by sundry ceremonies; For whereas
you shall find few or no laws made for the shutting men out from the
tabernacle (which was a type of heaven) for actual sins, there are many
against them that were defiled with such impurities as did typify the
corruption of our nature, by original sin. The leper though he were a King
might not be suffered to come into the house of the Lord, as you shall find, 2 Chronicles. 26.21. Nor the woman that had borne a child for a good space after her
childbirth, Levit. 12.4. Nor he that had touched the dead body of a man. Number.
9.7. and 19.11. Nor he that had the running of the reins, Levit. 15.14. Yea
see what the Lord says to Moses, Numb. 5.2, 3. Command the children of Israel,
that they put out of the camp every Leper, and every one that has an issue,
and whosoever is defiled by the dead; both male and female shall ye put out,
without the Camp ye shall put them, that they defile not their camps in the
midst whereof I dwell. Certainly by all these ceremonies, God meant to teach
his people this, that no sin makes us more odious unto God, no sin deserves
more that we should be forever separated from God and his kingdom, then the
very corruption of our nature does.

Now for the second branch of the doctrine, Branc. 2
that our original sin the corruption of our nature is the sin for which
we should be most humbled and abased in our selves; see the proof of it in
four notable examples, besides this of David's, which we have in the Text;
examples (I say) of such of Gods people, as being not guilty of any actual
sin, that did reign in them yet have complained exceedingly and cried out of
themselves even for this. The first is of Job who though in respect of his
conversation he was a perfect man and upright, and one that feared God and
eschewed evil, Chap. 1.1. yet Chap. 40.4. he cries out thus unto God, Behold
I am vile what shall I answer thee? As if he had said, How shall I appear or
stand before thee? The second is the Prophet Esaias who so soon as he had seen
the glory of the Lord, in a vision and by that means discerned what himself
was, better then ever he did before; breaks forth into this complaint, Esa.
6.5. Woe is me for I am undone. The third example is the Apostle Paul, of whom
you shall not find that ever he complained so bitterly, of any of the foulest
sins that he had committed before he knew Christ, as he does of this, Rom
7.24 O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death; this was a death to him, and nothing so much as this. The fourth and
last example is that of the whole Church, Esa. 64.6. We are all as an unclean
man; using the very words that the Leper was commanded to use and to cry Levit.
13.45. I am unclean I am unclean, worthy to be separated for ever from God
and from his people.

Reason.
Now for the grounds and reasons of the Doctrine why the Lord has so just cause
to abhor us for this corruption of our nature and why we have so just cause
likewise to be humbled in our selves for it, they may be taken from the
properties and effects of it. For as Adam by that first sin of his, (which
excepting only the sin against the Holy Ghost, was in sundry respects the
most heinous sin that ever mortal man did commit; and which sin of his, as
we have heard in the first doctrine of this verse, is most justly imputed unto
every one of us) as he (I say) by that first sin of his, did loose from
himself and all his posterity, that glorious image of God in which he was
created, and whereby he did wholly resemble the Lord in wisdom, and holiness;
so did he thereby also receive for himself and his whole posterity the image
of Satan, and was transformed into it. Whereby it is come to pass, that we do
all by nature (a fearful thing to hear and yet a certain truth) most lively
in our disposition resemble Satan. Let us therefore consider our nature and the
corruption of it in the properties and effects of it, and it shall evidently
appear unto us, that there is no creature upon earth, that has so venomous,
and poisonfull a nature, as every one of us have. Neither will I speak of such
properties and effects of original sin, as are to be found in the natural man
only, and him that is void of all saving grace, but of those that every one of
us, and the best of Gods children (such as David and Job, and Esaias, and Paul
were) shall find in themselves. And those are four principally.

Psalm. 100.2. Serve the Lord with gladness. For this flesh of ours, this
corruption of our nature. 1. Disableth us unto spiritual duties, makes us
unwilling, untoward, dull, and cold, and faint in them, so as we perform them
with no lust, no life, no servency of spirit. This the Apostle complains of,
Romans 7.18. I know that in me (that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing: For
to will is present with me (through grace he means) but how to perform that
which is good I find not. Heb. 12.1. It easily besetteth us on every side, to
hinder us from running in any way of Gods commandments. 2. It will show and
intermingle it self, and will not be kept out of doors, no not for a moment
when we purpose and go about the best duties, but it will be meddling and have a
finger even in them. When I would do good (says the Apostle, Romans 7.21.) evil
is present with me. 3. It will cross 3. It will cross and oppose the spirit
and interrupt the work of it, stirring up such thoughts and motions as are
quite contrary, and opposite unto it. I see (says blessed Paul, Romans 7.23)
another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind. And Gal. 5.17.
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and these are contrary the one to the
other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. Yea 4. by these and such
like means it defiles our best duties, and makes them not only unworthy of
all reward with God, but worthy to be rejected and loathed by him; as the
Church complains, Esa. 64.6. All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags.

Secondly, It draws the best of us to offend God often. 1. Even to do that In
many things (says the Apostle, Iam. 3.2.) we offend all. And Paul, Romans 7.15.
What I hate that I do; and verse 23. It brings me into captivity to the law
of sin. 2. Yea it is restless, and never gives over working this way. Like
thtroubled sea (as the Prophet speaks, Esa. 57.20) which cannot rest, whose
waters cast up mire and dirt. This root and fountain is ever springing and
putting forth one corruption or other. Every imagination of the thoughts of our
hear^ (says the Lord, Genesis 6.5.) is only evil, continually. When we have by
faith and repentance mortified one sin and cleansed our selves of it, another
will rise out of the ashes of it this vile nature of ours will cast up some
other mire and dirt, some wretched motion or other, to defile us withal. 3.
And what are the motions and lusts it will stir up in us? Surely there is no
sin so foul and unnatural but we shall find it will be ready to stir up
motions and incli^ations unto it, even in the best of Gods children* motions of
atheism and blasphemy; motions of desparation, and of every other foul sin.
Sin wrought in me (says the Apostle, Romans 7.^) all mann^r of concupiscence.

Thirdly, It is an universal corruption, and leprosy that goes over the
whole Cor. 5.6.

Fourthly, and lastly, We can never be rid of it, while we live. It dwells in
as the Apostle speaks, Romans 7.17. It is an inmate that will never be gotten
out, till the house be pulled down. It is an hereditary disease (as we have
heard) which no Physician can cure; that that is bred in the bone will never
out of the flesh.

Lecture LXI. On Psalm 51.5. June 19. 1627.
THe uses that this doctrine serves unto, are four principally, 1 To inform
and settle our judgments, 2 To humble and abate the pride of our hearts, 3 To
exhort us to seek the cure of this dangerous leprosy, 4 and lastly, To breed
thankfulness in our hearts toward God, and admiration of his goodness to such
vile wretches as we are.

For the first, Use 1.
This Doctrine serves notably to confirm us against popery by discovering to
us the gross error of the Papists in their doctrine of original sin. And yet
would I (according to my custom) content my self to ground and confirm you
in the truth, and not trouble you with confuting their errors, were it not for
three reasons that move me to it. 1. That by confirming you against the error
of the Papists in this point, I shall also preserve you from the error of the
Semi-Pelagians; who as in sundry other maine articles of our Christian religion
so) in this agree to well with the Papists. 2. That the error of the Papists
in the Doctrine of original sin is maintained by them as a prop and stay to
many other of their damnable doctrines, which do depend upon this. Take away
their error in the doctrine of original sin, and then their doctrines of 1
freewill, of 2 preparatory works, of 3 the regenerate man's ability to keep the
whole law, of 4 justification by works, of 5 merit cannot stand, but must needs
fall to the ground. 3. Because I discern strong inclinations in many now
adays to think better of Popery, then they were wont to do. And yet was
popery never worse then it is now; neither was there ever Church or nation that
had more cause to detest it then our Church and nation has; neither had our
Church and nation ever more cause to detest it, then at this time.

Now for our entrance into this use of confutation, two general rules I will
give you whereby you may try all doctrines in religion whether they be of God,
or no.

Cor. 1.29. That no flesh may rejoice in his presence; and verse 31. He that
rejoices let him rejoice in the Lord. And Romans 3.27. Where is boasting then?
It is excluded. By what law, or doctrine? Of works? Nay, but by the law or
doctrine of faith. Where we see the Doctrine of justification by works proved a
false doctrine, and the Doctrine of Justification by faith only proved a true
Doctrine, by this argument because the one leaves unto man some matter of
boasting, the other does not. So Ephesians. 2.8, 9. By grace ye are saved, through
faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, lest
any man should rejoice. This note our Savior gives of a true teacher, John
7.18. He that speaks of himself seeks his own glory; but he that seeks
his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousnes is in him. The
true teacher does in his Doctrine and ministry ascribe all glory unto God. And
this note Paul gives of the true Church and religion, Phil. 3.3. We are the
circumcision which rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the
flesh. And this is the first rule I said I would give you to try all doctrines
and religions by. The true religion gives all glory to God, and none at all to
man.

Esa. 8.20. To the law and to the testimony, if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there it no light in them. And Iam. 3.15. This wisdom
descends not from above, but is earthly, natural (...) and divellish That
wisdom that is natural, agreeable unto and grounded upon natural reason is
not from above, but it is earthly and divelish. For natural reason is blind as
a beetle in these matters. 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man ((...) the very same
word that James uses) receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they
are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. Whereas (on the other side) the holy Scriptures are a
perfect direction able (as the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 3.15.) to make a man wise
unto salvation; and a sure direction, therefore can never deceive us. Thy
testimonies (says the Prophet, Psalm. 93.5.) are very sure. For they were all
given by divine inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16. It is Gods Word, 2 Pet. 1.21.
The prophesy of the Scripture came not by the will of man, but holy men of God
spoke (and wrote too) as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. So that he that
contradicts the Scripture in any point contradicts God himself. And
therefore when the great Antichrist is discribed, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. this is one
chief note that is given us to know him by, he is called (...) one that
opposes himself unto, that contradicts God and his truth.

Now if Christians would make use but of these two rules, Applic.
certainly neither Popery nor Pelagianisme would ever deceive them. Apply them
to the matter we have now in hand, and it will be evident unto us, that the
doctrine of the Papists, touching original sin is not of God. For 1. it gives
too much to man, and keeps him from being so much humbled, and dejected in
himself as he ought to be. 2. It directly opposes, and contradicts that
which the Lord has expressly spoken in the holy Scriptures.

See this in three points, which they teach touching original sin.

First. For the nature of original sin, they teach, that though we be thereby
Jericho, Luk 10.30. we are wounded sore, and left half dead. And though we
have by original sin, lost that righteousness and perfection of nature, in
which man was first created, and are now become by nature, as prone to sin,
when occasion is offered, and as apt to take hurt by any tentation, as tinder
or touch-wood is to take fire, yet is there not thereby any sinful quality
possitively infused into our nature.

Whereas the spirit of God in the holy Scripture speaks expressly. First.
That we are by nature not only wounded and weakened, and half dead, till God
quicken us, but dead all out; even the Elect are so by nature, Ephesians. 2.1. You
has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins, and verse 5. Even
when we were dead in sins, has God quickened us. Secondly. That there is in us
by nature, no true desire at all to be helped by Gods grace, out of this
estate, Phil. 2.13. It is God that works in you, both to will, and to do of
his good pleasure, John 8.44. The last of your father ye will do. And that
which our Savior says of good words, may likewise be said of good desires,
Mitch. 12.34. O generation of vipers (and certainly such are we all by nature)
how can ye being evil think good things, or desire good things. Thirdly.
That there is in us by nature, no power nor willingness to accept of the help
of Gods grace, when it is offered us, but an utter averseness, and
unwillingnesse to accept of it, yea, an hatred unto it. That we are apt to say
to God, even as the poor possessed man (for certainly such are we all by
nature also, even slaves to the devil, 2. Tim. 2.26.) Luke 4.34. Let us alone,
what have we to do with thee thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy
us? We gainsay, and resist the work of Gods grace in us, till God by his
mighty power do overcome us, Romans 10.11. All the day long have I stretched out
my hands unto a disobedient, and gaine-saying people. And Romans 8.7. The carnal
mind is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. Fourthly and
lastly. That our nature is not only privatively evil, and corrupt, deprived
of original righteousness, and apt as tinder is to receive the fire of
tentation, but possitively evil, and has in it a poisonfull and corrupt
quality, even the seeds of all sin, that cannot choose but work and bring
forth evil thoughts, and words, and actions, Gen 8.21. The imagination of man's
heart is evil (not prone only to be evil) from his youth. Yea, cap. 6.5.
Every imagination of the thoughts of his heart, is only evil continually.
Insomuch as we, even the Elect of God, are by nature rank enemies to God, and
rebels against him. You were (says the Apostle Col. 1.21.) alienated, and
enemies in your minds unto him.

And thus you see, how in this first point of their Doctrine concerning
original sin, they do plead for man, and do directly oppose, and contradict
the spirit of God. But the second and third points, are worse then this.



Whereas 1. The spirit of God in the holy Scripture, expressly calls it sin.
As here in this place, Psalm. 51.5. I was borne in iniquity, and in sin did my
mother conceive me. And in three chapters of the Epistle to the Romans (that
is to say, the sixth, seventh, and eight) fourteen times at the least. and Heb.
12.1. The sin that does so easily beset us. And shall we say, that that is not
properly and indeed a sin, which the holy Ghost so often calls sin? Secondly.
The spirit of God in the holy Scriptures speaks expressly that our original
corruption is the cause of all actual sins, that the foulest sins that ever
men committed, come all from this root. Every man is tempted (says the
Apostle, James 1.14.) when he is drawn away of his own lust, and entised. It
is our own corrupt nature that tempts us, that draws us away, that
entiseth us to all sins. So also the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 1.4. says, all the
corruption that is in the world, is through lust. And may we not truly and
properly call that sin, that is the cause of all the foulest sins in the world?
May we not well call that an evil tree, upon which all this evil fruit does
grow? Surely we may, or else our Saviors rule will fail, Matthew. 12.33. The
tree is known by his fruit. Thirdly. The spirit of God in the holy Scripture
teaches us expressly, that infants, yea infants that are baptized, which have
no other sin but this original sin, and corruption of nature in them, and who
never consented to it, nor obeyed it in the lusts thereof, do dye, Romans 5 14.
Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adams transgression. And therefore it must needs be sin, and may
be truly, and properly so called; for sin is the only cause of death; and none
can dye, but those that are sinners, either by imputation as Christ was, who
was made sin for us, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5.21. or really, and
personally, as all Adams posterity are, Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered into
the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all
have sinned. Fourthly and lastly. The spirit of God in the holy Scriptures
expressly teaches us, that this concupiscence even in the regenerate, these
evil motions that rise in us, though we consent not unto them, though we
resist them, are yet a swerving from the law of God, and a breach of it. For
the law of God requires of us, that we should love the Lord with all our
heart, and with all our soul, and with all our strength, and with all our
mind, Luke 10.27. And so can we not do, if there be in our heart, or souls,
or mind, at any time, an evil thought, or an evil motion. Yet the Scripture
teaches us, that this concupiscence, or corruption of our nature, even in the
regenerate^ does not only swerve from the law of God, but that it does oppose
and resist the spirit of God. I see (says the Apostle, Romans 7.23.) another law
in my members, warring against the law of my mind. and Gal. 5.17. The flesh
lusts against the spirit, and these are contrary the one to the other. And
therefore it must needs be sin. For so the Apostle defines sin. 1 John 3.4.
Sin is the transgression of the law, (...) is the word, this is to teach us,
that every swerving from the Law, is sin. This was the argument that convinced
Paul's conscience, Rom 7.7. I had not known lust to be a sin, except the Law
(in the tenth commandment) had said, thou shall not covet. And what kind of
lust, and concupiscence means he? That which we delight in, or consent unto?
No verily, for by the light of nature he might have known that to be a sin;
heathen men have acknowledged that to be sin; he must needs mean that
concupiscence, those motions unto evil, which the heart does not delight in,
nor consent unto.

We have heard how directly the Papists oppose the spirit of God, in these two
points of their Doctrine of Orignall sin; and all to advance the nature of man;
but I will show you yet a greater abomination in their Doctrine, then these two.

Their third error is far worse then the former two. For they teach, that
the corruption of nature that remains in the regenerate, the concupiscence,

I will not trouble you with many words in the confutation of so palpable an
error as this. Two reasons only I will give you against it.

First. If this should be true, then should the obedience, and good works
Hebr. 6.10. God is not unrighteous, that he should forget your work and
labor of love. But to say, that this corruption, and untowardnesse of our
nature, the evil thoughts and motions of infidelity, blasphemy, worldliness,
that trouble us in our best duties, are no sins, do not at all defile them,
but make them the better, and more meritorious in the sight of God, is little
better then gross blasphemy. For then should our poor unperfect, and maimed
obedience be better, and deserve to be more acceptable unto God, not only
then Adams was before his fall, and then that is which the Saints in heaven do
now yield unto God, but even then the obedience of Christ himself; for he
found in himself no corruption of nature to struggle with, nor to hinder him
in it, as we do.

My second reason, against this their last error, is this. That if the
corruption of David have so complained unto God here, and been humbled for his
natural corruption, even more then for his adultery, and murder, and would he
have so cried out of himself. Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin
did my mother conceive me? And Job 40.4. Behold, I am vile? And Esaias the
Prophet, Esa. 6.5. Woe is me for I am undone? And the Church, Esa. 64.6. We
are all as an unclean man, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags?
And the blessed Apostle Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from the body of this death? As if he had said, this is a death to me,
and nothing so much as this. Would all the Saints of God (I say) have so
complained of the corruption of nature that was in them; though it did not
reign in them, though they obeyed it not in the lusts thereof; if they had
believed, as the Church of Rome believes? If they had esteemed so lightly of
it as Papists do? If they had thought it had been no sin? If they had been
persuaded it was so far from defiling their good works* that it made them
the better, even more meritorious before God? But I have been too long in this
use of confutation, which (yet) I hope has not been altogether unusefull, and
unprofitable unto you.

Lecture LXII. on Psalm 51.5. June 26. 1627.
Use 2.
THE second use of this Doctrine, is to humble us, to abate the pride of our
hearts, and to cause us to think basely of our selves. This is one maine end
the Lord has respect unto, in not perfecting the work of regeneration, in any
of his servants in this life, but suffering much corruption of nature to
remain still in them, even that he might humble them, and keep them from
pride thereby. This is plain in the Apostles case, 2 Cor. 12.7. A thorn in
the flesh was given him (some lust or other stirred in him, and put him to
pain) left he should be exalted. He deals with his people in this case
now, whom he brings into the Kingdom of heaven, into the state of grace, as
he did with them of old, when he brought them into the land of Canaan, the
type of the Kingdom of heaven, he drives not out all these Canaanites, that
they might be scourges in our sides, and thorns in our eyes, to vex and
humble us as Ioshuah speaks, Josh. 23.13. Great force there is in this, to
humble the heart of a man that has grace in him, to consider how vile his
nature is, and what abundance of corruption does still remain in him. The
natural man indeed is never the humbler for this, because he has no sight
nor sense of it, but the godly man is. The proudest man that is, if he should
be smitten with a leprosy, or some such loathsome disease from top to toe,
would be much humbled with it. And how can Gods child choose but be much
humbled, when he seriously does think of this leprosy of his soul, that as
the Prophet speaks, Esa. 1.6. From the sole of the foot, even to the top of
the head (in understanding, conscience, memory, will, affections) there is no
soundness in him, but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores? The proudest
man that is, would be much dejected and abased in himself, if from an high
and wealthy estate, God should cast him into extreme poverty and beggary. And
the Lord speaks of this, as of a fruit of such judgments, Esa. 13.11. that
he will thereby cause the arrogance of the proud to cease, and will lay low
the haughtiness of the terrible. And so must Gods child needs, whose eyes God
has opened, when he discerns and considers seriously what state he was
once in by creation, and what he is now, how wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked, as Christ speaks to the Laodiceans, Rev. 3.17.
This knowledge and sense of our spiritual poverty will certainly make us
humble in our selves, and humble toward others also. As our Savior plainly
teaches, Matthew. 5.3. -- 5. in the connection of the three first beatitudes.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, blessed are they that mourn, blessed are the
meek. They that are poor in spirit, cannot choose but mourn, and be humbled
in themselves for it; and they that are truly humbled in themselves for it,
cannot choose but be meek in spirit toward others, they cannot be insolent,
nor censorious, nor harsh in their disposition, and carriage toward others. O
how apt are we all to be puffed up with a little knowledge and grace, that we
have attained unto above others? How apt to despise others, because of this. If
we knew our own hearts well, certainly we could not be so. The
consideration of what we were before our calling, has great force to keep us
from despising, and censuring others so sharply, as we are wont. Titus 3.2,
3. Speak evil of no man, but show all meekness to all men, for we our
selves were sometimes foolish, etc. As if he had said; as bad as any other.
But if we would consider well, what bad hearts we have since our calling and
conversion, how untoward to any thing that is good, how weak, and prone to
that that is evil, how pregnant, and full of vile motions, and inclinations
continually, this would have more force to humble us this way then the former.
Brethren (says the Apostle Gal. 6.1.) if a man be overtaken in a fault, you
that are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness,
considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. If we would consider our
selves well, and what we were like to prove, if we had the same tentation that
others have had, this would make us meek and humble, this would keep us from
despising others for their infirmities. This was that that made blessed Paul so
humble and lowly in his own eyes, that he does profess that he was not only
in respect of his estate before his calling of all sinners the chief, 1 Timothy
^.15. but even after his calling, Ephesians. 3.8. less then the least of all
Saints. How could he speak this in truth may you say? Doubtless he knew many
of the Saints that had more slips and falls then ever he had; he knew many of
the Saints that had not received that measure of grace from God, nor done him
that service that he had done, yea he professes of himself, 2 Cor. 12.11.
that he was in nothing behind the very chiefest Apostles. And 1 Cor. 15.10.
that he had labored more abundantly then they all. How could he then say that
he was less then the least of all Saints? Certainly his meaning is he knew
more evil, more corruption in his own heart, then he thought was in any
Christian in the world besides. And this conceit of our selves he requires to
be in all Christians, Phil. 2.3. Let each esteem others better then
themselves. That pronesse that we find in our own nature to evil (even after
our regeneration, yea after many years spent in the profession of
Christianity) should be matter of continual humbling unto us. And we have
cause even in that respect to complain as David did, Psalm. 38.17. I am ready
to halt, and my sorrow is continually before me. Let us now apply this second
use of the doctrine unto three particular cases wherein we may have occasion to
practice it.

First, Let this humble us in the performing of our best duties, and keep us
from priding our selves in them, as (alas) we are all too apt to do. See this
in the Luke 18.12. We are all by nature Papists, and Pharisees in this point,
apt to conceit we have merited somewhat of God, when we have done any thing
well. If we would but consider, and take notice of this, when we have done any
good duty, how our original sin our corrupt hearts have stained and defiled
it, and made all our righteousness as filthy rags, Esa. 64.6. we should find
even in our best duties, just matter not of pride but of humbling in them and
to say of our selves as our Savior bids us in another sense, Luke 17.10.
when we have done all we can do, we are but unprofitable servants. We read of
Rebecca, Genesis 25.22. that when she had conceived though she knew she bare in
her body the promised and blessed seed, yet the struggling and combat she felt
within her between the two twins was so painful and grievous to her that she
cried out Why am I thus? And certainly that combat that Gods child finds in
himself in the performing of any good duty, that his flesh does resist and
oppose Gods grace, and holy spirit in it, that it is so cross and contrary to
it, that he cannot do the things that he would; must needs be a just cause of
grief and humbling unto him; as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 5.17. By reason of
this every child of God when he has performed any duty to God, in the best
manner he can, has cause to pray with good Nehemiah 13.22. O my God pardon me,
according to the greatness of thy mercy. Yea without this sense of corruption
mixing it self with our best duties and sorrow for it, we can never perform
any good duty acceptably. Whatsoever ye do in word or deed (says the Apostle,
Col. 3.17.) do all in the name of the Lord Jesus. As if he should say, feel
the need ye have of Christ in it, look not that God should accept of it, but
only through him.

Secondly, Let this humble us at all times when we prepare our selves to
appear before God in prayer; We cannot be too humble when we are to go to Rev.
4.10. cast down their crowns when they were to speak unto God, though that
they were to speak were not confession of sin, nor petition, but praise and
tanksgiving only. Yea the blessed Angels, Rev. 7.11. Fell before the throne on
their faces and worshipped God And the more humble we are in our selves, the
more hope we may have to speed well in our prayers. If my people shall humble
themselves and pray, (says the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 7.14.) and seek my face and to
turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear from heaven. And Iam. 4.6. God
gives grace to the humble. We should all judge our selves unworthy to do God
any service. Abraham did so, Genesis 18.27. Behold I have taken upon me to speak
unto the Lord. John Baptist did so, Mar. 1.7. I am not worthy to stoup down,
and unlose the latchet of Christ's shoe; as if he had said, to do the lowest or
basest service about him. And how may we bring out selves to this humility of
heart when we go to God? Surely the consideration of his greatness and our
baseness may be effectual to do this. This consideration humbled Abraham,
Genesis 18.27. Behold now I have taken upon me, to speak unto the Lord, and I am
but dust, and ashes. And this consideration is also commended unto us by the
Holy Ghost, Eccl. 5 2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be
hasty to utter any thing before God, for God is in heaven and thou upon earth,
therefore let thy words be few. Mistake not the meaning of the Holy Ghost, he
condemns not all prayers that are long, long prayers are not unlawful,
specially upon extraordinary occasions (for Christ we know continued a whole
night in prayer, Luke 6.12.) Yea our own necessities and the necessities of
the Church, do sometimes impose a necessity upon us both to be more frequent,
and more long in our prayers then ordinary it were fit for us to be. When
Israel was in the field against Amalek, Exodus 1^.11, 12. Moses held up his
hands to God (with the help of Aaron and Hur) a whole day even to the going
down of the Sun. Carnal men are not fit judges in this case; they are apt to
think the smallest time that is spent in Gods service too long and to cry out
as Mal. 1.13. Behold what a weariness it is? And as in Amos 8.3. When will the
Sabbath be done? But if we would not offend in the length of our prayers, these
four cautions which God in his Word gives Matthew. 23.14. For a pretense they
made long prayers. Secondly, That we be indeed enabled by God to do it with
understanding, and use not vain repetitions in our long prayers. This caution
our Savior gives, Mat. 6.7. When ye pray use not vain repetitions, as the
heathen do. Certainly this is a common The true worshippers (says our
Savior, John 4.23.) shall worship the father in spirit and in truth. A short
prayer made with fervency of devotion prevails more with God, then the
longest and most eloquent prayer can do without it. It is the effectual
fervent prayer of the righteous man that avails much, Iam. 5.16. God cannot
abide the prayers that are nothing but lip labor; when men draw near to God
with their mouths (as the Lord complains, E^a. 29.13.) and honor him with
their lips, Fourthly, That he that conceives the prayer have as well respect
to them that join with him, as to himself whether their hearts be like to
hold out so long in that duty, as his heart or his tongue is. I had rather
(says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.19.) in the Church speak five words so as I may
edify others (and that that he speaks there of teaching is as well to be
understood of prayer, as appears by the context) then ten thousand words
otherwise. Marvel not that I say that in prayer and in all the exercises of
religion respect must be had to the ability of them that join with us in
these duties, and not to our own only. Our blessed Savior had respect to this
in his teaching. Mark 4.33. With many such parables spoke he the word unto
them, as they were able to hear it. And this the Lord had respect unto, in the
appointing of all the three solemn feasts, wherein all the males were to
assemble themselves before the Lord. He appointed them at such times, as all
the people might with most convenience come unto Jerusalem, and go back
again also unto their own homes. The Passover was about the beginning of our
April, the feast of Pentecost, in May, and the feast of Tabernacles, in
September. And in that month also was the day of atonement, the general fast
kept, as you may see, Levit. 23. and Deuteronomy. 16. Certainly Gods purpose was
therein to teach us, that in the exercises of his worship, whether ordinary or
extraordinary, respect must be had to the convenience of Gods people. Decency
and order is not more necessary, or comely in any thing, then in the matters of
Gods worship. Let all things be done (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14 40.)
decently and in order. You see then by that place of Eccl. 5. that the
consideration of Gods glorious greatness, and of our own baseness, may be
effectual to humble us, whenever we are to go to God, and to pray unto
him. But the consideration of the Lords holiness, and of our own sinfulness,
may do it much more. Not only the consideration of the foul actual sins
that we have all of us bin guilty of, as we see in that speech of Ezra. 9.6. O
my God, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God, for our
iniquities are increased over our heads; but specially the consideration of
this vile nature that remains still in us, even after our conversion, whereby
we are so prone unto sin, and have in us a continual thirst unto evil;
according to that speech of Eliphaz, Job 15.16. How much more abominable and
filthy is man that drinks iniquity like water?]

The third and last case, wherein we are to make use of this doctrine, for our
Levit. 23.29. Whatsoever soul it be that shall not be afflicted in that same
day, he shall be cut off, from among his people. And the more we can be
humbled in our fasts, certainly the more hope we may have to prevail with God
in them. He puts his mouth in the dust (says the Church, of an humbled
sinner, Lam. 3.29) if so be there may be hope. As if he had said, if any
thing will give him hope of mercy, that will do it. And because so few keep
fasts with humbled souls, even when they make so solemn profession of their
humiliation before God, and his people, therefore see we so little fruit of our
fasts now adays. But Gods people have now cause if ever, to complain unto God
as they did, Psalm. 80.4. O Lord God of hosts, how long will thou be angry
against the prayers of thy people? Certainly God seems even to be angry
with the prayers of his people. Yet must we not give over our fasts and days
of humiliation, for God calls us to fasting and prayer now, if ever he did.
Esaias 22.12. But our care must be to keep our fasts with more humbled souls,
then we have been heretofore.

First. We must be humbled for the tokens of Gods anger, that are upon all If
ones father have spit in his face (says God to Moses, Numb. 12.14.) should he
not be ashamed? Certainly our heavenly father has spit upon our faces and
disgraced us in the sight of all nations. The Lion has roared (says the
Prophet, Amos 3.8.) who will not fear? The Lord threatens terrible things
against this nation such as if we would give our selves leave seriously to
think of, would make the stoutest heart among us to quake and tremble. And
surely such as will seem to keep fasts and are not in their fasts affected
with, nor humbled for the judgments of God upon all the Churches, especially
upon our own land, are no better then graceless hipocrites, Ier. 5.3. Thou
have stricken them but they have not grieved, thou have consumed them but they
have refused to receive correction: they have made their faces harder then a a
rock. These are they that the Prophet speaks of Esa. 29 15 -- 18.

Naboth against God, and the King, a fast was proclaimed in Iezreel for that, 1
King. 21.9, 10. which doubtless Iezabel had learned from the example of Gods
own people, that had been wont to do so in such cases. And the Apostle
blames the whole Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 5.2. because they had not at all
mourned for that foul incest that had been committed among them. [What would
he have done if so desperate a murder had been committed there as was here the
last week. Certainly we should all mourn, and be humbled for it, and be glad
we have opportunity to do it with fasting and prayer.] It is made a note of
Gods people, whom he will mark for himself, and take care to provide for in
times of common calamity, Ezekiel. 9.4. that they are such as sigh and cry for all
the abominations that are done in the midst of the place they live in. If we
cannot be humbled for the sins of the land, of the place we live in, certainly
we can never be humbled aright for any judgments of God, that are either
presently upon us, or threatened against us. We read of Nehemiah that when he
heard of the great affliction, and reproach Gods people were in at Jerusalem,
Neh. 1.4. He wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted and prayed before the
God of heaven. But what was the thing that most humbled him in that fast?
Surely not so much the judgments whereby God showed himself to be angry
against Jerusalem, as the sins of Jerusalem whereby it had provoked God unto
this anger as you may perceive by the confession he makes of their sins in the
sixth, and seventh verses of that Chapter.

Ezekiel 7.16. They shall be on the mountains as the doves of the valleys, all
of them mourning, every man for his iniquity. And therefore also, we ought in
our fasts, to call back into our remembrance the foulest, and grosest of all
the sins that ever we committed in our lives, though they were done long ago.
Because the heart will sooner be brought unto remorse, and sorrow by the
remembrance of these then of smaller sins. Remember and forget not (says Moses
unto Israel, Deuteronomy. 9.7.) how thou provokest the Lord thy God in the
wilderness. He that brings not to the fast an heart humbled for his own
sins, that has no sense of the beams that are or have been in his own eye
(as our Savior speaks, Mat. 7.5.) is but an hypocrite in pretending that he
is humbled for the sins of the land.

David we see here in this his solemn profession of repentance and
humiliation, he was humbled not only for his adultery and murder but for the
corruption of his nature also, wherein he was conceived and borne, yea more for
that then for the other; for he ascends in his confession (as we have heard)
as to an higher step and degree of sin, and sets an Ecce before this Behold
I was borne in iniquity, etc. Thus was Paul humbled even after his regeneration
for this corruption of his nature. It was no actual sin, no corruption that
reigned in him, or that he did obey in the lusts thereof, that he complains
so of, and prays so against, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8. It was nothing else certainly
but the corruption of his nature, the motions and strong inclinations he found
in himself unto some foul evil; and this he said put his heart to that pain
and anguish as a thorn in the flesh would put a man's body to. This was that
that made him cry out so of himself, Romans 7.24. Owretched man that I am; this
was that that he calls his death; who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? And why were David and Paul being in the state of grace and having no
actual sin in them that they had not repented of, in whom this original
corruption of nature did not reign neither, why were they so humbled for that
nevertheless? And why must we in the days of our humiliation when we are to
renew our repentance, remember and bewail our original sin? Surely because.

First, That was the cause of all the foul sins that ever we committed, and
Iam. 1.14. Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and
enticed. And Mar 7.21.23. from within out of the heart of men proceed evil
thoughts adulteries, fornications, murders, etc. all these things come from
within, and these defile a man.

Secondly, Because though all other sins that we have committed be repented Job
uses, Job 14.8, 9. Though the root thereof wax old in the earth and the stock
thereof die in the ground: yet through the sent of water it will bud, and bring
forth boughs like a plant. He therefore (to conclude) that brings unto God in
the fast an heart humbled only for some gross actual sins, that he has
committed, but was never humbled for the vile corruption of his nature, could
never feelingly confess that unto God nor bewail it before him, has just
cause to suspect the truth of his repentance, and humiliation for sin. Shall
Job and David, and Esaias, and Paul cry out so much of themselves for this, and
do thou think thou art in a good case, that art never troubled for that
untowardnesse, thou find in thy heart to any thing that is good, for those
vile motions, and inclinations thou find in thy self unto all evil? This
God complains of as of a thing that did much provoke him against his people,
Ezekiel. 16.22. In all thine abominations and thy whordomes thou have not
remembered the days of thy youth, when thou wast naked, and bare, and wast
polluted in thy blood.

Lecture LXIII. On Psalm 51.5. July 10. 1627.
THe third use that this Doctrine serves unto, Use 3.
is for exhortation to stir up in every one of us a care to be cured of this
loathsome leprosy, to be delivered from the danger of this poison, this
fountain of all sin, this root of all bitterness, that is in the nature of
every one of us. This use the blessed Apostle did make of this Doctrine, Romans
7.24. For having bewailed greatly this corruption he felt in his nature, and
professed that he was deeply humbled in himself for it, which made him cry
out O wretched man that I am. As if he had said, O what a wretch am I, that
have such a deal of corruption remaining in me (which was the former use that
I told you this Doctrine serves unto; and handled by me the last day)
immediately he bursteth forth into these words, Who shall deliver me from the
body of this death? As if he should have said, O how may I be rid of it, and
delivered from the danger of it?

Now for the better enforcing of this exhortation, 1 I will give you certain
motives to provoke you unto this care to seek to be freed from the danger of
this sin. 2 I will show you the means whereby deliverance from the danger of
this sin, is to be obtained.

Motives.
And for motives, I shall not need to give you any other, then such as you have
already heard in the proofs and reasons of the Doctrine. 1. This is the
fountain and cause of all other our sins; and consequently of all our woe and
misery; as we have heard out of James 1.14. And it is a point of wisdom in
this case; to lay the axe unto the root of the tree. Matthew. 3.10. 2. This is an
universal leprosy that is gone over the whole man, the whole spirit, and
soul, and body, and is therefore called the old man, Romans 6.6. 3. This is such
a cursed root; and fountain of all evil, as will never cease sprouting,
boiling, and bubling up one corruption or other. Fitly resembled Esa. 57.20. to
the troubled Sea, that cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt
continually. So as when we have repented, and made our peace with God for our
actual sins, that we know by our selves, yet this is still apt to defile us
again, and cast filthy dirt upon our best actions; yea to bring us into danger
of falling again into the same, or fouler evils; and so apt ever and anon to
interrupt our peace with God, and to minister unto us matter of new doubts and
fears continually.

Means.
It therefore stands us upon, to enquire how and by what means we may be
delivered from the danger of this sin especially. And this is the second
thing I propounded for the enforcing of this exhortation, to show you the means
how we might be delivered from it. And those we may best learn of the
blessed Apostle, who when he had professed this desire that I now exhort you
to, Romans 7.24. Who shall deliver me? etc. In the words following he answers
himself, and gives full satisfaction to his own conscience in this weighty
question (which is the answer also that I must give to every one of you, in
whom the Lord has wrought that care and desire that was in Paul; as doubtless
he has in every good heart here, that knows the vi^enesse of his own
nature, and does remember, and believe that which I have taught you at large,
touching original sin) he answers himself (I say) by telling us, who
delivered him from the body of this death, how he was freed from the checks
and accusations of his own conscience for it. 1. By Jesus Christ, who
delivered him from the guilt of it, that it should never be imputed to him
unto condemnation verse 25. I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. And
8.1. There is therefore now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.
2. By the spirit of God, who freed him from the power, and dominion of his
corruption, and did mortify it in him, Romans 8.12. They that are in Christ,
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, for the law (the commanding
power) of the spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus, has freed me from the
law (the commanding power) of sin and death. The same answer he also gives, 1 Corinthians. 6.11. Ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye are justified in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. Here are therefore
(beloved you see) two ways (and other way then these two there is none)
whereby we may be delivered from all the hurt, and danger that may come to us
by the Original corruption of our nature. 1. By Jesus Christ that has
justified us, and delivered us from the guilt, and punishment of it. 2. By the
spirit of Christ which sanctifies, and delivers us from the power and
dominion of it. The first is without us, and made ours by imputation only, as
Adams transgression, which was the cause of our original corruption, was made
ours: and as our sins were made Christ's. The second is within us, a fruit and
evidence of the former, and more sensibly known and perceived by us, because
we are agents in it our selves.

Means 1.
First. Labor to be in Christ, and to get assurance to thy heart, by a lively
faith, that Christ is thine, so shall the filthiness of thy nature be covered,
and never imputed unto thee, it shall never make either thee or thy service
odious unto God, or displeasing unto him. There is no condemnation (as you have
heard) to them that are in Christ. Nay God is well pleased with all them that
are in Christ, Ephesians. 1.6. He has made us accepted in the beloved. Yea he is
well pleased with our poor services, notwithstanding they be so stained, and
defiled with this Original corruption. Prove. 15.8. The prayer of the upright,
is his delight. Yea, he sees none of these stains or corruptions, whereby
themselves, and their best services are defiled; that is, so as to impute them,
or to think ever the worse of them for them. Numb. 13.21. He sees no
iniquity in Jacob; Nay no spot, nor wrinkle, nor any such thing as the Apostle
speaks; Ephesians. 5.27. He passes by these transgressions, these swervings
from his righteous law, which he discerns in them, and in their best
actions, as the Prophet speaks, Micah 7.18. And why so? Surely two reasons
there be why it must needs be so.

First. Because the Lord exacted of Christ our surety, the full punishment, God
condemned sin in the flesh, says the Apostle, Romans 8 3. In our nature which
Christ our surety for our sakes took upon him, God received full satisfaction
to his justice for this sin. Our blessed Savior did not take upon him our
actual sins only, when he was made sin for us, as the Apostle speaks 2
Cor. 5.21. but this root, this fountain of all actual sins he took upon him
also, our old man was crucified with him, Romans 6.6. And therefore also was his
mother purified as well as other women, Luke 2.22. as if the child that she
had borne, had been unclean by nature, and had made her unclean as other
children did their mothers (for that was the thing that was taught by that
ceremony) and he was circumcised also as well as other children, Luke 2.21. as
if his heart and nature had had a filthy foreskin that must needs have been
cut off (for that was the thing that was taught by that ceremony, Jeremy 4.4.)
Surely Christ had no uncleannes of nature of his own, no filthy foreskin of
heart of his own, but the uncleanness of all our natures, the filthy foreskin
of all our hearts, the punishment of them he took upon him, it was imputed to
him; and therefore it was necessary, the blessed Virgin his mother should be
purified, and his own blessed flesh circumcised also, and made subject to that
painful, and bloody Sacrament. And by this circumcision of our blessed
Savior and surety, was signified and taught that all the fore-skins of our
hearts that are his Elect, the whole body of sin, and of our natural
corruption was quite cut off, and taken from us by him, so as it shall never be
imputed unto us. The body of the sins of the flesh (that is of our corrupt
nature, says the Apostle, Col. 2.11.) is put off (from us) by the circumcision
of Christ.

The second reason why God cannot loath them that are in Christ, for the vile
Matthew. 1.18. His mother was found to be with child of the holy Ghost, And Luke
1.35. The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall
over-shadow thee, therefore that holy thing that shall be borne of thee, shall
be called the Son of God. And why was our nature made so perfectly holy in
Christ our surety? Surely for us, and for our sakes, that we might have the
benefit of it, that it might be imputed unto us, and fully cover the impurity
of our nature. He is made unto us of God (faith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.30.) not
only wisdom, and righteousness, but sanctification also. And the Lord now
beholding us and our nature, not as it is in it self, but as it is in Christ,
sees, that is, imputes not any spot or blemish unto us, but esteems us, as
he speaks, Cant. 4.7. Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee.
All this was typified unto us by the Lords dealing with Iehoshua, Zac. 3.3, 4.
First, he took away from him his filthy garments, and then he clothed him
with change of raiment. The best of us in our selves, stand before the Lord in
filthy garments, but first the Lord Jesus by his most meritorious, and
satisfactory sufferings, has taken our filthy garments from us, so as the Lord
will never look upon them any more; Secondly, By the perfect holiness of our
nature in his person, has clothed us with change of raiment; and made us not
only clean, but beautiful in the eyes of his father, and made him to account
of us, as he speaks, Cant. 7.6. How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love
for delights?

Applic.
O then (beloved) if any of us do desire to be cleansed from the filthiness of
our vile nature, and to be delivered from the danger of it, so as it may never
be imputed unto us, let us give all diligence to make this sure to our selves,
that Christ is ours. To have reformed our lives much, and to have left many
sins, and to have many good things in us (alas) will not serve our turn, to
yield us any sound comfort, till by a lively faith we have laid hold of
Christ, and made him our own. It will never be well with us, till we have the
same mind and heart in us, that was in blessed Paul, Phil. 3.5 -- 9. that we
can prize Christ above whatsoever is dearest to us in the world, that we can
make no reckoning (I say not of all profits, and pleasures, and honors, but
even) of all our glorious profession, of all our morality, strictnes in our
conversation, of all our zeal and for wardnesse in religion (for these were
the things that Paul had to glory in) in comparison of Christ. Till we can be
content to renounce them all, and count them but as dung, that we may win
Christ, and be found in him.

Now if any man desire to know whether he be in Christ or no, he must
inquire, and try whether he have the spirit of Christ. If any man have not the
spirit of Christ (says the Apostle, Man's 2
Romans 8.9.) he is none of his. And 1 John 3. 24. hereby we know he abides
in us, by the spirit which he has given us. And this is the second means
whereby (as I told you) Paul said, he was delivered from the body of his
death, and whereby every one of us must seek to be delivered from it, and
from the accusations of our conscience for it, by feeling in our selves the
work of Gods spirit, subduing the corruption of our nature, keeping it from
reigning in us, mortifying and killing of it in us, Romans 8.2. This is the way
to know we are in Christ, and that by his death, and the perfect holiness of
our nature in him, we are fully delivered from the guilt, and punishment of
it, if by his spirit we be delivered from the dominion of it. He will subdue
our iniquities (says the prophet Micah. 7.19.) Where God pardons sin, he
subdueth it, that it shall not reign any more. If thy corruption be not
mortified in thee, but have as much strength and vigor in thee, as ever it
had, certainly it is not pardoned, thou art not in Christ. This second means
of our deliverance, though it be not so full, and perfect, as the former, yet
is it more sensible unto us, and we may better take notice of it, then of the
former, because we are agents in it our selves. They that are Christ's, (says
the Apostle, Galat. 5.24) have crucified the flesh, with the affections and
lusts. And Romans 8.13. If ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the
body, ye shall live. And 1 John 3.3. He that has this hope in him, purifieth
himself. And 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit. And 1 Pet. 1.22. Ye have purified your souls, in obeying
the truth through the spirit. We must cleanse our selves, purify our selves,
keep under our corruption, that it reign not in us, mortify and kill it, or
it will kill, and damn us. If we do not this our selves, certainly we have
no part in Christ.

Why (will you say) alas what can we do? I answer, surely nothing of our selves
by nature, Romans 5.6. Yea, 2 Cor. 3.5. Nothing till we be in Christ. John
15.5. Without me ye can do nothing. Nothing till we be acted and led by the
spirit of God. We must through the spirit, mortify the deeds of the body, as
the Apostle speaks, Romans 8.^3. there is no way else to do it. The Popish
exercises of mortification, consisting in their kind of fast^ings, and
whipping, and pilgrimage, and wearing of hair cloth next their skin, will
never work true mortification in the heart. Of them we may say with the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 48. Bodily exercise profits little. And Col. 2.23. Though
they have a great show of wisdom, and humility, and of neglect of the body,
yet they are of no worth, (...) because they are but will worship, not such
exercises of mortification, as Gods spirit has taught us.

If any man then shall ask, what are those means and exercises of
mortification, that Gods spirit has taught us to use? I answer. They be seven
principally.

Lecture LXIIII. On Psalm 51.5. July 17. 1627.
FIrst. Means 1
He that desires to mortify corruption in himself, and to keep it from
reigning in him, must observe and make conscience of the very first stirrings
and beginnings of it, even in his heart. Observe them I say first, that so we
may know what are the sins we are most inclined unto, and then make conscience
of them, tread upon these eggs of the cockatrice (as the Prophet calls them.
Esaias 59.5.) while our heart is hatching of them. Keep the heart with all
diligence, says the holy Ghost, Prove. 4.23. Take heed (says the Apostle,
Hebr. 3.12.) left there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, to
depart from the living God. The unbelief of the heart, the motion, and
inclination of the heart, to depart from God must be taken heed of. They that
are Christ's (says the Apostle, Gal. 5.24.) have crucified the flesh, with the
affections and lusts. The very affections and lusts of the flesh, must be
crucified. This is the way to keep sin from reigning. Take heed to your spirit
(says the Prophet Mal. 2.15.) and let none deal treacherously against the
wise of his youth; and again verse 16. Take heed to your spirit, that ye deal
not treacherously. The way for a man to keep himself from falling into any
actual sin, against God or man, is to take heed to his spirit. And certainly
the man that has no care to observe his own evil inclinations, and the first
workings of corruption in his heart, that makes no conscience of the vanity
and wickedness of his thoughts, and affections, has no true desire to
mortify sin in himself, or to keep it from reigning in him.

Secondly. Means 2
He that desires to mortify sin in himself, and to keep it from reigning,
must so soon as he spyeth it, set himself against it, as against a mortal
enemy that warreth against his soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. and be content, even to
offer violence to himself, and to his own nature in it. Certainly the
corruption of our nature, will not be weakened, and kept under, without putting
our selves to much pain, without doing violence to our selves. This work of
mortification which is the first part of true repentance, is compared to the
plucking out of our right eye, and casting it from us with detestation, Matthew.
5.29. It is called a sacrificing of our selves, Romans 12.1. And a crucifying of
our flesh, with the lusts and affections of it, Gal. 5.24. All these were most
painful things. See this in three particulers.

First. We must resist, and fight against every corruption we find, That I
do, I allow not, Romans 7.15. The spirit lusts against the flesh (says the
Apostle, Galat. 5.17.) and th^se two be contrary the one to the other. If the
spirit be in us, we shall find him (like Jacob in his mothers womb, Genesis
25.22) struggling with this Esan. And certainly, where there is not this
resisting of corruption, there is no truth of grace; and where this conflict is
maintained, there corruption shall not reign, but will be kept under. That
which the Apostle says of Satan himself, Iam. 4.7. may be also said of this
imp of Satan, if we can but conscionably resist him, we may be sure to overcome
him.

What I hate (says Paul; Romans 7.15.) that do I. See two notable examples of
this holy indignation against themselves. The one in Ephraim; Ier. 31.19. After
I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh. The other in the Publican, Luke 18.13.
who smote himself upon his breast. As if either of them should have said, o
what a wretch am I that have in me so cursed a nature, so apt to offend God?
Certainly where there is truth of grace, the heart will rise against our own
corruptions. The righteous soul (as we see in the example of Lot, 2 Pet. 2.8.)
will vex it self even for the sins of others, and therefore much more for his
own. And where this anger and indignation against sin, is nourished there sin
cannot reign. That which Solomon says of a backbiter, Pro. 25.23. may be said
of our lusts, An angry countenance will drive them away. They will soon grow
out of heart, if they be not much made of.

that in us that is in our flesh dwells no good thing, Romans 7.18 but an utter
unaptnesse, and untowardnesse to that that is good) should be a just cause of
mourning unto us; upon poverty of spirit follows mourning. Mat. 5.3, 4. how
much more these strong inclinations, we find continually in our selves, unto
that that is evil. And even this grieving for our sins, has great force to
weaken the strength of sin and to mortify it in us. By the sadness of the
countenance, (says the Holy Ghost, Eccle. 7.3.) the heart is made better. And
2 Cor. 7.10. Godly sorrow works repentance unto salvation, not to be repented
of. Certainly if we could thus resist our lusts, and be displeased, and mourn
heartily for them, our corruptions would not be so strong in us as they are. On
the other side, how can it be avoided but they must needs grow headstrong in
us, and carry us whither they list, when we are so far from killing and
crucifying them, that we cannot abide to be at any trouble with them at all, to
put our selves to any pain for the subduing of them; we never set our selves
in opposition unto them, nor are vexed or grieved in our selves for them, but
make them our best playfellowes, and (as Zophar speaks, Job 20.12, 13.)
wickedness is sweet in our mouth, we hide it under our tongue, we spare it,
and forsake it not.

Means 3
Thirdly, He that desires to mortify the corruption of his nature, and keep
it from reigning in him, must carefully shun all occasions and provocations
unto it, and be content to weane and abridge himself, of all such things as he
finds do feed, and increase it, though the things be in themselves never so
lawful. We must lay aside (says the Apostle, Heb. 12.1.) not only every
sin that hinders us in our spiritual race, but every weight also, every
clogg though it be no sin. The overmuch liberty that men have given to
themselves in such things, as are in their own nature lawful, has
marvellously strengthened and increased the natural corruption of their
hearts, and made it out of measure sinful. Look into the description that our
Savior makes, Luke 17.27, 28. of the behavior of the old world, and of Sodom
at those very times when Gods vengeance fell upon them. What were they doing
then? They did eat, and drink (says our Savior) and marry, and buy, and
sell, and plant, and build. Why what hurt was there in all this? Were not all
these things most lawful for them to do? Ye^ verily. But by overu-sing of
these lawful things and setting their hearts upon them, they choked all
grace, and care of heavenly things, they fed and increased the pride and
covetousness and cruelty and lust of their evil hearts, and so drowned
themselves in perdition. All things are lawful (says the Apostle, 1 Cor.
6.12.) but all things are not profitable. And a Christian must have respect to
this whether the thing that he uses be profitable for him, and will do him
good, as well as to that whether it be lawful or no. When the Apostle Peter
exhorts the faithful to take heed of their adversary the devil that he
prevail not over them, nor overcome them, 1 Pet. 5.8. he bids them be sober,
and watch. The same may be said to them, that desire to be preserved from the
power of their own corruptions and to overcome it, they must not take too much
of these outward comforts, not more then will do them good, not so much as will
overcome them. See the necessity of this in two particulars.

First, To keep company, and to refresh and make our selves merry by eating
Solomon's time, 1 King. 4.20. that they did eat, and drink and make merry
together. But a man may easily surfeit of this and take more then will do him
good; as they did, Amos 6.5, 6. who by their drinking together, their
recreation and their mirth, were made unsensible of the afflictions of Joseph.
Nay it is not possible but the corruption of the heart, must needs grow and
increase in the best man that is, if he keep not a measure in these things.
When Solomon himself (as strong a man as he was) gave himself too much
liberty this way that Whatsoever his eyes desired he kept not from them (as he
says, Eccle. 2.10.) he withheld not his heart, from any joy, he corrupted
himself fearfully. And certainly of those men (whereof the world now is full)
that give their nature the full swing in these matters of delight, that are
never well but when they are in the alehouse and in good company as they call
it; never well but when they are at one sport or other, make every day a
festival day as Dives did, Luke 16.19. as if they had no other calling, or
were borne for nothing else; of such men we may be bold to say there is no
mortification in them, no care at all to subdue the corruption of their nature,
such men care not how strong it grow, how much it increase in them. A Christian
therefore is bound in the use of these things to enquire whether he be made the
better or the worse by them; and to say as Eccl. 2.2. I said of mirth what do
thou? To use them with fear, lest he should take hurt by them, Jude 12. And
when a man finds that his weakness is such, that he cannot use recreations,
nor keep company as he has done, but he is made the worse by it, apt to
exceed and be overcome, more unapt to the service of God, and the duties of his
calling, he is bound in conscience to abstain, and weane himself from them.
The Apostle give thus in his own example two notable rules for this. The first
is 1 Cor. 6.12. All things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under
the power of any thing. The other is in 1 Cor. 8.13. If meat make my brother to
offend, I will never eat flesh while the world stands, lest I make my brother
to offend. And much more should this be the resolution of every true Christian,
if wine, and strong drink, if such company and recreations as I have been wont
to use, cause me to offend, I will never use them again while I live.

Secondly, To labor in our callings and to follow diligently the means of
Exodus 20.9. Six days shall thou labor and do all thy work. And he that is
not careful to provide for his family is worse then an infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8.
But a man may easily surfeit and take more of this also then will do him good.
For the cares of the world, and the deceitfullnesse of riches (says our
Savior, Mat. 13.22.) choke the word, and make it unfruitful, even under the
best ministry in the world. Nay it is not possible, but the best man under
heaven must needs surfeit, and take hurt by it, if he keep not a measure in it.
Therefore the most wise God that knows us better then we do our selves, has
seen it necessary to injoine unto his people one day in every week to be kept
as a Sabbath, a day of rest from our worldly labors and affairs; and spent in
spiritual duties, Exodus 20.8. Yea he saw it necessary even for Adam before his
fall that he should not continually be employed in dressing of Paradise, but
that one day in seven he should rest from that labor, and be employed wholly
in spiritual duties, Genesis 2.3. Yea he has ordained that no one of the week
days should be wholly spent in our wordly affairs, but that some part of
every morning, and of every evening should be spared from them, and employed in
spiritual duties; As appears plainly in those two laws; the one for the
sacrifice, Exodus 29.38, 39. the other for the incense, Exodus 30.7, 8. which
every morning and evening was to be offered up unto the Lord.

Object. 1
If any man shall say, Tush, those were but ceremonial laws; what tell you us
of them?

Answ.
I answer, They were so indeed, but yet there is a moral equity of them, which
is perpetual. And of them I may say as the Apostle does of another of the same
kind, 1 Cor. 9.10. For our sakes, no doubt, this is written; to teach us, that
it is the will of God that every morning, and every evening, we should spend
some time in his service.

Object. 2
If any shall object again, Tush, those laws concerned the Priests only in
the Temple, and serve well in the moral equity of them to prove that Ministers
should do so, but what is that to the people?

Ans.
I answer, That these laws concerned the people as well as the Priests, as
appears, Luke 1.10. The whole multitude were praying without (that is, in the
courts of the Lords house which was the place allotted to them in the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 22.5.) at the time of incense.

You see then how dangerous the Lord sees it is for us, to be always employed
in the affairs of our worldly callings (be our callings what they may be, for
some are certainly more toilesome then others are) how necessary it is for us
to be often taken off from them, and to have our hearts and minds turned another
way. And certainly the man that has most employment in the world has of all
other men most cause to love the Sabbath, and praise God for it, and long for
it, and acknowledge the necessity of it, yea to keep his times constantly for
religious duties every morning, and every evening; and to account it an
happiness if his occasions will also permit him to frequent Lectures; and to
say with David, Psalm. 84.4. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will
still be praising thee; Because he of all others is in most danger, to have his
heart corrupted and glued to the world. See a notable proof of this in that
straight commandment that is given unto the King, Deuteronomy. 17.19. and Josh. 1.8.
to read every day some part of the Bible. And Daniel would not omit his
constant course of praying three times a day, though he knew he was in danger
to be cast into the Lions den for it, Dan. 6.10. And therefore those men that
never have enough of toiling and moiling about the world, but as Solomon
speaks, Eccl. 4.8. There is no end of their labors, neither is their eye
satisfied with riches; they think they never have enough. These long days are
not long enough for them to do their business in, they can spare no time
morning nor evening for religious duties; nay six days in a week is not time
enough for them, but they must needs take some part of the Lords day to employ
in their worldly occasions; that see no necessity at all of spending any part
of the week days in religious duties either in hearing or reading of the
Word, or praying with their families, but are apt to say of them that use it as
Pharaoh did, Exodus 5.8. They are idle, and have nothing to do and therefore
they cry, saying, let us go and sacrifice unto our God; yea that see no
necessity of the Sabbath it self, specially not of those means God has
ordained for the sanctifying of it, but think they can do well enough without
them; and are apt to say of it as those did, Mal. 1.13. Oh what a weariness is
it? (And such men as I have described, the world, yea the Church of God is
every where full of) Such men I may boldly say have no mortification, and
consequently no true repentance in them at all, no care to keep under the
corruption of their own heart, such men certainly care not how strong it grow,
how much it increase in them. And he that has no care of that, he that does
not study, and practice mortification, certainly has not the spirit of Christ
in him (as you have heard) and therefore is none of his, he cannot possibly be
saved. Take a notable proof for this, in the speech and example of the blessed
Apostle, who when he had said, 1 Cor 9.25. Every man that striveth for the
mastery, is temperate in all things, And so he that striveth to get the
mastery over his own corruption, must be temperate in all things, and not take
too much, either of meat or drink, or of company, or of recreation, or of
worldly business; He adds verse 27. I keep under my body, and bring it into
subjection; lest by any means, when I have preached unto others, I my self
should be a cast away. If Paul had not bin temperate in all things, taking no
more of them then would stand with the health of his soul, Paul himself had
bin a cast away, and could never have bin saved.

Lecture LXV. on Psalm 51.5. July 24. 1627.
THE fourth means whereby the corruption of our nature is to be mortified,
Means 4
is a conscionable use of the exercises of religion. I know there be many that
use religious duties, both public, and private, ordinary, and extraordinary
constantly, who yet cannot master nor subdue any one lust; but if they did use
them conscionably, and in a spiritual manner certainly the strength of their
corruptions would be abated by them. Walk in the spirit (says the Apostle,
Galat. 5 16.) and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. If in this as
well as in other parts of our conversation, we could walk in the spirit,
perform spiritual duties in a spiritual manner, we could not fulfill the
lusts of our flesh as we do. See the truth of this but in two exercises of
religion (not to trouble you with more) that are in most daily use with all
Christians, and that is, the Word and Prayer.

First. There is great force in reading of the Word, and hearing of it, to
subdue and mortify sin in us, if it be used conscionably. Now ye are clean
(says John 15.3.) through the word which I have spoken unto you. The
conscionable hearing of the Word, is able to cleanse the heart, from the
corruption that is in it It is therefore called the ingrafted Word, James ^.21
because (as the sciense of a good fruit that is grafted into a
crab-tree-stocke, will change the nature of the juice and sap of it, so) the
Word is able to change our natures quite. See two notable instances of the
power the Word has this way. 1. In the young man, in whom we know all kinds
of lusts are most strong, and violent; and yet of him David says, Psalm. 119.9.
that if he would but conscionably exercise himself in the Word, if he would
take heed to his way according the Word, he might be able to cleanse his way,
to cleanse his heart, even from those unruly lusts of his. 2. In a King, who of
all men in the world, is in most danger, as of other sins, so specially of
this, to have his heart lifted, and puffed up with pride, and contempt, of them
specially that are his own subjects, and yet of him the Lord says, that if he
will but exercise himself conscionably in the reading of the Word, he shall
obtain power over this corruption. For giving the reason, why he would have
him every day to read some part of the Bible, he says thus, Deuteronomy. 17.20. That
his heart be not lifted up above his brethren, and that he turn not aside
from the commandment, to the right hand, or to the left. As if he should say,
this will subdue both the pride of his heart, and every other corruption that
is in it. And two reasons there are, why it must needs be so.

First. Because the Word is able to discover every corruption to us, how by the
law comes the knowledge of sin, says the Apostle, Romans 3.20. It is a
discerner, and discoverer of the very thoughts, and intents of the heart, as he
says, Heb. 3.12. Compared therefore to a glass, Iam. 1.23. and to the light
that makes all things manifest, as the Apostle speaks. Ephesians. 5.13.

The words that I speak unto you, (says our Savior, John 6.63.) they are
spirit, and they are life. I have hid thy word in my heart (says David, Psalm.
119.11.) that I might not sin against thee. How could that keep him from
sinning? Surely, when any lust began to rise in his heart, when he was tempted
to any sin, if he could then but remember some sentence of Gods word, that
condemned that sin, that would be of force to stay him from it. That even as
our blessed Savior himself did overcome Satan with Scriptum est. It is
written, Matthew. 4.10. so may the members of Christ be able to overcome Satan,
and their own corruptions, by calling to mind, and meditating, and applying to
themselves, that which is written in the Word against them. So says David,
Psalm. 17.4. By the words of thy lips, I have kept me from the paths of the
destroyer. For it is the sword of the spirit, as the Apostle calls it, Ephesians.
6.17. It is the weapon of our warfare, mighty through God to cast down our
imaginations, and every thing in us that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity, every thought to the obedience
of Christ, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor 10.4, 5. This Divine power that is in
the Word, to bridle and subdue their corruptions, Gods people have always
felt, and found by experience in themselves, and do all of them to this day;
and that is the cause why they do take such pains for it, and esteem more of
it (as Job speaks, Job 23.12.) then of their necessary food.

Applic.
They that regard not the Word, exercise not themselves in the reading and
hearing of it, or if they do read, and hear it, yet have no care to hide it
in their hearts, and to use it as the sword of the spirit, against their own
corruptions, certainly such are far from mortification, any have no desire at
all to mortify and kill sin in themselves.

Paul used, when he was troubled with the thorn in his flesh, and sought to
be rid of it, 2 Cor. 12.8. and by it, he obtained, though not a full
deliverance from it, yet strength sufficient to master it; so as he was not
overcome by it. That which David says of his worldly enemies, Psalm. 56.9.
every Christian may say of these lusts that war against his soul. When I cry
unto thee, then shall mine enemies turn back. When we can pray, we may be
sure to become conquerours over any of our lusts. By our faithful prayer, we
may be able to deliver any brother from the bondage of any sin that he is
fallen into, if it be not the unpardonable sin; For so says the Apostle, 1
John 5.16. How much more may we have confidence to obtain by prayer,
deliverance from the dominion of any of our own corruptions? For of all suits
we can make to God, we have greatest assurance to speed in this when we pray
for grace. How much more (says our Savior, Lut 11.13.) shall your heavenly
father give the holy spirit to them that ask him? Applic.
Certainly this is one chief cause, why the most of us can no better prevail
against our corruptions, because we do not more heartily complain unto God of
them, and pray against them. And we may say as the Church does, Esaias. 64.6, 7.
Our iniquities like a wind have taken us away, they carry us headlong whether
they please. And the reason is given in the next words, There is none that
calls upon thy name, or that stirs up himself to take hold of thee. Means
5


The fifth means the spirit of God in the word has directed us unto, for the
mortifying of our flesh, is to take up our cross, that is, to bear willingly
the afflictions God is pleased to exercise us by. A Christian is not bound to
desire affliction, I have not desired the woeful day, thou know, says the
Prophet. Iere. 17.16. But when he sees once it is his cross, the cross that
the Lord has appointed, and thinks fit for him, the cup that his father has
given him, as our Savior speaks John 18.11. then must he even take it up,
and undergo it willingly. This means our Savior prescribes. Luke 9.23. If
any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross
daily, these two go together. There are sundry strange things spoken in the
Scripture, touching affliction. As 1. That Gods people have borne it willingly.
Lev. 26.41. They shall accept or suffer willingly, the punishment of their
iniquity. 2. That they have professed it was good for them that they were
afflicted, as David did, Psalm. 119.71. 3. That they should rejoice when they
are abased, and made low, James 1.10. Yea, that they should count it all joy,
exceeding joy, when they fall into diverse tentations, that is afflictions.
James 1.2. 4. That they have just cause to doubt their estate, if they be
without affliction, Hebr. 12.8. If ye be without chastisement, whereof all
are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons. These are strange
Paradoxes to flesh and blood, and yet undoubted truths. And surely a chief
reason of all this, is because of the great force that affliction has in Gods
children, to mortify their lusts, and to subdue sin in them. By this shall the
iniquity of Jacob be purged (says the Prophet Esa. 27.9.) and this is all the
fruit, even the taking away of his sin. He reapeth no fruit by his
affliction, profits not by it, in whom the strength of corruption is not in
some measure abated by it. Affliction therefore is compared to baptizing, and
washing, that takes away the filth of the soul. Mark 10.38, 39. to a
winnowing, that blows away the chafe that is in it, Amos 9.9. to fire, that
refineth, and purges away the dross that is in it, Zach. 13.9. In a word,
that which the Apostle speaks of the shame that is brought upon men, by the
censures of the Church, 1 Cor. 5.5. the same may be said of that humiliation,
that God brings his servants to, by any affliction, it is most effectual to
the destruction of the flesh, to the mortifying of that sinfulness, and
corruption that is in their hearts. If then thou desire to have thy lusts and
corruptions mortified, Applic.
thou must be content to bear afflictions willingly, even thine own cross.
When the Apostle had exhorted Gods people to cleanse their hands, and purge
their hearts, that so they might draw near unto God. James 4.8. He directs
them to this means, verse 9. suffer affliction, mourn, and we^pe. Yea, if
thou have no afflictions of thine own, it is profitable for thee to
communicate in an holy sympathy with the afflictions of others, specially of
Gods Churches and people, and to make them thine own. Remember them that are
in bonds, as bound with them (says the Apostle, Hebr. 13.3.) and them which
suffer adversity, as being your selves also in the body. This is that which the
holy Ghost teaches us, Eccle. 7.2. It is better to go into the house of
mourning, then into the house of feasting. Alas (will thou say) I love not to
go to them that are sick, or in any great misery, it will make my heart so
sad, and heavy. O but (says the holy Ghost) that sadness is profitable, it is
good for thee, to have thy heart made heavy sometimes this way. Sorrow (says
he, verse 3.) is better then laughter, for by the sadness of the countenance,
the heart is made better; Corruption is weakened, and destroyed by it. And he
that cannot endure any affliction, cannot abide to be sad at any time,
certainly has no desire to mortify sin in himself; he knows not what
mortification, and consequently not what true repentance means.

The sixth means of Mortification, Mean^ 6
is this. He that desires to have sin mortified in himself, must be willing
to dye, and in his heart subscribe to that sentence of the holy Ghost, Eccle.
7.1. The day of a man's death, is better then the day of his birth. No man may
impatiently desire death; we may not desire death out of coffeehouse of
mind, because we are weary of the miseries we are subject unto in this life.
It was the sin of Moses to pray thus to God, Numb. 11.15. If thou deals thus
with me, kill me I pray thee out of hand, if I have found favor in thy sight,
and let me not see my wretchedness. Nay, we may not desire death out of a
longing, to be rid of our sins, and to be with Christ absolutely, or
impatiently, but under correction (as we say) and with a submitting of our
wills to the will of God, if he see it good for us. We (like soldiers in the
field) must be content to keep our stations, wherein the Lord has set us,
till he shall be pleased to dismiss, and call us away. Lord now let thou
thy servant to depart in peace, says good Simeon, Luke 2.29.. Though Paul knew
it were far better for him to dye, then to live, as he professes, Phil.
1.23. yet durst he not desire it absolutely, but was in a straight as he says,
and submits himself wholly to the will of God in it. Yet is it not an
unlawful thing for a Christian to desire death in this manner; yea it is a
good thing and a grace we should all strive to attain unto, not only to be
willing to dye when God shall call us, but even to desire death also. Paul
professes of himself, that he did desire to be dissolved, Phil. 1*23. And
he speaks thus in the name of all the faithful, 2 Cor. 5.2. In this we
groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon, with our house, which is from
heaven. And verse 6. Knowing that while we are at home in the body, we are
absent from the Lord. And though there be many other reasons, which should
make Gods people willing to dye, (which out of my respect to the time, I will
not now mention) yet this is a principal, that when death comes once, we
shall sin no more. While this life lasts, we shall never give over sinning
against God, He that has entered into his rest, has ceased from his own
works, says the Apostle, Hebr. 4.10. but till then, no man can quite cease
from his own works, but is in continual danger of falling. Nay, no man can
tell how far he may fall, and admit that the Elect cannot utterly apostate
from God, of whom let it be said, that he has everlasting life, and shall
not come into condemnation, but is passed from death to life. John 5.24. Yet
may such fall fearfully, yea, are in continual danger of falling fearfully
so long as they live. How fearful falls have many of Gods worthies taken in
their latter times? David's first ways are commended, 2 Chronicles 17.3. which
implies, that his last days were not so good. No no, in his latter time he
fell (as we have heard) fearfully. The like is noted of Solomon, 1 Kings
11.4. And of Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16.10.12. And of Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.35. For,
1. while we are in this world, we are never out of Satan's danger. For he is
the prince of this world, John. 14.30. 2. That fountain of corruption that is
in our vile natures, will never be drawn dry, while we live here; this root of
bitterness, will never be stocked up, nor killed, there can never be a perfect
cure made of that filthy leprosy, that is run over our whole nature, so long
as this life lasts. Therefore are the corruptions of our nature, called our
members that are upon the earth. Col 3*5. and worldly lusts. Titus 2.12.
because while we are here upon the earth, while we live in this world, we can
never be rid of them. The Apostle compares himself, and the best of Gods
servants, to earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7. And the earthen vessels that were
defiled with any legal pollution, could not be sufficiently purged, till they
were quite broken in pieces, as you shall see Levit. 11.33. and 15.12. To teach
us that we can never be perfectly cleansed from the filthiness of our
nature, till we be broken in pieces by death. We have a double righteousness by
Christ, as we had a double unrighteousnes from Adam; the one imputed to our
justification, and by that we are already perfectly cleansed from all our
sins, as the Apostle speaks, 1 John 1.7. the other inherent in our
sanctification, and that is not yet perfect, as the Apostle speaks, Romans
5.49. As by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners. (How? Not by
imputation only, for of that he had spoken, verse 18.) so by the obedience of
one, many shall be made righteous. They are not yet, but they shall be. When
shall they be so? Surely after this life is ended; As the Apostle calls the
faithful departed, Hebr. 12.2^. The spirits of just men that are made perfect.
The best man's sanctification is not perfect here; the holiest man that is, is
not perfectly cleansed, while he lives, but has much filthiness remaining
in him. Prove. ^0*9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my
sin? We may do much in the work of mortification, by such means as I have
told you G^^s spirit in the word has directed us unto, we may keep it from
reigning in our mortal bodies, as the Apostle exhorts us, Romans 6.12. but so
long as these mortal bodies have life in them, so long will our sins have life
in them. Though it reign not in us as a King, so as we obey it willingly, yet
it keeps us in bondage, as a tyrant does his captives, and slaves, as the
Apostle complains, Romans 7.23. It brought him into captivity. Now when death
comes, it (and nothing but it) will set us free from this bondage. He that
is dead (says the Apostle, Romans 6.7.) is freed from sin. Death will free us
from all danger, and possibility of offending God, and falling away from him;
then may it be said of our sins, as Moses says of the Egyptians, Exodus
14.13. Ye shall see them again no more for ever. And what child of God is
there, that would not even in this respect be willing to dye? When Joseph was
in prison, though he wanted nothing there, but had all at command, Genesis 39.22,
23. yet see how earnest he was with Pharaohs chief Butler, to help him to his
liberty, Genes. 40.14. Think on me when it shall be well with thee, and show
kindness I pray thee unto me, and make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring
me out of this house. I know well there may be in the dearest of Gods
servants, an unwillingnesse and fear to dye, as there was in Jeremiah, Ier
37.20. Our Savior fore-warning Peter of the manner of his death, tells him,
John 21.18. he should be carried whither he would not. Whereby it appears,
that even in the blessed Martyrs, there has been some unwillingnesse to dye.
Though Lots righteous soul was vexed day by day, while he lived in Sodom, 2
Pet. 2.8. yet, o how he lingered when God would take him from thence, Genesis
19.16. Even the Saints of God, who while they live in this world, this Sodom,
are daily vexed and disquieted with their own corruptions, are not so willing
to leave this world, as they should be. When Cyrus made proclamation for the
Jews, that who so would, might return from the land of their captivity, it is
said, Ezra 1.5. none were willing to leave Babylon, but those whose spirits God
had raised up to go. Though we know this world is as Babylon to us, the land
of our captivity and bondage, yet till God raise up our spirits by his grace,
we can never be willing to leave it, but shall rather be desirous still to
serve in this bondage, as we may also see, Exodus 14.12. And great reason
there is for this. 1. Death is a parting of two most dear and inward, and
ancient friends. When David and Jonathan were to depart one from another for a
while, o how grievous was their parting, 1 Samuel 20 41. But the soul and the
body have bin more inward and ancient friends, then ever Jonathan and David
were, no marvel therefore, though their parting be painful and grievous. 2.
The best of Gods children do believe but in part. Though the spirit be ready,
the flesh is weak, as our Savior speaks, Matthew. 26.41. But though there be
some unwillingnesse in the best to dye, yet they know it is their fault and
sin, to be so, they know they ought to be willing upon this ground* even in
this their spirit in them, lusts against the flesh, as the Apostle speaks,
Galat. 5.17. Yea, they overcome this unwillingnesse in the end, according to
that promise, Psalm. 29.11* The Lord will give strength unto his people, the
Lord will bless his people with peace. And certainly, he that desires not,
that striveth not to be willing to dye, even upon this ground; because death
and nothing but death) will perfect the work of mortification in him, has
just cause to suspect that there is no truth of saving grace in him, no sense
of the vile corruption of his nature, it is no bondage unto him.

Lecture LXVI. On Psalm 51.5. August 7. 1629.
Means 7
THe seventh and last Means of Mortification is this. He that desires to
mortify, and subdue any corruption that is strongest in him, must flee to
Christ by faith for strength against it; he must exercise and make use of his
faith, for the mortifying of it; and he shall find great force in it, this way.
All other means we have heard of, are in vain without this, and this will do
the deed, when all other means do fail. Now for the more plain and
profitable handling of this last means, these three points are distinctly to
be considered. 1. That till a man has true faith, he can mortify no
corruption. 2. That true faith wheresoever it is, will mortify sin. 3. That
for the mortifying of sin faith must be exercised and put forth, and how that
is to be don.

Luke 18.11. it may well be, was truly said, he was no extortioner, no unjust
man, no adulterer; and that also, Mat. 19.20. All these things have I kept from
my youth up. And Paul says of himself, Phil. 3.6. that his life had been
blameless, even before he knew Christ. But yet neither in the Pharisee, nor in
Paul, nor in any other that is not in Christ, was ever any sin truly mortified
and subdued. Some corruptions may lurk and lie very close in him and not
break forth nor show themselves in outward actions, but mortified they cannot
be. Neither the Fox, nor the Wolf, nor the Lion, nor the Bear will do any
hurt, or show what they be so long as they are either a sleep, or tied up.
Sin shall not have dominion over you (says the Apostle, Rom 6.14.) for ye
are not under the law but under grace. Till a man be under grace, in the estate
of grace reconciled to God in Christ, sin must needs have dominion over him.
For mortification is a part of sanctification, and a man must first be
justified before he can be sanctified, Romans 8.30. Whom he justified them he
glorified. All true sanctification proceeds from faith and is a fruit
thereof. As our Savior speaks to Paul, Acts 26.18. of such as shall have
inheritance in heaven, he calls them such as are sanctified by faith in him.
As the branch (says our Savior, John 15.4.) cannot bear fruit of it self
except it abide in the vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me. The good
things you see in any man that is not by a lively faith ingrafted into Christ,
are no better then wild grapes or figs unacceptable to God, and unprofitable to
themselves.

Applic.
And therefore it is a pitiful thing to see how men content themselves with
this, that they have reformed their lives and find some good things in
themselves, though they have no true faith at all nor ever seek after it, We
should first labor to make the tree good, or else the fruit can not be good, as
our Savior speaks, Matthew. 12.33.

Peter speaks, Acts 15.9. Yea nothing has that force to strengthen a man
against any of his corruptions, and against the strongest tentations he can
have unto any sin, as true faith has. This the Apostle teaches, 1 John 5.4,
5. This is the victory that overcommeth the world, even our faith* who is he
that overcommeth the world but he that believes? He and none but he. See the
force of faith both these ways in an instance or two.

First, For purifying the heart, and killing of our lusts; see the force of
faith Luke 17.3, 4. If thy brother trespass against thee seven times in a day,
and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent, thou shall
forgive him; The Apostles said unto the Lord (verse 5.) increase our faith. As
if they had said, unless we have faith we shall never be able to abstain from
revenge so often, but if thou will increase our faith we shall be able to
conquer, even this sin. 2. Zacheus had been a most covetous man (and that you
know is a most strong corruption, and hardly subdued) and yet so soon as he
had received Christ by faith into his heart, he overcame this lust presently as
you may see by the bountiful restitution, he was content to make, Luke 19.8.
He would restore fourefold. 3. Sundry of the Corinthians had been outragiously
filthy given not only to fornication, and adultery but even to Sodomy and
unnatural lust; 4. They had been also given to drunkenness as the Apostle
tells them, 1 Cor. 6.9. -- 11. (and these are sins you know that are hardly
left, and overcome) and yet so soon as they had obtained grace to believe in
Christ aright they were presently delivered from the dominion of these sins.
Such were some of you (says he, 1 Cor. 6.11.) but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of our God.

And as for the force that is in faith to make us overcome the world and the
Heb. 11.33 -- 37. that though they were tempted, and urged by most cruel
tortures and persecutions to sin against God yet by faith they overcame them
all. Yea (as he says, verse 34.) out of weakness were made strong; that is,
though they were in themselves at first as weak and timorous as any of us, can
be in the like case, yet their faith in the end made them strong, to overcome
all. And (blessed be God) no age, no place has wanted examples of such, as
through faith have overcome and vanquished as strong corruptions and as violent
tentations as ever any of us can be subject unto. This force of faith to
mortify corruption, will yet be further evident unto us if we will consider
two reasons and grounds of it.

First, True faith applies all that Christ did and suffered particularly to
every Phil. 2.7. that he made himself of no reputation. Many were astonished at
thee (says the Prophet, Esa. 52.14) his visage was so marred more then any
man, and his form more then the sons of men. And 53.3. We (even his own
people, and Disciples) hid as it were our faces from him, he was despised, and
we esteemed him not. And yet all this was nothing in comparison of his inward
miseries, and sufferings, his soul was exceeding sorrowful even unto death,
Matthew. 26.38. He was so overwhelmed with terror and fear of that death he was
to endure, that in his prayer he uttered strong cries and roared and shed
tears abundantly, Heb. 5.7. He sweat drops of blood (through the extremity of
his sorrow and anguish) so abundantly that they fell upon the ground, Luke
22.44. Being on the cross he could not contain himself but (though he knew
who were by to hear him, Mat. 27.39 -- 44. yet) cried with a loud voice, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, verse 46. In a word he was made a
curse, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 3.13. The curse of God, and the torments
due to all the elect, were laid on his blessed body and soul to the full. Now
true faith (as I said) applies all this that Christ has suffered particularly
to every believer, and persuades his soul that out of his love to him, he
endured all this. It makes him able to say with blessed Paul, Gal. 2.20. He
loved me, and gave himself for me. And as Esa 53.4. He has borne our griefs
and carried our sorrows. These sorrows and terrors, and torments were mine,
and I should have endured them everlastingly, if he had not endured them for
me. And verse 5. He was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our
iniquities; they were my sins, that put him to all these torments.

Now he that is thus persuaded Christ has so loved him, has had this respect
unto him in particular he cannot choose but he must needs out of love to
Christ, hate and renounce his sins. If the spirit of Christ have persuaded us
once that Christ has so dearly loved us, we cannot choose but love him
again. We love him (says the Apostle, 1 Io^. 4.19.) because he loved us
first. The blood of bulls and goats (says the Apostle, Heb. 9 13, 14.)
sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh, that is,
served the turn to cleanse a man from legal and ceremonial pollutions. How
much more shall the blood of Christ (if it be sprinkled, and by faith
particularly applied to you) purge your consciences from dead works to serve
the living God? O there is great force in this particular application of the
blood of Christ, and assurance it was shed for thee, to mortify sin in thee.
The love of Christ (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.14.) constrains us. Nothing
has that force to curb corruption in Gods child, and to compel him to live
in Gods fear as this has. They shall fear the Lord, and his goodness in the
latter days, that is, under the Gospel, says the Prophet, Hos. 3.5. When the
Apostle had prayed for the Ephesians 3.16. that they might be strengthened with
might, by the spirit of God in the inner man; He prays further, verse 18, 19
that to that end they may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
length and breadth and depth and height, and to know the love of Christ which
passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God. If
thou did indeed know the love of Christ aright, that out of his love to thee
he endured such torments even to save thee from hell; thou could not choose
but be strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner man to withstand and
overcome thine own corruptions.

I know the Papists prate much against, and blaspheme this doctrine of
particular application of Christ by faith, of the assurance it gives to a man
of Gods special love to him in Christ; they say it lays reins on men's
necks, and opens a gap to all licentiousness. But these two things I
confidently affirm concerning this Doctrine by warrant of Gods Word.

David says, Psalm. 78.34. When he show them, then they sought him and
returned, and inquired early after God; but it is far otherwise with Gods
child. The knowledge even of this more general love and goodness of the Lord,
to poor sinners, that he is ready upon their repentance and turning to him to
forgive their sins, how great soever they have been; that he offers Christ
unto all men in the ministry of the Gospel, and proclaims his pardon in the
most general terms that can be, Ioh. 3.16. and commands all to believe
that Christ died for them; Even the consideration of this general love to all,
that live in the Church, is a most strong and effectual argument to persuade a
man to forsake his sins and turn unto God. Nay till a man can be persuaded of
that love and goodness of God, he can never have an heart to repent, and to
turn unto him. This is plain by that speech of the Evangelicall Prophet, Esaias
55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and
let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God,
for he will abundantly pardon. Having these promises (says the Apostle, 2
Cor. 7.1. And what promises means he? Surely those mentioned. Cap. 6.16.18.)
let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit.

Secondly. That he that truly knows that Christ loved him, and gave himself
cannot possibly grow licentious by it. He that has gotten a conceit and
persuasion of heart, that Christ dyed for him, only out of a carnal, and
natural knowledge of the Doctrine of the Gospel, may abuse this persuasion I
grant, and grow the worse by it, such a one I know, may turn the grace of God
into wantonness. But he that has been taught this of God, and brought to
this persuasion by the word and spirit of God, cannot possibly abuse it, but it
must needs mortify sin in him. See a plain proof of this, Ephe. 4.20. But ye
have not so learned Christ (so he means, as to live licentiously still, what
follows, verse 21?) if so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught
by him, as the truth is in Jesus. As if he should have said. Many live in the
Church, and make a profession of Christ, by virtue only of an outward calling,
they have heard, and been taught by many excellent ministers of Christ, and by
hearing them, have attained the knowledge of Christ, but they never heard
Christ himself speaking to their heart, in the ministry of his word, they
were never taught of him, as the truth is in Jesus. And what is it to be taught
by him, as the truth is in Jesus? To know Christ aright? That he tells,
verse 22. That ye put off, concerning the former conversation, the old man,
which is corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts. The man that truly knows
Christ to have dyed for him, cannot but cast off, and renounce his lusts and
corruptions. This is that also which the Prophet teaches Zach. 12.10. I will
power upon them the spirit of grace, and they shall look upon me, whom they
have pierced, and they shall mourn abundantly. It is the spirit of grace
only that makes a man able to know, and believe aright, that his sins pierced
Christ; that Christ in all that he suffered, had special respect unto him;
nothing but the spirit of grace, makes a man able to look upon Christ, whom
he has pierced, to consider it, to be moved with admiration, and astonishment,
at this wonderful love of his. But when once the spirit of grace, has made a
man to know, and believe, and consider this, it must needs affect the heart
much, and make him mourn for his sins abundantly; it must needs work in him
a loathing of his sins, and a resolution to set himself against them.

O that all we, Applic.
that say we know, and believe that Christ loved us, and dyed for us, would
think seriously of this. Certainly, thou that say so, and find no force
in this assurance to mortify sin in thee, and to strengthen thee against thy
corruptions, deceivest thine own soul, and have no true assurance that Christ
bare such love to thee, as to endure so much for thy sake. Hereby we know,
that we know him, to be a propitiation for our sins (says the Apostle, 1
John 2.3, 4.) if we keep his commandments. He that says, I know him (to be
a propitiation for my sins, for that is the knowledge of Christ, he speaks
of, as appears verse 2.) and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and
the truth is not in him. He is a rank hypocrite, and void of all truth of
grace, how fair a show soever he make in the Church of God. O fearful
sentence against the most of such as say they have faith. And so much shall
suffice to have bin spoken of the first reason, why true faith must needs
mortify corruption, wheresoever it dwells, it applies Christ particularly
to every one that has it.

The second reason of it is this, because true faith joyneth, and uniteth us
mystical, and spiritual. Yea, this is a great mystery, as the Apostle calls
it, Ephesians. 5.32. But though it be mystical, and supernatural, yet it is most
true and real, a most near and unspeakeable union, that faith makes between
Christ, and every believing soul; as near as between husband and wife,
Ephesians. 5.23. as between the head and the members, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. as between
the vine, and the branches, John 15.5. By faith we receive him, and make him
our own, John 1.12. Nay, we feed upon him, and make him our own, as the meat
we eat, which is turned into our substance, is made our own, John 6.35. By
faith he dwells in us, Ephesians. 3.17. By faith we are grafted into him. Romans
11.23. Now if faith do so join us unto Christ, and make such an union between
us and him, it is not possible, but it must needs mortify and kill sin in us.
We cannot be thus joined unto Christ, but we must needs receive virtue and
power from him, his spirit must needs be derived from him unto us. He that is
joined unto the Lord (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.17) is one spirit. The law of
the spirit of life in Christ Jesus (says the Apostle, Romans 8.2.) has made me
free from the law of sin, and of death. The spirit of Christ must needs free
him from the dominion of sin, that is thus by faith united to him. And
therefore to conclude this second point. Certainly that man in whom sin
reigns still, in whom the strength of his natural corruption is not at all
abated, is not united unto Christ, and consequently has no true faith in him.
If we say we have fellowship with him (says the Apostle, 1 John 1.6.) and
walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth.

Lecture LXVII. on Psalm 51.5. Aug. 14. 1627.
THE third and last point which has been propounded for the more distinct

He that desires to get strength against any corruption, must not content
himself to have faith, but he must exercise, and make use of his faith in
this work. The most of us loose much of the benefit and comfort, we might
find in our faith, because we do not make use of it; nay, the cause why we
find it so weak and feeble to stand us in any stead, when we have most need
of it for our comfort, is because we have not been wont to exercise it, and
put it into action. We have an old proverb, Use legs, and have legs; and
experience teaches, that the neglect of exercising the body, is a great means
to weaken it much. This may every whit as truly be said of the graces of Gods
spirit, exercise them by practice, and they will increase, neglect to exercise
them, and they will decay in thee. To every one that has (says our Savior in
the parable of the talents, Mat. 25.29 that is, that by making use of it, and
employing it, does show that he has grace) more shall be given, and be
shall have abundance, but from him that has not, shall be taken away, even
that which he has. The Apostle commending the Thessalonians, says, 1 Thessalonians.
1.3. he remembered their work of faith, their faith was ever in action, ever
exercising it self. And what is the proper work and act, wherein faith
exercises it self? Surely in taking hold of the promises that God has made
unto us in Christ, in applying them unto our selves, and resting upon them.
Thus must we exercise our faith, if we would have it grow, if we would have
the comfort of it. The Apostle says of all the faithful, 2 Cor. 5.7. that
they walk by faith. In our whole conversation we may, and ought to make use of
our faith. And of himself he says, that he did live by his faith. The life
which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, says he,
Galat. 2.20. In all the occasions of our life, we may, and should exercise our
faith, and we loose a great deal of sweetness, and comfort, because we do
not so. But in no occasion of our life, can we have more use of our faith, then
when we are troubled with any strong corruption, which we would feign
overcome, and get the mastery of; Let us come then to Christ, and stir up our
selves to take hold of him, and confidently expect, and look for help and
strength from him against it, and we may be sure to be delivered from the
dominion of it. Through God we shall do valiantly (says David, Psalm.
108.13.) for he it is that shall tread down our enemies. And Phil 4.13. I can
do all things through Christ, which strengthens me. We read in the history
of the Gospel, of sundry that came to Christ for help in their bodily
diseases, and infirmities, and had wonderful cures done upon them. And
concerning these cures, three things are to be observed. 1. That there were
none that came to Christ, whatsoever their disease or infirmity was, but he
cured them all. Matthew. 12.15. Great multitudes followed him, and he healed them
all. 2. That the cure that was done upon them, and the help they received from
Christ, is still ascribed to nothing else, but to their faith. They did pray,
and cry to Christ for help, but the help they received, is ascribed to their
faith, and nothing else. They came to Christ in full affiance and confidence of
heart, that they should receive help from him, in these particular infirmities
that troubled them, and that was it that drew virtue from him to cure them.
This you shall see in the poor woman that had the issue of blood, Matthew. 9.21.
She said within her self, if I may but touch his garment, I shall be whole.
And to this our Savior ascribes the cure that was done upon her, verse ^2.
Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole; and she was made
whole from that hour. So says he likewise to blind Bartimeus, Mark 10.52.
Go thy way, thy faith has made thee whole. And to the Leper, Luke 17.19.
Arise, go thy way, thy faith has made thee whole. 3. That our Savior
requires nothing else of any of them, that came to him to be cured of any
infirmity, but only this, that they would believe, and rest confident in this,
that they should certainly receive help from him. When the poor man came to
him for his son, that had been possessed with a divill from his childhood, this
is all that Christ says to him, Mark 9.23. If thou can believe, all things
are possible to him that believes. So says he to Iarius, when his daughter
was dead, and all men counted it folly in him, to seek to Christ for any help
then, Mark 5.36. Be not afraid, only believe. Where this faith was, the cure
was always made; where this was wanting, no good could be done, Acts 14.9, 10.
When Paul the servant of Christ, steadfastly beholding the creeple, perceived
that he had ^aith to be healed, he cured him presently. Whereas of our blessed
Savior himself it is said, Mar. 6.5, 6. He could do no mighty work at
Nazareth, because of their unbelief.

But to what purpose (will you say) are these cures, that men received from
Christ in all their bodily infirmities, alleged in this case, that we have now
in hand?

Surely to teach us, to take the same course for the healing of our souls,
that they did take for the curing of their bodies. Thou complainest of the
blindness, and ignorance of thy soul, do as blind Bartimeus did, Mark
10.47. Thou feel many foul issues, and fountains of sin in thy soul, of
blasphemy, pride, hypocrisy, wrathfulnesse, uncleanness, worldliness, etc.
Would thou be cured of them? Do as that poor woman did, that had the
issue of blood twelve years, and had spent all that she had, to get help,
and was never the nearer, Mar. 5.25.27. Thou have a spirit of infirmity in
thee, that makes thee unable to do anything that is good, or to lift up thy
heart to God, do as that poor woman did, Luke 13.11. that had a spirit of
infirmity eighteen years, and was bowed together, and could in no wise lift
up her self. Go thou to Christ for help as they did, and go in the same
manner as they did, in in faith with full assurance of heart, to receive help
from him, and thou shall be sure to receive as much help from him for thy
spiritual infirmities, as they did for their corporal.

Four reasons and grounds of faith, I will give you for this.

Matthew. 9.27, 28. before he would help them, he asks them this question,
Believe ye that I am able to do this? This persuasion of the power of Christ,
is necessary also, in all them that would receive help of him for their
souls. We must be confident in this, that he is able to heal our souls of
all their diseases, how great soever they be. He is full of grace and truth,
John 1.14. In him (says the Apostle, Col. 2.9) dwells the fullness of the
Godhead bodily. And as in respect of this all sufficiency that was in him, ^all
bodily diseases were alike to him, he could as easily cure a leper, Luke
17.14. or one that was lunaticke, Matthew. 4 24. or one that was borne blind,
John 9.32. as one that had but an ague. Matthew. 8.14, 15. So is he as easily
able (as to pardon the greatest sins, as well as the smallest, so) to heal
the greatest of our corruptions, as the smallest, and to give us strength
against these sins that we have the strongest tentations unto, as against
any other. Greater is he that is in you (says the Apostle, 1 John 4.4.) then
he that is in the world.

When he saw the multitudes like sheep, having no shepherd to take care for
their souls, it is said, Matthew. 9.36. he was moved with compassion on them,
(...) his bowels even yearned with grief and compassion toward them. As a
father pitieth his children (says the Prophet, Psalm. 103.13, 14.) so the Lord
pitieth them that fear him; for he knows our frame; he remembers that we
are dust. So the Apostle says, Hebr. 4.15. that he is touched with the
feeling of our infirmimities. He knows what our nature is, and he knows
what the tentations are, we are subject unto, and pitieth our case for this,
more then ever he did any man for his bodily diseases. And he will therefore
be more ready to yield us help in this case, then he was then. And so says
the Prophet Mic. 7.19. He will have compassion upon us, he will subdue our
iniquities.

Matthew. 8.16. he adds verse 17. that all this was done that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the Prophet, saying; himself took our
infirmities, and bare our sicknesses; he means our sins, the infirmities, and
sicknesses of our souls. When the name Jesus is given to him, the reason is
said to be this, Matthew. 1.21. Because he shall save his people from their
sins. And that not only by procuring pardon for them, by justifying and
delivering them from the guilt and punishment of them, but also by sanctifying
them, and healing their natures, by killing sin in them. All Christians will be
ready to acknowledge, and magnify the all sufficiency of Christ, for procuring
pardon at Gods hands for their sins, and are apt to run to him for ease and
comfort, when their consciences are oppressed with the burden of them; but few
or none will run to Christ for strength against their corruptions, for help in
their spiritual combat and wrestling with them; whereas he came into the
world to yield us help that way, as well as the other, to sanctify us as well
as to justify us, to deliver us from the power of sin, as well as from the
guilt and punishment of it. For this purpose (says the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 3.8.)
was the son of God manifested, that he might destroy the works of the
devil; that he might destroy sin. And he is made to us of God (says Paul, 1
Cor. 1.30.) not only wisdom and righteousness, but sanctification also and
redemption. He gave himself for us ( Tit. 2.14.) that he might redeem us from
all iniquity. (And how are we redeemed from it, if it still be suffered to
reign and domineere in us?) and purify to himself a peculiar people zealous
of good works.

Fourthly, and lastly, We have his express promise whereby he has bound the
word of faith, Romans 10.8.) they had none as we have.

Why but (will you say) has every member of Christ any such promise from God
that no sin shall reign in him? Quest.
That he shall have strength given him to master any headstrong and unruly
lust that troubles him, if he will seek to Christ for it?

I answer, Answ.
Yes verily, he has the express promise of God and that not only in
particular against some special corruptions, but also in general against all.

Four special corruptions there are that Gods people use much to complain
of, for which we have the Lords promise in particular that we shall have help
against them.

First, Ignorance, blindness, and blockishnesse of mind that we cannot learn
Paul speaks of bad ones, 2 Timothy 3.7. I am ever learning, and can never come
to the knowledge of the truth. But see what a promise we have against this,
Esa. 35.5. In Christ's kingdom the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the
ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. 2 Cor. 3.16. When the heart shall turn
to the Lord, the evil shall be taken away. And thus our Savior expressly
speaks, Ioh. 9.39. I am come into the world, that they that see not, might
see. And 12.46. I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believes in
me, should not abide in darkness.

Secondly, Hardness of heart, is another great corruption that Gods people
Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and take away this
thick skin from it. And Ezekiel, 36.26. I will take away the stony heart out of
you, and give you an heart of flesh. And Acts 5.31. God has exalted Christ to
be a Prince and a Savior to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of
sins. Christ will give thee grace to repent, as well as forgiveness of sins.

Thirdly, O but says many a good soul. I think no body in the world has
Ier. 32.39. I will give them a heart, that they may fear me for ever. And
verse 40. I will put my fear into their hearts.

Fourthly, O but I am so unconstant (says many a Christian) in every thing all
my goodness is like the morning dew as the Prophet complains of hypocrites,
Hos. 6.4. Have I any promise for help against this? Yes indeed have thou, Hos.
14.4. I will heal their backeslidings.

Ezekiel. 36.25. I will pour clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean, from
all your filthiness, and from all your Idols I will cleanse you. And (lest
that should be understood only of that washing we have by the blood of Christ
in our justification) he adds, verse 26. A new heart also will I give you,
and a new spirit will I put within you. And Mal. 4.2. Unto you that fear my
name shall the sun of righteousness arise, with healing in his wings. When the
sun of righteousness does arise in our hearts, he shall heal our nature, and
dry up the issues of corruption that are in it. And so speaks the Apostle
Peter, Acts 3.26. God has sent his son to bless you, in turning away every
one of you from your iniquities. Christ will turn every one from his
iniquities, whom he is sent of God to be a Savior unto. Many more such
promises I might allege whereby God has bound himself to sanctify all such,
as are in Christ, and to purge them from all their sins; yea to strengthen them
against the strongest of all their corruptions, and tentations also that they
can be subject unto as Ier. 33.6. 2 Pet. 1.3, 4. Mat. 5.6. Act. 26.18. Romans
16.20.

Applic.
To conclude therefore, If Christ be 1 as able now to heal our souls of all
their diseases, as he was to cure all corporal infirmity when he was upon
earth. 2 If he be as willing to yield his people help, this way as he was the
other, and more willing too. 3 If the principal work he came into the world
for, was not to cure the bodies of men, but to heal their souls. 4 If we have
his express promise for the healing of our souls of all their corruptions,
which they had not for the curing of their bodily infirmities. How comes it
to pass that so many then were cured by him of all their bodily infirmities,
and we have little or no help at all from him for the healing of our souls?
Surely one of these three things must needs be the cause of it. 1. Either we
do not so earnestly desire help for our souls this way, as they did for
their bodies; the punishment of our sins we would feign be delivered from, but
whether we be freed from the power of them or no, we are indifferent. 2. Or we
do not seek to Christ for help in this case of ours, as they did in theirs.
Pardon of sin and mercy with God, and comfort, and peace we look to have
through Christ alone; but we seek not to him for grace to sanctify us and
mortify sin in us, nor look to receive that benefit by him also. Or else 3 we
seek not to Christ for help this way, in that manner as they did; that is, in
faith and full assurance of heart to receive help from him in this case. But
of us it may be said in this case as the Apostle speaks in an other, Iam.
4.2, 3. We desire to have grace and cannot obtain; we fight and war against
our lusts and yet have not victory over them because we ask not we seek not
to Christ, we ask and receive not, because we ask amiss; that is, we ask
not in faith, in confidence and assurance to obtain it of God, through Christ.
Let us therefore stir up our selves to take hold of Christ and these
promises, and confidently expect the performance of them to our selves in our
own particular cases; and so by faith draw virtue from Christ, to dry up all
the filthy issues that are in our fowls. As the Israelites looking on the
brazen serpent in faith healed them, Number. 21.8, 9. So let thine eyes be upon
Christ with expectation and dependence upon him (as Iehoshaphat speaks, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. in another case) for help and virtue will be derived from him to
cure thee. All things (says our Savior, Mat. 21.22.) whatsoever ye shall ask
in prayer, believing (having his promise for them, as in this case we have) ye
shall receive. And if thou can believe (says he, thou may have help
against that spirit that has possessed thy son from his very childhood, though
my Disciples could not cast him out, Mar. 9.23.) all things are possible to him
that believes. Certainly it were possible enough for any of us to get power
over our strongest corruptions, and to attain to a far greater measure of
mortification then we are yet come unto, if we would employ our faith in this
work, if we would make claim to these promises, and rest upon them, and
confidently expect strength and help from God through Christ, against them.

Say not any of you, Object. 1
alas I am so sinful and unworthy a wretch that I dare not presume to believe
and be so confident that Christ will help me. For

First, Answ. 1
Thy unworthiness will not bar thee from receiving help from Christ. In all
the cures he did upon men, he had no respect at all to the worthiness of the
persons, Mat. 8.16. He healed all that were sick, without all respect of
persons. He sells not his grace, but gives it freely, Esa. 55.1. Every one
that thirsts come ye to the waters, and he that has no money.

Secondly, 2.
The more unworthy thou feel thy self to be, the more fit thou art to
receive help from him. For God gives grace to the humble, Iam. 4.6. And among
all that received help from Christ those had the strongest faith, and did most
confidently expect help from him that had in themselves the deepest sense of
their own unworthiness, as is evident in the example of the Centurion, Luke
7.7, 8. and of the woman that had the bloody issue, Mar. 5.27, 33, 34. and the
woman of Canaan, Mat. 15.27, 28.

Neither say secondly, Object. 2
Alas I cannot believe, I go to Christ, I pray against my hardness of heart,
and against my frowardness, and against my blasphemous thoughts, etc. but I
cannot pray in faith nor certainly believe that God will give me help against
them. For

First, Answ. 1.
Do as the poor man did that went to Christ to have his son dispossessed,
Mar. 9 24. mourn and weep for thy unbeleefe, that thou can not give credit
unto God.

Secondly, 2.
Do again as he did, pray heartily to God to help thy unbeleefe, Mar. 9 24.

Thirdly, 3.
Then know assuredly thou have a true faith though a weak one; and that this
weak one will be sufficient to procure help to thee from him; as it did for
that poor man, Mar. 9.25.

Thirdly and lastly, Object.
Say not this is contrary to mine own experience and to the experience of all
the godly, who though they have had true faith, yet they could never obtain
power from Christ to vanquish their lusts, I have in my prayers against my
corruptions called to mind these promises you have spoken of, and made claim
to them and am never the nearer. Yea Paul though he had so much faith, yet
complains, Romans 7.23. that the law of his members did bring him still into
captivity to the law of sin. The faithful do indeed receive from Christ
their justification in this life fully and perfectly, but as for their
sanctification it is but little, that many of them do receive as appears by
the strong corruptions, that may be discerned even in the most of them.

To this I answer. Answ. 1.
First, Christ does not utterly destroy sin in any believer so long as he
lives here. For he sees that would not be good for us in many respects; as we
heard in the handling of the Doctrine.

Secondly, 2.
He does give to some of his servants a greater measure of sanctification, and
power to overcome their corruptions, then he does unto other, Ephesians. 4.7. To
every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ.

Thirdly, 3.
Every believer is in some measure sanctified by Christ, and his corruption
has received from him a deadly blow, that it shall never reign more; he has
so much strength given him as he shall never be quite overcome, nor brought
under the dominion of sin any more, but shall be made able to maintain war
against it. For Christ has made us all Kings and Priests unto God, Rev. 1.6.
And Romans 6.^4. Sin shall not have dominion over you: for ye are not under the
law, but under grace.

4.
Fourthly, Proportionable to the measure of our faith shall our sanctification
be, and our strength to overcome our corruptions. And even to this may that
speech of our Savior be applied, Matthew. 9.29. According to thy faith, so be it
unto thee.

5.
Fifthly and lastly, That soul that can seek to Christ for help against any
corruption, and confidently expect to receive it, and wait upon him for it,
shall be sure not to be overcome of it, Esa. 40.31. They that wait upon the
Lord, shall renew their strength. And 30.18. Blessed are all they that wait
for him.

Lecture LXVIII. On Psalm 51.5. September 11. 1627.
Use 4.
THe fourth and last use that the third and last Doctrine that we have learned
out of these words touching the heinousness and danger of original sin
serves unto, is, To breed thankfulness in us, and so to comfort us in the
acknowledgement and admiration of the goodness and mercy of God. For the
Doctrine of original sin, and the true consideration of this, how vile, and
corrupt we are even by nature, does notably set forth the goodness of God
toward us, and has great force to make us thankful for it, and cause us to
admire and take comfort in it. This use we find the Apostle made of this
Doctrine, Romans 7. For having meditated seriously of the strength of corruption
that was still in his nature, and being deeply affected, and humbled with it,
as appears by that exclamation of his, verse 24. O wretched man that I am who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? Presently he bursteth forth into
this voice of joy and thanksgiving, verse 25. I thank God through Jesus Christ
our Lord. As if he should say, O how much am I bound to God, for his mercy
toward me in Jesus Christ. Certainly we can never be truly thankful to God
for his mercies, we cannot value them aright nor relish the sweetness of them
till we do apprehend, and can feelingly acknowledge how unworthy we are, that
God should show any respect unto us, and can say with Jacob, Genesis 32.10. I am
unworthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth which thou have
showed unto thy servant. The blessed Virgin in her song, Luke 1.48. gives this
for the reason why her soul did magnify the Lord, and her spirit did rejoice
in God her Savior; because the Lord had regarded the low estate of his
handmaid, had so far regarded one that was in so low, and base an estate as
she was. And surely if we knew our own vileness well (as it has been
discovered to us, by this Doctrine of original sin) and could also have
grace seriously to think of it, our souls would also magnify the Lord and
our spirits would rejoice in God our Savior, Gods mercies would be sweeter to
us then they are, we could not choose but wonder, that the Lord should be so
gracious and good to us, that are even by nature so alienated from him, and
enemies in our minds unto him, as the Apostle speaks, Col. 1.21. Every
imagination of the thoughts of whose hearts, are only evil continually, Genesis
6.5. That he I say, should nevertheless be so good and gracious unto us, as he
is, It would make every one of us say often unto the Lord as Mephibosheth once
did to David, 2 Samuel 9.8. What is thy servant that thou should look upon
such a dead dog as I am?

But (to speak more distinctly of this point) there be four things especially
wherein the knowledge of the vileness and corruption of our nature, may cause
us to admire the mercy and goodness of God. 1. That there being such a world
of wickedness in every man's nature as there is, the Lord is pleased so far
forth to keep it under, by his restraining grace that it breaks forth no
more then it does. 2. That the nature of man being in all the parts of it so
extremely corrupted, any of Gods people, should have any goodness at all in
them. 3. That there being so strong corruptions remaining in the very best of
us, any of us should be able to hold out in a Christian course. 4, and lastly,
That the corruption of our nature being so great as it is, it should do us no
more heart, but that we should be so fully and perfectly freed from the danger
of it.

And for the first of these. Restraining grace
Certainly when we rightly consider, what the nature of man is, we shall see
just cause to admire the mercy of God toward us, even in his restraining
grace, and to blame our selves, that we have not taken better notice of it, and
been more thankful unto God for it, hitherto. Let us consider the work and
power of it, first in others, secondly in our selves, and we shall see that
we receive great benefit by it both ways.

And first for the work of it in other men. It must needs be acknowledged Romans
3.14 -- 17. Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are
swift to shed blood, destruction and misery are in their ways; that is to say,
a desire to bring others to misery and destruction; and the way of peace (how
to live peaceably) they have not known. This being so* how comes it to pass
that we receive no hurt at all by such kind of persons as these are?
Sanctifying grace they have none to change their natures. For as the Apostle
says of them in the next words, verse 18. There is no fear of God before
their eyes. Besides we hear daily of other lewd men that in such and, such
places have committed strange outrages upon men in the high ways, as they have
been traveling, and in their houses while they have been asleep on their
beds. How falls it out then that we have lived in such safety hitherto? You
will say, because the Lord has been our keeper, Psalm. 121.5. he has kept
watch and ward about us; He has made a hedge about us, and our houses, as
Satan said of Job 1.10. This is true indeed; but a principal means whereby
the Lord has so kept us, is this restraining grace of his, in the hearts even
of the most wicked men. Observe (I pray you) the work of it, and the benefit
we receive by it in three degrees.

First, Whereas there is no corruption that a natural man is more strongly
Pro. 29.27. He that is upright in his ways (be he otherwise never so
harmless or peaceable) is an abomination to the wicked. How comes it to
pass that in many natural, yea otherwise lewd men we live by, we could never
yet discern the least malice against us, that ever they desired, that ever it
came into their thought, to do us any hurt? Shall we impute this to any
goodness of nature that is in them? No no, this is to be ascribed to the
powerful restraining grace of that God, who made this promise to his servants
that were compassed about with most wicked people on every side, Exodus 34.24.
No man shall desire thy land, when thou shall go up to appear before the Lord
thy God, thrice in a year.

Secondly, Whereas we know there be many lewd men amongst us, not Papists
David, Psalm. 57.4. My soul is among lions, and I lie even among them that are
set on fire. How comes it to pass that they have yet done us no hurt, nor so
much as attempted any thing against us? Surely that God that restrained Laban
from hurting Jacob, though he had pursued him six days journey with a great
power and full purpose to be revenged on him, and continued in this purpose,
till the very night before he overtooke him as you shall find, Genesis 31.23.29.
that God I say is he that has kept all these lewd men from doing us that hurt,
that they have desired, and purposed to do. He that when the Sun arises (
Psalm. 104.22, 23.) makes the Lions to gather themselves together and lay them
down in their dens, that man may go forth to his work, and to his labor
until the evening. He that shut the mouths of the Lions from hurting Daniel
6.22. does curb and muzzle these men from hurting us; and let him have the
glory of all that safety we live in.

Genes. 3.15. I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed. How comes it to pass, that many wicked men we live by,
are not only harmless, and void of malice toward us, but neighbourly and
courteous, and kind unto us? Surely of this we may say as the Prophet does in
another case. Psalm 118.23. This is the Lords doing, and it should seem
mavelous in our eyes. He that made Esau run to meet Jacob, and to embrace
him, and fall on his neck, and kiss him. Genesis 23 4. He that gave his people
such favor in the sight of the Egyptians, Exodus 11.3. that they thought
nothing too good for them, is the only cause of all this. And certainly if the
Lord should not thus restrain wicked men, if he should set their hearts at
liberty, and let loose all that wickedness that is in them, we might with
much more safety live among Lions, and Bears, then among them. When our
Savior had told his disciples, Matthew. 10.16. Behold, I send you forth, as
sheep into the midst of wolves; he adds presently, verse 17. but beware of
men. As if he had said. What speak I of wolves, you have more cause to fear
danger from men, then from wolves, or from any other creature whatsoever.

Applic.
Let us therefore (beloved) 1. Among other mercies of God, take notice of this,
and be thankful for it, that in so wicked a world, we live in such peace
and safety as we do. 2. Let us in these dangerous times, wherein we see
cause of so great fear on every side, by reason of the multitude, and cruelty,
and strength of our enemies, both at home and abroad, learn to secure and
quiet our hearts in the providence of this mighty God, that can thus command
and rule the hearts of the vilest men upon earth, yea, though they were the
mightiest Princes, that can turn them whether soever he will, as Solomon
speaks, Prove. 21.1. Let us seriously meditate of that which the Prophet
speaks. Psalm. 76.10. Surely the rage of man shall turn to thy praise, the
remnant of the rage thou will restrain. 1. God can and will in his time
restrain the remnant of the rage that the bloody enemies of his Gospel, are
apt to show still against his people. 2. And surely the rage that they have
already showed, shall in the end tend to his praise, or else it should not have
proceeded so far as it has done. That we may be able thus to quiet, and
secure our hearts, in the providence of this mighty God. 1. Let us never give
our selves rest till we be able (through a lively faith) to say with Gods
people, Psalm. 48.14. This God is our God for ever and ever; he will be our
guide, (and shepherd) even unto death. 2. Let us live in his fear, and labor
to please him in all our ways. For when a man's ways please the Lord (as the
holy Ghost says, Prove. 16.7.) he makes even his enemies to be at peace with
him. Then may we be secure and void of fear, though the times were much
worse, and our enemies many more, and stronger then they are; then may we say
as David does, when his heart was made glad with the light of Gods countenance,
Psalm 4.8. I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep also, for thou Lord
only make me to dwell in safety. And so much shall suffice to be spoken of
the benefit we receive by the work of Gods restraining grace, in the hearts
of other men.

But yet in the work of Gods restraining grace in our own selves, we have We
are all by nature the children of wrath even as others, as the Apostle speaks
Ephesians. 2.3. We have all of us still even after our regeneration, the whole
body of sin, not one member of it wanting in us, the seeds of all sins, as
appears plainly by that complaint of the Apostle, Romans 7 24. Who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? How comes it to pass, that we are
not in our lives, as well as in our natures, as bad as any others? Surely the
Lord by his restraining grace, suffers not all the corruption that is in our
nature, to break forth in us; as he said to Abimelech, Genesis 20.6. so may
hee-say to every one of us, I have kept thee that thou should not sin against
me in these and these kinds.

Why but will you say, Object.
this is true indeed of heathens and natural men, they are kept from sin by
restraining grace, but there is more in us that are regenerate then so, we have
sanctifying grace also.

I answer. This is true, and of that I shall speak in the next place; but yet
the best of Gods servants are much bound to him also even for his restraining
grace. See three notable benefits we do receive even by that.

First. Though we have in our nature the seeds of all sin, yet there Saul,
and other of David's enemies that were with Saul, 1 Samuel 26.12. so it may be
said of many noisome lusts that are in our nature, the Lord has sent a dead
sleep upon them, that they never stir in us.

Think not, Applic.
think not (beloved) that thou art made of a better mould, that thou art
better by nature (I say, not then Lot, or David, or Peter, but even) then the
Sodomites, or Cain was, or then any of the most monstrous sinners that ever
thou have known or heard of, because thou have not felt thy self inclined to
such foul sins as they fell into; think not that thou have not any
inclinations in thine heart to such sins, because thou have not felt them
stirring in thee at any time; but ascribe that to this grace of God, and
consider who it is that has made thee to differ from another, from any other
man, as the Apostle speaks in another case 1 Cor. 4.7. that thou may be
humbled in thy self, and give the glory of it unto God. Learn thou to be
thankful unto God, as well for keeping thee from these sins, that thou never
feltest thy self given unto, as for the pardon of those that thou have most
offended in.

Secondly. Many of us have felt in our selves some motions and inclinations
Esa. 59.5. It may be thou will say, that by the sactifying spirit of God, thou
have resisted thy corruption when thou did feel it arise, thou have prayed
against it, and so by the spirit have mortified it. And this I doubt not but
every child of God may truly say, of many a corruption they have found in
themselves. But that is not all. If these sins that we have been preserved
from, had set upon us with that strength and violence as they have done upon
others, or as many other of our sins have done upon our selves, if they had
been set forward by the like tentations, we had (doubtless) been overcome by
them as well as others. And whereunto is this to be ascribed, that they have
not done so? surely to this mighty power of Gods restraining grace in us. That
whereas in other men (yea in some of his own people, as we may see, Psalm
81.12.) the Lord lets go his hand, and suffers their lusts to have the sway,
gives them up to their own hearts lusts; and says to their corruptions, as
he did to the deceiving spirits, 1 Kings 22.22. Go and prevail. He has
dealt more graciously with us; and though to humble us he has let us see what
monsters we lodge in our breasts, what abominable corruptions we have in our
hearts, yet he holds them in a chain, and lets them not loose upon us,
but pulls them in again, that they may not prevail against us. He that has
set bars and doors to the raging sea (as he speaks, Job 38.10, 11.) and
said, hitherto shall thou come and no further, and here shall thy proud waves
be stayed; is he only that stinteth and gageth the corruptions of our hearts,
that sets such limits and bounds unto them.

Applic.
Let us also (beloved) take notice of this mercy of God, and be thankful for
it. When thou see or hear of the outrageous sins that many fall into,
drunkenesse, adultery, murder, blasphemy, and such like sins, pity thou their
case; and lift up thy heart in thankfulness unto God, that has kept thee from
being thy self as bad as they are. That speech of the Pharisee, Luke 18.11. if
it had come from an humbled heart, had been a good speech, and such as
beseems every one of us to use unto God. Lord I thank thee I am not as other
men are, extortioners, unjust adulterers. Consider thus with thy self. I am by
nature, as bad as the worst man I know, yea, I find my self sometimes
inclined, and ready even to fall into those very sins, that have brought
others to so much shame. And then think upon, and bless that hand that has
kept thee from falling, and say in thankfulness of heart with the Prophet,
Psalm. 94.18. When I said my foot slippeth, thy mercy o Lord did hold me up.



Object.
But you will say to me. Is it a benefit to be kept from the knowledge of our
sins?

Answ,
I answer. No not from all knowledge of our sins. For it is a great benefit to
have our sins discovered to us, 1. So far forth as is necessary to drive us
unto Christ, to show us how wretched we are without him. For this makes us
capable of benefit by Christ. 1 Timothy 1.15. this makes us able to prize him,
and thirst after him, Numbers 21.9. this makes us able to relish and find
sweetness in him, Matthew. 11.28. 2. So far forth as is necessary to bring us
unto repentance for them, and to keep us from living and continuing in them.
Iere. 8.6. No man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? So
far forth we should labor to find out our sins by diligent search, Psalm.
4.4. and should be content that others should acquaint us with them. Psalm.
141.5. 3. So far forth as is necessary for the pacifying of Gods wrath, in
any special judgments that are upon us. For in this case, as the Lord
restifieth by his judgments, that he has matter against us, Ruth 1.21. so it
is our duty and the way for us to appease the Lords anger, by a diligent search
and examination of our selves to find out the special sin whereby we have thus
provoked God, Lam. 3.39.40. Yea in this case we are bound to beg of God, that
he would discover those special sins unto us, as Job did, Job 13.23. 4. So
far forth as it is necessary to keep us from pride, and to humble us. For to
this end, God commanded his people to remember, and often to call to their minds,
their old sin, and the most heinous of them all. Deuteronomy 9.7. Remember, and
forget not how thou provokedst the Lord thy God to wrath in the wilderness.
And to this end, Moses spends a whole chapter, Deuteronomy. 9. in calling to the
peoples minds, and bringing into their remembrance, their old sins; which he
would never have done, if he had not known this profitable, and needful for
them, that their repentance for them might be often renewed.

But further then the knowledge of our sins serves for one of these four
ends, it is no benefit, it is a judgment, and correction of God upon us.
Therefore it is threatened as a judgment to wicked men, Psalm. 50.21. I will
reproove thee, and set thy sins in order before thee. Therefore Job complains
of it as of a judgment, Job 13.26. Thou writest bitter things against me, and
make me to possess the sins of my youth. And Paul prays against it, 2 Cor.
12.8. I grant indeed it is such a judgment, and correction, as God uses most
to exercise them by, that are dearest to him, and sees it to be most
necessary for them, as is plain by the example of Job 13.26. and of Paul. 2
Cor. 12.7. But herein his mercy appears, that as it is said of all other
corrections upon his Church, Esa 27.8. In measure thou will debate with it; so
it is in this. 1. The Lord does not let any of us see all our sins, but so many
of them as he sees will be sufficicient for us to see for our saving
humiliation, and repentance. Dealing with us in this case, as Balak did with
Balaam, Number. 23.13. Thou shall see but the utmost part of them, thou shall not
see them all. And 2. those that he is pleased to discover to us, he does not
let us feel the full weight of them, nor let us fully see the loathsomeness of
them. Oh, if the Lord should break up the sink that is in every one of our
hearts, and let us fully discern, and feel how much filth is in them, we were
never able to abide our selves, but should every one of us become a
Magormissahib (as Jeremy calls Pashur, Ier. 20.3, 4.) a terror to our
selves. If the Lord should let us feel the full weight of our sins, certainly
we were never able to bear it, but should be overwhelmed by it. See this not
only in the sin of Cain and Judas, that were castawayes, Genesis 4.13. Mat. 27.5.
but in the sins also of Gods own people. Hear what David says of his sin, Ps.
38.4. It is a heavy burden, too heavy for me to bear. And hear what Paul
says of the incestuous person, 2 Cor 2.7. he was in danger to be swallowed up
with overmuch sorrow.

1. Think of this thou wretched man, Applic.
to whom many foul sins seem as light as a feather, drunkenness, swearing,
whoring, etc. when the Lord shall but let thee thoroughly to see what thou have
done, when he shall lay but any one of these sins unto thy charge, and cause
thee to feel the full weight of it, he shall need to inflict no other
punishment upon thee, but even to let thee see and feel what thou have done.
Ier. 2 19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall
reprove thee. Wickedness will burn like the fire, Esa. 9.18. Hell it self has
no greater torment then that. And this thou have cause to look for, and
know not how soon, Number. 32.23. Thou have sinned against the Lord, and be
thou sure thy sin will find thee out. 2. Let us therefore (beloved) acknowledge
it for a mercy of God, that he does give us the sight, and sense of our sins so
far forth as is necessary to our saving humiliation and repentance; but let
us acknowledge it for as great a mercy, that he does not let us see, and feel
our sins to the full, so as we should be overwhelmed by it.

Lecture LXIX. On Psalm 51.5. September 18. 1627.
Co^verting grace.
THe second thing wherein the admirable goodness of God appears unto us, is
this. If we could rightly weigh what we were by nature, we would see just cause
to wonder at the power and goodness of God in this, that there should be any
truth of grace in any of us. Let us consider this first in general, in the
whole work of our conversion, and of that change that is wrought in our
hearts, by the grace and spirit of God; Secondly, In every particular act of
grace that we do discern in our selves.

And for the first, we shall find the Apostle makes this use of the Doctrine
Ephesians. 2.4, 5. God who is rich in mercy, for his great love, wherewith he
loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with
Christ; by grace ye are saved. As if he had said, this was nothing but mere
grace, this argued the riches of Gods mercy, the greatness of his love to do
this. When the people beheld the mighty works that Christ wrought, in giving
sight to the blind, and hearing to the deaf, and speech to the dumb, and life
to the dead, it is said, they were all amazed at the mighty power of God, Luke
9.43. and as it is said, Matthew. 9.8 they marvelled and glorified God. And the
party himself whom Christ had restored to sight, admired the work of God upon
himself, and said, John 9.32. Since the world began, was it not heard that any
man opened the eyes of one that was borne blind? But the work that God has
wrought upon our hearts whom he has converted, and begun saving grace in, is
(though not so sensible, yet) a far greater demonstration of his power, and
goodness, then any of those was, and such as we, have much more cause to
admire, and glorify God for. Certainly it is as possible for a blackmore to
change his skin, or a leopard his spots, as the Prophet speaks, Jeremy
13.23. for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, as our Savior says,
Luke 18.25. as for us to have a change wrought in our hearts. But blessed be
God that the thing which is impossible with men, has been possible with God,
as our Savior there speaks, Luke 18.27. This admirable power of God is
sensible and apparent in the conversion of some men; of such I mean as have
been prepared for their conversion, with legal terrors; such as (having
been notorious sinners before) have been by some strong hand of God changed
suddenly. In the conversion of such as Paul was, that of a bloody persecutour,
was of a sudden made, not only a disciple, but a zealous preacher also. Where
he that was even now a Wolf, and a Leopard, was so changed, that he dwelt
with the Lambs, and lay down with the Kids, as the Prophet speaks, Esa.
11.6. All men will be apt to take notice of, and to admire the power of God in
the conversion of such a man, as Paul says of himself, Galathians 1.24. that
the Churches glorified God in him. But the work of Gods power in the
conversion of most men, of such as have been bred in the Church, and who by
the restraining grace of God, have bin ever kept from gross sins, is not so
sensible, but more secret a great deal. The most Christians, though they be
able to say with the blind man, John 9.25. One thing I know, whereas I was
blind, now I see, they know well, and feel there is a blessed change wrought
in their hearts, yet when it was wrought, or how it was wrought, that they know
not. That which Solomon says of other of Gods works, Ecclesi. 11.5. is
verified in this especially. As thou know not what is the way of the spirit,
nor how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child, even so
know thou not the works of God, who works all. And as our Savior
speaks, Mark 4.27. When the seed is sown in the heart, it works, and
springs, and grows, no man knows how. And yet even in this conversion of
such men, though the work of God be more secret and insensible; yet is the
almighty power of God, to be acknowledged as much in it as in the other. As the
omnipotency of Christ was as well showed in the turning of the water into wine,
Job. 2.11. and the curing of the woman that had the bloody issue. Mar. 5.29. as
in the helping of him that was from his childhood possessed with a dumb and
deaf spirit, Mark 9.25, 26. O that we could see and take notice of this
admirable power of God, in the change that he has been pleased to work in
our hearts. O that God would be pleased according to the prayer of the Apostle
for the Ephesians. 1.18, 19. to inlighten the eyes of our understanding, that we
may know what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward, who believe
according to the working of his mighty power. That we may accordingly admire
and magnify it, and give him the glory of it.

And yet his goodness and mercy will appear to be no less admirable in this
work of our conversion, then his power was, if we rightly consider what we
were by nature. Observe this I pray you in three degrees.

First. That God should seek out any of us, that like a poor lost sheep was
Luke 15.4. we being so far from seeking him, from doing any thing to further
our own conversion, that we desired nothing less, but opposed, and resisted
it, and were in our hearts ready to say with the man that had the unclean
spirit, Luke 4 34. Let us alone, what have we to do with thee thou Jesus of
Nazareth. That he would take no nay at our hands, but by his most effectual
grace, overcame us as he says, Revelation 3.9, Behold, I will make them that
are of the Synagogue of Satan (which say they are Jews, and are not, but do
lie) behold, I will make them to come and worship before thy feet. He made us
to turn, he made us to obey, and follow his call. This gracious favor I say
that the Lord has done us in the work of our conversion, o it was his
admirable mercy unto us.

Secondly. That the Lord should seek reconciliation with us, when we Corinth.
5.20. and make love to us, when we were such loathsome creatures, that passing
by us, when we were in our blood, even when we were in our blood (as he
says, Ezekiel. 16.6.8.) he should look upon us, and that that should be the
time of his love, as he there speaks. That he should never give over making
love unto us, till he had won our hearts, and made us able to affect, and
love him, and to seek him, and his love unfeinedly (who were by nature much
more alienated from him, then he was from us, even hated him in our hearts,
much more then ever he did us) this was I say, his admirable mercy toward us.
And so the Apostle speaks of it, Colos. 1.21. And you that were sometimes
alienated, and enemies in your minds, yet now has he reconciled. And the Lord
by the Prophet, Esaias 65.1. I am sought of them that asked not for me. Even
this, that such as we were by nature should have the grace to love the Lord,
and to seek his favor, which we could never have done, if he had not bin
first reconciled unto us, 1 John 4.19, is the admirable goodness of God unto
us.

Thirdly. That God should thus change and convert our hearts unto him, and give
us any measure of grace, to desire unfeinedly to fear,

That he should deny this grace to such as the young Noble man was, that had
lived so civilly, and had so many good things in him. Mar. 10.20, 21. and grant
it to such as that infamous harlot was, Lu. 7.37. This is certainly the
admirable and unspeakeable mercy of God to such a one.

delight in the law of God, in the inner man, Romans 7.22. to love the brethren.
1 John 3.14. to weep and shed tears for our sins, 2 King 22.19. to make any
one prayer, Psalm 17.1. to give any alms, Matthew. 10.42. in truth and
uprightness of heart, considering what we are by nature, is to be ascribed to
the mavelous power and goodness of God toward us. When David and his people
had offered toward the building of Gods house, it is said, 1 Chronicles. 29.9. They
rejoiced with great joy, because with a perfect (and upright) heart, they had
offered willingly unto the Lord. And David himself burst out into words of
strange admiration, verse 14. But who am I Lord, and what is my people, that we
should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? For all things come of
thee.

Applic.
Now let me apply this that has bin said in three points, and so lay it
somewhat nearer to our hearts.

God that works in us both the will and the deed. Phil. 2.13. And Ioh 6.44.
No man can come unto me, except my father draw him. 2. That God does all in
this work himself alone, and has no help from man, and it is therefore
called a creation, Ephesians. 2.10. a regeneration, John. 3.3. a raising of one
from the dead, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. 3. That this work that God does in man's
conversion, is no common work. For 1. It is evident, he gives not so much as
the outward means, of grace, and conversion in particular to all men. Yea, to
the most of the nations in the world by far he has denied his word
altogether, and suffered them as the Apostle speaks, Acts 14.16. to walk in
their own ways. And even those nations that he has vouchsafed his word
unto, that may be said of this spiritual rain, which he speaks of the
material, Amos 4.7. I caused it to rain upon one City, and caused it not to
rain upon another City, one piece was rained upon, and the other piece
whereupon it rained not, withered. In Phrygia and Galatia, Paul preached (as
you may see Acts. 16.6, 7.) but was forbidden of the holy Ghost to preach the
word in Asia, In Misia he preached, but when he assayed to go into Bithynia,
the spirit suffered him not. 2. To many of those that he does give the means
unto, he does not give effectual grace to be converted by them. To you it is
given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven (says our Savior,
Matthew. 13.11.) but to them it is not given. This saving grace, it is a rare
grace, found in very few, even of them that do enjoy the means in one of a
City, or two of a Tribe, as the Prophet speaks, Iere. 3.14. Many are called,
but few are chosen. Matthew. 22.14. Acts 13.48. As many as were ordained to
eternal life, believed.

Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Iere. 13.23.
then may thou be able to repent when thou will. No, no, it is the work of
God alone, yea, the wonderful, and miraculous, and rare work of God, to
convert a soul. And therefore bemone thy state to God with Ephraim, Jeremy
31.18, 19. and say: turn thou me, and I shall be turned, else shall I never
be turned, surely after I was turned, I repented. Till God convert and change
thy heart, thou can never repent. Apply thy self therefore to the means
that God has appointed to convert thee by, and when he by his word and spirit
offers to convert thee, resist not, but yield thy self unto him. Remember
the fearful sentence of God against such as despise or neglect the means of
their conversion, Ezekiel. 24.13. Because I have purged thee (that is, offered to
do it, given thee the means whereby thou might have been purged) and thou
wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness. Because thou
have neglected the time of thy visitation, as our Savior speaks, Luke 19.44.
either the means shall be taken from thee, or being continued, shall be as a
dead letter to thee, and never do thee good. And (doubtless) God in his
eternal, and secret counsel, has set a just time to every one of us, that by
such a time, the means shall work upon us, and convert us, or they shall
never do us good. That which Job says of the life of man, Job 14.5. may as
truly be said of all things that fall out in the life of man, and specially of
his conversion, his days are determined, the number of his months are with
thee, thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. There is mention
made of the times of the Gentiles, Luke 21.24. Jerusalem shall be trodden down
till the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled; which is expounded by the Apostle
in another phrase, Romans 11.25. until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in.
Every nation has her time set her of God, how long she shall have the means
of grace, and how long the means shall become effectual in her, and
accompanied with the life and power of Gods spirit; and in this time all her
fullness, the full number of those that God has appointed unto life shall come
in. God has set a time for Bohemia, and for Germany, and for the Palatinate,
and so has he set a time for England also certainly. And as God has set a
time for whole Nations, so has he for every Town, and for every person also
God has set a time for this place, and God has set a time for every soul of
us that are here, if we come not in by such a time, we may fear we shall
never come in. As it is said of Iezabel, Revel. 2.21. I gave her a space to
repent; so may it be said of every one of us here, God has given thee and me
a space too. If we come not in that space, we shall never come in, When once
the master of the house (says our Savior in a parable, Luke 13.25.) is risen
up, and has shut to the door, and ye then begin to stand without, and to
knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us, then it will be to late.

Now the just period of this time that God has set to any nation, or person,
is known to God alone. No man can say of any nation, their time is out, nor of
any person his time is out, no nor of himself neither, my time is out, the
master of the house has shut the door, it is to no purpose for me now to
knock, and cry, Lord, Lord, open to me, it is too late for me to repent. It
is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the father has put in
his own power; as our Savior tells the Apostles themselves, Acts 1.7. This
is too great a secret for the wisest or learned man in the world to know.
Every man is bound so long as he lives, to use the means of grace, and has
no cause to despair of mercy while life lasts. To him that is joined to all
the living, there is hope, says Solomon, Eccle. 9.4. But yet seeing 1. God
must convert thee, or thou can never be converted, and 2. God has directed
thee to means, whereby he will do this work, if ever he do it; and 3. He
has set a certain time* how long thou shall have these means, and in which
space these means shall work upon thy heart, or they shall never work, and 4.
Thou know not how near this thy time is to an end, how soon the master of
the house will shut the door. Therefore it stands thee upon, presently, and
without delay, to make thy best use of the means of thy conversion God gives
thee, and to yield thy self to his word and spirit, whereby he offers to
draw thee. Heb. 3.7, 8. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts. Behold, now is the acceptable time, now is the day of salvation, 2 Cor.
6.2. The master of the house has not yet shut his door upon thee, but how
soon it may be shut thou know not.

Cor. 13.5. and how that may be done you shall hear out of the next verse. But
if thou have but the least measure of grace in truth, thou have just cause to
rejoice in this more then if God had made thee the greatest prince in the
world. Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord, Psalm. 105.3. And the
Apostle James 1.9. Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted.
Whatsoever men think of thee, or thou art apt to think of thy self, he that
cannot deceive thee has pronounced of thee, that if thou have but any one
grace in truth thou art a blessed man, happy art thou that ever thou were
borne. If thou can believe in Christ hear what he says, Mat. 16.17. Blessed
art thou Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee,
but my father which is in heaven. As if he had said, Thou have more in thee
then flesh and blood. If thou do fear to displease God hearken what the Holy
ghost says of thee, Psalm. 128.1. Blessed is every one that fears the Lord.
Nay if thou can but unfeignedly desire to believe and to fear God, remember
this was all that Nehemiah could say of himself, Neh. 1.11. that he desired to
fear Gods name. Remember what Christ pronounces of thee, Matthew. 5.6. Blessed
are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be
filled. Nay if thou have but so much grace as to feel the want of grace and
unfeignedly to bewail it, hearken what thy blessed Savior says of thy
estate, Matthew. 5.3, 4. Blessed are the poor in spirit, Blessed are they that
mourn for that poverty. Make thy calling and conversion sure, and thou have
made thine election sure, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 1.10. If thou have
but the least grace in thee in truth, thou have Gods seal upon thee, whereby
he has marked and will own thee for himself, by the print and stamp of
that seal; According to that speech of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not
the holy spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption.
Wherefore let me say again unto thee as I began in the words of David, Psalm.
32.11. Be glad in the Lord and rejoice ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye
that are upright in heart. And 33.1. Rejoice in the Lord o ye righteous, for
praise is comely for the upright. O it is a seemly sight to see an upright
hearted Christian cheerful and comfortable.

Say not o but I have so much corruption in me that I cannot take notice of,
nor rejoice in any goodness that I have. For 1 I bid thee not rejoice in any
corruption but dislike, and bewail it still, but rejoice in the Lord, Phil.
4.4. In the very same action thou may have just matter of mourning in respect
of the work of thine own corruption in it, and of joy in respect of the work
of Gods grace in it, Rejoice in trembling, Psalm. 2.11. Regard not so much thine
own corruption, as to neglect altogether the grace of God in thee. 2. By how
much the more corruption thou find in thy self, by so much the more cause
have thou to rejoice in and to admire Gods mercy that to such a wretch as thou
art he should give the grace to make conscience of any sin, to do any duty in
truth of desire to please God. Wicked men think it strange (as the Apostle
says, 1 Pet. 4.4.) that we do not as they do that we run not with them into
the same excess of riot. They think it strange yea impossible, that any man
should be in deed and truth so changed in heart as Gods people in their outward
conversation would seem to be; they esteem all profession of holiness to be
no better then hypocrisy, and therefore speak evil of us. But we that know
our own hearts, have more cause to wonder at this our selves, and to praise
God for it.

Lecture LXXI. On Psalm 51.5. October 2. 1627.
THE third point wherein the admirable goodness of God appears unto us,
Confirming grace.
who are even by nature so vile, as we all are, is in the work of his
confirming grace. If we could rightly weigh what our nature is, and what a
strength and power of corruption, there remains still in the best of us, we
would see cause to wonder that any of us after we are converted, and have some
measure of saving grace begun in us, should stand for any time. We read in
Scripture of a threefold standing, and in every one of these kinds, every
Christian has cause to admire Gods power, and goodness, toward his soul. 1.
There is a standing in the faith, and in the profession of the truth. Of this
the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 15.1. I declare unto you the Gospel which I
preached unto you, which also you have received, and wherein ye stand. 2,
There is a standing in the state of grace, and in a comfortable assurance, and
feeling of Gods favor, Romans 5.2. By Christ we have access by faith, into the
grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God. 3. There
is a standing in a Christian course of life, and conscionable practice of
godliness. This Epaphras begd of God for the Colossians. Col. 4.12, That they
might stand perfect, and complete in all the will of God.

Now that any of us, should be able to stand steadfast, and persevere any of
these ways, that is to say, either in foundnesse of judgment, and profession
of the truth; or in the comfortable assurance of our salvation, and of the
favor of God; or in a conscionable care to please God in our whole
conversation, is certainly a matter of greater wonder and admiration, then the
most of us do conceive of. This we would all easily discern, and acknowledge,
if we would but seriously consider of these four points.

First, what a world, what an age and time we live in, wherein (by reason David
says of wicked men, that live in the greatest prosperity, Psalm. 73.18. may
truly be said of all Gods children, even of those, whose souls prosper, and
thrive most in grace, Surely thou have set them in slippery places. Surely the
times and places we live in, are so slippery, as it is strange any of us
should hold our feet, or keep our selves from falling fearfully This made the
Prophet complain so, Esa. 6.5. Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man
of unclean lips. As if he had said, My speech is too unclean, too profane
to be a Prophet, and how can it choose but be so, I dwell (says he) in the
midst of a people of unclean lips.

Secondly. Consider what the malice, and subtilty, and power of Satan, our any,
in whom he sees this image renewed, he cannot rest till he have defaced it
again; as our Savior speaks, Matthew. 12.43. When the unclean spirit is gone
out of a man, he walks through dry places, seeking rest, and finds none.
And the old Serpent has a thousand ways to work his own ends, in this. Yea
his envy and malice is most bent upon them whom he discerns the greatest
measure of grace in. Satan has desired to have you (says Christ to Peter of
himself, and all the elect Apostles, Luke 22.31.) that he may sift you as
wheat. And there is no faithful soul that observes himself well but he may
often say of this his enemy, as David did of his, Psalm. 118.13. Thou have thrust
sore at me that I might fall: but the Lord helped me. This made the Apostle so
jealous and fearful of the Thessalonians, that made so great proceedings in
grace, 1 Thessalonians. 3 5. he sent Timothy to them to confirm them lest by some
means the tempter might have tempted them, and his labor amongst them should
have been in vain.

Matthew. 19.30. Many that were the first (the forwardest in their love to the
Word, and in every good duty) are now become the last the backwardest of all
others. How many there be that with the dog are fallen again to the vomit,
that once they had cast up, and with the sow lie wallowing in that mire, that
once they were washed from, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 2 22. And shall we
not then see cause to wonder, that our selves have been preserved in the state
of grace thus long? When we have seen so many to fall on our left hand, and so
many on our right hand (as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm 91.7.) have we not
cause to wonder, that our selves stand still in any measure of uprightness and
truth of heart?

Iehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. We have no might to withstand this great company
that comes against us. 2. We have no corruption in us that we are more
strongly inclined unto, then to inconstancy in goodness, and pronesse to
decline and fall away from God, to be quickly weary of well doing. In respect
whereof the best of us have cause to complain of our selves, as the Lord does
of Ephraim, Hos. 6.4. Our goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew
it goes away. This people is of a revolting heart, says the Lord of Israel,
Ier. 5.23. And none of us all are any better then they were in that point. 3.
There is such a deal of corruption remaining still in every one of our hearts,
of pride, and infidelity, and hypocrisy, and malice,and worldliness, that it
is certainly as great a miracle, that grace should live, and grow, and
continue in such hearts as ours are, as to see a candle or fire continue
burning in the water. That this fire of God that came down from heaven, should
burn in water (as that did that consumed Elias sacrifice that lay soked in
such abundance of water, so as the water ran round about the altar and the
trench was also filled with water, as we read, 1 King. 18.35, 38.) this is
(doubtless) the wonderful and miraculous work of God only. Our Savior
tells us, Mar. 4.19. That the cares of the world and lusts of other things,
will choke the Word, and make it unfruitful. And what heart of all ours is
there that has not in it these cares of the world and lusts of other things?
And is it not then strange that any grace should live and grow in us, and not
be quite choked with all these thorns? The nature of sin is to grieve the
spirit of God and to quench grace. If he see any unclean thing in thee (says
the Lord to his people, Deuteronomy. 23.14.) he will turn away from thee. And is it
not then strange that the spirit of grace should abide in us and not forsake us
utterly, in whose hearts he sees so much uncleanness as he does in every one
of us? That he that once said, Genesis 6.3. My spirit shall not always strive
with man, for that he also is flesh, should yet strive with us, though we be
flesh?

And whereunto then shall we ascribe this that any of us do persevere in the
state of grace? Surely to the Lord alone. The admirable work of God is to be
acknowledged in this, that the best of us have not fallen totally and finally
long before now.

First, His admirable power is the cause of this. For nothing but a divine Be
strong in the Lord (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.10.12.) and in the power of his
might, For we wrestle against principalities and powers, and against the rulers
of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.
Nothing but a divine power could keep grace alive, in such hearts as ours are.
We are kept (says the Apostle, 1 Peter 1.5.) by the power of God unto
salvation.

Secondly, His admirable goodness is the cause of this, and the
unchangablenesse according to his purpose, and eternal counsel, as the
Apostle speaks, Romans 8.28. He never loved any thus far as to call them
effectually, and to work truth of grace in their hearts,but he loved them to
the end. Having loved his own which were in the world (says the Evangelist of
our blessed Savior, John 13.1.) he loved them to the end. I have loved thee
(says the Lord to his Church, Ier. 31.3.) with an everlasting love, therefore
with loving kindness have I drawn thee. Them whom he has showed such loving
kindness unto, as to draw them to himself, by an effectual calling, he
loves with an everlasting love. The Lord advanced Saul to be King over his
people, and gave him his spirit, that is, such gifts of his spirit as might fit
him for that calling. As soon as Samuel had anointed him the spirit of the
Lord came upon him (as the Text says, 1 Samuel 10.6, 9) and he was turned into
another man, God gave him another heart. But this favor and love God showed to
Saul was not an unchangable, and everlasting love. It repents me (says the
Lord, 1 Samuel 15.11.) that I have set up Saul to be King. And 1 Samuel 16.14. The
spirit of the Lord departed from Saul; he had received excellent gifts of Gods
spirit, and lost them quite again. But if God have advanced any of us to this
dignity to be a true Convert, to be effectually called, Ioh. 1.12. he never
repents him of it, this favor and love of God is unchangable, and
everlasting. The gifts, and calling of God are without repentance, as the
Apostle speaks, Romans 11.29. In respect of this good, and perfect gift, the
Apostle calls the Lord Iam. 1.17. the father of lights, in whom is no
variableness neither shadow of turning. And were it not for this, that Gods
love to such as he has once regenerated, and given saving grace to, is
constant and everlasting, if any thing could have changed or altered him, alas
there is none of us all, but we have done enough a thousand times to have lost
him for ever, and to have caused him to depart quite from us, and to have
stripped us of all grace long ago.

Before we pass from this point let us apply it to our selves, in a few words;
that is, Applic.
in five.

Paul says of Riches, 1 Timothy 6.17. may be said of them all, they are uncertain
riches, uncertain good things, But true grace is durable riches, as Solomon
calls it, Pro. 8.18. These are the sure mercies of David as the Holy Ghost
calls them, Esa. 55.3. 2. No other good thing we can enjoy, is any certain
argument of Gods special love and favor. No man knows either love, or
hatred, by any thing that is before him, says Solomon, Eccle. 9.1. Esau of
whom it is said God hated him, Mal. 1.3. yet did enjoy all worldly blessings in
greater measure then Jacob did, as is plain by that speech of Moses, Genesis
36.31. But true grace is a certain argument of Gods love, yea of his special,
and everlasting love. According to that speech of the Lord, Ier. 31.3. I have
loved thee with an everlasting love; therefore with loving kindness have I
drawn thee.

Mnason of Cyprus for this, Act. 21.16. And Paul says of Andronicus and Iunia
( Romans 16.7.) that they were of note among the Apostles, and honors them for
this that they were in Christ before him. If any of us have found mercy with
God to be old Disciples; Nay if we be of any standing in Christianity and keep
our standing, let us give God the glory of it, think of it often, and never
think we can be sufficiently thankful to God for it. O bless our God, ye
people, (says David, Psalm. 66.8, 9.) and make the voice of his praise to be
heard; which holds our soul in life, and suffers not our feet to be moved.
Praise God for keeping and preserving the life of grace in thy soul all this
while. Say with David, Psalm. 116.7, 8. The Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee, for thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and
my feet from falling. Praise God for keeping thee fom deadly, and irrecoverable
falls. Yea take thou up that thanksgiving, which of all the forms of
thanksgiving, that we read of in Scripture, has been most in use with Gods
Saints (as if it were not for spending of time, I could give you many instances
of) I mean that Psalm. 106.1. Praise ye the Lord, o give thanks unto the Lord
for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever. God is more to be praised by
us for the unchangeablenesse, and constancy of his love to such wretches as we
are, then for any other of his mercies how great so ever they be.

Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God I am that I am. And that which the Apostle
there speaks of his labors, we must say in this case It is not I, that have
held out all this while, not I but the grace of God which was with me. It is
the Lord (as Annah speaks, 1 Samuel 2.9.) that keeps the ^eet of his Saints,
for in his own might shall no man be strong. It is not by any strength of our
own that we have stood all this while, but by the strength and free grace of
God only.

old, or the staff ye walk with can do when ye leave holding of it. In which
respect the Lord compares himself to a nurse that dadeth a child, Hos. 11.3.
I taught Ephraim to go, taking them by their arms. We can neither go nor
stand any longer, then the Lord does uphold us. This is the inference that the
Apostle himself makes, Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out your own salvation with
fear, and trembling, for it is God that works in you both to will, and to do
even of his good pleasure. Because we have no ability to preserve our selves in
the state of grace, but all depends upon the power and goodness of God,
therefore we must fear. Continue in his goodness (as the same Apostle
speaks, Romans 11.12) keep in favor with him, otherwise thou also shall be
cut off.

But (you will say) that is not possible, Object.
whom God once loves in this kind, he loves for ever.

I answer, Answ.
First, Whom God does love in this kind them he makes fearful to offend him,
fearful to fall and to decay in grace, and this fear is a principal means
whereby he does preserve them from falling away. This is plain, Ier. 32.40. I
will make an everlasting covenant with them, and I will not turn away from
them, to do them good; but I will put my fear into their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me. So that by this thou shall know whether thou be
indeed converted, whether there be any truth of grace in thee, if God have put
this fear into thy heart, there is; otherwise there is none at all. Wherefore,
let him that thinks he stands take heed least he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12.

Secondly, Though those whom God loves according to his good purpose he loves
to the end, and therefore will never disinherit them, nor utterly cast them
off, yet if they be not fearful to offend him (though he love them, yea
because he loves them) he will chasten them (as the Apostle speaks, Heb.
12.6.) and he scourges every son whom he receives. And in what kind he will
scourge them, how long his scourge shall lie upon them, how deeply he will
wound them with the lashes that he will give them, with his scourge, that the
Lord only does know. Admit that if ever we had the spirit of God, and truth of
grace in us, it will never depart from us, we can never loose it utterly, but
yet if we grow secure and neglect the means whereby we may preserve grace in
our selves and keep it alive, whereby we may preserve our selves from falling
away, we may quench the spirit in our selves. This is plain by the Apostles
speech, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19, 20. Quench not the spirit, despise not prophesyings.
Even the despising of hearing the Word, will quench the spirit; that is,
deprive us of the operation, of the feeling, of the comfort of Gods grace in
us. Be it he that is once in the state of grace shall be preserved by God from
falling totally, from taking such falls as should break his neck, and quite
deprive him of the life of grace; and from falling finally, from falling into
such pits as he should never be able to get out of again, from taking such
falls as the Apostle speaks of, Heb. 6.6. which they that take them can never
after be renewed again by repentance. Yet if he grow secure and look not well
to his feet, if he nourish not in his heart the fear of the Lord, he may fall
fearfully, he may take such falls as may break his bones, as may put him to
such anguish of soul, as if he had a kingdom he would give it to be eased of
it. This is plain by the words of David in the 8. verse of this Psalm, Make
me to hear joy and gladness that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice. His fall into adultery and murder had broken his bones; that is, had
put him to more anguish and grief, then ever man felt that had his bones
broken in his body.

Lecture LXXI. On Psalm 51.5. October 9. 1627.


Tentatio^ 1
First, Some of them are apt to conclude that they are already quite fallen from
grace; because 1 They have lost their first love, that delight, and fervency
wherewith they were wont to serve God; 2 They have lost their faith, and cannot
be assured of Gods favor, as once they were; 3 They slip ever and anon into
the sins they have repented of, and find no strength to overcome them.

Against this first tentation there is notable comfort, and strength ministered
to Gods people in the Word of God, and even in that which we heard the last day
of the admirable work of God in the perseverance of his Saints. And for the
comfort, and strength of Gods people against this tentation, the Scripture
gives us two notable preservatives.

Preservative 1.
First, The choicest of Gods servants, and such as unto whom the Lord has given
the best testimony in his Word have been in this case that thou art in,
subject to this variableness to these alterations in their spiritual estate.
They have not stood always steady in one state, but have been of and on with
the Lord. 1. For their delight, and fervencie in good duties. You shall read of
David that sometimes he did service unto God with mavelous alacrity, and
cherfulness of spirit. When he contributed to the building of Gods house
he did it with exceeding joy, 1 Chronicles. 29.9. David the King rejoiced with great
joy. You shall also read of his going to the house of God with the voice of joy
and praise, as one that were going to a feast, Psalm 42.4. And sometimes
again you shall hear him complaining of the deadness of his heart, that he
could serve God with no life or cherfulness at all, Psalm 119 25. My soul
cleaves to the dust, quicken thou me according to thy Word. 2. So it is with
them for their faith, and confident assurance of Gods favor. David that one
while glories. The Lord is my light, and my salvation whom shall I fear?
Psalm 27.1. At another time you shall find him quite void of this assurance,
Psalm 31.22. I said in my have I am cut off from before thine eyes. You shall
hear him complaining, Psalm 88.15. While I suffer thy terrors, I am
distracted. And blessed Paul who at one time speaks so triumphantly, Romans
8.35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? At another time (2 Cor.
7.5.) you shall hear him complain of inward fears and terrors. 3. For their
conscionable care to please God in all their ways, they have showed great
inconstancy in that also. 1. Abraham was sometimes so obedient unto God, so
careful to please him that there was no commandment of God so hard, so
contrary to reason, but he made conscience to obey it, When God said unto him
get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers house,
unto a land that I will show thee, Genesis 12.1. he durst not break or neglect
such a commandment as this. Nay when God bad him go and sacrifice his own
son, Genesis 22.1, 2. He durst not neglect such a commandment as that was. But
stood he always in this estate? In this fear to offend God, and care to
please him? No verily, for you shall find this resolute man, at another time
dissembling and concealing for fear, that Sarah was his wife, and calling her
his sister, Genesis 12.13. Yea you shall find him slipping again into that
very sin, after he had (doubtless) repented of it, Genesis 20.2. 2. You shall
hear David professing sometimes a strong and firm resolution that way, Psalm.
26.11. As for me, I will walk in mine integrity. And Psalm. 119.106. I have
sworn and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments. But
for all this, we know what slips he had at other times, yea what fearful falls
he took also. By many more examples it might be made evident, that in the
holiest of Gods servants there has been much variableness and show of
changing and falling in all these three degrees. In many things they have
sinned all as the Apostle speaks, James 3.2. they have slipped often, and
fallen also fearfully. And you will easily conceive it cannot be otherwise if
you remember what you heard the last day. 1 What a world they live in. 2 What a
kind of enemy Satan is. 3 What a deal of corruption remained in the nature of
the best of them, still after their regeneration.

But you will say the Lord is able to uphold, Object. 1
and keep his servants from falling or slipping notwithstanding all this.

I answer, Answ.
It is true he can do it, and would also certainly do it, if he did not see it
were for his own glory, and for our good also (for these two are inseparably
coupled together) to let go his hold sometimes in part, and to leave us to our
selves, and so to let us take these slips and falls now and then. The Lord does
(says Solomon, Pro. 16.4.) all things (and consequently this) for himself,
and his own glory. And all things (and consequently this) are for your sakes,
says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.15.

How is God glorified hereby, Quest.
will you say?

I answer, Answ.
1. He glorifieth his justice hereby, and shows he cannot abide sin, but
must needs correct it in them that he loves best of all. When good Hezekiah
waxed cold in his thankfulness to God, for his great deliverance, and his
heart began to be lifted up, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. it is said, verse 31. God left him
a while and let him slip. So when the Church grew secure and lazy and
neglected her watch, her well-beloved (to correct her for this) withdrew
himself for a time, Cant. 5.2 -- 6. 2. God glorifieth his mighty power in
this, by making such weak wretches as we often show our selves to be, able to
hold out to the end, and stand against such adversaries as we have. Gods power
is made (that is, declared to be) perfect through our weakness, as the Apostle
speaks, 2 Cor. 12.9.3. God glorifieth his goodness and mercy in continuing
so constant in his love to such unconstant ones as we are. When the Apostle had
said, Romans 5.6. When we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died
for the ungodly, He adds and infers, ver. 8. God commends his love
toward us in this.

But how should it be possible that this should be for our good, to be left
thus to our selves? Quest.


I answer, Answ.
1. Hereby we are taught not to trust in our selves, but to the Lord alone, to
depend wholly upon him, for our eternal salvation; According to that of the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.9. We had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should
not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the dead. 2. To keep us from
pride; As we see in the case of the blessed Apostle, 2 Cor. 12.7. Tho whom lest
he should be exalted above measure through the abundance of revelations, there
was given to him a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet him.

Yet might all this speech (may some say) that has been used touching the
slips and falls of holy men have well been spared; Object. 2
for many a carnal man will be ready to snatch at these examples, and say,
Well I see then I may be Gods child, though I slip and fall now and then into
the same sins I have repented of, though I be often drunken and wanton, and
swear and lie, and beguile my neighbor, etc. For the best men have had their
slips, and falls too.

Answ. 1.
To these I answer, First, That this is very true and cannot be avoided. Lewd
and ungodly men will be apt to stumble at this, and to wrest it as they do
also the other Scriptures, unto their own destruction, as the Apostle says, 2
Pet. 3.16.

2.
But then I answer Secondly, That this is the childrens bread; and belongs not
to dogs, as our Savior speaks, Matthew. 15.26. This is written not for the
encouragement of senseless, and secure worldlings, but for the comfort of poor
sinners that are humbled in sense of their often failings, and dangerous falls
they are apt to take. To them I may say as the Apostle speaks in another
case, 1 Cor. 9.10. This is altogether for your sakes, for your sakes no doubt
it is written. And it were better that reprobates should stumble and break
their necks at these examples, then that they should not have been recorded in
the Word, for the comfort of the humbled soul.

3.
Thirdly and lastly, The carnal man has indeed no cause of encouragement from
these examples at all. For though the godly have had, and have daily their
slips and falls, yet their falls are not like the falls of wicked men, but to
them it may be said as Deuteronomy. 32.5. Their spot is not the spot of his children.
There are many broad differences between them, as you shall hear in the
second preservative which the Scripture gives us against this first tentation,
and that is this

Preservative 2.
Secondly, That in none of these slips and falls thou complainest of thou did
ever fall desperately. In the greatest falls that ever any of the Elect have
taken, the spirit of God did never wholly depart from them, but even when they
have lost the feeling and comfort of it, when they could discern no operation
or working of it in themselves, yet even then have they had the root, and seed
and habit of grace remaining in them.

David took when he was in that case, Psalm. 77.6. I communed with mine own
heart, and my spirit made diligent search. Here is a notable privilege that
Gods child has above all hypocrites and wicked men in the world, the more
narrowly he prieth into himself, the more diligently he searches into his own
heart and ways the more comfort he has in his estate. Nothing hinders our
comfort so much as the neglect of this examination of our selves. Let every man
prove his own work (says the Apostle, Gal. 6.4.) and then shall he have
rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another.

a stander by, may see that which the gamester himself sees not. And as daily
experience shows in them that by fevers or otherways have their brains
distempered, they that visit them may discern much goodness in them, when
themselves know not what they say or do. This help the Church used when she
had lost her beloved, Can. 3.2, 3. She went about the city to private
Christians, she went unto the Watchmen the Ministers of the Word, that they
might help her to recover her comfort, to raise her up again when she was
fallen. And even in this respect it may truly be said, as Eccle. 4.10. Woe to
him that is alone, when he falls, for he has not another to help him up.

purpose; can so fall as utterly to lose all grace; because God in his Word
has said so, and there is more credit to be given to Gods Word, then to the
sense and reason of all the men in the world. We must walk by faith and not by
sight, 2 Cor. 5.7.

If any man shall ask me where has God in his Word said so? Quest.


I answer. Answ.
1. God in his Word has said, Ioh. 3.36. He that believes on the son, has
everlasting life. What life means he there? Surely the life of grace which is
the beginning of the life of glory. The life of grace, it is an everlasting
life. 2. God in his Word has said, 2 Ioh. 2. The truth dwells in us (not in
himself only, but in all the faithful) and shall be with us for ever.
Whether we understand by the truth saving knowledge or sincerity of heart, the
proof is pregnant that where once it is, it is of a lasting nature. 3. God in
his Word has said, 1 Ioh. 3.9. He that is borne of God does not commit sin,
(that is, does not sin as the wicked man does of whom he had spoken verse 8.
with the full sway of his soul) for his seed (says he, the seed of God, the
seed of grace and regeneration, that incorruptible seed as the Apostle Peter
calls it, 1 Pet. 1.23.) remains in him; and he cannot sin (he cannot so
fall as apostates) because he is borne of God. This were easy to be showed in
all the three degrees I mentioned before of the spiritual decays and falls,
that the regenerate subject unto, which when thou find in thy self thou
may take comfort. 1. When they have lost that cherfulness and vigor of
spirit wherewith they were wont to perform spiritual duties, the delight they
were wont to take in the Word, and prayer, yet they dare not give over these
duties, but in obedience unto God, and with a labor of love they perform them
still, and grieve that they can perform them no better. Behold the seed of God
remains in them. So was it with David, Psalm. 119.25. When his soul cleaved
to the dust yet he cried still to God. 2. When they have lost their assurance
of Gods favor in the greatest fits of infidelity that ever they have, they
dare not then do any thing that might offend him, they seek and cry to God
still, thirst after nothing more, then his favor, mourn for no loss so much.
Their soul lamenteth after the Lord as his people did, 1 Samuel 7.2. Behold the
seed of God remains in them. See this also in David, Psalm. 22.1. When he was
even ready to sink in despair and to conclude God had forsaken him yet then
he could cry, and weep and take on, for the want of Gods favor. And Psalm.
31.22. I said in mine have I am cut off from before thine eyes; nevertheless
thou heardest the voice of my supplications, when I cried unto thee. 3. And
lastly, When they have slipped and fallen most foully either through their own
security, or by the violence of any tentation, they do not only feel inward
checks for their fall in themselves ( the spirit lusting against the flesh as
the Apostle speaks, Gal. 5.17.) but a greater aptness to rise again when
God shall be pleased to give them the means of recovery, and to reach out his
hand unto them, then is in any other men. Behold in this also the seed of God
remaining in them. See this in the Church, Cant. 5.2. I sleep but my heart
waketh, it is the voice of my beloved that knocks. 1. She was not in a dead
sleep, not quite overcome with security. 2. So soon as she heard the voice,
of Christ, she certainly knew it to be his voice, and it wrought upon her and
made her rise, though not so soon as she should have done.

And so much may suffice for the strengthening and comfort of Gods people
against the first of those two tentations that I mentioned unto you. I now
proceed unto the second.

O but (says many a good soul) though I be for the present (I praise God) in
the state of grace; Tentatio^ 2.
yet God knows how long I shall so continue; I may fall away from God
irrecoverably; yea I find my self so weak now, so unable now to resist any
tentation, that when the fiery trial shall come, when the hour of death shall
come, and that last, and sharpest skirmish that I must look to have with
Satan, I fear I shall then be unable to stand, and this fear disquieteth and
tormenteth my heart.

Preservative.
Now for the comfort of Gods people against this tentation, I say, that (though
thou may in the hour of tentation show much weakness, yet) if there be
the fruit of Gods eternal love and Election in any truth of grace in thee,
thou shall never be so overcome of any tentation, as to fall finally, but
certainly thou shall recover thy self before thou dyest. When the Apostle had
spoken, 1 John 5.17. of the sin unto death, he adds in the next words, this
comfortable sentence, verse 18. We know that whosoever is borne of God sins
not. This we know, and are most certain of, that he can never fall into that
sin. Insomuch as that which the Apostle speaks of the whole Church of the
Jews, Romans 11.11. may be truly said of every elect child of God, Have they
stumbled, that they should fall? (that is, that they should fall finally, and
for ever, for in the next verse, 12. he grants, they are fallen) God forbid
says he. See this also plainly taught us, Psalm. 15. where the Prophet having
described the upright hearted Christian, by sundry properties and actions, he
concludes verse 5. He that does these things, shall never be moved; never
be utterly and finally overcome by any tentation. And this is that which our
Savior teaches also, Mat. 7.24, 25. Whosoever hears these sayings of mine,
and does them; I will liken him unto a wise man, that built his house upon a
rock; and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and
beat upon that house, and it fell not, because it was built upon a rock. And
that which he says of a godly life, he says Matthew. 16.18. of a lively and
true faith also. Thou art Peter (a rock impregnable, whom Satan with all his
might shall not be able to overcome, though thou shall fall, thou shall not
fall utterly) and upon this rock (this faith that thou have made confession
of) I will build my Church, and the gates of hell (all the cunning, all the
power of Satan) shall not prevail against it. Quest.


If any man shall ask me; and why cannot a chosen vessel and true believer
(what tentations soever shall assault him) perish irrecoverably? Answ.


I answer. There be two pillars that uphold him, and make it impossible for
him to fall in that manner, of which I spoke the last day. 1. The almighty
power of God. 2. The unchangeable love of God. Both fitly typified by those two
pillars we read of, 1 Kin 7.21. that were in Solomon's Temple, which was also it
self, a type of the Church and people of God, the one was called Iachin, that
is to say, he will establish, the other, Boaz, in him is strength.

Boaz. In the Lord is strength, enough to keep us from falling, totally or
finally. Upon this pillar, our Savior lies this Doctrine, John 10.28.29. None
of my sheep shall perish, my father which gave them me, is greater then all,
and no man is able to pluck them out of my fathers hand. No, no man if he be
once one of Christ's sheep, a true believer, no man can pluck him away. Upon
this pillar does Paul ground his confidence, 2 Timothy 1.12. I am not ashamed, for
I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that
which I have committed unto him, against that day. Yea, upon this pillar, he
groundeth the confidence even of the weakest Christian that is, having an
honest heart. Romans 14. For speaking of one that is weak in the faith, verse 1.
he says thus of him, verse 4. Yea he shall be held up, for God is able to make
him stand.

Now for the second pillar, lachin, he will establish. The Lord not only Esa.
54.10. The mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness
shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed,
says the Lord that has mercy on thee. Upon this pillar does the Church ground
her confidence, Esa. 64.5. Behold, thou art wroth, for we have sinned; in
those is continuance, and we shall be saved. And so does David, Psalm. 23.6.
Surely, goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life. And
48.14. This God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our guide even unto
death.

Lecture LXXII. On Psalm 51.5. October. 16. 1627.
IT follows now, Saving grace.
that we proceed to the fourth and last point, wherein the admirable goodness
of God, is set forth by the Doctrine of original sin; and that is this. That
the sinfulness, and corruption of our nature, being so great as it is, it
should do us no more hurt then it does. And surely this is a thing that we
can never sufficiently admire, that we not only slipping, and falling often
into many actual sins, but having also still in us so vile a nature, such a
fountain of corruption, that makes us we cannot cease from sin any one
moment, and like the troubled sea that cannot rest (it is the Prophets
comparison, though in another sense, Esa. 57.20.) is ever casting up some
filthy mire and dirt or other, to defile our best actions by; that we being
such I say, the Lord should not loath and abhor, both our selves, and every
thing that proceeds from us. That the Lord should notwithstanding all this,
have so gracious respect unto us, and to our poor service as he has, this
does notably set forth his admirable goodness and mercy toward us.

This will the better appear unto us, if we shall distinctly consider these
three things. 1. What we and our best actions, and performances are. 2. What
the Lord is in the holiness of his own nature. 3. What the respect is that
the Lord (notwithstanding) does show to us, and to the service we do unto him.

For the first Our flesh and corrupt nature is such, as it will not suffer us
to Paul complained of, Romans 7.18. To will, is present with me (this was
doubtless the speech of a regenerate man) but how to perform that which is
good, I find not. And that that he says of himself there, he says of all
the faithful. Galat. 5.17. Ye cannot do the thing that ye would. Nay it
does so palpably corrupt, and defile every good thing we desire to do, as our
selves cannot choose (if there be any truth of grace in us) but discern, and
be ashamed of it, and complain of it also, as the Church does, Esa. 64.6. We
are all as the unclean man (the leper) and all our righteousnesses (not one,
but all) are as filthy rags. So that when we have done the best service that
ever we did to God, we have cause to cry God mercy for it, and to pray with
good Nehemiah, 13.22. Lord pardon me according to the greatness of thy mercy.
And if we (as blind and senseless, and full of self-love, as we are) can
discern so much filth our selves in them; what can the Lord do. Who is
greater then our heart (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Ioh. 3.20.) and knows all
things?

For the second point, The Lord (we know) is so infinitely holy, that he Thou
art of purer eyes (says the Prophet. Hab. 1.13.) then to behold evil, and
can not look on iniquity. He will by no means clear the guilty, as the
Lord speaks of himself. Exodus 34.7. Therefore shall thy camp be holy
(says the Lord. Deuterono. 23.14.) lest he see any unclean thing in thee,
and turn away from thee.

Now let us come to the third point I told you was to be considered, though
great respect to us and to them for all that. And this shall appear unto us in
four points especially.

I know thy works and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not
bear them which are evil, says Christ to the poor Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, Rev. 2.2. that had lost his first love, and was much decayed, and
fallen away in his goodness. There is not any patience that the poor weak
Christian has showed in suffering ought for Christ's sake, not any pains he
has taken to get to heaven, not any zeal he has showed against sin, but the
Lord takes notice of it, be it done never so secretly, Acts 9.11. Yea, he
will remember it also, and never forget it. David knew this, and therefore
prayed, Psalm. 56.8. Put thou my tears into thy bottle, are they not in thy
register? He takes notice of the tears we shed for our sins, and in our
prayer, and will not forget them. And surely this is a matter of great
admiration, and so David conceived of it, Psalm. 144.3. Lord, what is man that
thou take knowledge of him; or the son of man, that thou make account of
him?

He sees no iniquity in Jacob (as Baalam himself was constrained in the
spirit of prophecy to confess, Numbers 23.21.) nor transgression in Israel.
He does not for these spots and blemishes that are in our services, we do
unto him, reject us or our services, but accepts of them, and takes them in
good part, as if there were no spot or defect in them at all. He did not reject
the service that Rahab did him, in saving of the spies, though she had
blemished, and stained it with a lie, Joshua 2.4, 5. but accepted, and
commended it, Hebrews 11.31. The prayer that Joshua made, when (out of
impatiency) he cried, Josh. 7.7. Would to God we had been content, and dwelt
on the other side of Jordan, and never come into Canaan; the Lord rejected not
for all that. When David in his prayer, was so full of infidelity, that he
said in his have, I am cut off from before thine eyes, nevertheless (says he
Psalm 31.22.) thou heardest the voice of my supplications, when I cried unto
thee. And at another time, when he was in that distress, that he says, his
soul refused to be comforted, he remembered God, and was troubled, and his
spirit was overwhelmed (as he says, Psalm. 77.2, 3. A poor prayer you may
think it was that a man in that case could make) yet did not God reject that
prayer that was so foully stained, but as he says verse 1. when he was in that
case, I cried to God with my voice, even to God with my voice, and he gave
ear unto me. When Moses had showed a great deal both of impatiency, and
infidelity when God bad him only speak unto the rock before the people (as
you shall read, Number. 20.10, 11.) yet did not God reject his service for this,
but wrought with him, and showed his mavelous power, even in that work
nevertheless. And surely so he does still; he does not reject our prayers for
our manifold infirmities, he does not refuse to work with, and bless our poor
labors that are his ministers, though (alas) we bewray much of our own
ignorance, and other our corruptions in them, when we preach best of all. And
even in this also his mavelous goodness and mercy is to be admired by us,
which makes the Church break forth into that speech of admiration, and so
would we all if we did rightly consider it. Mic. 7.18. Who is a God like unto
thee that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgressions of the remnant
of his heritage?

Thirdly. He delights in us, and in our poor services, notwithstanding all
The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, says David, Psalm. 147.11. and
149.4. The Lord takes pleasure in his people. If ye will obey my voice indeed
(says the Lord to the children of Israel, Exodus 19.5.) and keep my Covenant,
then ye shall be pecuculiar treasure unto me above all people. And Mala. 3.17.
They shall be mine says the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my
Jewels, and I will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him.
Yea, those poor duties we perform to him in his service, which our selves
take so small comfort in, yet he delights in them. He delights in the way
of a good man, says David, Psalm. 37.23. And Solomon Prove. 15.8. The prayer of
the upright in his delight. Thy voice is sweet, says Christ to his Church,
Cant. 2 14* In which respect, he compares the hearts of his people that are
able to pray, Revel* 5 8. unto golden vialls full of sweet odours. And the
faithful minister is said by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.15. to be unto God a sweet
savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish, whether the
people receive good by our labors, or no. And for this cause also he desires
to hear us pray, to see us keep his Sabbaths, preach, and hear his word,
give alms to his poor members, etc. as much as ever man did desire any thing
he most delighted in. Let me see thy countenance (says Christ to his Church,
Cant. 2.14) let me hear thy voice. And John 4.23. The father seeks such
worshippers, as worship him in spirit and truth; as a great man would seek
far and near for a faithful, and profitable servant. And have not every one
of us cause to wonder at this, and to say to the Lord, as John Baptist did to
Christ, Matthew. 3.14. I have need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to
me? I have need to seek to thee, to have my best services washed, and cleansed
from their filthiness, and seek thou to me for such poor services as I am
able to do?

Fourthly and lastly. He does also reward every service we do unto him,
Whatsoever good thing any man does (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.8.) the same
shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. Not only great
services, and such as much glory redoundeth to his name by, but even the
meanest and poorest, and such as may seem to be of least use unto him. See
what Christ says of the poor widows two mites, Luke 21.3. of a cup of cold
water given to one of his little ones in the name of a Disciple, Matthew. 10.42.
and what the Apostle says Colos. 3 24. of the conscionable service,that a
poor drudge, that had an infidel to his master did, Know that of the Lord, ye
shall receive the reward of inheritance. Therefore when Christ speaks, Matthew.
25. of the good works that shall be rewarded in heaven, he speaks not of
Martyrdom, nor of building of Colleges, nor fighting the Lords battle, nor
redeeming of impropriations, and such like great and excellent works, but of
such as the meanest Christian almost may be able to perform. The poor man's
sacrifice, who was able to bring but a turtle Dove, or a young Pigeon, was an
offering of as sweet a savor unto the Lord (as you shall find Levit. 1.17) as
the rich man's was, that brought never so many sheep, or oxen either. Yea,
those very services that have been apparently polluted with mixture of
corruption, have been rewarded by him nevertheless. Because the mid-wives
feared God, (says Moses, Exodus 1.20, 21. and saved the childrens lives)
therefore God dealt well with the mid-wives, and made them houses; though they
in doing this service, had excused themselves by a lie, as ye may see, verse
19. Yea, those services that we do unto God with sensible untowardnesse,
unwillingnesse, and reluctance of our flesh against them, those God will be
most sure to reward. God is not unrighteous (says the Apostle, Heb. 6.10) to
forget your work and labor of love.

Now if we will search the Scriptures, and enquire into the reason of this
admirable goodness of God, and demand how it comes to pass, that so
perfect, and pure, and righteous a God, should so far respect so imperfect,
and impure services as we are able to do unto him; we shall find three reasons
given of it, in the holy Scriptures.

To will, is present with them, as Paul speaks, Romans 7.18. They would feign
do better; They would feign serve God, even in that exact manner that he
requires. Their spirit is willing (as our Savior says, Matthew. 26.41.) though
the flesh be weak. And they oft-times pray unto God as David does, Psalm.
119.5. O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes. And can say as Esa.
26.8. The desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.
They that are after the spirit (says the Apostle, Romans 8.5.) do mind the
things of the spirit. The poor servants will, was to pay his master even the
ten thousand talents that he required of him. Matthew. 18.24, 16. The faithful
do not please themselves in any of their failings, but are troubled with them,
and mourn for them. As the poor man in the Gospel was, that he could
believe no better. Mar. 9.24. In all their coldness in prayer, in all their
wanderings, and evil thoughts they find then, they can say with the spouse,
Cant. 5.2. I sleep, but my heart waketh. And this is a thing that highly
pleases God, he will bear with much, when he finds this. If there be a
willing mind (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8.12.) a man is accepted according to
that that a man has. The good Lord pardon every one (says good Hezechiah in
his prayer, 2 Chronicles. 38.18, 19. and the Lord hearkened to him, verse 20.) that
prepares his heart to seek God, though he be not cleansed according to the
purification of the Sanctuary. The Lord will pardon and pass by much, where he
sees the heart is thus set to please him.

It is God works in us, both to will, and to do, as the Apostle speaks,
Phil. 2.13. In those poor prayers that the faithful soul makes, when his
spirit is overwhelmed so, that he knows not what to pray as he ought, the
spirit it self makes intercession for us, with groanings that cannot be
uttered; as the Apostle speaks, Rom, 8.26. And though God dislike never so
much that that is ours, the corruptions and stains that cleave to our best
works, yet that that is his own, the work of his own spirit, he cannot but
like, and delight in. This reason we shall find given by David, Psalm. 37.23.
The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord; and he delights in his way.
Therefore he delights in the good man's way, because he by his spirit does
order and direct it. And thus the Church reasons, Esaias 26.12. Lord thou will
ordain peace for us, for thou also have wrought all our works in us.

He has made us accepted (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.6.) in the beloved. And
when we our selves are once reconciled unto God, and in favor with him, it is
no marvel though he take our poor services in so good part. The Lord had
respect to Abel, and to his offering, says Moses, Genes. 4.4. We that are
evil (ye know) can bear with much in them that we love dearly. Yea* the
services that the faithful do unto God, they do not present them to him in
their own name, but in Christ's only, they do not look to have them accepted
for their own, but for the Lords sake, as Daniel speaks, Dan. 9.17, 18. And
Christ has borne all these our blemishes and defects, and fully satisfied for
them. As it is said of Aaron the high Priest ( Exodus 28 38.) that he did bear
the iniquity of the holy things that Gods people did offer, in all their holy
gifts. Our spiritual sacrifices are acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, as the
Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 2 5. For he presents them to his father in the merit
of his sacrifice, and in presenting them, casts of these his sweet odours,
and incense into them, as you shall read Rev. 8.3. And being so perfumed, it is
no marvel though our poor services, be as a sacrifice of a most sweet
smelling savor unto God.

Lecture LXXIII. on Psalm 51.5. October. 30. 1627.
THis point may not be passed over, Applic.
without some application. And it is to be applied 1. By way of prevention
unto carnal and wicked men, who are apt to draw that comfort unto themselves
from it, that belongs not unto them. 2. By way of encouragement unto the
people of God, who receive not that comfort from it, that they ought to do.

First. Many a carnal man is apt to stumble at this Doctrine, and to bless
Luke 18.11, 12. And certainly the world is full of such Pharisees, even in
these days.

Now to beat down the presumption of these Pharisees, I have three things to
say.

First. Consider who they are that the Lord stands so graciously affected
There is no condemnation (says the Apostle, Romans 8.1.) to them that are in
Christ Jesus. But who are they? He answers, Which walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit. It is certain thou art not the child of God, because
thou art not led by the spirit of God. For so says the Apostle likewise, Romans
8.14. As many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God, and
none but they.

Secondly. Admit thou were the child of God, admit thou were in Mat. 3.17. To
spare and bear with his children as a man spares his son that serves him. In
those good duties wherein he sees our heart is set to serve him he will bear
with many defects and failings. But he will not bear with the dearest child he
has in any gross sin. Did he bear with David when he fell to adultery? No
no, he beat him so sore for it, (as David complains here, ver. 8.) that he
brake his bones with beating of him. For such sins God is very terrible in
the assembly of his Saints especially, as the Prophet speaks, Psalm 89.7.
Nay I say more, the Lord will not pass by nor wink at in the dearest child he
has, those very defects and failings that are in their best duties, if they be
reigning corruptions, and not infirmities; that is, if they be not felt, and
striven against, and mourned for. Therefore we are required in doing of good
duties to watch, and observe our own hearts. Continue in prayer, and watch in
the same, says the Apostle, Colos. 4.2. And to strive against our own
corruptions therein. Strive with me, and for me in prayer, says he, Romans
15.30. And to bewail unto God our failings in them, Spare me according to the
greatness of thy mercy, says Nehemiah 13.22. And if God will not wink at
such faults as thine are in his dearest children, can thou hope that he will
wink at them in thee, that art still a child of wrath? If God will not accept
of the services that his dearest children do unto him, unless they be
sensible of those corruptions wherewith they are stained, can thou hope that
he will accept of thine? And what talkest thou of thy serving of God, or of any
good thing that ever thou did? Alas thou could never serve God, nor do
any good thing in thy life. That which the Prophet says, Jeremy 6.10. of such
as thou art, their ear is uncircumcised and they cannot hearken, thou could
never in thy life hear one Sermon to any purpose; the same may be said of all
other duties of Gods service, thou could never pray, nor receive the
Sacrament, in thy life. Ye cannot serve the Lord, says Ioshuah 24.19. to them
that lived in idolatry. And that which I say of the duties of Gods worship the
same I say likewise of all other good works. Thou never did work of mercy
in thy life, thou did never make conscience of dealing justly and truly with
thy neighbor, Matthew 12.34. How can ye being evil speak good things? Luke
6.43. A corrupt tree brings not forth good fruit. They that profess that
they know God (says the Apostle, Titus 1.16.) but in their works deny him,
being abominable, and disobedient, are reprobate unto every good work. The
good things that such men seem to do are not only defective in the manner,
or in the measure, or in matter of circumstance (as the best works of the
faithful may be) but they are utterly void of that which is the very
substance, and that gives life, and being to a good work, that is, faith that
works by love, Gal. 5 6.



shall give account even for every idle word that thou have spoken at the day
of Judgment, as our Savior speaks, Mat. 12.36. Yea the Lord will bring
every secret thought of thine into judgment, Eccl. 12.14.

What have I to do (says the Lord, Esa. 1.11.) with the multitude of your
sacrifices? As if he had said, What care I for them? And ver. 12. Who required
this at your hands to tread in my courts? As if he should say, What do you
here? Any other place were fitter for you then this. Certainly in doing any
service to God thou do but a thankelesse office, thou do but lose thy
labor while thou art unconverted.

Thirdly and lastly, Though the Lord will reward and do good to his children
The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination unto the Lord, says Solomon,
Pro. 15.8. Incense is an abomination unto me (says the Lord, Esa. 1.13.) the
new Mosnes and Sabbaths and calling of assemblies, I cannot away with. You see
how small cause wicked men have to presume of Gods mercy, or of any good thing
they know by themselves. O that God would be pleased to awaken them, that they
could see and consider aright of their woeful estate, and labor to get out of
it.

If any man shall object, Object.
and say, Would you not then have wicked men to come to Church? Would you not
have them to pray and read the Word? Would you have no man to do any good
work but such as are godly?

I answer, Answ. 1
Yes verily, For first, Though in doing this they do not God any service that
will please him, yet is there a necessity laid upon them, and woe be to them if
they do it not. These are duties of the moral law, that all men stand bound
unto. The wickedest man in the world is strictly bound by the commandment of
God to pray. God blames most wicked men for neglect of this, Hos. 7.7. None
among them calls unto me; and ver. 14. They have not cried unto me with their
heart. Yea he condemns the very Atheist, Psalm. 14.4. for this, because he
does not pray. And will pour his wrath upon every family ( Ier. 10.25. and
consequently upon every person) that does not call upon his name. So is the
wickedest man living bound to hear the Word. For he that turns away his
ear from hearing the law, (says Solomon, Pro. 28.9.) his prayer shall be
abominable. So God requires of every man, Mic. 6.8. to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with him. So that though he can neither pray, nor
hear, nor give alms but he must needs sin, yet must he pray and hear, and
give alms for all that. An indifferent thing a man is bound to forbear if he
cannot use it without sin. If he cannot use such or such a recreation without
chasing or swearing or losing too much time, he is bound to forbear it. But
duties commanded of God he may not omit, because he cannot use them without
sin. For there are degrees of sin; and he is guilty of a greater sin (and
shows greater contempt to God) that does not pray or hear or give alms at
all, and so disobeyeth him totally, then he does that does pray and hear, and
give alms but not with an honest, and good heart, and so disobeyeth God but in
part only.

Secondly, 2.
Though no wicked man can have assurance to receive any reward from God, for
the best thing he does, because he has no promise (for all the promises of God
belong only to them that are in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. and to the godly, 1 Timothy
4.8.) nay though he do deserve further wrath from God by the best thing he
does; yet by being careful to abstain from evil and to do good even after
his manner and as he is able he may receive good three ways. For 1. Though he
should never find mercy with God unto salvation, yet will this lessen his
condemnation in hell, where every man shall receive torment proportionable to
his works and to that dishonor he has done to God here, Romans 2.6. 2. This
may free him from many temporal judgments, and bring upon him many temporal
blessings in this life. For the Lord (out of the infiniteness of his
goodness) has often showed so much respect unto good things that have been
done even by wicked men (though they have been but the dead carcass, and have
wanted the life and soul of good works) as to reward them temporally. The
Lord that is said to feed the young ravens when they cry unto him, Job 38.41.
has often had respect to the prayer that a man void of grace has made unto him,
in his misery. As profane a wretch as Ishmael was (when he was cast out of his
fathers house for his profanesse, Genesis 21.9, 10.) yet when he cried to God in
his misery, it is twice said in one verse, Genesis 21.17. that God heard the voice
of the lad, and relieved him. And we know how much even Ahabs prayer that he
made when he was humbled by fear prevailed with God, 1 King. 21.29. Therefore
also Daniel exhorts Nebuchadnezzar a most wicked man, Dan. 4.27. to break of
his sins, to cease from oppression and cruelty, How? By righteousness, that is,
by making restitution to them that he had wronged; And how else? By showing
mercy to the poor. And why did he counsel a man so void of grace to do so
good works as these? Was it not all one as if he should have bidden a dead man
to walk? Mark the reason and motive the Prophet uses to persuade him to
this, if it may be (says he) a lengthening of thy tranquillity. As if he should
have said, It may be these good works performed even as thou art able to do
them, will prevent the judgment which God by this dream that thou have had,
does threaten to bring upon thee, and prolong thy peace. 3. He may by doing
that that lies in him to do, further the eternal salvation of his own soul.
For though no wicked, nay no natural man can use the means of grace aright,
nor so as to please God therein, yet if the wickedest man that is, frequent the
ministry of the Word, there is hope he may be converted and have grace wrought
in him, both because it is the means ordained of God to breed grace where none
is, Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing; and because as wicked men as live
have been won to God by their hearing; as appears not only by daily
experience, but by those two notable examples that are recorded in the Word.
The one 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. of the man that was an ignorant man, and an infidel
before. And the other John 7.45, 46. of them that came to hear Christ with a
most wicked heart to entrap and apprehend him. And so much shall serve for that
part of the application of this point, that concerns the natural and carnal
man.



David complains of himself that he went mourning all the day long, Ps.
38.6. And they are called such as are of a fearful heart, Esa. 35.4. Their
frailty is like a cloud, Esa. 44.22. Whereas indeed those that do unfeignedly
fear God and have set their hearts to please him, are the only men of the
world, that have just cause to be cheerful and comfortable, Psalm. 105.3. Let
the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord. And 32.11. Shout for joy all ye
that are upright in heart. Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again, I
say rejoice. Yea though his frailties were far greater then they are, yet
has he much more cause to rejoice in the Lord, then to be sad for them. 1. His
sins are forgiven him and that is a just cause of joy. Son be of good cheer
(says Christ, Mat. 9.2.) thy sins are forgiven. 2. God is reconciled to him in
Christ and delights in him, as you heard the last day; and that is another
just cause of joy. Let him that glories (says the Lord, Ier 9 24) glory in
this, that he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord which exercise
loving kindness. 3. And lastly, His name is written in heaven, and that is
also a just ground of unspeakable joy. Rejoice in this (says our Savior, Luke
10.20.) that your names are written in heaven. So that I may boldly say to
every poor Christian thou art more bound to rejoice in these things, then to
mourn for thine own infirmities; yea it were not so great a sin in thee not to
mourn at all for thine infirmities, as it is not to rejoice in the Lord.

Secondly, There is yet another fault that Gods people are much to blame for,
Serve the Lord with gladness, says David, Ps. 100. 2. We should count the
Sabbath a delight, Esa. 58.13. I will make them (says the Lord speaking of his
people, Esa. 56.7.) joyful in my house of prayer. True it is Gods people have
just cause of mourning and fear in the best services they do unto God in
respect of the unworthiness of them to be presented unto God, and the
untowardnesse of their hearts in them. Good Hezekiah went sore when he prayed,
Esa. 38.3. and his prayer was never the worse for that. But yet there must be
in every acceptable service we do unto God a mixture of joy with that sorrow
and fear. Serve the Lord with fear (says David, Psalm. 2.11.) and rejoice
with trembling. When we consider how bad servants we are, we see just cause of
sorrow and fear; but when we consider how good a master it is, that we do
service unto, there is more cause of joy and comfort in that then there is of
sorrow and fear in the other. Certainly if we did rightly know the
disposition of this master of ours that we do service unto, it would put life
into us, and make us serve him with more gladness of heart then we do.
Consider therefore and think often (for thy encouragement) of the disposition of
thy Lord and master in these five points.

First, His eye is continually upon thee, to take notice of that thou do in
his Ephesians. 6.6. Not with eye-service as mem-pleasers.

Secondly, In whatsoever service he injoineth us to do unto him, he seeks not
If thou be righteous (says Elihu, Job 35.7.) what give thou to him? or what
receives he at thy hand? And Deuteronomy. 10.13. These commandments and statutes I
command thee this day for thy good. We do no faithful service unto him, but it
yields us fruit even in the doing of it, besides that it will yield us when
the harvest comes, that is, at the end of the world. Being freed from sin
(says the Apostle, Romans 6.22.) and being become the servants of God, ye have
your fruit in holiness, and in the end everlasting life. It is joy to the just
(says Solomon, Pro. 21.15.) to do judgment. Even the very doing of good
duties with a good heart yields that joy and comfort to a man, as will
abundantly recompense all the pains and service we can do. The people rejoiced
for that they offered willingly, (1 Chronicles. 29.9.) because with a perfect heart
they offered willingly to the Lord, and David also the King rejoiced with great
joy.

Thirdly, The Lord is no such hard and rigorous master as will bear with no I
will spare them (says the Lord, Mal. 3.17.) as a man spares his own son that
serves him. And this makes the Prophet to cry out, Psalm. 130 3, 4. If thou
Lord should mark iniquities o Lord who shall stand, but there is
forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. As if he had said, Who would
not fear, that is, serve and worship such a God, as is so easy to be pleased,
so apt to forgive the slips and frailties of his servants in whom he sees
there is truth of heart?

If there be a willing mind (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8.12.) a man is
accepted. Because he was willing to have done it, God says of Abraham, Heb.
11.17. that he did offer up his only son.

Arise, and be doing (says David to Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 22.16.) and the Lord
will be with thee. If we draw near to God, do our best endeavor God will draw
near unto us, as the Apostle speaks, James 4.8.

LECTVRES ON PSALM. LI. 6.
Lecture LXXIV. On Psalm LI. 6. November. 6. MDCXXVII.
Behold, thou desire truth in the inward parts; and in the hidden part thou
had made me to know wisdom.
WE have already heard out of the former verses of this Psalm, that David in
seeking to God for mercy, in the pardon of his grievous sins, does make
confession of his sin, and accuse himself before God, and that not only in
gross and general, verse 3. but more fully in these three verses following.
For, 1. He acknowledges his sin in particular, that very sin that Nathan
charged him with, verse 4. I have done this evil in thy sight. 2. The
fountain and root from whence this his sin did grow, even his vile and cursed
nature, verse 5 Behold I was borne in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me. 3. From the consideration of that uprightness, and truth of
heart, which the Lord so much desires, and which he found his corrupt heart so
far from, specially in the committing of this soul sin. (For, oh, what a
deal of fraud and cunning did he use in this matter, to hide and cloak his
sin. 1. He sent for Vriah home, and persuaded him to go and lodge at his own
house, 2. Sam. 11.6. 2. When persuasion would not serve, he made him drunk,
in hope that that would provoke him to lust, verse 13. 3. When all this would
not serve, nor he could get Vriah to father the child, he procures him to
be made away, that so by marrying of his wife, he might cloak his sin the
better, ver. 15.) in the beginning of this sixth verse. Behold, thou desire
truth in the inward parts. 4. From the consideration of that measure of saving
knowledge and grace, which he had received from God, before he fell into this
sin, in the last words of this verse. And in the hidden part thou had made me
(for so I read it, and not thou shall make me) to know wisdom. And thus you
see the scope and drift of this verse, and what coherence, and dependence it
has on that which went before.

The words divide themselves naturally into two parts, as they do contain two
arguments and considerations, whereby David does amplify and aggravate his
sin. 1. What a one God would have David and all his children to be; that is to
say, Upright in heart. 2. What a one David was, before he fell into these
foul sins; that is, God had wrought soundness of grace in his heart. In the
hidden part thou had made me to know wisdom. In the former part, three
points are to be observed. 1. The thing, the grace that God desired, that God
would have to be in David and all his children. Truth, thou desire truth;
that is, sincerity, and uprightness; which is opposed to guile and hypocrisy.
So is truth taken, Josh. 24.14. Fear the Lord, and serve him, insincerity, and
in truth. And 1 Cor. 5.8. Let us keep the feast with the unleavened bread of
sincerity, and truth. And John 1.47. Behold (says our Savior of Nathanael) an
Israelite in truth ((...)) in whom is no guile. 2. The subject, the place where
God would have this grace to be, in the inward parts, that is, in the heart.
For so we find this place interpreted by Job 38.36. Who has put wisdom in
the inward parts? or who has given understanding to the heart? And by our
Savior, Mark 7.21. From within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil
thoughts. And by the Apostle, Ephesians. 3. who when he had prayed for them, verse
16. that they might be strengthened by Gods spirit, in the inner man. He
expounds himself thus, verse 17. that Christ might dwell in their hearts by
faith. The heart is the proper seat of this truth and sincerity. For then a
thing is said to be spoken or done in truth. 1. When that which is said or
done, agrees with the heart, and proceeds from it. As a good man is said.
Psalm. 15.2. To speak the truth in his heart. He speaks the truth in his
heart, because he speaks as he thinks. 2. When the purpose and intent of
the heart, is upright in that which a man speaks or does. My father (says
Solomon in his prayer. 1 Kings 3.6.) walked before thee in truth, and
uprightness of heart; therefore in truth, because in uprightness of heart.
Therefore also is this sincerity called singleness of heart. Acts 2.46 When a
man in that which he says, and does, has but one heart, not a heart, and a
heart, a double heart, ( Psalm. 12.2.) one heart for that which he pretends,
and another for that which he intends. It is said, that the Zebulonites that
came to make David King. 1 Chronicles. 12.33. were not of a double heart. And that
is expounded verse 38, that they came with a perfect or an upright heart. A
true heart is called a whole heart also, Psalm. 119.10. a false heart is called
a divided heart. Hosea 10.2. 3. and lastly, The note of observation that David
prefixeth before this Behold. As if he should say; this, this is that which I
cannot but take notice of, and think much upon, that whereas I am by nature so
filthy and corrupt, and have so much falsehood, and hypocrisy in my heart,
which has been the maine cause of this my fearful fall, thou art a God that
look for, and requirest, yea, desire above all things, and delightest in
the truth and uprightness of the heart, and where that is wanting, all that a
man can do, is nothing in thy sight. Now all this cunning and falsehood he had
used, does greatly augment his grief and shame, when he considers how much
the Lord delights in truth, and abhors hypocrisy.

Then the Doctrine that we are to learn from the first part of the verse, is
this.

Doct. 20
That truth and uprightness of heart, is that which God highly esteems of,
and desires, and delights in above all things. Observe the proof of this
Doctrine, in five points and degrees.

My son (says the Lord, Prove. 23.26.) give me thine heart; that is it that I
look for. So Joshua 24.14. calls upon the people. Now therefore fear the
Lord, and serve him in sincerity, and truth. Are not thine eyes upon the truth?
says Iere. 5.3. As if he should say, Is not that the thing thou look after
in all the works of men, in all the services they do unto thee? The true
worshippers (says our Savior, John 4 23.) shall worship the father in spirit
and truth; for the father seeks such to worship him. He even longs for
such servants, as will worship him in that manner.

Secondly. This is that that the Lord delights in. Such as are upright in
(says Solomon, Prove. 11.20.) are the Lords delight. I know also my God (says
David, 1 Chronicles. 29.17.) that thou have pleasure in purightnesse. We can by
nothing we are able to do, gratify and please the Lord so much, as in this.

Thirdly. This is all in all with God, the only thing that he requires of
us, Abram, in that covenant that he made with him, Genes. 17.1. Walk before
me, and be thou upright. So speaks Samuel also to the people, when he would
renew the covenant between God and them. 1 Samuel 12.24. Only fear the Lord,
and serve him in truth, with all your heart. So runs the covenant also that
God made with David and his posterity, 1 Kin. 2.4. If thy children take heed to
their ways, and walk before me in truth, with all their heart, and all their
soul, there shall not fail thee a man upon the throne of Israel.

Fourthly. The Lord valueth, and esteems of us, and of all our words, Psalm.
125.4. Do good o Lord to those that be good. Who are they? And to them that
are upright in their hearts. 2. A little grace, a small measure of knowledge
and faith, the meanest and poorest service we do unto God, is of a great
price, and worth with him, where he sees uprightness of heart. Philadelphia
is said, Revel. 3.8. to have had but a little strength, and yet of all the
Churches Christ wrote to, he finds least fault with her, she pleased him
best. 3. Nay the Lord will bear with many frailties, and faults, where he
sees there is truth in the inward parts. See three notable examples of this.
1. Asa had sundry great faults, which you shall see recorded, 2 Chronicles.
16.10.12. And yet because of this, see what a testimony the holy Ghost gives
of him. 1 Kings 15.14. Nevertheless Asaes heart was perfect with the Lord, all
his days. As if he should have said, for all his slips and frailties, he was
a good man, because his heart was upright. 2 The second example is of
Iehoshaphat his son, of whom also we read, that he had many great frailties.
He made a league of great amity with Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 18.3. He went with him to
battle against Ramoth Gilead, though he had heard what Micajah the Prophet
spoke against it, 2 Chronicles. 18.27, 28. Though he had been reproved for this by
Iehu the Prophet, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. yet does he after that again, join himself
in special league with Ahaziah, Ahabs son, a most wicked man, 2 Chronicles.
20.35. And he bestowed his son Iehoram, in marriage upon Ahabs daughter, 2 Chronicles. 21.6. And yet for all this, God accounted him a good man all his days,
1 King. 22.43. He turned not aside from doing that which was right in the eyes
of the Lord. And why did God so esteem of him? Surely because his heart was
upright with God. For, says the Prophet Iehu to him, 2 Chronicles. 19.3.
Nevertheless, there are good things found in thee, in that thou have prepared
thine heart to seek God. And as it is said, 2 Chronicles. 17.6. His heart was lift
up in the ways of the Lord. He was unfeinedly, and zealously bent in the
purpose of his heart to please the Lord. 3. The third and last example, is of
the people that received the passover in Hezechiahs time, of whom it is said,
2 Chronicles. 30.18. that they did eat it otherwise then it was written; they
swerved in that holy service from the express direction and commandment of
God. For they had not cleansed themselves according to the purification of the
Sanctuary, they came not so prepared to the Sacrament as they ought to have
done. And yet did God pass by this fault and imputed it not unto them but at
the prayer of Hezekiah healed, and forgave them, made his Sacrament effectual
to their comfort for all that. And why so? The reason is given, verse 19. They
had prepared their hearts to seek God in that his ordinance, the bent of their
heart was upright with God in that service. You see then what account God
makes of the uprightness of the heart. 4 On the other side, The greatest
shows of goodness that can be in a man, the best works he can do, are of no
worth with him, if this be wanting. Judas repented, confessed his sin in
particular, and made restitution also of that he had unjustly got, Matthew.
27.3, 4. and all to no purpose, because his heart was rotten and unsound. The
Pharisee led so civil, and honest a life, that he justified himself before
men and was highly esteemed for it, as our Savior speaks, Luke 16.15. but
was of no reckoning with God. And why? Our Savior tells us, Matthew. 23.^8, Ye
outwardly appear righteous to men, but within ye are full of hypocr^sie and
iniquity. The people in Ezekiels time, frequented his ministry diligently,
took as great delight to hear him as as ever they did in any music, yet
were they stark naught in Gods account. And the reason is given, Ezekiel. 33.31.
their heart was false, their heart went after their covetousness. Iehu showed
great zeal for Gods glory, and did much for the advancement of it, and gloried
of it unto good Ieho^adab, 2 King. 10.16. Come with me (says he) and see my
zeal for the Lord. And yet did the Lord account of him no better then of a
murderer. I will avenge (says he, Hos. 1.4.) the blood of Iezreel upon the
house of Iehu. And why? Because in doing that excellent piece of service his
heart was not right, as you shall see, 2 King. 10.31.

Job 2.3. A perfect, and an upright man. So speaks David, Psalm. 37.37. Mark
the perfect man, and behold the upright. So Psalm. 32.11. Rejoice in the Lord ye
righteous. Why who can say he is righteous? He answers in the next words,
Shout for joy, all ye that are upright in heart. And 97.11. Light is sown for
the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. Yea Hezekiah in his
sickness when he thought there was no way with him but one, 2 King. 20.3.
could say of himself (and that was strange) that he had walked before God
with a perfect heart; because his conscience witnessed with him he had walked
in truth his heart was upright with God.

The reasons and grounds of this Doctrine are four principally; three of them
taken from the nature of God; and the fourth from the nature of this grace of
truth and uprightness of heart.

Reason 1
First, The Lord we know is a spirit and therefore looks for the service of
the heart and spirit, his eye is upon that rather then upon any outward thing,
So the Lord tells Samuel, 1 Samuel 16.7. This reason our Savior gives, John
4.24. God is a spirit, and therefore they that worship him, must worship him in
spirit, and in truth.

Reason 2
Secondly, The Lord is a God that knows and is able to search the heart, and
all the corners and windings of it, and it is to no purpose therefore, to
double with him. I know Ephraim (says the Lord, Hos 5.3.) and Israel is not
hid from me. All things are naked, and opened (says the Apostle, Heb. 4.13.)
unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to do. This reason the Lord gives
Iere. 17.9, 10. The heart is deceitful above all things, who can know it? I
the Lord search the very heart, and try the reins. And therefore, to think
we can flatter the Lord, and please him with good words, and shows (as it is
said the Israelites that perished in the wilderness did, Psalm 78.36, 37.
They flattered him with their mouths, for their heart was not right with him)
is even to lie unto the holy Ghost (as Peter charged Ananios. Acts 5.3. Why
has Satan filled thy heart to lie unto the holy Ghost) a dissembling with him,
that cannot be deceived by us.

Thirdly. Reason 3
The Lord is the God of truth, and so is called, Psalm. 31.5. and the spirit of
God is called the spirit of truth, John 14.17. In this grace specially
consists the image of God, in this we most resemble him, God made man
upright, Eccle. 7.29. So the Apostle speaking of the image of God, according to
which we were first created, and unto which we are renewed by the spirit of
regeneration, Ephesians. 4.24. He calls it righteousness, and holiness of
truth. And our Savior describing the fall of the Angels, the devils falling
from God, and loosing of his image, he describes it thus, John 8.44. He abode
not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. If there be truth in our
inward parts, we resemble God our heavenly father, if there be no truth
there, we resemble Satan, and therefore it is no marvel though the Lord take
such pleasure, and delight in uprightness.

Fourthly and lastly. Reason 4
The uprightness of the heart will command and carry the whole man with it.
This reason the holy Ghost gives. Prove. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all
diligence, look that that that be sound and upright, for out of it, come the
issues of life. Uprightness in the hid man of the heart, is like unto the
leven, (it is our Saviors comparison. Matthew. 13.33.) h^d in three measures of
meal, the whole lump of dough will savor of it. A good man, cut of the good
treasure of his heart (says our Savior, Matthew. 12.35.) will bring forth good
things. If the heart be upright and good, the speech will be good, and the
actions also. The mouth of the righteous (says David, Psalm, 37.30, 31.)
speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks of judgment. Why so? The law of his
God is in his heart, none of his steps shall slide. If grace and uprightness
be in the heart, it will make the speech gracious, it will keep a man from
sliding and falling from God, in his whole conversation. It is therefore no
marvel, though the Lord desire that above all things, and so much delight in
it.

Lecture LXXV. On Psalm 51.6. Novem. 13. 1627.
IT follows now, that we proceed to show you the uses that this Doctrine
serves unto, and those are principally two. 1. For examination and trial of
our selves, whether we have this grace or no. 2. For exhortation to stir us
up to seek for it, if we want it, and to make much of it, to maintain and
strengthen it, if we have it already; for, as for the uses both of reproof,
and comfort, they will fitly be comprehended in these two.

The first use (I say) it serves unto, is for examination, for every one of us
to try our own hearts, Use 1.
whether there be that truth and uprightness in them, that the Lord takes so
much delight in.

Now for the more orderly and profitable handling of this use, I will show you.
1. The Motives that may stir us all up to take pains in this trial and
examination of our selves. 2. The Notes and Marks whereby this trial is to
be made, and whereby the truth and sincerity of the heart, is to be judged
of. The Motives are three principally. 1. From the necessity of this work, in
respect of the difficulty of it. 2. From the possibility of it. 3. From the
benefit and fruit of it, when it is well done.

Motive 1.
First, it is a difficult thing to find out whether our heart be upright or no.
This is evident. 1. By common and daily experience; all sorts of people are apt
to deceive themselves in this point. The worst men that are, as they are the
most confident people in the world and the best persuaded of their estate
toward God; according to that of Solomon, Pro. 14.16. A wise man fears and
departs from evil: (he is afraid of Gods wrath, and apt to doubt much of his
own estate, and that keeps him in awe and makes him careful to depart from
evil) but the fool rages (and roareth and swaggereth) and (yet) is
confident. So do they build their confidence upon this persuasion principally
that though they speak foolishly now and then, and do amiss through frailty,
yet they have as good as true hearts to God, as the best. There is a generation
(says Solomon, Pro. 30.12.) that are pure in their own eyes, and yet are not
washed from their filthiness. As if he had said, though their lives be most
filthy, yet they are thus conceited of their own purity. Every way of man
(says Solomon, Pro. 21.2.) is right in his own eyes, but the Lord pondereth
the hearts. As if he should say. Why do men please themselves in their own
ways, and are deceived in them? The reason is, they cannot ponder nor know
their hearts, they think better of their hearts then they should do. On the
other side, the best men that are are apt to charge themselves that their
hearts are false and unsound, that they have no more in them then may be in an
hypocrite. The good things that are in the regenerate are so mixed and
intermingled with their own corruptions; yea that little fire they have, is
covered in them with such an heap of ashes, that little corn that is in them
is hid in them in such a deal of chafe, as they can hardly discern that
truth of grace that is them. To this case that proverb may fitly be applied,
Pro. 13.7. There is that makes himself rich, and has nothing; there is that
makes himself poor, yet has great riches. See an example of this in David
in that prayer he makes, ver. 10. of this Psalm, Create in me a clean heart
o God, and renew a right spirit within me. He had certainly at this time a
clean heart, and a right spirit, but he could not perceive nor discern it in
himself at this time, and therefore prays God would create it and renew it
in him, as if it had been quite gone. It is a far easier thing for a
regenerate man to see and discern the corruption that is in him, then the
truth of grace that is in him. When the Apostle speaks of the fruits of the
flesh, he says of them, Gal, 5.19. The works of the flesh are manifest; but
when he comes to speak of the fruits of the spirit, ver. 22. he says not so
of them. The grace of Gods spirit is an hidden and secret thing (called
therefore that hidden man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3.4.) and cannot be certainly
known unless a man take pains, to search into it. In this respect it is said
the wise merchant, Mat. 13.44. when he had found the treasure hid in the field
withdrew himself ((...) as merchants use to do that have great accounts to
make) that he might try whether it were the true treasure or no. 2. The
difficulty of this work may appear by the express testimony of the Lord
himself, Ier. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things -- who can know
it? It is so deceitful, this dark den has so many corners and turnings in
it, that the wisest man in the world by the strength of nature is not able to
find it out, to know whether it be true, or false; sound or rotten. A man may
be an hypocrite and have a false heart and himself not know it; though some
hypocrisy be gross and palpable, yet all is not so. This is plain by that
which our Savior speaks, to the Angel of the Church of Laodicea, Rev. 3.17.
Thou know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind,
and naked. 3. The difficulty of this work is evident by reason also. For there
be many good things so like unto true grace that may be in a mere natural
man, as it is no easy thing to discern and put a difference between them;
but a man may easily be deceived, and think he has truth of saving grace, when
he has nothing but nature in him. 1. There are certain remnants of Gods image
in many natural men, that are very like unto true grace. The Gentiles that
know not the law, (says the Apostle, Romans 2.14.) do by nature the things
contained in the law. They make conscience of and hate many sins, they may
practice many moral virtues as justice, mercy, and fidelity which our Savior
( Matthew. 23.23.) calls the weightier points in Gods law. And these are
certainly in themselves and materially good things; and it is said, Mar.
10.21. our Savior looking upon the rich man that had these things in him loved
him. So that it is no marvel though so many be deceived in them, and take them
for true grace 2. There are certain common graces and beginnings of
sanctification in many hypocrites, that live in Gods Church and in the
profession of the Gospel which are yet more like to saving grace, then the
other are. Some of those that fall into the unpardonable sin have been
enlightened (as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6.4, 5.) and have tasted of the
heavenly gift and have been made partakers of the Holy Ghost. Some such have
escaped the pollutions of the world (left their known sins) even through the
knowledge of the Lord, and Savior, as the Apostle Peter speaks, 2 Pet. 2.20.
3. Yea it is certain there is a kind of truth and uprightness of heart, in
many a man that never had any truth of saving grace in him. I know (says the
Lord to Abimelech the King of Gerar an heathen man, Genesis 20.6.) that thou did
this in the integrity of thy heart. Paul even whilst he was a persecuter had a
kind of truth and uprightness of heart in that which he did. I have lived
(says he, Acts 23 1.) in all good conscience before God, unto this day. He did
nothing but that which he was persuaded in his heart he ought to do. I verily
thought (says he, Act. 26.9.) with my self, that I ought to do many things,
contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. The intent, and purpose of his heart
was to please, and honor God in it. In all these three respects it is
certainly an hard thing for a man to know whether his heart be right or no; if
he do not carefully and diligently observe his own heart and examine it, he
will never be able to know it. It behooves us to use all diligence in this
business, it will never else be well done. Give diligence (says the Apostle, 2
Pet. 1.10.) to make your calling and election sure. And by making this sure
unto our selves, that our hearts are upright, we shall make both our calling
and election sure. And this is the first Motive.

The second is from the possibility of this work. Motive 2.
Though most men be deceived in this point, though their heart be so
deceitful, though there be so great a resemblance between those good things
that may be in natural men and hypocrites, and the truth of grace; yet if we
will take pains to examine our selves well, we may certainly know that our
hearts are upright if they be so, that there is truth of grace in us, that
there is more in us, then can be in any natural man or hypocrite in the world.
This also shall be made evident to you in three points.

First, Because the faithful are exhorted so often and earnestly to prove and
examine 2 Cor. 13.5, To prove every man his own work, Gal. 6.4. To make sure
to themselves their own calling and election, 2 Pet. 1.10. Now these
exhortations had been in vain, if it were not possible for the faithful to
know they have true faith, that the works and duties they do are done in
uprightness; if a man might not be certain and sure that he is effectually
called. For though God in his law require that of the natural man, which it is
impossible for him to do; as the Apostle speaks, Romans 8.3. and may justly do
it; 1 because when God first gave the law to mankind in Adam, he made him able
to keep it; 2 because by exacting this of him which he is not able to do, he
drives him to despair in himself, and to seek help in Christ; Yet in the
Gospel Christ requires nothing of the faithful that is impossible for them
to do, His yoke is easy, and his burden light, as he says, Mat. 11.30.

Surely shall one say (it is the promise made to the faithful that should live
in the days of the Gospel, Esa. 45.24.) in the Lord have I righteousness.
They may be sure of their adoption. Doubtless thou art our father (say the
faithful, Esa. 63.16.) though Abraham be ignorant of us. They may be sure of
their perseverance in Gods favor unto the end. Surely (says David, Psalm.
23.6) goodness and mercy shall follow me, all the days of my life. They may
be sure that after this life they shall inherit eternal glory. We know (says
Paul, 2 Cor. 5.1. not speaking in his own person, but in the person of all the
faithful) that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have
a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. And
we know (says John, 1 Ioh. 3.14.) we are translated from death to life. How
knew he that? By revelation? No but by such an evidence as is common to all the
faithful; Because we love the brethren, says he. Now there could be no such
assurance of their salvation in any of the faithful, if they knew not
undoubtedly, that their hearts were upright, that they have truth of grace in
them. How could any conclude thus to the comfort of his soul, I know I am
translated from death to life because I love the brethren, if he could not
certainly know, that he does love the brethren, and that in truth and
sincerity, and not in show only. Hereby we know (says he, 1 Ioh. 4.13.) that
we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit. The
spirit of sanctification and the truth of grace wrought in us thereby, is the
only thing that can assure us, that we have any communion with God, or are in
his favor.

probatum est. Job knew that his heart was upright, or he would not have said
as he did, Job 27.5. God forbid that I should justify you; till I die, I will
not remove mine integrity from me. As if he should say, I will die rather then
believe you that would persuade me I am an hypocrite. And 12.4. The just
upright man is laughed to scorn. And 16.17 -- 19. There is not any injustice
in my hands; also my prayer is pure. O earth, cover thou not my blood, and let
my cry have no place. Also now behold my witness is in heaven, and my record
is on high. Yea the poor soul had then been in a most woeful case, if he had
not been so certain of the uprightness of his heart, as that all those
learned and worthy men could not make him to doubt of it. David likewise was
certain of the uprightness of his heart, or he durst never have said as he
did, Psalm. 26.1, 2. Judge me, O Lord, for I have walked in mine integrity,
examine me o Lord and prove me, try my reins and my heart. Hezekiah (even in
the time of his great affliction) knew assuredly and was able to call God for a
witness to his conscience, Esa. 38.3. that he had walked before God in truth,
and with a perfect heart. Yea Peter (even then when he was so exceedingly
dejected in himself for his fearful fall) knew so assuredly that his heart
was upright, that he did unfeignedly love Christ above all things in the world,
as that he durst confidently avouch it unto Christ himself; and was grieved
that Christ should question that the third time. Lord (says he, John 21.17.)
thou know all things, thou know that I love thee. And (to conclude) the
Apostle John speaking in the name not of himself only, or of some rare and
extraordinary persons says, 1 John 5.19. We know that we are of God, that is,
borne of God, truly regenerate as appears by the former verse. Thus you see
there is no such impossibility no such difficulty in the matter, but we may
know and be certain whether our hearts be upright, or no. True it is the best
Christian that is, may be at some times doubtful and uncertain in this point;
unable to discern that there is truth of grace in him. If he could rightly
examine his own heart and ways, he might find it out. But he is not at all
times in case, to examine himself thus. The best are subject 1 to spiritual
desertion sometimes (through their own sloth and negligence) as the Church
was, Cant. 3.1. and 5.6. 2 To such tentations and sorrows as do even
overwhelme their spirits, Psalm. 142.3. In such a case it is good 1 to call to
mind the times that are past; and the evidence thou have formerly had, of the
uprightness of thy heart, Psalm. 77.5, 6. 2 Even then cast not away thy
confidence, but having lost thine evidence, seek and sue and cry to God for a
new copy of it; as David did even in that case, Psalm. 77.^. 3 Use the help of
some faithful and experienced Christian who in this case may be better able to
judge of thee, then thou art thy self. And that is the second Motive that may
persuade us to examine our selves diligently in this point.

The third and last is taken from the benefit and comfort we shall receive in
this, Motive 3
when by diligent trial and examination of our selves, we can find that there
is truth of grace in us, that our hearts are sound and upright with God. O the
comfort that this will yield us will abundantly recompense all the pains we
can take about it. This will appear to be so in two points.

First, This will make every duty, every service we do to God, sweet and Gal.
6 4. Let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in
himself alone, and not in another. When the people in David's time contributed
largely toward the building of the Temple, it is said they rejoiced and found
great comfort; and the reason is given, 1 Chronicles. 19 9. because they did it with
a perfect, and upright heart. So when all Judah in Asa his time renewed their
covenant and bound themselves by solemn oath to cleave unto the Lord, and to
the purity of his religion and worship, it is said, 2 Chronicles 15.15. they
rejoiced at the oath; and the reason is given, because they had sworn with all
their heart. So Paul professes of himself, 2 Cor. 1.12. that the testimony
his conscience gave him of this, that he had served God in his ministry in
simplicity and godly sincerity, that is, with an upright heart, was the
greatest joy he had in the world.

Secondly, This will yield a man comfort in the time of any affliction and Job
found this to be so in his extreme affliction and therefore professes, Job
27.5, 6. that he would not loose the comfort of his integrity for all the
world, he would hold it fast, and would not let it go, though his friends
pulled hard to get it from him. Thus did Jeremy likewise comfort himself in
the time of a great tentation, Jeremy 12.3. Thou o Lord (says he) know
me, thou have seen me and tried mine heart toward thee. And so did Hezekiah
when he had received the sentence of death, Esa. 38.3. Remember now o Lord I
beseech thee how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect (that
is, an upright) heart.

You see now how effectual the Motives are that God in his Word has given to
stir us up unto this duty, Applic.
even to examine our selves, and to enquire diligently into our hearts whether
there be truth of grace in them, whether they be upright with God or no. O that
the Lord would be pleased to give them life, and power in our hearts.

Lecture LXXVI. On Psalm 51.6. November. 27. 1627.
NOw we proceed to those marks and notes whereby this truth of heart may be
known, and discerned. All of them I will not go about to give you. That would
be an endless labor. For look how many saving and sanctifying graces there
be in any of Gods elect, so many signs there be of an upright heart. He that
has any one saving grace in him, he has certainly an upright heart, he
cannot be an hypocrite. Yea though that one grace that is in him, be for
measure and degree very weak and small; though it be no more for quantity then
so much fire, as will serve to make fire to smoke (it is our Saviors
comfortable comparison, Matthew. 12.^0.) and a very little spark, you know will
make flax to smoke and to burn and flame also. As when a man with sickness is
grown so weak, that he can neither move, nor speak, nor see, and they that
are about him think he is quite gone, yet if when we speak to him we can
perceive, that he lifts up his hand; nay though he cannot do so much, if we
can perceive he breaths still, we conclude that certainly he is not yet
dead, there is life in him. So is it in this case. If a man have true faith,
though it be very weak he cannot be an hypocrite; For our Savior says, John
3.36. He that believes on the son has everlasting life. If a man have truly
repented of any one sin, he cannot be an hypocrite. For of Zacheus Christ
pronounces upon his repentance, for the unjust gain he had gotten, Luke 19.9.
that salvation was come into his house, he was become the son of Abraham. If a
man do truly fear God, he cannot be an hypocrite. For the Holy Ghost says,
Pro. 14.26. In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence. As if he had said, A
man may confidently build upon that, that he is in the state of grace. If a man
do truly love such as do fear the Lord, he cannot be an hypocrite* For so
says the Apostle, 1 John 3.14. We know we are translated from death to life,
because we love the brethren; and verse 19. Hereby we know that we are of the
truth, (sound and upright) and shall assure our hearts before him. So that from
any one grace that a man finds to be indeed in him, he may confidently
conclude that his heart is upright and true to God. And though it be true, that
no man has truly repented of one sin but he has habitually repented of
all; neither has he any one grace in truth, that has not in him the seeds and
habits of every grace (as we shall hear hereafter in the prosecution of this
point touching the signs of uprightness) yet makes the knowledge of this
greatly to the comfort of Gods people, who may have received some one grace in
far greater measure then any other, and can sometimes sensibly discern in
themselves some one grace, when in their own feeling they are utterly
destitute of all the rest. All the difficulty will be to prove that we have any
one saving grace in us in truth, and not the show and shadow of it only. But
to give you the notes whereby the truth of every grace may be discerned would
be an infinite piece of work, I will therefore instance only in three whereby
a man may most sensibly discern whether his heart be upright or no. 1. The
jealousy and fear that a man finds in himself, lest his heart should not
be upright. 2. The conscience a man makes of, and the obedience he yields
unto the commandments and will of God. 3. The bent of his will, of the purpose
and desire of his heart toward God.

The first sign of uprightness of heart.
First, It is a good sign a man is not an hypocrite when he is apt to suspect
himself, and fearful of being deceived in this point. So long as this
jealousy that he has of himself makes him more diligent in examining
himself and more willing to be tried by others, he is far enough from being
an hypocrite, though he suspect himself to be one. The best and uprightest
souls are of all other most subject to this jealousy, as experience does
daily prove and has proved in all ages. This is certainly one part of that
poverty of spirit that our Savior commends when he says, Matthew. 5.3.
Blessed are the poor in spirit. A man may be in a blessed state, and therefore
also sound and upright hearted, though he be poor in spirit, and suspect
himself to be un^ound; nay he is therefore in a blessed state because he is
poor in spirit, because he is thus jealous of himself. For this argues and
proceeds from an hearty dislike and fear of being an hypocrite, and from a
strong desire to be upright in heart; He thinks himself never sure enough of
this. See this in two notable examples. The first is of David, Doubtless he
was not free from this jealousy and suspicion of himself when he prayed,
Psalm 119 80. Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed.
Nor when he prayed as he did, Psalm. 1^9.23, 24. Search me, o God, and know my
heart, try me, and know my thoughts: and see if there be any wicked way in me
(if there be any falsehood in my heart) and lead me in the way everlasting.
Make me upright, and guide me in an upright course. This is that that made him
pray as he does, Psalm. 141.5. Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a
kindness, and let him reproove me, it shall be an excellent oil. As if he had
said, give me such friends and teachers, as will help to search me and to
discover to me that unfoundnesse and corruption that is hidden from my self.
But of all other places this most plainly appears to have been in him, when
he made that prayer that we read verse 10. of this Psalm. Create in me a
clean heart, o God; and renew a right spirit within me. Was David an hypocrite
when he said so? No, no. Certainly he had at this time as clean a heart and
as right a spirit as ever he had in his life, as by many passages in this
Psalm is most evident. But he could not perceive nor discern it in himself
at this time, and therefore prays that God would create and renew it in him,
as if it had been quite gone. The other example is that of the elect Apostles,
Matthew. 26.21, 22. When our Savior had said (all the twelve being then
together) that one of them should betray him; though he had plainly said it
was but one of them all that should have an hand in that foul sin, yet did
every one of them suspect himself to be that one man, and out of this self
suspicion were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto
him. Lord is it I? They knew no such falsehood and treachery in their own
hearts (nay it is certain they were most free from it; for so our Savior
himself says of them all, John 13.10. Ye are clean) yet were they exceeding
apt to suspect themselves of it. And as the man whose heart is upright indeed
is apt to doubt himself, and careful to have his heart well examined, that he
be not deceived; So the man whose heart is most unsound and farthest of from
truth of grace, never suspecteth himself, is never troubled with any such
doubts, but always confident in this point. The fool is confident, says
Solomon, Pro. 14.16. Many a most wicked man that has no fear of God before
his eyes yet flattereth himself (says David, Psalm. 36.1, 2.) in his own
eyes; persuades himself verily, he has as true an heart to God as any man.
No affliction that God can lay upon them, no mortal sickness can make them
doubt of this, or once call in question the truth of their hearts, but even
upon their death bed, they are (as Job speaks, Job 21.23) wholly at ease and
quiet. Nay it is a death to him to have any such doubt to rise in his mind. He
cannot abide that in his sickness any thing should be spoken to him, that
might move him to doubt of his salvation, but is ready to say with that
miserable man, Luke 4.34. Let me alone, what have I to do with thee? art thou
come to torment me? He cannot abide in his health to hear such preaching, as
by the searching power of it, is wont to work in him these doubtings of his
estate, and to trouble his mind thereby, but shunneth it as Ahab did the
ministry of Micajah, I hate him (says he, 2 Chronicles. 18.7.) for he never
prophesied good to me, but always evil. I never hear him but he troubles
and disquieteth my mind. This quietness and peace that wicked men have, when
Job did meditate and consider of, he did tremble at as at a most fearful
sign of Gods wrath upon them. Even when I remember it (says he, Job 21.6.) I
am afraid, and trembling takes hold on my flesh. A godly man cannot choose but
tremble to think, how quietly many pass away without the least trouble or
doubt of their estate, either in life or in death.

Applic.
Let us therefore (beloved) begin the examination of our hearts, if we desire to
know whether they be upright or no, at this first note and sign. 1. Art thou
apt to doubt and suspect thy self much, lest thou should be no better then
an hypocrite? Think not the worse of thine own estate for this, so long as
thou yeeldest not to these doubts and jelousies, but art thereby made careful
to look up thine evidences and to find in thy self more sure marks and notes
of the uprightness of thy heart. Remember what Christ says of such as thou
art, Matthew. 5.2. Consider that as thou thy self show most tender care and
kind affections toward thy children, that are very young and little ones,
specially if they be also sick, then toward all the rest; so does the Lord to
his children when they are such weak little ones, as thou art, Psalm. 103.13.
Like as a father pitieth his children, so does the Lord. Remember what care
Jacob had of his little children, and of the lambs that were yet in the bellies
of their dams, Genesis 33.13, 14. and know that was nothing to the tender care
that the Lord (who is thy father, yea another manner of father more fatherly in
his affection, and more kind then any upon earth ever was, Matthew. 23.9. and
thy shepherd also, Psalm. 23.1.) has of his little ones of his lambs, as the
Prophet also describes him, Esa. 40.11. He shall feed his flock like a
shepherd; he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his
bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young. 2. Were thou never
troubled with doubts of this kind? Never so poor in spirit? Certainly thy
heart is unsound. And I may say to thee as our Savior does, Luke 6.24. Woe be
to you that are rich, for you have received your consolation. Woe be to you that
are so confident, for you shall see cause of despair one day.

The second sign of uprightnes of heart.
The second note to try the truth and uprightness of our hearts by is, the
conscience we make, the obedience we yield unto the commandments of God. And
this is yet a more sure and sensible mark and sign of sincerity, then the
former is. This is that which Solomon teaches in his speech to the people, at
the dedication of the Temple, 1 King. 8.61. Let your heart be perfect with the
Lord your God, to walk in his statutes, and to keep his commandments. As
though he had said. In this consists the soundness and perfectness of the
heart, by this it is to be discerned. It is a man's doings, the life and
conversation that he leads that will best discover unto him the truth and
uprightness of his heart. Thus shall we find the true hearted Christian
described, Psalm. 15.2. He walks uprightly, and works righteousness. And by
the Apostle, 3 John 4. I have no greater joy then to hear that my children
walk in truth; that they show the truth of their hearts in their conversation.
It is not the persuasion that we have of our selves, nor the good words we can
speak, nor the good profession we make, but our doings, our conversation that
will show what our hearts are. Even a child (says Solomon, Pro. 20.11.) is
known by his doings, whether his work be pure, and whether it be right. Thus
did Hezekiah approve the truth of his heart, Esa. 38.3. Remember now, o Lord, I
beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and have done that which
is good in thy sight. And indeed this is all in all. Circumcision is nothing,
(says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.19.) nor uncircumcision is nothing, but the
keeping of the commandments of God. Certainly if a man's doings, if his life
and conversation be naught, his heart is false and naught, whatsoever shows he
makes, how good soever his profession be. In this (says the Apostle, 1 John
3.10.) the children of God are manifest and the children of the devil,
whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God.

But some may object against this, Object.
Surely this can be no good note of uprightness of heart, seeing many that
are far from that do many good deeds and live very unblameably. 1. Many an
hypocrite will compare Saul; who meeting with Samuel after he had destroyed the
Amalekites saluted him thus, 1 Samuel 15.13. Blessed be thou of the Lord* I have
performed the commandment of the Lord. The next is Iehu of whom we read what
a deal of good he did; and that (as it seemed) in obedience to the
commandment of the Lord. He utterly destroyed Baal out of Israel, 2 Kings
10.28. And the Lord himself says thus to him, verse 30. Because thou have
done well in executing that which is right in mine eyes, and have done unto the
house of Ahab according to all that was in mine heart, thy children of the
fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel. And upon this his
obedience he grew so confident that he was Gods faithful servant that meeting
with Iehonadab the son of Rechab an holy man, Come with me (says he to him,
2 King. 10.16.) and see my zeal for the Lord. The last example is of those
hypocrites we read of, Esa. 58.2, 3. They seek me daily (says the Lord of
them) and delight to know my ways, as a nation that did righteousness -- they
ask of me the ordinances of justice, they take delight in approaching to God.
And see the confidence they reposed in this they were persuaded their obedience
and service was such as God could not choose but like of, Wherefore have we
fasted say they, and thou see not? Wherefore have we afflicted our souls,
and thou take no knowledge? 2. The Papist will compare with the best
Christian in this, and glory in his Luke 18.11. Nay a great deal more then
ever any Pharisee did, for he can perfectly keep Gods law, he says and merit
heaven by it. 3. And lastly, The moral and civil The Gentiles which have not
the law, no true religion, no respect to the means of saving grace (says the
Apostle, Romans 2.14.) do by nature the things contained in the law. So that it
should seem by all these instances, that no certainty can be had of the truth
of grace, of the uprightness of a man's heart, by the goodness and
unblameablenesse of his life, by any good works he is able to do.

To this I answer; Answ.
That though all these sorts boast of their good lives, of the good deeds they
do; yet did none of them ever do one good work in all their lives; but of them
all that may be said which the Apostle speaks, Romans 3.12. They are
altogether unprofitable there is none that does good, no not one. All those
three sorts may even by those works, those good lives they brag of, be
sufficiently discovered to have no truth of grace nor uprightness in their
hearts. And of them that may be said which our Savior speaks, Matthew. 7.16.
Ye shall know them by their fruits; do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs
of thistles? How is it possible for such kind of men, to do any one work that
is truly good, and acceptable unto God. None but he that has an upright heart,
can in any measure yield true obedience to Gods commandments, nor do any good
work. By our obedience and the care we have to keep Gods commandments, we
may certainly approve to our selves the uprightness of our own hearts, and
find even in this that we have more in us, then either any Papist, or
hypocrite, or mere civil man in the world could ever have. Except your
righteousness (says our Savior to his hearers, Mat. 5.20. and so say I to you)
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees (of the hypocrite, and
civil man) ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven. But the
righteousness and obedience of the weakest Christian that is upright in heart,
does exceed the righteousness and obedience of them all in four properties.
And by them must every one of us try the truth and sincerity of our obedience,
and consequently the truth and uprightness of our hearts. The first is the
ground and matter of our righteousness and good works; the rule we follow in
it. The second the root and fountain from whence our obedience and
righteousness does spring. The third the extent of it, how far it reaches.
The fourth and last the manner how it is performed, with what affection we do
it, what ends we aim at in it.

Lecture LXXVII. On Psalm 51.6. January 8. 1627.
IT follows now that we proceed to speak particularly of those four
properties of true righteousness and goodness, which I only propounded unto
you the last day. And in the handling of them you shall better understand my
meaning in them; and find that a good life is a certain and infallible sign
of an upright heart.

The first property of obedience, and true righteousness.
The first of these properties then is this; True righteousness and goodness
must be materially good, it must have a right ground, it must be done according
to the right rule. And in handling of this first property I must show you two
things. 1. What that right rule and ground of all true righteousness is. 2.
That the following of that rule in all the good things we do, is a good note
of an upright heart.

Now the only rule of true righteousness is the Word of God. As nothing is a
sin (how great a show of evil soever it bears) but that which swerveth from
the direction of Gods Word, 1 John 3.4. Sin is a swerving from the law. So is
nothing a good work (how great a show of goodness soever it carry) but only
that, which God in his Word has directed us to do. Thus the Apostle defines
good works, Ephesians. 2.10. to be such as God has ordained that we should walk
in them. And so does Moses define true righteousness, Deuteronomy. 6.25. It shall be
our righteousness if we observe to do all these commandments before the Lord
our God as he has commanded us. When Gods material house was to be built,
God gave to Moses for the Tabernacle, Exodus 25.9. and to David for the Temple,
1 Chronicles. 28.12. a pattern according to which he would have every thing made
and done. And of this pattern that God gave to David for the Temple it is
expressly said, 1 Chronicles. 28.19. that God gave it him in writing. Nothing might
be done either by Moses or by Solomon (though they were two of the wisest men
that ever lived) about the Tabernacle or Temple, nor about the whole service of
God that was used in them, but according to that pattern that God had given
them. And this charge the Lord did repeat unto Moses (to show the importance
and necessity of observing it) four several times, Exodus 25.9.40.26.30.27.8.
And so the Apostle also mentions it, Hebrews 8.5. See says he, that thou
make all things according to the pattern that was showed thee in the mount.
And even thus has the Lord done in the building of his spiritual house; he
has given us a pattern according to which he would have all our good works
done; and he has given it us in writing, in the holy Scriptures; and he has
given it us with this charge that whatsoever we do we do it according to this
pattern. See this charge expressly given, Deuteronomy. 5.32. You shall observe to
do as the Lord your God has commanded you, ye shall not turn aside to the
right hand nor to the left. As if he should say, ye shall neither do more nor
less then that. When one asked our Savior this question. Master what shall I
do to inherit eternal life? He answers him thus, Luke 10.25, 26. How is it
written in the law? How read thou? As if he had said, In the written law of
God (and there only) thou shall find what those good works are, that God will
reward in heaven.

And that you may the better see what a perfect, and absolute pattern and rule
this is that God has given us, in his written Word, and what necessity there
is that we should follow the direction of it, in every thing wherein we desire
to please God. I will manifest it unto you in six points which I must desire
you to attend unto.

First, There is no good work any man can do, no good thing at all that any
Moses in the mount. See this plainly proved, Pro. 2.1.9. My son if thou will
receive my words (says the wisdom of God) and hide my commandments with
thee, then shall thou understand righteousness and judgment, and equity; yea,
every good path. And indeed how else could the holy Scripture be ^o profitable
and sufficient not only to teach and convince (in all matters of Doctrine) but
also to correct, and instruct in righteousness that by it the man of God may
become perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work (as the Apostle says
it is, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.) if there were any one good duty which the Minister of
God might not be able out of the holy Scripture to give Gods people clear
direction in? Therefore the Lord gives this testimony of David, 1 King. 14.8.
that he kept his commandments, and followed him with all his heart, to do that
only that was right in Gods eyes. As we do that which is right in Gods eyes
then only, when we keep his commandments and follow the direction of his
Word; so then only do we follow the Lord with all our hearts (we serve him with
honest, and upright hearts) when we do that only that is right in his eyes,
that only that we have the direction of his Word for.

Secondly, Nothing that God has commanded or approved in his Word can Every
creature of God is good (says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5.) for it is
sanctified by the Word and prayer. As if he should say, Whatsoever God has
allowed and sanctified in his Word, that must needs be good. Nay to account
any thing evil, or to make scruple of doing any thing that God in his Word
has approved, is (doubtless) a great error and sin. Be not righteous
overmuch (says the Holy Ghost. Eccl. 7.16.) neither make thy self over wise.
As if he had said, Be not holier then God; make no more sins then God has
made. Our Savior calls the Ruler of the Synagogue hypocrite, Luke 13.14, 15.
for holding it unlawful to do works of mercy on the Sabbath day. Why? Was it
not a good thing in him to be so zealous for the observation of the Sabbath; or
was it a good thing to do such cures upon the Sabbath? Yes verily, because God
had not in his Word forbidden but allowed and commanded works of mercy to be
done then, and at all times; and this man in being so hot and zealous against
it, showed himself to be no better then an hypocrite. See in a notable example
what the danger of this is, 1 King. 20.35, 36. A Prophet said to his neighbor
in the word of the Lord (and his neighbor knew him to be a Prophet and that it
was the word and commandment of the Lord which he spoke) smite me I pray
thee, and the man refused to smite him; he made scruple to do it, because he
thought it unjust and unreasonable to do it. But what says the Prophet to
him? Because thou have not obeyed the voice of the Lord (but wilt be more
righteous and merciful then God would have thee) as soon as thou art departed
from me, a lion shall slay thee. And so it fell out. He had not sinned in
smiting and wounding the Prophet (as verse 37. you shall find another upon the
same warrant, and commandment did) yea he sinned in not doing it in making a
scruple of it, when he had Gods Word and commandment for it. So it was no
sin in the Disciples that were eyewitnesses of Christ's transfiguration to
be so silent as they were. They kept it close (says the Text, Luke 9.36.) and
told no man in those days any of those things which they had seen. Was this
well done, to conceal such things as might have tended so much to the glory of
God and to the confirming of the faith of Gods people? To say nothing of that
glory they saw Christ's body in, of the voice they heard from heaven, of Moses
and Elias appearing and conferring with him? Yes verily this silence was
lawful, they did well to say nothing then of those things because Christ had
commanded them to be silent, Matthew. 17.9. Jesus charged them, saying, tell the
vision to no man, until the son of man be risen again from the dead. We
may not take upon us to judge what is spiritually good and what may tend to
Gods glory, the Word of God only must be judge of that. You see then we may
account nothing unlawful or unfit to be done, that God in his Word has
commanded or allowed us to do.

Thirdly, Whatsoever God in his Word has commanded or appointed Ezraes time is
commended, Ezra 3.4. because they kept the feast of the tabernacles, as it is
written. And Moses is praised for this by the Holy Ghost, Heb. 3.2. that he
was faithful in all Gods house, because in the least thing that was done about
the making of Gods house, he precisely followed the direction that God had
given him, as it is expressly noted of him, Exodus 40.16.19.21.23.25.27.29.32.
Yea we read, Exodus 39.43. that when Bezaleel and Aholiab and the rest had
finished the making of the Tabernacle, Moses did look upon all the work; and
when he saw they had done every thing just as the Lord had commanded; then he
blessed them. Why? What if they had missed in a cord, or a pin, or in some
other such like trifle? Surely he blessed them for making every thing, even
these small trifles, according to their pattern. So the Holy Ghost praises
Daniel for this as for a thing wherein his piety and the uprightness of his
heart did greatly appear, and wherein he highly pleased God, Dan. 1.8. that he
purposed in his heart, that he would not defile himself with the portion of
the Kings meat, nor with the wine which he drank; nay though this his
strictness was likely to endanger the life of the prince of the Eunuchs his
noble friend, verse 10. Why how could this have defiled him? Surely either for
this cause because the portion of the Kings meat was of such things as God in
his law had forbidden his people, to eat of Levit. 11. or rather (for it is not
likely that all the Kings meat was of such creatures as were by that law
prohibited; and if all the meat were, yet the Kings wine certainly was not)
because they were things offered unto Idols, and used to the honor of them,
as we may see, Dan. 5.4. Certainly if flesh and blood might have had the
censuring of this fact of Daniel, they would have counted him a precise fool
for standing upon such a trifle as this (specially in a case of so great
danger) yet does the Lord (you see) commend him for it.

Fourthly, No worship we can do unto God (though it carry never so great Cor.
4.6. Learn (says he) not to think of men, above that which is written. As if
he should say. Though this carry a great show of zeal in it yet know that even
in this point you must follow your rule, or you may sin dangerously. See one
notable instance for this which may serve in stead of many. The building of a
Temple, for God to be solemnly worshipped in, was as good a work (one would
have thought) as it was possible for any man to do. David (it appears by the
vow he made in his affliction, Psalm 132, 1 -- 5. and by his speech to
Nathan, 2 Samuel 7.2.) thought he could not do a better work then this, nor
honor God any way more. Nay Nathan himself thought so too, as appears by
the encouragement he gave to David in it, 2 Samuel 7.3. And yet if any of the
Judges or if David himself should have done it, this had not been a good
work, they had not pleased God in it. Shall thou build me a house (says the
Lord to David, 2 Samuel 7.5.) for me to dwell in? And why had not this been a
good work? Why would God have rejected it? Surely because they had no Word of
God, that required or directed them to do it, and the Temple was to be built
by special warrant. For this reason the Lord himself gives for it, 1 Chronicles.
17.6. Spoke I one word to any one of the Judges, saying, Why have ye not built
me an house?

Fifthly, Admit the work it self be such as God has commanded, and we Chron.
30.18-^0. because they did eat the Passover otherwise then it was written
(though they did for the substance of it do an excellent service unto God, and
such as he had commanded yet) was God not pleased with them nor their service,
for it is said Hezekiah prayed earnestly to God to pardon them, and that upon
his prayer God healed the people.

Sixthly and lastly, God is so far from accounting any thing we do a good
Nadab and Abihu who because they offered incense unto God with strange fire
that God had not commanded were suddenly consumed with fire from heaven, Levit.
10.1, 2. The other is in Vzzah who because (in a right good intent) he put
forth his hand to stay the arc from falling (which he had no calling nor
warrant from Gods Word to do) the anger of the Lord was kindled against him and
struck him dead suddenly, 2 Samuel 6.6.7.

And thus have we seen what is the rule and pattern of all true
righteousness, and that nothing can be a good work, that is not done by the
direction of Gods Word; which is the first general poi^t I propounded in
handling the first property of true goodness. Let us proceed now to the second
of them. That the cleaving unto the word and following the direction of it in
all that we do, is a good note of an upright heart. To make Gods Word the
only guide of our life, to make conscience of nothing as in it self sinful
or holy but only of that which God has commanded or forbidden in his Word, is
a singular note of an upright heart. See the proof of this, first in the
description the Holy Ghost makes of the man that has an upright heart, Psalm.
119.1. Blessed are the undefiled (or the perfect and sincere) in the way. Yea
but how shall we know who are such? Who walk in the law of the Lord, says
he. As if he should have said; that is the note to know them by. So verse 7.
I will praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I shall have learned thy
righteous judgments. And Psalm. 112.1. Blessed is the man that fears the
Lord. Yea but how shall we know him? That delights greatly in his
commandments. That is the way to know who truly fears God. Secondly, See the
proof of this in four notable examples. 1. Job was an upright hearted man,
Job 1.1. Yea himself was very confident of the uprightness of his heart, as
you may see, Job 23.10. He knows the way that I take, when he has tried me,
I shall come forth like gold. And what made him so confident of this? That he
tells you in the next words, verse 11, 12. My foot has held his steps, his
way have I kept, and not declined, neither have I gone back from the
commandment of his lips, I have esteemed the words of his mouth, more then my
necessary food. 2. Of David likewise God himself gives testimony, 1 King.
9.4. that he had walked before him in integrity and uprightness of heart. But
how did that appear? That he tells you in the next words, by doing according
to all that I have commanded. 3. Of Iehoshaphat God gives testimony, 2 Chronicles.
19.3. that he prepared his heart to seek God; he had an upright heart. How did
it appear? Surely when he showed most frailty in taking part first with Ahab,
then with his son Ioram, yet even then the uprightness of his heart appeared
in his dependence upon the direction of Gods Word, and the high account he made
of it, 1 King, 22.5. Enquire I pray thee at the word of the Lord, says he to
Ahab. And verse 7. Is there not here a Prophet of the Lord, besides, that we
may enquire of him? And the same you shall see noted of him also when he went
with Ioram, 2 King. 3.11. Is there not here a Prophet of the Lord, that we may
enquire of the Lord by him? And when he heard that Elisha was there. The word
of the Lord is with him, (says he, ver. 12.) so he (and by his means the
other two Kings likewise, sent not for the Prophet, though that they might well
have done but) went down to him. The fourth and last example is Josiah of
whose goodness the Holy Ghost makes honorable mention even after his death, 2 Chronicles. 35.26. Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and his goodness. As if he
should say, There was goodness indeed and truth of grace in him. But how is
that proved? According to all that is written in the Law of the Lord, says the
Text, As if he had said, His goodness appeared in making Gods written Word,
the only rule of his life.

Applic.
Now let us make some application of all this that we have heard touching this
first property of true goodness and righteousness; and that 1 by way of
exhortation, 2 by way of trial and examination of our own hearts.

Deuteronomy. 17.18.19. Josh. 1.8. be commanded daily to read, and meditate in it, but
that the Holy Ghost describes the blessed and good man, Psalm. 1.2. by this
that his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in it he does meditate day and
night. O with what certainty and security and comfort, might we walk in all
our ways, if we had that knowledge in the Word and were so well acquainted
with it as in these days wherein we live, and under such means as we enjoy we
might be?

Secondly, Let us all examine the uprightness of our hearts by this note. Mar.
7.6, and so forward. For this he calls them hypocrites and says they did
worship God in vain. And the Apostle likewise against such as did forbid
marriage, and the eating of meats that Gods Word did allow, 1 Timothy 4.1 -- 3.
he says this was a doctrine of devils, that they that taught it taught lies
through hypocrisy, and had their consciences seared with a hot iron. Mark
well I say the vehemence and bitterness of them both against these men, and
you will see cause to wonder at it. For (admit this was an error and blind
devotion in both these, yet) what great hurt was there in them? Had they not a
show of holiness and mortification? Surely if you weigh the matter well (for
as much as you may be sure that neither Christ nor the Apostle could be thus
vehement without just cause) you will find that to be strict and precise in the
observation of any thing as a part of Gods worship, that God in his Word has
given us no direction for though it seem to tend never so much unto holiness
and mortification is a most heinous sin. For 1 it is gross Idolatry and
High Treason against God, to give to our selves or to any creature this divine
authority as to make him a lawgiver to our conscience. For this is the Lords
royal prerogative in which he will endure no partner. There is one lawgiver
who is able to save and to destroy, says the Apostle, Iam. 4.12. I am the Lord
(says he, Esa 42.8.) that is my name, and I will not give my glory to another.
2 This will quite steal and turn away the heart from God and his Word, and
breed a light account of the Word, of the commandments and ordinances of God.
This is one reason our Savior gives for his vehemence against the
Pharisaicall purifyings, Mat. 15.6. Ye have made the commandment of God of
none effect, by your traditions. And Mar. 7.9. Full well ye reject the
commandment of God, that ye may keep your own tradition. Ahaz we know 1
brought his altar into Gods house, and offered on it, 2 King. 16.12, 13. 2 He
set it cheek by jowle (as we say) by the Lords own altar, verse 14. 3 He
brought it in further, and placed it above Gods altar, verse 14. 4 He used it
only, in the ordinary offerings and sacrifices with neglect of Gods altar,
verse 15. The more zealous any are for the religious observation of such things
as God never commanded, the less conscience we shall find they make of any
commandment of God, the less account they make of Gods Word. When Ephraim had
multiplied altars (in a will worship being more abundant in sacrifices then God
required, Hos. 8.11, 12.) the great things of Gods written law were counted by
him as a strange thing, not belonging unto him. Yea this will worship will
breed in the heart a hatred of God, and his ordinances, which is the cause why
the Lord calls the transgressors of the second commandment such as hate
him, Exodus ^0.5. And the Apostle says, Tit. 1.14. that the giving heed to the
commandments of men (in this case) will turn men from the truth. This
experience has proved most true not only in the Papists, but in too many other
fondly superstitious. 2 Can any of you find in your selves a high and reverend
esteem of Gods Word, do you love it, and delight in it, do you depend upon it
only for direction in all your ways, despising and rejecting all other rules
besides it? Can thou say with David, Psalm. 119 113. I hate vain inventions,
but thy law do I love? Certainly (how ever thou may be slouted and hated
for this in the world) this will one day (even when thou shall have most need
of it) yield a comfortable testimony to thee, that thy heart is upright with
God. Remember as thou have now heard what comfort Job found in this, Job
33.10-12. Remember how often David calls him a blessed man that can do thus,
Ps. 1.^.112 1.128.1. Remember that our blessed Savior accounts such, Luke
8.21. (in respect of his dear and tender affection and respect unto them) as
his brethren, and sisters and mother. And that for this cause he professes of
Mary, Luke 10.42. that she had chosen the good part, which should not be taken
away from her.

Lecture LXXVIII. On Psalm 51.6. January 22. 1627.
The second property of true goodness, and righteousness.
IT follows now that we proceed unto the second property that is necessarily
required in true goodness and righteousness, it must have a good root. We
must therefore know, that nothing that we can do is truly good and pleasing
unto God, unless the inward principle, the root that produces it, and moves
us to do it, be good. We read of holy Job. 9 28. that he comfort himself
against the censures of his friends that judged him to be an hypocrite by this
that the root of the matter was found in him, he knew he had in him the root of
true righteousness and goodness, and therefore he was no hypocrite, therefore
his heart was upright. And on the other side in the parable of the sower, our
Savior gives this for the reason, why the hearer that is resembled to the
stony ground, fell quite away and so showed himself to be an hypocrite, and
that his heart was never upright, Matthew. 13.21. because he had no root in
himself. Now if you ask me what is this root of true righteousness and
goodness, that a man must have in himself, or else his heart cannot be
upright? I answer it is that, which the Apostle speaks of, Gal. 5.6. In
Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith
that works by love. Faith that works by love, is that root from whence all
true goodness and righteousness does spring. Here are (you see) two graces
grow together in this root, faith and love. 1. Nothing that we do is truly
good and pleasing unto God, neither will the doing of it argue the uprightness
of our hearts, unless we do it out of love to God. 2. The love that we bear
to God is not sound, nor such as will argue the uprightness of our hearts,
unless it proceed from faith, that assures us of Gods special love to us in
Christ.

For the first, The love of God is the root of all true obedience, and that
heart that truly loves God, is certainly an upright and true heart. Two
branches you see there are of this point which I will severally and distinctly
consider of. 1. The love of God is the root of all true obedience. 2. The heart
that truly loves God, is an upright heart.

Branch 1
First, Nothing that we do is good in Gods sight, unless we do it out of love
unto him. This is the root of all true obedience. God has chosen us (says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 1.4.) in Christ, before the foundation of the world that we
should be holy, and without blame before him in love. When our Savior gives
the sum of all the four commandments of the first table he gives it us in
these terms, Matthew. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
soul, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. Then only we pray
well, and and hear well, and preach well, and receive the Sacrament well, and
keep the Sabbath well, yea then only we put our trust in him aright and serve
him aright, when we do all this, out of love to the Lord our God. So for the
duties of the second table then only we perform the duties of righteousness
and love and mercy toward men aright, when the thing that moves us to do
them, is the love we bear unto God. So speaks the Apostle of the works of
mercy, Heb. 6.10. God is not unrighteous to forget your work, and labor of
love, which you have showed toward his name, in that ye have ministered to the
Saints, and do minister. It was their love to God that moved them to minister
to the Saints; and such works of mercy as proceed from that root God will
never forget to reward. So speaks the Apostle John likewise, 1 John 5.2. By
this we know we love the children of God, when we love God Before we can love
the children of God, we must first love God, and for that cause love his
children. In a word (to conclude the confirmation of this first branch) this is
made the root of all obedience in general, to any commandment of God, of all
good works, Deuteronomy. 7.9. He keeps covenant, and mercy with them that love him,
and keep his commandments. First, We must love him, before we can keep any
of his commandments well. In which respect the Apostle, Romans 13.10. calls
love the fulfilling of the law. He that has not this love can keep no part
of Gods law well, he cannot fulfill it, he that has it, keeps the whole law
yea fulfilleth it; keeps it so as God in Christ accepts of it, as if he had
perfectly kept it.

Now before I pass from this branch, Object.
an objection must here be answered. Is nothing well done unless it be done,
out of love to God? Is nothing well done, that is done out of fear of Gods
judgments? If a man abstain from sin and perform good duties out of fear
of wrath, even out of the fear of hell, will God in no case be pleased with
this?

I answer, Answ. 1
First. Yes verily. The fear of Gods wrath, kept Job from sundry sins. It
kept him from uncleanness. For he professing, Job 31.1. that he durst not
give himself liberty in wanton looks, nor in wanton thoughts, he tells us,
verse 3. what moved him to it. Is not destruction (says he) to the wicked, and
a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity? And professing, verse 21. that
he durst not oppress or wrong any poor man, he gives this for the reason
whereby he was kept from it, verse 23. For destruction from God was a terror
to me (says he) and by reason of his highness, I could not endure. As though
he should say, I was not able to bear the wrath, and fury of that high and
mighty God. And the Apostle speaking of Noah's obedience unto that strange
commandment that God gave him to prepare the arc one hundred, and twenty
years before the flood came (wherein doubtless he made himself a scorn and
laughing stock, to all that knew him) tells us, Heb. 11.7. that he was moved
by fear to do it. And the same Apostle professes of himself, 2 Cor. 5.11.
that he had not been so diligent and conscionable in his ministry, as he was;
if the fear of Gods wrath against all idle, and unconscionable, and
unprofitable Ministers had not moved him unto it. Knowing (says he) the
terrors of the Lord, we persuade men. So that it is (certainly) lawful and
pleasing unto God, that we should both think often of Gods wrath due to sin,
yea even of the torments prepared in hell for sinners, where the worm never
dies, and the fire never goes out; and to abstain and restrain our selves
from evil, even out of that fear. Nay our Savior commands us so to do,
Luke 12.5. Fear him, that after he has killed, (and taken away your life)
has power to cast you into hell; yea, I say unto you, fear him.

But then I answer secondly, Answ. 2
That no godly man does abstain from sin or do good duties only out of
this fear of Gods wrath, but out of the love he bears to God for his
goodness, as well, nay more out of that, then out of the fear of his wrath.
This is evident in the Apostle even in that very Chapter, 2 Cor. 5. wherein (as
we have heard) he professed what force there was in the terrors of the Lord,
to move him unto his duty, he tells us of this other motive, verse 14. and
says it was more forcible with him then fear. For the love of Christ
constrains us says he. And of Noah it is said, Heb. ^1.7. By faith he
prepared an Arc. There is in the obedience of the godly, a holy mixture of
fear and love. As their love to God is not a fellow-like familiarity, as is
among equals but is (out of an apprehension of his greatness and holiness, and
justice) tempered with fear, and a dreadful awe of him; so neither is that
fear of God that is in them, a servile fear, like that of the slave, that
has nothing to move him unto duty but the fear of the whip, but is (out of an
apprehension and assurance of his goodness) mixed with love. Like the fear
that ought to be in every good child, toward his parents, Lev. 9.3. Ye shall
fear every man his mother and his father. Yea the love they bear to God for
his goodness, is the chief root of that fear they have of him; according to
that, Hos. 3.5. They shall fear the Lord, and his goodness in the latter
days. The fear they have of God is not such a tormenting fear as wicked men
have, but there is joy and comfort mixed with their fear. They rejoice even in
their trembling, as David speaks, Psalm. 2.11. Yea they have confidence in
their fear, Psalm. 56.3. What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee. The fear
of wicked men is like that of the soldiers that kept Christ Sepulcher when the
Angel that rolled away the stone appeared unto them. For fear of him (says
the Text, Matthew. 28.4.) the keepers did shake, and became as dead men; they had
no comfort, no hope. But the fear of the godly is like that of the two Maryes
of whom we read, verse 8. that when they had both seen the Angel and heard
his glorious voice also they departed from the Sepulcher with fear and great
joy. And thus have I finished the first branch of the Doctrine, and showed you
that we can do nothing well, we cannot please God in any thing we do unless
it proceed from the love we bear to God, unless it grow from that root, Cant.
1.4. The upright love thee.

Branch 2
Now let us proceed unto the second branch, That the true love of God
wheresoever it is, is an infallible sign of a true and upright heart. This you
shall hear confirmed unto you by three sorts of proofs.

Cant. 1.4. The upright love thee. And every one that loves the Lord is a good
man, a sound elect Christian, an upright hearted man. Let them that love thy
name (all good men, all sound hearted men, says David, Psalm. 5.11.) be joyful
in thee. So Psalm. 119.132. Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me; as
thou usest to do to those that love thy name. If any man love God (says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.3.) the same is known of him. As if he had said, Whatsoever
men may think of such, howsoever men may account many of such to be no better
then hypocrites, yea howsoever they may often times think so of themselves also,
yet God approves, and highly esteems of them.

James 1.12. He shall receive the crown of li^^, which the Lord has promised
to them that love him; and 2.5. Has not God chosen the poor of this world,
rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom, which he has promised to them that
love him? All that love the Lord shall go to heaven and none but they. See
this secondly in spiritual blessings. All the comforts of the Gospel
(righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, the fatness of Gods house,
comfort in the Word and Sacraments) are promised to them that love the Lord,
and to none but them, 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, ear has not heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared
for them that love him. See this thirdly in temporal blessings. Because he
has set his love upon me (says the Lord, Psalm. 91.14.) therefore will I
deliver him. Romans 8.28. We know that all things work together for the good of
such as love God. They that love God, may be sure to be made the better by
their prosperity and by their adversity, by their sickness and by their
health, everything that befalls them shall be sanctified unto them; and to
none but such. And on the other side he that loves not the Lord, has no right
to any blessing of God, no promise of God belongs unto him, but a certain
looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the
adversaries, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 10.27. If any man love not the Lord
Jesus (says the Apostle, 1 Corinthians 16.22.) let him be Anathema,
Maranatha; as if he had said, let him be accursed even unto the coming of
Christ to judgment.

Thirdly and lastly, See this confirmed by a practical experiment. When Peter
was so dejected in the sense of his fearful sin, that he thought himself
unworthy ever to be employed or to meddle any more in the work of his
Apostleship and ministry; see how, and by what argument our Savior seeks to
raise him, and comfort him, John 21.15. Simon thou son of Jonas love thou
me? As if he had said, If this be in thee, be of good comfort thou art not
quite fallen from God, thy heart is upright for all thy fall. And thus may we
comfort any poor Christian, in their greatest distress of Conscience. You see
then that that we do out of true love to God, will give us a comfortable
testimony that our hearts are upright; so will not that do, that is done
merely out of such a fear of Gods wrath, as has no mixture of love in it.
See an instance for this in those false hearted Jews that perished in the
wilderness, as we shall find it set down, Psalm. 78.34 36, 37. When he slew
them (sometimes by fiery serpents, sometimes by strange pestilence and other
judgments) then they sought him, and returned, and enquired early after God,
They made great shows of repentance, great protestations of amendment, as you
have known many lewd men in extreme sicknesses do. But what came all these
shows unto? That you shall find, verse 36, 37. They did but flatter him with
their mouth, and they lied to him with their tongues, for their hearts were not
right with him. There is no truth of heart in those shows of repentance and
goodness, that are extorted from us only by the judgments of God, and sense
of his wrath, that grow out of that fear that has no mixture of love in it.

Now let us make some application of this that we have heard. Applic.
And seeing whatsoever good thing we do out of love to God, is pleasing to him
and nothing else; if we truly love the Lord our hearts are upright; if the love
of God be not in us, there is no truth in our hearts, but we shall be sure to
have our portion with hypocrites. Let us therefore try our own hearts by this
note. Let us every one of us seriously bethink our selves, if the Lord should
speak to every one of us particularly and by name, and ask us that question
that he did Peter, John 21.15. Simon thou son of Jonas love thou me? what
answer we would be able to make unto him. Certainly your answer to this
question would be very indifferent. Some of you that have no love of God in you
at all, but hate him in your hearts, would be ready to answer him most
confidently; and some others of you that do indeed entirely and unfeignedly
love him, would make a very doubtful and fearful answer unto this question.
Let me direct my speech to you both severally and apart.

God the avenger (as the Prophet calls him, Psalm. 94.1.) that will take
vengeance of them, for their sins; in these respects they hate him. His
Citizens hated him, (says our Savior in the Parable, Luke 19.14.) we will not
have him to reign over us. Yea they hate him with a mortal hatred, Their
soul abhorred me, says the Lord, Zach. 11.8. and wish with all their hearts
as to their most mortal enemy (a fearful thing to be spoken or thought) that
he had no being, that he were quite rid out of the world. Many such wretches I
say there be in the world and even in the Church too; and if thou knew thy
self well, thou would find thy self to be of that wretched number. But
though thou know not thy self, the Lord knows thee well, and will one day
say to thee as he said to a great number, that were members of the true Church
as thou art, professors of the true religion as thou art, John 5.42. But I
know you that ye have not the love of God in you. 1. If thou be a profane
person and go on in a course of sin, thou can not leave thy drinking,
nor thy swearing, nor thy whoring, then the Holy Ghost pronounces of thee,
that thou love not God, thou hate him, and art an enemy unto him, Psalm.
68.21. God shall wound the head of his enemies (has God any enemies? So it
appears. Why who are they? That he tells you in the next words) and the
hairy scalpe of such a one as goes on still in his trespasses. 2. If thou be a
superstitious person, and such a one as dotest upon any will worship that is of
thine own or of any other man's devising, whatsoever thou think of thy
self, then the Holy Ghost pronounces of thee, that thou love not God, but
thou hate him in thy heart. For so the Lord speaks of the transgressors of
the second commandment, Exodus 20.5. Visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon
the children, to the third, and fourth generation of them that hate me. 3. Nay
if thou be but a mere natural man unregenerated, unconverted, there is no
love of God in thee, but thou hate him in thy heart. For so says our
Savior, John 15.18. of the whole world, of all men in their natural estate,
Ye know that the world hated me, before it hated you. And verse 23. He that
hates me, hates my father also. Neither is this the state of the reprobate in
the world only, but even of Gods elect also, while they are of the world
before they be regenerated, they cannot love the Lord, but hate him in their
hearts. This is plain by that promise God makes to his elect, Deuteronomy. 30.6. The
Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart. Till God circumcise our hearts, and take
away the hard foreskin that is upon them, we can never love the Lord with all
our heart, that is, unfeignedly. And the Apostle speaking to the elect
Colosians puts them in mind of this, Col. 1.21. You were sometimes
alienated, and enemies in your minds. As if he had said, you were not only
void of the love of God, but you were quite alienated from him, and enemies in
your mind, you hated him in your hearts.

John 2.15. If any man love the world, the love of the father is not Secondly,
He loves not God, because he does not desire to enjoy him, to be where he is,
to have any communion with him neither in heaven, nor in the assembly of his
Saints, and use of his ordinances. For this has been the voice of such as
have loved God, 2 Cor. 5.8. We are willing rather to be absent from the body,
and to be present with the Lord. And Psalm. 42.1, 2. As the heart pants after
the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee o God; my soul thirsts for
God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear before God? And 26.8.
Lord I have loved the habitation of thy houses, and the place where thine
honor dwells. And can he then have any love to God that cannot abide to
think of death, that if he might have his will, would never go to God? Can he
have any love to God that cares not how seldom he comes to Gods Sanctuary,
where (of all places in the world) the Lord shows himself to be present with
his people, in the most gracious and comfortable manner. Thirdly, He loves not
God, because he has no delight to do that that The carnal mind is enmity
against God, (says the Apostle, Romans 8.7.) For it is not subject to the law of
God, neither indeed can be. He that has my commandments and keeps them
(says our Savior, Ioh. 14.21.) is he that loves me, and none but he.
Fourthly, He loves not God because I love them that love me (says the Lord,
Pro. 8.17. But how shall that be known? That he tells you in the next words)
and those that seek me early shall find me. As if he had said, Those that love
me, will seek peace with me when they have offended me, yea they will do it
early, they cannot rest, they cannot sleep, till they have made their peace
with me; and thus will I show my love to them again, I will be found of them,
I will be easy to be entreated by them. Fifthly, They love not God, because
they love not them that Every one that loves him that begat (says the
Apostle, 1 John 5.1.) loves him also that is begotten of him. Nay there is a
certain sign they hate God, because they bear a mortal hatred to all such
as in whom they see any life or power of religion, for that cause only because
they bear the image of God, they reproach them, nickname them, slander them,
use them with all the despite they can. He that is upright in the way is an
abomination to the wicked, says Solomon, Pro. 29.27. Like the Leopard, and
Tiger of whom we read that they do so hate man that they will express their
hatred, to the very picture of a man, wheresoever they see it. Sixthly and
lastly, They love not God, because We love him: (says the Apostle, 1 John
4.19.) because he loved us first. And it is no more possible there should be
any true love in the heart of man toward God till then; then it is possible
there should be, heat in the pavement before the sun in his strength, have
shown upon it.

Now then to conclude this first part of my application; let no man be too
confident that he loves the Lord, but let every one examine himself by these
six arguments; and if thou find by them (as I dare say many of you may) that
there is no love of God in thee but that thou bear in thy breast such a
canckered and malicious heart against God; 1 Bewail thine estate; 2 Think not
so well of thy self as thou have done; but loath, and abhor thy self for
it; 3 Admire the patience and goodness of God toward thee; 4 Let this drive
thee to Christ who is our only peace (as the Apostle calls him, Ephesians. 2.14)
and who by his cross has slain the enmity that was between God and us, as
he says, verse 16. 5 Let This patience and bountifullnesse of his move thee
to turn to him; and cry to him that is the God of love, 2 Cor. 13.11. that by
that blessed spirit of his which is the spirit of love, 2 Timothy 1.7. he would
give thee an heart to love him; And if thou can seek to him this way, thou
have no cause to despair, For he that commands us, Matthew. 5.44, 45. Love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, etc. will (doubtless) love thee if
in truth of heart thou desire to love him.

Lecture LXXIX. On Psalm 51.6. January 29. 1627.


I told you the last day, that if God should move to every one of you
particularly that that was moved unto Peter, John 21.15. (as who knows how
soon it may be moved to us, either by the Lord himself when he shall wrestle
with us, as he did with Jacob, Genesis ^2. or by Satan our adversary) there is
many a one among you, that do unfeignedly love the Lord would make a very
doubtful and fearful answer unto this question, because though you do
indeed love him, yet you do not feel or perceive in your selves that you do
so. But you are ready (upon the hearing of the former Doctrine) to say. Have
none upright hearts but such only as do love the Lord? Alas then I fear I am
no better then an hypocrite, for I am exceedingly subject unto slavish fear. I
cannot think of death but I tremble; I cannot hear of any danger of an
invasion or such like troubles, but I am ready to quake for fear; I cannot
hear or see any great thunder or lightning but I am exceedingly distempered
with slavish fear. And can there be any true love of God in such a heart?

Now to these poor souls that object thus against themselves I have three
things to say. 1. Thou may have the true love of God in thy heart, though
thou be subject unto these fears. 2. Thou have in thee evident signs that
thou have the true love of God in thy heart, though thou be so subject unto
these fears. 3. Yet thou must strive against these fears and labor to rid
thy heart of them.

Job was subject to these fears, even before the time of his great affliction,
while he enjoyed much prosperity and outward peace. For whereas he says of
himself, Job 3.26. that in those days I was not in peace, neither had I rest,
neither was I quiet, he tells us in the former verse 25. that it was fear
that did thus disquiet him. David also often complains of this, Psalm. 119.120.
My flesh trembles for fear of thee: and I am afraid of thy judgments. This
may seem to be more then a child-like fear to offend God, that he could not
see nor hear of any strange judgments of God but his flesh trembled at it,
And Psalm. ^^.4.^. My heart is ^ore pained within me (with what? with fear as
appears by the next words) and the terrors of death are fallen upon me;
fearefullnesse and trembling are come upon me, and horror has overwhelmed
me. What poor Christian is there in the world, can say more of his fears.
And yet Heman the Prophet goes further, Psalm. 88.15. While I suffer thy
terrors I am distracted; and verse 16. Thy terrors have cut me off. As if he
had said, For fear and terror I know not what to do, I have no use of my
understanding, I am become even as a dead man. Take another example for this in
the Apostle Paul who professes of himself, 2 Cor. 7.5. that while he was in
Macedonia he found no rest in his flesh, but that as he had fightings without
(much opposition and trouble raised against him by men) so he had terrors
within. Certainly he was much subject to these fears we speak of. But what
speak I of particular examples? this is the condition of most Christians, that
at one time or other they are subject unto them. Yea they are more subject unto
them a great deal then the lewdest men are, who have much more just cause to
fear then they have; as we see the trees that have life and sap in them are
shaken too and fro with the winds, when those that are dry and dead are not
moved at all but strand stone-still. In which respect the Lord speaking to them
to whom the promises of the Gospel do belong, calls them Esa. 35.4. such as
are of a fearful heart; and chideth them for this, Esa. 51.13. Thou have
feared continually every day, because of the fury of the oppressor.

Now if you would know the reasons why Gods most faithful and upright-hearted
servants may be so subject to these fears, and why they are so, I find two
principal causes of this.

First, Their own weakness. When the Apostle speaks of those fears I was
with you (says he, 1 Cor. 2.3.) in weakness, and in fear and in much
trembling. And there is a double weakness in the best of Gods servants, a
natural weakness, and a sinful weakness; and so there is a natural
fear, and a sinful fear in them. Our blessed Savior that had no sin in him
yet when he was in the garden was sore afraid, and (being to pray) durst not be
alone, but got three of his Disciples to be by him, yea charged them to keep
themselves awake too, as you shall find, Mar. 14.32 -- 34. Through this
natural weakness it is, that the best man that is, may feel in himself
some fear of death; and when he seriously thinks of his appearing before
God, or when the Lord does by any extraordinary work as thundering and
lightning and earthquakes etc. manifest unto him his glorious power, he cannot
choose but fear, and tremble. I remembered God, and was troubled, says the
Prophet, Psalm. 77.3. and that has often been the case of many a good soul.
When God showed his glory in the delivering of the law by darkness and
tempest, by thunder and lightning, it is said by the Apostle, Heb. 12.21. that
the sight was so terrible, that Moses himself said, I exceedingly fear and
quake. Yea when Christ did show his divine and glorious power even in
goodness, by bringing such a multitude of fish to the net that it brake
withal, it is said, Luke 5.8, 9. that Peter was so astonished with fear that
he fell down at Jesus knees, saying, depart from me for I am a sinful man O
Lord. But besides this natural weakness, there is a sinful weakness also
in the best of Gods children; even weakness of faith which makes them subject
not to natural fears only, but to sinful fears also. There is much lacking
in their faith as the Apostle said of the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. And
this is a chief cause of all their fears; Why are ye fearful, o ye of
little faith, says our Savior to his Disciples, Mat. 8.16. pointing at the
chief cause of all our fear. When are apt to doubt of Gods favor, and of the
pardon of our sins; and who can choose but be much disquieted in his heart,
with ^eare when he doubts of Gods favor? When the Prophet complained, Psalm.
88.15. While I suffer thy terrors I am distracted: he tells us, verse 14.
what was the cause of those terrors he felt in himself, Lord why castest thou
off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? He could not be persuaded of
Gods love, he thought God had cast him of. And can you wonder then though his
heart were full of terror?

The second cause of these fears is the Lord himself. Certainly his holy
Lords terrors, Psalm. 88.15. and 2 Cor. 5.11. because they come from him. And
the Lord sees it to be good, and profitable many ways, for sundry of his
servants to be much exercised by them. 1. This makes them careful by
repentance to purge themselves from all their known sins. So the Lord
speaks of the fear which they that travel by sea are in, when they see the
strange breaches which the whale by his rising does make in the sea, Job 4^.25.
When he raises up himself, the mighty (and most stout hearted) are afraid, by
reason of his breakings they purify themselves. As we see the mariners that
carried Jonah did, Jonah 1.5. The mariners were afraid and cried every man to
his God. Every one sought to make his peace with God in the best manner that he
could. This effect we know fear usually has even in all men; but much more
certainly in Gods children. 2. This keeps them humble, fearful to sin,
tractable and willing to obey God in all things. This is also a natural effect
of fear to abate the pride of man's heart, and to make it humble and tractible.
Put them in fear, o Lord: (says David, Psalm. 9.20.) that the nations may know
themselves to be but men. Certainly if the Lord should not now and then visit
them with inward terrors and gripes, there be many in the world would even
forget themselves to be men. But this effect it has in Gods children
especially, O that there were such a heart in them, (says the Lord of his
people, Deuteronomy. 5.29.) that they would fear me, and keep my commandments
always. As if he had said, Now they are fearful to offend me in any thing,
now they are willing to do any thing I would have them; as they protested,
verse 27. But when was that? Surely when by seeing the law delivered in that
terrible manner, they were brought into a wonderful fear. 3. Lastly, This
prepares them, and makes them fit to receive comfort from God. Thus the Lord
has been wont to prepare his servants, whom he meant to give most comfort
unto. Before the Lord delivevered that large and comfortable promise unto
Abram, Genesis 15.13 -- 21. it is said verse 12. Lo an horror of great darkness
fell upon him. Before Elijah could hear that still and small voice that spoke
so much comfort unto him, concerning himself and the whole Church, the Lord
first affrighted him with a great and strong wind that rent the mountains and
brake the rocks in pieces, and then by an earthquake, and after that by a
fire, 1 King. 19.11, 12. he deeply humbled him by fear and terror first,
that he might prepare and make him fit to receive that comfort. You see then,
that this may be the case of them that are most upright hearted, and such as
truly love the Lord they may be much subject to these fears. And this is the
first thing I told you I had to say, for the comfort of such poor souls.



Cant. 2.1 -- 4. she expresses the cause that moved her so to seek after him,
by calling him him whom her soul loved; and this title she repeateth in every
one of those verses. Certainly if her soul had not dearly loved him, she
could not in that manner have sought after him. So that this grief and trouble
thy heart is in, because thou can not be assured of Gods favor, argues
plainly that thou art sick of love as the Church says she was, Cant. 2.5.
and 5.8. Thy love to God is the cause of thy sickness and grief. O how happy
a thing would it be, with many if they were sick of this disease?

He that has my commandments and keeps them. (says our Savior, Ioh.
14.21.) is he that loves me. And 1 John 5.3. This is the love of God, that we
keep his commandments; we could not else do it constantly nor conscionably.

Thirdly, When thou have through infirmity done any thing to offend God, Mary
Magdalen to weep so abundantly for her sins, as our Savior testifies of
her, Luke 7.47. And this was the only thing whereby Peter did express that
though he ha^ so shamefully denied Christ, yet he loved him above all things;
when he had so offended, he went out and wept bitterly, Mat. 26.75.

Fourthly, Thou love the Word and ordinances of God and the sincerity such as
love him, Exodus 20.6. And David professing himself* Psalm. 119 132. to be one of
those that did love Gods name; declares it by no argument so much as by this
throughout that Psalm, even by that love he bare unto, and that delight he
took in the Word of God.

Fifthly, thou love the children of God, even because of the goodness thou If
we love one another (says the Apostle, 1 John 4.12.) God dwells in us, and
his love is perfected in us. As if he had said, That is a sign of a sound and
perfect love of God. So Christ will acknowledge at the last day that the love
that was showed to the least of his brethren, was showed unto him, Matthew.
25.40. If thou love the brethren thou love the Lord.

Sixthly and lastly, Thou do unfeignedly desire to love the Lord and strivest
Neh. 1.11. And he that mourns for his infidelity and striveth against it,
has true faith; as it appears in that example of the poor man mentioned,
Mar. 9.24. So has he the true love of God in his heart, that does unfeignedly
desire to love the Lord.

But how can this be, Object.
will you say? Could I be so afrraid of God as I am, if I did truly love him?
Is it possible for a man to be so afraid of him, whom he does love? Does not
the Apostle say, 1 John 4.18. That there is no fear in love, but perfect love
casts out fear.

I answer, Answ.
1. It is true that in love there is no such fear, nothing is more contrary
unto the nature of love, then these fears are. But in the person that has
true love these fears may be. As though there is no infidelity or doubting of
Gods favor in faith (nothing more contrary unto faith then doubting and
infidelity) yet in the person of a true believer there may be much infidelity,
as we have heard out of Mar. 9.24. 2. Perfect love will cast out all these
fears; and the perfecter our love to God is, the more it will cast out these
fears and deliver us from them. But the love of the best of Gods servants is
imperfect and will be till we come to heaven; for there and there only are the
spirits of just men made perfect, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 12.23.

The third and last thing I have to say unto these poor souls that are so
much David did, Psalm. 56.3. What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee. For 1
A trembling heart is in it self a judgment of God, and part of that curse
that God has threatened in his law against sin; as you shall find Deuteronomy.
28.65. And Job 18.11. Terrors shall make him afraid on every side. Yea it is
the greatest tormentour of the heart, and enemy to the peace and tranquillity
of it, that can be. Fear has torment, says the Apostle, 1 John 4.18. He that
is afraid to die must needs live in continual and extreme bondage, as the
Apostle speaks, Heb. 2.15. 2. It is not only a judgment but a sin also.
For it is often forbidden and condemned in the Word, Esa 8.12. Fear not their
fear, nor be afraid. And Matthew. 8.26. Why are ye fearful, o ye of little
faith? Yea it is a cause of many other sins. The fear of man brings a
snare, says Solomon, Pro. 29.25. 1. It makes a man apt to hide himself from
God and run away from him. I was afraid (says Adam, Genesis 3.10.) because I was
naked, and I hid my self. 2. It makes a man unprofitable and heartlesse to
every good duty. I was afraid (says the unprofitable servant, Matthew. 25.25.)
and went, and hid thy talent in the earth. 3. It keeps a man from loving God
as he should. The more servile fear of God is in the heart, the less love of
God must needs be in it. These are so contrary that they do mutually diminish
and expel one another as the Apostle has taught us, 1 John 4.18.

Object.
All this is true will you say, but by what means may I rid my heart of this
servile fear?

Answ.
I answer, These be the means.

Solomon would have us take when a great man is offended with us, Eccle. 8.3.
Be not hasty to go out of his sight. It is good for me (says David, Psalm.
73.28.) to draw near unto God; to get within him, when he is most angry, and
to fall down at his feet. If thou return to the Almighty (says Eliphaz, Ioh
22.23.26.) then shall thou have thy delight in the Almighty, and shall lift up
thy face unto God.

Fear not their fear, nor be afraid (says the Lord, Esa. 8.12, 13) Alas how
should we help that, might they say? He answers. Sanctify the Lord of
^osts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. In the
fear of the Lord (says Solomon, Pro. 14.26.) is strong confidence.

David's practice, Psalm. 34.4. I sought the Lord and he heard me, and delivered
me from all my fears, Pray as Ier. 17.17. Be not thou a terror unto me, thou
art my hope in the day of evil. As if he had said. If I be afraid of thee,
what hope can I have in the evil day.

One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord, all the days of my life, to behold the beauty
of the Lord, says David, Psalm. 27.4.

Psalm. 48.14. This God is my God for ever and ever, he will be my guide even
unto death. In him (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.12.) we have boldness, and
access with confidence by faith in him.

Job 11.15. Thou shall lift up thy face without spot, yea thou shall be
steadfast, and shall not fear. Psalm. 112.7, 8. He shall not be afraid of evil
ridings, his heart is fixed, his heart is established, he shall not be afraid.
And Pro. 1.33. Who so hearkneth unto me shall dwelt safely, and shall be quiet
from fear of evil. These and such promises thou should by faith give
undoubted credit unto; and apply them to thy self; and rest upon them; and
make claim and challenge unto them. Remembering how able the Lord is to
perform them, how faithful also, and true of his word.

Lecture LXXX. On Psalm 51.6. February 5. 1627.
IT follows now that we proceed unto the second grace whereof the right root
of all true righteousness, and goodness does consist; and that is a lively
faith. The point then that we are now to learn is this

That all true love unto God, Doct.
and (consequently) all true godliness and uprightness of heart, springs
from a lively faith even such a faith, as makes known to a man Gods love to
him in Christ, and makes him able to receive Christ, and to rest upon him.

See the proof of this in four degrees. First, Without faith it is not
possible Sin shall not have dominion over you (says the Apostle, Romans 6.14.)
for ye are not under the law, but under grace. As if he had said, Till you be
under grace, till by faith ye be assured of Gods gracious disposition toward
you, sin will have dominion over you, ye cannot help it, ye cannot avoid it.
It is the blood of Christ only (applied by faith) that purges the conscience
from dead works, as the Apostle teaches, Heb. 9.14. Secondly, Without faith
it is not possible for a man to Heb. 1^.6. Without says it is impossible to
please God. The life that I now live (says the Apostle, Gal. 2.20. that is, my
spiritual life) I live by the faith of the son of God. Thirdly, faith that
purifieth the heart, Acts 15.9. and that sanctifies it, Acts 26.^8. Fourthly
and says that works by love says the Apostle, Gal. 5.6. As if he had said,
faith is that that sets love on working, that gives life and motion unto
it. This is that which the Apostle also teaches, 1 Timothy 1.5. The end of the
commandment is love out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and faith
unfeigned. As if he had said, The true love of God (which is the very end and
perfection, the fulfilling of every commandment of God; which makes us able
to keep the commandments and to account them no burden, nothing grievous to
us, which gives the price and value in Gods sight to all our obedience)
springs from a pure and upright heart, and that from a good conscience, and
that from faith, yea from faith unfeigned. So that is the maine root of all.
The reasons hereof are two.

First, Reason 1
Because faith is the only thing that knitteth us to Christ and makes him
ours. Christ dwells in our hearts by says, Ephesians. 3.17. And till we be knit
to him and he be made ours there can be no goodness in us. Of his fulness
have we all received, Ioh. 1.16. Without me ye can do nothing, says our
Savior, John 15.4.

Secondly, Reason 2
Because faith, and faith only makes known to us that love of God, as is
effectual to to breed in us a true love unto God. It is an old and true
proverb (and the truth of it is not so certain in any case as in this) magnes
omoris amor, Love is of an attractive nature, like the lodestone, to draw love
unto it. We love God (says the Apostle, 1 John 4.19.) because he loved us
first. We can never love him, till we be first persuaded of his love to us.
When the Sun in his full strength and heat has shined much upon it, the stony
pavement it self will reflect, and send up an heat toward the sun, yea a
greater heat then either the softer earth, or the air will: but till the sun
has shined, and shined much upon it, it can send up no heat nor have any in
it at all. And even so it is with our cold and stony hearts, when the knowledge
and sense of Gods love has warmed them, then will they reflect love to God
again, but till then they cannot. But to handle this second reason more
plainly, and profitably two things are to be observed, which I will distinctly
speak of. 1. Nothing but a lively faith can so assure us of Gods love to us,
as to kindle in our hearts a true

Object.
For the first. It may be objected, that a man may be sufficiently persuaded
of Gods love to him, though he have not a lively faith. For, 1 Experience does
now, and in all ages has proved, that many a most wicked man that is utterly
void of true faith, is fully persuaded that God loves him, and glories in
nothing more then in that. He makes his boast of God, as the Apostle speaks
of the wicked Jews, Romans 2.17. The Lord speaking of some that did both in word
and deed, commit as much wickedness as they were able, Ier. 3.5. yet says of
them, ver 4. that these men would cry unto him, My God, thou art the guide of
my youth. And our Savior says, that those cursed Jews, of whom he
pronounces that the devil was their father. John 8.44. yet were themselves
fully persuaded of Gods fatherly love unto them, and could say of themselves,
verse 41, We have one father, even God. And what child of God know you upon
earth, that has this word (I thank my God) so much in his mouth, as many a
most wicked man has? 2 A man that has no faith, may yet have just cause to
be persuaded of Gods love toward him, for God does indeed love him, and
shows it many ways that he does love him. The Lord is good to all (says
David, Ps. 145.9.) and his tender mercies are over all his works. He is kind to
the unthankefull, and to the evil, says our Savior, Luke 6.25. Lo he is
good and kind, and tenderly merciful unto all, even unto the worst men. And
upon whom does not his light arise? says Bildad, Job 25.3. What man is there
in the world that has not sensible and comfortable experience of Gods love
every day? And why should not all men then be persuaded that God loves them?
Answ.




First. It is very true, that even these outward, and common favors of God,
that all men enjoy, are evident testimonies of Gods love and goodness, In that
he gives life and health, and seasonable times; in that he causes us to
prosper, yea, in that he feeds us, and cloatheth us, it is a sign he
loves us. God loves the stranger (says Moses, Deutere. 10.18.) in giving him
food and raiment.

Jacob saw that God had changed Esaus heart so, that he looked, and spoke
kindly to him, he saw Gods face, and loving countenance toward him, even in
that. I have seen thy face (says he Genes. 33.10.) as though I had seen the
face of God. By this I know (says David, Psalm. 41.11.) that thou favourest me
because mine enemy does not triumph over me.





he wi^t^d his goods, Luke 15.30. no doubt but they showed a great deal of
kindness unto him, but when he could give them no more, their love was at an
end Satan knew well, that this is the love of most men unto God, though he
falsely and maliciously charged Job with it, Job 1.10, 11. While God m^^^th in
hedge about them, and about all that they have, while he blesses the work of
their hands, and their substance is increased, they will love the Lord, but let
the Lord put forth his hand, and touch all that they have, they will be ready
to curse him to his face. Whereas he that soundly and truly loves the Lord,
loves him for himself, and those perfections, and excellencies that are in
him, and not for his gifts, nor for his own advantage only. He loves him as
a good child does his parents (1 Timothy 5 4) though they be poor, and have
nothing to give him. And as Paul declaring the truth of his love to the
Corinthians professes, 2 Cor. 12.14. he sought not theirs, but them; so does
he that truly loves the Lord desire to enjoy him and his favor, more then
he does desire any of Gods blessings, any thing that the Lord can do for him.
His soul says unto God, as David did, Psalm. 119.57. Thou art my portion o
Lord. If I have thee, I have enough, I desire no more. There are many will say
(says David, Psalm. 4.6, 7.) who will show us any good? Gods goods and
benefits every man desires, every man is enamored with But Lord (says he)
lift up the light of thy countenance upon us. As if he had said; We have
enough if we have thee and thy favor. And so speaks he also, Psalm. 73.25.
There is nothing upon earth that I desire besides thee. And from hence also it
comes, that as he that truly and entirely loves any man, will love him at
all times, even then, when his friend does not, nor can requite his love, yea,
therein principally the truth of his love appears, as Solomon says, Prove.
17.17. A friend loves at all times, and a brother is borne for adversity. And
as our Savior teaches us, that no man has any true charity in him toward
his neighbor, that loves him only while he deals kindly with him, but ca^
love no man that has dealt unkindly with him, or done him wrong. If you do
good to them that do good to you (says he Luke 6.33) what thanks h^^e you?
for sinners also will do so much: So he that truly loves the Lord, will love
him at all times, even when he withholds his hand, and with-draweth his
bounty when he carries himself toward him, even as if he were his enemy.
Though he slay me (says Job 13* 15.) yet will ^trust in him; which he could
never have done, if he had not loved him.

Secondly. The love that is bred in men toward God, by his temporal He that
loves father or mother, more then me (says our Savior, Matthew. 10.37. he
that to please them dare offend me) he that loves sun, or daughter more
then me, (he that to scrap^ and provide for them, dare sin against me; or
through fondness (like Ely) can bear with any profaneness, or lewdness in
them) is not worthy of me; his love is of no worth at all in my account. If a
man be a lover of pleasures, more then a lover of God, as the Apostle tells
us, 2 Timothy 3.4. many in these last days shall be; if a man love any lust of
his better then God, and rather then he will forsake it, he will adventure the
lost of Gods favor, certainly he has no true love of God in him. He that
truly loves God, gives him the highest seat in his heart, loves him more
then any thing else in the world, and can say with Paul, Phil. ^.8. For Christ
I have suffered (that is, in will and affection) the loss of all things, and
do count them but dung, that I may win Christ. And this Christ required in
Peter's love, John 21.15. he says not only Simon thou son of Jonas, love
thou me? (that had not been enough to prove his love true and sincere) but
love thou me more then these? then thy nets, then thy fish, then thy friends
that are here about thee. And though Peter (in the depth of his humility)
says nothing in his answer to that term of comparison, yet is it evident by
Christ's question, that he knew his love was so unfeined toward him, that there
was nothing in the world that he loved more, or so much as him.

Ioh 3.17. How dwells the love of God in him? And thereupon infers in the
next words, verse 18. My little children, let us not love (he means, let us
not love God) in word, nor in tongue, but in deed, and in truth. As if he had
said, no man does love God in deed, and in truth, if his love to God will not
make him willing to do any thing that he would have him to do, and that may
please him. True love we know, is a most forcible thing to make one
serviceable, and willing to do any thing for such as they love. What pains
will the mother take, what offices will she perform to her little infant?
yea, how wil^ingly and cheerfully? The seven years wherein Jacob did service
to Laban, a very hard master, seemed to him but a very few d^yes (says Moses,
Genes. 29.20.) because he loved Rachel. And surely our love to God is no less
forcible this way, if it be true, it will make us willing to obey him, even in
his hardest commandments. Of this her love to God, it is that the Church
speaks when she says, Cant. 8.6. Love is strong (and irresistible) as
death. And this is that which the Apostle means, 1 John 5.3, 4. This is the
love of God, that we keep his commandments, and his commandments are not
grievous. As if he had said, the love of God will make us careful to keep
Gods commandments, yea it will make those commandments easy to us, that are
most cross to our nature, they will be nothing grievous to us, if we love the
Lord. And thus have I finished the first point I propounded, Nothing but faith
can so assure us of Gods love to us, as may kindle in our hearts a true love to
God.

The second follows. A lively faith is able to do this. Faith assures us of
such a love that God has borne to us, so special, so mavelous a love, above
that that he has done to the greatest part of the world, as we cannot choose
but love him again, and love him unfeinedly, that is, love him for himself,
love him better then any thing else, love him so, as we can be content to go
through thick and thin to please him. Observe the proof of this in three
degrees.

Herein is love (says the Apostle, 1 John 4.10.) that God loved us, and sent
his son to be the propitiation for our sins. And Romans 5.8. God commends
his love toward us in this, that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for
us. This was a mavelous love of God, all the fruits of Gods favor that
worldlings do enjoy, are but shells and husks in comparison of this.

Fear not little flock (says our Savior, Luke 12.32.) Whereas God in sending
his son, had not such respect to the greatest part of the world, I pray not for
the world, says Christ. John 17.9. Faith assures every true believer, that
this wonderful love of God belongs to him. That God in special love to him,
sent his Son to do and endure all that he did. It makes him able to say
with the Apostle, Galat. 2.20. He loved me, and gave himself for me. And with
David, Ps. 31.21. Blessed be the Lord, for he has showed me his mavelous
kindness. He has made me able to see that this mavelous love of his
belongs to me.

Thirdly and lastly. When the heart of a man is once by faith assured, that
Mary Magdalene because she knew by faith, that Gods love to her had been so
abundant, as to forgive her so many sins, therefore did she love Christ
abundantly, Luk 7.47. Thus David professes of himself, Psalm. 116.1. I love
the Lord, because he has heard my voice, and my supplications. And what was
the prayer that he had made? for hearing of which he did so love the Lord? He
tells us ver 3.4. The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell
got hold upon me, I found trouble and sorrow, then called I upon the name of
the Lord. He was in anguish of conscience, and fear of damnation, and God
(upon his prayer) spoke peace to his heart, and assured him of his favor in
Christ, therefore did he so love the Lord. Therefore the Apostle praying for
the Ephesians 3.17 -- 19. that they might be rooted, and grounded in love (to
God he means, and to men for his sake) he desires to that end that God
would make them able fully to comprehend, and know in all the dimensions of it,
the love of Christ that passes knowledge. As if he should say, If men did
well know this love of God to us in Christ, they could not choose but be so
settled, and rooted in love to God, as nothing could be able to draw their
hearts from him.

Lecture LXXXI. On Psalm 51.6. Febru. 19. 1627.
LET us now apply this that we have heard to our selves. Applic.
And that that I will say for the application of this point shall be by way of
exhortation only; even to stir up, and persuade my self, and every one of
you, not to rest contented with the fruits of Gods common and general love,
be not satisfied in thy self, till thou be assured by faith, that God loves
thee with his special and particular love, that thou art one of the world of
Gods Elect, whom God so loved, that he gave his only begotten son for thee,
that thou believing in him, might not perish, but have life everlasting; as
our Savior speaks, John 3.16. That God so loves thee, that he spared not
his own son, but delivered him up for thee; as Romans 8.32. Till thou can
say with Paul, Gal. 2.20. Christ Jesus the Son of God loved me, and gave
himself for me. And with John, Revel. 1.5. He loved us, and washed us from
our sins in his own blood. Till thou be assured that God loves thee, with
this more then common, with this mavelous love, nothing should content thee,
but thou should still cry with David, Psalm. 17.7. Show me thy mavelous
loving kindness; make me able to see and know that thou love me with this
mavelous love. And 106.4. Remember me o Lord, with the favor that thou
bear to thy people; o visit me with thy salvation. To be beloved of God
with that love that he bears to strangers, or to his hired servants, should
not content us, but that love only that he bears to his own people, to his
dear children. None of his gifts should satisfy us without his salvation,
those good things that accompany salvation, but we should still cry, o visit
me with thy salvation; as if he had said, give me a comfortable sense and
assurance of that. It is said of the faithful Bereans, Acts 17.11. that they
were (...) better borne and bred, more noble then others. And as those that are
nobly borne, aspire after higher estates, and conditions of life then other men
do, they scorn to live upon a base, and mechanical trade. So says our
Savior, Matthew. 6.31 -- 33. that all we that are his Disciples should do.
After all these things (says he, that is meat, and drink, and clothes) do
the Gentiles (that are borne to no better hope) seek (that is, only or
chiefly) but seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness. And
certainly, if we be borne of God, we shall not be so base minded as other
men are; but find in our selves, such high and generous spirits, as nothing but
the reward of the inheritance, as the Apostle calls it, Colos. 3.24. nothing
but the kingdom of heaven will content us. And thus are all they that shall
be saved described, Romans 2.7. They seek for glory, and honor, and
immortality. And this is that Holy ambition, that I desire to stir up in my
self, and in every one of you, that we would strive to bring our hearts to
this; that we may be able to say, life is sweet, and a good blessing of God,
and so is health, and so is peace, and so is a plentiful estate, and so is
credit, and so is mirth; but all these things are nothing unto me, without
the assurance of Gods special love unto me in Christ. Rejoice not in this,
that the spirits are subject unto you (says our Savior to his Disciples, Luke
10.20. and yet that was a great and a rare gift of God) but rather rejoice,
because your names are written in heaven. That even as Absalom 2 Samuel 14.32.
thought it nothing to be restored from his banishment, and to be admitted to
live in Jerusalem, unless he might see the Kings face; so should we esteem
all other comforts and contentments whatsoever, as nothing, unless we may see
the light of Gods countenance, see him look cheerfully upon us, and show
himself to be reconciled unto us. This is that, that David preferred before
all the World. Psalm 4.6. Many say, who will show us any good (who will show us
how we may get wealth, and credit, and pleasure, and such things) but (As if
he should say, but I am not of their mind) Lord, lift up the light of thy
countenance upon us; upon me, and upon thy people, this is all in all unto
me. This, this is that I desire, to persuade you unto, to get assurance that
God loves you with this special love. Get assurance of it I say unto your
selves, Make your casting and election sure, says the Apostle, 2 Peter 1.10.
Content not your selves with an uncertain hope in this case, but seek to be
sure of this. Yea, he that is most sure of this, let him seek to be more
sure still, as the Church does, Canticles 1.2. Let him kiss me with the
kisses of his mouth; as if she had said, Let him still give me more evidences
of his love; for thy love is better then wine.

Motives
Now for the better enforcing of this exhortation. 1. I will give you some
motives that may provoke you to seek this assurance of the special love of
God. 2. I will show you the means how you may attain unto it.

We have all need of motives, yea of strong motives, to persuade us (a strange
thing to consider of) to seek Gods favor, to seek assurance that he loves
us. For, 1. The most men are like the prodigal, of whom we read, Luke 15.16,
17. who so long as he could have enough to fill his belly, though it were but
the husks that the swine fed on, never thought of his father, nor sought for
his favor. And like profane Esau that despised his birthright. Genesis 25.34.
If God will but love them so far, as to let them live in wealth, and peace,
and credit, and mirth here, his special love, that reaches to the
forgiveness of their sins, and life everlasting, they care not for, they
seek not after. 2. Many that are possessed with the spirit of bondage, and
often vexed with terrible doubts and fears, about this matter, yet never seek
for this certainty, 3. Many that think they have faith, content themselves
with an uncertain opinion, and wavering hope of Gods favor and never seek to
make this certain unto themselves.

Hearken therefore unto six Motives I will give you out of Gods word to stir
you up to this.

First. Motive 1
This love of God, is an everlasting love, I have loved thee (says God to his
people, to his elect in Christ, Ier. 31.3) with an everlasting love. And of
Christ's love, the Evangelist says, Ioh. 13.1. Having loved his own (that is,
such as his father gave him, such as believed in him) unto the end he loved
them, I am persuaded (says the Apostle, Romans 8.38, 39.) that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Then get
once the assurance of this love of God in Christ, and thou may be certain
thou shall never loose it. Thy assurance of it, I grant thou may loose for a
time, through thy own folly, but this love of God can thou never loose, if
ever thou had it. The Moon is subject to change, and so are all things that
are under it; but the Sun (though through the interposition of somewhat
between it and us, it do not always shine upon us) yet does it never change.
So though our sins may raise up a thick cloud (as the Prophet speaks, Esaias
44 22.) between the Lord and us, that keeps the light of his countenance
from shining upon us, yet is there in this father of lights (as the Apostle
says, James 1.17.) no variableness at all, nor so much as a shadow of
turning, or changing his affection toward us. This is a love therefore worth
the having, worth the seeking, even the seeking to be sure of it. This
property of Gods love, has made Gods people highly to esteem of it. O give
thanks to the Lord (says David, Psalm. 118.1) for he is good; because his
mercy endures for ever. Yea, see how the Prophet follows this, and insisteth
upon it, verse 2.4. This special love of God to us in Christ, is called, Esa.
55.3. The sure mercies of David. All the other mercies of God, and fruits of
his love without Christ (which yet men so much dote upon) are transitory, and
such as we can have no certainty of; these only are sure mercies, this only is
an everlasting and unchangeable love.

Secondly. Motive 2
This would free the heart from those fears that do so vex and torment us, if
we were once sure of this special love of God to us. That even as when Christ
was come into the ship, where his Disciples were, Mark 6 5^. the wind ceased
presently, and there was a ^alme; so will it be with thy heart, get Christ
once into it, and it will be quiet. So David professes, that when he had
seen the light of Gods countenance, and rejoiced in it, Psalm 4 8. I will
both lay me down in peace, and sleep, says he. And indeed, what need we to
fear, if we have Gods favor? If God be for us, (says Paul, Romans 8.31.) who
can be against us? To hurt us he means. The Lord is my light and my
salvation (says David, Psalm 27.1.) whom shall I fear? And 49.5. Wherefore
should I fear in the days of evil: when the iniquity of my heels shall
compass me about? Why David what makes thee so secure in the midst of
danger? He tells you verse 15. God will redeem my soul from the power of
the grave, for he shall receive me. On the other side, he that doubts of
Gods love to him in Christ, must needs be vexed with continual fears, fear
of death, and fear of troubles. It is Christ only (says the Apostle, Heb.
2.15.) that delivers them, who through the fear of death, were all their
life time subject to bondage.

Thirdly, Motive 3
This brings with it unto us all good things. Seek ye first the kingdom of
God, and his righteousness (says our Savior, Matthew. 6.33. As if he had said,
Make your salvation sure, make this sure unto your selves that God is
reconciled unto you, that you are in his favor) and all these things, shall be
added unto you. O that men could believe Christ in this, that this is the best
way to be certain of all earthly comforts, so far as they shall be good for
us. He that spared not his own son (says the Apostle, Romans 8.32.) but
delivered him up for us all; how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things? Yea this sweetneth all Gods blessings to us, and gives a pleasant
relish unto them, when we can taste in them, Gods love unto us in Christ. When
Job speaks, Job 29.1 -- 7. of the comfort he took in all Gods blessings, in
the time of his prosperity, in his children and riches, in that honor and
esteem God gave him among all men; he gives this for the reason of it, verse
3. His candle (his light, the comfortable assurance of his savor) shined upon
my head. Yea this will not only sustain and keep us from fainting in times
of common trouble and calamity as Job says there, Job 29.3. By his light I
walked through darkness; While the light of his countenance shined upon me I
could walk cheerfully in the darkest, and saddest times; But it will also
sweeten the bitterest afflictions that can befall our selves in particular,
when we know they are but the chastisements of our father, that loves us
dearly though he thus correct us. The cup which my father has given me
(says our Savior, John 18.11.) shall I not drink it? All hope of deliverance
and comfort in danger and distress grows from the assurance of Gods favor.
Upon this David grounded his hope, Psalm. 42.5. Why art thou cast down o my
soul? etc. Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, for the help of his
countenance. To this he ascribes all the deliverances the Church had received
from the Lords right hand, Psalm 44.3. They got not the land in possession by
their own sword, neither did their own arm save them, but thy right hand and
thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou had a favor unto
them. The sting of death (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.56. and if of death,
then of all other afflictions sure) is sin; and if the sting of them be once
gone, certainly there can be no deadly pain in them. And thus Christ
comfort a poor man that was sick of a dead palsy (a disease that dulleth
the spirits and makes the heart as heavy, as any disease can) Matthew. 9.2.
Son be of good cheer thy sins be forgiven thee. On the other side he that
doubts of Gods love to him in Christ, what comfort can he have in life or in
death, in prosperity or in adversity, specially if God shall be pleased to
awaken his conscience? What sweetness can a man find in all his wealth or
pleasure, or good cheer when it has this bitter tang, and loose with it, that
his heart shall say to him, I may be a vessel of wrath for all that. Alas Cain
had as much as all this comes to, and Esau and Dives who are all now
firebrands in hell. Must not the joy that all such men seem to take in their
prosperity be such as the Apostle speaks of, 2 Cor. 5.12. in the face only,
and not in the heart. And if this be their condition in their greatest
prosperity, then what comfort can they have in their affliction, and in their
death think you? What is the hope of the hypocrite (says Job 27.8.) though he
has gained, when God takes away his soul?

Motive 4.
Fourthly, If we were once assured of Gods special love to us in Christ this
would make us yield obedience unto God, and do his service, not grudgingly or
as of necessity, but as out of love and willingly, and cheerfully. For a good
man (a bountiful, a kind man, says the Apostle, Romans 5.7.) some will even
dare to die. And if the goodness and bounty of a man have such force with us,
that we think we can never do too much for him; will not the assurance of this
mavelous bounty and goodness of God to us in Christ make us to say with
David, Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render unto the Lord, for all his benefits
toward me; what might I do to please and honor him, that has so dearly
loved me? This will make us pray with boldness and zeal. O God thou art my
God (says David, Psalm. 63.1.) early will I seek thee. When our Savior taught
his Disciples (and in them us all) to pray, Matthew. 6.9. he bids us begin
thus, Our father which art in heaven; Till our hearts do thus conceive of God,
that he is our father, that he loves us with a fatherly love, we can never
pray aright. We may say a prayer (and that is all that the most of us do) but
we can never pray with our hearts, till then. Therefore also the Apostle
teaches us, Romans 8.15, 16. that the spirit that makes us able to cry in our
prayers unto God; that is, to pray fervently and earnestly is the spirit of
adoption, that spirit which witnesses with our spirits, that we are the
sons and daughters of God; that assures us God is our father and makes us
able to call him father, yea to cry to him Abba father. And as this will make
us able to pray with comfort; so will this also make us able to hear and read
and meditate in the Word with cherfulness, and a good appetite. As newborn babes (says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.2, 3.) desire the sincere milk of the
Word; if so be that ye have tasted, that the Lord is gracious. This will make
us keep the Sabbaths even whole Sabbaths without wearisomenesse. Ye shall
keep every man my Sabbaths (says the Lord, Levit. 19.3.) Why so? What may
move us to do this willingly and cheerfully? I am the Lord your God, says
he. In a word this will make us walk cheerfully in every duty of obedience,
in every way of God. Thy loving kindness is before mine eyes (says David,
Psalm. 26.3.) therefore have I walked in thy truth. If we would set that oftener
before our eyes, meditate more seriously of that, certainly it would make all
Gods ways more easy and pleasant to us, then they are. On the other side he
that has no assurance of Gods love in Christ, can never pray, or hear, or
receive with any delight or comfort. Would thou know the true cause why it is
so irksome a thing for thee to pray, or to read, or to hear, or to keep the
Sabbath, that thou say of all these duties in thy heart as they did, Mal.
1.13. O what a weariness is it? Certainly thou have in thee an evil heart of
unbelief; as the Apostle calls it, Heb. 3.12. Thou art not assured of Gods
fatherly love to thee in Christ. Nor thou seek not to be sure of it. Get
more faith, and more assurance of Gods love, and it will seem no bondage to
thee to serve God, thou will find ease and pleasure it.

Fifthly, Motive 5.
This and this only will cure us of that stone that is in our hearts, and make
them soft and fleshy, make us able kindly to mourn for offending God, by our
sins. When God once makes thee able by the spirit of grace, to see that
Christ endured so much for thee, that thy sins pierced Christ so, then will thou be able to mourn for thy sins (says the Prophet, Zach. 12.10.) as a
man would mourn for the loss of his only son. When Mary was once assured
by faith that her sins were forgiven, yea how many sins God had forgiven
unto her, Luke 7.38.47. o how she wept for her sins? If thou were indeed
assured of the forgiveness of thy sins, and of Gods favor in Christ, thou
could never think of thy sins, without grief of heart. And if thou
desire to grow more soft hearted, labor to increase thy faith, and to get
more assurance of this special love of God to thee in Christ.

Sixthly and lastly, Motive 6.
As no grace can grow in thy heart till thou have faith; so as the measure of
thy assurance of Gods love shall increase in thee, so shall every saving grace
increase and abound in thy soul. Therefore the Apostle praying for the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.19. that God would make them able to know the love of
Christ which passes knowledge; he gives this for the reason of it, that ye
might be filled (says he) with all the fulness of God.

And these are Motives strong enough (if God be pleased to work with them) to
persuade our hearts to seek to be assured of Gods love in Christ, to make our
calling and election sure. It follows now I should show you the Means how
this may be attained; but those I must (I see) leave till the next day.

Lecture LXXXII. On Psalm 51.6. February 26. 1627.
NOw then there be five things, principally to be done by them, that would get,
and preserve in themselves this assurance of Gods favor.

Mean. 1
First, If thou desire to get assurance of Gods special love to thee in Christ,
assurance that Christ is thine, assurance of thy salvation, thou must first
settle this persuasion in thy heart, that it is possible to be attained. By
harboring this conceit in thy heart, that it is presumption for any man, to
say he is sure of his salvation, I hope well, but it is not possible for me or
any man to be sure of this, thou make thy self incapable of this comfortable
assurance. Know therefore that though 1. It be a very difficult thing to get,
and keep this assurance; 2. Few attain unto it; 3. Though this assurance be
not perfect in any while they live here, but they that have it best, have it
with some mixture of doubting and unbelief; 4. They that have had it in the
greatest measure have not had it at all times; Yet every true believer may
attain unto it, if the fault be not in himself. ^or 1. God has commanded the
faithful to make their calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. 2. God has
promised that he will certify and assure his people of this, Ezekiel. 34.30. They
shall know that I the Lord their God am with them, and that they, even the
house of Israel, are my people, says the Lord God. 3. God has given his
people in all ages experience of the truth of this his promise in themselves,
Romans 8.15, 16. Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear (as
if he should say once ye had it) but ye have received the spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba father. This could not be without assurance of Gods
favor; and this he says not of himself only but of all the faithful; of
all Gods children, Gal. 4.6. Because ye are sons, God hat^ sent forth the
spirit of his son into your hearts. This spirit witnesses with our spirit^
(says the Apostle, Romans 8.16) that we are the sons of God. We know (says
the Apostle, 1 John 3.2. not of himself but of all Gods children) that when
Christ shall appear we shall be like him. And again, verse 14. We know we are
translated from death to life. And again, Chap 4.16. We have known and
believed, the love that God has to us. Nay I say more, It is not only
possible for thee if thou be Gods child to have this assurance of Gods love in
some measure, but it is in some manner necessary thou should have it, thou
must get it, and the hope thou talkest of is to little purpose without it. Know
ye not your own selves (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.5.) how that Jesus Christ
is in you, except ye be reprobates? that is, except ye be unsound and
counterfeit in the profession of the faith. His house we are ( Heb. 3.6.) if we
hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end. That
hope that has no confidence nor rejoicing in it is little worth. Hope must be
as an anchor of the soul both sure, and steadfast; as the Apostle speaks, Heb.
6.19. Well then, seeing we both may and must get this assurance it stands us
upon to enquire how and by what means we may get it. What is then next to be
done?

Mean. 2.
I answer, Secondly, We must bind our selves to a diligent, and conscionable use
of Gods ordinances, which he has sanctified to be the means whereby he will
work and increase all saving grace, and consequently this, in our hearts. I
will instance but in three and that briefly too.

Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing; but this blessed fruit of faith also,
the assurance of Gods favor. The Scriptures were written to this end, to breed
in us this assurance. These things have I written to you (1 John 5.12.) that ye
may know, that ye have eternal life. And 1.4. These things write we unto you,
that your joy may be full, that you may have sound consolation in this
assurance. And this is the maine end, that God ordained preaching for. So
Zachary says that John the Baptist, was sent to that end, Luke 1.77. To give
knowledge of salvation to his people, by the remission of their sins. When
God had promised Esa. 57.18* that he would restore comfort to his Israel and to
his mourners; he tells us in the next words, verse 19. the means whereby he
will do it, I create the fruit of the lips; (my word in the speech and
ministry of my servants, Mal. 2.7. The priests lips should keep knowledge,
and they should seek the law at his mouth) peace, peace, to him that is far
off, and to him that is near, says the Lord, and I will heal him. God has
promised to work by the ministry of his servants in the hearts of his people
abundance of peace and comfort (which cannot be without assurance of his
favor) and to heal them of all that anguish of heart, which the doubting of
his favor did breed in them. And no marvel though the Word have this force to
breed this assurance, for therein are all the promises of God to be found,
which are the ground and evidence upon which all true assurance of Gods favor
is built. In God will I praise his word (says David, Psalm. 56.4.) in God have
I put my trust, I will not fear what flesh can do unto me. All his comfort,
all his assurance and confidence was grounded upon the Word.

The second ordinance of God that has great force in it to breed in our
prepared their hearts to seek the Lord in that his ordinance (as Hez^kiah
speaks of them, 2 Chronicles. 30.19.) that they found mavelous comfort in it,
verse 21. They kept the feast with great gladness. And verse 26. There was
great joy in Jerusalem. And that Sacrament we know, was the same in substance
with our Lords Supper. Certainly there is not more virtue in any ordinance of
God, to confirm us in the comfortable assurance of Gods favor, then in this,
if it be worthily received. For 1 Christ is no where so particularly offered
and applied to us as in it, 1 Cor. 11.24. Take, eat, this is my body which was
broken for you. 2 He is offered to us as meat and drink to feed upon; and
what is so nearly applied to us and made ours, as our food, which is turned
into our very substance and made one with us. 3 He is offered to us as bread
and wine, which of all food has most force to strengthen, and make glad our
hearts, Psa. 104.15. 4 The Sacraments are ordained to be his seals to assure
and confirm his covenant unto us; they are seals of the righteousness which
is by faith, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 4.11.

The third and last ordinance of God, that has great force to breed and
preserve Ask, and you shall receive, (says our Savior, John 16.14.) that
your joy may be full. This is one of the principal fruits of prayer, it
breeds full and sound joy in the heart; which necessarily presupposes
assurance of Gods favor. This course David often took to recover his assurance
and comfort and found great success in it. When he made that prayer that is
set down, Psalm. 6. he was in great anguish of mind, through the loss of the
assurance of Gods favor, as appears verse 1 -- 4. to recover his assurance
he falls to fervent prayer; and before he had ended his prayer, he was so
filled with the assurance of Gods favor, that he bursteth forth into these
patheticall expressions of his joy, verse 8, 9. The Lord has heard the voice
of my weeping, the Lord has heard my supplications, the Lord will receive my
prayer. And Psalm. 31. when he had lost his assurance so far that he said in
his have (verse 22.) he was cast out of Gods sight; to recover it he betook
himself to prayer and prevailed so thereby, that he cries out, verse 21.
Blessed be the Lord for he has showed me his mavelous kindness. As though
he had said, The Lord has given me again, a sweet and comfortable assurance
of his favor. I do not deny but many (yea many of Gods own children) may use
all these three ordinances of God, that I have named unto you, and use them
often too, read, and hear, and receive, and pray, and yet never attain to
this assurance of Gods favor by them. Alas; this will never be obtained
without great diligence in the use of all means that God has appointed. Give
diligence (says the Apostle. 2 Pet. 1.10.) to make your calling and election
sure; Yea verse 5. Give even all diligence thereunto. Alas; we do not in our
hearing, receiving, praying, seek or aim at this, to get assurance thereby,
that we are in Gods favor; or if we do seek it, yet use we no diligence in
the use of these means, that we might obtain that which we seek in them.

But if we cannot obtain it by these means, there is a third thing to be
done. Means. 3
Seek to be more humbled in thy self, in the apprehension of thine own
wretchedness. Seek the Lord and his favor, with an humbled soul. When Jeremy
prophesies of the comfort that Gods people should find, upon their earnest
seeking of his favor, before the end of their captivity, he speaks thus of
them, Jeremy 50.4. Going, and weeping, they shall go and seek the Lord their
God. When we can lament after the Lord, as Israel did, 1 Samuel 7.2. mourn for
the loss of his favor, and go weeping to him to seek the recovery of it,
we need not doubt of prevailing with him. God resists the proud (says the
Apostle James 4.6.) but he gives grace to the humble. Specially this grace of
a comfortable assurance of his favor, he uses not to give unto any, but unto
the humbled soul. And thereupon the Apostle infers verse 10. Humble your
selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up. The want of sound
humiliation, is the chief cause we cannot attain unto sound assurance of
Gods favor. Never did any attain unto any great measure of assurance of Gods
favor, that had not first bin deeply humbled in themselves. Neither does God
use to give the spirit of adoption to his people, till he have first given
them the spirit of bondage, Romans 8.15. God comfort those that are cast
down, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7.6. Therefore the day of humiliation, wherein
Gods people did afflict their souls, is called the day of atonement, between
God and them, Levit. 23.27, 28. Such God has bound himself by promise, to
speak peace unto. Blessed are they that mourn (says our Savior, Matthew. 5.4)
for they shall be comforted. I will dwell with him (says the Lord, Esaias*
57.15.) that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the
humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. For 1. then, and never
till then, we will in our judgments value and prize Gods favor in Christ,
above all things in the world, and say with David, Psalm. 63.3. Thy loving
kindness is better then life. Show us the father (says Philip to Christ, John
14.8) and it suffices us. This he spoke indeed out of ignorance and
curiosity, but thus speaks the humbled soul advisedly. Let me but see my
heavenly father reconciled to me in Christ, and the light of his countenance
shining upon me, and I have enough, though I had nothing else in the world. And
on the other side, the humbled soul does say, that without this, though he
had all the world he has nothing; but is ready to say with Paul, Phil. 3.8. I
count all but as dung without Christ. ^. Then when we are soundly humbled, and
never till then, we will hunger and thirst after Christ, and desire Gods
favor in him more earnestly and eagerly, then any thing in the world. It was
the voice of an humbled soul that we read, Psalm. 42.1, ^. As the Heart pants
after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee, o God, my soul
thirsts for God. And they that can thus thirst after Gods favor, shall be
sure to obtain the assurance of it. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst
after righteousness (says our Savior, Matthew. 5.6.) for they shall be
satisfied.

And what marvel is it then, that there be so few that attain to this
assurance, (alas) there be few that prize it as they ought, few that thirst
after it, because few that are soundly humbled in themselves for their sins.

Lecture LXXXIII. on Psalm 51.6. March. 4. 1627.
THE fourth thing that they must do, Means 4.
that desire to get and preserve in themselves a comfortable assurance of Gods
favor, is this, They must nourish in their hearts a constant care to please
God in all their ways, and a fear to offend him in anything. For 1. None but
such can possibly get or keep any true assurance of Gods favor. 2. All such
shall certainly attain unto it.

For the first. You may hear some wicked men glory much in the assurance A
wise man fears (says Solomon Prove. 14.16,) and departs from evil (the
godly man's doubts and fears keep him from many a sin, that otherwise he
should fall into) but the fool rages* and confident, he sins
outragiously, and yet is confident. But this is but a vain presumption, this
can be no true assurance certainly. It is not possible for any man that
wittingly lives in any known sin, to have any true assurance of his
salvation, or of the favor of God. Let us draw neer^ (says the Apostle, Heb.
10.22. with a true heart in full assurance of faith (But how may a sinful man
attain to this high privilege to be able to draw near to God, with that
boldness and full assurance of faith, that God bears a fatherly love unto
him? He tells us that in the next words, alluding in his speech to the manner
of such as did draw near to God under the ceremonial law) having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. As
if he had said, without a man be both justified and delivered from the guilt
of his sins by the blood of Christ, and sanctified and delivered from the
dominion of sin by the spirit of Christ, it is not possible for him to draw
near unto God, in full assurance of faith. Let the man that has the strongest
faith, and the most comfortable assurance of Gods love, once give himself
liberty to commit any gross sin, and he must needs loose his comfort and
assurance of Gods love. Certainly our iniquities (as the Prophet speaks,
Esaias 59.2) will separate between us and our God, and our sins will cause him
to hide his face from us. See the proof of this in David. Who ever had more
comfortable assurance of Gods favor, then he sometimes had? The Lord is my
light and my salvation (says he, Psalm. 27.1.) whom shall I fear? But when he
had once given liberty to himself to sin against his conscience in the
matter of Vriah, see how all his comfort in the assurance of his salvation and
of Gods favor was quite lost. Restore to me (says he, Psalm. 51.1^.) the joy
of thy salvation. But what speak I of gross sins? Let a Christian but grow
worldly and secure, let him but remit any thing of that watchfulness and care
that was wont to be in him to take heed to his ways, of that fear to offend
God in any thing, of his diligence to serve, and please the Lord, and his
comfortable assurance of Gods favor will be lost. See an example of this in
the Church, the spouse of Christ. Cant. 5.2.6. It is said, verse 6. her beloved
had withdrawn himself, and was gone; she lost the comfortable assurance of
his love. How lost she it? Not by any gross sin, but merely by her laziness,
and wordly security, by that answer she gave him, verse 3. I have put off my
^^at, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them?
As if she had said, I am now at ease and quiet, and by opening unto thee, by
harkening and yielding unto thee in every thing, I should put my self to a
great deal of trouble and labor, that I am now eased of. Thus lost she her
sweet assurance of Gods love then, and thus does many a soul loose it at this
day. That exhortation therefore that the Apostle gives to the Hebrews, 6.11.
is necessary for every one of us. We desire that every one of you (says he)
show the same diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end. As if he
had said, ye have good things in you now, and such as accompany salvation, you
have now much labor of love, ye have ministered unto the Saints, and yet do
minister, but if you would have full assurance of your salvation, be diligent
to do so still, even unto the end; if you grow negligent and careless in
these duties hereafter, this full assurance of salvation, you will certainly
loose? A full and well grounded assurance of our salvation and of the favor of
God, will not be gotten in a day or two; without good proof and experience
we have had of the work of Gods grace in us, it will never be gotten; And
when we have gotten it, we may easily loose it again, if either we give
liberty to our selves in known sins, or grow secure and careless in taking
heed to our hearts and ways.

To him that orders his conversation aright (says the Lord, Psalm. 50.13.) I
will show the salvation of God. As if the Lord should say, I will cause him to
see and know that he shall be saved. So when David had said, Psalm. 85 8. God
will speak peace unto his people, and to his Saints; God will speak peace to
the heart of every godly man; he adds verse 9. Surely his salvation is nigh
unto them that fear him. As if he had said, Certainly it will not be long
before God give to every soul that truly fears him, a comfortable assurance
of his salvation, though he do delay it for a time, he will not do it long.
To you that fear my name (says the Lord to his people, Matthew 4.2) shall the
sun of righteousness arise, with healing in his wings. So that to every
soul among you, that truly fears God, I may boldly say; Though it be night
with thee yet, thou see no light nor comfort, thou art continually disquieted
with fears and doubts of thy salvation, yet certainly, the sun of
righteousness will arise upon thee with healing in his wings, thou shall see
the comfortable light of Gods countenance, and have a sweet and full assurance
of his favor. Light is sown for the righteous (as the Prophet speaks,
Psalm 97.11) and gladness for the upright in heart. Thou have in thee the
seed of comfort and assurance, and thou shall surely see it spring, and taste of
the fruit of it.

Means. 5
Fifthly, and lastly. If by all these means we cannot get or recover the
comfortable assurance of Gods favor, there is yet one thing more to be done,
one help more to be used, that has more force to do us good this way then
all the rest. We must by faith rest upon Christ, and cleave unto him.

Object.
But some may object and say, this is an absurd direction, to bid us rest upon
Christ by faith, that so we may get assurance, For if I had faith, I know I
should have assurance of Gods favor. For what is faith else, but a full
persuasion, and steadfast assurance that Christ and all his merits belong to me,
and my sins through him are pardoned. But alas, by this I know I have no faith,
because I have no assurance of these things.

Answ.
To such as object thus I answer. That they are much deceived in defining faith
thus; and that this is a dangerous mistake, and such as has bred much
needless fear and trouble of mind in many a good soul. For the better
understanding therefore of this fifth and last point three things must be
distinctly considered. 1. That assurance of Gods favor is not of the essence,
and being of true faith. 2. Wherein then the nature and essence of true faith
consists. 3. That though true faith may be without this assurance, yet if it
be put forth and exercised, it will certainly breed assurance sooner or later,
in one degree or other.

For the first, That there may be true says where there is no assurance,
David cried out unto God, Psalm 22.1. Why have thou forsaken me? Why art thou
so far from helping me, and from the words of my roaring? Doubtless he
wanted the assurance of Gods love and of his salvation. And yet even at that
time, he had true faith, or else he could not have prayed as he did and said
My God, my God. So when the Prophet cried, Psalm 88.14. Why castest thou off
my soul? Why hidest thou thy face from me? his assurance was gone; yet if he
had not had true faith at that time, he could not have prayed as he did,
verse 1. O God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee. So that
assurance of Gods favor, and of the pardon of our sins is not faith it
self, but only a fruit of it, and such a fruit of this tree it is, as is not
to be found on it at all seasons. It is I say a fruit of faith, and such as
none can attain unto till first he have faith. For 1. It is the spirit of
adoption witnessing with our spirits that we are the sons of God, Romans
8.16. that breeds this assurance in us; and that spirit we cannot have, till
first we have faith, Galathians 4 6. Because ye are sons, God has sent
forth the spirit of his son, into your hearts. First we must be sons
before we can have this spirit; and we must first have faith, before we can
be the sons of God, Galathians 3.26. Ye are all the children of God by
faith in Christ Jesus. And John 1.12. So many as received him (even to them
that believe on his name) to them he gave power to become the sons of God.
So Paul tells the Ephesians 1.13. that they were sealed with the holy spirit
of promise after they had believed in Christ. 2. Assurance of salvation is ever
accompanied with peace of conscience and joy in the Holy Ghost. Now neither of
these can be in any heart till first it have true faith, they are the fruits
and consequents of faith. Being justified by faith (says the Apostle, Romans
5.1 -- 3.) we have peace toward God, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of
God. And 15.13. The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing.

Secondly, If you would know wherein then the essence and being

First, I must know Christ aright, and that which the Gospel reveals to John
3.16. God so loved the world, etc. 2. That Christ, and all his merits are
offered by the Lord to me as well as to any other: For Gods servants and
Ministers are commanded by him to proclaim in his name a general pardon, and
to make this general offer of him unto all, to whom they preach without
excluding any, Mar. 16.15. Preach the Gospel to every creature. And what is it
to preach the Gospel unto them, but to say unto them as the Angel did to the
shepherds, Luke 2.10, 11. I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall
be to all people. For unto you is borne this day in the city of David, a
Savior which is Christ the Lord. And as Peter to the Jews, Acts 2.39. The
promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are a far off,
even as many as the Lord our God shall call. Yea that Christ is offered so unto
me, as I am commanded to believe that he belongs unto me. Come unto me (says
our Savior, Matthew. 11.28. that is, believe in me for so is that phrase
expounded by himself, John 6 35.) all ye that labor, and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest. 3. I must know how and upon what terms and
conditions, Christ is offered unto me in the Gospel; that is to say, If I will
receive him as in a matrimonial covenant. For so is the covenant of the
Gospel often called in the holy Scripture, Hos. 2.19, 20. I wish betroth thee
unto me for ever, yea I will betr^th thee unto me in righteousness, and in
judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies; I will even betroth thee
unto me in faithfulness. In this respect also the preachers of the Gospel
are called the friends of the Bridegroom, John 3.29. such as woo for him, and
whose whole endeavor is, to make this match between Christ, and his people. I
have espoused you (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 11.2.) to one husband, that I may
present you as a chaste virgin to Christ. Now in the matrimonial covenant we
know the spouse. 1. Takes her husband so, as she binds her self to forsake
all others, and to keep her self only to him so long as they both shall
live; and so must we take and receive Christ, Psalm. 45.10. Matthew. 10.37. Luke
14.2^. 2. She takes him not only to receive protection and wealth and credit
by him, but as her head and guide to be governed and ruled by him, and he
binds her self to serve, honor, and obey him, Genesis 3.16. 1 Cor. 11.3.
Ephesians. 5.22, 23. And so must Christ be taken and received by us, not only for
our Savior, but our Prophet, yea our Lord and King, Psalm. 45.11. John 20.28.
and 3.35. Heb. 5.9. 3. She takes him for better for worse, for richer for
poorer, in sickness and in health, and binds her self to cleave to him, in
every estate, Genesis 2.24. 1 Cor. 7.10. And so must Christ be taken and received
by us, Luke 9 23. This knowledge of the Gospel is (as I told you) the first
thing wherein the nature and essence of true faith consists. In which respect
faith is called the knowledge of Christ, Esa. 53.11. John 17.3. Ephesians. 4.13.

Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying. So is the faith of the old
fathers described, Heb. 11.13. They saw the promises a far off, and were
persuaded of them. In respect of this second property faith is called a
believing of Christ, John 3.36. And a believing of God, 1 Ioh. 5.10. Rom 4.3.
Till Naaman could thus believe he could not be healed, 2 King. 5.11, 12.

Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15. this is not only a faithful saying but worthy of all
acceptance. So is the faith of the fathers described, Heb 11.13. At the least
(though the believer find in respect of the sense he has of his own
unworthiness, much reluctance and doubting, which hinders this act of faith,
yet) his soul unfeignedly desires and longs to receive and take Christ, in
this matrimonial covenant, and says with the blessed Virgin, Luke 1.38 Behold
the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy word. In respect of
this property faith is called sometimes a receiving of Christ, Ioh. 1.12.
sometimes a t^^isting after him, Rev. 21.6. Where that promise is made to him
that thirsts, which none can possibly be partakers of but he only that
truly believes.

The fourth and last act of the soul wherein the nature of true faith
consists, John 3.16.18 36. 1 John 5.10. a trusting in Christ, Ephesians. 1.12. a
resting upon God, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. a resting upon his promise, 2 Chronicles. 32.8. a
relying upon God, 2 Chronicles 16 8. a staying our selves upon him, Esa. 50.10. a
cleaving and sticking close unto him, Acts 11.23. believing in him and trusting
in him are made all one, Psalm 78.22. He that finds these properties of
faith in him has certainly true faith, though he want yet the assurance of
Gods favor.

Follows now the third and last point which I propounded, That though

Alas (may some man say) how can I thus trust in Christ, Object.
and rely upon him when I have no assurance, but so much doubting in me of
the favor of God?

To such I answer, Yes this is very possible. Job did so. Though he slay me,
(says he, Job 13.15.) yet will I trust in him. David did so, Psalm 13. For
though he thought God had long forgotten him, and hid his face from him, verse
1. yet says he, verse 5. But I have trusted in thy mercy. So Psalm. 143. when
he cries thus, verse 7. My spirit fails, hide not thy face from me, he
adds, verse 8. Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the morning, for in
thee do I trust. He trusted in God and looked for comfort, even then. So did
the woman of Canaan, Matthew. 15.22 -- 28. For though she had received three
fearful repulses from Christ, and therefore could have no assurance of his
favor, yet trusted she still in him, for mercy and would not give over,
importuning him for it. So must every one of us, learn to do in the like
case; though we have no assurance of Gods favor, yet let us trust confidently
in Christ through him to obtain it. For this is a thing highly pleasing unto
God. The Lord takes pleasure (says David, Psalm. 147.11.) in them that hope in
his mercy. And 1 Chronicles. 5.20. God was entreated of them, because they put their
trust in him. And they that can do so need not doubt but that God will
certainly lift up the light of his countenance upon them, and give them
comfort in the assurance of his favor. For

First, Thou have true faith and consequently thou have Christ, he is thine
own believe on the name of Christ (trust to him, rely upon him) have received
him, he is their own as the Holy Ghost speaks, John 1.12.

Secondly, Having received Christ certainly thou have Gods favor, all thy Ye
are all the children of God (says the Apostle, Gal. 3.26.) By faith in Christ
Jesus. He that believes on the son of God (says the Apostle, 1 John 5.10.)
has the witness in himself; He has that in himself that will witness for
him, that he is in Gods favor. And John 3.36.

David did, when he had lost his assurance of Gods favor, Psalm. 13.1. How long
will thou forget me o Lord for ever I how long will thou bide thy face from me?
What did he then to recover his assurance? That you shall see, verse 5. But I
have trusted in thy mercy, my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation. As if he
had said, My comfortable assurance of thy savor, and of my salvation will
return again. And Psalm. 42.5. Why art thou cast down o my soul and why art
thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him for the
help of his countenance. As if he had said, I shall for all this, see the
light of his countenance again, and rejoice in it.

Applic.
So that (to conclude) I may say to every soul here (1 that desires assurance
of Gods favor; and 2 seeks it in a diligent, and conscionable use of Gods
ordinance; and 3 with an humbled heart; and 4 by a conscionable care to please
God in all his ways; and 5 by faith has received Christ, and rests upon
him) concerning this promise of restoring a comfortable assurance as the
Prophet does of his vision, Hab. 2.2. The vision is yet for an appointed time
(God has set the time in his own counsel when he will give thee the comfort
of this promise) but in the end it shall speak, and not lie, though it ^a^ry
wait for i^, because it will surely come, and not ^arry one moment longer then
God shall see it to be for thy good, and advantage. And whereas thou doubtest
thine own strength, and fear thou shall never be able to hold out, and
endure resting and waiting upon God till comfort do come; and cryest with
David, Psalm 69.3. Mine eyes fail while I wait for my God. Let me say to thee
as David does, Psalm. 27 14. Wait on the Lord, ^e of good courage, and he shall
strengthen thy heart: (he will keep thee from fainting, and make thee able to
hold out) wait I say, on the Lord.

Lecture LXXXIV. On Psalm 51.6. March 18. 1627.
The third property of true goodness and righteousness.
THe third note to try our goodness and righteousness by, is the extent of it.
True goodness and grace is of a large extent. 1. In respect of the subject of
it, it reaches unto and goes through the whole man, 2. In respect of the
object of it, it shows it self, in a conscionable respect unto all the
commandments of God, 3. In respect of the time, it shows this conscionable
care to please God in all things, at one time as well as at another.

The subject of sanc^^fying grace.
For the first, If that grace and goodness that seems to be in any man, be
true and unseigned it works a total change, a reformation in the whole man;
in the inward man and in the outward man too; in the mind and understanding,
in the conscience, in the memory, in the will, in the affections, in the
outward senses and parts of the body, in the words and in the actions of a man.
This was typified by the burnt offerings under the law. The whole sacrifice (as
you may read, Levit. 1.8, 9, 13.) not the four quarters only but the head and
the fat and the inwards and the legs must be offered unto God, and burnt upon
the altar. Which was not only a type of Christ who (as a propitiatory
sacrifice) was wholly offered up and endured the fiery wrath of God for us, not
in his body only but in his soul too, and in every power and faculty of it;
but it was also a type of the obedience of the faithful which are the members
of Christ, as appears plainly by the allusion that is made unto it both by
the Apostle, Romans 12.1. and by our Savior himself, Mar. 12.33. And thus you
see a total obedience and sanctification, of the whole man is required of us;
but I say more then so, this total change not only ought to be in every
Christian, but it is wrought in every one that has any truth of grace in him.
In this respect our Savior compares it Matthew. 13.33. unto leaven, which will
leaven the whole lump of dough that it is put into. Thus the Apostle
describes true sanctifying grace in that prayer he makes for the
Thessalonians, 1 These 5.23. The very God of peace sanctify you wholly (that is
true may you say, this is to be desired and prayed for, yea this is to be aimed
at, and we should endeavor to attain unto it, but this is not possible to be
attained unto in this life; mark therefore what follows in the next words)
and I pray God (says he) that your whole spirit, and soul, and body, may be
preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. As if he had
said, Now your whole spirit and soul, and body is sanctified, you are
sanctified throughout, and my prayer is, that this good work that is begun,
may be increased, and that you may be preserved in this estate unto the end.
Of the soul and spirit men will easily grant that they are capable of grace;
yea, that the whole spirit and soul of the regenerate man may be sanctified;
but mark that the Apostle a^firmeth this of the body also, yea of the whole
body that it is capable of sanctifying grace. And therefore also he calls the
very bodies of the faithful, the members of Christ. 1 Cor. 6.15. And verse 19.
the temples of the holy Ghost. And says of himself and the rest of his
brethren, 2 Corinthians. 4.10, 11. that the life of the Lord Jesus (that is, his
quickening grace) was mad: manifest in their bodies. In this respect also, he
calls the regenerate part Colos. 3.10. (not a new mind, nor a new will, nor a
new heart only, but) the new man; Ye have put on (says he) the new man; it is
a complete man, it has all the faculties and powers of a perfect man in it. So
speaks he again. 2 Corinthians. 5.17. If any man be in Christ (in the state of
grace) he is a new creature, old things are past away, behold, all things are
become new. Every one that is in Christ, is become a new man, every faculty,
every part of him is renewed. In this respect also every upright-hearted man is
called a perfect man ( Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, says
David, Psalm 37.37.) because they have this perfection of parts, they are
sanctified throughout, in all their parts. And as the children that we beget,
are perfect men and women, so soon as ever they are borne, because they have
the souls and bodies, and all the parts of men and women, though in great
weakness; so is it with all the children of God much more. Men may beget
children that are defective, and want some of their parts, we read of some
that have been borne blind, John 9.1. and of some that have been creeples
from their mothers womb, Acts 14.8. and of some that have been borne fools.
But our heavenly father begets no such children, all his children are perfect,
and have no such defect of parts in them.

Now before I make application of this point, I must first give you three
cautions to prevent the children of God from taking occasion of much fear* and
discomfort by the mistaking and misunderstanding of this point.

The first caution is this. Caution 1^
As the goodliest child that ever was borne, is defective when it is an infant
and newborn; not only in the stature and strength of every member of his
body, but even in the measure of his understanding also; even so is it with the
new man. They that are sanctified in the best measure, are yet in every part,
in every faculty of their soul in every sense and member of their body
defective in the measure and degree of grace. Paul tells those worthy
Christians the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. that he desired to come to them
to perfect that that was lacking in their faith. Yea of himself he says,
Phil. 3.12. that he was not perfect. And if that great Apostle could say of
himself, and such as he was, 1 Cor. 13.9. we know but in part, then how great
cause have the best of every one of us to complain, alas, how little
spiritual light and knowledge have I in my understanding, how little
sanctifying grace and goodness have I in my thoughts, in my memory, in my
conscience, in my will, in my desires and affections? How little inclination to
any thing that is good in my eye, or in my ear, or in any other of my senses,
or parts of my body?

Caution, 2,
Secondly. Though they that have truth of grace in them, have every faculty and
power of their soul, and every sense and member of their body seasoned in some
measure, with the new leaven of sanctifying grace; yet have they also much of
the old leaven of their corrupt nature remaining still in every faculty of
their soul, and in every sense and member of their body. Purge out therefore
the old leaven says the Apostle, 1 Cor 5.7. As if he had said, This is a
work wherein we must always be doing, and which we shall never make an end of
while we live here. In which respect the regenerate man may fitly be compared
unto the air in the twilight, in which there is no part but it has some light
in it, neither is there any part of it, but it has some darkness in it also;
and unto the water that is lukewarm, there is no part of it, but it has some
heat in it, nor any part but it has some coldness in it too. Therefore as
the spirit, the regenerate part in us is called (as we have heard) the new man,
so is the flesh and the unregenerate part in us called the old man likewise,
Ephesians. 4.22. because it goes through the whole man as the other does. And this
makes many a good soul think there is no truth of grace in them, because
that throughout in their whole spirit and soul, and body, they discern still
so much corruption. From the sole of the foot (say they, as Esa. 1.6.) even to
the head there is no soundnes in me. This makes them complain with Job 40.4.
Behold, I am vile. What a deal of ignorance and blindness have I in my
understanding? how vain and wicked are my thoughts for the most part? how
hardly can I forget any small wrong that has bin done me, and how apt am I to
forget any good thing? how hard a heart have I, and unable to mourn for any of
my sins, how apt to be overwhelmed with grief for the smallest cross that
befalls me? With what delight do mine ears listen to any evil I can hear
of my neighbor, and how dull of hearing is it toward any thing that is good?
how apt is mine eye to wander and to steal away my heart, when I should attend
to the word, and how hardly can I keep it fixed upon any thing that might
bring good to my soul? These we know are the complaints of the best souls.
And yet all this may be where there is truth of heart.

Caution 3.
Thirdly and lastly. Though where truth of grace is, it diffuseth, and sheddeth
it self abroad throughout the whole man, every faculty of the soul is
sanctified, and every part of the body also, yet is not the work of grace
therein so sensible and manifest, as is the corruption of our nature. The
works of the flesh are manifest, says the Apostle, Galathians 5.19. more
manifest then the work of grace is. I cannot perceive (says many a good
Christian) any work of Gods sanctifying grace at all in my memory, in sundry
of my affections in my joy, and my anger, much less in the members of my body;
and how can I say then, that there is any truth of grace in me? To such I say,
there may be some sanctifying grace in thee, yea in every faculty of thy soul
and member of thy body, though thou perceive it not. The little infant has all
the parts of a man's body, though there be sundry of them, thou can discern
no use he has of them in any action; yea he has a reasonable soul, and all
the faculties of it, though it appear not in any operation at all.

Three things thou have in thee, that show thou have sanctifying grace, even
there where thou perceivest it least. 1. As thou have in thy whole man, in
every faculty and part, both flesh and spirit, so have thou in thy whole man, a
conflict between them. The flesh lusts against the spirit (says the Apostle
Gal. 5.17.) and the spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to
the other. Thou heartily dislikest, and checkest thy self for the corruption
thou find in thy thoughts, in thy memory, in thy affections, in thine eye
and ear, and in every other part. And whence comes this, but from
sanctifying grace. 2. Thou mournest and art unfeinedly grieved for any
corruption, any untowardnesse to that that is good which thou find in any
part, and can say with Paul, Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who can
deliver me from the body of this death? 3. Thou do unfeinedly desire and
endeavor to be rid of that corruption that is in any faculty of thy soul, and
part of thy body, to offer thy self unto God as an holocaust, a whole burnt
sacrifice to be sanctified throughout, and can say with David, Psalm. 103.1.
Bless the Lord, o my soul, and all that is within me (understanding, memory,
conscience, will, affections) bless his holy name. And certainly that man that
can thus unfeinedly desire and endeavor to have better thoughts, a better
memory, a better conscience, a better will, better affections, a better tongue,
a better eye, and a better ear, has grace in all these parts, and is in some
measure sanctified in them all.

Let us now make some application of this point, Applic.
for the trial of our own hearts, whither they be upright or no, whether
there be any truth of saving grace in them, that truth in the inward parts that
David here speaks of, and which the Lord takes so great delight in. And
certainly it will appear by this doctrine, that many that glory much in the
uprightness of their own hearts, have no truth of grace in them, because the
grace they pretend to have, is not total, but partial, it goes not through
the whole man.

Two sorts there be especially that are discovered to be void of truth in their
hearts, by this Doctrine.

First. Many there be that persuade themselves they have good hearts, Corinth.
4.3. he passed very little for the judgment and censure of men? God says 1.
Sam. 16.7. he looks not to the outward appearance men make, but to the
heart. 3. Nay they shun all outward shows of goodness, specially of strictnes
in religion, and purposely desire to carry themselves so in their company, and
speech, and attire, and behavior every way, that they may not be thought to
be too religious, because they see that is so odious a thing in the world,
Concerning this sect (say the Jews to Paul, Act. 28.22.) we know that every
where it is spoken against. 4. Yea they hate those that are of any nore, for
more forwardness in religion then is in other men, and confidently pronounce
of them (as their father the devil did of Job 1.9, 10.) that they are all
hypocrites, they cannot abide to make show of more goodness then is in them
indeed, they hate hypocrisy with all their hearts.

To these men, I have two things to say.

First. If it were possible for such a one as thou art to have a good heart,
yet cleanse thy self from all filthiness of the flesh, as well as of the
spirit, 2 Cor 7.1. To glorify God in thy body, as well as in thy spirit, for
both are the Lords, and both are bought with a price, as the Apostle speaks,
1 Cor. 6.20. Yea thou shall be judged at the last day, not so much according to
that that has bin in thy heart, as according to that that thou have done in
thy body. For so the Apostle teaches plainly, 2 Cor 5.10. We must all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done
in his body. Yea God has prepared torments in hell for every member of thy
body whereby thou have dishonored him. The rich gluttons tongue (the member
that none abuse more then your drunkards and gluttons, we read Luke 16.24) was
tormented in hell fire. And 2. whereas thou gloriest that thou art no
hyprocite; I assure thee that as thy sin is greater then the hyprocrites, and
God more dishonored by it, so shall thy portion be more deeper in hell then
his. They declare their sin as Sodom (says the Prophet, Esaias 3 9. they care
not who hear them blaspheme and scorn religion, they care not who knows
they are drunk) they hide it not* woe unto their soul. 3. If ever thou will
be saved, thou must live so, as men may be witnesses of thy goodness. And
those places that thou alleadgest out of 1 Samuel 16.7. and 1 Cor 4.3. are not to
be understood simply, but comparatively only. Let your light so shine before
men (says our Savior, Matthew. 5.16.) that they may see your good works. With
the heart man believes unto righteousness (says the Apostle, Romans 10.10.)
and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. No hope of salvation,
without an open profession of religion. And thus the faithful are brought in
by the Prophet, Esaias 44.5. glorying in the open profession of their religion.
One shall say, I am the Lords, another shall call himself by the name of
Jacob; and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname
himself by the name of Israel. And he that is ashamed to profess religion,
even in the strictest manner (so that the strictness be no other then such as
is grounded upon the word of God* not upon the fancies of men) certainly can
have no hope to be saved. For so says our blessed Savior (that Amen, that
faithful and true witness, Rev. 3.14.) Mar. 8.38. Whosoever shall be ashamed
of me, and of my words, in this adulterous, and sinful generation, of him
also shall the son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his
father, and of the holy Angels

And this is the first thing I have to say to these kind of men, if it were
possible for such as they are to have good hearts, yet were it not possible for
them to be saved for all that.





Lecture LXXXV. On Psalm 51.6. March 25. 1628.
THe second respect wherein the universality and large extent of true
sanctifying The (...).
is the object namely the matter wherein our goodness and grace is exercised,
it shows it self in a conscionable respect unto all the commandments of
God. He that has truth of grace in him, makes conscience of every
commandment of God of one as well as of another. And as the sincerity of a
Christians love to the brethren, appears in this when he loves all the
Saints without respect of persons, poor and rich, weak and strong: as the
Apostle, Col. 1.4. and else where often notes; and the faithfulness of the
governors of the Church, when they observe the rules of Church government
which God has appointed, without preferring one before another and when they
do nothing by partiality, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 5.21. And on the
other side, the unfaithfullnesse of a Minister is chiefly seen in this, when
he is partial in the law; that is, in the application of the law; as the Lord
charge the Priests to have been, Mal. 2.9. some truths they would teach that
were needful and profitable and some they would conceal; some men's sins
they would sharply reprove, and some men's faults they would wink at; So does
the sincerity of our love and obedience unto God and his law appear in this,
when we love and make conscience of all his commandments without preferring
one before another; and the hypocrisy and falsehood of our hearts is seeene in
this, when we are partial in the law, when we will seem to esteem highly of
some of the commandments of God with the slighting and neglecting of other
some. And this is that which the Apostle teaches, James 2.10. Whosoever shall
keep the whole law, (outwardly he means and in show) and yet offend in one
point (that is, wittingly and giving himself liberty to break any one
commandment) is guilty of all. So the Lord charge the wicked Jews, Ier.
32.23* that they had done nothing of all, that he commanded them to do. How
could that be? Did they not circumcise their children, and offer sacrifices,
and do many other things that he had commanded? Yes verily; but because that
in some things they had wittingly transgressed Gods commandment (and namely in
idolatry, for that is the only particular sin that God charge them with in
that place; as you may see, verse 29, 34, 35) therefore he says, they had done
nothing of all that he commanded them to do; and verse 30. that they had done
that only that was evil before him. They do nothing with an upright heart,
that do give themselves liberty in any one thing to transgress Gods law, we
must either keep all, or else we keep none at all. Therefore we shall find
this often noted by the Holy Ghost, for the property and mark of an upright
hearted man, that he makes conscience of every thing that God has commanded,
of one commandment as well as of another. This you shall see in that speech of
the Lord unto Sololomon, 1 King. 9.4. If thou will walk before me, as David
thy father walked, in integrity of heart, and in uprightness to do according
to all that I have commanded thee. He only walks before God in truth of
heart and in uprightness, that does according to all that God has commanded.
Thus does David also describe a perfect heart in that prayer he makes for
Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 29.19. Give unto Solomon my son a perfect heart, to keep
thy commandments, thy testimonies, and thy statutes (thy precepts of every
kind) and to do all these things. Lastly, Thus is the uprightness of Zachary
and Elizabeth described, Luk 1.6. They were both righteous before God, walking
in all the commandments, and ordinances of the Lord blameless. The Apostle
James 2.11. gives two reasons for that which he had said, verse 10. (which to
many might seem a strange paradox) that he that keeps the whole law and yet
offends in one point, is guilty of all. The first of them is in these words,
He that said, do not commit adultery, said also, do not steal. Every
commandment (even the least of them, one as well as another) has God for the
author of it. God spoke all these words, as it is said in the preface to the
law, Exodus 20.1. So that every commandment ought to be of equal authority in
our hearts. The second i^ like unto the first, says our Savior, Matthew. 22.39.
And therefore he that out of love and obedience unto God, keeps any one
commandment must needs be careful also to keep at the rest. Secondly, All
the commandments of God, are so coupled together, that they make but one
sentence, one copulative proposition, but one law. See this Deuteronomy. 5.17 -- 21.
Thou shall not kill, neither shall thou commit adultery, neither shall thou
steal, etc. So that (as the Apostle infers, James 2.11.) if thou do not
commit adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a transgressour of the law.

Now because this is a point of manifold and daily use, and one of the
principal and most sensible signs of an upright heart, of all those that are
given us in the Word, I will insist a little upon it, and 1 give you certain
cautions to prevent the misunderstanding of it, by answering two questions and
doubts that may be moved concerning this point. 2 I will make some application
of it.

Quest. 1
The first question is this. Has no man an upright heart that does not live
according to Gods law in all points? That does not walk in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless?

Answ. 1.
I answer, first, Yes verily, for else there were not one upright hearted man
upon earth. In many things we offend all, says the Apostle, James 3.2. Nay I
say more the righteousest man upon earth, is so far from keeping all the
commandments of God that he breaks them all, he keeps none of them, as
they ought to be kept. Thus speaks holy and zealous Nehemiah of all Gods
people and puts himself in the number, Neh. 1.7. We have dealt very
corruptly against thee, and have not kept the commandments, nor the statutes,
nor the judgments which thou commandedst thy servant Moses. Yea be has
certainly a false heart, no uprightness, no truth of grace in it, that says
in his heart of the commandments of God as that rich young man did, Mat.
19.20. All these things I have kept from my youth up; or that thinks himself
to be free from the transgression of any one of the commandments of God.

Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes and ye shall keep my ju^gements and do them. David did so as we have
heard; Zachary and Elizabeth did so; yea the Apostle says thus of all
faithful, 1 John 3.22. Whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we
keep his commandments and do those things that are pleasing in his sight.
For 1 there is no one commandment but in his mind and judgment he consents
unto it; and says of it as Romans 7.12. The commandment is holy, and just, and
good: He can say of himself as David did, Psalm. 119.128. I esteem all thy
precepts concerning all things to be right. 2. There is no one commandment of
God, that he does wittingly dispense with himself in, but he makes conscience
of it, and it has a divine authority in his heart. He can say with David,
Psalm. 119.6. that he has respect to all Gods commandments. And with Paul,
Romans 7.15. That which I do (when I transgress any commandment) I allow not,
for what I would that do I not, but what I hate that do I. As if he had
said, I would feign keep every commandment of God, though I do it not; my
desire is to do the will of God in all things; I dislike in my self and hate
every transgression of the law of God. And he that does thus approve in his
mind, and set his seal unto every commandment of God; he that does thus make
conscience of and unfeignedly desire to do the will of God in all things, is
certainly an happy man. Never did any hypocrite or natural man in the world
go thus far. He is not thus subject to the law of God (says the Apostle,
Romans 8.7.) neither indeed can be. He cannot esteem (in his mind) all Gods
precepts concerning all things to be right, but he has in himself secret
reasonings and imaginations that exalt themselves against the knowledge of God
(as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 10.5.) against some part of Gods will revealed
in his Word; neither can he make conscience of, or (in his will) unfeignedly
desire to do the will of God in all things, but does willingly dispense with
himself in some things, and say with Naaman, 2 King. 5.18. In this thing the
Lord bear with thy servant. No no, never could hypocrite go thus far; Thou
that can thus consent unto Gods law and approve of Gods will revealed in his
Word in all points, and do unfeignedly desire to do every thing the Lord
requires of thee, thou have certainly (notwithstanding all thy failings) an
upright heart, yea thou art a righteous man in Gods sight, not only by
imputation of Christ's perfect righteousness unto thee, but by an inherent
righteousness which the spirit of Christ has wrought in thee. The
righteousness of the law is fulfilled in thee, as the Apostle speaks, Romans
8.4. Thou do keep all the commandments of God though not legally, or so as
to be justified thereby, yet Evangelically and so as by the new covenant of
grace, through Christ thou art esteemed by God, as a fullfiller of them all.
And this made Paul to say, Romans 7.^7 It is no more I that do it; as if he had
said* I am not a transgressour of the law. And verse 25. I my self serve the
law of God; as if he had said, I do keep and observe Gods law. And so much may
serve for the answer to the first question.

The second question is this. Quest. 2
Has no man an upright heart that makes more conscience of some of Gods
commandments then of other some?

My answer to this question must consist of two parts. 1. I will show you how
far forth an upright hearted man may and ought to show more respect to some
of Gods commandments then to other some. 2. How and wherein he does and must
show an equal respect unto them all.

For the first, A man may have an upright heart and yet be more slack and
careless in some duties then in other, Answ. 1.
in his obedience to some of the commandments of God then in other, more apt
to offend in some sins then in other. This may arise; 1. Sometimes from this,
that he has more light and knowledge of his duty in some things then in other.
So it was with Jacob and the Patriarchs who being most holy men in other
things, yet made no conscience at all of Polygamy, because (though it was ever
a sin, yet) it was not known by them to be so. 2. Sometimes from this that
their tentations are stronger to some sins then to other, and their
pull-backs stronger to withold them from some duties, then from other. Of
both these cases we have an example in Iehosaphat. Iehosaphat was as zealous as
any King of Judah for the planting of true religion throughout his kingdom, as
you may see, 2 Chronicles. 17.6 -- 9. and yet in the abolishing of the relics of
idolatry he showed nothing so much zeal as Hezekiah and Josiah did. Alas, it
was with him as with our good King Edward he did what he could, but was not
able to do it, as you shall see, 2 Chronicles. 20.33. Howbeit the high places were
not taken away, for as yet the people had not prepared their hearts unto the
God of their fathers. The backwardness of the people did hinder him, he could
not do as he would. So in another case he that showed in all his other courses
such a deal of piety and zeal; how great want of zeal and piety did he show
in that league and affinity that he made with Ahab, and being so ready to help
both him and after him his two sons Iehoram and Ahaziah three as gross
idolaters and enemies to God, as lived upon the earth. Alas he he being of a
soft and flexible disposition, was naturally inclined and had more strong
tentations to that then to other sins. But herein the truth of his heart
appeared that when God had by his Prophet reproved him for helping Ahab, his
heart relented and he became after that more zealous for God then ever he had
been before, as you shall, see, 2 Chronicles. 19.2 -- 11. and being again after
that reproved for helping Ahaziah more sharply, 2 Chronicles. 20.37. he could never
be drawn to offend that way any more, 1 King. 22.49. You see then a man may
have an upright heart though he do seem to make more conscience of some
commandments, some duties and some sins then of others. But I say further, a
man cannot have an upright heart if he do not show more care and conscience in
some duties commanded, and in some sins that are forbidden, then in other
some. Though all the commandments be equal in respect of the authority and
sovereignty of the commander, yet in respect of the things commanded or
forbidden, and in respect of the strictness of the charge laid upon us, by the
Lord for the doing or not doing of them, some are greater then others are. Yea
there is no surer note of an upright heart, then this, when we do make more
conscience of those things that God has laid most special charge upon us in,
then we do of any others.

If you ask me; Which are those? I answer, They are of three sorts.

The first and the great commandment, Mat. 22.38. greater then any of the nine
that follow. God delights much more in the inward then in the outward worship
we do to him. Has the Lord as great delight in burnt offering and sacrifices,
(says Samuel, 1 Samuel 15, 22.) as in obeying the voice of the Lord? I desire
mercy and not sacrifice; (says the Lord, Hos. 6.6.) and the knowledge of God
more then burnt offerings. Yea he calls mercy, and justice, and fidelity,
which are substantial duties of the second table, the weightier matters of the
law, Matthew. 23.23. weightier then the matters of ceremony, and circumstances of
Gods own worship, prescribed in the first table. Go ye and learn (says our
Savior, Matthew 9.13.) what this means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice.

Applic.
It is therefore a certain note of an unsound heart when men; 1. Put all their
religion in outward duties and services to God, and regard not those weightier
matters of the law that I told you of mercy, and justice, and fidelity; no nor
the inward worship of God neither; 2. Stand more upon ceremonies and
circumstances of Gods worship then upon the substance, would be greatly
troubled if they should not receive now at Easter, or not receive with that
gesture that they have been accustomed unto; but to come without all knowledge
to discern the Lords body, to come without charity, without all preparation of
heart, troubles them not at all. What is this else but to strain at a gnat,
and swallow a camel, as our Savior speaks, Mat. 23.24?

every tree must be known by his own fruit, as our Savior says, Luke 6.44.
This we shall see in that direction John Baptist gives to the Publicans and
Soldiers, Luke 3.13, 14* and in those directions the Apostle gives in his
Epistles, Ephesians. 5. and 6. Col. 3. and 4. and by the charge he gives to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.2. and to Titus, Tit. 2.15.

It is therefore a great sign of unsoundnesse, Applic.
when men seem very forward in the common duties of Christianity but neglect
their callings, are bad husbands, and wives, and masters, and servants; bad
Magistrates and Ministers; like a blind eye or lame hand in the body, that have
life and sense and motion as all the members have, but can do nothing that
belongs to their particular office.

Thirdly and lastly, God has given us more special charge to look to our
Examine your selves, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.28. and 2 Cor. 13.5, prove
your own selves. Gal. 6.4. Let every man prove his own work. Romans 14.22.
Have ^aith to thy self, before God. Therefore David professes this of
himself, Psalm. 18.23. I was upright before him; and I kept my self from mine
iniquity.

It is therefore a great sign of unsoundnesse when a man busieth himself more
with censuring, and seems to hate sin more in others, then in himself.
This our Savior notes for the trick of an hypocrite, Mat. 7.3. that he
beholds the mote that is in his brothers eye, but considers not the beam
that is in his own eye.

Lecture LXXXVI. On Psalm 51.6. April 1^ 1628.
NOw it follows that we proceed to the second part of my answer, Answ. 2.
to the Question, and show you, How and wherein the upright hearted man does,
and must show an equal respect unto all the commandments of God. Now this
does appear in three points principally. 1. He desires to know the whole will
of God, in all things that concern him, in one point as well as in another. 2.
He makes conscience of every sin God has forbidden 3. He makes conscience
of every duty, God has commanded him. These three points I will speak of in
order, and make application of them also as I go over them severally.

For the first, The upright hearted man shows thus farre-forth an equal he
set bounds unto them, and charged them upon pain of death (as you shall find,
Exodus 19.12.21) not to pass those bounds to gaze and pry too far. 2. When a
man is too inquisitive to know that, that concerns other men. O how perfect
are many men in the knowledge of those things that concern the duty of their
Ministers and superiors and of their neighbors also? Like Peter, John 21.21.
Lord what shall this man do; whom our Savior reproves in the next verse for
this and says, What is that to thee? follow thou me. 3. When a man seeks
knowledge in those things most, that are no way useful not fit to edify
himself in faith and obedience unto God. For as it is an argument of a vain
and unsound heart, in a Minister to teach any thing that tends not to the
edifying of the people in faith and godliness; as the Apostle tells Timothy
some did in his time, 1 Timothy 1.3, 4. This the Apostle says was the rule that
he followed in teaching, Acts 20.20. he taught them not all that he was able to
teach, but he kept back nothing that was profitable for them: So it is a sign
of a vain and unsound heart, in an hearer, to desire to know more in religion
then may be of use unto him for his own practice. The wisdom of the prudent
(says Solomon, Pro. 14.8.) is to understand his way; how he may walk to
please God. This was the knowledge that David desired, Psalm. 119.66. Teach me
good judgment, and knowledge. As if he had said, such as may do me good and
make me better. Now the upright hearted man, to the end he may not offend God
in any thing, but obey his will in all things, he desires to know the whole
will of God, so far as it concerns him and may be profitable for him to
know it. I opened my mouth, and panted, (says David, Psalm. 119.131.) for I
longed for thy commandments; as if he had said; to know them that I might not
break them. And thus he says, Psalm. 18.22, 23. that he approved to his own
heart his uprightness and integrity. For all his judgments were before me,
and I did not put away his statutes (any of them) from me. I was also upright
before him. As we see it is with wise men (specially with justices and
officers) they will acquaint themselves well with the statutes, that they may
do nothing in their office that is against law and so bring themselves into
danger: So is it with the wise and prudent hearted Christian in this case. I am
thine, save me (says David, Psalm. 119.94) for I have sought thy precepts. And
indeed how is it possible, for him to be afraid to offend God in any thing, or
desirous to do the will of God in all things, that is not careful to enquire
and know what the will of God is in all things? So it is said of Ezra 7.10.
that he had prepared his heart to seek the law of the Lord, and to do it.
Thus David charged his Princes and Nobles and Commons in that great Parliament,
and common Council that he summoned not long before his death, 1 Chronicles. 28.8.
Now therefore in the sight of all Israel, the Congregation of the Lord, and in
the audience of our God, keep, and seek for all the commandments of the Lord
your God. As if he had said, You cannot keep them unless first you seek to
know them.

Applic.
If this be so; then is there certainly no truth of grace no uprightness of
Job 21.14. They say unto God, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge
of thy ways. As though he should say, They that do not desire the knowledge
of his ways (how honest men soever they seem to be) do certainly in their
hearts say unto God, depart from us, they would have nothing to do with him by
their good will. And Ps. 119.155. Salvation is far from the wicked; for they
seek not thy statutes. As if he should say, They that never seek to know what
God has either forbidden or commanded them in his Word, are far from
salvation.

Mat. 2.7. that his people should seek his law at the mouth of his messenger.
And John's hearers did so, his ministry wrought fears and doubts in them, and
both the people and the Publicans and the soldiers came to him as you may see,
Luke 3.10.12.14. to be resolved in their doubts, and said unto him, What shall
we do? But our hearers have no doubts no cases of conscience to be resolved in.
No man ever asks the question whether that that he has gotten by usury, or
by gaming, or by filling in of pots to men till they be drunk, and have made
themselves beasts be lawfully gotten or no. No man asks is God pleased with
the gain that I get thus? Will God bless it to me and mine?

hearts, that wittingly and purposely shun the knowledge of some parts of Gods
will that concern their own practice, because if they should know them, and
not do accordingly, their conscience would be disquieted, and if they should
practice them, they must incur danger and trouble; and it is good sleeping
(think they) in a whole skin. Let none that are such, flatter themselves in
this, that they thank God, they do nothing against their conscience, they do
nothing that they know to be evil, and displeasing to God. For if thou
wilfully close thine own eyes against any part of Gods will, that thou may
not see it, as those Jews did that our Savior condemns, Matthew. 13.15. if
there be any truth of God, concerning which it may be said of thee, as the
Apostle speaks of some wicked men in his time, 2 Peter 3.5. this thou art
willingly ignorant of; certainly thy heart is unsound; and the Lord will judge
thee as one that has sinned, not out of ignorance, but wilfully. And so much
shall serve to be spoken of the first of these three points that I propounded
touching the equal respect that the upright-hearted man bears to all the
commandments of God. He desires to know the whole will of God in all things
that concern him, in one point, as well as in another.

Secondly. He makes conscience of every sin that God has in his Luke
18.11. God I thank thee I am not as other men are (I am not so bad as such and
such are ( I am not extortioner, no unjust man (in my dealings with men) no
adulterer. But this is often made in Scripture, a note of uprightness, to make
conscience of every known sin, of one as well as of another. Thus David
describes them that are undefiled in the way, Psalm. 119.3. They also do no
iniquity. As if he had said. Not wittingly, as giving themselves liberty in
any sin. By this David approves to himself, and to the Lord, the
uprightness of his heart. Psalm 119.101. I have refrained my feet from every
evil way. And by this property does the Prophet describe the blessed man Esa,
56.2. He keeps his hand from doing any evil.

Let every one of us make trial of our hearts by this note. Applic.
Do we make conscience of every sin? This may best be discerned, in three
sorts of sins especially.

First. In the conscience we make of our beloved, and darling sins; Iehu
seemed in many things a very zealous, and good man, but there was one sin he
could not leave, and the hypocrisy of his heart was discovered by that, 2 Kin.
10.31. But Iehu took no heed to walk in the law of the Lord with all his
heart (that is, with an upright heart. How did that appear, that his heart was
unsound?) for he departed not from the sin of Jeroboam. Why could he not
leave that sin? Oh, that was a sin that the custom of his country had by
long use made most familiar, and it was also a very profitable sin; he
thought it may seem (and so did the rest of the Kings of Israel, as Jeroboam
did, when first he erected that idolatry, 1 Kings 12.26.28.) that if he
should have abolished the idols of Dan, and Bethel, and let the people go
(according to Gods ordinance) to worship at Jerusalem only, it would have cost
him his kingdom. Herod's example also is notable to this purpose. How many good
things are noted in him. Mar. 6.20. yet was the hypocrisy of his heart
discovered in this, he could not leave his incest. Why not that as well as
other sins, that John reproved? He was more strongly inclined by nature unto
that sin, that sin yielded him more pleasure then other sins did, it was
his darling sin. It is not the conscience a man makes of some sins, that
will assure him of the uprightness of his heart; but when thou can make
conscience of* hate and strive against the sin thou art most inclined to by
nature, the sin thou find most sweetness in; the sin of which thou can
say as Demetrius said of his, Acts 19.25. by this craft I get my wealth, this
will give thee a comfortable assurance of the uprightness of thy heart.

If one know them (says Job 24.17.) they are in the terrors of the shadow of
death. The fear of shame, and discredit with men, has great force to
restrain them; but in secret they care not what they do. It is a shame even
to speak (says the Apostle Ephesians 5.12.) of those things which are done of
them in secret. But he that makes conscience sinning even in secret, he is
the upright-hearted man, he disliketh sin, because it is sin, even out of
conscience toward God. 1. When a man makes conscience of speaking or doing
any thing that is evil, even at home in his own family, as well as abroad
among strangers; and can say with David, Psalm 101.2. I will walk within my
house with a perfect heart. 2. When a man makes conscience of sin; even there,
where he may do it so secretly, as no man can know of it; as Joseph did, Genesis
39.11. and David that was greatly troubled, and beggeth pardon for his secret
faults, Psalm. 19.12. 3. When a man makes conscience even of sinful thoughts,
which of all secret sins are most secret. The thoughts of the righteous are
right, says Solomon, Prove. 12.5. Thus Job gathering together all the evidences
he could, of the uprightness of his heart, does mention this as one of the
first and chiefest of them that he durst not give liberty to himself, no not
in unchaste and unclean thoughts. I made a covenant with mine eyes, why then
should I think upon a maid; says he, Job 31.1. And he that makes no
conscience of the wickedness of his thoughts, the vanity, maliciousness,
worldliness of them, certainly has no truth of grace in him. Evil thoughts
are set in the first rank of those things that defile a man, and make him
loathsome to God. Mat. 15.19.

David's uprightness of heart appeared. 1 Samuel. 24.5. His heart smote him for
cutting off Saul's skirt. And Paul in the conscience he made of a private
promise he had made to the Corinthians, to see them in his journey toward
Macedonia. See what a protestation he makes. 2 Corinthians. 1.18. that he did not
use lightness in making that promise, nor when he had made it was careless of
his word, As God is true (says he) our word to you was not yea, and nay; that
is, light and wavering. And mark his reason, verse 19. For the Son of God
Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, even by me and Sylvanus, and
Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in him, was yea. As if he should say; as I
have made conscience in my preaching to you, to speak nothing but the certain
truth, so do I in my private speeches and promise also. If we that are
ministers be vain and light persons in our private conversations, it is much
to be feared (if the Apostles reason be good) that though we teach the
truth, yet we do it not in uprightness of heart, and out of conscience
toward God. But I will conclude this point with those two sentences of our
blessed Savior, Matthew 5.19. Whosoever shall break one (one I say) of these
least commandments (least I say) and shall teach men so (there have been you
see formerly as well as now, that have taught men, it is no matter to break
Gods small commandments) he shall be called least in the kingdom of God (he
seeks applause and credit happily by teaching such things, but he shall
certainly miss of his aim) but whosoever shall do and teach them (even
these least commandments, lo we must be doers our selves, before we can
preach well) the same shall be called great in the Kingdom of God. As if he
had said. He shall in the end loose no credit by it, but (though that be not
the thing he may seek, or aim at, yet) he shall be sure to be the better
esteemed for it in the Church of God. And thus much of the second point,
wherein the upright hearted man's equal respect to all the commandments of God
appears, he makes conscience of every sin, of one as well as of another.

Follows the third, and last of them. He makes conscience of every duty As
ye abound (says the Apostle, 2 Corinthians 8.7.) in every good thing, -- see
that ye abound in this grace also; that is to say, in mercifullnesse, and
liberality. And he says in the next verse, that he requires this of them,
to prove the sincerity of their love. As if he had said; There can be no
sincerity in him that contenteth himself to have some good things in him, if
he desire, and strive not after every grace. And again, Phil. 4.8, 9.
Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any
praise, think on these things. Those things which ye have both learned, and
received, and heard, and seen in me, do. Whatsoever good things they had
heard of Paul, or seen in his example, they must strive to attain unto. But
the Apostle Peter goes further, 2 Peter 1. for he is not content to say, that
the way to make our calling and election sure, is by doing of those things that
he had spoken of before; that is to say, by giving all diligence to add one
grace to another (and eight several graces he names, verse 5 -- 7. that must
be thus combined in us) but he says plainly, ver. 9. that he that lacks
these things is blind; that is, has no truth of grace in him.

Alas then, Applic.
what assurance can they have of the truth of their hearts, that in the duties
God enjoyneth them, will take and leave at their own pleasure. 1. They that
are just in word and deed, but the other two duties that God enjoyneth, Mic.
6.8. (mercy and humility toward God) they cannot, nay they strive not to
attain to. 2. They that love preaching, and good preaching well, but there is
a grace commended to them in David's example, which they will not imitate, 2 Samuel 24.24. I will not offer burnt offerings to the Lord my God, with that that
does cost me nothing; and Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the word,
communicate unto him that teaches in all good things. They love a life to
serve God of free-cost. 3. They that are zealous in frequenting the public
worship of God, but have no mind to that that is commended unto them in the
example of Joshua 24.15. As for me and mine house, we will serve the Lord;
much less of that that Christ enjoyneth, Matthew. 6.6. When thou prayest, enter
into thy closet, and when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy father which is
in secret. 4. They that are very forward in all other duties almost, and yet in
one maine duty that Christ enjoyneth as strictly as any, and says, Mat. 6.15.
If ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your father forgive your
trespasses, Yea 5.24. Leave thy gift before the altar, and go thy way, first
be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift, they must be
borne with, they cannot overcome themselves in this. Certainly the best that
these can say of themselves with truth, is but that that Agrippa says of
himself, Acts 26.28. they are almost persuaded to be Christians. And as good
never a whit, as never the better. If there be any commandment of God that
thou can not (at least in the unfeined desire, and endeavor of thy heart)
yield unto and obey, certainly thou art no true Christian. He that says I
know Christ (says the Apostle, 1 John 2.4.) and keeps not his commandments,
is a liar, and the truth is not in him.

Lecture LXXXVII. on Psalm 51.6. April. 15. 1628.
The continuance of saving grace.
THE third and last respect, wherein the universality and large extent of true
saving, and sanctifying grace appears, is, In respect of the time, where once
it is in truth, it will never dye, nor decay utterly. We must therefore know,
that among the notes and properties of saving grace, that are given us in the
holy Scripture (whereby we may every one of us try our selves, whether there
be in us that uprightness of heart, and truth in our inward parts, which
David says here the Lord so much delights in) this is one principal. That
true saving, and sanctifying grace, extends it self unto the whole course
and time of a man's life that has it in him. True saving grace is durable and
everlasting.

Now because this is a truth, that behooves all of us to be well settled and
grounded in, therefore before I come to the confirmation of it, I must first
premise three things which are to be granted concerning this point, which if
you mark them well, will both make our meaning in it plain unto you, and take
out of the way all the maine objections that are made against it.

a righteous man (thus in profession, and in the judgment of men) may turn
away from his righteousness (as the Prophet speaks, Ezekiel 18.24) and
commit iniquity, and do according to all the abominations of the wicked, and
dye in that state too. So Hymeneus and Alexander are said. 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. to
have made shipwreck of says. They had made profession of the true faith and
religion of God, and fell quite away from it afterward. And they that thus make
profession of true righteousness and holiness, and of the true faith and
religion, are called by the holy Ghost (and we may not teach him to speak)
righteous men and believers, though there be no true righteousness or faith
in them at all. So it is said, John 2.23, 24. Many believed in Christ's name,
when they saw the miracles that he did. Had these men true and saving faith? No
verily, as appears plainly by the next words, But Jesus did not commit
himself unto them, because he knew all men. As though the Evangelist had
said; He knew there was no truth of faith in their hearts, though they made
such a profession of it. So it is said of Simon Magus, Acts 8.13. that he
believed. Why had he ever a true justifying faith in him? No verily, for he
was even then (though neither Philip, nor Peter perceived it till a little
after) in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity; as Peter
testifies of him verse 23. yet all that are baptized, are said to be
regenerated, and borne anew; yea all the infants of the faithful are said by
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.14. to be holy. Are all infants holy indeed, and truly
sanctified? Are all men that are baptized, regenerated indeed? No verily. But
by profession and sacramentally, they are so all. But why are they then by the
holy Ghost called so, not being so indeed? Surely, because the Church and
people of God are bound to judge them believers, and righteous persons, that
outwardly profess themselves to be such, till God shall be pleased to
reveile and discover them to be otherwise. The secret things belong to the
Lord our God (says Moses, Deutero. 29.29) but those things which are reveiled,
belong to us, and to our children for ever. And therefore Simon Magus (as bad a
man as he was inwardly and in heart) was without all scruple admitted by
Philip the Evangelist unto baptism, and so accounted a true believer. Acts
8.13. even for this cause, because he professed the true faith. So then the
believers, the righteous, and regenerate persons that are such only by
profession, and in the judgment of the Church, may quite fall away and loose
all that goodness that seemed to be in them.

Secondly. It cannot be denied, but that a man may have in him in truth,
sundry receives the word, and believes it, and finds joy and comfort in it,
yet may fall away, as is plain Luke 8.13. A man that has been enlightened,
and has tasted of the heavenly gift (of Christ) and has been made partaker
of the holy Ghost, may so fall away (says the Apostle, Heb. 6 4.6,) as it is
impossible for him to be renewed again unto repentance. A man that has
escaped the pollutions of the world (forsaken all foul and gross sins) may be
yet so entangled again, and overcome by them (as the Apostle teaches, 2 Peter
2.20.) that his latter end may become worse with him, then ever his beginning
was. And what shall we say of these men, and of the good things that are
spoken of them? Were they such in show and profession only? No verily. They
were indeed enlightened, they did indeed believe, they did indeed rejoice, and
found comfort in the word; they did indeed, forsake the pollutions of the
world. Yea these good things in them were the works and effects of the word
and spirit of God, and not of nature only; that, that sprung up in them, came
from the seed of the word that was sown in their hearts, Luke 8.6.13. It was
the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (as the Apostle speaks, 2
Peter 2.20.) and the sweetness that they found in that, that made them to
forsake all foul and gross sins. How then? Had these men ever any truth of
saving, or sanctifying grace in them? No verily. For our Savior says. 1. Of
these Luke 8.13. that they had no root in themselves, the goodness and work of
the spirit that was in them, was overly, it never went low enough, deep enough,
to the giving of them a root, to the reforming of the inward man. 2. Of the
hearer that is compared to the good ground. Luke 8.15. that he, and he only of
all the four sorts of hearers, had on honest and a good heart, there was no
goodness of heart, no truth of grace in any of the other three.

Lord why castest thou off my soul (says the Prophet Ps. 88.14, 15) while I
suffer thy terrors I am distracted. 2. He may loose the vigor and powerful
operation of it; it may (like a spark of fire) be so covered and hidden in an
heap of ashes, that neither himself nor any other, can by any light, or heat
that comes from it, discern any other but that it is quite dead and gone. If
Nathan himself had come to David when after the committing of his shameful
adultery, he was practicing with all the cunning he had, the murder of Vriah,
or if any of the Apostles had bin with Peter, when he denied Christ so often with
such bitter oaths and execrations against himself, Mat. 26.74. what spark of
grace could they have discerned in them? In these three points then you see how
far forth it may be granted, that men may fall from grace.

And yet is this that I have taught you a certain truth, that true sanctifying
and saving grace, is of a lasting permanent and continuing nature. See this
confirmed. 1. By that which the holy Ghost expressly affirms of sundry
particular graces, and fruits of the spirit of sanctification. I will instance
but in three. 1. The fear of the Lord is clean (says David, Psalm. 19.9.)
enduring for ever. 2. So speaking of the upright man, Psalm. 112.2, 3. he says
his righteousness endures for ever. 3. And the Apostle speaking of that
meekenes of spirit which Gods sanctifying grace works in the faithful, he
calls it, Pet. 3, 4. a thing that is not corruptible, it can never dye. See
this also confirmed, 2. By that which the holy Ghost expressly affirms of the
whole habit and quality of renewed holiness, created and infused by the spirit
of God into our souls, at our first conversion. The grace of regeneration is
called by the Apostle. 1 Pet. 1.23. an incorruptible seed, which he amplifieth
by this comparison, verse 24.25. All flesh is as grass, and all the glory of
man is as the flower of the grass, the grass withers, and the flower
thereof falls away, but the word of the Lord endures for ever. As if he
should say. Whatsoever excellency we have by nature (wit or knowledge, or
morality, all natural parts whatsoever) are tansitory, and corruptible, but
that which the spirit of God works in us by the word, will last for ever. See
this proved also, Ioh. 15.16. I have chosen you, and ordained you, that you
should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain. And least
any should say (as some do) that though Gods sanctifying grace be in it self
incorruptible and immortal (for it is called the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4)
yet is it not so in respect of us; mark how the holy Ghost tells us, that it
is not so only in it self, but it is so in respect of us also. Whosoever is
borne of God, (says the Apostle. 1 John 3.9) does not commit sin (that is to
say, in that manner as he did before) for his seed remains in him. The seed
of God, the grace of regeneration does remain in every one that is borne of
God. In which respect also our Savior says thus of it. Luke 10.42. Mary has
chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her.

Therefore also is this durablenesse, and perpetuity made often in Scripture an
essential property of true and saving grace; Colossians 1.21.23. You has he
reconciled, if ye continue in the faith grounded and settled, and be not moved
away from the hope of the Gospel. As if he had said; If ye continue not in
the faith, ye are not in the state of grace, ye are not reconciled unto God,
by the blood of Christ. So says the Apostle Hebrews 3.6. Whose house we are,
if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the
end. As though he should say, He that does not continue in the faith to the
end, is not the house of God, the Temple of the holy Ghost, has not any saving
sanctifying grace in his heart. Lastly, So speaks the Apostle, 1 John 2.19.
If they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, but they
went out that they might be made manifest, that they were not of us. As if he
should have said, No doubt but he that ever was, not only in the Church by
profession but a living and true member of it rooted in Christ, shall continue
so to the end; and it is as manifest, that no Apostate had ever any such truth
of grace in him.

Let us now make some application of this point in two words of exhortation
unto you.

The first thing that I have to exhort you unto is this, Applic. 1
that seeing true saving grace is proved to be so permanent and durable a thing
that you would therefore esteem of it and prize it accordingly, yea seek it
above all other things whatsoever. Two other strong motives there be to
persuade you to this.

First, By prizing of grace thus and seeking it first, and above all other
Seek ye first (says our Savior, Matthew. 6.33.) the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness and all these things shall be added unto you. Whereas by
esteeming so highly of earthly things, and seeking them above grace, we shall
be sure to loose grace (as is plain by this, that our Savior mentioning the
cause that made Sodom so void of goodness and so full of sin names nothing
but their eager seeking after worldly things, Luke 17.28.) and yet can we have
no assurance to get those things we so earnestly seek after. For godliness
(and that only) has the promise both of this life, and of that which is to
come, 1 Timothy 4.8.

Secondly, If we have grace it will make all other things comfortable unto us,
Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasure and trouble
therewith, Pro. 19.16.

But secondly, The motive that the Doctrine we have now heard yields
uncertain riches, 1 Timothy 6 17. Grace is durable substance, as the Holy Ghost
calls it, Pro. 8.^8. He that once has it, all the power and cunning of the
devil shall never be able to spoil him of it; The gates of hell (says our
Savior, Matthew. 16.18.) shall not prevail against it. And this is the motive
that our Savior himself uses to persuade us to seek for grace, John 6.27.
Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures
unto everlasting life.

The third and last thing that I have to exhort you unto is this, that seeing
true That which ye have already (says our Savior, Rev. 2.25.) hold fast till
I come. This was David's care, Psalm. 119.112. I have inclined my heart to
perform thy statutes always even unto the end. And Psalm. 104.33. I will sing
unto the Lord as long as I live, I will sing praise to my God, while I have my
being. And this was all Paul's care, Act. 20.24. that he might finish his course
with joy; that he might hold out to the end. This exhortation he gives to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10.12. He that thinks he stands let him take heed lest
he fall. And to the Romans 11.20. Thou stand by faith: be not high-minded
but fear.

If any man shall object, This is contrary to that that you have taught, for if
saving grace be so permanent and of a lasting nature, Object.
what need men take any thought for holding out unto the end?

Answ. 1.
I answer, First, Though the seed of Gods grace be incorruptible, yet a
Christian may loose the sense of grace, and the vigor and operation of grace.
In these respects the spirit may be quenched, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. And as fire may be
quenched 1 by casting water upon it; or 2 by whaming any thing upon it to
smother it; or 3 by withholding fuel from it; or 4 by neglecting to blow it,
when it is but a little kindled; So may the spirit in respect of the lively
sense, and vigor, and operation of it be quenched; 1 either by giving our
selves liberty to sin against our conscience, as in David's case; 2 or by
resisting and smothering the good motions of it, as Stephen charge the Jews
to have done, Acts 7.51. 3 or by despising the means of grace, 1 Thessalonians. 5.20.
4 or by neglecting to stir up and exercise the graces of it in our selves;
which the Apostle charge Timothy to do, 2 Timothy 1.6.

2.
Secondly, Every regenerate man is of himself exceeding prone thus to quench
the spirit, and to fall from grace; and it is the wonderful mercy and power of
God only that does keep us from falling quite away; if he should let go his
hand never so little, we could be no more able to stand, then the little
infant, which the nurse dadeth can do if she let go her hold she has of it,
or then your staff can do when you take off your hand. It is God alone that
keeps the feet of his Saints, 1 Samuel 2.^. And this is a just cause why we
should be continually in fear of falling away. Work out your salvation
(says the Apostle, Philippians 2.12, 13) with fear and trembling, because it
is God that works in you, both to will and to do of his good pleasure.

3.
Thirdly, As God has made an everlasting covenant with us that he will never
forsake us, and that we shall not depart from him, Jeremy 32. so the means
whereby he in his goodness does preserve us from falling away from him is by
working in us by his spirit this fear of falling away, this care to persevere
and hold out and grow in grace. And so he expressly speaks, Ier. 32.40. I
will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. So that
he that finds not in himself this fear of falling away, this care to
nourish grace in himself, and to finish his course with joy, has just cause
to judge that God never received him into this covenant of grace, this
everlasting covenant, that you have heard of.

4.
Fourthly, and lastly, Constancy in well-doing and an uniformity in a Christian
course, is an inseparable property of true grace. It is nothing for any of you
to be devout in your prayers and in hearing of the Word in the morning, and in
your buying and selling afterward to play the cutthroats and cheatours of your
neighbors; thus much an hypocrite can do; but this is that that may give thee
comfort when thou keep thy heart in the fear of the Lord all the day long,
as Solomon speaks, Pro. 23.17. When thou can say with Paul, Acts 24.10.
Herein do I exercise my self to have always a conscience void of offense
toward God, and toward men too. It is a small sign of grace for any of you
to have some fits of remorse for sin and of good motions and desires when you
have been dangerously sick, or the morning before you received the Communion,
Pharaoh and Saul had such fits, and good moods; But this is that that will give
you comfort when you find your selves constant in the hatred of sin, and in
performing good duties. Blessed is the man that fears always to offend God,
says Solomon, Pro. 28.14. And Psalm. 106.3. Blessed are they that keep
judgment, and do righteousness at all times. When we can say with David,
Psalm. 119.117. I will have respect to thy statutes continually.

Lecture LXXXVIII. On Psalm 51.6. April 29. 1628.
THe fourth and last property of true obedience, The ^ourth property of true
goodness, and righteousness.
of true righteousness and goodness, which will give us a comfortable
assurance of the uprightness of our hearts, is the manner how it is performed,
with what affection we do it, what ends we aim at in it. He that would
approve the uprightness of his heart by the unblameablenesse and godliness of
his life, must not content himself with this, that he escheweth evil and does
good, he abstaineth from all known sins, that God has forbidden, and
performs all good duties that God has commanded him to do, unless he be
careful also to do this in that manner as God requires. This I will 1
confirm unto you; and then 2 I will give you some directions, how to perform
good duties in a good and right manner.

And for the first, We shall find that the Lord in requiring obedience of us,
stands not so much upon this that we do good duties, as that we do them in
the right manner. It shall be our righteousness, (says Moses, Deuteronomy. 6.25.) if
we observe to do all these commandments before the Lord our God, as he has
commanded us. As if he had said, Say we should do all he has commanded us,
yet if we do it not as he has commanded us, it is no righteousness in Gods
account. You shall see this also confirmed more particularly by instancing in
duties of all sorts, 1 In those that are to be performed to men, 2 In those
that, are done directly, and immediately unto God. No good thing we do, is of
any account with God, unless it be done in a good manner. In the duty of
servants toward their masters, this is the chief thing God requires; he
stands not so much upon what they do as how and in what manner they do it;
that is to say, with fear and trembling, (as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 6.5,
6.) in singleness of heart, as unto Christ, not with eye-service as
men-pleasers but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the
heart. So in other duties of government and care of others duties the Apostle
stands upon this principally, Romans 12.8. he that gives let him do it with
simplicity, he that rules with diligence, he that shows mercy with
cherfulness. So though it were an excellent work of mercy of bounty and
kindness that Gajus showed to the godly, of whom the Apostle says, Romans
16.23. that he was not his host only, but the host of the whole Church. Yet
the thing that graced this excellent good work of his so much in the sight of
God, was this that he did it in so good a manner and with so good an heart,
Beloved (says the Apostle to him, 3 John 5.) thou do faithfully whatsoever
thou do both to the brethren, and to strangers. See this also confirmed in
the duties of Gods own worship, which are greater then the other. Even in them
also the manner of doing them is all in all. 1. For prayer if a man pray never
so constantly, it is to no purpose, unless he pray in the right manner, James.
4.3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss. 2. Neither will the
receiving of the Sacraments do us any good, unless we receive them in that
manner as we ought to do. The Apostle speaking of the hypocrites that perished
in the wilderness says of them, 1 Cor. 10. -- 4. They were all baptized unto
Moses in the cloud, and in the sea, and did all eat the same spiritual meat,
(that we do in the Lords Supper) and did drink the same spiritual drink --
yet with many of them God was not well pleased. 3. Of hearing the Word ye know
what our Savior says, Luke 8.18. Take heed how you hear, not only that you
hear, and what you hear, but even how and in what manner you hear also. 4
Lastly, The preaching of the Word though it be the greatest work of all other;
in respect whereof the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 2.15. We are unto God a sweet
savor of Christ, in them that are saved and in them that perish. As if he had
said, whether the people receive good by us or no; and of which work the best
of us may say as the Apostle does, 2 Cor. 2.16. Who is sufficient for these
things? Yet if this work be not done in the right manner, all the preaching,
all the pains we take in our ministry, is nothing in Gods account. If any
man speak (says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.11.) let him speak, at the Oracles of
God. As if he had said, with that fear and reverence, with that preparation,
with that judgment and discretion, with that zeal and affection, as it
becomes the Oracles of God to be spoken with. See what a pattern we have for
this, in our Lord Jesus who is the chief Pastor (as the Apostle calls him,
1 Pet. 5.4.) Whatsoever I speak (says he, John 12.50.) even as the father
said unto me, so I speak. As if he had said, Not for the matter only that I
teach, but for the manner also of my teaching, I follow precisely the direction
of my father. And see (I pray you) what account is to be made of preaching in
the right manner. It is said of Paul and Barnabas preaching in the Synagogue at
Iconium, Acts 14.1. that they so spoke that a great multitude both of the Jews
and also of Greeks believed. The success and fruitfullnesse of their
ministry, is ascribed even to their manner of preaching. And the Apostle Paul
who took more pains in his ministry then all the rest of the Apostles did as
he says of himself, 1 Corinthians 15.10. yet professes, 1 Corinthians 9.16,
17. that all the pains ^ee took in preaching, did not yield him so much
comfort, as this did, that his care was in preaching, to do it with that
heart, and in that manner that he ought to do it. Though I preach the Gospel
(says he) I have nothing to glory of, if I do this thing willingly I have a
reward. This, this is that that will give comfort both to us and you all, and
that will give us all assurance of the uprightness of our heart, when in doing
good duties, we rest not in this, that we do the deed, (for in that an
hypocrite may match and excel the best of us all) but our care is to do it in
the right manner, to do it so as we may please God in doing it. Let us have
grace, (says the Apostle, Heb. 12.28.) whereby we may so serve God as we may
please him. That grace we should all labor for. Else if we do not good duties
so, as we may please God in doing them, we loose all our labor. And God is so
far from being pleased with the good duties we do, if our care be not to do
them in the right manner, as we may offend and provoke him as much by doing
good duties, as by any other sin we can commit against him. Incense is an
abomination unto me (says the Lord, Esa. 1 13.) the new Moons and Sabbaths
the calling of assemblies I cannot away with, it is iniquity, even the solemn
meeting upon public fasts and such like occasions.

Applic.
Let every one of us think this is spoken to our selves, and be humbled for
our loose performing of holy duties, and be afraid of formality in Gods
service; and take heed of that natural popery that is in every one of our
hearts, I mean of resting in opere operato; and therefore also attend to the
direction I shall now give you out of Gods Word, how good duties are to be
performed in a good manner, and so as they may be pleasing unto God. There be
then three things principally required to the performing of good duties in a
right manner, (besides that that they must be done in faith and in love to God
which I have already showed to be rather the roots from whence all true
obedience does spring, then properties required in the manner of our obedience)
1 That we do them to a right end, 2 That we perform them not with the
outward man only but with the heart, 3 That we do them in humility.

the Apostle says, Romans 10.2. yea even in that vile action they had a good
intent* they thought they did God good service in it, says our Savior, Ioh.
16.2.) yet the best action that we can do is spoiled and made nothing worth,
if the intent and aim of our heart in doing it be not right. That is the
chief thing God looks after, in any good thing we do what heart we do it
with; As the Lord himself told Samuel, 1 Samuel 16.7. The Lord looks on the
heart. When the counsels of the heart shall be made manifest (says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.5. with what intent, and purpose of heart men have done that
which they did) then (and not before) shall every man have praise with God. Now
the intent and purpose of our heart in doing good duties, is then only right
when we do them chiefly to this end, that thereby we may please and honor
God, and show our obedience and love to him. This is a maine note of difference
twixt the hypocrite and upright hearted man. The hypocrite, and natural man
(even in the best services he seems to do unto God) serves not the Lord at
all but himself. He either respects 1 the applause of men in doing that
good he does, as our Savior says, Matthew. 6. the Pharisee in his prayers and
fasts and almesdeeds did; Or 2 he hops to merit somewhat of God, and to bind
him thereby to bear with him the rather in other things as those hypocrites
did, Esa. 58.3. Or 3 at the best he does it to avoid Gods wrath, as those did
the Prophet speaks of, Psalm. 78.34. In seeming to serve the Lord he still
seeks himself only and not the Lord, in seeming to look directly upon the
Lord he has a squint eye upon some what else. When ye fa^^ed and mourned in
the fifth and seventh month even those seventy years (says the Lord to the
hypocrites, Zach. 7 5, 6.) did ye at all fast to me? even unto me (did ye it to
please me, did ye it in obedience and love to me?) and when ye did eat and
when ye did drink, did ye not eat for your selves and drink for your selves?
As if he had said, Did you not in your fasting as well as in your feasting,
seek your selves only and not me? On the other side, The man whose heart is
upright, whatsoever good thing he does, he does it to the Lord. And he that
does so, certainly he is no hypocrite, but has a good and upright heart. Thus
the Apostle proves, that Christians might not despise nor judge one another to
be hypocrites, and void of truth of grace because of their difference in
judgment, and practice from them, about indifferent things, Romans 14.6. He that
regards a day, regards it unto the Lord, and he that regards not a day,
unto the Lord he regards it not. As if he had said, He does it in obedience
unto God, and out of a care to please him therefore he is no hypocrite. Thus
may a man get a comfortable assurance to himself of the uprightness of his
own heart, in every good thing he does, if he do it to the Lord, if he serve
God in that, that he does, if he do it in obedience unto him, the intent of
his heart be in it, to please God. If we did thus when we preach and hear,
when we receive the Sacrament, when we pray, or sing Psalms there is never a
one of these duties but would yield as much more comfort then they do. Thus
did Paul in preaching. As we were allowed of God (says he, 1 Thessalonians. 2.4.) to
be put in trust with the Gospel, even so we speak, not as pleasing men, but
God, which tries our hearts. Thus did Gods people in receiving of the
Sacrament, 2 Chronicles 30.19. They prepared their hearts to seek God in that
ordinance; and so did Josiah, 2 Chronicles 35.1. He kept a Passover to the Lord. So
the Apostle requires us to do in singing of Psalms, Ephesians. 5.19. make melody
in your hearts to the Lord. Yea even in the duties we perform unto men, (in
our almesdeeds, in the labors of our ordinary callings) we may get comfortable
assurance to our selves of the uprightness of our hearts, if we do them to the
Lord, we respect and serve God in them, we do them in obedience and care to
please him. Be not slothful to do service (says the Apostle, Romans 12.11. he
means one to another as appears verse 10.) servent in spirit, serving the
Lord. As if he had said, even in the service ye do to men, serve the Lord. So
in almsdeeds, Pro. 3.9, 10. Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the
first fruits of all thine increase; so shall thy barnes be filled with plenty,
and thy presses shall burst out with new wine. And 19.17. He that has pity on
the poor lends unto the Lord. So speaks the Apostle to comfort poor
servants that had infidells unto their masters, Whatsoever ye do (says he,
Col. 3.23, 24.) do it as unto the Lord, and not unto men. As if he had said,
look to God in it, do it in conscience and obedience unto him, content your
selves with this, that he is pleased with that you do, Knowing that of the Lord
you shall receive the reward of inheritance: for you serve the Lord Christ. As
if he had said, Whatsoever good thing any man does as a service unto God, he
shall be sure to be rewarded for it, God will pay his servants their wages
certainly. And in this respect, of all good duties that a Christian can
perform those will yield him greatest comfort, and assurance of the sincerity
of his heart wherein there is least danger of having any other respect then
unto the Lord only, I will instance in three sorts of those duties.

When thou make a feast (says our Savior, Luke 14.13, 14) call the poor,
the maimed, the lame, the blind, and thou shall be blessed; foe they cannot
recompense thee; for thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just.

I say unto you (says our Savior, Mat. 5.44, 45.) love your enemies, bless
them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
despitefully use you, and persecute you; that you may be (that is, manifest
your selves to be) the children of your heavenly father. So Mat. 10.42.
Whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones (contemptible for
their poor estate, contemptible for their infirmities) a cup of cold water
only, in the name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise
lose his reward.

When thou do alms (says our Savior, Mat. 6.3.) let not thy left hand
know, what thy right hand does. And verse 6. When thou prayest, enter into thy
closet, and when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy father which is in
secret. The Prophet speaking of the sincerity and soundness of repentance that
the Gospel should work in the faithful speaks thus, Zach. 12.12. The land
shall mourn every family apart, and their wives apart. True it is there be
other respects for which it is not only lawful but fit, and necessary also
for a man both to pray and give alms, and to mourn for sin so as others may
take notice of it; but in this respect for giving us assurance of the
uprightness of our hearts, they can never be so well done as in secret; nay
they cannot be done in sincerity of heart, if they be done only openly, and
not in secret also.

Applic.
O then (beloved) let every one of us examine our selves often in this point, and
in every good duty we do ask our own hearts that question that our Savior
did Andrew and his fellow, John 1.38. What seek thou? What aimest thou at?
What end do thou propound to thy self in doing these things? Let us all
strive in our preaching and hearing, in our praying, and every other good thing
we do, to do it unto the Lord, as a service unto him, in obedience and care
to please him. The Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 5.15. that Christ died for all,
that they which live should not hence forth (that is to say, from the time that
they have given their names unto Christ, and believe in him) live unto
themselves but unto him which died for them. And speaking of all the faithful
he says, Romans 14.7, 8. None of us lives to himself, nor dies to himself;
for whether we live, we live unto the Lord, and whether we die, we die unto the
Lord. O that we could so say of our selves, that none of us lives unto
himself, but to the Lord, for then we might be sure we should not die unto
our selves, but to the Lord. But what hope is there that he that has lived
only to himself, has sought himself only, and had no respect to God, no
care to please or honor him all his life long, should die unto the Lord,
should please the Lord in his death, or that the Lord should then have any
respect unto him. Well, certainly of most men's best works and duties that
they have at any time performed, that may be said which the Prophet speaks of
Israel, Hos. 10.1. Israel is as an empty vine, he brings forth fruit to
himself. As if he had said, In all good things he does, as he does them out
of self-love so he seeks himself only in them. The meanest work we do in
our calling if we do it to the Lord and serve him in it will yield us assured
comfort, and reward also; the best Sermon we can preach or hear if we do it
not to the Lord, but to our selves, will yield us no comfort or reward from
God. Verily I say unto you (says our Savior, Mat. 6.2) they have their
reward. And so much for the first property, that is required to the right
manner of performing of all good duties, they must be done to the right end. In
the other two I will be very brief.

The second property required to the right manner of performing good My son,
give me thy heart, says he, Pro. 2^.26. Ferv^nt in spirit serving the Lord,
says the Apostle, Romans 12.11. As if he had said, No service pleases God,
unless it be done with fervencie of spirit. This was the thing that God so
much commends in the obedience of Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17.6. that his heart
was lift up in the ways of the Lord. As though he should say, He stirred up
himself to walk in Gods ways with zeal and affection. This also the Lord
praises Hezekiah for, 2 Chronicles. 31 21. In every work that he began in the
service of the house of God, and in the law, and in the commandments to seek
his God, he did it with all his heart, and prospered. See this also in sundry
special parts of our obedience and service unto God.

First, No man's preaching pleases God unless he preach with affection I
serve God (says Paul, Romans 1.9.) with my spirit, in the Gospel of his son.

Secondly, No man's hearing pleases God, or will do him any good, unless he
hear with affection. If God open not your hearts as he did Lydias, Act. Paul
was, your hearing would be to no purpose.

Thirdly, No man's praying pleases God or will do himself any good, The
effectual ^ervent prayer of a righteous man avails much, says the Apostle,
James 5.16. As if he should have said, The most righteous man's prayer that is,
will not be effectual, nor avail much with God, unless it be fervent.

Fourthly, Our singing of Psalms pleases not God unless it be done with
singing (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.19.) must be a making of melody in our
hearts to the Lord. As if he had said, The Lord regards no melody but that.

Whatsoever ye do (says the Apostle to the servant, Col 3.23.) do it
heartily, as to the Lord. As if he had said, Else you serve not God in any
thing you do, nor must look for any acceptance, or reward from him.

Whosoever has ability, and sees his brother has need, (says the Apostle, 1
Ioh. 3.17.) and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, (though he open
his purse and give him never so much) how dwells the love of God in him?

Applic.
Let every one of us apply this to our selves for the time will not permit me to
do it.

When ye have done all those things that are commanded you (says our Savior,
Luke 17.10.) say, we are unprofitable servants. As if he had said, Say this
is nothing, to that that I should have done. Whatsoever ye do in word or deed,
(says the Apostle, Col 3 17.) do all in the name of the Lord Jesus As though
he should say, Acknowledge and feel the need you have of Christ, to make the
best things that you do acceptable unto God. Thus did Nehemiah when he had
done a better work and service to God then any of us are ever like to do
while we live, yet see how he was humbled in himself, Neh. 13.22. Remember me,
o my God, concerning this also, and spare me (pardon me) according to the
greatness of thy mercy. Without this there can be no uprightness of heart in
us, how good duties soever we perform. Behold (says the Prophet, Hab. 2.4.)
his soul which is listed up, is not upright in him.

Lecture LXXXIX. On Psalm 51.6. May 13. 1628.
The third sign of uprightness of heart.
IT follows now that we proceed to the third and last sign and note whereby
uprightness of heart, and truth of saving grace, may be discerned and judged
of; namely, The bent of a man's mind and will, the purpose and desire of his
heart toward God. We must therefore know that one of the surest notes of
uprightness of heart, and truth of grace is this, when (howsoever we fail in
our practice and obedience) yet God has our heart: Yea that is such a sign as
a poor Christian may find comfort in, when he cannot in the most of them that
you heard of before. In the handling of this sign I will (for the help of
your understanding and memory) observe this order. 1. I will show you what I
mean by it. 2. I will confirm it unto you. 3. I will answer that which may
be objected against it. 4. I will make some application of it.

David does, Psalm. 119.128. I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to
be right. And even in those things wherein (through our corruption and
weakness) we do offend against the law, yet we can say of the law with the
Apostle, Romans 7.12. The law is holy, and the commandment is holy and just and
good. 2. When our will is to please God in all things, we desire nothing so
much, when we offend it is against the purpose of our heart. When we can say
with David, Ps. 40.8. as your old translation reads it, I desire to do thy
good will, o my God, yea thy law is within my heart, and 119.57. O Lord thou
art my portion, I have determined to keep thy words, and to do nothing that
might offend thee. The truth of grace is in us, and the uprightness of our
hearts may be better discerned by this consent we give in our minds to Gods law
in all things; and by this unfeined desire and purpose of our heart to please
God, then by any thing we can do, by any performance we are able to make.

Let us now see the confirmation of this point in three degrees of proofs,

And for the first. The holy Ghost describes the upright hearted and good
Iehoshaphat, when he had much offended God in joining in affinity with Ahab.
Nevertheless (says he to him, 2 Chronicles. 19.3.) there are good things found in
thee, in that thou have taken away the groves out of the land, and (more then
that) have prepared thine heart to seek God, thy heart is set and bent to
please God. Thus also does Hezechiah describe the sincerity of them that
communicated with him in the passover, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19. The good Lord
pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his
fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the
sanctuary. They were good men (though they had failed, and offended in that
service) because their hearts were set to please God in it. This was all that
Samuel required of Israel. 1 Samuel 7.3. Prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and
serve him only. And Barnabas, of the Disciples in Antiochia, who were the
first that were called Christians, Acts 11.23. He exhorted them all, that
with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. As if all piety and
truth of grace consisted in this, when the bent of our mind, the unfeined
purpose and desire of our heart is for God. And so does David describe an
upright heart, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Thou Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy
father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind. And on the
other side, we shall find, that men that were hypocrites, and void of all
truth of grace, are described, not so much by any of their evil actions as by
this, that the bent of their hearts, of their minds, and wills, was not for
God. So it is said of the hypocrites that perished in the wilderness, Psalm
78.8. they are called a generation that set not their hearts aright. So it is
said of Rehoboam, 2 Chronicles. 12.14. He did evil, because he prepared not his
heart to seek the Lord, the desire and purpose of his heart was not set that
way. And of Simon Magus. Acts 8.21. Thou have neither part nor lot in the
matter, for thy heart is not right in the sight of God.

Secondly. The best men we can read of in Scripture, when they have been
driven to search, and look out their evidences, for their spiritual estate,
have Paul comfort himself in his spiritual conflict. Romans 7. 1. In the bent
of his mind, verse 16. I consent to the Law, that it is good; and verse 25.
With the mind I my self serve the Law of God; As if he had said I obey it in
my mind. I know that by the mind, there he means the regenerate part, as by
the flesh and members, he means the unregenerate part, that was in him. But
why is the regenerate part called so, and the grace of regeneration, verse 23.
the law of his mind? Certainly because the truth and power of regeneration is
not so much seen in our actions, as in the renewing and sanctifying of our
minds; according to that Romans 12.2. Be ye transformed by the renewing of your
mind. 2. He comfort himself in the bent of his will, that his will and
desire was for good, and against all evil, verse 15. What I would, that do I
not, but what I hate, that do I. And verse 18. to will is present with me. As
if he should have said. The constant desire, purpose, and endeavor of my
heart, is to do the will of God in all things. What failings soever the
regenerate man is subject to, yet will the work of Gods sanctifying grace (if
it appear in any thing) appear most sensibly in this will. The spirit indeed
is willing (says our Savior Matthew. 26.41.) but the flesh is weak. Even when
the flesh shows it self most weak, the spirit will show it self willing.
It will stir up in us such desires as David expresses. Psalm. 119.5. O that
my ways were directed to keep thy statutes. Ye cannot do the things that
ye would, says the Apostle, speaking of the conf^ict that is in the
regenerate, between the flesh and the spirit, Gal. 5.17. And this is that that
Paul took comfort in, when he was much troubled with the sense of his inward
corruption, To will is present with me, says he. So speaks he of himself
also, Hebrews 13.18. that his will was to live honestly. Why (may you say) was
that all that Paul could say for himself, that he was willing to live
honestly, was he not able also, did he not live honestly? Yes verily, but yet
this was the thing that yielded him most comfort, that his will and desire was
better then his ability; though he slipped and failed often in his words, and
actions, yet his will and desire was constantly bent to please God in all
things. And in this also does holy and zealous Nehemiah comfort himself, this
he could be bold to say unto God of himself and his brethren, and this was
all he durst say, Nehemiah 1.11. that they desired to fear his name. And so
does the Church, Esa. 26.8.9. The desire of our soul is to thy name, and to
the remembrance of thee, with my soul have I desired thee in the night. As if
it had said. There is nothing in the world that I desire so much as thy favor
and grace. And Cant. 5.2. I slept, but my heart was awake, As if she had said,
even then when I showed that weakness, that cost me so dear, yet my heart
was for God, I did it not with the full sway of my soul. This you see every
true hearted Christian can to his comfort say of every evil that (through
infirmity) he has slipped into, this I ought not to have done, it was against
the purpose of my heart, against my will that I have done so, and of every good
thing that he has failed in, either for matter or manner, thus I should do,
and thus with all my heart I desire to do.



He that looks on a woman to lust after her, (says the Lord. Matthew. 5.28.)
has committed adultery with her already in his heart. And 1 John 3.15.
Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer. And as Solomon says, Prove. 23.7.
As he thinks in his heart, so is he in Gods account. So on the other side,
the Lord accounts every good thing as done, yea as perfectly performed by any
of his servants, which he sees them purpose and endeavor, and unfeinedly
desire to do. If there be first a willing mind (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8
12. it is accepted. So the Lord says of Abraham, that he did offer up his son
in sacrifice, Heb. 11.17. because he was willing and purposed to do it. So
because David had a purpose and desire to build God an house, he commends him
for this purpose. 1 Kin. 8.18. Thou did well, that it was in thine heart. Yea
he rewards him for it, as if he had done it, and tells him 2 Samuel 7.27.
that for that he would build him an house. So when the servant that ought his
Lord ten thousand talents, had showed himself willing to pay all, and said,
Mat 18.^6. Lord have patience with me, and I will pay thee all (a thing utterly
impossible for him to do, yet was he desirous and willing to do it; as every
true Christian is willing and desirous to keep all Gods commandments
completely, though it be impossible for him to do it (it is said in the next
words, ver. 27. that his Lord had compassion on him, and loosed him, and
fargave him the debt, he took this for full payment, he accepted of the will
for the deed. So when Zacheus had unfeinedly professed his willingness to make
restitution, Christ says of him, Lu. 19.9. This day is salvation come to thy
house. So the Lord accounts that soul a true believer that does unfeinedly
desire to believe. For Christ says they are blessed that hunger and thirst
after righteousness, Mat. 5.6. And him a trve penitent sinner that does
unfeinedly purpose, and desire to repent, and turn unto God. When the
Prodigal did but purpose to return, and humble himself to his father. When
he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran,
and fell on his neck, and kissed him. Lu. 15.20. And the Lord accounts him a
godly man, and an observer of all his holy commandments, that does unfeinedly
desire to obey him in all things. If ye be willing and obedient (says the
Lord, Esa. 1.^9) ye shall eat the good of the land. Thus you see how God
accepts the will for the deed.

But (secondly) he does more then so. For in the best services we can
Corinthians bestowed on the Saints in Judea, as he did the willingness of
their mind in bestowing. You have begun (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8.10. not
only to do, but also to be willing a year ago. Neither did God so much
esteem of Paul's preaching (though that were excellent) as he did this, that
he preached with so willing a mind. If I do this thing willingly. (says he, 1
Cor. 9 17.) I have a reward. And this God makes high account of in every
Minister, when he feeds the flock of God, not by constraint, but willingly.
1 Peter 5.2. And when the Lord bids Moses speak unto the children of
Israel, that they should bring an offering for the making of the Tabernacle,
he says, Exodus 25.2. Of every man that gives it willingly with his heart,
ye shall take my offering; he esteems more of the willingness of the heart
in offering, then of the offering it self. And this reason Paul gives to
Philemon, verse 14. why he would not retain Onesimus without his mind, that
thy benefit (says he) should not be as it were of necessity, but willingly;
he knew God did most esteem of that.

Thirdly and lastly. When God has once wrought an unfeined purpose works in
us to will, as well as to do. Phil. 2.13.) he will reward it with an increase
of strength, and ability to do well, and a chief cause why we have no more
ability to do well, is because we no more desire to do well. For the Lord
has promised to fulfill the desires of them that fear him, Psalm 145 19.) to
fill thy mouth if thou open it wide, Psalm 8^.10. to fill the hungry with good
things. Luke 1.53. And thus you have heard this truth confirmed unto you, that
a Christian may gather more comfortable assurance of the uprightness of his
heart, from the goodness of his will and desire, then from the goodness of
his life, or of any actions he is able to perform.

Let us now come to answer that which may be objected against this

For this doctrine may seem to be too broad a way, and too open a door of
hope and comfort to the most lewd men. Oh (will they say) this doctrine we like
well, this gives us assurance that our hearts are as upright, as the precisest
of them all; for we also have good desires, we would feign do well, we desire
to believe in Christ, we desire to repent and leave our sins. And so we shall
find in the word of sundry cast-awayes, that have not only had desires to be
saved, as Baalam. Numbers 23.10. Let me dye the death of the righteous, and
let my last end be like his, and those foolish virgins that cried, Mat. 25.11.
Lord, Lord, open unto us; but have had desires also to go in the way that
leads unto life, desires to do well. Many I say unto you (says our Savior,
Luke 13.24.) will seek to enter in at the strait gate, and shall not be able.

Answ. 1.
Now my answer unto this objection, shall consist of two parts. First. Admit,
that wicked men will take hurt by this doctrine (as I doubt not but many do,
and will do; the children of disobedience will be apt to stumble at the word,
and thereunto they were even appointed, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Peter 2.8.)
yet must not so necessary a truth, and that tends so much to the comfort of
poor Christians, be concealed for that; We may not indeed take the childrens
bread and cast it to dogs, as our Savior speaks, Mat. 15.26 but yet we must
not withold from Gods children, their bread, because such dogs will be
snatching at it. We are to have more respect in our ministry to the comfort of
one poor Christian, then to the offense of an hundred such as these. And
therein we are warranted by the example of our blessed Savior himself Matthew.
15.12 -- 14.

2.
But secondly I answer. If there were indeed in these, whose lives are most
wicked, such infeined desires to do well, and to please God, I will be bold to
assure them in Gods name, and by warrant of his word, that (notwithstanding all
the wickedness of their lives) their hearts are upright, and there is truth of
saving grace in them. But (alas) no man whose life is wicked, has indeed any
good, and unfeined, and sanctified desires to do well, nay he has no true and
unfeined desire to be saved.

Five notes of difference I will give you out of Gods word, between the true
saving and sanctified desires which are in the regenerate, and the natural,
and counterfeit good desires that are in wicked men.

David, Psalm. 119.174. I have longed for thy salvation o Lord, and thy law is
my delight. The natural man has no desire or love to the means of salvation
and grace, to those means that God has ordained to bring them to faith and
repentance by, and therefore certainly he does not unfeinedly desire to
believe, or to repent, or to be saved. He that desires not the knowledge of
Gods ways, does say in his heart to God, depart from me, Job. 21.14. he does
not desire Gods favor, he does not desire to believe in him, or to serve him,
or to have any thing to do with him.

My soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at all
times, says David, Psalm 119.20. and 27.4. One thing have I desired of the
Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all
the days of my life. The natural man's good motions, and desires, be like the
fits of an ague, or flashings of lightning sudden and vanishing, when the
terrors of God are upon them. Their goodness is as the moring cloud (says the
Prophet Hos. 6.4.) and as early dew it goes away; therefore they are
counterfeit, they can have no comfort in them.

to do what he can, and some ability also to do well. As Paul professes of
himself, Heb. 13.18. that he was willing in all things to live honestly; so
he shows the sincerity of his desire in this, Herein (says he, Acts 24.6.)
do I endeavor my self always, to have a conscience void of offense toward
God, and toward man. He had not only a desire to live honestly but he did
endeavor it also. So speaking of the Macedonians mercifullnesse toward the
distressed Saints in Judea, 2 Cor. 8.3. To their power (says he) I bear them
record, yea and beyond their power they were willing. They did what they were
able, though their will was far above their ability. The natural man
flattereth himself in this, that he has good desires, he desires to be
saved, he would feign leave his sins, and believe, and do well, but he can
take no pains, use no endeavor that he may be saved, that he may believe and
reform his life he can leave no sin nor do any good duty. God knows my
heart (says he) I would feign do well, and there he rests. The confidence
he has in his good desires undoeth him. The desire of the slothful kills
him (says Solomon, Pro. ^1.25.) for his hands refuse to labor. Pilat seemed
very desirous to save Christ, and deliver him out of the hands of the Jews,
Pilat was willing to release Jesus, says the Evangelist, Luke 23.20. He was
determined to let him go, says the Apostle Peter, Acts 3.13. But Pilats good
purpose and desire was counterfeit, and such as yielded him no comfort, because
he did not what he might, and was in his power to do. Pilat gave sentence
(says the Text, Luke 23 24.) that it should be as they required.

Fourthly, The regenerate man's good desires are vehement, as the Apostle Cor.
7.11. Like the desire of the thirsty and hungry man. As the heart pants after
the water brooks (says David, Psalm. 42.1, 2.) so pants my soul after thee o
God, my soul thirsts for God, for the living God. He desires nothing so
much as Gods favor, as faith and grace to please him. He can say with David,
Psalm. 73.25. There is nothing (that sense the original will bear as well, as
any other) on earth that I desire besides thee. Yea he so desires Gods
favor, and grace as he is content to part with any thing for it. He counts
it a pearl of such price (as our Savior speaks, Mat. 13.46.) that he is
willing to sell all that he has, to buy it. As the condemned man desires
nothing so much as a pardon; nor the thirsty man as drink. But the natural
man's good desires are faint and cold, there be a thousand things in the world
he desires more then his salvation, or Gods favor and grace, he will part
with nothing for it. One that heard Christ speak in an heavenly manner of the
resurrection of the just, was presently ravished with a desire after heaven and
cries out, Luk 14.15. Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of
God. But our Savior to show him the vanity of such wishers and woulders as he
was, utters the parable of the guests, ver. 18 -- 20 that rather then they
would leave but for a while their profits pleasures, refused to come to the
Kings marriage feast, As if he had said; and so it is with such as thou art,
you set your mind upon the earth and not upon heaven.

Fifthly, and lastly, The regenerate man so desires Gods favor and grace as he
Hope deferred makes the heart sick (sath Solomon, Pro. 12.12.) but when the
desire comes, it is a tree of life. He feels his poverty of spirit so as he
mourns for want of grace, Mat. 5.3.4. He seeks Christ sorrowing, as his
parents did, Luke 2.48. The poor man, Mar. 9.24. so desired increase of faith
as he wept for the want of it. But the natural man so desires Gods favor and
grace as the want of it never troubles him. Woe unto you that are full (says
our Savior of such, Luke 6.25.) for ye shall hunger, Woe unto you that laugh
now, for ye shall mourn and weep.

Lecture XC. On Psalm 51.6. May 27. 1628.


Applic. 1
And in my speech to the former I will show you, 1. That there be in the world
yea in the Church of God, very many that do so, do refuse to be Gods
servants. 2. Why and upon what pretense they do so, their folly in it, and
that they have no just cause so to do. 3. The dangerous estate, that they are
in that do so.

As the eyes of servants look to the hands of their masters (says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 123.2.) so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until he have
mercy upon us. 2. He must do him service, and daily service, he must do what
he commands him. Thus does the Apostle describe a Christian servant even to
an earthly master, 1 Timothy 6.1. Servants as under the yoke. Every servant is
under a yoke, he may not do what he listeth^ And so is Gods servant described
he must not only profess, but practice religion. This is the protestation of
Gods servants, Josh. 24.24. The Lord our God will we serve, and his voice will
we obey. And certainly God has but a few such servants, even in his Church.
He has many reteiners, but very few household servants; many professors at
large, but few that will endure his yoke, the power and practice of religion.
They profess they know God: (says the Apostle, Tit. 1.16.) but in their
works they deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good
reprobate. When it comes to matter of practice and obedience then they
renounce him, and say with those, Luke 19 14. We will not have this man to
reign over us, As if they had said; any rather then him.

A strange and fearful thing it is to be spoken, and yet not so strange and
fearful as true; as bad a master as the Devil is, men had much rather serve
him, then the Lord. See the truth of this in three points.

the prince of this world as our Savior calls him, John 14.30. And the way
that leads to destrution is abroad way, ( Matthew. 7.13.) and many there be
that walk in it; he can want no servants. Whereas (on the other side) and Lord
has but a few to serve him. He is feign to take one of a city, and two of a
tribe, as he speaks, Ier. 3.14. His way, the way that leads unto life (
Matthew. 7.14.) is narrow, and but a few go that way.

Secondly, All the services that Satan imployeth his servants in, all the work
that he has for them to do (besides the hard reckoning that he will make
with them for it when the day of payment shall come) is for the present full of
vexation of spirit, the work and service it self is no better then most
toilsome and base drudgery. That covetousness is so you may see in Ahab, 1
King. 21.4, 5. and that filthy lust is so you may see in Ammon, 2 Samuel 13.2.
and that beastly drunkenness is so you may see, Pro. 23.29. And the like I
might show you, of many other of the works that this master imployeth his
servants in. O what pains men are content to take in his service? How they
toil and moile in it? They weary themselves to commit iniquity as the Prophet
speaks, Ier. 9.5. And yet though this be so Satan can have servants enough.
On the other side the places and works wherein the Lord imployeth all his
servants, are honorable services, and full of freedom and liberty. That as it
is said of Solomon, 1 King. 9.2^ Of the children of Israel did Solomon make no
bondmen; So may it more truly be said of the Lord, he uses none of his
servants as bondmen, they are all his freemen as the Apostle calls them, 1
Cor. 7.22. He imployeth them in no drudgery not base services, but takes them
near unto himself, to wait upon his own person. In which respect they are
called, Psalm. 148.14. A people near unto him. Nay he uses them as friends
rather then as servants. Henceforth (says our Savior, John 15.15.) I call you
not servants, for the servant knows not what the Lord does, but I have called
you friends. Though this be so I say, yet can the Lord get nothing so many
servants, no not in his Church, and among those that call themselves
Christians, as Satan has. Nay surely most men do with all their endeavor
shun his service, and bless themselves from it; they abhore it as if it were
the greatest bondage in the world, to be truly religious, to be the servant of
God. Israel would none of me, says the Lord, Psalm 81.11. Of all masters
they would none of him. Men had rather do any drudgery in the service of
Satan, and serve him as bondslaves, then to be the Lords freemen, and serve him
in the most honorable place he can employ them in.

Thirdly and lastly, The service that men do to Satan though it be never so
The lusts of your father ye will do, says our Savior, John 8.44. But the
service that most men do unto God, is most irksome unto them, they had rather
do any labor in the world then that. You that fear God have often I doubt not
met with such servants as would be content to take any pains, to do any
drudgery you can put them to, so as they be not urged to serve God, to come to
prayers, to be catechized, to give account of the Sermons they hear, to be
kept in on the Sabbath; and certainly this is the disposition not of poor
servants only but of the most men to the service of God; as the Lord
complains, Mal. 1.13. Ye said also, what a weariness is this? What a
toilesome thing this service of God, this practice of religion is?

Now let us consider what should be the cause of this that men even such as
Numb. 13.32.) that does discourage men from entering into it. See how God
expostulateth with Israel about this, Mic. 6.3. O my people, what have I done
unto thee? (how have I used thee, tha thou should thus complain of my
service?) and wherein have I wearied thee? Testify against me. He wondereth
what should be the cause, why men think so hardly of him and of his service.
It is good for us to enquire a little, upon what grounds this should rise. Six
of the principal of them, which I have observed I will mention unto you. But
the first five of them I will only name, and insist only a little upon the
last, which does concern the point, that I am to make application of.

Are there few that be saved? says one to Christ, Luke 13.23. As if he had
said, It were strange if no more should be saved, but those few that follow
thee and receive thy doctrine. Men see that the most of their neighbors whom
they live amongst, though they be not religious, yet they are good honest men
and such as they doubt not shall be saved; and if themselves should be more
religious then they, they should be among their neighbors as an owl among the
birds, and they would be neighbor like, they cannot abide to be singular.
This tentation did (for a time) discourage Eliah himself, 1 Kings 19.14. I,
even I only am left.

Concerning this sect, (say they with the Jews, Acts 28.21.) we know that
every where it is spoken against. To be accounted a thief, a drunkard, a
papist, or any thing will not make a man so odious to many as to be counted a
Puritan.

A third is that they that are conscionably religious are much subject to
trouble Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.12. On the other side they see that
they that are not so religious as themselves, live quietly and prosper in the
world This is a shrewd tentation, and for a while troubled the Prophet
himself, Psalm 73.5. They are not in trouble, as the other are; and verse 12.
Behold these are the ungodly who prosper in the world, and increase in riches

Woe be to the world because of offenses, says our Savior, Matthew. 18.7.

The natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, (says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.14.) for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned. Any will worship or superstition
he can much more easily brook and like of though it be never so painful
(such as the Apostle speaks of, Col. 2.23. such as popish confession, and
penance, and fastings, and pilgrimage) then of the true service of God; for
that is agreeable to nature, and but bodily, but this is spiritual and in that
respect not suitable to the fleshly and corrupt nature of man.

John 6.60. This is an hard saying, who can hear it? And of the faithful
Ministers of God, as if we were like the taskmasters of Egypt, Exodus 1.11.
that afflict men with the burdens we lay upon them. Or like the Pharisees of
whom we read, Matthew. 23.4. that they bound heavy burdens, and grievous to be
borne, and laid them upon men's shoulders; And of whom Peter says, Acts 15.10.
that they put a yoke upon the Disciples necks, which neither they nor their
fathers were ever able to bear. Of us they exclaim principally, and say that
we by our strictness and preciseness make the service and religion of God,
more burdensome to men then ever God himself made it. Let us break their
bands asunder (say those, Psalm 2.2, 3. who did indeed set themselves against
Christ, though they pretended only to mislike his ministers) and cast away
their cords from us. And certainly this conceit men have of God, and of his
service, as if he were the hardest master; and his service and religion the
greatest bondage and slavery in the world, such a yoke as no man is able to
bear. We cannot be religious, but we must be abridged of all liberty in
our mirth, and recreations, and good fellowship. We must spend the Sabbath in
religious duties, we must spend so much time in hearing, we must pray so often
at Church, and in our families, and in secret too; and many such like things
we must do; yea all this must be done, with our whole heart, or else all is
to no purpose; yea we must be so mortified, we must crucify that flesh with
the affections and lusts. Galat. 5.24. And who can do all this? We know there
be some that profess, and pretend they do all this; but certainly they are
all hypocrites that pretend this, it is impossible for flesh and blood to do
so indeed. These are the conceits that men have of Gods service; they think
the life of a Christian the most uncomfortable life, and the service of God,
the greatest bondage and drudgery in the world. But (alas beloved) this is but
a false slander that is cast upon the ways and service of God. And we must
say of it, as our Savior does of the tares that were sowed in Gods field.
Matthew 13.28. The enemy has done this. The devil has raised this slander,
and suggested it into the minds of men, to terrify them from Gods service by
it. There is no truth in it at all. For though indeed we must go under the
yoke if we will be his servants, and obey his commandments; we may not be
allowed to live as we list; yet if we can once humble our selves to bear this
yoke of Christ, we shall never have cause to complain of the hardness or
uneasinesse of it, Take my yoke upon you (says our Savior, Matthew. 11.29, 30.
even to the humbled sinner who was like the bruised reed, who was already weary
and heavy laden, and therefore unable to bear any heavy burden, or to wear a
yoke that would pinch and gall him; even to this man says Christ, take my yoke
upon thee, fear it not) for my yoke is easy, and my burden light? If this
yoke do pinch or gall any man, the fault is not in the yoke, but in himself,
because he takes it not upon him, but like an untamed and unruly bullock,
strugleth with it, and is unwilling to bear it. If any of Christ's burdens
seem intolerable to any man, the fault is not in the burden, but in himself,
he has some bile or corrupt sore upon him, that makes him unable to bear
the lightest burden, that can be laid upon him. And thus speaks the Apostle
John also of all Christ's burdens and commandments, 1 John 5.3. This is the
love of God that we keep his commandments (if we be his servants, and bear
any love to him, we must indeed keep his commandments) but his commandments
are not grievous, it is no bondage to be tied to keep them. In which respect
also the Apostle calls it the law of liberty, James 1.25. It is the greatest
freedom and liberty in the world to be obedient unto God. Certainly no man
has just cause to complain of the hardness of Gods service, nor to be
afraid of it. There is no life under heaven so pleasant as the life of Gods
servant; there is no service in the world so easy and comfortable, as the
service of God is. If men obey and serve him (says Elihu, Job 36.11.) they
shall spend their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasure.

This I know will seem to many of you a strange paradox; but if you will mark
well what I shall say, I will make it evident that it is so, and that in three
respects.

Lecture LXXXXI. On Psalm 51.6. June. 17. 1628.
FIrst I will show you that religion does not so abridge men of their liberty
in lawful delights, as is pretended. Secondly. That the taskes and duties that
it imposes upon men, are nothing so hard as Satan would make us believe.
Thirdly, That the service of God, is so far from being a bondage and drudgery,
that it is in sundry respects, the most comfortable life in the world.

For the first. Though God do indeed restrain his servants from
licentiousness, Tim. 4.3. may likewise be said of all other lawful
recreations, and delights. God has created them to be received with
thankesgiving of them which believe and know the truth. As if he had said, For
their sakes they were ordained, they are the people that have just title unto
them. God has called us to peace, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.15. that is, not
an hard, a troublesome, and rigorous, but a free and comfortable condition of
life, even in respect of these outward things. And in this respect among
others, the Apostle says, Gal. 5.13. Brethren ye have been called unto
liberty, only use not your liberty as an occasion to the flesh. Religion does
not forbid the use of any lawful delight, but the abuse of it only.

Secondly.The taskes that God sets to his servants, the burden he lays Quest.
Is it a matter of no hardness or difficulty to observe them? For answer unto
this, I will show 1. How, and in what respect they are hard and difficult. 2.
How and in what respect they are light and easy to be peformed.

Answ. 1
For the first. The commandments of God, and burdens he lays upon men, are
hard and heavy in three respects.

All these things (says the young man, Mat. 19 20.) have I kept from my youth
up. But indeed this is utterly impossible, every unbeleever is reprobate unto
every good work. Titus 1.16. How can ye being evil (says our Savior,
Matthew. 12.34.) speak good things? that is, constantly, and conscionably* Can
the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? (says the Lord,
Jeremy 13.23.) then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil.
And that which our Savior says of the covetous man, ( Luke 18.25.) may also
truly be said of the fornicatour, and of the drunkard, and of the proud man,
and of every wicked man, It is easier for a camel to go through a needles eye,
then for such a one to enter into the kingdom of God, or to keep any of those
commandments, that are against his sin.

Secondly. To every regenerate and godly man, the commandments of God are not
only hard, but impossible to be kept, in that manner that the law requires.
In that respect the Apostle Peter professes, Acts 15.10. that the law was
svch a yoke, as neither their fathers (none of the holy Patriarchs, nor
prophets) nor they (none of the elect Apostles themselves) were able to bear.
Now if a Papist (who holds and believes that this is not only possible, but
very easy also for every regenerate man to keep all the commandments of God
so perfectly as he may be justified thereby in Gods sight, and merit also
eternal life, if such a one I say) shall object against this proof, that the
Apostle speaks not there of the morrall, but of circumcision, and of the
ceremonial law. I answer, He calls circumcision and the ceremonial law, an
intolerable yoke, not in respect of it self (for the ceremonial law was much
more easy to be kept, then the moral was) but because by urging the
observation of the ceremonial law then (when it was abrogated by Christ) they
did deprive men of all benefit by Christ, and bound them to the observation of
the whole moral law, and to seek salvation by it. This the Apostle plainly
teaches us, Galat. 5.2.3. Behold I Paul say unto you, that if ye be
circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. For I testify again to every
one that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole law. The
observation therefore of the moral law in that manner that the law required
(that is exactly in all points and perfectly) was such a yoke, as no Prophet,
nor Apostle, was ever able to bear. This the Lord taught his people by
delivering the law unto them in so terrible a manner as he did. The sight was
so terrible (says the Apostle, Hebr. 12.^1) that Moses said, I exceedingly
fear and quake, and all Gods people were in that terrible fear, that they
entreated (as the Apostle says verse 19.) that the word might not be spoken
to them any more; that they might hear no more of it in that manner; and the
reason is given verse 20. why they were in this horrible fear For they could
not endure that which was commanded says the Apostle, The commandments of God
in that manner that the law enjoyneth them, have nothing but terror in them,
the perfect observation of them is so intolerable a yoke, as Moses himself
was not able to bear.

Thirdly and lastly. To observe the commandments of God, even in such Romans
7.23. Galat. 5.17.) certainly puts them to no less pain then Rebecca was
in, when the two children strugled together within her, Genesis 25.22. and as
the pain she was in then, made her cry out in a sudden fit of impatiency, If
it be so why I am thus? would I had never conceived, would I had never
married. So does the pain that this intestine war puts them in, make the
best of Gods servants often times, not only to sigh, and groan, and cry out
with Paul Romans 7.24. Oh wretched man that I am; but even to entertain such
motions as Rebecca did. If it be so, why am I thus? If it be so hard and
painful a thing to serve God, would I had never entered into his service, but
contented my self to live as other men do. This tentation we know the Prophet
himself was subject unto, when he cried, Ps. 73.13. Verily I have cleansed my
heart in vain, and washed mine hands in innocence. Let papists say what they
will, how easy a thing it is for a regenerate man to keep all the
commandments of God, and to keep them perfectly; it is certainly a painful
thing for such as the best of us are, that have so much flesh and corruption
remaining in us, to do any service unto God, even in that manner as the
Gospel requires of us; without labor and pain, no service can be done to
God acceptably. That which the Apostle says of prayer, Strive together with me
in prayer, says he, Rom 15.30. faithful prayer can never be well made,
without striving and labor; the same our Savior says of all the ways of God
that lead to life (faith, repentance, love, keeping of the Sabbath, every
other good duty and service) Lu. 13.24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate.
As though he should say, every way of God is strait and uneasy to our flesh,
and therefore, without striving and labor, there is no possibility of walking
in it.

Answ. 2.
All this notwithstanding (to come now unto the second part of my answer) the
commandments of God are not so hard, the service he requires of us is not so
difficult and paineful, as need to discourage any of us, or make us afraid of
it. For

All things are possible (says Christ, Mar 9.23.) to him that believes. Nay
as it has been truly said of the wicked man, he cannot possibly keep them,
he cannot but break them; so may it be as truly said of the regenerate man,
he cannot but keep them, he cannot break them as the other does. How can I
(says Joseph, Genesis 39.9.) do this great wickedness and sin against God?
Whosoever is borne of God, sins not (says the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 3.9.) and he
cannot sin, because he is borne of God.

Moses enjoined them, be an intolerable yoke, even to the regenerate
themselves, yet as Christ enjoyneth them, they are not so. Though that perfect
and strict obedience which the law requires, be utterly impossible for the
strongest Christian under heaven to perform; yet Evangelicall obedience to the
commandments of God, an unfeined love to them all, and endeavor to keep them
(which is all that the Gospel requires) is no more then the weakest Christian
is able to perform. For so says our Savior to the poor Christian, that is
most wearied, and over-burdened, and brokenhearted, Matthew. 11.30 My yoke is
easy, and my burden light.

I delight in the law of God (says the Apostle, Romans 7.22.) after the inward
man. And for this we have not only the express testimony of the holy Ghost, 1
Ioh. 5 3. His commandments are not grievous. But we have also the experience
of the faithful in all ages, who have been so far from finding of that
hardness in the yoke of Christ, as was in the yoke of Moses, that terror in
the law of Christ, as was in the law of Moses, that they have found more
sweetness in it, then in any thing else in the world. And by how much the
more, the inward man and grace of regeneration has grown and increased, and
as the flesh and corruption has decayed, and bin weakened in them, by so much
the more easy, they have found the commandments of God to be, by so much the
more sweetness and delight they have felt in them. We know how plentiful and
patheticall David is in expressing this, Oh how love I thy law, says he Ps.
119.97. and ver. 143. Thy commandments are my delights. As if he had said,
they are to me in stead of all delights and pleasures in the world. And thus
the Prophet professes Ier. 15.16. Thy word was to me the joy and rejoicing of
my heart. And whence comes this strange alteration and difference between
the people of God; Moses quaked at, and found terror in the Law, David joyed,
and felt sweetness in it; all Gods people at the delivery of the law desired
they might hear no more of it, Paul and Jeremy delight, and rejoice in it? O
see (beloved) what Christ has done for us, he has taken out the sting of the
law, that it is no more a killing letter; See the difference betwixt Christ and
Moses, betwixt the law and the Gospel. And thus have I finished the second
part of my answer, and showed you that the Lord sets no such hard taskes to
his servants, as Satan pretends. The commandments and duties that God
enioyneth unto them that are in Christ, are not impossible, nor hard to be
performed; it is nothing but this cursed flesh of ours that makes us so to
complain of the commandments of God, and repine at the yoke of Christ, as we
use to do.

Now come we to the third and last part of my answer to this slander that Who
would not fear thee (says the Prophet. Jeremy 10 7.) o King of nations? for
to thee it does appertain. As if he had said; All greatness and Sovereignty,
all power and Majesty belongs unto thee. But when unto greatness, and power,
goodness also, and graciousnesse of disposition is added; when men can say of
a man, that he is not only a great man, but he is also one that uses to be
good, and bountiful to his servants; this has wonderful force to draw the
hearts of all men unto him. For a good man (says the Apostle, Romans 5.7.) some
will even dare to dye; for such a one men think, they can never do too much.
And certainly, if we knew the Lord well, and how gracious and good he is
toward his servants, there is none of us here, but would desire and long to
be in his service. And that which David says, Psalm 9.10. of putting our
trust in him, may also be said of doing him service. They that know thy name,
will be glad to serve thee. And surely Satan deceives men, and keeps them
from serving God, and being religious by no device, more then by this, that he
persuades them, as he did the lazy and unprofitable servant; Matthew. 25.24.
that the Lord is an hard master, hard to be pleased, apt to exact rigorously of
his servants, more then they are able to perform. Observe therefore I pray you
(that you may perceive how false a slander this is) the gracious disposition of
the Lord whom we do service unto, in these four points especially.

First. His aptness to wink at, and pass by our offenses. Whereas we can
Nehemiah did, Nehem. 13 22. the Lord is not apt to mark and observe strictly,
every thing that is done amiss, but uses to wink at, and is ready to pass
by, and remit many slips and failings of his servants in this kind. I will
spare them (says he Mal. 3.17) as a man spares his son that serves him. If
thou Lord should mark iniquity (says David, Psalm. 130 3, 4.) o Lord who
shall stand? As if he had said, Who could endure thy service? But there is
forgiveness with thee: that thou may be feared. As if he had said, That
aptnes that is in thee to forgive thy servants their slips, would make any man
(that is not a very beast) willing to serve thee. This made the Church break
out into these words of admiration, Mic. 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee,
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his
heritage? As if he should say; Where shall a man find such a master as thou art?

To will, is present with us (as the Apostle speaks, Romans 7.18.) but we find
no ability at all, to perform that that is good; we have nothing in us but an
unfeined desire to do well, and a grief that we cannot do it; this good
Lord and master of ours, is apt to take even that in good part, if we but do
what we can, and accounts that, as perfectly performed by us, which he
sees us unfeinedly desire and endeavor to do. If there be first a willing
mind (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8.12.) it is accepted, according to that that a
man has, and not according to that that a man has not. And whereas we, when
we have done our work best, are apt to be ashamed, and discouraged in our
selves, because we have so slubbered it over, and done it so illfavouredly,
this good master of ours is apt to accept of in Christ, and to take in good
part these poorest services that are done in faith and obedience unto him. Yea
he is apt to delight in them, and to praise us for them. Our spiritual
sacrifices (the Apostle tells us, 1 Pet. 2.5.) are acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ. And let me see thy countenance (says Christ to his Church, Cant.
2.14) let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance
comely. And well done good and faithful servant, says the Lord to him, Matthew.
25.23. that had but two talents. And who can complain of such a master? Nay
who that knows and believes this, would not be glad to serve such a master,
as is so ready to accept of, and delight in, to commend and applaud such poor
service, as we are able to do unto him.

presses them with affliction out of measure above strength, as Paul says he
was, 2 Cor. 1.8. He brings them to the fiery trial that the Apostle speaks
of, 1 Peter 4.12. He sets the messenger of Satan to buffet them with strange
tentations as Paul was, 2 Cor. 12.7.) in such a case the Lord is wont to put to
his own hand to the work, in an extraordinary manner, and to help his poor
servants that they may be able to go through with it. It is said, 1 Chronicles
15.26. that God helped the Levites that bare the arc of the covenant of the
Lord. And the Apostle speaking of the great trial of affliction that Gods
servants are sometimes brought unto, tells us, Rom 8.26. that in that case
the spirit it self helps our infirmities. The greater that the trial is,
that God shall be pleased to exercise us by, the greater degree of strength
will he minister unto us, for the bearing of it. And what need the weakest of
Gods servants fear the heaviest burden that can be laid upon them, when he
has such a one to help and support him? When those everlasting arms that
Moses speaks of, Deuteronomy. 33.27. are underneath him? Nay, why may we not in all
dangers secure our hearts in this, and say, Lord give thou strength to bear
it, and lay on me what thou will. The things that are unpossible with men
(says our Savior. Lu. 18.27. to his Disciples, when they were astonished out of
measure with a Doctrine he had taught, as Mark 10.26.) are possible with God.
So when Paul prayed thrice (that is often) unto God to be delivered from that
messenger of Satan, that buffeted him so (as it may be some of you have done
against those blasphemous thoughts, whereby you are buffeted) he received this
answer from God, 2 Cor. 12.9. My grace is sufficient for thee. As if he had
said, Fear him not, I will warrant thee, thou shall be strong enough for him,
he shall not be able to overcome thee, my grace and help will be sufficient
enough for thee, in this very case to uphold and strengthen thee. And this made
Paul speak so confidently. Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ
that strengthens me.

Fourthly and lastly. Observe what wages God gives to his servants. He is

First. If we be his faithful servants, we shall have his countenance and
David had spoken of the happiness of them that dwell in Gods house, he
mentions this for one part of it, Psalm. 48.11. For the Lord God is a sun to
such, the light of his countenance uses to shine upon them. And this is such a
privilege as is worth all the pains we can take in his service, though it
were a thousand times more. Cause thy face to shine (says the Church. Psalm.
80.19.) and we shall be saved. As if she had said, We have even enough.

Secondly. If we be Gods faithful servants, we may be assured of protection
David reckons for another part of their happiness that dwell in Gods house,
and serve him. Psalm. 84.11. the Lord will be a shield unto such.

Thirdly. If we be Gods faithful servants, we shall be sure to want nothing,
Tim. 5.8 And this David reckons for a third part of the happiness of those
that dwell in Gods house, Psalm. 84.11. No good thing will he withold from
them that walk uprightly.

Fourthly and lastly. If we be Gods faithful servants, we shall be sure when
Matthew. 20.8. till our day be done, till this life be ended) to receive such a
reward of our service, as no tongue can express, no heart can conceive how
great it shall be Our Savior speaking of the reward of such of Gods servants,
as had done but little service unto God, even so little as themselves took no
notice of it, says, he will say thus to them at the day of judgment, Matthew.
25 34, 35. Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
you, for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink. Alas, what was that that they had done, to be rewarded with a kingdom?
Certainly there is no proportion between the service and the wages; but this
it is to serve such a master; thus will the Lord reward all that serve him. And
therefore admit the service that God should employ us in all our life long,
either in doing or suffering, were never so hard and painful; yet the
certain hope we have of this reward in the end, were sufficient to make it
easy unto us, yea to make us cheerful and comfortable in it, and even to
sing at our work, as Paul and Silas did, even at midnight, when they had bin
grievously scourged, and were then in a dungeon, and their feet fast in the
stocks, as you shall read Acts 16.25. And what was it that made Moses not only
willing to forsake the pleasures of sin, and all those wicked liberties and
delights that worldly men dote so much upon, but to betake himself to the
service of God, and join himself to the people of God, even then when they
were in greatest affliction and reproach, yea to account their life a far
more happy and comfortable life, then the life of any courtier, or of Pharaoh
himself, but only this, that he had respect to the recompense of reward; as
the Apostle tells us, Hebr. 11.26. For this cause we faint not (says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17.) but though our outward man perish, yet the inward
man is renewed day by day (our delight in Gods service, and in his holy law
increases daily) for our light affliction which is but for a moment, works
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Rejoicing in hope
(says the Apostle, Romans 12.12.) patient in tribulation. As though he should
say, The hope of this reward is able not only to make you patient in any
tribulation (how great soever it may be) but even comfortable and joyful in it
also.

Applic.
O that all this that we have heard, might (through Gods gracious and mighty
working with it) become effectual to make us all in love with Gods service. O
that we could count it our happiness and honor to be admitted into it, and
think and say of it as David does, Psalm. 65.4. Blessed is the man whom thou
choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy house,
and be one of thy household servants. And 116.16. O Lord truly I am thy servant,
thy servant and the son of thine handmaid thou have loosed my hands. As if he
had said, I was a bondslave till I became thy servant; but thou have brought me
out of that bondage, and by making me thy servant have loosed my bonds, and
made me a free man. And then follows, verse 17. I will offer unto thee the
sacrifice of thankesgiving. As if he should say. I will praise thy name for
this so long as I live.

Lecture XCII. On Psalm 51.6. June 24. 1628.
The woman (says he, Genesis 3.12.) which thou gave to be with me, she gave me
of the tree, and I did eat. As if he had said, I may thank thee for that that
I have done, If thou had not given me this woman, I had never sinned. And
thus did the unprofitable servant plead for himself, Matthew. 25.14. I know
thou art an hard man, reaping where thou never sowedst. As though he had said,
Exacting fruit of holiness and obedience where thou did never bestow the
seed of grace. And thus the Apostle brings in wicked men objecting against
the Lord, Romans 9 19. Why does he yet find fault? for who has resisted his
will? As if he had said, How can I justly be blamed or punished for being as I
am, if it be the will of God I shall be no better? How can I be said to be the
cause of mine own damnation, when it is the decree and will of God that I
should perish? But (as I told you) these are but the pleas and pretenses of
wicked men. These pleas will not hold. Certainly as God is not the cause of
any man's sin, but himself as the Apostle teaches us, Iam. 1.13, 14. Let no
man say (As if he had said, I know men are apt to say so, but it is folly and
sin for a man to say) when he is tempted (or moved to any sin) I am tempted
of God, for God cannot be tempted of evil, neither tempts he any man; but
every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed. So
neither is God the cause of man's destruction but himself. It is the fruit of
his own way, as the Holy Ghost speaks, Pro. 1.31. And as of every temporal
cross that befalls a man in this life (of what kind soever it be) a man may
justly smite himself upon the breast, and say to his own heart as the Lord
speaks, Ier. 2.17. Have thou not procured this to thy self? He may truly
say, Whatsoever hand, God, or man had in this evil that is befa^len me, I am
sure I was the chief cause of it my self; so may it truly be said to every
wicked man of his spiritual and eternal death and destruction, as the Lord
speaks to Israel, Hos. 13.9. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, but in
me is thy help; that is, though thou can not save thy self nor work any
goodness in thy self, that must come wholly from my mere grace ( By grace
are ye saved, through faith (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.8) and that not of
your selves; it is the gift of God) yet thou have destroyed thy self, thou art
thy self the cause why thou have no grace, why thou can not repent, nor
leave thy gross sins, why thou can not believe nor take any comfort in
Christ, why thou shall be damned and perish everlastingly. Yea how apt soever
men are now to plead thus for themselves and to impute all unto God, there will
come a day when (as the Apostle speaks, Romans 3.19.) every mouth shall be
stopped, and all the world shall become guilty before God; No man shall have
any such thing to say for himself, but shall clear the Lord, he shall cry
guilty and acknowledge himself to have been the only cause of his own
destruction. The books shall be opened (as the Apostle speaks, Revel. 20.12.
the books of every man's conscience) and men shall be judged according to the
things that are written in those books, according to their works. Every man's
own book, his own conscience will plead for God against himself, at that
day. At that day it will appear that not the Lord but every wicked man
himself is the only cause of his own destruction; that he is not saved,
because he had no desire nor will to be saved, he did not his endeavor nor
what lay in him, to come to grace and salvation; that the Lord was not wanting
to him this way but he was wanting to himself. In that day the Lord will say
to every wicked man as he says to Jerusalem, Matthew. 22.37. O wretched man and
woman how often would I have gathered thee, but thou would not? How often would I
have converted thee; what means of grace did I give unto thee; how often have
I showed my self willing by such and such a Sermon, by such and such an
affliction to have changed thy heart, but thou would not? Certainly all
wicked men perish wilfully, they perish because they will perish, they have no
desire to be saved. Why will ye die O house of Israel, says the Lord, Ezekiel.
33.11? As if he had said Ye die because ye will die. Now that men do perish
thus wilfully, that they have no true desire nor will to be saved, appears
evidently by these four things that may be observed in them.

First, They will use no means nor take any pains to escape damnation, to
obtain grace and to get to heaven, as they would do to escape any great
danger they desire to avoid; or to obtain any good thing they desire to have.
Salvation is far from the wicked (says David, Psalm. 119.155. how should they
come by it?) for they kept not thy statutes. As if he had said, They will not
use the means, nor labor to get it.

Job 21.24. Depart from me, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.

Stephen says the Jews did, Acts 7.51. They hold the truth in
unrighteousness, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 1.18. They violently withstand
and oppose these good motions and will not yield to them.

Gallio the profane deputy, Act. 8.17. he cared for none of those things; so
may it be said of them, the matter of religion and of their salvation is the
least of their care; when they have nothing else to do or think of, then they
will think of heaven. So that as it is said of Esau that he despised his
birthright, Gen 25.34. because he sold it for one morsel of meat, for one
meals meat, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 12.16. so may it be truly said of
all wicked, that they despise grace and salvation because there be so many
trifles that they prefer before it. And so the Holy Ghost expressly
speaks, Pro. 11.33. He that refuses instruction despises his own soul. So
that it is evident you see, that every wicked man is utterly inexcusable: he
perishes justly, because he perishes wilfully; he has no desire at all, no
will to be saved, but an utter averseness and unwillingnesse to go to heaven,
or to walk in the way that leads thither.

Now if any man shall object against this and say, How can this be? seeing the
spirit speaks expressly in the holy Scriptures. 1. That man has by nature
no freedom of will to any thing that is good but is dead in trespasses and
sins as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 2.1. He cannot desire to have grace or
to be saved, no more then a dead man can desire to live; nay he cannot accept
of Gods grace when it is offered, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not
the things of the spirit of God for they are foolishness unto him; he cannot
choose but be unwilling and averse from good things. 2. That the matter of man's
salvation depends wholly, not upon the will of man but upon the will and free
grace of God; as the Apostle speaks, Romans 9.16. It is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs (this matter depends neither upon the desire
of man, nor upon any endeavor neither that he can use) but of God that shows
mercy. And verse 18. He has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he
will, he hardens. And he works all things according to the counsel of his
own will, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.11. 3. Gods grace is irresistible and
able to overcome and subdue this unwillingnesse and averseness that is in our
nature. God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham, as John
Baptist speaks, Matthew. 3.9. And that in these three respects it should seem
that the wicked man is not the cause of his own destruction, but the Lord
rather.

Answ. 1.
To this I answer, First. That the Lord is not the cause why man is by nature
dead in trespasses and sins, but himself only: he killed himself, and
deprived himself of this spiritual life, the Lord did it not; God requires
nothing of man, (for not doing whereof the condemns him) but he made him well
able to do it. God made man upright, says the Holy Ghost, Eccl. 7.29. not the
first man, but man indefinitely, mankind, God made man upright. And as in Adam
all men were made upright, so in Adam all men voluntarily and unconstrainedly
sinned, as the Apostle says, Romans 5.12. killed themselves, lost this
spiritual life; So that even in this respect, that stands good which you
heard out of Hos. 13.9. O man, thou have destroyed thy self.

Secondly, 2.
Though God be able to restore to every wicked man this spiritual life again,
and to quicken him by his grace, yet is he not bound to do it, he does no man
wrong if he do it not. Is it not lawful for me (says the Lord, Mat. 20.15.)
to do what I will with mine own? Who has first given to him (says the
Apostle, Romans 11.35. who has made God a debtor to him) and it shall be
recompensed to him again?

Thirdly, 3.
Though every natural man be dead in trespasses and sins so as he can do
nothing that is spiritually good and pleasing unto God, nothing that he can
save himself by. Yet may every natural man do much more then he does, to
further his own salvation. He is not so dead but there is enough left in him
to make him without excuse as the Apostle plainly teaches, Romans 1.20. He may
do more then he does to avoid damnation, he may do more then he does to
further his own salvation, and because he will not do what he may therefore
he is inexcusable, therefore he is the cause of his own destruction. Why what
can he do, Quest.
will you say?

I answer, Answ. 1.
First, He has power enough left in him by nature to curb and restrain
himself from all gross sins, from drunkenness, and whoredom, and such
like sins, yea and from haunting of lewd company that may draw him to such
sins; he may forbear these things if he will; he has enough left in him to
make him able to live a civil and unblameable life. There is many a man that
even by the strength of nature can truly say, as he said, Luke 18.11. I thank
God I am no extortioner, nor unjust (in my dealings with men) nor an adulterer.

Secondly, 2.
He has enough left in him to make him able to do many good works, I mean
works that are materially and morally good. He can (if he will) make
restitution of that that he has gotten unjustly, and do works of mercy also
to the poor. Else would not Daniel 4.27. have spoken thus to such a man as
Nebuchadnezzar was, Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine
iniquities by showing mercy to the poor. And that which the young man says of
the outward observation of all the commandments of the second table, Matthew. 19
20. All these things have I kept from my youth up; that the Apostle speaks
even of many a Gentile, Romans 2.14. The Gentiles do by nature the things
contained in the law. And in the Church, many a man is even by the strength of
nature able to say, not of the second table only but of the three latter
commandments of the first table also (so far forth as the letter and
external observation of them) all these have I kept.

Thirdly, 3.
He can (if he will) frequent the ministry of the Word, the plainest, and most
powerful ministry and that constantly. When thou were young (says our
Savior to Peter, John 21.18.) thou girdest thy self, and walkedst whither
thou would. So much freedom of will every man has by nature, so much power
(even by that general and common grace and assistance that God communicates
unto all men) that he may go to Church if he will; yea he may (if he will)
ride or go many miles to a Sermon ordinarily as well as he may to an market so
far. The Lord speaking of such as were no better then natural men tells
the Prophet, Ezekiel. 33.31. They come to thee as the people comes, and they sit
before thee as my people, and they hear thy words.

4.
Fourthly, He may (if he will) so seriously mark and observe the Word that is
preached unto him, and the judgments of God which he sees and feels, as he
may bring himself thereby unto legal repentance; even to such a sight and
sense of his sin and of the wrath of God as may make his heart to quake and
judge himself to be in a most miserable estate. Of them that were no more then
natural men we do read, Esa. 58.3. that they did use in the time of Gods
judgments upon them, to fast and afflict their own souls. And of Ahab and
Felix we read how by hearing the Word and observing what they heard they were
wrought upon. Ahab 1 King. 21.27.29. rent his clothes, put sackcloth upon his
flesh, fasted and humbled himself before God. And Felix ( Acts 24.25.)
trembled exceedingly.

5.
Fifthly and lastly, He may be able (out of this sense he has of his own
miserable estate) not only to desire the prayers of others, as Pharaoh did,
Exodus 10.17. and Jeroboam, 1 King. 13.6. but even himself also to cry
importunately and pray to God for mercy. So it is said of the mariners, Jonah
1. that in the extreme fear they were in through the apprehension of Gods
wrath they cried not only every man unto his God, verse 5. but unto the Lord
also unto Jehovah, verse 14. So it is likewise said of Saul, Acts 9.11. Behold,
he prays. When our Savior exhorts the hypocritical Jews in an
allegorical speech, to make their peace with God in time, while this life and
the day of grace lasts, Luke 12.58, 59. he makes this preface to that
exhortation, verse 57. Yea, and why even of your selves judge ye not what is
right? As if he had said, You have so much light and judgment in your selves,
even by nature, as to discern that that is fit and necessary to be done. Even
by the light of nature a man may be able (out of the apprehension and sense of
his own fearful condition) to desire reconciliation with God, and to cry
earnestly for it.

Quest.
Now if any man shall ask me; and what is all to the purpose that you say a
natural man is able to do, seeing none of all this, is any thing worth in the
sight of God, or pleasing unto him? seeing there is no true goodness in any of
this, that a natural man does; Without faith it is impossible to please God,
Hebrews 11.6.

Answ. 1.
I answer, First, That though this be so, yet I may say to the natural man that
does these things, that does thus what in him lies, as our Savior said to the
Scribe, Mark 12.34. Thou art not far from the kingdom of God; such a man is
nearer to heaven then any other natural man in the world is.

2.
Secondly, That though by doing all this that lies in his power 1 he cannot
deserve (neither ex condigno, nor ex congruo as the Papists speak) that God
should save him or give him his grace (for Gods grace is free, he works in
men both to will and to do, of his own good pleasure, as the Apostle
speaks, Phil. 2.13.) 2 He can have no certain assurance when he has done
all this, that lies in him to do that he shall find mercy with God (for there
is no promise made to these things, All the promises of God are in Christ yea
and Amen, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 1.20. till a man be in Christ he has
no promise from God) yet may the natural man be greatly encouraged to do thus
what lies in him, to fly from the wrath to come, and to please God; and may
conceive hope that by doing these things as well as he is able, God will be
pleased (out of his infinite goodness) to show mercy on him. And these grounds
he has out of Gods Word for his encouragement therein. 1. Because the Lord
has revealed himself in his Word to be so infinite in mercy and goodness,
Exodus 34.7. and has sworn, Ezekiel. 33.11. that he has no pleasure in the
death of the wicked. 2. Because God seeks to the vilest sinner in the
ministry of his word, 2 Cor. 5.^0. and beseeches him by us, that he would
be reconciled unto God. Commands us to offer Christ to every wicked man that
hears us (upon condition that he will believe, and obey) and to proclaim a
general pardon without excluding any. Preach the Gospel (says he Mark
16.15.) to every creature. And what cause then has such a man that has gone
thus far to doubt of finding mercy? 3. Because God has bin pleased (out of
his infinite goodness) to show respect even to such poor stuff as natural
men out of the strength of nature, have been able to do. Christ loved the
young man, of whom we read, Mark 1^.21. even for that morality that was in
him. And God showed much respect even unto Ahab^ humiliation. 1 Kings 21.29.
and to Iehoahaz prayer, that in the sense of his misery he made, Iehoahaz
besought the Lord (says the story, 2 Kings 12.4.) and the Lord hearkened unto
him; and to that prayer which Saul out of his legal humiliation before his
conversion did make unto him. Acts 9.11.

Thirdly and lastly. 3.
I may confidently affirm of all such, as do not their endeavor thus, and
what in them lies to escape damnation, and to be saved these three things. 1.
That they are hereby made more inexcusable, and do more evidently declare
themselves to be the causes of their own damnation. 2. That they make
themselves worse and worse thereby, and more unable to repent. As the Apostle
plainly reaches, Rom 1. that the Gentiles by not making use of that light and
freedom of will, and of that power that was in them by nature; because as he
says, verse 18. they held the truth in unrighteousness, and verse 21. when
they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but
became vain in their imaginations, therefore verse 4. God gave them up to
uncleannes through the lusts of their own hearts. 3. That their damnation
shall even for this, be far greater in hell, they shall become twofold more
the children of hell, as our Savior speaks, Matthew 23.15. This is plain by
that Christ says of Capernaum. Matthew 11.^4. It shall be more tolerable for
the land of S^dom, in the day of judgment, then for thee.

Lecture XCIII. On Psalm 51.6. Aug 5. 1628.
IT follows now, Applic. 2
that we proceed to the second branch of the application, which is for the
comfort of all such as do unfeinedly fear God. For though it be the least part
of them that hear us, that have need of comfort (the greatest part (alas) have
more need to be humbled then comforted, yea they will be in danger to take
hurt, by that which they shall hear spoken, for the comfort of Gods people)
yet are we bound in our ministry of all other our hearers, to have most
respect to those few that are brokenhearted. This was the first and chief
charge that was given to Christ (the chief pastor, 1 Peter. 5.4.) when he came
to be a preacher. He has sent me (says he Esa. 61.1, 2.) to bind up the
broken hearted, and to comfort all that mourn in Zion. And this was the first
and chief charge that Christ gave to Peter, and so to all us his servants, and
ministers, he charge him indeed to feed all his sheep, but the first and
chief charge he gives him, is concerning his lambs, the weakest and tenderest
of his flock. If thou love me ( Ioh. 21.15.) feed my lambs. He that
prophesies (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14 3.) speaks to edification, to
exhortation, and to comfort. As if he had said, No man prophesies, no man
preaches or divides the word aright, if he omit this, if he do not apply
his doctrine to the comfort of such as stand in need of it. Therefore when the
Prophet Esaias begins to speak of the ministry of the Gospel, he brings
in the Lord giving this first of all in charge to his servants, and ministers,
Esaias 40.1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God, speak ye
comfortably to Jerusalem. As if he had said. Whatsoever ye do else, neglect
not this duty of your ministry.

Now of all the things that do deject the hearts of Gods poor people, and
cause them so to droop as they do, this is the principal, that they cannot
be persuaded of the uprightness of their own hearts, they cannot be
persuaded that they are any better then hypocrites. Yea, they are so far from
finding any comfort in those signs of uprightness of heart, that I have given
you out of Gods word, that even from thence they are apt to conclude strongly
against themselves, that all the goodness that is in them, is no better then
hypocrisy. And I nothing doubt, but many of you while you have heard me
speaking of them, have been apt to say within your selves, alas, I can take no
comfort in any of these signs and notes that the Scripture gives of an
upright heart, for I find no such thing in me. If these be the marks whereby
the truth of the heart is to be known, woe be unto me, how far am I from
truth of heart, what can I be but an hypocrite? For 1. The evil abstain
from, and the good I do, I do it not in obedience to the word, that is not the
only rule that I follow; but I make custom, and example my guide, rather then
it; and for many things I do, I never enquire for warrant and direction from
the word for them, I never say to mine own heart before I do them, as Luke
10.26 What is written in the law? how read thou? What has God in his word
directed me to do in this case? 2. I do that I do, more out of a slavish
fear of Gods wrath, then out of any true love to God; and am like to those of
whom the Lord speaks, Job 41.25. by reason of breakings, they purify
themselves. When my heart is broken with terrors, then am I careful to do
well, but never else. 3. I do not that that I do in faith, out of a
comfortable assurance of Gods love to me in Christ. This could I never yet
attain to. And without faith (I know and have learned, Heb. 11.6) it is
impossible to please God. 4. Gods grace, where it is in truth, is like to the
leaven that leaveneth the whole lump, Matthew. 13.33. it sanctifies the whole
man, the mind, conscience, memory, will, affections, thoughts, words, and
actions. In such a one, all things are become new, as the Apostle speaks, 2
Cor* 5.17. But alas, I can find no such total change in me, in some of these I
can discern no work of Gods grace at all. 5. He that has an upright heart,
will be universal in his obedience; he will obey the will of God in one thing
as well as in another. And thus we have heard God describes the uprightness
of David's heart, 1 Kings 9.4. He walked in integrity of heart, and in
uprightnes, to do according to all that God commanded him. Now alas (says the
poor Christian) I cannot say it is so with me. Some commandments and duties I
do indeed make conscience of, but others I neglect wonderfully. Some sins I
hate and tremble at, but others I slip into ever and anon. 6. True grace is
constant and durable; and no man is blessed, and in the state of grace, but he
that fears always, Proverbs 28.14. that does righteousness at all times,
Psalm. 106.3. But alas, the goodness that is in me, is like the morning dew; as
the Prophet speaks, Hosea 6.4. there is no constancy nor durablenesse in it.
I am extremely inconstant in good things, and cannot continue in a good temper
and disposition of my soul for any time, 7. Lastly. No man has truth of
grace, that contenteth himself with this, that he abstaineth from evil, and
does good, unless his care be to do all this in the right manner, unless he
do it to the Lord, that is, with an intent to please and honor him.
Whatsoever ye do (says the Apostle, Coloss. 3.23.) do it as unto the Lord,
unless he do it with his heart, and spirit, and not with the outward man
only, and can say with the Apostle, Romans 1.9. I serve God with my spirit,
unless he do it in humility, and can discern cause to be humbled, even in
his best actions. Behold (says the Prophet, Hab. 2.4.) his soul which is
lifted up, is not upright in him. Now though I do good things sometimes, yet
do I never any thing in that manner that I should. For 1. The end that I aim
at, is not so much to please the Lord, and to honor him, but I have by
respects to my self in every thing that I do. 2. The good things I do, I do
without any affection, and use to offer dead sacrifices unto God. 3. I do not
walk humbly with my God, but if I do any thing in any measure well, I am ready
(at the least secretly) to glory and to pride my self in it. In a word, all
the signs of sincerity mentioned in the word of God, make against me, and are
unto me as so many signs and evidences of the falsehood, and hypocrisy of mine
own heart. These are the usual complaints of the best of Gods people, and
there is no tentation wherewith they use to be more troubled, both in life and
in death then with this, that there is no truth of grace in them, they are no
better then hypocrites.

Now I have three things to say for the comfort of these poor souls, and in

First. Admit all this be true that thou say against thy self, this will
prove indeed, that there is hypocrisy in thee, yea and much hypocrisy too it
may be; but this will not prove that thou art an hypocrite. It is not the
having of hypocrisy, or of any other wicked corruption in a man, that makes
him to deserve the name of an hypocrite, or of a wicked man, but the reigning
of hypocrisy and wickedness in him. No man doubts but Moses, Samuel, Job, and
all the holiest men that ever were, had wickedness in them; (For who could
ever say, as it is Prove. 20.9. I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my
sin.) And yet to say, that either Moses, or Samuel, or Job were wicked men,
were to open our mouths in blasphemy against them that dwell in heaven, as the
spirit speaks, Revel. 13.6. So that a man may have sin in him, and as other
sins, so hypocrisy, and much hypocrisy too, and yet be in the state of
grace for all that, so long as it reigns not in him. That which the Apostle
says of sin in general (1 John 1.8.) may be said of this sin in particular.
If we (the best of the Apostles or Saints of God) say, we have no hypocrisy
in us, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us. How often shall you
find Master Bradford, and other of the holy Martyrs, complain to God of their
hypocrisy, and crave pardon for it. And certainly David would not have cried
unto God, as he does, Psalm. 119.80. Let my heart be sound in thy statutes,
that I be not ashamed; if he had not felt himself subject to unsoundnes; and
to hyprocrisie, and much troubled with it. I know our Savior, Ioh. 1.47.
describes the true Israelite to be one in whom is no guile; and David the
justified man, the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin. Psalm. 32.2. to be
one in whose spirit there is no guile. But these places are no otherwise to be
understood, then that of David, when speaking of godly men he says, Psalm.
119.3. They do no iniquity; and that of the Apostle, 1 John 3 9. Whosoever in
borne of God, does not commit sin, nay he cannot sin, because he is borne
of God. Was there ever godly man, of whom it could be truly said, that he did
no iniquity, that he did commit no sin? No verily. But this is the meaning
of the holy Ghost in those phrases, he that is regenerate, does not commit any
iniquity, nor can do it ordinarily, and willingly, with the full sway of his
soul, or in that manner as the unregenerate man does, so he that is justified
and sanctified, has no guile, that is, no reigning hypocrisy in him. So this
is the first thing I have to say for thy comfort, though by this which thou
objectest against thy self, it may appear there is hypocrisy in thy heart,
yet will it not follow from thence, that thou art an hypocrite, thou may be
in the state of grace, and the dear child of God for all that.

Secondly. By this it is evident, that though there be hypocrisy in thy heart,
yet it reigns not in thee, thou art no hypocrite; because thou discernest
thine own hypocrisy, thou feel it, and art so troubled with it. It is not
corruption, but grace, that makes a man able to discern his corruption,
specially so hidden and secret a corruption as hypocrisy is. There be
thousands in the world, that are indeed in that state that thou suspectest thy
self to be in, that are hypocrites indeed, and they discern no such thing in
themselves, they think passing well of their own estate. But what speak I of
others? Thou thy self when thou were an hypocrite indeed, and had both this
and many other vile corruptions reigning in thee, perceivedst them not, were
never troubled with them. Ye were once darkness (says he Ephesians. 5.8.) but now
ye are light in the Lord. While we were in the state of nature (which the
Apostle calls darkness) we saw not a deal of naughtiness and corruption,
which now we discern in our selves. This discerning of our secret
corruptions, is a blessed sign, we are no longer darkness, but light in the
Lord. All things that are reproved (says he* Ephesians. 5.13. (...) all things
whereof we are convinced in our selves, that they are sins) are made
manifest by the light, for whatsoever does make manifest, is light. Before we
had saving grace wrought in us, we were dead in trespasses and sins, as the
Apostle speaks, Ephesians 2.1. and the dead man we know discerns not, nor
has any feeling of his own estate, sense is a sign of a living, not of a
dead man. This the holy Ghost expresses by a different phrase he uses, when
he speaks of the sinfulness of the natural, and of the regenerate man. Of
the natural man he says, he is in the flesh, Romans 8 8. he is in his
sins. 1 Cor. 15.17 he is in the bond of iniquity, and in the gall of
bitterness, Acts 8.23. plunged over head and ears in sin. But of the
regenerate man he says, Romans 8.9. he is not in the flesh, but in the spirit;
sin dwells in him, Romans 7.17. While a man is in the water, though he have
as much water upon him as would fill many hogs-heads or tuns, he feels not
the weight of it, it is no burden to him at all; but let him be out of the
water, four or five gallons of water will be a burden unto him. This
therefore is a blessed sign thou art no longer in thy sins (though much sin be
in thee) thou art not in the state of nature, under the reign or dominion of
thy hypocrisy or any other sin, because thou do discern and feel it to
be a burden unto thee.



Object.
But thou will object against this, and say. How can this be? Can he that
wants all the rest of the notes of uprightness, take comfort in this? How
are they then given for signs and notes of uprightness, if he that wants
them all may have an upright heart nevertheless?

Answ..
To this I answer, That if it were possible for him that wants all the other
signs of an upright heart, to have in him this only and no more, he could
certainly take no comfort in this. But that is not possible; he that has this
in him, has all the rest also in some measure. And I may boldly say to every
one of you, that has this in him (whatsoever thou think or say of thy
self) thou have in thy self every one of those signs of uprightnes, which
thou have heard delivered unto thee out of the word of God. This 1. I will
declare and explain unto you by instancing in every one of them particularly.
2. I will confirm it unto you.

For the first. 1. Thou do make the word of God, the only rule of

See now the proof of all this in three points.

First. In the comfort that Gods best servants have taken in this against all

The first is David's, who when he had said, Psalm. 119.4. Thou have commanded;
He breaks forth in the next words, verse 5. into an expression of his
unfeined, and vehement desire to do so. Oh that my ways were directed to
keep thy statutes. As if he had said, o that I could in all my ways walk
precisely, and keep thy precepts diligently. And then in the next words he
answers, and satisfies his own soul in this manner. Then shall I not be
ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy commandments. As if he should say.
Though I cannot keep thy precepts diligently as I ought, yet if I have respect
unto them all, make conscience of every one of them, allow and consent to them
in my mind, desire unfeinedly, and endeavor to keep them, I know I shall
never be ashamed, nor disappointed of that hope and comfort that I have in
Nehemiah, who even in his prayer unto God, Neh. 1.11. that he desired to fear
Gods name. The third example is the Apostle Paul's, who desiring the prayers of
Gods people for himself, Heb. 13.18. mentions this for their encouragement
therein, and for his own comfort, that he had a good conscience in all
things, desiring to live honestly, (...). And again, Romans 7. he professes
verse 20 It is no more ^ that do it, he did not transgress Gods law. Why so*
Because (as he says ver. 15) he did not in his mind allow himself in any
evil, that which I do, I allow not. And because whatsoever evil he did, was
against his will, verse 16 I do that which I would not, And verse 19. The
evil which I would not, that I do. and verse 15. What I hate that do I. So
on the other side, he professes verse 25. that he himself did serve the law
of God, he kept Gods law. How could that be, when he confesses verse. 18.
that he found no ability in himself to perform that which is good? Yes he
tells us how he kept the law for all that Because 1. in his mind he did
consent to the law, that it is good, verse 16. and verse 12. The law is holy,
and the commandment is holy and just, and good, and verse 25. With the mind I
my self serve the law of God. 2 In his will he did desire to obey God in every
commandment, To will is present with me, says he, ver. 18. and ver. 19. The
good that I would, I do not; and verse 21. When I would do good, evil is
present. Certainly these holy men would never have made such mention of the
goodness of their minds, and desires, if they had not held this a certain
evidence that they were in the state of grace; if they had not believed that no
sin shall be imputed to us, which we do not allow our selves in, and which
we commit against the desire and purpose of our hearts; if they had not
believed, that that man has truth of grace in him, that does unfeinedly desire
grace; he does truly believe; that does thus desire to believe; he does truly
repent, that thus desires to repent; he does obey God in all things, and lead
an holy life, that does thus unfeinedly desire to do so.

Cor. 8.12. If there be first a willing mind, a man is accepted; it is (...).
If a man have a mind unfeinedly willing to do good, he is accepted of God;
and that that is said of doing good, may be said likewise of believing, of
repenting, and of every other grace, if a man have a mind unfeinedly willing,
and desirous to believe, to repent, to love, and fear God, he is accepted of
God. And how could he be accepted of God, if he had not these graces in him
indeed. The second testimony is that which our Savior gives, Matthew. 5.6.
Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness. And how could
they be blessed that hunger after righteousness, if they be not righteous? how
could he that hungreth after faith, or any other saving grace be a blessed man,
^f this unfeined desire were not a certain evidence that there is truth of
saving faith, and grace in that man?



which had a spirit of an unclean Devil, who cried out with a loud voice,
saying, Let us alone, what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth?
Art thou come to destroy us? I know thee, who thou art, the Holy one of God. (
Luk 4.34) but is the work of Gods sanctifying spirit. It is God that works
in us (says the Apostle, Phil. 2.^3) to will as well as to do, and that of
his good pleasure, his (...) his special favor and love.

Secondly. This is a special part of that purchase that Christ has made
Galathians 3 10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are
written in the book of the law, to do them. Christ by performing in his own
person this exact obedience to the law for us, has procured that our poor and
imperfect obedience, (which stands more in an unfeined desire and endeavor,
to do the will of God, then in any performance we are able to make) should be
acceptable unto him; as the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 2.5.

Yet is there a third objection that these poor souls are apt to make against
themselves; Object.
and my desire is to give them as full satisfaction in all their doubts, as I
can. I grant all this (says one) that if I had a true and unfeined desire of
grace, then I had truth of grace in me indeed; I had all the signs of
uprightness in me, if I did indeed unfeinedly desire them. But alas, the good
desires that seem to be in me, are most hypocritical and unsound. If I did
unfeinedly, and with a good and upright heart desire grace, I could not be so
void of grace as I am. For the Lord has promised to fulfill the desires of
them that fear him. Psalm 145.19. He fills the hungry with good things.
Luke 1.53.

To this I answer. Take heed of denying the work of Gods grace in thy self. It
is an high degree of unthankefulnesse to do so. Answ.
But take these for certain evidences, that the desire of thy heart is right.

First. Thou esteemest more of the favor of God, and of his grace, then of any
thing else in the world, and can say with David, Psalm 4.6. I would joy

Secondly, Thou allowest not thy self, but strivest against every sin and
Paul speaks of, Galath. 5.17. The spirit lusts against the flesh.

Thirdly. Thou seek by prayer and all other good means, to get more grace,
and cryest with that poor man, Mark 9.24. Lord help mine unbelief. Lord
help my impenitency, my worldliness, etc. Yea even when thou have hardest
conceit against thy self, that thou art but an hypocrite, but a castaway, yet
thou cryest, and prayest still to God for grace as David did, Psalm 31.22.

Fourthly and lastly. Thou mournest and grievest unfeinedly, that thou Mark
9.24. he cried out of his infidelity, and watered his prayers with his tears.
He said with tears, Lord help my unbelief. Certainly this lamenting after
the Lord as they did. 1 Samuel 7.2. is a certain sign thou art in the state
of grace. None but the children of the Bride-chamber can thus mourn when they
miss the Bridegroom, as our Savior speaks, Matthew. 9.15. Certainly thou
art in a blessed state that can thus mourn; for so says the truth it self,
Matthew. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn (for the poverty of their spirits he
means) for they shall be comforted.

Lecture XCIIII. On Psalm 51.6. August 12. 1628.
Use 2.
IT follows now that we proceed to the second and last use of the Doctrine,
and that is for exhortation to stir us all up, to seek above all things for
this uprightness and truth of heart, which God so much delights in, if we
want it, and to make much of it to maintain to strengthen and increase it, if
by the mercy of God, we have already attained unto it. Now for the better
enforcing of this so necessary an exhortation, I will first give you some
Motives that may persuade us to labor for this soundness, and uprightness of
heart; secondly, I will show you the means whereby it may be obtained.

Motive.
And for Motives I will not stand upon them that were brought in the handling of
the Doctrine; that is to say 1 That God cannot be pleased with shows of
goodness, he looks for truth of heart, in every service we do unto him,
that is, that that he desires, and delights in. 2 That this is all in all
with God; he valueth us and all our actions according to this; he esteems
highly of the smallest measure of grace, and will bear with many frailties
where he sees this; yea he counts him a perfect man, and one that has as
much as he requires of him, if he have an upright heart. 3 On the other side
he cannot abide, that we should halt or double with him, he takes nothing we
do in good part, if our hearts be not upright. These are certainly most
effectual motives, if we could consider them well, and weigh them in our minds
to make us afraid of resting in shows of goodness, and to make us labor for
uprightness, and truth of heart. But to these I will add the consideration of
the promises God has made in his Word; not so much to any good work that any
of his servants can do, as to the uprightness of their hearts in doing of it;
not so much to any other grace, as to truth of heart; nor to the measure and
quantity of any saving grace so much as to the truth and sincerity of it.

See this first in general promises that God has made unto this. Truly God is
good to Israel (says the Prophet, Psalm. 73.1. Who means he by Israel? That
he tells you in the next words, the same which Christ does, John 1.47.) even
to them that are pure in heart. As if he had said, How ever God may be thought
in his providence to neglect the ways of men, and the worst men seem to
prosper most, and the best to be most miserable in this world (for that was the
tentation he had strugled withal, and out of which now he had recovered
himself) yet I am sure of this, God is, and will be good to all them that
have true and upright hearts. So Psalm. 125.4. Do good, O Lord, unto those that
be good. And who are they? And to those that are true and upright in their
hearts, says he. As if he had said, Whatsoever their weaknesses and frailties
be, yet if they be true in their hearts, they are good men, God will certainly
be good unto them (for that prophetical prayer is in the nature of a promise)
he will do them good. And Psalm. 18.25. With an upright man, thou will show thy
self upright. As if he had said, To him that is in his heart true to thee,
thou will show thy self (so as himself and others also shall perceive it)
true to him, thou will be as good as thy word, thou will make good thy promise
unto him. Thus we see in general God will be good to all them, that are
upright in heart. If thy heart be upright, though thou be never so weak in
grace, though thou have many infirmities and strong corruptions in thee yet if
no hypocrisy reign in thy heart, if thy heart be true to God, certainly
thou shall find God will be good and gracious unto thee.

But how or wherein will he be so good unto them, Quest.
that are upright in heart?

This you shall see in the particular promises he has made unto them. Answ.


First, Concerning corporal and earthly blessings, he has promised to be
Pro. 14.11. The tabernacle of the upright shall flourish. If thy heart be
upright Gods secret shall be upon thy tabernacle as Job speaks, Job 29.4. His
secret providence shall protect and prosper thee in it. Secondly, He has
promised to be good Psalm. 112.2. The generation of the upright shall be
blessed. All thy care is for thy children; the best way thou can take to
provide well for them is this, be thou upright in heart, yea the greater thy
cares are that way, the more careful be thou to walk uprightly with God, and
he will take that care upon him; the generation of the upright shall be
blessed. Thirdly, He will be good to them in all other the comforts of this
life, Psalm. No good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. Be
thou upright in heart, and if wealth be good for thee, thou shall have wealth;
and if health be good for thee, thou shall have health; and if credit be good
for thee, thou shall have credit, No good thing will he withhold from them that
walk uprightly. Fourthly, He will be thus good unto them, even in times of
They shall not be ashamed in the evil time (says the Prophet, Psalm. 37.19.)
and in the days of famine they shall be satisfied. Thou tremblest at the
thought and consideration of those evil times, that approach so fast toward
us and our nation, labor thou for an upright heart and thou shall find God
will be good to thee, even when the worst times shall come. Thou have no such
way to prepare and arm thy self against the expectation and fear of evil
times, as to look to thy heart, to make sure that that be found and upright.
The Lord is a sun and shield (says the Prophet, Ps. 84.11. but mark what
follows in the latter end of that verse as I told you even now) no good thing
will he withhold from them that walk uprightly. If he see that to be good for
thee he will be a shield to thee when the evil day shall come, In the time of
trouble he will hide thee in his pavillion, as David speaks, Ps. 27.5. When a
thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand and at thy right hand (as the
Prophet speaks, Ps 91.7.) he can so hide thee that the judgment shall not
touch thee. Thus he did hide diverse when he sent his destroying Angel to
smite the city and other parts of the land with the pestilence, and thus he can
hide thee when he shall send his destroying Angel to smite our land with the
bloody sword, if it please him; Nay thus he will hide thee if he shall see that
good for thee, he will be a shield unto thee, Pro. 2.7. He is a buckler to them
that walk uprightly. But if he will not be a shield he will certainly be a
sun unto thee, he will be a comforter to thee in that day. Unto the upright
there arises light in the darkness, says the Prophet, Psalm. 112.4. As when
there was palpable darkness in all the land of Egypt, all the children of
Israel had light in their dwellings, Exodus 10.23. So in times of greatest
misery and perplexity that shall come upon the land, certainly God will be a
sun to them that walk uprightly; to the upright there shall arise light in
darkness; they shall find comfort in God even in that day, yea more then,
then ever before. Thus you have seen how God will do good to them, that are
upright in heart in outward things.

But that is not all, he will be better to them then so, he will do good to
them

First, Such shall never fall away nor loose his favor and grace. O continue
thy loving kindness (says the Prophet, Psalm. 36.10. and a prophetical prayer
has the nature of a promise as I told you before) unto them that know thee,
and thy righteousness to the upright in heart. And Psalm. 112.6. Surely he
shall not be moved for ever. Thou art often much disquieted with the fear of
this, that thou shall never be able to hold out to the end; thou fear that
thou may fall, that thou shall fall before thou dyest; labor to be upright
in heart, and God will continue his loving kindness unto thee, he will love
thee to the end, surely thou shall never be moved. Though the seed was lost
upon all the other three sorts of hearers, though they all fell away and lost
those beginnings of grace they had received, yet he that had an honest and good
heart (as our Savior speaks, Luke 8.15) he kept it. If thy heart be not
^ound thou that make profession of the truth with greatest forwardness and
zeal, may become a Papist before thou die and a persecuter of that truth
which thou now professest; and thou that seem to be most reformed and
sanctified in thy life, may prove a most profane and debaushed man. The
Prophet speaking of those Israelites that perished in the wilderness, who
though they had made a most zealous profession, as you may read, Deuteronomy. 5.27.
Speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we
will hear it, and do it; yet afterward became some of them gross Idolaters,
some of them beastly adulterers; the Prophet I say gives the reason of this,
Psalm. 78.37. why they were not more steadfast in his covenant; for their heart
(says he) was not right with him; and verse 8. They were a generation that set
not their heart aright, and whose spirit was not steadfast with God: even then
when they made the best shows, their heart was never right. Thou can not be
sure to be preserved from any sin (how foul soever it be, and how much
soever thy heart seems now to abhor it) pay thou shall be sure to fall
fearfully one way or other, if thy heart be not upright, 2 Chronicles. 12.14. He
did evil, because he prepared not his heart, to seek the Lord; that was the
cause of all Rehoboams lewdness, he professed the true religion and made
excellent shows of goodness for three years, 2 Chronicles. 11.17. but he fell
fearfully, he had no care of his heart, his heart was never right. The Apple
that is rotten at the Core, though it seem never so beautiful, will quickly
putrify; and so will every professor that is unsound at the heart. But if thy
heart be upright, fear not, certainly thou shall hold out, and persevere to
the end.

The eyes of the Lord (says the Prophet, Hanani, 2 Chronicles. 16.9.) run to and
fro throughout the whole earth to show himself strong in the behalf of them,
whose heart is perfect toward him. When thou think of the fiery trial that
all Gods people may be brought unto thou tremblest much and fear that so
weak a wretch as thou art shall never be able to endure it. But look thou to
thy heart, that that be upright and sound and certainly though thou be so
weak, God will show himself strong in thee when that trial shall come. What
a measure of strength and courage shall we find in the book of Martyrs that a
number of weak and simple women and children did show in the time of that
fiery trial? More a great deal (it is to be feared) then would be found now
if the like trial should come. We have much more knowledge now then they had,
but they had better hearts then we have. Fear not thine own weakness, if thy
heart be upright. For as it is not any strength that is in thee that can make
thee stand in such a trial, In his own might shall no man be strong, says
Anna in her song, 1 Samuel 2.9. if ever we be strong at such a time, it must be
in the Lord only and in the power of his might, as the Apostle speaks,
Ephesians. 6.10. so the sense we have of our own weakness, is no hinderance to
the Lords strengthening of us but a furtherance unto it rather, His power is
made perfect in weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. As if he had said, it uses to show it
self most, in them that have most sense of their own weakness. Out of
weakness (says the Apostle of the Martyrs in the time of Antiochus, Hebrews
11.34.) they were made strong.

Thirdly, and lastly, Such as are upright in heart shall be sure to have a
comfortable Mark the perfect man (says David* Ps 3^.37) and behold the
upright, for the end of that man is peace. Thou art often subject to grievous
tentations and spiritual desertions that makes thy life wearisome and
burdensome unto thee. Thy well-be^oved is gone, thou have no sense of Gods
favor. Thou art apt to say with Zion, Esa 49.14. The Lord has forsaken me,
Thou art troubled with strong and fearful tentations unto desperation. Well
for all this, if thy heart be upright (though thou perceive it not) nay if
ever it were upright, certainly they shall end in joy. Mark the perfect man,
and behold the upright, (As if he had said, It is our great sin that we
observe no better the manifold examples and experiments God gives us of this)
for the end of that man is peace. Yea proportionable to the measure of thy
desertion and discomfort, shall thy joy be in the end. According to the
comparison the Lord uses in this case, Ps. 7.11. Light is sown for the
righteous; and gladness for the upright in heart. And 126.5. They that sow in
tears, shall reap in joy. Proportionable to the seed^esse of their sorrow,
shall the harvest and crop of their joy be.

Now then (to conclude all that I have said of these motives) seeing there be
so many promises made, Applic.
so many excellent privileges belonging to them that are upright in heart, let
us not any longer content our selves with shows of goodness, with professing,
and thinking we are Christians, we fear God, we serve him; But let us be
ashamed of, and bewail, and strive against our hypocrisy and our halting with
God; Let us labor to attain to that uprightness of heart, which we have
heard at large described to us out of Gods Word, and which the Lord our God so
much delights in.

And for our help herein I will show you some of the principal means which
God has in his Word directed us to use, for the obtaining of it. And I will
pass over them as briefly as I can.

First, Means. 1
It is not possible for a man to have an upright heart, till his heart have
first been truly humbled for sin. Behold (says the Prophet, Hab. 2.4.) his
soul which is listed up, is not upright in him. It must be humbled before it
can be upright. As when a bell is cracked, it can never be mended, till it have
been first broken in pieces, and melted, and cast a new; so before the heart
of man that is so full of cracks and unsoundnesse can be made sound and whole,
it must first be broken. David could not rid himself of that guile that was in
his heart, till he took this course, till with an humbled soul he did
acknowledge against himself his wickedness to the Lord, as is plain, Psalm.
32.2-5.

Secondly, Means. 2
He that would have an upright heart must labor for a true faith, for
assurance of Gods fatherly love to him in Christ. Let us draw near (says the
Apostle, Heb. 10.22.) with a true heart, in full assurance of says. For it is
faith only that purifieth the heart (as the Apostle speaks, Acts 15.9.) as
from all other corruptions, so from that falsehood and hypocrisy that is in it,
by nature. When David had professed, Psalm. 16.^. that he had walked in his
integrity; he names this to be the cause of it, and the means whereby he was
brought unto and preserved in this integrity, verse 3. For thy loving kindness
is before mine eyes; when we once know that the service we do is unto our
father that has so dearly loved us this will make us serve him heartily and
unseignedly.

Thirdly, Means. 3
He that would have, and keep an upright heart must take heed of living in any
known sin, of doing any thing against his conscience. Keep thy servant from
presumptuous sins (says David, Psalm. 19.13.) let them not have dominion over
me, then shall I be upright. The end of the commandment is love (says the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.5.) out of a pure heart, and a good conscience. Purity and
truth of heart, can never be had or preserved without a good conscience.

Means. 4
Fourthly, He that would have an upright heart must think often of this and keep
it in his mind that Gods eye is upon him wheresoever he is, and whatsoever he
goes about. This the Lord himself prescribes unto Abraham, Genesis 17.1. as a
mean to breed and preserve uprightness of heart in him. Walk before me
(says he) and be thou upright. By this means Paul kept his heart upright in
his ministry (and so may we do now) from seeking his own praise or advantage,
or the humouring of men. As of sincerity (says he, 2 Cor. 2.17.) as of God, in
the sight of God, so speak we in Christ. By this means Noah kept himself
upright in a most corrupt age (and so may we do now, as bad as the times are)
Noah was a just man (says the Holy Ghost, Genesis 6 9.) and upright in his
generations, Noah walked with God. He looked not to the practice of men, but
set the Lord always before him, and walked as in his sight and presence, and
that kept him upright. By this means the Church and people of God, kept
themselves upright in times of extreme trouble and persecution (and so may we
do when the like times shall come upon us) All this is come upon us (say they,
Psalm 44.17, 18.) even all that they had mentioned in eight verses before) yet
have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant, our
heart is not turned back. Why, What was it that kept them from halting with
God in such a time as that was? That they tell us, verse 21. even the
consideration of this tha^ they could not hide themselves from God, they were
ever in his eye, Shall not God search this out? (say they) for he knows the
secrets of the heart. Certainly a secret Atheism that lodges in our breasts
whereby either we believe not, or remember not, that Gods eye is upon us, is a
chief cause (as of all other foul sins; according to that, Ezekiel. 9.9. The
land is full of blood and the city full of perverseness: for they say, the
Lord has forsaken the earth, and the Lord sees not; so is it a chief cause)
of all that falsehood and hypocrisy that is in our hearts.

Means. 5
Fifthly and lastly, He that would have an upright heart must diligently observe
the falsehood and hypocrisy of his own heart, how apt it is to halt and
dissemble with God in every service he does unto him; and out of an humbled
soul for it, complain much to God of it, and beg help of him against it. By
this means David here labors to get an upright heart; he complains to God
in this verse of the want of that truth in the inward parts, which God so much
delights in (for as we have heard, he speaks of that here for the
aggravation of his sin) and then he beggeth of God help against this falsehood
of his heart, verse 10. Create in me a ^leane heart, o God, and renew a right
spirit within me. And so does he likewise, Psalm. 119.80. Let my heart be sound
in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed. As if he had said, O Lord give me a
sound heart. And certainly one chief cause why hypocrisy so much prevails
that increases in our hearts, is, because we observe it no more, nor take our
selves with it, we feel it no burden, nor trouble to us, we complain not more
to God of it, nor cry more earnestly to him, for help against it. We have not,
because we ask not, as the Apostle speaks in another case, Iam. 4.2.

LECTVRES ON PSALM. LI.6.
Lecture XCV. On Psalm LI. 6. August XIX. MDCXXVIII.
And in the hidden part thou had made me to know wisdom.
WE have already heard that David suing unto God for mercy in the pardon of
those heinous sins he had fallen into, does make humble confession of his
sin and accuse himself before God for it; not only in gross and general,
ver. 3. but more fully in the three verses following. For 1. He acknowledges
his sin in particular, that very sin that Nathan had charged him with, ver. 4.
I have done this evil in thy sight. 2. He aggravateth his sin by four
arguments; that is to say, 1. From the consideration of the person against whom
he had sinned, verse 4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this
evil in thy sight. 2. From the consideration of the fountain and root from
whence this his sin did spring, even his vile and cursed nature, ver. 5. Behold
I was borne in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. 3. From the
consideration of that delight the Lord takes in the truth and uprightness of
the heart, which he found his corrupt heart so far from specially in the
committing of these foul sins, in the beginning of this sixth verse, Behold
thou desire truth in the inward parts. 4. Lastly, From the consideration of
that truth of saving grace which God had wrought in him before he fell into
these sins; in these last words of the sixth verse, And in the hidden part,
thou had made me to know wisdom. For so I read the words. 1. Because the
original will bear this sense as well as the other; as might be showed by
many other places of Scripture (where words of the future tense are put for the
preter-perfect tense) and as appears by the judgment of the most and best
interpreters (that is to say, the Septuagint, the vulgar latin, Pagin,
Vatablus, Tremellius, Calvin, Bucer, the Geneva translatours) who all
understand the words to be meant of the time past, not of the present or future
time. 2. Because this sense does best agree with the scope of the place; for
David does yet continue in the aggravation of his sin, and in professing his
humiliation, and sorrow for it. The sum then of these words is an aggravation
of his foul sins from the consideration of that sound conversion, and truth
of grace that God had wrought in him before he did thus fall.

And in the words there are these three principal things to be observed. 1.
The description David makes of his own true conversion and regeneration, In
the hidden part he had known wisdom. 2. The author and worker of this his
conversion, In the hidden part thou had made me to know wisdom. 3. The end
and purpose David had in mentioning the truth of his conversion in this place;
that is to say, to aggravate and increase his sin by the consideration of it.

Nota.
And for the first of these three points (before we can receive that instruction
which the Holy Ghost intends to give us in them) three questions must first
be moved and answered for the opening of the words.

Quest. 1.
First, What means he here by Wisdom?

Answ.
I answer, By wisdom he means true religion and piety, the knowledge of the
right way how to serve God and to save our own souls. This only the Holy
Ghost calls true wisdom. Unto man he said (says Job 28.28.) the fear of
the Lord, that is wisdom. Teach us so to number our days, to be so persuaded
of and to think of the uncertainty of our lives (says Moses in his prayer,
Psalm. 90.1^.) as we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. As if he had said, As
we may seriously study and endeavor to please thee, and provide for the
salvation of our own souls. But wisdom is justified of her children, says
our Savior, Matthew. 11.19. As though he should say, Though the right way of
salvation which John Baptist and I do teach, be despised and rejected by the
world, yet by all those that God has appointed unto salvation, it is approved
of and received.

Quest. 2.
Secondly, What means he here by the hidden part?

Answ.
I answer, By it he means the heart, which he called before the inward parts.
Thus the Lord himself expounds it, Job 38.36. Who has put wisdom in the
inward parts? or who has given understanding to the heart? So the Apostle
calls the regenerate part the hidden man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3.4. because it
is hidden and concealed from all men. Who can know it? Ier. 17.9. Thou even
thou only (says Solomon, 1 King. 8.39.) know the hearts of all the
children of men.

Quest. 3.
Thirdly, And how is he then said here to have known wisdom in the hidden
part?

Answ.
I answer. He did not only see and discern in his judgment the right way of
salvation, but God had made him able also with his heart, and in affection to
approve and like of it, to know it feelingly, experimentally, effectually. And
indeed this is the only right and saving knowledge. This was the knowledge of
Christ that the Apostle made so high account of. Doubtless (says he, Phil.
3.8.10.) I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of
Jesus Christ; that I may know him and the power of his resurrection and the
fellowship of his sufferings; that is, experimentally and effectually. And they
that know not God and his ways thus in their heart, but in their brain only,
know him not aright. As it is said of the Priests Elyes sons, 1 Samuel 2.12.
(and may be too truly of many a Minister now, even of such as can preach well)
that they knew not the Lord.

The words then being thus opened, we see this Doctrine does naturally arise
from them for our instruction.

Doct. 21
That true and saving knowledge is the principal work of Gods grace in the
conversion of a man. See the proof of this Doctrine in three points.

Ier. 31.3^, 34. I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and will be their God and they shall be my people. And they shall teach
no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother saying, know the
Lord; for they shall all know me from the least of them to the greatest of
them, says the Lord, For I will forgive their iniquity and I will remember
their sin no more. Every one whom God receives into covenant and to favor,
whose sins he forgiveth, even the least, the weakest of them all, shall have
an understanding heart given unto him, he shall not be only taught by men, God
himself will be his teacher, God will write his law in his heart.

Secondly, This is the first work of Gods grace in the regeneration and
conversion Genesis 1.3. so in the regeneration of man, which is a second
creation this spiritual and supernatural light is his first work. After two
days will he revive us, (says the Church, Hos. 6.2, 3. speaking of their true
conversion and turning unto God) in the third day he will raise us up, and we
shall live in his sight, then shall we have knowledge and endeavor our selves
to know the Lord. As if she had said, So soon as ever he has begun to revive
us, we shall have knowledge. So when God sends Paul to convert the Gentiles
he mentions this as the first work and fruit of his ministry, Acts 26.18.
he says he sent him to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness unto
light. As if he had said, To deliver them from their blindness and ignorance
and to breed knowledge in them. So speaks the Apostle of the Jews, 2
Corinthians 3.16. Nevertheless (As if he had said, Though there be now a
veil upon their heart) when it shall turn to the Lord, the veil shall be
taken away. As though he should say, So soon as ever they shall be converted,
they shall be able to understand, what Moses has written concerning Christ.

Thirdly, and lastly, The change and conversion of a sinner is said to Be ye
transformed (or changed says the Apostle, Romans 12.2.) by the renewing of
your mind. When the mind is once renewed, a man is transformed, the saving
change and conversion of his heart is wrought. Ye have put on the new man which
is renewed in knowledge (says the Apostle, Col. 3.10.) after the image of him
that created him. As if he should say, The man that has this knowledge is
certainly renewed, become a new creature, has Gods image stamped upon him.
After ye were illuminated (that is, after ye were effectually called and
converted says he to the Hebrews 10.32.) ye endured a great fight of
afflictions. To be enlightened with this knowledge and to be converted and
effectually called, he makes all one thing. And as the state we were in by
nature, and all the misery we were subject unto in that estate, is called
darkness and consisted chiefly in the blindness and ignorance we then lived
in; so the estate of grace, and all the comfort and happiness we enjoy in it,
is called light and consists chiefly in the spiritual knowledge and
understanding that we do enjoy in it. Ye were once darkness (says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 5.8.) but now are ye light in the Lord. So speaks the
Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.9. Show forth the praises of him that has called you out of
darkness into his mavelous light. Gods saving grace in the heart of man, his
effectual calling and conversion, is seen in nothing more then in delivering
him out of that darkness, that blindness and blockishnesse and ignorance that
was in him by nature, then in opening of his eyes and renewing his mind, then
in causing him in his hidden part to know wisdom, as the Prophet here
speaks.

Now if we shall inquire into the ground and reason of this why the Holy Ghost
ascribes so much unto knowledge; we shall find two reasons of it principally.

First, Reason 1
Because knowledge is the foundation, and that that gives strength and
stability to all other graces. If the good profession we make, if our faith,
our love, our zeal, our repentance be grounded upon sound knowledge, then
they will last, and abide as the house that is built upon a rock. But if these
graces, or any other holy affections seem to be in us in never so great a
measure, certainly they will be of no continuance, unless they be grounded
upon knowledge. See this instanced in three particular graces. First, Our zeal
and love to God and goodness, will never hold out unless it be grounded upon
sound knowledge. This I pray (says the Apostle, Phil. 1.9.) that your love may
abound yet more and more, in knowledge and in all judgment. As if he had said,
I know to my great comfort that you are now full of love to God, and to his
truth and to his servants, and I pray God ye may continue, and increase in
this grace, but that can ye never do, unless your love, your holy and good
affections be supported and grounded upon knowledge and sound judgment.
Secondly, We shall never be able to abide constant in the profession of the
truth unless we be well grounded in the knowledge of it. The Apostle tells
us, Ephesians. 4.12 -- 14. that the function of the ministry was ordained by
Christ to bring us to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son
of God, that we might be no more children tossed to and fro and carried about
with every wind of doctrine, by sleight of men, and cunning craftiness,
whereby they lie in wait to deceive. As if he had said, 1 The Church of God
will never want seducers and false teachers; and 2 they are very cunning, and
will be ready to cheat us with their false dice; and we 3 are naturally like
little children easily cousened, or like ships upon the sea that have no anchor,
4 we shall never be able to hold the truth, and keep our selves from being
deceived and seduced by them, unless by living under a sound and constant
ministry, we ground our selves well in the knowledge of the truth. So the
Apostle speaking of some that perverted the writings of Paul, 2 Pet. 3.16.
says they were such as were unlearned and unstable men. Unlearned men and such
as want knowledge, must needs be unstable men, they cannot continue constant
and steady in the profession of the truth. So our Savior giving the reason why
those hearers whom he compares to stony ground, proved temporaries endured but
for a time says of them, Mar. 4.16, 17. 1 that they had no root in themselves,
they were never well grounded in the truth, 2 that they did receive the Word
immediately with gladness, they were somewhat too hasty in receiving the truth,
if they had first taken pains to examine well the grounds of it (as those
Bereans did, Acts 17.11.) before they had received it, they would not so soon
have fallen from it. Certainly no constancy in religion can be expected from
those men that are not well grounded in the knowledge of the truth. Thirdly and
lastly, Patience and comfort in affliction will never hold out nor continue,
when the fiery trial shall come, unless it be well grounded upon knowledge.
This is plain by that prayer which the Apostle makes for the Colossians, Col.
1.9 -- 11. I cease not to pray for you, and to desire that you may be filled
with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding,
that ye may walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in
every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God. Strengthened with all
might according to his glorious power, unto all patience and long suffering
with joyfulnesse. Mark 1 how earnestly he prays for increase of knowledge in
them that had already greatly profited in it; 2 that he desires this as the
means whereby all other graces that were in them, were to receive their
strength, specially the grace of patience to bear the cross of Christ with
comfort. As if he had said thus, I know it is not possible for you to be
strengthened in patience, nor to hold out in the fiery trial with comfort,
unless you be filled with the knowledge of Gods Word, in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding. This the Apostle teaches us, Romans 15.4. Whatsoever
things were written aforetime (by the holy Prophets) were written for our
learning, (to teach us, to breed knowledge in us) that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. As if he should have said, All true
patience and comfort, and hope in the time of affliction, is grounded upon
that, which we have learned in the holy Scriptures. This David confirms to us
by his own experience in many passages of the 119. Psalm. That Psalm
appears plainly to have been made in the time of great affliction both
outward and inward, that David was exercised with; and we shall find that in
all his affliction he cries there unto God, for nothing so much, for nothing
so earnestly as he does for knowledge in the Word of God, See this in verse
124, 125, 143, 144, 169. And why does he thus cry for knowledge? Certainly he
knew nothing was able to support and stablish his faith and hope, his patience
and comfort in his affliction but only this.

If any man shall object against this, Object.
That many of the Martyrs were most constant in their profession and showed
mavelous patience and comfort in their sufferings that yet had very little
knowledge; we read in the book of Martyrs of some that suffered who were so
ignorant as they could not tell how many Sacraments there were; or what a
Sacrament is; nay one of them answered she had heard there was one Sacrament,
but what it was she knew not, Page 2091. of another we read that was so simple
as he was commonly reputed little better then an idiot, Page 2232. of another who
in a letter of his does admire this, himself, that knowing himself to be so
unlearned and ignorant as he was, yet he found such strength and assistance
from God in his sufferings as he did, Page 2080.

To this I answer, Answ.
1. That all these had full and certain knowledge out of Gods Word of those
truths that they did suffer for, though they were very ignorant of many other.
2. They were filled with the knowledge of Gods will according to their measure,
their knowledge was fully proportionable to the measure of the means and
capacity that God had given them; and the least pot may be as full, as the
greatest vessel that is. 3. That little knowledge that they had was saving and
spiritual, they were taught it of God; in the hidden part God had made them to
know wisdom; or else they could never have held out in such sufferings, with
such constancy and patience as they did. And this is the first reason why the
Holy Ghost in the Scripture does ascribe so much unto knowledge, it is the
foundation of all other graces, and that that gives strength and stability
unto them.

Secondly, Reason 2
Knowledge is the seed from whence all other graces do grow; it is the means
whereby they are bred and begotten in us. This point is evident even in nature,
for the will and affections are moved by the understanding; that sits at the
stern in the soul of man. A man can neither love nor hate, desire nor fear,
rejoice nor^ mourn for any thing, but according to the apprehension he has
of it first in his understanding. But see the proof of this out of the holy
Scripture in these two points. 1. God does never ordinarily work any saving
grace in any that has no knowledge. 2. Where knowledge is once truly wrought,
by the spirit of God, all other saving graces will follow.

For the first, See what the holy Apostle says, 2 Pet. 1.2, 3. Grace and
Knowledge is the means to bring us to the sense of Gods free grace and to that
sweet peace that is the fruit of it, yea to have them multiplied in us. But he
goes further in the next words. According as his divine power has given us
all things that pertain to life and godliness, through the knowledge of him
that has called us to glory and virtue. Knowledge is the means whereby God
gives and works in us every other grace also No man can attain to true
says till he have knowledge. How shall they believe in him of whom they have
not heard? Romans 10.14. And Esa. 53.11. By his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many. No man can pray aright or do any other service unto God,
till he have knowledge. Know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a
perfect heart, says David to Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. My lips shall utter
praise: when thou have taught me thy statutes, says David, Psalm 119.171. As
if he had said, Till then I can never do it. Be more ready to hear, (says
Solomon, Eccles. 5.1.) then to give the sacrifice of fools. Till by hearing of
the Word we have gotten knowledge, all our prayers and services we do unto
God are but the sacrifice of fools, they are not the fruits of Gods grace and
spirit, nor acceptable unto him. To conclude this first proof. God will have
all men (his elect of all sorts says Paul, 1 Timothy 2.4.) to be saved and to
come unto the knowledge of the truth. This knowledge of the truth, is the
means whereby all those shall be saved whom God will save.

If thou knew that gift of God (says our Savior to the woman, John 4 10.)
and who it is that says unto thee, give me to drink, thou would have asked
of him, and he would have given thee living water. If a man knew Christ aright
he could not choose, but thirst after him and prize him above all the world. If
a man did rightly know and were persuaded of the comfort that is to be found
in godliness and the reward thereof, it were not possible for him not to
desire and be in love with it. And if men did rightly know the torments that
are prepared for wicked men, they must needs tremble and be afraid of them. 2.
It will draw a man unto obedience and to a conscionable practice of that he
knows if his knowledge be sound and saving. Give me understanding, and I
shall keep thy law: (says David, Psalm 119.34.) yea I shall observe it with
my whole heart. 3. It will effectually restrain from sin and reform the
life of him that has it. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy
mountain: (says the Lord, Esa. 11.9.) for the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea. As if he had said, Where
the true knowledge of the Lord does abound, it is not possible that any
oppression or violence should reign. If ye have been taught by him, (says
the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.21, 22.) as the truth is in Christ Jesus, that ye put
off, concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt
according to the deceitful lusts. As though he had said, Whosoever has been
taught of God to know Christ in truth must needs put off the old man. Therefore
also the Holy Ghost makes ignorance the cause of all sin, calling all the
sins which are pardonable, and for which sacrifice was to be offered by the
law (...) ignorances, Hebrews 9.7. the lusts we had when we were in
ignorance, 1 Peter 1.14. and works of darkness, Ephesians 5.11. Yea he
ascribes all the ungraciousnesse and wickedness of men to their want of
knowledge and understanding. There is none that understands, (says the
Apostle, Romans 3.11.) there is none that seeks after God. Why are men so
profane, that they never seek peace with God? Surely their brutish ignorance
is the cause of it. Why are men in their hearts and lives so alienated from all
goodness? The Apostle will tell you the true cause, Ephesians. 4.18. They have
their understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart.

Object.
If any man shall object and say, That this is contrary to all sense and
experience, For all sin does much more abound now in these days of light then
it did in times of greatest darkness and blindness; and in what places now is
all outrageous sin so rife, as in those where there is most teaching and
where knowledge does most abound?

Answ.
To this I answer in the words of the Apostle, Romans 3.4. Yet let God be true
and every man a liar. Certain it is, because God has said it, that not
knowledge but the want of knowledge, is the cause of all the wickedness of
these days, of these places, of these persons that you speak of. 1. Many that
live in these days of light and in places where the light shines most bright,
are blind and receive no benefit by the light. They are as ignorant as those
that live in the darkness of Egypt. They love darkness more then the light,
yea they hate the light, as our Savior speaks, John 3.19, 20. For this cause
God gives them up unto vile affections, as the Apostle speaks of the
Gentiles, Romans 1.26. And mark what he adds, verse 28, 29. As they
regarded not to know God, God gave them up to a reprobate mind, to do those
things that are not convenient; being filled with all unrighteousness,
fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy, murder,
debate, deceit, malignity, whisperers, etc. And if God were so severe against
them that regarded not but despised the light of nature, what must he needs be
against them that regard not but despise the light of his glorious Gospel.
Marvel not though such men be more outragiously lewd (or at least more
senseless and obdurate more hardly moved and brought unto repentance) then any
other men in the world. 2. Though it cannot be denied but many a wicked man
has knowledge (For so the Apostle speaks of the hypocritical Jew, Romans
2.18. Thou know his will, and approvest the things that are more excellent,
being instructed out of the law; and verse 20. Thou have the form of knowledge
and of the truth in the law. As if he should say, Thou have the knowledge of
the will of God as it is revealed in his Word, yea thou art expert in the whole
body of true religion, gathered out of the law of God, and in thy judgment
approvest of it) yet of him we may say as the Apostle does, 1 Corinthians 8.2.
He knows nothing yet as he ought to know. Their knowledge is not true,
saving, and spiritual knowledge. They were never taught of him, as the truth
is in Jesus, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians 4.21. Their knowledge swimmeth
in their brain, it soaketh not into their heart. In their hidden part God
never made them to know wisdom as he did David here. But of this we shall
say more when we come to the uses of this Doctrine.

Lecture XCVI. On Psalm 51.6. September. 2. 1628.
IT follows now that we proceed to show you what uses this Doctrine may
serve us unto. And they are principally two. First, To exhort and stir us up
unto a duty we owe both unto others and to our selves. Use 1.
Secondly, To reprove us for neglect of duty in this kind. That which we are
here to be exhorted unto is, First of all a duty that we owe unto others,
Secondly, a duty that every one of us owes unto himself.

And for the first Branch of this Exhortation it concerns three sorts.

1. All of us in general. 2. Such of us as are masters of families. 3. Lastly,
Such of us especially as are Ministers of the Gospel.

For the first, Seeing (as we have heard) knowledge is both the foundation
estate, and unfeinedly to desire and pray for their salvation. I exhort (says
the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.1.) that first of all, supplications, prayers, and
intercessions be made for all men. And that prayer which the Church makes,
Psalm. 67.3. and (to express the vehemence of her desire therein) repeateth
again verse 5. should (doubtless) be the prayer of every good soul. Let the
people praise thee o God, yea let all the people praise thee. As if she had
said, Oh that all people, even the worst men that live upon earth, might be
brought to honor and worship thee aright. And the very sum and effect of all
the three first petitions of the Lords prayer, Matthew 6.9, 10. is no more but
this. Oh that thy great name may be known, and duly honored every where, that
all that thou have appointed to save, may come in, and become thy subjects and
servants, and so live as becomes thy subjects and servants to do. So that he
that does not heartily desire this, did never yet know how to pray aright. Now
if any of us do indeed pity the estate of wicked men, and desire that they may
be saved, let us then pray (and procure for them so far as in us lies) that
they may have the means of knowledge. For this is the way, yea this is the
only way to bring them unto salvation. God will have all men (says the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.4 that is, some of all sorts of men, for that phrase
cannot be properly meant of any that shall perish) God will have all men to
be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth. As if he had said,
Look whom God will have to be saved, them he will bring to the knowledge of
the truth. So when the Church makes so fervent a prayer unto God for the
conversion of all nations, Psalm. 67 3, 5. she prefixeth this, as the means
whereby that was to be effected, and brought to pass, verse 1, 2. God be
merciful unto us (to the whole catholic Church, to the whole number and
company of his Elect, for so that prayer is to be understood) God be
merciful unto us, and bless us, and cause his face to shine upon us, that thy
way may be known upon earth, and thy saving health among all nations. As if
she had said. This is the greatest mercy and blessing, the greatest fruit of
Gods special favor unto a people, when he gives them the means, whereby
they may know his ways, how to serve and please him, and his saving health,
how to attain unto the eternal salvation of their own souls, and till this
mercy be vouchsafed to them (as appears by the coherence of the third verse,
with these two) men can never praise God, nor worship him aright. This is the
greatest outward fruit of Gods mercy and goodness toward men of all others,
when he gives them able, and faithful teachers, to bring them unto
knowledge. As the Apostle also teaches us, Ephesians. 4.8. When Christ ascended up
on high, and led captivity captive (went up in his triumph after he had
conquered Satan upon the cross) he gave gifts unto men. And what were those
gifts which that great King and conqerour at such a time when he would
express his bounty to the full, did bestow upon men? Surely they are expressed
verse 11. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors, and teachers. As if he had said, He gave able ministers unto his
Church, as the greatest outward gift that he had to bestow upon them. And as
this is the greatest outward work of mercy and love in God toward man; so is
it certainly the greatest work of mercy and charity in man toward man; to
provide for them the means of sound knowledge and instruction. The Papists
glory much of their good works, and think they have therein a great advantage
against us. And if their religion were indeed more fruitful in good works then
ours is, they had a just and great advantage against us, for you shall know
them by their fruits, says our Savior, Mat. 7.16. But what are the works
whereby they teach men they may merit most at Gods hands Surely to give largely
to the Church. To what end? Was it to provide thereby that the people might be
taught and instructed how to know God, and to worship him aright? No, no, the
whole endeavor of their Church has been to take from men the key of
knowledge, as our Savior speaks, Luke 11.5, 2. that is, the means of
knowledge, whereby (as by a key) men are to have their entrance into the
kingdom of heaven; all that was given to their Church (wherein (as their
forefathers the Pharisees did) they teach men to put such confidence) was to
maintain a sort of idle fellows to say masses, and sing dirges for their
souls. And what goodness (I pray you) was there in these works? No, no,
blessed be the Lord our God, the Papists have no just cause of glorying
against the Gospel in this behalf. For though we have too many amongst us,
whom the Lord has greatly blessed with worldly wealth, that neither in their
life, nor at their death, do honor God with their substance, as the holy
Ghost tells us, Prove. 3.9. they are bound to do, and that even with the
first fruits of all their increase. As if he had said, God should have the
first part of all. Though we have many (I say) that are too straithanded and
hearted this way, that being of great ability, give nothing to God, (or at
least nothing proportionable unto their estates) that when they make their
wills, and find they have hundreds, and thousands to dispose of, yet never
think of God, give nothing (to speak of) unto pious uses, all is too little
they think for their children and kindred; (And shall their children and
kindred prosper the better for this think you, when God is robbed of his part?
No, no, the sentence of God shall stand, which he pronounces of the man that
is bountiful in the works of charity, Psalm. 37.26. He is ever merciful,
and lends, and his seed is blessed; his children shall be never the poorer
for that) Though we have (I say) too many such of our profession; yet is not
this the fault of our religion (our religion teaches the necessity of such
good works, as much as Popery does) this is only the fault of these carnal,
and worldly minded professors of our religion, having a show of godliness,
but denying the power of it, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 3.5. these are
spots in our Church, as the Apostle speaks, Jude 12. they blemish and shame
our religion. But though we have too many such, yet is it (thanks be to God)
notorious to the world, that the Gospel has been more fruitful in all sorts
of good works (that have been good works indeed) then ever popery was. More
has bin given in this land within these threescore years to the building and
increase of hospitals, of Colleges, and other schools of good learning, and
to such like works as are truly charitable, then were in any one hundred
years, during all the time and reign of popery. But this is a good work,
passing all other, wherein the Gospel glories and triumphs against popery,
that the Gospel has made men careful, and liberal to provide for the souls
of Gods people, to provide means of knowledge, and sound instruction for them;
That there have been so many good Lectures founded of late; That there has
bin such care taken, and cost bestowed, for the redeeming of Impropriations,
and restoring of them to the Church; That even in this last Session of
Parliament, there was so earnest endeavor used by the state, (and God be
merciful unto them that were the hinderers of so honorable, and pious a
work) that out of every impropriation in the land, there should be so much
taken, as might make a competent maintenance for an able teacher. These, these
are the works, which as they be proper and peculiar to the Gospel, and such as
popery could never skill of, so are they of all other the best works, most
acceptable unto God, and most profitable unto men. And certainly (to conclude
this first branch of my exhortation) of all good works, of all works of
charity that any man can do, this is the best, and that that will yield him
most comfort, when he has been the instrument to provide the means of
knowledge and instruction for a people, to settle and establish a sound
ministry among them that had none before, and to maintain (and so to give
encouragement) to an able and conscionable minister, that is already settled and
placed among a people. It is said of good Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 7.6 that his
heart was lift up in the ways of the Lord. As if the holy Ghost had said thus
of him. He did most zealously seek to promote and advance the true religion
of God. And how did he most show his goodness and zeal? That you shall see
in the three next verses, He provided carefully, that all his people might be
well taught and instructed; he sent teaching Levites, and able ministers into
all parts of the land, and magistrates also with them, to protect and encourage
them in their ministry. And this is noted for one of the best works that ever
Hezechiah did 2 Chronicles 30.22. He spoke comfortably to all the Levites that
taught the good knowledge of the Lord, 1. he encouraged and heartned (he spoke
to the heart says the original of) all the Levites, 2. he encouraged them
because they were able, and conscionable teachers, because they taught the good
knowledge of God to the people. And he did not so himself only, but it is
said further of him, 2 Chronicles. 31.4. He commanded the people (to do the like)
to give the portion of the Priests and the Levites, that they might be
encouraged in the Law of the Lord. He knew they could never do their duty
with any heart and encouragement, if due maintenance were withheld from them.
See yet a third example for this, in King Josiah, of whom we read also, 2 Chronicles. 35.2, 3. that he encouraged the Priests and Levites to the service of
the house of the Lord. No good work we can do, will better argue that we
are truly religious, and fear God indeed, then the kindness and bounty we
show to Gods faithful ministers. Obadiah feared God greatly (1 Kings 18.34.
and mark the reason is given to prove this) for when Iezebel cut off the
Prophets of the Lord, Obadiah took an hundred Prophets and hid them, and fed
them. And it is worthy further to be observed in the example of Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles 17.7. that he is said to have sent his princes to teach in the cities of
Judah. They were not preachers certainly, he sent them only to countenance
and encourage the Levites, and even for that cause they are said to teach in
the cities of Judah. And so all you that do encourage the ministers of God,
that do comfort, and protect them in their ministry, are your selves doers of
this blessed work. So says our Savior, Matthew. 10.41. He that receives a
Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward. A Prophets
reward is due to him that does the work of a Prophet, but every one that does
entertain and encourage the faithful ministers of the Gospel any way, does
the work of a Prophet for he shall receive a Prophets reward. Applic.
I know well this is a great paradox to many now a days, 1. they think they
may bestow their bounty twenty ways better, then in placing, and maintaining
of able ministers; 2. they think there is no want of preaching, there are
preachers enough and too many too every where, 3. they think it a great
privilege to give nothing to the maintenance, or to increase the maintenance
of a preacher, 4. they are so far from encouraging the minister by any free
gift for the increase of his maintenance, that by spoiling, and withholding
from him that which is his due, they discourage him in his ministry, all that
they can. But to these men I have four things to say. First. That in the
judgment of those three worthy Kings (nay in the judgment of the holy Ghost,
who notes and commends them for this) to place and maintain able ministers,
is a chief good work, a principal work of mercy above all others. Secondly.
That notwithstanding the plenty of teachers they talk of, yet there be still
a great number of congregations that want able teachers, whose case is
extremely to be pitied, think of their case, and judge of it by the Prophets
words, Now for a long season (says he, 2 Chronicles. 15.3.) Israel has been
without the true God, and without a teaching Priest, and without law. Thirdly.
That the want of sound knowledge, and instruction, is the chief cause of all
the wickedness in the land, and that so many perish in their sins, as appea^reth
by that complaint the Lord makes, Hos. 4.6. My people perish for want of
knowledge.

Fourthly and lastly. To him that is still resolved (notwithstanding all that
has been said) it is no good work, no deed of charity, to place and
maintain able ministers, it is no sin at all to show no kindness, to give
no encouragement that way to his teacher, no nor to withold from him what he
can, I can say no more but what the Angel of God says. Revel. 22.11. He that
is unjust, let him be unjust still. But let him withal blot out of his Bible,
(and so his own name also out of the book of life) that express commandment
of God, Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the word, communicate with him that
teaches in all good things. And this shall suffice for the first branch of my
exhortation that concerns the duty we owe unto other men, we are bound to
desire, and procure (so far as in us lies) that all men may have the means
of knowledge.

Secondly. If knowledge be both the foundation, and the seed also of all
Ephesians. 6.4 and that that he says to parents of their children, may as well be
said to masters of their servants. And ye fathers, provoke not your children
to wrath, but bring them up in the instruction, and information of the Lord. To
this end. 1. We must hold our selves bound to teach them our selves. God
established a testimony in Jacob, (says the Prophet, Psalm. 78.5.) and
appointed a law in Israel, which he commanded our fathers that they should
make them known unto their children. All parents you see are commanded to
instruct their children themselves, in the law of God. 2. We are bound to
bring our children and servants with us, to the public means of knowledge
and instruction. When Elkanah went to the house of God in Shil^h, 1 Samuel 1.21.
his manner was to take his whole family with him. 3. We are bound to examine
our children and servants, what they have learned, and how they have profited
in knowledge, by that which has been taught them. For this we have the
example of the best master of a family that ever was, Matthew, 13.51. For though
many that have been from their childhood brought up thus in the knowledge of
religion, for the present seem to be as void of grace as any other, yet is not
our labor lost, for (if they belong to God) even this dead and senseless
knowledge which they have gotten by these our endeavors, will be of good use
unto them one day, and a great advantage unto them, when the time of their
visitation shall come; as there is good use of laying the wood together in the
chimney beforehand, though it will not burn till fire be put to it. So that
knowledge which the Jews learned of John the Baptist, concerning Christ though
for the present they regarded it not, but rather were offended at it, yet in
the day of their conversion, it proved a great advantage unto them, and help
unto their faith, John 10.41, 42.

Thirdly and lastly. Seeing knowledge is both the foundation and seed of He
that prophesies (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.3.) speaks unto edification,
and exhortation, and comfort. We must labor to work upon the heart and
affection, as well as upon the understanding; Speak to the heart of Ierusalam,
says the Lord, Esaias 40.2. Yet is this our first and chief work, to open the
eyes of Gods people, and to turn them from darkness to light, as the Lord
told Paul, Acts 26.18. to work upon their understanding, and to bring them to
knowledge. As he is said to be a pastor according to the Lords own heart.
Jeremy 3.15. that feeds the people with knowledge and understanding. That is
that, that feeds the soul. The Preachers chief care must be to teach the
people knowledge. Eccl. 12.9. The minister then that has taken the charge of
souls upon him, and would approve himself to be a pastor, according to Gods
own heart and liking, must do these things.

First. He must hold himself bound to catechize, as well as to preach, and
count catechizing a chief part of his ministry. The Apostles (the great
master builders) took this course, they taught first the chief principles of
religion, and laid that as a foundation to all their preaching, Heb. 6.12. The
Romans had a form of Doctrine (a catechism) delivered unto them this way,
Romans 6.17. And so had other Churches also, that the Apostles did plant. Hold
fast the form of sound words (says the Apostle. 2 Timothy 1.13.) which thou have
heard of me.

Secondly. He must not content himself to teach diligently, but hold himself
bound also to teach plainly, that the people may understand the text that he
handles, understand how his Doctrine rises from it, understand how it is
confirmed by the word. Thus is the preaching of the Levites commended, Nehem
8.7, 8. They caused the people to understand the law; they gave the sense, and
caused the people to understand the reading. Thus it is said of Moses, that he
laid before their faces, all the words that the Lord had commanded him, Exodus
19.7 He made all things most plain, and evident unto them.

Thirdly. We must lay a good foundation of Doctrine, for all our exhortations
and reproves, and deal substantially, and soundly in our ministry. Be
instant (says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.2.) reprove, rebuke, exhort, but do it
with all long suffering and doctrine.

Fourthly and lastly. We must study and take pains for our sermons. It is said
of Ezra. 7.10. that he prepared his heart to teach in Israel, statutes, and
judgments, he studied much. Because the preacher was wise (says Solomon,
Eccles. 12.9, 10.) he still taught the people knowledge, yea he gave good
heed, and sought out, and set in order many parables. The preacher sought to
find out acceptable words, and that which was written, was upright, even words
of truth. I know well there is a great difference between that preacher, and
the best of us, for he spoke and wrote by divine, and immediate inspiration,
but that adds much to the strength of the proof I bring from this place. For
1. If he gave good heed to that he taught, and sought out, and set in order
his parables, was careful both to find out good matter, and to deliver it in a
plain and good method, if he had such need to take these pains? If Paul the
Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.13. had such need of books, and of his parchments too
(which may appear to be note-bookes of his own making; the Syriak
translateth it, the bundle of writings folded up together, for they used then,
parchment to write in, as we do paper now) how much more need have we (who
may expect no immediate inspirations as they had, but must attain all the
knowledge we have, by reading, and meditation, and prayer to God for his
blessing upon these ordinary helps) both to have books to read, and
note-bookes, and commonplace books of our own, and to study hard, that we
may be well furnished, and prepared for this work? 2. His reasons concern us
as much as him. For 1. we must still teach the people knowledge; strive to
teach them more then they knew before; and be as good stewards, bringing forth
new as well as old. Matthew 13.52. 2. We must labor to find out acceptable
words, such as may give our hearers content, and make them delight to hear us.
3. Yet not by humouring them, but by words of truth. And this cannot be done
without study.

Lecture XCVII. On Psalm 51.6. September. 9. 1628.
WE proceed now unto the second branch of the exhortation, which Pro. 4.5. Get
wisdom, get understanding. And verse 7. Wisdom is the principal thing,
therefore get wisdom, and with all thy getting with all that thou have gotten,
with all thy wealth and substance) get understanding.

Now when I exhort you to get knowledge and understanding, I desire to persuade
you unto these two things.

First. That you would not rest nor content your selves with any other join to
your virtue knowledge, says the Apostle, 2 Peter. 1.5. An unblameable and a
virtuous life will not serve the turn without knowledge, no nor this neither,
that you have a good meaning and desire to do well, that you are devout, and
given much to prayer. For the Apostle bears record, Romans 10.2. that they had
the zeal of God (a zealous care to please God, and to serve him) and yet
because it was without knowledge, the wrath of God came on them to the utmost
for all that, as he tells us, 1 These 2.16.

Secondly. I would feign persuade you, not to rest, nor content your selves
Brethren (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.20.) be not children in understanding,
in malice be ye children, but in understanding be ye men of ripe age. Let
every man be fully persuaded in his mind, says he, Romans 14.5. Even in the
least matter of conscience and practice, a Christian should seek for
certainty* and full assurance of understanding. And this none of us can attain
unto, unless the word of Christ dwell richly, and plentifully in us, as the
Apostle speaks, Col. 3.16.

But for the better enforcing of this exhortation, that is so necessary. I will
speak distinctly of it, and observe this method in the handling of it* 1. I
will show you what this knowledge is, that we are bound to seek for, above all
other things, and to be at such cost and charge for the obtaining of it, ^. I
will give you Motives that may provoke us thus to seek it. 3. I will show you
the means we must use for the obtaining of it.

For the first. It is certain, that not all knowledge, no not all knowledge
Cor. 81. We know that we have all knowledge. As if he had said. That is no
such great matter to be gloried in. Yea many an hypocrite, has had a great
desire to get, and to grow in knowledge, and has delighted much in it. They
seek me daily (says the Lord of those hypocrites, Esaias. 58.2) and delight to
know my ways. 2. It cannot be denied, but many an hypocrite and graceless
man, has much excelled many of Gods dearest servants this way. Judas no doubt,
had more knowledge then a great number of Christ's best hearers had. Yea, Satan
himself the prince of darkness, knows the truth much more clearly and
certainly, then many of Gods Elect do, and could say to Christ, even then
when he was unknown to the greatest part of the Church, Mark 1.24. I know
thee who thou art, even the holy one of God. Yea, 3. there is a kind of
knowledge, that is a great bar and impediment unto grace, and makes men more
wicked and incapable of grace, then otherwise they would be. Thy wisdom and
thy knowledge (says the Lord, Esa. 41.10.) it has perverted thee, and thou
have said in thy heart, I am, and none else besides me. In which respect it
has been observed in all ages, that there has been more grace and power of
godliness, in the common sort of simple people oft-times, then in the greatest
scholars. The common people heard Christ gladly, says the Evangelist, Mark
12.37. But of the most learned men that were in those days, it is said John
7.48, 49. Have any of the rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? But this
people that know not the law, are accursed. Insomuch as it is spoken of, as a
matter of great wonder, Acts 6.7. that a great company of the Priests were
obedient unto the says.

What is then the knowledge that we should so desire, and make such high
account of? Surely such knowledge as David here speaks of, In the hidden
part thou had made me to know wisdom; such knowledge as the spirit of God
works in the hearts of such, as he does effectually convert, saving
knowledge, sanctifying knowledge. This is called the good knowledge of God. 2 Chronicles. 30.22, the other will do a man no good at all, unless it grow unto
this. Of all the knowledge that is in natural, and unregenerate men, that may
be truly said which Solomon speaks, Eccles. 1.18. He that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow; the more thy knowledge is, unless it be for the
present, or (at least) prove in the end, a sanctified knowledge, the more shall
the sorrow and anguish of thy soul be one day. Nay, this only deserves the
name of true knowledge. The knowledge of holy men (says Solomon, Proverbs 9,
10. of regenerate and goodly men) is understanding. This is the knowledge we
should seek, and make reckoning of. Teach me good judgment and knowledge,
says David. Psalm 119.66. Though we have but a little knowledge, yet if we
can find, that little knowledge we have, is sanctified knowledge, the
knowledge of the holy, we may take more comfort in it, then the greatest
Clearks in the world can do in all their learning. The want of this knowledge
should humble the best of us, that though we have much light and knowledge,
we have but a little of this saving and sanctified knowledge. This is that the
Prophet Agur complains of, Proverbs 30.2, 3. Surely I am more brutish then
any man, and have not the understanding of a man, I have not learned wisdom,
nor have the knowledge of the holy. As if he should say, Till I have the
knowledge of the holy and regenerate, till I find I have sanctified knowledge,
I am brutish, and void of understanding. Every unregenerate man certainly
(how great a clearke soever he be) has no true light in him, but is in
darkness even until now, as the Apostle speaks, 1 John 2.9. and with all
his knowledge, and learning, shall perish for want of knowledge, as the Lord
speaks, Hosea 4.6. O let every one of us take heed it be not so with us.
Take heed (says our Savior, Luke 11.35. that the light that is in thee, be
not darkness. Take heed lest that knowledge that is in thee, be no better
then natural and carnal knowledge, that that is in hypocrites and
cast-awaies, and in the devils themselves. If the light that is in thee be
darkness: (says Christ, Mat. 6.23) how great is that darkness? Examine thy
estate even by the nature and quality of that knowledge that is in thee.

And for our help herein I will show you the signs and notes whereby sound
and saving knowledge, such as is the work not of nature, but of Gods
sanctifying spirit, may be discerned and judged of. And they be referred to
these three heads, The first is taken from the object of this knowledge. The
second from the properties and qualities of it. The third and last from the
effects of it in him that has it.

And concerning the object of it we have these two notes to know it by. The
object of true knowledge


First, the object of all saving knowledge is the Word of God; he that has
it, has gotten it out of this book, loves it, delights in it, studieth it,
esteems more of it then of all the books in the world. He that has By thy
precepts (thy Word) I get understanding, says David, Psalm 119.104. and verse
99. I have more understanding then all my teachers; for thy testimonies are my
meditation. Thus got he his knowledge. And the knowledge he got thus he
esteemed the only knowledge, and such as he took comfort in, O how love I thy
law? It is my meditation all the day, verse 97. And Paul commending the
knowledge that Timothy had learned, and charging him to hold and continue in
it, 2 Timothy 3.14. commends it by this note, verse 15. From a child thou
have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto
salvation. As if he had said, That is an excellent knowledge indeed, that is
able to make a man wise unto salvation; and no knowledge can do this, but the
knowledge of the holy Scripture only.

Secondly, Though the whole Scripture be the object of saving knowledge, We
are present before God (says Cornelius, Acts 10.33.) to hear all things that
are commanded thee of God; Yet the special object of saving knowledge, are
those parts of the Word that are most useful and profitable, that concern our
selves. If a man be never so learned in the Scriptures and understand all
mysteries and all knowledge, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 13.2. yet if he
know not and desire not to know above all things, the things that concern his
own practice, his own salvation, he has no sound or saving knowledge in
him. The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way, says Solomon, Pro.
14.8. That is sound wisdom and knowledge, to know how things stand at home
between God and his own soul, to understand his own way whether it be right
or wrong. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom (says the
Apostle, Col. 3.16.) teaching and admonishing your own selves ((...)) As if
he should have said, if you cannot teach and admonish your own selves, the
word of Christ dwells not in you in wisdom: there is no saving knowledge in
you This is saving knowledge for a man to know his own sins, the evil of
his own ways. Make me to know my transgression and my sin, says Job 13 23.
that I may be humbled for it and forsake it. This is saving knowledge to know
Christ aright I determined not (says Paul, 1 Corinthians 7.2.) to know any
thing among you save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. This is saving knowledge
to know how we may walk in our whole conversation; to please and honor God.
Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk, says David, Psalm. 14^.8.
This was that, that the people and publicans and soldiers (when God had
effectually touched their hearts by John's ministry) desired to know, and
learn of John, Luke 3.10, 12, 14. (though doubtless they might have learned
of him, many other high and excellent points) What shall we do? And though a
man abound never so much in knowledge yea even in the knowledge of the
Scripture, yet if he know not these things, if he cannot see a far off nor
discern these things that belong to his future estate he is blind, says the
Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.9. he sees nothing to the purpose. He that cannot see nor
understand that his swearing, or his drunkenness, his usury, or his idleness,
is a sin, certainly he has no saving knowledge in him.

The properties of saving knowledge
The second sort of signs, is taken from the property the quality and nature of
saving knowledge; And those are also two.

For first, Saving knowledge is a clear and certain knowledge of those
Proverbes 22.20, 21. Have not I written to thee excellent things in counsels
and knowledge: that I might make thee know the certainty of the words of truth?
And the ministry of the Word was ordained by Christ and given to his Church to
that end also, Ephesians 4.14. And every one that is taught of God is able to
say with the Apostle, John 6.69. We believe and are sure, that thou art that
Christ the son of the living God. And with Paul, Romans 14.14. I know and am
persuaded, this is the truth of God. My people shall know my name, (says the
Lord, Esa. 52.6.) they shall know in that day, that I am he that does speak,
behold it is I. And he that knows himself thus to be taught of God is so
sure of the truth, that nothing that is objected by any adversary against it
(though so learnedly as he knows not how to answer him) shall be able to
draw him from it. The sheep follow him (says our Savior, John 10.4, 5.) for
they know his voice, and a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from
him; for they know not the voice of strangers. He that is spiritual (taught of
God) judges all things, (says the Apostle, 1 Corinthians 2.15. he has
judgment to discern of that that is taught) yet he himself is judged of no
man; no man shall alter him or sway with him against the truth. I have not
departed from thy judgments: (says David, Psalm. 119.102.) for thou have
taught me. They that have indeed been taught of God, shall never depart from
his truth. They that either are fallen away from the truth, that once they
professed, or that cannot attain to any certainty in religion, but are like
children tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind of doctrine (as
the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4.14.) certainly were never taught of God, had
never any saving knowledge in them.

A wise man will hear (says Solomon, Pro. 1.5.) and will increase learning.
And 15.14. The heart of him that has understanding, seeks knowledge. And
18.15. The heart of the prudent gets knowledge; and the ear of the wise
seeks knowledge. David may be a notable example for this, who though he had
attained to that measure of this knowledge, as he excelled all his teachers,
yet seeks still to God for more knowledge, as if he had been the most
ignorant man in the world, Psalm 119.27. Make me to understand the way of thy
precepts; verse 73. Give me understanding that I may learn thy commandments;
verse 125. I am thy servant, give me understanding that I may know thy
testimonies; verse 144. The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting,
give me understanding and I shall live. They then that think they have
knowledge enough, and feel no need they have to learn any more, that wonder
at and deride the folly of them, that think they can never hear enough, or
read enough, certainly were never taught of God, nor have any saving knowledge
in them. Woe unto you that are full, (says our Savior, Luke 6.25.) for ye
shall hunger.

Lecture XCVIII. On Psalm 51.6. September. 16. 1628.
THe third and last sort of the signs of saving knowledge, The effects of
saving knowledge
is taken from the effects of it; and those are four principally.

First, Whereas carnal knowledge even of heavenly things (I mean such a
knowledge of them, as a man by the strength of his own wit in hearing or
Knowledge puffs up, says the Apostle, 1 Corinthians 8.1. Yea Paul himself
was apt to be exalted above measure with the abundance of revelations, he had
received above other men as himself says, 2 Corinthians 12.7. Saving
knowledge that is wrought in the heart by the spirit of grace, has a quite
contrary effect; for it humbles a man and makes him think more lowly of
himself, then ever he did before. See this is James 3.13. Who is a wise man
and endued with knowledge among you? (says he) let him show out of a good
conversation hit works with meekness of wisdom. As if he had thus said, If
he have true and saving knowledge and wisdom indeed, let him show it by his
meekness and humility in his whole conversation. The meek will he guide in
judgment: (says David, Psalm. 25.9.) and the meek will he teach his way. As
if he had said, Those that are taught of God, will be meek and humble men.
And indeed, it must needs be so. For the more this light shines into the heart
of a man, the more ignorance and corruption shall he see to be in himself. All
things that are reproved (evil and reprovable says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.13.)
are made manifest by the light This experience shows us in the best of Gods
servants, and such as have most saving knowledge in them. None complain so
much of their ignorance, none so much humbled, in the sense of their own
corruptions, as they are. Nay themselves before their conversion, when they had
far less knowledge and less goodness then now they have, never thought so
basely of themselves, as now they do. What is the cause of this? Surely God
has now opened their eyes, that were shut before, this light of grace, has
discovered that ignorance and corruption of heart unto them, that before they
never discerned nor thought had been in them.

Let every one of us by this note, try his own knowledge whether it be the
good knowledge of God, Applic.
such as will do us good, whether it be the work of Gods spirit and grace or
of nature only. 1. See thou no matter of shame and humbling in thy self, no
ignorance and blockishnesse, no sluttish and foul corners in thine own heart
that thou never discernedst before? Nay art thou not indeed humbled often for
these things? Certainly this light of saving knowledge never yet shined in thy
heart. The first work of it wheresoever it comes is the discovering of
ignorance and corruption, and the humbling of the heart for it. 2. Art thou
well persuaded of thine own knowledge, and proud of it; does it puff thee up
and make thee censorious and apt to despise others, that thou think have not
that knowledge and grace that thou have, like the supercilious Pharisees, John
7.49. This people who know not the law are accursed (a fault that many of our
young professors do much dishonor the Gospel by) certainly (thou may
have knowledge I will not deny but) thou were never yet taught of God, saving
and sanctified knowledge thou have not? For so says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.2.
If any man think he knows any thing, (if he be conceited and proud of his
knowledge, if it make him swell and puff him up as he had said, verse 1.) he
knows nothing yet, as he ought to know.

Amos 3.2. You only have I known of all the families of the earth; And of
wicked men whom he loves not, nor affects he says, Mat. 7.23 that he never
knew them. So man is said to know nothing in religion, unless his heart be
affected with that which he knows. Thus speaks Ioshuah of the knowledge of
Gods people, Josh. 23.14. Ye know in all your hearts, and in all your souls.
As if he had said, Ye know the truth of God in his promises, not speculatively
only but feelingly, comfortably, and experimentally. So speaks the Lord of
his peoples knowledge, Esa. 5^.7. Hearken unto me ye people that know
righteousness, in whose heart is my law. As though he should say, No man
knows righteousness and religion indeed, and with a saving knowledge,
unless the law of God and that that he knows in religion, be in his heart
and affection, as well as in his brain and understanding. O taste and see
(says David, Psalm 34.8.) that the Lord is good. As if he had said, You can
never see nor discern and understand it well, unless ye taste and feel the
sweetness of it in your own hearts. So the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 2.14. that
by his ministry God made manifest the savor of his knowledge, in every place.
That knowledge of God which the faithful gat by his ministry, and whereby
they were converted had savor in it, it was a savoury knowledge. This light of
sanctified knowledge is not like the light of a gloworme, or like the light
that the Moon gives, which glittereth and shines but has no heat in it at
all; but it is like that of the Sun yea of the spring or summer sun which
does not only give light unto the world, but it warmeth also and quickneth
every thing. Therefore is this light called the light of life, Ioh. 8.12. No
man knows God aright with a saving and sanctified knowledge, but he must
needs fear him, and love him, and put his trust in him. The spirit of
knowledge is called, Esa. 11.2. The spirit of the fear of the Lord. These
graces go always together. So speaks the Apostle likewise of love, 1 John
4.8. He that loves not, knows not God, for God is love. So Psalm. 9.10. They
that know thy name, will put their trust in thee; for thou Lord have not
forsaken them that seek thee. No man knows himself or his own sins both of
nature and practice aright, with a knowledge of the holy spirits working, but
he must needs loath himself in his own sight, as the Prophet speaks, Ezekiel.
36 31. No man can know Christ aright, know him to be his Savior, but he must
needs be affected with it, and joy more in it then in any thing in the world
besides. So speaks the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.8. In whom though now ye see him
not, yet believing in him, (knowing that he loved you and gave himself for
you) ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory. To conclude this second
effect of saving knowledge, No man can have any knowledge in the Scriptures of
Gods teaching, but he must needs affect the Word, love it, and delight in it.
So David in that very octonary and part of Psalm. 119. that is to say, part 13.
wherein he speaks of the knowledge and understanding he had gotten by
studying the Scriptures, professes how he was affected to the Word, verse 97.
O how love I thy law? And verse 103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste? Yea
sweeter then honey unto my mouth. And verse 50. Thy Word has quickened me. As if
he should say, It has not been a dead and senseless knowledge that I have
gotten by it, but such as has enlightened me and bred holy affections in me.

Now if we would examine our selves by this note, Applic.
we should find that many of us that make a goodly show in the Church of God,
after all these means of knowledge we have enjoyed, have little or no saving
knowledge in us. Of a number of us it may be said as the Apostle speaks, 1
Cor. 8.1. We know that we have all knowledge, and a great deal of it, many of
us. But we are not affected with that we know, it works not upon our hearts;
we have a great deal of light in our understanding, but it is but like as the
Moone-shine or the glittering of the glo-worme, it warmeth not our hearts at
all, but they remain still as cold and dead as any stone. We have the
knowledge of God and of all his attributes, his holiness, his justice, his
omniscience, his power, his goodness; but what affections does this knowledge
work in our hearts? What reverence, what fear to offend him, what desire to
be reconciled unto him, what love unto his name? We know well enough what sin
is, and what the curse of God is, that is due unto sin; yea that our selves are
sinners, and that if we be not still, yet certainly we were under this curse;
yet all this that we know, never makes our hearts to quake, works no fear,
nor sorrow, nor humiliation in them. We say we know Christ not only to be an
all sufficient Savior to the elect, but that he has redeemed us from the
curse of the law, his body was broken for us, and his blood was shed for us,
but we are not affected with this at all, we taste no more sweetness in Christ,
then in a chip, we rejoice not in him. In a word we have knowledge in the
Scriptures and increase in it daily, by reading and hearing we learn more and
more, but nothing we read or hear or learn affects or moves us, or if it
work any motions in us, they are but sudden flashes that vanish quickly; and
can this be saving knowledge? No no, beloved deceive not your own souls; the
knowledge that Gods spirit works, rests not in the brain but sinketh and
soaketh into the heart, and works kindly upon the affections of a man. Labor
therefore for good affections and make much of them, mourn for this that thy
heart is so senseless and dead. Know that as good affections without knowledge
will yield thee no comfort, no more will knowledge without good affections. It
will do you no good to know God, unless you fear him and love him. If any
man love God (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.3. and that that he says of love,
may be said of fear) the same is known (and approved) of him. It will do you
no good to know your selves to be sinners, and to be able to make large
confessions of them, unless you can mourn and be humbled for them. When
Christ had said, Matthew. 5.3. Blessed are the poor in spirit; he adds verse
4. Blessed are they that mourn. As if he had said, Without this, the other
will never make us happy. It will do us no good to know Christ, unless we can
rejoice in him. We are the circumcision (says Paul, Phil. 3.3. the true people
of God) which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus. It will
do us no good to read and hear much and so to increase in the knowledge of
the Word, unless we be affected with that we hear and learn. These words
which I command thee this day (says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 6.6.) shall be in thine
heart. If ye will not hear (says the Prophet, Mal. 2.2.) and if ye will not
lay it to heart. As if he had said, As good not hear at all, as not lay that
to heart, and not to be affected with that we hear.

The third effect of saving and sanctified knowledge is this; It will reform
Divinity it is otherwise; a man knows nothing aright in religion, till he
become a practiser of that he knows. This the Apostle teaches us notably,
Ephesians. 4.20 -- 24. But ye have not so learned Christ (says he; that is to say,
to profess your selves to be Christians and yet to live lewdly still) if so
be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the truth is in
Jesus. Why? What is it to be taught by Christ as the truth is in Christ Jesus?
That he tells us in the next words, verse 22. that ye put off, concerning
the former conversation the old man; and be renewed in the spirit of your
mind: and put on the new man which after God is created in righteousness and
true holiness. As though he had said, Every one that has learned Christ
aright, and is taught of God (has true and sanctified knowledge in him) cannot
but forsake his old sins, and become a new man. It is such a knowledge of God
as whereby we are changed into the same image (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor.
3.18.) from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord. See this briefly
confirmed in both the parts of true godliness; that is to say, both in
eschewing of evil, and in doing of good. For the first, Hear what the Lord
says, Job 28.28. To depart from evil is understanding. As if he had said,
This is the only right knowledge, sanctified and saving understanding, that
has power in it to kill sin in a man, to make him forsake all known sins. Yea
the knowledge of Gods Word, if it be a Gods teaching, will make a man not only
to eschew evil, but to do it out of a zealous hatred of sin. Through thy
precepts I get understanding (says David, Psalm. 119.104.) therefore I hate
every false way. As if he should say, The more my knowledge in thy Word
increases, to more my hatred to every sin increases likewise. See this also
in the other part of godliness, In doing of good A man of understanding,
walks uprightly, says Solomon, Pro. 15.21. If we know any duty God
requires of us, with a sanctified knowledge, we cannot but make conscience of
the practice of it, yea practice it with uprightness and sincerity of heart. A
good understanding (says David, Psalm. 111.10.) have all they that do his
commandments. As if he had said, That and that only is good understanding,
sanctified and saving knowledge, that draws a man to obedience, to the
practice of that he does know. So the Lord speaks of the knowledge that was
in good Josiah, Ier. 22.16. He judged the cause of the poor and needy -- was
not this to know me, says the Lord? As if he should have said, This was sound
and sanctified knowledge indeed, that made him conscionable in the duties of
his particular calling. This wisdom that comes from above (as the Apostle
speaks, James 3.17. this knowledge that is of Gods teaching) is first pure,
then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits.

Applic.
Let me now make some application of this in two points.

Judas who was Even such a religion as the Apostle describes and calls, 1 Timothy 6 3. A doctrine which is according to Godliness. Thirdly, That such
professors of it at whose sensual, and not having the spirit, Jude 19. And it
is not flesh and blood that can reveile these things unto a man, as our Savior
teaches, Matthew. 16.17. But there is a spirit in man: (says Elihu, Io^ 32.8.)
and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them understanding. He that lives
in any known sin, understands nothing aright in our religion. Of every
such a one (be he never so learned) that may be said which the Holy Ghost
speaks of the harlot, Pro. 9.13. He is simple, and knows nothing. He that
makes not conscience of every commandment and duty that God has enjoined him
in his general or particular calling, has no sound and true knowledge of God
or of religion in him. He that says I know him (says the Apostle, 1 Ioh.
2.4.) and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.

Secondly, Let me apply this by way of exhortation unto every one of you. He
that has knowledge spares his words, (says Solomon, Pro. 17.27.) and a man
of understanding, is of a cool spirit. Else 1 thou can have no comfort in all
thy knowledge, if it be not powerful to restrain thee, to reform thee, John
13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye, if ye do them; As if he had
said, not else. It is no happiness to have knowledge, carnal knowledge,
natural knowledge, that is not sanctified, not effectual. 2. The more thou
have of it the more it will increase thy sin, James 4.17. He that knows to
do well, and does it not, to him it is sin. And (consequently) the more thou
have of it, the more extreme shall thy condemnation and torment be. You know
the saying of our Savior, Luke 12.47. The servant that knows his ma^sters
will and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. And so it is with
Sa^an; who as he knows more in religion then any man (and is therefore called
(...)) so shall his torments be greater then any man's; both in the life to
come, Matthew. 25.41. those unspeakable torments are prepared chiefly for him and
his angels; and even in this life also his knowledge increases his torments,
The devils believe and tremble says the Apostle, James 2.19. The certain
knowledge he has of things revealed in the Word, works unspeakable hor^ours
in him. O glory not in that knowledge that has no power in it to reform thee;
but tremble to think how this will one day increase thy torments.

Follows the fourth and last effect of saving knowledge (which I will but A
wise man is strong, (says Solomon, Pro. 24.5.) and a man of knowledge
increases strength. As though he should say, As a man's knowledge increases
(if it be spiritual, and sanctified knowledge) so shall his strength to resist
any tentation increase likewise. When wisdom enters into thy soul (says
Solomon, Pro. 2.10, 11.) and knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul, Discretion
shall preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee. And he instanceth in
two tentations which it will preserve a man in, (in the verses following) which
experience of all ages has found to be most strong and prevalent. 1. From the
counsel and example of lewd men, verse 12 -- 15. 2. From the allurements of
harlots, verse 16. Applic.
And therefore the knowledge of that man who has not strength to overcome, but
is as weak as water to resist any tentation; can both eschew evil and do
good till he be tempted, but thinks it a sufficient excuse for any sin, that
he was tempted; as our first parents did, Genesis 3.12, 13. is but carnal and
natural, it is no sanctified nor saving knowledge. Certainly God did never
yet in his hidden part make him to know wisdom, as he had done unto David.
Know you, there can be no saving knowledge, nor indeed any truth of grace, in
that man that has no power to resist tentation, As appears by the conclusion
Christ makes of every Epistle that he wrote to the seven Churches, Revel 2.
and 3. where the promise is made to him that overcommeth, and to none but him.
Remember that this is spoken of a principal part of our miserable condition in
the state of nature that we were then without strength, Romans 5.6. He that is
without all strength to resist tentation, certainly is still in the state of
nature, he is still in his sins.

Lecture XCIX. On Psalm 51.6. October 7. 1628.
NOw we proceed unto the Motives that may persuade us to seek for this
knowledge. And the Motives (besides those that were delivered in the reason and
ground of the Doctrine) may be referred to these two considerations
principally. Consider 1 the things themselves that we are exhorted to know, and
to have understanding in; 2 the necessity and benefit of knowledge, compared
with the danger of ignorance in these things; and we cannot choose but be
ashamed of our ignorance, in the matters of our religion, and desire knowledge
unfeignedly.

Motive 1
For the first, There be many other things the knowledge whereof though it be
profitable and useful unto men, yet does it not concern all men, to be
skillful in them. There is great use of knowledge in law and physic, and in
many other liberal arts and sciences, yea even in husbandry and in sundry
handy-crafts. And this skill many have even in handy-crafts, is said to be a
singular gift of God, Exodus 31.3, 4. And so is that skill that men have in
husbandry also, Esa. 28.24 -- 26. Yet it is no shame at all to many a man, to
want knowledge in these things. But the matters of religion concern all alike,
men and women, old and young, poor and rich; they belong to all, all are
equally interested in them, and therefore it behooves all to have knowledge in
these things. See the truth of this in two points.

Josh. 22.24, 25. What have ye to do with the Lord God of Israel? Ye children
of Ruben and of God, ye have no part in the Lord. And indeed that which the
Apostle says of Jews and Gentiles, Romans 3.^9. may fitly be applied to all the
several sorts and conditions of men. Is he the God of preachers, of rich men
of great men only? Is he not also the God of husbandmen and tradesmen and
poor men? Yes of these as well as of the other. Upon whom does not his light
arise? says Bildad, Job 25.3. He that is Lord over all, (says the Apostle,
Romans 10.12.) is rich unto all that call upon him. He gives to all life and
breath and all things says the Apostle, Acts 17.25. And to what end is the
Lord so good and bountiful unto all men? That the Apostle tells us, verse
27. That they might seek the Lord; that is to say, seek to know, to serve and
please him. Seeing then that every man challenges a part and interest in God,
as much as any other, and depends upon him for all present comforts and for
his happiness hereafter, why should any man think it concerns not him, to
know God and his will as much as any other man? See how the Lord upbraideth
Israel with this, Esa. 1.3. The Ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters
crib, but Israel does not know. Not to know him, to have no desire to know him,
that made us and preserves us, and without whom we cannot live or subsist one
moment, is certainly more then brutish stupidity, in any man. See how this
consideration prevailed with David, Psalm. 119.73. Thy hands have made me, and
fashioned me, give me understanding that I may learn thy commandments. As if
he should have said, Even because I have my being of thee, therefore I desire
to know thy will; and verse 68. Thou art good, and do good; teach me thy
statutes. Every man that can say God is good and does good to him, should count
it a shame for him not to know him, to be ignorant of his will.

Secondly, All Gods people men and women rich and poor have equal Those
things which are revealed (says Moses speaking in the name of all Gods people,
Deuteronomy. 29.29) belong unto us and to our children. As though he had said, The
whole will of God revealed in his Word, concerns us all. Whatsoever things
were written afore-time (even in the Old Testament as well as in the New, says
the Apostle speaking to all Gods people, Romans 15.4.) were written for our
learning. As if he had said, There is nothing in the holy Scripture but it
concerns us to know it, and learn it, to be instructed in it. I have written
to him (says the Lord, Hos. 8.12. speaking of Ephraim the whole Church of
Israel, as of one man) the great things of my law, but they were counted as a
strange thing. As if he had said, The whole Scripture is as a letter or Epistle
sent from God to every man and woman that is a member of his Church; and it is
an high contempt done to God, by any man that refuses to receive it or
counts it as a strange thing, that thinks there is any thing in it that
concerns not him. Nay there is nothing that a Christian man is more
interested in, which a man may say it belongs to him and is his own, wherein
he may challenge a propriety to himself, then the holy Scriptures. It is
therefore called his inheritance. Moses commanded us a law (say Gods people,
Deuteronomy. 33.4.) even the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob. And so David
speaks of it, Psalm. 119.111. Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for
ever. And what may be said more properly to be a man's own then his inheritance
is? Or who would not be desirous to know his own inheritance, yea and every
parcel, every foot of land, that does belong unto it?

The second sort of Motives to persuade us to seek knowledge is taken from the
consideration of the necessity and benefit of knowledge compared with the
danger and mischief of ignorance. Motive 2
This we shall see in four points.

First, Knowledge is a duty commanded us of God, and that in the first And thou
Solomon my son (says David, not as a father only, but as a Prophet too, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.) know thou the God of thy father. Be ye not unwise (says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 5.17.) but understanding what the will of the Lord is. Yea you
are all bound to increase in knowledge (as God gives you means) and to seek
to abound in it. The words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.20. Brethren be not
children in understanding but in understanding be perfect men, and Col. 3.6.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, are plain and direct commandments
of God given unto every man. On the other side, Ignorance in these matters is a
sin that grieveth God much, and highly provokes him. See how God complains
of this, Ier. 4.22. My people are foolish they have not known me, they are
sortish children, and have no understanding. Yea see how angry Christ was for
this even with elect Disciples, Are ye also yet without understanding? says he
to them, Matthew. 15.16. when they understood not the meaning of that he had
said, touching that which defiles a man. And at another time, Mar. 8.17.
Perceive ye not yet, neither understand? Have ye your hearts yet hardened? And
how does the Apostle, Heb. 5.11.12. rebuke them for being such dullards under
the means of knowledge, that they had so long enjoyed? Yea he threatens them,
Heb. 6.1 -- 4. that if they did not stir up themselves and endeavor to grow
to greater ripeness and perfection in knowledge, they would be in danger to
fall quite away from God even into the unpardonable sin. Certainly God will be
angry even with you that are his own people, if you profit not in knowledge,
according to the means he gives you. What will he then be with them that
have no spiritual knowledge in them at all, nor any desire of knowledge? Let
no man think it an advantage to him to be ignorant of the will of God when he
may have the means of knowledge, or that such ignorance will be any excuse to
his sin. To such the Lord will say as Abiah the King of Judah said to Israel, 2 Chronicles. 13 5. Ought ye not to know; whether thou know my will or no, that is
nether here nor there, but ought thou not to have known, is it not thy sin
that thou art so ignorant of it? Say not thou before the Angel (before Christ
the Angel of the covenant says Solomon, Eccle. 5.6.) it was an error (it was
out of mine ignorance that I made such a vow) wherefore should God be angry at
thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands? As if he had said, That will
not excuse thy rash vow but rather such an excuse will anger the Lord and
provoke him to accurse thee in whatsoever thou take in hand. Be not deceived
(beloved) certainly God will be highly offended with you, even for your
ignorance. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against men for their
ignorance many ways. 1. In corporal judgments. My people are gone into
captivity (says the Lord, Esa. 5.13.) because they have no knowledge. This is
the cause of many judgments of God that have fallen upon the state, and upon
many of your own families and persons, that there is so much ignorance so
little desire of knowledge among men. 2. In spiritual judgments. The people
that does not understand shall fall, Hos. 4.14. Certainly God punishes the
wilful ignorance of many men, and their contempt of knowledge, by giving them
up unto many foul sins. As they regarded not to know God (says the Apostle,
Romans 1.28.) even so God delivered them up unto a reprobate mind, to do those
things which are not convenient. 3. With eternal judgments. It is a people
that do err in their heart: (says the Lord, Psalm. 95.10, 11.) and they have
not known my ways; unto whom I swear in my wrath that they should not enter
into my rest. As if he had said, Even for this cause they shall never come to
heaven (for that is meant by Gods rest there, and not the land of Canaan only
as is plain by that application the Apostle makes of this place, Heb. 3. and
4.) because they have not known my ways, says the Lord. Certainly men shall
be damned not only though they sinned ignorantly (their ignorance shall be no
excuse unto them) but even because of their ignorance. When Christ shall come
at the last day inflaming fire (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.) he will
take vengeance on them that know not God. It is a people of no understanding
(says the Lord, Esa. 27.11.) therefore he that made them will not have mercy
upon them, and he that formed them, will show them no favor. Let no man plead
for his ignorance, that yet his punishment in hell shall not be so great as
theirs that have had much knowledge, and yet have done as bad as he. His
ignorance will be some privilege unto him; For so says our Savior, Luke
12.^8. He that knew not his masters will, and did commit things worthy of
stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. For 1. No heart can conceive how
great and intolerable his misery shall be, that shall have the fewest stripes,
that shall have the least portion in those torments, where the worm shall
never dye, and the fire shall be never quenched, as our Savior speaks often.
Mark 9.44.46.48. 2. Though the ignorance of that man that wanted either
means, or capacity, may find some mitigation of torments in hell* yet is there
no hope that thy ignorance that is wilful should do so.

Secondly. Knowledge (I mean sanctified knowledge, such as you heard Ananias
speaks of it, as of an high favor of God unto Paul, and sign of his
election. Acts 22.14. The God of our fathers has chosen thee, that thou
should know his will. And so does our blessed Savior also unto his
disciples, Matthew 13.11. To you it is given to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given. As if he had said, It is a
special favor and gift of God. And verse 16. Blessed are your eyes, for they
see, and your ^ares, for they hear. Surely it is a great blessing of God, or
else Christ would not have said so. Yea, he rejoices in his spirit (on their
behalf for this, and said, Luke 10.21.) I thank thee o father Lord of heaven
and earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have
reveiled them unto babes; even so o father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.
Certainly it is a singular favor and blessing of God, that our blessed
Savior made such high reckoning and account of. 2. It is a sign, a man is in
covenant with God, reconciled to him in Christ. So we shall find it promised
as a favor peculiar to them that are in covenant with God. Jeremy 24.7. I will
give them an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be my
people, and I will be their God. And 31.34. They shall teach no more every man
his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord. (As if he had
said. They shall not be taught of men only, nor rest upon this outward and
ordinary means of knowledge, I will be their teacher my self) for they shall
all know me from the least of them, to the greatest of them, says the Lord,
for I will forgive their iniquity, and will remember their sins no more. It
is a sign that God has received thee into covenant, that he has forgiven
thee thy sins, and is reconciled to thee in Christ, when he has given thee
an heart to know him, to understand what thou hear and read in the
matters that concern God, and their own salvation. 3. It is a special sign
of an honest and good heart; a false and naughty heart cannot attain to this.
What man is he that fears the Lord? (says David, Psalm 25 1^) him shall
he teach in the way that he shall choose. So speaks the wisdom of God
likewise, Proverbs 28.5. Evil men understand not judgment (they have no
judgment in the things that belong to God and their own salvation) but they
that seek the Lord (desire nothing so much as his favor, and to know how they
may best please him) understand all things. So that if God have given thee an
heart to understand his word, to carry away what thou hear, to profit in
knowledge, and to have a clear and settled judgment in religion, it may be a
comfortable testimony to thy conscience, that thy heart is upright, and that
thou do indeed seek the Lord, and fear him in truth. On the other side, 1.
It is a great judgment of God, and sign of his reprobation, when having the
means of knowledge, he can learn nothing, nor profit by them. This our
Savior gives for the reason why many of the Jews profited not, either by his
miracles or ministry. John 12.40. God has blinded their eyes, and hardened
their heart, that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with
their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them. A sign it is, God
never decreed to save them, whom he so blinds, that they cannot understand
and learn nothing. 2. This is a sign of a man that remains still under
Satan's government, and is in his power to be led which way pleases him. For
he is the ruler of the darkness of the world, as the Apostle calls him,
Ephesians. 6.12. Therefore the Lord tells Paul, he sent him to open the eyes of
the blind, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, Acts 26.^8. Therefore also you shall find in the parable of the
sower, Mat. 13.19. that of all the three sort of bad hearers, he that
understands and learneth nothing, is the worst, and most under the power of
Satan, The wicked one comes, and catches away that that was sown in his
heart. 3. Lastly. This is a sign of an ungracious and wicked heart, when a man
under good means, can learn nothing, nor get any knowledge. None of the
wicked shall understand, says the Prophet, Daniel 12.10. he means
feelingly, and savingly. And the Apostle speaking of certain women, 2. Timothy
3.7. that were ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth, gives this for the reason of it, verse 6. that they were laden with
sins, and led away with diverse lusts. A wicked and naughty heart is
certainly the chief cause, why many enjoying excellent means, and
frequenting them also diligently, yet can never attain to any clear, and
certain, and savoury knowledge of the truth.

Collossians, Col. 2.2. that God would give them all riches of the full
assurance of understanding, gives this for the reason of it, verse 4. This I
say (thus I pray for you) lest any man should beguile you with entising words.
As if he had said. The only means to preserve you from being beguiled by
false teachers, that will seek to draw you from the sincerity of Gods
religion, and worship, is to get knowledge, and to ground your selves well that
way. On the other side. They are children (in understanding) are apt to be
tossed too and fro (as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians 4.14.) and carried about
with every wind of Doctrine. And what kind of persons have the seducers in all
ages been wont most to prevail withal, and to lead captive? That the Apostle
will tell you, 2 Timothy 3.6, 7. silly women that were never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth. Such as are ignorant, and have not grounds in
themselves, for that which they hold and profess in religion, will be apt to
pin their conscience upon other men's sleeves, and to be carried away, even
as they are led (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Corinthians 12.2.) and according to
the opinion they have of their teachers gifts. Certainly, this Motive should
be of great force with us in these days, wherein we are in such danger to
be seduced, and drawn into error. For our land swarmeth, not only with
Papists, those grievous Wolves that the Apostle speaks, Acts. 20.29. that
spare not the flock, but even of our own selves (as he speaks in the next
words, verse 30.) do men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away
disciples after them. They want disciples poor men, they are not followed so
much as they think themselves worthy to be. I do not persuade you all to
seek for that measure of knowledge, that you may be able to reason with every
Papist, or with every seducer. I could wish with Moses, Numb. 11.29. would to
God, that all the Lords people were Prophets, that they were able to do this.
But that measure of knowledge is not to be looked for in all Christians. Nay,
God requires it not of every Christian, to dispute, and reason with seducers.
He forbids it rather. Avoid them (says the Apostle, Romans 16.17. Turn away
from such, 2 Timothy 3.5. As if he had said, reason not with them, read not their
books. But even this you will never be able to do, you will never with that
detestation as ye ought, avoid, and turn away from such as seek to pervert
you, unless you have knowledge, unless you be upon good grounds assured,
that it is indeed the truth of God, which ye have learned, and received, and
professed all this while. And this is that which Solomon teaches us, Proverbs
19.27. Cease my son, to hear the instruction which causes to err from the
words of knowledge. As if he should say, Reason not with him, hear not that
man, read not that book that would draw thee from the truth of God, from that
which thou know thou have learned out of his word.

Fourthly and lastly. He that has knowledge, walks boldly, confidently,
When thou go (says Solomon, Proverbs 4.12. speaking of this benefit of
knowledge) thy steps shall not be straightened, and when thou runnest, thou shall
not stumble. As if he had said, When a man knows himself to be in the right
way, and that he has good warrant in Gods word for that which he holds or
practices, he may be bold to run in that way, he need not fear being too
forward, or zealous in it. And he gives a good reason for this, Proverbs
22.12. The eyes of the Lord preserve knowledge. As if he had said, The Lord
will have a special eye to him that does that which he does upon knowledge, to
preserve and protect him from whatsoever danger he may incur for doing of
it. On the other side. He that is ignorant, walks at all adventures, and
must needs be in doubt, and uncertain whether that he does please God or
no. He that walks in darkness (says our Savior, John 12.35) knows not
whither he goes. And consequently he must needs be full of fear. If a man
walk in the night, (says our Savior, John 11.10.) he stumbleth, because
there is no light in him.

Lecture C. On Psalm 51.6. October. 14. 1628.
IT follows now that we proceed to direct you unto the Means whereby this
found and sanctified knowledge may be attained. Means to attain to sound
knowledge.


This then we must now understand, that God has appointed means whereby the
simplest of his people may attain unto knowledge in religion, yea unto a
clear, and certain, and sanctified knowledge, if they shall use them
diligently. For this we have Gods express promise. Prove. 2.4, 5. If thou
seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures (if thou
seek grace and piety diligently, and desire it more then any other thing)
then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of
God. And Hos. 6.3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord. As if
he had said, If we give not over the diligent use of those means, that God
has sanctified to breed and work it in our hearts, we shall certainly
attain to a clear, and certain knowledge of God, and of his will. Now these
means that God has sanctified, to bring us to saving knowledge by, are seven
principally; whereof the first two are but preparatives unto the rest.

Means 1
First. He that would attain to saving and sanctified knowledge in the matters
of God, must first discern his own ignorance and blindness in these things.
This is the Apostles rule, 1 Cor. 3.18. Let no man deceive himself, If any man
among you seems to be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he
may be wise. As if he had said, He must first become in his own sense and
apprehension, a fool, he must discern how ignorant a fool he is, that he
may become wise. These are the only persons whom the Lord calls and
receives to be his scholars to be taught of him. Prove. 9.4. Who so is simple,
let him turn in hither. And these are the only persons that are capable of
heavenly and spiritual knowledge. The testimony of the Lord is sure (says
David, Psalm 19.7.) making wise the simple. And whom means the holy Ghost by
these simple ones? Surely not so much such as want understanding, as such as
do discern, and feel their own ignorance, and want of understanding, in
heavenly things. Let no man then that is in this case, be discouraged, or
despair of attaining unto knowledge; Nay, let him comfort himself in this,
that though it comes from the corruption of his nature, that he is so
ignorant; yet the sight and sense of his ignorance comes from grace, and not
from corruption, and makes him more apt to be taught of God, then another man
is. On the other side, The conceit that most men have, that they have knowledge
enough, is a maine hinderance of their salvation, and bar unto saving
knowledge; As is plain by that speech of our Savior unto the Pharsees that
had asked him, Are we blind also? John 9.40, 41. If ye were blind (says he)
ye should have no sin, but now ye say, we see, therefore your sin
remains. Why, were they not blind and ignorant? Yes verily, and so our
Savior calls them, Matthew. 23.26. but he says here, they were not blind,
because they discerned not their own blindness, and therefore their case was
so fearful; So that I may conclude this first point, with that speech of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.2. If any man think that he knows any thing, he knows
nothing yet as he ought to know. As if he should say, If any man be
conceited of his own knowledge, and cannot discern, and bewail his
ignorance, certainly he neither has any saving knowledge at all, nor is
capable of it.

Means 2
Secondly. He that would attain unto saving and sanctified knowledge, must
first see, and be truly humbled for his sins. Till men have a true sight and
sense of their own sins, they can never attain unto any clear, and certain,
and comfortable knowledge in the matters of God. That which is said in general
of all grace, James 4.6. God gives grace to the humble, must needs be true of
this, God uses to give the saving knowledge of himself and of his will, unto
the humbled soul, and unto it only, God will teach sinners in the way, says
David, Psalm 25.8. that is, such as know, and feel themselves to be sinners.
And in the next words, verse 9. The meek (that is, such as by sight, and
sorrow for sins are made meek and humble, as our Savior also describes the
meek, Matthew. 5.5.) will he guide in judgment. As if he had said, Unto such
God will give a good, and sound judgment to guide them by, in their whole
conversation. As the earth cannot receive the seed till it be plowed up; no
more can the heart of man receive the seed of the Word, till the Lords plough
have first bin in it. It is the comparison that the Lord uses, Ier. 4.3.
Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns. Mark two things in
this speech of the Prophet. 1. It is to no purpose to sow good seed among
thorns, to hear, and read, and use the best means of knowledge, while our
sins remain in us unrepented of. 2. That these thorns will never be gotten
out till our hearts be plowed, and broken up, by an effectual sense and sorrow
of heart for sin. A kind of knowledge I will not deny, may be in many a man
that lives securely in sin and never knew what true sorrow of heart and
trouble of mind for sin does mean, but a clear and settled, a sanctified and
comfortable knowledge of religion, was never known to be in any such man. See
an example of this in the woman of Samaria mentioned in the fourth of John
verse 10 -- 29. How ignorant did she show her self, yea how blockish and
incapable of any thing Christ had said, till Christ did effectually discover
unto her the foul sin she had so long lived in? Yea the maine cause why she
was so blockish, and unable to understand the words of Christ, was because she
lived securely in so gross a sin; But after Christ had once touched her
conscience with sight and sense of her sin, see how the scales fell from her
eyes presently, how desirous she was of knowledge, how savoury and profitable
questions she propounded to our Savior, yea how capable and apt to understand
and believe whatsoever Christ taught her. And certainly this is a chief cause
at this day why most men are so ignorant and unsettled in religion, because
there are so few to whom the Lord did ever yet effectually discover their sins
and give them hearts to be truly humbled for them. The soft and tender heart,
is the only teachable heart, the heart that is secure and senseless can never
be capable of heavenly and sanctified knowledge. Perceive ye not, neither
understand (says our Savior to his own Disciples, Mark 8 17.) have ye your
heart yet hardened? As if he had said Even Gods own children unless they be
careful to keep their hearts soft and tender, shall never be able to
understand well what they read and hear, nor to profit by the best means of
knowledge that they do enjoy.

Thirdly, Means. 3
He that would attain unto sanctified and saving knowledge must attend
diligently and conscionably upon the sound ministry of the Word preached. He
that loves instruction (says Solomon, Pro. 1^.1) loves knowledge. As if he
should say, He and none but he has any love to knowledge, or desire to attain
unto it, that loves instruction, which is the means to bring him to it.
Therefore the Holy Ghost having earnestly exhorted Gods people, Pro. 4.5 -- 12.
to get understanding and heavenly wisdom, adds this as the chief means of
it, verse 13. Take fast hold of instruction, let her not go, keep her, for
she is thy life. As if he had said, Forsake not in any case, be not drawn
away, neglect not this means of knowledge. And Chap. 15.32. He that refuses
instruction despises his own soul. As if he had said, He has no care of his
own soul, but neglects and despises it, cares not what becomes of it,
that cares not for instruction. As there is no art, and science that a man can
get knowledge and skill in, unless he have some to teach him; so may no man
hope without teachers and instructours, to attain to this knowledge, this
heavenly and supernatural knowledge especially. But though he have never so
good capacity and natural parts in him, and use his best endeavor by reading
and study to get it, he shall still have cause to say with the Noble Eunuch,
Acts. 8.31. How can I understand what I read in the holy Scriptures except I
had some to guide me?

But what is this (may some say) to prove the necessity of depending on the
ministry of the Word preached? Object.
May not a man have help enough in good Commentaries and printed Sermons, to
guide and instruct him in the meaning of the holy Scriptures, though he hear
no Sermons?

I answer, Answ.
It is very true that God gives his people (in this age especially) much help
that way. But the instruction the Holy Ghost sends us to, and calls upon us
to regard so much, is that that is gotten not by reading, but by hearing. Hear
instruction (says the Holy Ghost, Pro. 8.33.) and be wise, and refuse it not;
yea by hearing and attending constantly upon the public ministry of the
Word, as appears in the next words, verse 34. Blessed is the man that hears
me (says Christ the wisdom of God) watching daily at my gates, and giving
attendance at the posts of my doors. The frequenting of the house of God to
hear Christ in his ordinances there, is the instruction that the Lord so much
commends to us, and promises such a blessing unto. God reveals his will
and teaches his people no where so clearly and effectually as he does in his
house in the public ministry. Thy way O God, is in thy Sanctuary says
David, Psalm. 77.1^. As if he should say, It is no where so clearly and
comfortably seen and learned as there. There David learned to know and
understand aright the doctrine of Gods providence, of his wisdom and
righteousness in ordering all things that fall out in the world, when he could
learn it no where else, nor by any other means. When I thought to know this
(says he, Psalm. 73.16, 17.) it was too painful for me, until I went into
the Sanctuary of God; then understood I their end. And there it is that God
says, Esa. 2.3. his people should exhort and stir up one another to seek
the true knowledge of God and of his ways, Many people shall go and say, Come
ye and let us go into the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of
Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths. There is
I confess a kind of knowledge in religion, which a man may attain unto, and
to a great measure of it also by his own study and reading, though he never
frequent Gods Sanctuary, nor regard the public ministry of the Word at all;
but a sanctified and saving knowledge that man shall never be able to attain
unto. That which the Apostle says of faith, Romans 10.17. Faith comes by
hearing; he says in another place of every saving grace of Gods sanctifying
spirit, and consequently of saving knowledge, Gal. 3.2. This only would I
learn of you, received ye the spirit by the works of the law, or by the
hearing of faith (that is, the doctrine of faith) preached? The ministry of
the Gospel is the ministration of ^he spirit, as the Apostle calls it, 2
Cor. 3.8. So that in this respect the old sentence holds true auditus est
sensus disciplinae; of all the senses God has given to man, hearing (even
hearing of the Word preached) is the sense whereby we get knowledge, saving
knowledge especially. In which respect we shall find, that when the Prophet
speaks of Gods mighty work in the conversion of a man who was by nature both
blind and deaf, he uses to join these two works together the opening of the
eyes, and opening of the ears too, Esa. 35.5. Then the eyes of the blind shall
be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. Yea he often puts
the opening of the ear, before the opening of the eyes. In that day shall the
deaf hear the words of the book (says he, Esa. 29 18.) and the eyes of the
blind shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness. And 42.18. Hear ye
deaf, and look ye blind that ye may see; To teach us two things. 1. That God
does never use to open his eyes and to give him saving knowledge, whose ears
he does not also open and make both willing to hear, and able also to hear
profitably. 2. That he usually opens the ear first and makes a man a
hearer, a conscionable hearer before he open his eyes, and bring him to any
clear and saving understanding of his will. Certainly even we that are
preachers (though we have greater helps to bring us to knowledge then other
men) yet shall we never attain to a clear, a certain, a sanctified knowledge
of the things we teach, if we despise the ordinance of God; if God have not as
well opened our ears, as either our eyes or our lips; if he have not made us
both willing and able to hear conscionably. In which respect also we find that
(though the Apostles had both their calling and gifts immediately from God,
yet) Christ thought it fit to have them with him during the whole time of his
ministry* that they might be continual and constant hearers of his Sermons,
as well as eyewitnesses of his works and miracles, of his passion and
resurrection, and saw it good even by this means, to bring them to knowledge,
and to prepare them and make them fit to preach well. And the Apostle notes
this for the credit of their doctrine and ministry, Hebrews 2.3. that they
were hearers of Christ themselves. At the first (says he) it was spoken by the
Lord, and was confirmed to us by them that heard him. Two reasons there be
given for this why the frequenting of a sound ministry is the chief mean of
all other, to bring a man to saving knowledge.

First, In respect of the gifts God has bestowed on his Ministers; that is to
The manifestation of the spirit (says the Apostle, 1 Corinthians 12.7.) is
given to every man, to profit withal. As if he had said, There is not the
meanest faithful Minister in the Church, but some gifts of Gods spirit do
manifestly appear to be in him; which as he ought to use to the profit of the
Church; so the Church may receive profit by them. Nay there is not the best
preacher of us all, but we may profit by hearing of the meanest of our
brethren, if the fault be not in our selves.

Secondly, But the chief reason of the point is this, that God has been
pleased to ordain this to be the means whereby he will work all saving It
has pleased God (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.21.) by the foolishness of
preaching, to save them that believe. And even as God under the law promised
his people that he would meet them in the Sanctuary, and declare himself to be
present there, in a more comfortable manner then in any other place in the
world, Exodus ^9.42. And David says, Psalm. 6^.1, 2. his soul thirsted to see
God so as he had seen him in the Sanctuary; So has God promised to be present
in a special manner in the public ministry of his Gospel, and meet his
people there. I will be with you (says Christ, Matthew. 28.20) to the end of the
world. And to bless them in their hearing, Pro. 8.34. Blessed is the man that
hears me; and Esa. 55.3. Hear and your soul shall live; and Mar. 4.24. To
you that hear, more shall be given. And these promises of God, every
conscionable hearer that comes so prepared to this ordinance of God, as you
have heard, with sense of his own ignorance, and with an humble heart, may and
ought to believe and expect the performance of them, to himself and even
claim and challenge them at the hands of God. And although, alas, many that
hear much (because they come not thus prepared nor hear conscionably) receive
no good by it at all, and so discredit this holy ordinance; yet wisdom is
justified of her children, Luke 7.35. and daily experience proves that the
only men that attain to a sound and settled knowledge of the truth, whom no
Papist nor other seducer can pervert, are they that have been constant, and
conscionable frequenters of a sound ministry. And of them that have been
seduced it may be said for the most part, as the Prophet speaks, Ezekiel. ^4.^.
they were scattered (and divided from the rest of the flock) because there was
no shepherd, they had no sound and ordinary ministry to depend upon.

This being so, Let me exhort every one of you beloved. 1. To know your own
happiness, Applic.
such of you as do enjoy the benefit of a sound ministry, prize it, be
thankful for it. Though God should give you the bread of adversity and the
water of affliction (as the Prophet speaks, Esa. 30.20.) yet so long as your
teachers are not removed into a corner any more, but your eyes may see your
teachers in the solemn and public assemblies, count your selves happy men.
2. Resolve with your selves as David does, Psalm. 23.6. that you will dwell in
the house of the Lord for ever; you will never live where you may not frequent
Gods house, where you may not enjoy the comfort of a sound ministry. 3. While
ye enjoy this blessing, make your best use of it. When the Apostle had said,
James 1.18. Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth; As if he had
said, That saving grace that is in any of us, was wrought in us by the
ministry of the Word. He infers, verse 19. Wherefore my beloved brethren,
Let every man be swift to hear. For who can tell how soon this blessed
liberty will have an end? And though I cannot say to you as our Savior did to
the Jews, John 12.35. Yet a little while is the light with you, I cannot
certainly say you shall enjoy it but a little while; yet his next words I may
boldly apply to you, Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon
you. Make your best use of this ordinance of God, while ye have it lest ye be
deprived of it, before you be aware. The four other means whereby saving
knowledge is to be attained, I will but name only because of the time.

Means. 4
The fourth means to come to this knowledge by, is the reading of good books
and of the holy Scriptures especially; As is evident by the commandment given
to the King not only for the private reading of it, Deuteronomy. 17.19. but also for
the public reading of it unto all the people, Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12. and the reason
given for the commandment in both places.

Means. 5
Fifthly, Meditation and serious thinking and considering with our selves, of
that which we have heard and read is a special means to breed knowledge, and
without it indeed neither hearing nor reading will do us much good. I have
more understanding (says David, Psalm. 119.99.) then all my teachers, for thy
testimonies are my meditation.

Means. 6
Sixthly, Conference and making use of other men's gifts, and moving our doubts to
such as are able to resolve us, would also much increase our knowledge, and
settle our judgments in the truth. This was the course that Christ's Disciples
(by his direction no doubt) took for the increase of their knowledge, John
16.17 -- 19. first to confer among themselves of that which they heard, and
then also to move their doubts to Christ himself.

Means. 7
Seventhly and lastly, Prayer is a principal means to make all other means of
knowledge effectual to do us good, Pro. 2.3, 5, 6. If thou cryest after
knowledge, and liftest up thy voice (to God he means) for understanding, Then
shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. For
the Lord gives wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding.

The use of reproof I purposely omit, because the sum of it is intermingled
with this use of exhortation.

Lecture CI. On Psalm 51.6. October 28. 1628.
WE have heard that in these words, there be three principal things to be
observed. 1. The description that David makes here of his own conversion and
regeneration, In the hidden part he had known wisdom; that is, his mind was
enlightened with the sound and saving knowledge of Gods true religion, of the
right way how to serve God and to save his own soul. 2. Who was the author
and worker of this his true conversion of this saving knowledge that he had
attained to, In the hidden part thou had made me to know wisdom. 3. And
lastly, The end and purpose David had in mentioning the truth of his conversion
in this place, and that was to aggravate the heinousness of his sin by the
consideration of it. The first of these three points we finished the last day,
and now it follows that we proceed unto the second of them.

Now therefore we are to observe that David calling to mind here the estate he
was in before he fell into these sins, Nota.
that he was a regenerate man, he had truth of sanctifying grace in him, he
was enlightened with the saving knowledge of the truth; he mentions (and that
purposely, and with an emphasis and vigorous and strong expression of his mind
in this point) who wrought this conversion and truth of grace, this saving
knowledge in him, In the hidden part thou have made me to know wisdom. And
from hence this Doctrine does naturally arise for our instruction.

That the conversion of a man, Doct. 22
even the bringing of him unto saving knowledge is to be ascribed only unto
God, and to the mighty work of his grace.

Two branches (you see there are of the Doctrine that must be distinctly
handled. 1. That any man is truly converted, it is to be ascribed only unto
God. 2. That any man has attained to so much as to the sound and saving
knowledge of the truth, it is to be ascribed unto the Lord only; yea both
these are to be ascribed to the mighty work of Gods grace, In the hidden
part, thou have made me to know wisdom.

For the first, Branch 1
We shall see the truth of it confirmed to us, in both the causes of the
conversion of a man. Every man that is converted ordinarily has both an
outward, and an inward calling. Outward by the Word in the ministry of Gods
servants; of which our Savior speaks, Matthew. 20.16. Many be called, but few
chosen. And even this calling is necessary by the ordinance of God, to the
conversion of every man, that shall be saved; as is plain by the Apostles
speech, Romans 10.14. How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard?
And how shall they hear without a preacher? Then there is an inward calling
also by the spirit of God, without which no man can be converted, Of which the
Apostle speaks, Romans 8.30. Whom he did predestinate, them he also called,
and whom he called, them he also justified. Now the glory of both these is
due to the Lord alone, nothing in either of them unto man himself.

For the first, You shall see it made evident unto you in three points.

First, Of God only it is, that any man does enjoy the outward means Jeremy
3.15. I will give you Pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed you
with knowledge and understanding. It is the Lord of the harvest that sends
forth laborers into his harvest, as our Savior speaks, Matthew. 9.38. And
even as he did at the first in the Primitive Church, not only send forth his
Apostles his chief laborers into his harvest, but did also appoint them the
special field, and part of the field where they should work. Go not into the
way of the Gentiles (says our Savior to them, Matthew 10.5, 6.) and into any
city of the Samaritans enter ye not; but go rather to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel. And after when he did send them to the Gentiles, to work in
that field, he still had a special hand in appointing them, what part of the
field they should work in. He forbad them to preach the Word in Asia, Acts
16.6. and verse 7. He suffered them not to go into Bythinia; and verse 10.
he called and commanded them to go into Macedonia, and to preach the Gospel
there. And even so now also, though not so sensibly as then (because visions
and revelations are now ceased) yet as truly and powerfully, the Lord has
still a special hand in disposing the ministry of his Word, who shall enjoy
it, and who shall want it, how long it shall continue where it is, and when it
shall be removed from thence. It is he that holds the seven stars (that
is, all the stars of the Churches) in his right hand; as our Savior speaks
of himself, Revel. 2.1. he disposes of them as it pleases him. And he also
protecteth and maintains them, no man shall be able to pluck them out of
his hand, or to remove them, till they have done the work, that he has
appointed them to do, and he lay them down himself. And so the Lord
speaks of his two witnesses (that is, of that competent number of faithful
teachers that God said he would raise up to his Church, to discover and oppose
Antichrist. Revel. 11.) not only that the just period of time even to a day
was determined by him how long they should prophecy, verse 3. even a thousand
two hundred and threescore days; but also verse 7. that till they had finished
their testimony and done that work which the Lord had appointed them, the beast
that ascended out of the bottomless pit, should not make war against them,
nor overcome and kill them.

Applic.
Let no man impute it either to chance or to the goodness or policy of man,
that the Gospel which is banished out of the Palatinate and many other places
is preached in this land and among us so plentifully; that it has continued
and made it abode with us for so long a time. No no let us acknowledge Gods
special hand and goodness toward our land, and toward our selves in this,
and let him have all the glory of it. Certainly if we had hearts rightly to
consider and weigh this with our selves, we would find just cause to say of
this as the Church does in another case, Psalm. 118.23. This is the Lords doing,
and it is mavelous in our eyes It is of the Lord certainly, and of his
special goodness, that any man does enjoy the benefit of a sound ministry
whereby he has his outward calling unto grace, and which is the ordinary
means of his conversion. And even in this first respect the conversion of a
man, is to be ascribed unto God alone.

Matthew. 13.3 -- 8. there fell every whit as good seed upon the highway side,
and upon the stony and thorny land, as upon the good ground. But his maine aim
is for the elects sake, that live amongst them; as our Savior also teaches us
in another case in the Parable of the tares, Matthew 13.29, 30. 2. To all men
even to all the reprobate, God vouchsafes some means of grace, some means to
convert them, and bring them unto repentance. Christ lights every man that
comes into the world, says the Apostle, John 1.9. Every man has received
from him the light of nature, and does in many things know what is good, and
what is evil; and that which may be known of God (says the Apostle, Romans
1.9. that is to say, that there is a God, and that he is to be feared, and
worshipped) is manifest in them (in their very hearts and consciences) for God
showed it unto them, even unto all men by nature, God has given this knowledge
unto them. And they that have this light and knowledge, cannot be denied to
have means given them of God, to bring them unto grace and unto repentance.
Nay the Apostle teaches us, Romans 2.4. that the goodness of God (whereof all
men living do taste) leads them unto repentance, is a notable means to
turn and convert their hearts unto God. Yea, he tells us, ver 15. that the
Gentiles have the work of the law (that is to say, that which the law
requires) written in their hearts, and that thereupon they do by nature the
things contained in the law, verse 14. But all this that men have by nature,
these helps that God thus vouchsafes unto all men, are not sufficient means
of grace and conversion. They are sufficient indeed to make them without
excuse, and to that end they serve as the Apostle expressly teaches us, Romans
1.10. By giving unto all men this light, and these means God has not left
himself without witness against them, as the Apostle speaks Act. 14.17. But
to breed saving grace, and to work sound conversion in the heart, they are not
sufficient; No, no, it is not the light of nature, not that knowledge of God,
that is gotten by the contemplation of the creature, nor the work of the law
that is written in all men's hearts, but the Gospel only that is a sufficient
means of grace and conversion. The Gospel is the ministration of the spirit,
as the Apostle calls it, 2 Corinthians. 3.8. And therefore he tells the
Ephesians, 2, 12. that while they were without Christ, while they were
strangers from the covenants of promise, they were without hope. Till Christ
and his covenants of promise were made known to them by the Gospel, they
could have no hope at all to be saved. Nay, it is the preaching and ministry
of the Gospel, that is the only sufficient means of conversion, the means
that God has ordained to work saving grace by, that is, the power of God unto
salvation, as the Apostle calls it, Romans 1.16. Every man that has heard, and
has learned of the father (says our Savior, John 6 45, comes unto me. No
man can come to Christ, till he be taught of God, and drawn by him unto
Christ. And the means God uses to teach and draw men by, is the hearing of
his Gospel preached; which made the Apostle say, Romans 10.14. How shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a
preacher? Now sufficient means I call the Gospel, and the preaching thereof,
because 1. It is the means God has ordained to work by. 2. Because no other
outward means are needful for the effecting of this work. The means which
is the only sufficient means of conversion (as you have heard) the only
means God has ordained to work saving grace by, God did never vouchsafe unto
all men, never I say. For 1. before Christ's coming, God denied his word to the
greatest part of the world, and made it the special prerogative of the Jews,
that to them were committed the Oracles of God; as the Apostle speaks, Romans
3.2. He showed his word unto Jacob (says the Prophet, Psalm. 147.19, 20.) his
statutes, and his judgments unto Israel, he has not dealt so with any nation
(No not so clearly may some say, not so plentifully; nay says the Psalmist)
as for his judgments (in his word and statutes) they have not known them. In
those days he suffered all nations to walk in their own ways, as the
Apostle speaks. Acts 14.16. 2. In Christ's own time this restraint
continued, and the Gospel was still denied to the Gentiles. Go not into the
way of the Gentiles (says he to his Apostles. Mat. 10.5.) and into any city of
the Samaritanes enter ye not. 3. Though after Christ's ascension this partition
wall between the Jews and Gentiles was broken down, and the Gospel went
into all the world, as the Apostle speaks, Col. 1.6. and was preached to
every creature, as he says verse 23. that is, to the Gentiles as well as to
the Jews, without difference. Their sound (of the Apostles Doctrine and
ministry) went into all the earth (as he says, Romans 10.18.) and their words
unto the ends of the world. There was no nation or language, in which the
Gospel was not then preached. Yet neither at that time was the Gospel
preached to all men; God did not vouchsafe this mercy to every village or city,
much less to every person, no not in that age. But even as the Lord sometimes
disposed of the material rain, as he says, Amos 4.7. I caused it to rain
upon one City, and caused it not to rain upon another City, one piece was
rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained not, withered; Even so did he
then of this heavenly rain, the ministry of his Gospel, some places he
bestowed it on, and some he denied it unto. The Apostles (notwithstanding the
general charge to go and teach all nations, Mat. 28.19) yet were forbidden of
the holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia (as we read Act. 16.6, 7.) and when
they assayed to go into Byt^inia, the spirit suffered them not.

Applic.
Now let every one of us consider well this second point. One chief cause why
we do so much under-vallue the Gospel, we rejoice not in it, we are
unthankefull for it, is this that though we think it a gift and blessing of
God, yet we account it but a common gift; and the common blessings of God,
though they be never so great, affect us but a little. Think therefore well
of this that thou have heard, and let me say unto you as our Savior says
unto his Disciples (though to another purpose, John 4.35.) Behold, I say unto
you, lift up your eyes, and look upon the regions. Consider that God has
denied his Gospel to the greatest part of the world by far; that a thick
and palpable darkness is over all Egypt, as Exodus 10.21 -- 23. and that
England and a few places more, are the only Goshen, where the light remains;
Consider how many places are still denied this mercy of a sound ministry which
thou and the place thou live in do enjoy; Consider lastly, that neither
thou nor the place thou live in, should have enjoyed this blessing at all, if
either thou were not one of Gods Elect thy self, or at least that in the place
thou live in, God has some of his Elect yet to be gathered. The Lord of the
harvest never sent forth his laborers to work in any field, when he had no
corn to get; Consider these things (I say) and consider them well, and thou will no longer account the ministry of the Gospel, a common blessing, thou will esteem even the outward calling thou have by the ministry of the word,
as a rare and singular favor of God; thou will admire Gods mercy in it, and
be more thankful for it.

He has called us with an holy calling (says the Apostle, 2. Tim. 1.9. and
that word comprehends not the inward calling only, but even the outward also)
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace;
nothing but his own free grace and good pleasure moved him to do it. And the
experience of all ages has proved this to be true, that the Lord passing by
such as have best used the light of nature, has given his Gospel, and the
means of salvation, unto far more wicked people then they were. Thus the
Lord speaks to the Prophet touching Israel, Ezekiel. 3.5 -- 7. Thou art not sent
to a people of a strange speech, and of an hard language but to the house of
Israel. Not to many people of a strange speech and of an hard language whose
words thou can not understand; surely had I sent thee to them, they would
have hearkened unto thee: But the house of Israel will not hearken unto thee:
for they will not hearken unto me; for all the house of Israel are impudent and
hard-hearted. And of Judah it is said, Ezekiel. 5.6. that she had changed Gods
judgments into wickedness more then the nations, and his statutes more then
the countries that were round about her; and yet unto Judah God gave the means
of salvation, and denied them to all other nations in the world beside.
Chorazin and Bethsaida were worse people, and did not make so good use of the
light of nature, as Tire and Sidon did, as is plain by Christ's speech, Matthew.
11.21. and yet unto them the Gospel was preached by Christ himself and denied
unto the other. The Gentiles that lived after Christ's ascension and unto whom
the Apostles did preach, were nothing so moral men, nor were comparable in the
right use of the light and law of nature unto Socrates and Aristides, unto Cato
and Scipio and diverse others that we read of: For of some of them it is said
that they even till the time of their calling, Tit. 3.3. served diverse lusts
and pleasures, lived in malice and envy and that they were odious men. And of
some of them it is said, 1 Cor. 6.9 -- 11. that they had been not only
thieves, and drunkards, and extortioners, and adulterers, but even effeminate
persons, and buggerers, abusers of themselves with mankind. And yet to these
God vouchsafed his Gospel and denied it unto the other, that were not only
free from these foul vices, but were also for moral virtues and for the use
they made of the light and law of nature, most rare and excellent men.

And may not we all (to conclude) set our seal to this truth from our own
experience? Applic.
Is our nation, or are those towns in our land where the Gospel is most
plentifully preached? Or were many of our selves before our calling, better
people then any of those are to whom the Lord still denies the light of his
Gospel? No no, the Lord knows and our own hearts know it is not so. The
Lord in giving us his Gospel had no respect at all to any goodness he saw
was in us; Nothing moved him to it but his own free grace and good pleasure
toward us, we did nothing at all to further and procure so much as our
outward calling; All is to be ascribed unto God alone.

Lecture CII. On Psalm 51.6. November 4. 1628.
IT follows now that we show this to be so likewise in the inward calling,

For the first, The best course I can take for the confirmation of it

First, Quest. 1.
Does not the Scripture speak great things and ascribe much to the Word it
self in this case and to the preaching of it? 1, The Word it self is said to
be lively and mighty in operation, sharper then any two edged sword, Heb. 4.12.
Is not my Word like as a fire says the Lord? ( Ier. 23.29.) and like a hammer
that breaks the rock in pieces? And the Apostle calls it the incorruptible
seed whereby we are borne again, 1 Pet. 1.23. Yea the Prophet expressly
says, Psalm. 19.7. That the law of the Lord is perfect converting the soul. 2.
Of the faithful Ministers and preachers of the Word it is said both 1 Cor.
3.9. and 2 Cor. 6.1. that they are workers together with God. And Paul tells
the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.15. that he was their father in Christ Jesus, he had
begotten them through the Gospel; and 9.1. that they were his work in the
Lord. Yea Philem. 19. Thou owe to me even thine own self.

Answ. 1.
To this I answer, First, That these places are not so to be understood, as if
there were any natural virtue or power inherent in the Word it self, or the
ministry thereof, given unto it of God; as there is in the fire to warm us,
or in our food to nourish us, or in the seed to bring forth fruit.

Answ. 2.
Secondly, That the reason why the Holy Ghost is pleased thus to speak, and to
ascribe thus much unto the Word and the ministry thereof is, that he might
dignifie this ordinance of his, and work in his people an high esteem of it;
And to show them. 1. It is that noble instrument, that he has ordained to
work the conversion of man by, and without which he uses not to work the
conversion of any. It pleased God by the foolishness of preaching (says the
Apostle, 1 Corinthians 1.21.) to save men. And we are the Ministers by whom ye
beeleeved (says he, 1 Cor. 3.5.) even as the Lord gave to every man. And Romans
10.14. How can they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall
they hear without a preacher? 2. He uses to work with it and to accompany it
by the operation of his spirit (though not in every one that hears it yet) in
the hearts of his elect; according to the promise of Christ, Matthew. ^8.20. Lo I
am with you always even to the end of the world. This made the Apostle to say
and to praise God for it, 2 Cor. 2.14. that he did make manifest the savor of
his knowledge by them in every place. God never places the faithful ministry
of the Gospel in any place, but he uses to make it savoury and fruitful unto
some. 3. To show us the high account the Lord himself makes of this his
ordinance how he esteems of it. We are unto God a sweet savor in Christ
(says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.15.) in them that are saved, and in them that
perish. As if he had said, Even where God is not pleased to work with our
ministry so far as to make it effectual, to the conversion of men, yet even
there also our ministry is never the less acceptable to God, but he joieth
and takes pleasure in it.

Answ. 3.
Thirdly and lastly, I answer to this first Question that the virtue and power
that the Word and ministry thereof has to convert and work grace, is not in
it self, but wholly in the spirit of God, that works with it. And so the
holy Scripture that ascribes so much unto the Word as you have heard,
interprets it self in sundry places. I am the Lord thy God that teaches
thee to profit, says the Lord, Esa 48.17. that any man profits by the best
means it is of God only. Of his own will begat he us by the Word of truth,
says the Apostle, James 1.18. As though he (...) ^ay, We were indeed begotten
again by the Word, but it was God alone that begot us by it. This made that
Convert mentioned, 1 Corinthians 14.24, 25. when he had felt in the hearing of
Gods Prophets and Ministers, the searching and piercing power of the Word in
his heart to fall down on his face, and to worship God, and to profess God is
in you of a truth. As if he had said, Certainly God is in your ministry; it
is not in the words that I have heard you speak, nor in your manner of uttring
and delivering of them, that my heart has been so mightily wrought upon, but
in the divine power of God, that speaks in and by you. So the Apostle tells
the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 13.3. it was Christ that spoke in him, who to them-word
was not weak, but was mighty in them. As if he should say, It was not I, nor
any thing that I said, when I preached to you, but Christ that spoke in me that
was so mighty in your hearts to convert them.

But then from hence there arises a second Question. Quest. 2
What? Is the Word and the ministry thereof in it self but as a dead
instrument or tool that God works by? Is it but as a truncke through which
Christ speaks? Is there no more virtue and power then so in the Word it self?

My answer to this Question must have two parts. For 1. I must show you what
virtue and power the Word has in it self. 2. What virtue and power it has
not.

For the first, Answ. 1.
It cannot be denied but that there is some virtue and power in the Word it
self, and in the ministry thereof. For

First, There are in the Word most strong and effectual arguments to move
sets before men life and death, bl^ssing and cursing as Moses speaks,
Deuteronomy. 30.19. And Agrippa was almost perswadad to be a Christian by hearing of
that which Paul spoke concerning Christ, Acts 26.28.

Secondly, Some doctrines that Gods Ministers teach out of Gods Word, are
Timothy and to Titus also for teaching and pressing some Doctrines above
others, These things command and teach, says he, 1 Timothy 4.11. and Tit. 2.15.
These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all authority.

Thirdly and lastly, There is much force this way even in the manner of Apollos
was said to have been, Acts 18.24, 25. so eloquent men and mighty in the
Scriptures, and fervent in spirit) that no man almost can hear them, but he
must needs understand them, and be affected with that that they teach.

But the second part of my answer to this second Question is, Answ. 2.
That the power to convert the soul of any man, lies neither in the
excellency of any teachers gifts, no not in the Doctrine and Word of God it
self, but in the spirit of God only that works by these means. And thus
the Apostle who had said (as you have heard) that he was the Corinthians
father, he had begotten them to Christ, they were his work; interprets
himself in other places. He ascribes all the power that was in his ministry
(though both his doctrine doubtless and his manner of delivering it, his
ministerial gifts were most excellent yet) he ascribes all (I say) to the
work of Gods spirit only. My preaching was (says he, 1 Cor. 2.4.) in
demonstration of the spirit and of power. As if he had said, It was such as the
power of the spirit was evidently to be seen and felt in it, all the power
that it had, was from the spirit. And 2 Cor. 4.7. he says that the excellency
of that power (that was in his, and his fellow Apostles ministry) was wholly
of God and not of them. The weapons of our warfare (says he, 2 Cor. 10 4.) are
mighty through God. As if he had said, All that mighty power that is in our
ministry to pull down strong holds, and cast down imaginations and every
high thing, that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and to bring
into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ is from God alone. Yea
he professes in another place that he durst not for his life ascribe any thing
to himself in this work of converting men to God, by his ministry. I will
not dare (says he, Romans 15.18.) to speak of any thing which Christ has not
wrought by me* to make the Gentiles obedient both in word and deed. As if he
had said, That the Gentiles that heard me were brought to that obedience and
reformation, God forbid I should say or think it was my doing; I dare not for
a world say so; No no, it was Christ and he alone that did work it by me as
by his poor instrument. Nay when he had said, 1 Cor. 3.6. that he (as an
Apostle and master workman) had planted, and Apollos (as an Evangelist and
under workman) had watered the plants that he had set, he adds not only that
it was God that gave the increase, all the success and fruit of their labors
was from God alone; but he adds further, verse 7. so then neither is he that
planteth any thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the increase. As
though he should say, As excellent as the gifts of these men were, they did
nothing in this work, the whole glory of it was to be ^ given unto the Lord
alone. And thus have you seen the first point I propounded confirmed unto you,
that it is of God only that the means of grace become effectual unto the
conversion of any man.

John 6.41 -- 45. that this was the cause why they profited not by Christ's
ministry but murmured against him, and his Doctrine, because his father did
not draw them, because they were not taught of God. And John 12.38. They
believed not, that the saying of Esaias the Prophet might be fufilled, which he
sp^ke, Lord who has believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? 1. The arm of the Lord was not revealed to them, no not in Christ's
ministry, the mighty spirit of God did not work with the Word in their hearts.
2. That was the cause why they did not believe, and profit by the Word. 3. That
the only cause why they were not converted, was not because they would not
themselves, but because the Lord did not give them that grace whereby they
should be converted Secondly, It is expressly said that Gods intent and
purpose in Ezekiel to preach, he did not absolutely intend in sending him that
all to whom he should preach should profit by him; for he tells and assures
him of the contrary, Ezekiel. 3.7. The house of Israel will not hearken unto thee,
for they will not hearken unto me, for all the house of Israel are impudent and
hard-hearted. What was the Lords intent then in sending him unto them? That is
expressed, Ezekiel. 2.5. Yet they shall know that there has been a Prophet among
them; As if he had said, To make them without excuse, to make their
condemnation more just, the Lord sent his Word unto them. So when our Savior
says, Matthew. 24.14. that before the destruction of Jerusalem the Gospel
should be preached in all the world, he declares that the intent of God in
sending his Apostles to preach to all nations, was for a witness to all
nations, that is, to make them without excuse. And our Savior himself
speaking of his own ministry says, John 9.39. For judgment am I come into
this world not only that those that see not might see but also that they
Thirdly and lastly, It is expressly said that this grace of Gods spirit
whereby men are made to profit by the means, to repent, and believe, is
peculiar and proper to the elect of God, and not common to all men. As many as
were ordained to eternal life, believed, says the Holy Ghost, Acts 13.48. And
Romans 8.30. Whom he did predestinate them he also called; that is to say, with
an inward and effectual calling. And 11.7. The election has obtained it, and
the rest were blinded. And thus you have seen also the second point proved,
that every man to whom God gives the ministry of the Word, has not so
powerful and effectual grace given him as whereby he shall be converted.

The son quickneth whom he will, and whom he will he hardens. Of his own
will (says the Apostle Iam. 1.18.) begat he us by the word of truth. So when
our Savior fell into an admiration at the work of God in this case, that he
should hide the mysteries of his kingdom from the wisest men in the world, and
reveal them to babes, Luke 10.21. he could find no other reason of it, but
only the good pleasure of God, Even so o father (says he) for so it seemed
good in thy sight. The conversion of a man you see, depends wholly on the
will and good pleasure of God, upon the will of man, it depends not at all.
They that believe in Christ (says the Evangelist, John 1.13) are borne, not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. This
will appear clearly to us in two points. First. Nothing that is in man before
his He has called us with an holy calling (says the Apostle. 2 Timothy 1.9.)
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace. Even
when we were dead in trespasses and sins, he quickened us (says the
Apostle, Ephesians 2.5.) and adds these words upon it. By grace ye are
saved. As if he should thus say. Nothing but Gods free grace could be the
cause of the conversion of a man, that had no goodness in him to move God to
it, but was dead in trespasses and sins. Secondly. Nothing that is in man Rom
10.21. All the day long have I stretched out my hands to a disobedient, and
gaine-saying people. But when God is pleased to convert them, he does by his
grace overcome this rebellion that is in their will, that they resist no
longer. Yet does he not convert any man against his will, nor force the will
of man to obey his call, but he changes the will of man, and takes from it
that frowardness and rebelliousnesse that was in it by nature, and makes it
heartily willing to yield unto God. I will take the stony heart out of them
(says the Lord, Ezekiel. 11.19.) and will give them an heart of flesh. God
works in us to will of his good pleasure (says the Apostle, Phil. 2.13) This
may fitly be resembled by the change that God wrought in the heart of Esau,
toward his brother Jacob. Esaus heart and will was most strongly bent against
Jacob, he came against him with a great power, and with a most cruel mind,
Genesis 32.6. yet when he met him, he had no power to hurt him; what was the
cause of this? Did God by force restrain him, or bind him from hurting Jacob?
No verily, God changed his will and heart, that he was naturally affected
toward him, Gen, 33.4. He ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his
neck and kissed him, and wept in kindness over him And even so is it in this
case. The Lord in converting of a man, does not only persuade him by
effectual arguments out of the word, to repent, and turn to God, nor only
give a man so much grace, as he may be able to repent and turn to God if he
will himself, but he does also infuse, and work the grace of repentance in
him, he does so change his will, that he does most willingly repent, and obey
the call of God. A new heart will I give you (says the Lord, Ezechiel 36.26,
27.) and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will put my spirit within
you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments,
and do them. And so says the Apostle of Christ, Act. 5.31. God has exalted
him to be a Prince, and a Savior (not only to persuade men to repent, or to
give them power to repent if they would themselves, but) to give repentance
unto Israel, to infuse this grace into them, and to work this change in their
hearts.

So that you see the work of man's conversion, is wholly to be ascribed to the
grace of God, to his will and good pleasure; not to the natural will of man at
all. It lies not in man either to further, or absolutely to hinder it. In
which respect we shall find it is compared to the work of creation, 2 Cor.
5.17. and to the work of raising men from death, John 5.25. and to the work
of generation, John 3.5. And what use had man of his own will in any of these
works? What power was there in him, either to further or to hinder any of them?

And if the efficacy of grace that God gives to men for their conversion,
were no more but this, that they are made thereby able to convert and repent if
they will, how could that be true which the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 4.7. Who
makes thee to differ from another, and what have thou, that thou have not
received? Who made Peter to differ from Judas, that when they had both fallen,
the one truly repented, the other did not? Surely if this were so, Peter might
have said, not the Lord, but I made my self to differ from Judas; he had as
sufficient grace given him of God for his conversion as I had; he had power
given him to repent, if he had listed, as well as I, but he did not make right
use of his free will, for the accepting of Gods grace, as I did, and that was
it that made the difference between him and me.

Lecture CIII. On Psalm 51.6. Nouemb. 11. 1618.
Branch 2
IT follows now that we proceed to the latter branch of the Doctrine, namely
to show, That the sound and saving knowledge of the truth that is in any man,
is to be ascribed only to the work of Gods grace and holy spirit, not unto
any power and ability that is in man himself, In the hidden part (says David
here) thou had made me to know wisdom. See this confirmed unto you in
three points. 1. No man is able without the supernatural grace of Gods spirit,
to attain unto that knowledge of the truth, as is sufficient unto his
salvation. 2 This supernatural grace of Gods spirit, is not common, nor
actually vouchsafed unto all that do enjoy the means of instruction. 3. No
cause can be given why this grace should be vouchsafed unto one, rather then
unto another, but only the good pleasure, and will of God.



Object. 1
For the first. It cannot be denied, that all those truths, the knowledge
whereof is necessary unto salvation, are not darkely, and obscurely, but
plainly, and clearly set down in the holy Scriptures. Thy word (says David
Psalm. 119.105.) is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. And the
Apostle, 2 Peter 1.19. calls the word of prophecy (the Scripture of the old
Testament) a light that shines in a dark place. An evident demonstration of
the plainness, and easiness of the holy Scripture to be understood, is this,
that it was written for the use (not of the learned only, but) of all Gods
people. I have written to him (says the Lord, Hosea 8.12. that is to say, to
Ephraim, to the whole people and congregation of Israel) the great things of my
law, but they were counted as a strange thing. And how could Ephraim be blamed
for counting them as a strange thing, if they had been written so obscurely,
and darkely, that they could not be understood by them? So our Savior
speaking to the multitude, to the common people. John 5.39. commands them to
search the Scriptures; that is, to read, and study them diligently; and gives
this for his reason; For in them (says he) you think to have eternal life,
and they are they that testify of me; which he would never have done, if he
had thought the Scriptures had been so dark that the common people could
never understand them. Neither would the Apostle have commended this in
Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15. that from a child he had known the holy Scriptures; nor
noted it to the praise of his grandmother and mother, that they had trained him
up so, if he had not known that the holy Scriptures are so plain, that even
children may be able to understand them. Certainly they are so plain (in
those points the knowledge whereof, is necessary to the obtaining of eternal
life) as no man, no woman, no child, need to be discouraged from the reading
and study of them. Yea, it was purposely written by the holy Ghost in that
manner, that it might be understood of the simplest of them that read it, and
bring them unto knowledge. The testimony of the Lord (says David, Psalm. 19.7,
8.) is sure, making wise the simple; the commandment of the Lord is pure,
enlightening the eyes. And 119.130. The entrance of thy words (says he, or the
door of them, as it is in the Original) gives light, it gives understanding
unto the simple. As if he had said, So soon as they do but open the door,
and make any entrance into them, they shall see light, and get understanding by
them. And if these necessary truths of God were so plainly delivered and set
down in the word of prophecy, in the Scripture of the old Testament, how much
more in the new, wherein all things are plainer then they were in the old, and
which does open and interpret those things that were more darkely delivered by
the prophets. The mystery which was kept secret since the world began (says
the Apostle, Romans 16.25, 26.) is now made manifest; and by the Scriptures of
the Prophets (he means as they are now opened and interpreted) according to
the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all nations for the
obedience of faith. And if all necessary truths be so plainly set down, and
delivered in the written word, how much more in the ministry of the word
preached. For this is a chief work and duty of the ministry, to open the
Scriptures, and make the meaning of them plain unto the people, as those
Levites did, Nehem. 8.8. They gave the sense of the law of God, and caused the
people to understand the reading. And if all necessary truths be with such
evidence and plainness delivered in the word and the ministry thereof, why
may not any man having the use of reason, and judgment, and being attentive in
reading, and hearing, without the help of any supernatural grace, attain to
the sufficient knowledge of them, nay, how can he choose but do it?

To this I answer. Answ.
The whole truth of God that is necessary to be known unto salvation, is
indeed plainly and clearly revealed in the holy Scriptures: there is in the
word and ministry thereof, a bright and shining light; But (alas) every man by
nature is blind. He that lacks these things (says the Apostle, 2 Peter 19.
he that is unregenerate, and lacks saving grace) is blind. And what use can
the blind man make of the light, while he remains blind, and till his eyes be
opened? Till the Lord anoint our eyes with that eye salve that Christ speaks
of, Revel. 3.18. and cure us of this blindness; till he open our eyes, till he
by his spirit inlighten the eyes of our understanding, as the Apostle speaks,
Ephesians. 1.18. all the light and clearenesse that is in the holy Scripture, will
do us no good at all. An this is therefore spoken of, as a principal work of
the spirit of Christ in our conversion, Esa. 35.5. Then the eyes of the blind
shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped; then, and
never till then, that we be converted, and regenerated by the spirit of God.
That which the Apostle says of the Jews, 2. Cor. 3.15, 16. Even unto this
day, when Moses is read, the veil is upon their heart, nevertheless, when it
shall turn to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away; may be said of every
man while he is in his natural estate, when the word is read, or preached unto
him, the veil is upon his heart, and till he be regenerate and converted, the
veil will never be taken away. A little child that wants capacity, though
you teach him any thing never so plainly, cannot possibly learn. And such are
we all by nature, we have no capacity for heavenly and spir^tuall things. The
natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God (says the Apostle,
1 Cor. 2.14. he is not capable of them) for they are fooli^hnesse unto him,
neither can be know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Till the
Lord do renew us in the spirit of our minds, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians.
4.23. give us new minds; till he give us an understanding, that we may know
him that is true, as the Apostle 1 John 5.20. says, we have no capacity at
all in us for these things. Therefore the holy Ghost commending the word of God
for this property among others, even for the perspicuity, and lightsomnesse of
it, tells us who they be to whom it is so clear, and easy to be
understood, Proverbes 8.9 They are all plain to him that understands says
he. A strange manner of speech this is, but the meaning of it, is no more but
this. The Scriptures are plain indeed, but to whom are they plain? Not unto
all, but to them only, whose eyes God has opened, from whom God has taken
the veil that was upon their heart, whom he has by his spirit, given
capacity and an understanding heart unto, and to no other man. Yea,
proportionable to the measure of this grace, of this work of Gods spirit in
the opening of our eyes, and curing our natural blindness, in the renewing of
our minds, and enlightening of the eyes of our understanding, shall the measure
of our knowledge in heavenly things be, shall the meaning of the holy
Scriptures be plain and easy unto us. For we must understand, that this
cure of our natural blindness, is not perfected in any man in this life. The
best of Gods servants may say with the Apostle, 1 Corinthians 13.9 We know but in
part. He that has the clearest sight in spiritual things, shall have cause
while he lives here, to cry unto God with David, Psalm 119.18. Open thou
mine eyes. Wonder not that every one of Gods servants does not see the truth in
some points, that to thee are most clear and evident, though they hear as
much as thou hear, and read and study as much to understand the truth as
thou do. To every one of us (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.7.) is given grace,
according to the measure of the gift of Christ. So much light and understanding
in heavenly things, as Christ by his spirit is pleased to give unto us, we
shall have, and no more. When we shall come to heaven, our blindness shall be
perfectly cured, the darkness that is in our understanding shall be fully done
away, as the Apostle teaches, ^ Cor* 13.12. All good men shall be of one mind,
and of one judgment in all things, but never till then.

Object. 2
The second objection that may be made against this truth is this. That common
experience proves, that many a natural man has attained to the knowledge of
the truth, yea unto a great measure of it also, so as they have been able
soundly to teach it unto others. The Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses
chair, that is, taught the doctrine of Moses so soundly and substantially,
that our Savior commands the people, Mat. 23 2, 3. to observe and do,
whatsoever they (sitting thus in Moses chair) did bid and teach them to
observe. And the Apostle speaks of knowledge, 1 Cor. 8.1. as of a common
gift, that all that live in the Church, under good means of instruction
(though they have no grace) may easily, yea, cannot choose almost but attain
unto. We know (says he) that we all have knowledge.

Answ.
To this I answer. That a natural man may indeed understand the literal sense
and meaning of the holy Scriptures, so as he may be able soundly to
discourse, dispute, and write of them. But this knowledge is not sufficient,
there is another manner of knowledge then this, that is necessary to the
salvation of every man. Such a knowledge as you heard described to you, when I
delivered ^o you the properties, and signs of saving knowledge. 1. Such a
knowledge, as has in it full assurance, and undoubted persuasion of the truth,
full assurance of understanding, as the Apostle calls it. Col. 2.2. 2. Such a
knowledge as is spiritual, Paul prays, Col. 1.9. that they might be filled
with the knowledge of Gods will in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding.
Such a wisdom as works upon the heart, and breeds love and care to
practice that we know. This was that knowledge of Christ, that Paul so much
desired, and made such reckoning of, Phil. 3.10. That I may know him (says
he) and the power of his resurrection. And thus we should all desire to know,
every thing that we know in religion, to know, not only the clear and
certain truth of it, but to know it with an experimental knowledge to know
the goodness, the sweetness, the life, and power of it also. A man may have
the literal and historical knowledge of the truth, and yet want this saving
and sound knowledge. 1. He may be void of assurance and full persuasion of the
truth of that he knows, as they that are compared to the stony ground were.
Mark. 4, 17. 2. He may be void of spiritual understanding, and have no
feeling, no love, no conscience of the practice of that he knows, but scorn
that, and hate it, and count it foolish preciseness. 1 Cor. 2.14. 2 Timothy 3.5.
And such is the knowledge that all natural men have, they are not fully
persuaded of the truth and goodness of that they know; their knowledge is not
spiritual, they feel no sweetness, no life and power in it. Now this
assurance of understanding, this spiritual knowledge (which only deserves the
name of true knowledge, and which only is sufficient unto salvation) no man
with the best abilities he has by nature, without the supernatural grace of
Gods spirit, is able to attain unto. Of this knowledge Elihu says, Job. 32.8.
There is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them
understanding. Of this knowledge our Savior says to Peter, Matthew. 16.17.
Blessed at thou Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and blood has not reveiled it unto
thee, but my father which is in heaven. Why? what was it that Peter had the
knowledge of? Surely this, as you shall find verse 16. That Jesus was Christ
the son of the living God. And could not this be known without the
inspiration of the Almighty? Why Satan himself knew thus much, as you shall
find, Mark. 5.7. Yes, but he knew it only with a literal and historical
knowledge, he knew it not with that full assurance, with that spiritual
understanding, he knew not the goodness, the sweetness, and power of that
truth as Peter did. So the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4.20, 21. No man has learned
Christ, no man can know him rightly, till he have heard him, and been taught
by him. Though he have heard, and been taught by the best preachers in the
world, if he have not heard Christ by his spirit, speaking to his heart, if he
have not had this inward and powerful teacher, he can never know Christ
aright. And that is it which our Savior also speaks, John 6.45. It is
written in the Prophets, and they shall be all taught of God, every man
therefore (says he) that has heard, and learned of the father, comes unto
me, and none but he. And thus have I finished the first point I propounded for
the proof of the Doctrine, No man is able without the supernatural grace of
Gods spirit, to attain unto that knowledge of the truth, as is sufficient unto
his salvation.

Now for the second point. That this supernatural grace of Gods spirit, is
work of God; God who commanded light to shine out of darkness (says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.6.) has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ; As mighty a work,
as the creating of light at the first, when there was nothing but darkness
upon the face of the deep, Genesis 1.1, 2. as mighty and miraculous a work, as
the opening of the eyes of them that were borne blind, which could never be
done, but by the divine power. Since the world began (says the man that had
bin blind, John 9.32,) was it not heard, that any man opened the eyes of one
that was borne blind; As (I say) it is a mighty, and extraordinary, and
miraculous work of God; so is it a rare work also, To you it is given (says
our Savior to his Disciples. Matthew. 13.11.) to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given. Though the Lord command us to
teach all men, Matthew. 8.19 he will not teach all men himself. What man is he
that fears the Lord (says David, Psalm. 25.12.) him shall be teach the way
that he shall choose. As if he should say, He will teach none but such as by
his holy spirit he does also effectually convert and sanctify, such, and none
but such, shall ever attain to a certain and spiritual understanding of Gods
truth. The secret of the Lord (says David, Psalm 25.14.) is with them that
fear him, and he will show them his covenant. The mystery of God (says the
Apostle, Col. 1.16.) is now made manifest (as clear as the light, but to whom?
to his Saints says he, and to none but them. Certainly the Lord himself has
nothing so many hearers, nothing so many scholars, as we his poor servants
have. Many are called, but few are chosen, says our Savior more then once to
his hearers. Mat. 20.16. and 12.14.

Mat. 11.26. Even so father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. And with the
Apostle, Ephesians. 1.9. He has made known to us the mystery of his will, according
to his good pleasure, which he had purposed in himself.

Lecture CIIII. On Psalm 51.6. November. 25. 1628.
Now it follows that we proceed unto the grounds and reasons of the
Doctrine. That it is so, we have heard it proved sufficiently; but now, why it
is so, yea why it must needs be so, that whatsoever goodness, whatsoever
soundnes of knowledge is in any man, must be ascribed wholly to Gods grace, and
nothing to man himself, that remains to be enquired into. And we shall find
in the holy Scriptures, two principal reasons given of this; the one of them
respects man, and the other the Lord himself.

Reason 1
For the first. Every man by nature is not only utterly void of all true
goodness, of all sound knowledge and understanding, but unable also, either to
do anything that might move God to give him his grace, or to desire it, or to
receive and accept of it, when it pleases the Lord to offer it unto him; or to
withstand and repel it when God is pleased, thereby to enlighten and convert
his heart. For in all these respects, he is neither better nor worse then a
dead man. Thus speaks the holy Ghost, not only of such as have bin notorious
and gross sinners, of such as by their lewdness, may be thought to have
extinguished in themselves, that light and goodness that was in them by nature.
Such a one was the prodigal, of whom his father says, Luke 15.24. This my
son was dead. And those widows the Apostle speaks of, 1 Timothy 5.6. She that
lives in pleasure (in wantonness he means as appears ver. 11.) is dead
while she lives. But of all natural men indefintely the Holy Ghost speaks
so, Let the dead bury the dead, says our Savior, Matthew. 8.22. Even of them
that God loved before all eternity and ordained unto life, the Holy Ghost
speaks thus. The elect Ephesians were dead men by nature, Ephesians. 2.1. And the
elect Colossians were dead men by nature also, Col. 2.13. Yea of them that have
been most civil and moral men, that have lived most unblameably, in whom the
light of nature and the remnants of Gods image that any natural man can have,
did most abound, even of them (I say) the Holy Ghost speaks thus; that in
their natural estate they were no better then dead men. Such a one was Paul
who though before his conversion he had lived most civilly and his life
touching the righteousness which is in the law had been blameless, as
himself speaks, Phil. 3.6. yet was he before his conversion but a dead man,
For you shall find he puts himself in that number, Even when we were dead
in sins, says he, Ephesians. 2.5. Of all men (you see) it is said that they are
by nature not only half dead, as the man that went from Jerusalem to Jericho
and fell among thieves, as Luk 10.30. but stark dead. And therefore the work
of our conversion is called by the Holy Ghost not the healing of a wounded man,
or the curing of a sick man, but the giving of life unto, and raising up of a
dead man. God when we were dead in sins has quickened us, and has raised us
up, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. It was certainly a mighty work of
Christ, when upon his saying to the Leper, Matthew. 8.3. Be thou clean,
immediately his Leprosy was cleansed. But it was a far mightier work of
Christ when upon his saying unto Iairus daughter, Matthew. 5.41, 42. Damsel (I
say unto thee) arise, straightway the damsel arose and walked. And such a
mighty work of Christ as this, is the conversion of every man. To every soul
before it can be converted the Lord by his mighty voice says as you read,
Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, that is to say, the sleep of death,
Psalm 13.3.) and arise from the dead and Christ shall give thee light. The
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God (says our Savior, John 5.25.)
and they that hear shall live. Certainly we are all by nature dead in
trespasses and sins; and our conversion is a reviving and raising up of one
that was dead; and if a dead man has any power at all, to further his own
resurrection, then may it be granted that there is in a man by nature, some
power to further the work of his own conversion; but not else.

I know well, Object.
what is objected against this reason that there can be no strength in it. 1.
Because it is taken from such sayings of the Holy Ghost, as are not proper but
similitudes only, figurative and borrowed speeches, and that from similitudes
nothing can be taught or concluded demonstratively. 2. That the meaning of the
Holy Ghost in these speeches cannot be to teach that the natural man is in all
respects like unto a dead man, because it is evident every natural man has
some life left in him.

But unto this I answer, Answ.
First, That the similitudes and borrowed speeches that the Holy Ghost uses in
the holy Scriptures, are profitable to teach and to convince also; As the
Apostle speaks of the whole Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God and is profitable for Doctrine, and (...) for convincing too
Yea and doctrine may be as substantially confirmed, and any error as strongly
improved and convinced by those places of holy Scripture as are set down in
similitudes and borrowed speeches, as by any other; so that those similitudes
be not strained beyond the scope and intent of the Holy Ghost, in using and
applying of them; yea the doctrine of salvation is more clearly and
convincingly taught unto the faithful in sundry of the Scripture similitudes
and parables, then in any other place. Therefore the Lord speaks of this as
of a great favor and mercy vouchsafed unto his Church, that he has in his
Word taught us by similitudes. I have also spoken by the Prophets, (says he,
Hos. 12.10.) and I have multiplied visions, and used similitudes, by the
ministry of the Prophets. He taught them many things by parables, and said
unto them in his doctrine, says the Evangelist of our Savior, Mar. 4.2. He
used similitudes and parables much in his ministry, and he taught them
doctrine by parables. And when he had taught Nicodemus this very doctrine, that
we have now in hand, Ioh. 3.3. (the doctrine of the conversion of a man the
necessity of it, and the manner of it) by a similitude and figurative speech
borrowed from our natural generation (a similitude which men now a days can
as ill abide should be pressed in the handling of this doctrine, as they can
this of a natural man's being dead in trespasses and sins) he sharply
reproves him, ver. 12. for his blockishnesse and frowardness in not
understanding and believing this truth, that was taught him in so plain a
manner and by so familiar a similitude. If I have told you earthly things (that
is this heavenly and necessary Doctrine in an earthly manner by an earthly
similitude) and ye believe not, how shall ye believe if I tell of heavenly
things? If I should teach you, in a more heavenly manner. And surely I am
afraid Christ will be as angry with many now a days, as he was then with
Nicodemus that will not believe man is by nature utterly void of freedom of
will, to further the work of God in his conversion, though the Lord have so
often taught it us in his Word in this earthly manner, by these plain and
sensible comparisons and said that we were all by nature dead in trespasses and
sins; that our conversion is a regeneration, a new creation, a resurrection
from the dead, yet they will not believe it.

Answ. 2.
Secondly, Whereas they say that the natural man is not in all respects like
unto the dead man, for it is evident there is some life left in him. I answer,
That he has indeed some life. The very light of nature which every man has is
a kind of life. And so the Evangelist speaks, John 1.4. In him was life, and
that life was the light of men. The Ability that the natural man has to do
sundry things that are morally good ( the Gentiles do by nature the things
contained in the law, says the Apostle, Romans 2.14.) argues there is some
life in him. A natural life I confess* he has as well in his soul as in his
body whereby he is able to live unto himself and unto men; but spiritual life
whereby he might live unto God, he has none at all. In respect of any ability
is in him, to further his own conversion, of any ability to do, or think, or
desire any thing that is truly good and pleasing unto God, of any freedom of
will to accept of Gods grace in Christ when it is offered to him in the
Gospel, in respect of this spiritual life (I say) he is stark dead. He is
utterly alienated from the life of God, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4.18.
For every imagination of the thoughts of his heart, is only evil continually,
as the Lord speaks, Genesis 6.5. No man has any jot of spiritual life in him
till he be regenerated, till Christ dwell in his heart by faith. The life which
I now live in the flesh, (says the Apostle, Gal. 2.20.) I live by the faith of
the son of God. And Heb. 10.38. The just shall live by says. And in respect of
this want of all spiritual life, the natural man is truly said to be dead in
trespasses and sins; and the man that is converted is truly said by the
Apostle, Romans 6.13. to be made alive from the dead. And this shall suffice to
be spoken of the first reason and ground of the Doctrine, The conversion of a
man is to be ascribed wholly unto God, there is nothing in man himself to
further or help forward this work, but that which the Scripture speaks to
abase and vilify man, may be applied to this case principally. Cease ye from
man whose breath is in his nostrills (says the Prophet, Esa. 2.22. talk no
more of his abilities, put no confidence in any thing that is in him) for
wherein it he to be accounted of? And 40.17. All nations before him (in this
case especially) are as nothing, and they are counted to him less then
nothing, and vanity.

Now the second reason and ground of the Doctrine, Reason 2
respects the Lord himself. For if we will consider the hand that the Lord
has in the work of man's conversion we shall easily discern good reason why
this work must needs be wholly ascribed unto the Lord and neither in whole nor
in part unto man himself.

For first, Object.
If any man shall say, It is absurd and against all reason to say that the
grace of God in man's conversion is so powerful as it admits no other
resistance.

I will answer him, Answ.
It is not absurd, it is most agreeable to reason, because the power of God
(who is the doer of this mighty work) is such as no man can withstand. If God
be pleased to show his power in this work who shall resist it? I will work
and who shall let it? says the Lord, Esa. 43.13. He does according to his
will (says the Prophet, Daniel 4.35.) in the army of heaven, and among the
inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his hand.

Yes (say they) it is not to be doubted but the power of God is irresistible;
Object.
but God is not pleased to show his almighty power in the conversion of a man,
but to work it only by his Word, and by the sweet motives and persuasions
that are contained in it.

But to this I answer, Answ.
Yes God shows and exercises his omnipotent power in the conversion of a
man, as much as ever he did in any other of his most mighty and miraculous
works. When a strong man armed keeps his palace (says our Savior, Luke.
11.21, 22.) his goods are in peace, till a stronger then he come upon him, and
overcome him. Certainly while we were in our natural estate, Satan like a
strong and armed man had us in his possession, if a stronger then he had not
come, if the Lord himself had not showed his almighty power in delivering us,
we had never been converted any of us. Therefore the Apostle says, 2 Pet.
1.3. that God by his divine power has given us all things that pertain^ to
life and godliness. True grace was never wrought in any, but by a divine
power. Yea the Apostle plainly tells us, Ephesians ^.19, 20. that no man is
brought unto true faith, but by the working of Gods mighty power; yea he
calls it the exceeding greatness of Gods power that works faith in a man;
yea he says God shows and exercises no less power in this work, then he
did in raising Christ from the dead. And therefore the grace of God in man's
conversion must needs be most powerful, there is great reason (you see) for
it, why it should be so.

Secondly, Quest.
If any man shall ask me a reason for this, Why God should give the means of
grace to one, and deny them unto another, why to one that enjoys the means
he should give effectual grace to profit and be converted by them, and not
unto another; why he should give the means and grace to such as have been
worse men, and deny it to such as have been nothing so bad.

I answer, Answ.
That if we would but consider who it is that does thus, and why he does it we
shall find great reason for it.

For first, The Lord that does this, is a most absolute sovereign, and has Is
it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? says the Lord of the
vineyard, Mat. 20.15. In respect of this his sovereignty it is that Elihu
speaks thus to Job, Job 33.13. Why do thou strive against him? for he
gives not account of any of his matters. As if he had said, He is not bound
to give a reason of any thing that he does, and therefore it is madness for
man to wrangle or murmur against any of his doings. In respect of this his
sovereignty it is not possible the Lord should do wrong unto any of his
creatures. Who has enjoined him his way? (or prescribed him a law and rule to
work by, says Elihu, Job 36.23.) or who can say, thou have wrought iniquity?
If God should have denied the means of grace or in giving the means should
have denied grace to profit by them, to all men he had done them no wrong at
all. For who has deserved that he should do this for him? Nay who has not
deserved the contrary? Who has first given unto him, and it shall be
recompensed to him again, says the Apostle, Romans 11.35? In respect of this
absolute sovereignty of the Lord, he has no other rule to guide him, nothing
at all to move him, to give the means of conversion, or the grace of
conversion unto any, but only his own holy will, and good pleasure; according
to that of the Apostle, Romans 9.18. He has mercy on whom he will have
mercy, and whom he will, he hardens.

The Lord has made all things for himself, says Solomon, Proverbs 16.4. All
things were created by him, and for him, says the Apostle, Col. 1.16. So a
secundary end the Lord has aimed at in all his counsels and works, is the
happiness and glory of his elect. All things are for your sakes, to further
and increase your happiness, says the Apostle to the faithful, 2 Cor. 4.15.
And as the glory that God has principally sought and aimed at in all his
counsels and works is the glory of his mercy. He delights in mercy, says
the Prophet, Mic. 7.18. He has predestined us to the adoption of children
by Jesus Christ unto himself (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.5, 6.) according to
the good pleasure of his will: to the praise of the glory of his grace. So even
in his denying of the means of conversion and the grace of conversion to many
people he has had respect to this, even to glorify his mercy, the more
toward his own people. The Apostle tells us, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. that at the day
of judgment God shall be made mavelous in all them that believe. As if he
had said, His mercy toward the faithful in electing them to life, in redeeming
them, in calling them effectually, in justifying, and sanctifying them, shall
be admired and wondered at by men and Angels at that day. When they shall see
how many God has denied this mercy unto, yea to how many that were in many
respects far better then themselves, then will this mercy of God toward them
seem (as it is indeed) admirable in their eyes. If this mercy had been
universal to all men, God could not have been so glorified in it in this
world, if the Lord should have given this grace or means alike to all men; the
glory of his special mercy and free grace had not been so manifested as in
this it is. Thus the Apostle speaking, Romans 9.22, 23. of the vessels of
wrath fitted to destruction, and of the ends that the Lord aimed at and had
respect unto in it; he does not say that he did it only to show his wrath
and to make his power known upon them; but that the Lord even thereby might
make known the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy. The reprobates
are fitted to destruction, effectual grace is denied unto them; that the
riches of Gods grace and mercy toward his elect to whom he vouchsafes both,
might be set forth the better by this comparison and glorified the more. And
this was the true cause of that joy our Savior expressed, Luke 10.21. In that
hour (says the Evangelist) Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee
o father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent and have revealed them unto babes. Did he rejoice in the
judgment of God upon the wise and prudent? No verily, but so far forth only
as it served to set forth the mercy of God toward those babes. This made him
to admire and magnify the mercy of God toward those babes so much the more,
when he considered what manner of persons that mercy was denied unto; when he
considered that it was no common, but a rare mercy that God had vouchsafed unto
them.

Lecture CV. On Psalm 51.6. December 9. 1628.
IT follows now that we proceed unto the uses that this Doctrine serves
unto. And they are principally two. First, For instruction, to establish our
judgments in the truth and confirm us against those errors which in this
great work of man's conversion, do derogate from the glory of Gods free grace,
and give too much unto man himself. Secondly, For exhortation to work upon
our affections and stir us up unto sundry duties.

For the first, Use 1.
This doctrine serves notably to establish our hearts in the truth of that
holy religion which we do profess, and to assure us that it is the only
true Doctrine and religion of Christ. Yea it may serve for a touchstone to try
all other Doctrines in religion by* and to discover to us the falsehood and
vanity of all other Doctrines and religions whatsoever, how fair a show soever
of truth and holiness they do bear, or whatsoever the persons be that do
hold and profess them. That Doctrine and religion that does derogate never so
little from the honor of God, that does not give the whole honor and glory of
man's salvation unto him alone, but gives some cause of boasting and glorying
unto man himself, certainly that cannot be the true Doctrine and religion of
Christ. It is not that wisdom that Doctrine and religion that descends from
above, as the Apostle speaks, James 3.15. See this distinctly proved unto you
in these three points. 1. All the glory of man's salvation is due to God alone,
and no part of it unto man. 2. All the glory of man's salvation is to be
ascribed only to the free grace and mercy of God, and not unto any thing in
man himself that might move God to it. 3. The ascribing of the whole glory of
man's salvation to the Lord alone and to his free grace, is the chief rule
whereby the true Doctrine and religion of God is to be tried and judged of.

For the first, This has ever been the profession of Gods true Church and
Luke 2.14. Glory to God in the highest and on earth peace, good will toward
men. As if he had said, It is enough for men that through Christ their peace
is to be made, Gods good will and free favor is to be purchased for them,
though they have no part of the glory of this work ascribed unto them, that is
wholly due unto the Lord alone, Glory to God in the highest. This was the
profession of the whole Catholic Church, Revel. 4.9 -- 11. When those four
beasts (representing the whole Church under the New Testament) gave glory, and
honor, and thanks to him that sat upon the throne; the four and twenty
Elders (representing the whole Church under the Old Testament) fell down
before him that sat on the throne, and cast their crowns before the throne,
saying, thou art worthy o Lord to receive glory. As if he should say, Though
they had crowns and Christ had made them Kings and Priests unto God, to reign
ev^n on the earth (that is, to vanquish and overcome their own corruptions and
the tentations of Satan and of the world, as themselves say, Rev. 5.10.) yet
they cast down their crowns* they disclaim all honor that may seem to be
due unto themselves, they ascribe all the honor and glory of whatsoever
goodness was in them unto him that sat upon the throne, unto the Lord alone.
All the glory of man's salvation you see is due to the Lord alone.

If any other man thinks (says he, Phil. 4.^.) that he has whereof he might
trust in the flesh, I more, yet) professes, 1 Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God
I am what I am. So the Prophet tells us, Zach. 4.7 that when the temple
(which was a type of the spiritual house and Church of God) should be built by
Zerubbabel, this should be the general acclamation of al Gods people they
should shout and cry grace, grace unto it; As though he had said, They should
praise God and ascribe the beginning, the proceeding, and the perfecting of
Gods house, this whole spiritual building to the grace of God alone, and to
nothing else. By grace ye are saved (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.5.) and not
contenting himself to have said so once, he says it again, and says it
most emphatically, verse 8, 9. By grace ye are saved through faith, and that
not of your selves, it is the g^^t of God; not of works, lest any man should
boast. Mark three points in this Doctrine which the Apostle does thus
earnestly press upon Gods people. 1. He contenteth not himself to say, We
are saved by grace, (but he adds not by works. What needed this superfluity
of speech may some say? O he knew there were then and ever would be in the
Church erroneous spirits that would seem to ascribe much to grace in this
work of man's salvation, and yet they wou^d give somewhat also unto works,
somewhat unto that man himself (being helped a little by Gods grace is able to
do. Now therefore he opposes the one to the other: the one quite excludes the
other, If by grace then not by works (says he, Romans 11.6) otherwise grace is
no grace. As if he had said, ascribe never so little to works to that that a
man himself is able to do as any cause of his salvation, and ye renounce Gods
grace utterly. Whatsoever glorious words you give of Gods grace you do indeed
and effect deny you are saved by grace. 2. Observe that he adds, Not of our
selves. Our selves have no hand at all in this work, as of our selves, all is
to be ascribed unto Gods grace. 3. He gives this for the reason, why God would
not have us to be saved by our works, but by faith only, why he so ordained
that we our selves should have no hand at all in this work, but all should be
of grace, lest any man should boast. The same reason he gives of that
mavelous liberty God is pleased to use in the calling and conversion of men,
in giving the means of conversion and grace to profit by them, to such as are
most unworthy and unlikely, and denying it to others that are more worthy, more
likely men, 1 Cor. 1.29. That no flesh should glory in his presence; And verse
31. this is given for the reason why Christ is made unto us of God wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption, all in all, that he that
glories might glory in the Lord. God cannot abide that any flesh should glory
in his presence, that any matter of boasting or glorying should be given unto
man. His maine drift in his Word and works is to abase man, to pull down his
pride, to make him even to despair in himself; and on the other side to
advance and magnify the glory of his own free grace. He that glories let
him glory in the Lord, says he, and in him alone. We are the circumcision
(says the Apostle, Phil. 3.3) that rejoice in the Lord Jesus, and have no
confidence in the flesh. They only are the true Israel of God that make Christ
the only ground and matter of their joy and comfort; and renounce all
confidence, all ground of hope and comfort in themselves, or in any thing they
are able to do.

Thirdly and lastly, This is the best rule and note to try all doctrines and
religions John 7.18. He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory
(humane doctrines do all tend one way or other to the glory of man, to the
advancing of him) but he that seeks his glory that sent him, is true and
there is no unrighteousness in him. As if he should say, That teacher that in
his Doctrine gives no glory to man at all, but all unto God alone, he is the
only true teacher, that is the only true Doctrine and religion of God So the
Apostle proves the Doctrine of justification by works to be a false Doctrine;
and that of justification by faith only, to be a true doctrine, by this
argument, Romans ^.27. Where is boasting then? It is excluded (says he) By what
law or Doctrine? By works? No, but by the law or Doctrine of faith. As if he
should have said, That doctrine that does exclu^e and shut out all matter of
boasting of rejoicing or comfort in himself but only in the Lord, that must
needs be the true doctrine of God; that that leaves unto man any matter of
boasting at all that must needs be an earthly and false Doctrine.

Let us now make some application of these three points. 1. Unto such
erroneous, and false teachers as trouble and oppose this doctrine. 2. Unto our
selves.

For the first, Applic. 1
There are two sorts of false teachers that do most oppose this doctrine, the
Papist I mean and the Pelagian. Both these do in their Doctrine derogate from
the grace of God, they give unto man some part of the glory of his own
salvation* they leave unto man some matter of boasting and glorying before God,
and therefore their Doctrine must needs be a false and damnable doctrine. Of
the Papist this will easily be believed; their doctrine of justification by
works, of merit, of satisfaction to be made by our selves, unto God for our
sins either in this life, or in purgatory, their doctrine of works of
supererogation, proves them so palpably to be adversaries of the grace of God,
tha^ I shall not need to spend any more time in confuting of them. But Pelagius
and his followers of old do in words some times seem to ascribe much to Gods
grace in the work of man's conversion, but it has been the ancient practice of
most dangerous seducers as the Apostle teaches us, Rom 16.18. by good words
and fair speeches, to deceive the hearts of the simple. If they that hold
damnable opinions should not make some show of truth and piety few would be
deceived by them. They shall speak lies in hypocrisy, says he, 1 Timothy 4.2.
But mark how they express themselves, and you shall find that for all their
good words and fair speeches they are indeed adversaries of the grace of God,
and hold and teach that that does greatly derogate from the glory of Gods
grace, and does give much matter of boasting and glorying unto man himself. I
will not stand to prove this from their other Doctrines touching our election,
our redemption, our justification, and perseverance to the end (the maine
grounds on which the hope of our salvation and comfort is built) all which they
have corrupted and poisoned, and in all which they derogate from the glory of
Gods grace, and give too much unto man. But I will insist only upon that which
they teach touching the work of Gods grace in the conversion of man, which
concerns the present Doctrine I have now in hand; And in three points they
teach concerning that, you shall find that (whatsoever they pretend) they do
indeed impeach the grace of God, and give either all, or almost all the glory
of this great work, unto man himself.

For first, They teach that all that God does upon the will of man in the work
of his conversion is no more but this, He does by his Word off^r Christ unto
us, and show us what obedience he requires of us; and he does also by his Word
with most strong and effectual arguments persuade us unto faith and obedience;
but he does not confer or inspire any such grace into the will whereby it is
actually inclined and caused to receive Christ, and to yield obedience unto
God; but leaves it absolutely unto it own liberty whether it will receive
Christ, and yield obedience unto God, or not. Whereas the Scripture expressly
teaches, that God by his grace does much more then so, he actually enclineth
renews and changes our wills, or we could never be converted. This was that
work of Gods grace that David prayed for, Psalm. 119 36. Incline my heart unto
thy testimonies; And Solomon in the dedication of the Temple, 1 King. 8 58 The
Lord our God incline our hearts unto him, to walk in all his ways. This is
that which God promises to work by his grace in them, whom he will convert
and save, Ezekiel 36.26. A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you.

Judas and for them that are now damned in hell, as for Peter or any of the
Saints that are now in heaven, he loved all men before their conversion with
an equal love, his grace is universal, and he gives it to one, as well as to
another; Whereas (as you have heard it (...) in the Doctrine) the Scripture
expressly teaches, That he does more for them that are converted then he
does for any other, he did more for Peter then he did for Iuda^; that the Lord
does not give the grace of conversion to all (...), Psalm. 147.20. He has not
dealt so with every nation, neither have they known his judgments. To you it
is given (says our Savior, Matthew. 13 ^1.) to know the mysteries of the
kingdom of God, to them it is not given. That this is a fruit not of the
common love he bears to all men, but of his specia^l love. The Apostle
speaking of that love of God whereby he was moved to q^icken and convert his
people, Ephesians. 2 4 calls it his great love; ^e says he showed himself
therein to be rich in mercy; yea he says, ver. 7. he did it to show the
exceeding riches of his grace in this his kindness toward us. This is a fruit
of that love which is in a special manner borne unto his elect, As many as
were ordained to eternal life, believed, Acts 13.48. Whom he predestined
them he called, Romans 8.30. All that the father gives me (says our Savior,
Ioh 6.37.) shall come unto me; that is, believe in me, as he had expounded
himself, ver 35. None but those that are given to Christ can believe in him;
and all such shall certainly believe. Ye believe not because ye are not of my
sheep (says our Savior, John 10.26, 27.) my sheep hear my voice.

his grace, but cause us to accept of it, does not only make us able to
convert, to believe, to obey, if we will, but he does cause us actually to
convert, to believe, to obey, he does all in all, in this work. Turn thou
me, and I shall be turned, says Ephraim. Ier. 31.18 Christ turns every one
of us from our iniquities, says the Apostle, Acts 3.6. He gives repentance
unto Israel, Acts 5.31. I will cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall
keep my judgments, and do them, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 36.27. It is God that
works in you, both to will, and to do. P^al. 2.1^. By the grace of God I am
what I am, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.^0. And thus have I made application of
these three points I delivered unto you in the use of instruction unto such as
are erroneous teachers.

Now let me make some application of it to our selves in a word or two.
Applic. 2
And herein I will conclude my speech unto you, as the Apostle Peter did his
first Epistle, 1 Peter 5.1^. he made application of the doctrine he had taught
them, by exhorting and testifying unto them. 1. By testifying and earnestly
protesting to them. And what did he thus testify? Surely that that was the
true grace of God, wherein they did then stand. And so do I testify, and
confidently avouch and protest unto you, that that Doctrine and religion which
has (through the mavelous goodness of God) been taught in this famous, and
Orthodox Church of England, now by the space of these seventy years, and in
the profession whereof we all now stand, is the only true Doctrine and
religion of Christ. Because it only gives the whole glory of man's salvation
unto Gods free grace in Christ, but it abaseth man, and gives him no matter of
boasting or glorying at all. 2. The Apostle in his application of his Doctrine,
exhorted them. And what was his exhortation? That is not expressed, but it was
doubtless, the same that Paul and Barnabas used, Acts 13.^3. They persuaded
them to continue in the grace of God; that is, in the Doctrine of grace, which
they had taught them. And so do I earnestly exhort, and beseech you all, in
the name of Christ, to continue constant in this holy Doctrine and truth of
God, to hold it fast, and not to suffer it by any mean^s to be wrested from
you. For though (thanks be to God) these errors that you have heard of, do
not trouble us in these parts, yet have we all just cause to judge, that this
exhortation is as needful now, as ever it was. We have all cause to fear,
that as heresy has been the scourge, whereby God has formerly plagued, and
vexed his Church, for the contempt of his blessed Gospel; so that heresy
shall be the way whereby again he will correct us, and by which Satan
intends to make way for Apostasy, and to bring ruin and desolation upon the
Churches of Christ. We have therefore all need to be exhorted to continue
constant in the faith which we have received. It is the exhortation that the
Apostle gives unto the Hebrews, Heb. 4 14. Let us hold fast our profession.
And it is the charge that our Savior gives to the Church of Sardis, Rev. 3.3.
Remember how thou have received, and hard, and hold fast. What (will you say)
would you have us to hold fast whatsoever we have heard any of you teach;
whatsoever we and others in the Church and time wherein we live have received
(as it were by tradition) for a truth? No verily, we require no more of you
then the Apostle does. 1 These 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that that is
good. Receive nothing upon the credit of any man. Examine all things that you
h^are, even from the best teachers in the world, by the written word, and even
by that touchstone that I have now delivered unto you out of the word. But
when you have found that which has been taught you to have been well
grounded upon the word, when you have felt Gods spirit persuading you of the
truth of it, and yielding you comfort in it (And such a teacher certainly all
the faithful have. They shall be all taught of God, says our Savior, John
6.45. The same anointing teaches you all things, says the Apostle, 1 John
2.27.) when hereupon you have received it, and embraced it, and professed it
for the truth of God, you are bound 1. To hold it fast, and to be resolute in
it. Stand fast in the says (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 16.13.) quit ye like
men, be strong. 2. To love it, and joy in it, and be zealous for it. Paul
praises the Thessalonians for this, 1 These. 1.6. that they received the word
with joy of the holy Ghost. 3. To hate those false doctrines that are against
it. By thy precepts I have gotten understanding, (says David Psalm 119.104.)
therefore I hate every false way. 4. We should not desire nor be willing to
hear what may be said against it, but shun the familiarity of such as are
seducers. I speak not of shunning all familiarity with all that differ in
opinion from you, or are unresolved in the truth, that your selves do believe,
but I speak of such as are seducers, and perswaders unto error, such as
secretly seek to discredit the truth which you have heard and received, to
put buzzes and doubts into your heads against it, and to alienate your hearts
from it. Such the Apostle commands you, Romans 6.17. to avoid and shun them.
The sheep of Christ will flee from a stranger, as he tells us, John 10.5.
It is certainly a dangerous sign, for a man to be wavering, light of belief
in the matters of his faith and religion, ap^ to hearken unto seducers, and to
be corrupted by them, and drawn from the truth. See how earnest the Apostle
is in warning the Thessalonians of this, 2 Thessalonians. 2.1, 2. Now we beseech you
brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering
together unto him, that ye be not soon shaken in mind. By our constancy in
the truth, we shall approve unto our own hearts, our election and calling,
and by our variableness, and readiness to hearken unto seducers, we shall
discover the contrary. If ye continue in my word (says our Savior, John
8.31.) then are ye my Disciples indeed. And one chief end (doubtless) that
God always has respect unto, in sending or permitting seducing spirits, that
with some show, both of learning, and piety, do oppose the truth, and trouble
the Church, is to make trial of his people this way. There must be also
heresies among you (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.19.) that they which are
approved (and true-hearted) may be made manifest among you.

Lecture CVI. On Psalm 51.6. December. 30. 1628.
Use 2.
IT follows now, that we proceed to the second use of the Doctrine which is
for exhortation to work upon our affections, and provoke us unto sundry duties.

And this use of exhortation concerns three sorts of people especially.

For the first. Though we may not, nor dare say, that all they are damned that
live without the ministry of the Gospel (which as we have heard) is the only
sufficient, and ordinary means to bring men to grace) because the Lord is not
tied to any means, but can without means (if it please him) work grace in
his elect, as is plain by Heb. 11.31. that he did in Rahab while she lived
in Jericho, and by Matthew. 2.12. that he did in the wisemen while they lived in
the East, among Pagans and Infidells; yet may we confidently say, that the
present estate of such men is most fear full, and such as if themselves could
discern it, they could not choose but tremble at it. And though they cannot
do it, because this is hid from their own eyes (as our Savior speaks of
Jerusalem, Luke 1^.42.) yet ought we that have heard this Doctrine, and do,
believe it, to be deeply affected with their estate, and even weep over them
as our Savior did over Jerusalem, Luke 19.41. And that out of there two
considerations.

First Because we cannot find in all the word, any one ground of certain
Galilee, the holy Ghost says, Matthew. 4.16 that before Christ brought the light
of the Gospel unto them (though they were all Jews and members of the true
visible Church, yet) till this light sprung up among them, they sat all in the
very region, and shadow of death. As if he had said, They were in a damnable
estate. And though no doubt may be made, but God can save such, yet that he
will do it, we have no ground at all, nay we have great cause to fear the
contrary. Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved,
wheresoever he live, whatsoever his former course of life has been (says
the Apostle, Romans ^0 13, ^4) But how shall they call on him, in whom they have
not believed? And how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard?
And how shall they hear without a preacher? Are not these fearful sentences,
that the holy Ghost gives, concerning the estate of such as live without the
word, and such as may move the stoniest heart among us, to pity them, and
tremble for them.

But then consider secondly, Whose doing this is, and then you shall see Ho^ea
13 9. O Israel thou have ^estroyed thy self But that is not all. The Lord
himself (as we have heard proved in the Doctrine) has also a chief hand
both in giving, and withholding the means of grace; it is he, it is he,
that in his wrath withholds the ministry of his word, from them that do
thus want it. That which the Lord says of the material rain, whereby the
earth is made fruitful unto us? Amo^ 4 7. I have withheld the rain from
you, when there were yet three months to the harvest, and I caused it to rain
upon one city, and caused it not to rain upon another city; the same he
says likewise of the spiritual rain (the ministry of his word) whereby his
vineyard is made fruit full unto him, Esaias 5.6. I will also command the clouds,
that they rain no rain upon it. It is the hand of God and his wrath upon a
people, that keeps his word from them. Yet such people never look up unto
God, nor take notice of his fierce wrath, that is upon themselves in this
judgment. Whereas they should say as the Prophet teaches Israel to say in
another case, Esa. 42 ^4. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the
robbers? did not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned? And Esa. 43 ^8. I
have given Jacob to the curse. And Esa 9.19. Through the wrath of the Lord of
hosts, the land is darkened It is the Lord, that for their sins gives over a
people to this curse; it is through the wrath of the Lord, that any people do
abide in this darkness, that the light of the Gospel is denied unto them.
And even as it is a sign, that God has determined the temporal ruin and
destruction of a people* when he takes from them the ordinary means of their
preservation and safety, and so makes way for his anger, as the Prophet
speaks Psalm. 78.50. when he bereaveth them of wise and prudent statesmen,
and counselors, and of valiant and expert captains and soldiers, as you may
read. Esa. 3.2, 3. and Obaediah 8.9. that the desolation of Judea in the
Babilonish captivity, was prognosticated by this sign; even so is it
certainly a fearful sign, that God has determined the eternal destruction
of a people, when he depriveth them of the ordinary means whereby they might
be saved. Where there is no vision, the people perish, says the holy Ghost,
Prove. 29.18. And is there not then just cause of fear and trembling (think
ye) for these men? If they should be long without the material rain in the
spring or summertime, so as they could see no hope of grass for their
cattle, or corn for themselves, they would easily acknowledge Gods hand in
it, they would be deeply affected with it, and ready even with fasting and
prayer, to beg it of God. But they have no sense at all of Gods wrath, in
withholding from them this spiritual rain, without which, their souls can
never bear fruit unto God. Oh though they cannot themselves take this to
heart, let us do it for them, let us beg this mercy of God for them. Let the
same mind be in us, which was in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.5. who when he saw
multitudes of people that were like sheep scattered abroad having no
shepherd, (...) says the Evangelist, Mat. 9.36. he had compassion on them,
and pitied their case, even from his very bowels, and out of this compassion,
charged his Disciples to pray to the Lord for them, that he would have mercy on
them.



And before I speak of the first of these, I must premise two Cautions to
prevent the mistaking of that that I shall say.

Caution 1
First. That which I shall say of the danger they are in, that cannot profit by
the ministry of the word, does not concern all that they think they profit
by it. For there are many of the best of Gods servants, of the best proficients
in the School of Christ, whom you shall hear complain of nothing more, then
this, that living under excellent means of grace, they profit not at all by
them. To these poor souls I have three things to say for their comfort.
First. Thou may have profited by the means of grace, and be a fruitful
hearer, though thy profiting come far short of many others that thou know
have enjoyed no better means then thou have done. The seed brings forth
fruit, in some an hundred, in some but sixty, in some but thirty fold, as we
read, Mat. 13.8. yet all good ground, all elect, and profitable hearers.
Secondly. Thou may be the elect child of God, though thou be very dull of
understanding in heavenly things, and though thy memory be very weak in
retaining them, when thou have learned them. For so were the elect Apostles
themselves, while Christ lived amongst them, and they enjoyed the benefit of
his ministry, Luke 9.45. John 12.16. So were they whom our Savior calls
fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets had spoken, Luke
24.25. and of Hebr. 5.11. says that they were dull of hearing. Thirdly. thou
bear about thee two evident marks that thou art an elect hearer, that thou
have profited by the means. 1. Because thou have learned to fear God, and
that little knowledge thou have gotten, keeps thee from sin; thou dare
not do any thing that thou know would offend God. And he that has learned
thus much, is certainly a good proficient. To man God says (says Job 28.28.)
the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil, is
understanding. 2. Thou discernest thy non-proficiency, and art troubled, and
grieved for it, thou unfeinedly desire to profit more. And so long as thou
can do thus, thou art in a blessed state. For so says our Savior. Mat.
5.3.4, 6. Blessed are the poor in spirit, blessed are they that mourn,
blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness. Nourish these
things in thy self, and thou art safe enough. These non-proficients that I am
to speak of, are such as enjoying, and frequenting also the means, can
obtain no grace by them, no saving knowledge, no faith, no change of heart at
all, but become the worse by them rather, and yet are never troubled nor
grieved for it.

The second Caution that I told you I must premise, to prevent the mistaking of
that I have to say, Caution 2
is this. That even of these that I have long enjoyed the means, and been
never the better for them, but the worse rather, I dare not say they are
reprobates, I dare not conclude from hence, that they shall be damned. None of
us is able to say unto the worst man that hears us, as that Prophet by
immediate revelation was able to say unto Amaziah the King, 2 Chronicles. 25.6. I
know that God has determined to destroy thee, because thou have not hearkened
unto my counsel. For God may be pleased hereafter, to make the means
effectual unto them, though he have not done it yet; and we know by Matthew
20.6. that he has sometimes called them at the eleventh hour, that had stood
idle all the day. But this I say, that the present estate of these men is most
dangerous and fearful; yea, the more excellent the means have been which
they have enjoyed, the more dangerous and fearful their estate is, if they
cannot profit by them. And to persuade you of this, consider these three things.

First. How fearful a sentence christ has given of them that do not
Whos^ever shall not receive you, nor hear your words (says he to his
Apostles, Matthew 10.14, 15. and that which he says of their ministry in that
place, he would have to be understood of the ministry of any other, whom he
sends to teach his people, Job. 13.20.) verily I say unto you, it shall be
more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, then
for that city. Yea (will thou say) they that refuse to hear Gods ministers,
are in this danger I grant, for that is an high contempt done to the word
indeed; But I thank God I am none of those, I am willing to hear. True, but
thou art in the danger Christ speaks of here, unless thou receive the Word,
and profit by thy hearing, unless thou hear it, and receive it, and bring
forth fruit, as our Savior speaks of the good hearer, Mar. 4.20. Thou will
say again, I thank God I do not only hear, but profit too, I get some
knowledge by my hearing. True, but thou art in the danger Christ speaks of
here, unless thou profit unto repentance, unless thou be humbled and reformed
by that thou hear. So our Savior expounds himself in the next chapter.
Why should they of Capernaum be in worse case at the day of judgment then they
of Sodom, as he says, Mat. 11.24. He tells us ver. 20. Because (having such
means of grace) they repented not.

Secondly. Consider, that if the ministry of the word convert thee not, thou
the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1.1^. that is the ministration of the
spirit, ^ Cor. 3.8.

Thirdly and lastly. Consider what is the cause thou can not profit, and then
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.12. Thou have not been straightened in me, but thou have
been straitened in thine own bowels. I have not been wanting to thee, but
thou have been wanting to thy self. 2. Thou have wilfully hindered the fruit
of the Word in thine own heart. When our Savior speaks of that fearful
sentence that God had pronounced against the wicked Jews, Matthew. 13.14. Ye
shall hear and shall not understand, ye shall see, and shall not perceive, he
lays all the blame of this upon themselves, and gives this for the reason
and cause of it, verse 15. For this peoples heart is waxed gross, and their
ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they closed, le^t at any time
they should see with their eyes. So expounding the parable of the sower, and
showing how many of them that hear the word are never the better for it, he
gives this for a cause of it, Luke 8.14. that when they have heard, they go
forth and are choked with cares, and riches, and pleasures of this life. 3. Thy
former sins have provoked the Lord in his judgment, to give thee up to this
blockishnesse, and hardness of heart, that no means can do thee good. As
they did not like to retain God in their knowledge (says the Apostle, Romans
1.28.) God gave them over to a reprobate mind. All this is true (I say) that
thou art a chief cause of this thy self, that thou can not profit, thou
can not be converted. But that is not all, there is more in it then so; We
have heard in this Doctrine whereof we are now making use, that the Lord
himself has a chief hand, as in giving and withholding the means of grace;
so in making or not making them fruitful, in them that do enjoy them. To have
the means, and to have grace denied thee of God to profit by them, is a
fearful sign that God loves thee not, that he regards thee not, that he
never ordained nor appointed thee unto life. You know who it is that said, John
8.47. He that is of God, hears Gods words, ye therefore hear not, because
ye are not of God, and 10 26. Ye therefore believe not, because ye are none
of my sheep. What (will you say) are we all reprobates that are never the
better for your preachings? No, I say not so; for they may do thee good
hereafter, though they have not yet. But this I dare boldly say, that if thou
dye in this estate, thou shall carry with thee to thy grave, as fearful a
mark, and note of reprobation, as any we can find in the whole book of God.
I told you even now, that it is a dangerous sign, when God denies unto a
people, the means of grace, but it is a far worse sign to enjoy them, and
to be never the betterr but the worse rather for them. Therefore John Baptist
compares the ministry of the Gospel. Mat. 3.12. unto a fan, when Christ
makes use of this fan amongst a people, it will appear who among them are
wheat that shall be gathered in the Lords garner, and who are chafe that
shall be cast into the unquenchable fire.

Applic.
Oh consider this I pray you, and lay it to heart, ye that do enjoy the
ministry of the word. And if you have been unprofitable hearers hitherto,
think seriously of the danger of your estate, and use your utmost endeavor to
come out of it; which is the second thing that I told you, I must exhort you
unto.

And if you desire this, you must do these three things.

John 5.3. Come to the poole of Bethesda, and lie there waiting for the moving
of the water, Use the means, and wait for the good hour, when God shall be
pleased to work with his word in thy heart. That which Solomon says of the
works of mercy, Eccle. 11.6. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening
withold not thy hand; for thou know not whether shall prosper, either this
or that; As if he had said, Whether shall do most good; that may be fitly
applied to this case. Hear the word in the morning, in thy youth, and
withold not thy self from it in the evening, in thine age, for what know
thou which is the time God has determined to convert thee in, or which is the
sermon that he will do it by? Though he have showed no sign of his eternal
love toward thee all this while, but of his wrath rather, yet I may say to
thee, as the Prophet does in another case, Joel 2.14. Who knows whether he
will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him; for (as he says ver.
^3.) he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and
repents him of the evil.

Secondly. Seeing it is so dangerous a sign to remain blockish, and
senseless, Luke 8.18. so say I to you. Take heed how you hear. Hearken
diligently unto me, says the Lord, Esaias 55.2. Prepare thy self before, keep
thine eye, and ear, and mind, attentive when thou hear, meditate, confer,
use all the means thou can to make thy hearing profitable unto thee.

Thirdly and lastly. Rest not in, nor ascribe too much to the means, nor It is
not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows
mercy, says the Apostle, Romans 9.16. Think not thou can receive, and profit
by the Word, when thou listest, thou can repent when thou listest, Say not, o
if I lived under such a man's ministry, how should I profit? No, no, remember
who it is that says, Esa. 48.17 Thus says the Lord thy redeemer, the holy one
of Israel, I am the Lord thy God, that teaches thee to profit. I have planted
(says Paul. 1 Cor. 3.6.) and Apollo watered; but God gave the increase. And
therefore thou must join prayer with thy hearing, and beg earnestly of God,
that he would work with his word in thy heart. If thou cryest after knowledge
(says Solomon. Prove. 2.3.5.) and listest up thy voice (cryest heartily and
earnestly) for understanding, then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord,
and find the knowledge of God.

The third and last sort of people which I told you this use of exhortation
Bartimeus, Mark ^0.49. Be of good comfort, arise, h^e calls thee. Even this
outward calling on thee by his Word, is a great sign he loves thee, and
would have thee to be saved, it is a just cause of hope and comfort unto thee.
Look abroad in the world, and thou shall find it is no common mercy, he has
not dealt so with every nation Psalm. 147.^0. That the place where thou live,
should be as Goshen (enjoy the light, Exodus 10.21 -- 23.) when as so many
other places remain in palpable darkness, as all the rest of Egypt did, this
is surely to be acknowledged as a singular mercy of God unto thee. Surely I may
say unto you, as our Savior does to his disciples, Matthew. 13.17. Many
righteous men, many good people desire to hear that that you hear, would
count it their happiness to enjoy the means that you do, where you dwell, and
cannot. This is a great mercy that you enjoy the means.

But (secondly) it is yet a far greater mercy, if you have felt the power of
Cor 14.25. even to fall down upon thy face, and to worship, and praise God for
it. From hence thou may conclude infallibly (and so can thou no^ from all the outward blessings, that ever thou receivest from him) that God loves thee
with an everlasting love, and has chosen thee to life before the world was. I
have loved thee (says the Lord, Iere. 31.3.) with an everlasting love,
therefore in loving kindness have I drawn thee. If God have showed thee that
mercy, that loving kindness, as to draw thee by his word and spirit, certainly
he has loved thee with an everlasting love. Admit God has done no more for
thee but this; admit he exercise thee with never so many afflictions, outward,
or inward: admit thou find thy self to be so much the more subject to scorn
and contempt in the world, yet art thou an happy soul. We know (says the
Apostle, Romans 8.28.) that all things work together for good, to them that love
God, to them that are called according to his purpose. If thou find thy self
to be thus effectually, and inwardly called, certainly every thing that
befalls thee shall tend to the increase of thy happiness. O look about thee
(I beseech thee) look upon many of thy neighbors, yea, look upon sundry that
are nearer unto thee, who all enjoy the same means that thou do, and yet
never felt any sweetness, never felt any power in them. Let the hardness of
heart, and profaneness that thou see in others, draw thee to an admiration
of this goodness and mercy of God toward thy self. That the dew of Gods
grace should fall upon thy heart (as the material dew did upon Gideons fleece,
Judges 6.37) and the ground that is round about thee should be dry, not one
drop of this dew upon it; is not this a wonderful mercy? O consider it, and
admire it, and say with the Apostle Jude, John 14.22. Lord how is it, that thou will manifest thy self to us, and not to the world? Lord how is it, that thou
should give thy grace unto me, and deny it unto so many that were every whit
as good as I, nay better far then I, better in state and calling, better in
capacity and understanding, nay, better in life, more unblameable, more civil,
free from sundry gross sins that I was given unto. Take notice of this mercy
of God, thou that have received it, and rejoice in it, and be thankful for
it. But take heed thou be not puffed up by it, so to think better to thy self
for it, as to despise others to whom God has not yet bin so merciful this way
as he has bin to thee. But say often to thy soul, as the Apostle does to them,
1 Cor. 4.7. Who makes thee to differ from another? and what have thou, that
thou have not received? And if thou have received it, why gloriest thou?
Remember what use David made of the difference God had made between him and
Saul, 2 Samuel 6.22. I will be more vile then thus, and will be base in mine own
sight. And we shall see great reason for it, if we consider well what our
Savior says, Luke 12 48. Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much
required.

Lecture CVII. On Psalm 51.6. January 6. 1628.
WE have already heard that these words do contain the fourth and last
argument, whereby David does aggravate and set forth the heinousness of his
foul sins, taken from the consideration of that truth of grace and saving
knowledge God had wrought in him, before he fell thus fearfully. And that
there are three principal things to be observed in them. 1. The description
that David makes here of his own true conversion and regeneration. In the
hidden part he had known wisdom. 2. The author and worker of this his
conversion; that is to say. The Lord himself, In the hidden part thou had
made me to know wisdom. 3. Lastly. The end and purpose that David had in
mentioning here his conversion, that truth of grace and saving knowledge that
was in him before his fall; that is to say, To aggravate and increase his sin
by the consideration of it. The two former of these points we have already
finished, it follows now that we proceed unto the third and last of them.

Nota.
From this then, that David does here aggravate his sins from this consideration
that he was a re^enerate man, he had truth of grace and saving knowledge in him
before he fell into these sins; we learn.

That the sins that a man commits that is truly regenerate, Doct. 23
are in sundry respects much more heinous and dangerous, then the same sins
committed by another man. In sundry respects I say, but not in all respects.
This Caution I must needs give you for the opening and explaination of the
Doctrine, before I come to the confirmation of it. And in handling this
Caution, I must be something large, both because it is a point that may be of
great use unto you, and because I have not handled it before, nor know when I
may have hereafter so fit opportunity to speak of it, as in the handling of
this Doctrine, that cannot be well understood without it. Caution.


You must therefore know, that the sins of a regenerate man, are not in all
respects, nor indeed can be either so heinous in themselves, or so dangerous to
him that commits them as the sins of the unregenerate are, or may be.

First, They are not so heinous in themselves; and that in these two

First. There is one heinous sin that no regenerate Elect child of God can
There is a sin unto death, says the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 5.16. by which he means
not, that there is a sin that deserves death (for so every sin does) but a
sin, which whosoever falls into, and commits, he must needs dye and perish
everlastingly; and he adds, verse 18. We know that whosoever is borne of God,
sins not; that is, does never commit that sin, the sin unto death.

Secondly. Those heinous sins that it is possible for a man that is truly
regenerate David's and Peter's examples prove that to be too true. But he cannot
commit them so hainously, that is, in so heinous a manner as the other does.
Their spot (says Moses, speaking of the rebellious Jews, Deuteronomy. 32.5.) is not
the spot of his children. As if he had said, They may both have their spots,
yea, and great and foul spots too; but there is a great difference between
the spots of the lewd and unregenerate men, and the spots of Gods children. And
as the Lord gave to the Priest under the law, direction, how he might
distinguish, and put a difference between the spots of the leprous persons,
Levit. 13.24 -- 27. and ver. 38.39. So has he also given him in his word
direction, how we may distinguish and discern the spots of lewd and wicked
men, from the spots of his children. Of the one it is said, Jude 15. that their
ungodly deeds are ungodly committed. Of the other it is said, Psalm. 18.21. that
they have not wickedly departed from their God. As if he should say, even then,
when they have forsaken and departed from their God, yet they did i^ not
wickedly, in that wicked manner, with so wicked a mind and disposition of
heart, as the other do. The adultery that David committed was (doubtless)
great filthiness, and yet there is certainly a great deal more wickedness in
the whoredoms of many other men, then there was in his. In thy filthiness is
lewdness, says the Lord to the wicked Jew, Eze. 24.13. Was there not so (you
will say) in David's, and in every other man's whoredom? Surely the fact is most
filthy and abominable whosoever commits it, but yet in the heart of many a
man that commits it, there is much more lewdnes, then there was in David's So
the Apostasy of Peter was (out of doubt) a most heinous sin; yet was it not
committed so hainously, with so bad an heart, as the Apostasy of many a one
has been, that yet did never deny Christ with such oaths and execrations as
Peter did. Be not merciful unto all that transgress maliciouslly, says
David, Psalm 59.5. Peter tansgressed, but not maliciously, he did unfeinedly
love Christ in his heart, even then, when he did so deny him. No regenerate
man commits any sin so sinfully, with so bad an heart, as the unregenerate
man does; nay he cannot sin with the full sway and consent of his will.
Whosoever is borne of God (says the Apostle, 1 John 3.9.) does not commit
sin, for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin because he is borne
of God. As though he should have said, He cannot sin as the other man does.
In every sin that through frailty he falls into, the spirit will lust
against the flesh, as the Apostle speaks, Galat. 5.17. The seed of God that
remains in him, the regenerate part will make some resistance to the flesh
certainly, though it be sometimes so weak, as the party himself can scarcely
be able to discern it. So that you plainly see, that though in respect of the
outward act of sin there be no apparent difference to be discerned between
the regenerate and the wicked man, yet certainly in the manner and inward
disposition of their hearts in sinning, there is a great and wide difference
between them. And thus I have proved to you the first point I propounded unto
you, That the sins of the regenerate, are not, nor can be in themselves, and in
their own nature so great and heinous, as the sins of the unregenerate and
wicked men are.



Four notable differences there are in this respect between their sins.

For all these things (says Solomon, Eccles. 11.9) God will bring thee into
judgment. For every idle word that they speak (says our Savior, Matthew.
12.36.) they must give account at the day of judgment. The infirmities, the
daily and small offenses of the regenerate (such as the best are subject to,
and cannot in this life be freed from. In many things (says the Apostle Iam
3.2.) we offend all; such as either through ignorance or frailty they are apt
to slip into; such as themselves discern, and bewail, and strive against) the
Lord is so far from entering into judgment with his servants for such, as
that he will never impute them, or take notice of them. Of these sins it is,
that David speaks, Psalm 130.3. If thou Lord should mark iniquities: o
Lord who shall stand? And the Prophet, Micah 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee,
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of
his heritage? And the Lord himself, Mal. 3.17. I will spare them as a man
spares his own son that serves him.

He that believes not (says our Savior, John 3.18.) is condemned already;
because he believes not in the name of the only begotten son of God. The
most gross and heinous sins that any man that is truly regenerate does
commit, for them there is hope and promise of pardon. There is no condemnation
(says the Apostle, Romans 8.1.) to them that are in Christ Jesus. And 1 John
2.1, 2. If any man sin we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins.

he only that gives repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins, as the
Apostle speaks Act. 5.31. 2. He has no certain promise that God will ever
give him grace to repent after he has sinned, For being without Christ, he is
a stranger to the covenants of promise, and has nothing to do with them, as
the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 2.1^. It is far otherwise with the regenerate
man. No such child of God being regenerate, can fall so fearfully or
dangerously, but he shall certainly rise again, and be renewed again by
repentance. Of him that may truly be said that David speaks in another sense,
Psalm 37 24, Though he fall he shall not be utterly cast down. For 1. He
has in him the principle of repentance, that that will help him to recover
himself, The seed of God remains in him, as the Apostle says, 1 John 3 9.
That seed, that habit of grace, is immortal and incorruptible, as the Apostle
calls it, 1 Peter 1.23. It is living water, it is in him as a well of water
springing up unto everlasting life, as our Savior speaks, John 4.14 2. The
Lord (whose only work it is to raise up them that are bowed down, as David
singed to his praise, Psalm 145.14.) has promised that he shall not dye in
his sins, but he will restore him, and raise him up by repentance. I will
heal their back sliding (says the Lord. Hosea 14*^. and again verse 7) they
that dwell under his shadow (that ever were in his favor, if they happen
through frailty to go astray from God, they) shall return, they shall revive
as the corn, which though it seem (sometimes by water, sometimes by frosts)
to be quite dead, yet in due time it reviveth again, and becomes fruitful.
The unbeleever shall dye in his sins, as our Savior speaks, John 8 24. but
so can he never do that truly believes. I am the resurrection and the life
(says he, John 11 25, 6) he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet
shall he live, and whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never dye;
Which (though it were spoken by him upon the occasion of the bodily death, and
resurrection of Lazarus, yet) is not to be restrained unto that, but is to be
understood of the spiritual life and resurrection also. Mark three things (I
beseech you) in this speech of our blessed Savior. 1. Whosoever believes in
me (says he) shall never dye. As if he had said, that spiritual life, that
life of grace which he has received from me, is permanent. ^. That he
says, He that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live, As
if he had said, If it were possible for such a one to become stark dead,
utterly to loose the life of grace; if this (I say) were possible, yet shall
he live, and be revived again. 3. Lastly. Mark the reason that Christ
gives for it. I am the resurrection and the life, says he. As if he should
say, I am able to raise and restore unto life, both the body and the soul,
yea, it is mine office, and honor to do it. He that assured Peter before his
fearful fall, Luke 22 32. (not to make him less fearful of falling, but
that it might be an help to his repentance after he was fallen, and as it
were a cord for him to catch at, and take hold of, to keep him from sinking in
the guise of despair, and to draw him out of it) he (I say) that did then
give assurance unto him that his faith should not fail, nor utterly dye in
him, but he should certainly find mercy with God, to rise again by repentance
(for so his words plainly import. When thou art converted, strengthen thy
brethren) he has given the same assurance to every elect and believing man,
that his faith shall never utterly fail, but he shall certainly find mercy
with God, to rise again by repentance. For he prayed so for every believer as
well as for Peter, as is plain, John 17.15.20. And he has said of every true
believer, John 5 24. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word,
and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come
into condemnation, but is passed from death into life.

The fourth and last difference between the falls of the wicked, and of the
the people of Gods curse, as the Lord calls them, Esaias. 34.5. and (...) the
children of the curse, as the Apostle speaks, 2. Pet. 2*14. every thing that
belongs unto them, but specially every sin they commit, is accursed unto
them, and tends to make their state worse and worse, and to make them more
and more apt to sin, more and more unable to repent. They yield themselves
servants to iniquity, unto iniquity, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 6.19. As if
he had said, this is all the good they shall get by their service of sin, that
by committing one sin, they shall become more apt to commit another, and so by
filling up a great measure of sin (which is said to have been the cause why
the Amorites were spared so long, Genesis 15.16.) they might heap up wrath, as
Elihu speaks, Job 36.12. against the day of wrath. It is quite contrary with
the regenerate. For as they are called to be heirs of blessing as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Peter 3.9. so all things shall work together for their good. Romans
8.28. Every thing that befalls them, yea even their foulest sins that God
permits them to fall into, shall by the grace of repentance, make for their
good, they shall tend to the bettering of them, and making of them more happy
men, then otherwise they would have been. Insomuch as that which David says
of his affliction. Psalm. 119.7^. It is good for me, that I have been
afflicted, that both David and all the faithful have cause to say of their
grievous falls, Gods grace turning them to matter of greater repentance, it is
good for me, that God did leave me to my self.

Object. 2
This is an incredible thing, and dangerous also to be taught (you will say)
for this seems to give great encouragement unto the committing of any sin,
and what need men be afraid of sin, their sins shall do them good, that
they shall become by them the better and more happy men?

Answ.
But to this I answer. That their damnation is just, that make such inferences
and conclusions from this Doctrine, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 3.8. that
say, let us therefore do evil, that good may come of it. And who will
therefore desire, and run into any affliction or misery, because he has
heard that it shall be good for Gods children, that they have been afflicted.
It is no natural effect of sin, to do any man good that commits it, nay
nothing is more contrary to the nature of sin, then this is, sin is a most
deadly poison, and the most natural effect of it is to destroy him that
commits it, and to make him miserable everlastingly. The good that comes
to the faithful this way, is to be imputed, not unto their sins, but to the
infinite power of God, that was able to make the light to rise out of
darkness, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 4 6. And to the wisdom, and
goodness of our heavenly Physician that makes a sovereign medicine of this
deadly poison. This he is able to do, and this he does to al his children, he
sanctifies unto them their falls, and makes them means of their good, and
that sundry ways.

I dwell with him (says the Lord, Esa. 47.15.) that is of a contrite and
humble spirit; And God gives grace to the humble, James 4.6.) So the Lord
knows that many would never be soundly humbled, if he should not leave them
sometimes to themselves, and let them take such falls. Thus was Hezeckiahs fall
sanctified unto him. For when God had left him, as we read he did, 2 Chronicles.
32.31. and he fell in that height of pride that provoked God highly, not only
against himself, but against all his kindome, as we read verse 25. this fall
of his, had more force to humble him, and did him more good that way, then that
great affliction he had had a little before, either through the extreme fear
he was in of the host of Senacherib, verse 1.2, 20. or through that mortal
sickness whereby the Lord had visited him, verse 24. was able to do; and so the
holy Ghost says verse 26. Hezechiah humbled himself for the pride of his
heart. And so was it also with David here; He was more soundly and deeply
humbled by this, when God left him to himself, to fall into these fearful
sins, then by all the afflictions he had endured under Saul. He was never able
to offer unto God the sacrifice of so broken and contrite an heart, which he
speaks of verse 17. until now.

Secondly. By this means God makes his servants more fearful to offend The
burnt child (we say) will dread the fire. And as Paul says of Onesimus, Phil.
15. Perhaps he therefore departed for a season, that thou should receive
him for ever. As if he should say, It may be God in his providence so disposed
of his sin in running away from thee, and absenting himself from thee for a
time, that even this sin of his, his former unfaithfullnesse, will be a mean
to make him a better servant unto thee, and so thou shall have more cause to
love him, and take comfort in him while he lives. So may it be truly said of
many of Gods servants, their very sins that they have fallen into, have made
them better servants unto God then ever they were before, or then ever they
would have been, if they had not so fallen. Because Mary Magdalene had bin so
great a sinner, therefore she showed more love to Christ, then any other did,
who had not fallen so grievously as she had done. Her sins, which were many,
are forgiven (says our Savior, Luke 7.47.) for she loved much. As if he had
said, She could not love me so much, if she had not had so many, and so foul
sins forgiven her. Certainly it was so with Peter, whose fall by denying
Christ, made him to love Christ more dearly then any other of the Apostles
did, as is plain by Christ's asking of him, John 21.15. not only whether he
loved him, but whether he loved him more then his fellows did. And therefore
also we shall find that he was more bold and zealous ever after, more void of
fear in the confession of Christ, then any other of the Apostles were.

Thirdly and lastly. By this means the Lord makes his children more Titus to
put his hearers in mind to speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but
gentle, showing all meekness unto all men, Titus 3.2. He prescribes that, as
a preservative against that corruption verse 3. For we our selves also were
sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures,
living in malice and envy, hateful and hating one another. If God had not let
Paul feel the thorn that was in his own flesh, whereby (as by a messenger of
Satan) he was buffeted, and abased, he was in danger to have been exalted
above measure, and to have grown proud, and insolent with the abundance of
revelations he had received, and therefore twice in one verse, 2 Cor. 12.7. he
says, this thorn in the flesh was given him, least he should be exalted
above measure. And this good Peter also got by his fearful fall, that whereas
before he was conceited, and proud, and stood upon terms of comparison,
Matthew. 26.33. Though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I
never be offended; He thought better of himself, then of any other man. After
his fall he was of another temper. For when Christ asked him, John 21.15.
Simon, son of Jonas, love thou me more then chese? (which Christ knew well
that he did) he durst not answer, Yes Lord, unto that demand, but only thus,
Lord thou know that I love thee. As if he had said, I dare not say more then
any other, not more then the meanest of thy servants, but yet Lord thou know
that I love thee, though it be poorly, and wearkely, yet I love thee. And
thus have I showed you that the sins of the regenerate are not, nor can be in
all respects, either so heinous in themselves, or so dangerous in respect of
the consequents and punishment of them, as the sins of wicked and
unregenerate men are, or may be. Now should I come to the confirmation of the
Doctrine, and show you that the sins that a man commits, who is truly
regenerate, are in sundry respects much more heinous and dangerous then the
same sins are, being committed by another man. But this (because the time is
past) I must defer till the next day.

Lecture CVIII. On Psalm 51.6. Ianu. 20. 1628.
Proof.
IT follows now, that we proceed unto the proof and confirmation of the
Doctrine, and show you, That the sins of a man that is truly regenerat, are in
sundry respects much more heinous and dangerous then the same sins are, being
committed by another man. Two sorts of witnesses there are to confirm this. 1.
The conscience of the regenerate themselves. 2. The Lord who is

For the first. David and Peter may serve in stead of a thousand. For as it is
evident, they were truly regenerated before they fell, so is it as evident,
that they judged their sins to be so much the more heinous and damnable, even
for this cause, because they were regenerate, and in the state of grace, before
they committed them.

How David judged of his sin, you may see in these words wherein he aggravateth
his sin by this argument. And in the hidden part, thou had made me to know
wisdom. As if he had said, This, this is that that makes my sins
intollerably heavy to my conscience, that thou had given me saving knowledge,
I was in the state of grace, when I yielded to these tentations, when I fell
into these sins. And see how near he was unto despair, how much ado he had
to get assurance of pardon, and to receive his comfort in God, how often he
repeateth his suit and petition for pardon, verse 1.2.7, 8, 9.12.14.

And how, Peter judged of his sin, so soon as the violence of the tentation
was past, and God was pleased to open his eyes, and let him see what he had
done; how deep he sanke in sorrow; how near he was unto despair; how much a
do he had to recover his comfort and assurance of Gods favor, it is evident,
not only by his weeping so bitterly for it, Matthew. 26.75. but specially by that
great care Christ had to raise him up again to comfort him, more then for all
the rest of the Apostles. He appointed an Angel to send word to Peter by name,
of his resurrection, Mark 16.7. Tell his disciples and Peter. And he showed
himself first to him. 1 Cor. 15.5. He was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve;
And by encouraging him so earnestly, and so pathetically, John 21.15.17. not to
give over his ministry, but to feed his lambs, to feed his sheep for all
that. But to these two, I will add one example more; and that is of that poor
Corinthian that fell into incest. For as we have no cause to doubt, but that he
was a regenerate man before he fell into that sin (for he was a member of
that Church of whom the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1.2. that they were sanctified in
Jesus Christ, they were called to be Saints) so it is evident, that when he
came to see what he had done, he judged his sin to be so heinous and
intolerable, that he was brought even to the brinke of desperation. Insomuch as
the Apostle was feign to write unto the Church earnestly, 2 Cor, 2.7, 8. that
they would comfort him and confirm their love toward him, for fear he were
even swallowed up with overmuch sorrow. See by these three examples how the
regenerate themselves have judged of their falls. Object.


Now least any man should object against the strength of this proof, and say,
Alas, it was the weakness of these men to grieve as they did, and to be so
troubled in their minds for their falls, they were distempered in their
brains, either with melancholy, or Satan's tentations (as experience shows us
daily, that many good souls are) which made them judge worse of their estate,
then they had just cause to do. If they had been their own men, and in their
right minds, they would easily have discerned they have no reason to be so
troubled, seeing they (being once regenerate) were not under the law, but under
grace, and consequently their sin (whatsoever it were, how heinous soever)
could not have dominion over them, Romans 6.14. They had not sinned, nor could
possibly sin, as other men did, with the full sway of their soul, the full
consent of their will. For the seed of God remains still in them, as the
Apostle speaks, 1 John 3.9. They should not be damned for any sin, that
they had committed, or could commit. For there is no condemnation to them that
are once in Christ, Romans 8.1. It is not possible they should dye in their
sins, but they shall certainly be renewed by repentance. No sin they can
commit, is able to separate them from the love of God, or cast them out of his
favor, For whom Christ ever loved, he loves to the end, John 13.1.

To these men that shall thus object (as doubtless too many are apt to do,
Answ.
too many are apt to think, that all Gods people whom they see humbled, and
much perplexed in mind for their sins, are distempered in their brains, or
at least are but silly weak creatures, void of all judgment) to these men I
say, that those three persons, whom I have brought for witnesses to confirm
this truth, were all in their right minds, they were not mad, they were not
distempered in their brains, either through melancholy o^ tentation (though I
confess, many of Gods people are so often times) they judged not otherwise of
their falls then they had just cause to do; they were no more troubled for
their sins then they had just cause to be. And to prove this, I will produce
my second witness, that I told you I would bring for proof of this truth.

The Lord himself (who is greater then the conscience) does thus judge of

Observe the proof of the first of these two testimonies in three points.

First. Of the sins of the regenerate, of Gods own people it is said, that He
is an holy God, he is a jealous God (says Joshua to Gods own people, Josh.
24.19) he will not forgive your transgressions, nor your sins. And even of
Christ Jesus, the Angel of the Covenant, the Lord says to his people, Exodus
23.21. Obey his voice, provoke him not, for he will not pardon your
transgressions; and mark the reason God gives for it, For my name is in him.
As if he should say; Because he is God, therefore he will not pardon your
transgressions; he were not God if he should do it. What? (will you say)
cannot the sins that a regenerate man falls into be pardoned? Are all their
falls impardonable sins? No verily; for I proved to you the last day, that no
Elect child of God can possibly commit the unpardonable sin; that all their
sins shall upon their repentance certainly be forgiven. The blood of Jesus
Christ his son, cleanses us from all sin, as the Apostle says, 1 John
1.7. But in those fearful sentences that I mentioned to you, two things are
to be understood. 1. That God will not wink at: Christ himself (because he is
God) cannot brook nor bear with the sins of his people, he cannot count them
innocent, nor think well of them, till they have repented. 2. That though ever
since they first believed, and were converted, they have had a pardon upon
record in heaven, that can never be revoked nor cancelled; yet if they fall
again into gross sins, they shall have no comfort at all of that pardon, but
be as if they had no pardon, till by renewing their repentance and faith, they
have sued out their pardon, and be able to show, and plead it in the Court of
their own conscience.

If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments (says the Lord,
Psalm 89.31 -- 34.) then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and
their iniquity with stripes, nevertheless, my loving kindness I will not
utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail; my covenant will I
not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. And again, Psalm
99.8. Thou wast a God that forgavest them, though thou did take vengeance of
their inventions. Though the regenerate man has a general pardon, and all his
sins be so forgiven him, as they shall never be imputed to his condemnation;
yet if he give himself liberty to sin, he cannot hope to be exempted from any
of Gods judgments, and plagues, that ever fell upon sinner in this life. He
may be plagued as much as ever man was, in his estate, in his name, in his
posterity, in his body, yea in his mind and conscience also. And who can tell
in what kind, and in what measure God will plague him, how heavy and sharp, or
of how long continuance the judgment shall be, wherewith he will afflict him.
The Lord we know has great store, and variety of judgments to punish sinners
with. He has an armoury full of the weapons of his indignations, as the
Prophet speaks, Jeremy 50.25. O how terrible has the Lord showed himself to
many of his dear servants this way. He is apt indeed (as we heard the last
day) to pass by the frailties, and infirmities of his servants, such as they
discern and bewail in themselves, but wilful sins, scandalous sins, nay sins
of negligence, and carelessness, such as themselves make no conscience of, he
is not wont to wink at in them; he is wont to correct them sharply for such
sins. Shall I instance in some few examples for this? And indeed how should I
spend the time more profitably in so secure an age as this?

First. I will not stand upon the example of David, how sharply God scourged
him for those sins which he bewaileth in this Psalm, with what changes and
armies of sorrows and plagues (as Job speaks, cap. 10.17.) he followed him
ever after, all the days of his life. For you may say, his were most
presumptuous, and notorious sins, such as few that were ever truly regenerate
have fallen into. I will therefore come to the second example, wherein I will
couple him and good Hezechiah together; What say you to that foolish pride they
showed, the one in numbering the people, the other in showing all his treasures
to the Ambassadors of the King of Babell? O how severe was God in his
judgments against them both even for this sin? Of David it is said, 1 Chronicles
21.14, that God slew of his subjects for that, seventy thousand men. And of
Hezechiah it is said, ^ Chron 32.25, that for that sin, there was wrath upon
him, and upon Judah, and Jerusalem. But you will say also that this was a
presumptuous sin. O that we would learn yet from this example, how unable God
is to brook, or bear with presumptuous sin, (though it be but in heart) in
his dearest children. But let us come to a third example. What say you then to
the sin of Aaron, and Moses, when they being bidden to speak only to the
rock, and promised that it should yield water enough for all the camp, did
but doubt a little, and stagger at that promise, and instead of speaking only
to the rock, smote it twice (you shall see the story, Numb. 20.8 -- 1^.) and
Moses in a passion spoke unadvisedly with his lips, as the Psalmist speaks,
Psalm 106.33. Certainly this was but a frailty in them, no presumptuous sin;
and therefore you shall find the Prophet there, Psalm 136.32, 33. lays that
fault on the people, rather then on them; and so does Moses himself also, Deuteronomy
1.37. And yet see how angry the Lord was with them even for this sin? Because
of this, he would by no means be entreated to let them go into the land of
promise; though Moses earnestly besought him, he would not hear him. The Lord
was wroth with me (says he, Deuteronomy. 3.26.) and would not hear me, but charged
him to speak no more unto him of that matter. O but (you will say) though this
was but a sin of frailty, yet it was a scandalous sin. True, it was so indeed;
And the Lord alleges that for the cause, why he was so provoked by it,
because it was done openly to the scandal of the people, Numb. 20.12. Then
learn by this example, how severe God will be in his judgments upon his
people for scandalous sins. But what say you then to Moses his delaying of the
circumcision of his son; to old Elyes bearing too much with his lewd sons;
and the faithful Corinthians, going to the Communion without care to prepare
and examine themselves before? Certainly these were but sins of carelessness
and negligence. And yet see how severe God was in his judgments against them
even for these sins. The Lord met Moses in the Inn, and sought to kill him,
says the text, Exodus 4.24. The Lord did not only bring old Ely to a violent
and strange death, he brake his neck, 1 Samuel 4 18. but he plagued his whole
house and posterity for ever for that sin, in a most fearful manner, 1 Samuel
2.31 -- 33 and cap. 3.11.14. The Lord sent a pestilence and mortality among the
faithful Corinthians, even for this sin. For this cause many are weak and
sickly among you, and many sleep, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.30. Behold how
God hates, and will punish his own people, even for their negligences and
carelessness, if they judge not themselves for it, and make conscience of it.

But yet there is a third degree, that shows much more how odious the They
rebelled and vexed his holy spirit (says the Prophet, Esa. 6^.10. speaking of
the Church of God in the wilderness) therefore he was turned to be their
enemy. When God heard this (that is, when he understood this, that they fell
into idolatry, for that was the sin that so provoked him then, as you may see,
verse. 58.) he was wroth (says the Psalmist, Psalm 78.59.) and greatly
abhorred Israel. Though the Lord can bear with many sins in his people; or
though he bear not with them, yet can correct them only for them, and love
them never the worse (as you know parents oft-times do) yet may Gods children
fall into such sins, as will even make them odious unto their father. These are
things which defile a man, and will make him loathsome, says our Savior, Mat.
15.20. What are those things? That he tells us verse 19. Murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies.

Quest.
How can that be? will you say. Whom the Lord once loves in Christ, he loves
for ever. I have loved thee (says the Lord to his people, Ier. 31.3.) with an
everlasting love.

Answ.
I answer. That is most true. Yet may his children so provoke him, that though
he do not quite disinherite them, or cease to be a father to them, yet will he
show them no countenance or fatherly affection at all; As David so loathed
Absalom for murdering his brother, that though he continued a fatherly
affection toward him still (yea, and after that too, when he had done far
worse) yet he could not abide to see him, Let him turn to his own house, and
let him not see my face, says he, 2 Samuel 14 ^4. A Christian may by his sin
cause his father so to loath him, as it may be he shall never have good
countenance of him again, he shall never see his face with comfort while he
lives. His adoption, the right and title he has thereby to the word and
Sacraments, to Christ and unto heaven, the comfort I say of all these, and of
all the privileges, the (...) he might make of them, he shall loose. As Vzzia
when he fell into a leprosy, lost not his kingdom the right and title he had
unto it thereby; but he lost the use and execution of his regal authority, to
the very day of his death, as we read. ^ Chron. 26.21. Of Asa we read, that
though he dyed the child of God, as appears both by that which is said of him
in his life time, 1 Kin. 15.14. that his heart was perfect with the Lord all
his days; and also by the testimony is given of him twice after his death, 2 Chronicles. 20.32. and 21.12. though he continued in the state of grace to his very
death; yet by his sins he lost the use and operation, the vigor, power, and
comfort of his adoption, and of that grace that was in him, and recovered it
not, even to his dying day; as may appear by that report the holy Ghost makes
of his last days, 2 Chronicles. 16.10 12. A fearful, yet most profitable example
for all secure Christians to read and meditate of.

And thus you have heard the first testimony which the Lord has given in this
case, he hates sin every whit as much in the regenerate man, as he does in any
other person in the world.

Lecture CIX. On Psalm 51.6. Ianu. 27. 1628.


He reserveth them to the day of judgment to be punished, says the Apostle,
2. Pet. 2.9. 2. In this life many a wicked man goes scot-free, he tastes of
no affliction. They are not in trouble as other men (says he Psalmist, Psalm.
^3.^.) neither are they plagued like other men. 3. Nay, though their sins be
outrageous, yet God plagueth them not. Job speaks of some ( Job. 24.12.) that
were cruel oppressors, and played the tyrants, and yet (says he) God laid
not folly unto them. As if he had said, He no way lays it to their charge. 4.
The Lord lets them run riot, and do what they list, and never stops
them in their course. He suffers them to walk in their own ways, as the
Apostle speaks, Acts 14.16. 5. He holds his peace, and does not so much as
by his word rebuke them. These things have thou done, and I kept silence, says
the Lord, Psalm 50.21. 6. Nay, he seems not to see them, but to wink at
them, The times of ignorance God winked at, says Paul, Acts 17.30. 7. So that
you see many lewd men are in this life privileged persons, they go under a
protection, as we read, Genesis 4 15. that Cain did, no man might touch Cain.

On the other side, Look upon the estate of Gods children in this life, and
you shall find, it is far otherwise with them, they have no such privilege.
For 1. Every godly man shall be sure to be afflicted in this life, in one
degree or other. Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth (says the Apostle, Heb.
12.6.) he scourges every son whom he receives. And verse 8. If ye be
without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not
sons. 2. The Lord uses not to wink at his childrens faults, but he
observes them strictly; and if they fall into presumptious, and scandalous
sins, yea, or into sins of secure carelessness, and negligence, they shall
be sure to hear of him, and to taste of his rods. If I sin (says Job 10.14)
thou markest me, and wilt not acquit me from mine iniquity. His fire is in
Zion (says the Prophet Esa. 31.9.) and his furnace in Jerusalem. As if he had
said. They that sin there, cannot escape the furnace of affliction, as the
same Prophet speaks and interprets himself, Esaias 48.10. 3 Lastly* God
uses not, nor may any child of God expect that he should show such patience
and forbearance toward him when he has sinned, as he uses to do toward
many a lewd man. See this in that speech of Phinehas, and the Princes, unto the
two tribes, and the half, Josh. 22.18. It will be (says he) seeing ye
rebel to day against the Lord, that to morrow he will be wroth with the whole
congregation of Israel. That wise and holy man (you see) expected present
judgment would fall upon Gods people for their sin, he had no hope that God
would forbear them for any time, if ye rebel to day, to morrow Gods vengeance
will come.

Secondly. When the Lord has purposed to bring upon the world, or upon Esa.
28.18. his manner has been, to begin with his own Church and people,
Judgment must begin at the house of God, says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.17.
Begin at my sanctuary, says the Lord to the destroying Angel, Ezekiel 9.6. He
is wont first to scourge his own people for their sins, before he begin
with the world; and to make their misery and trouble, a forerunner of the
common and general destruction. I took the cup at the Lords hand ( the cup of
Gods fury, says the Prophet Jeremy 25.17.) and made all the nations to drink
(that is, prophesied, that they should certainly drink of it) unto whom the
Lord had sent me. But who were to drink first of this cup? He tells us verse
18. Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, and the Kings thereof, and the Princes
thereof. They were to begin in this cup to Egypt, and the Philistines, to Edom,
and Moab, and the Ammonites, and to all other nations, as he shows in the
verses following. So when our Savior had prophesied, Luke 21.10, 11. that
before the destruction of Jerusalem, Nation should rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom, and great earthquakes should be in diverse places,
and famines, and pestilences, he adds verse 12. but before all these, they
shall lay their hands on you (speaking to his Apostles and Disciples) and
persecute you. As if he should say, The judgment shall begin at my house.

Esa. 8.18. Behold, I and the children the Lord has given me, are for signs
and for wonders in Israel; from the Lord of hosts, which dwells in mount
Sion. As if he had said; This is of the Lord, he makes us so. And thus
speaks the Apostle of his times, 1 Cor. 4.9. We are made a spectacle unto the
world. So the Lord made Vzzah an example to the whole congregation of Israel,
of his wrath against them all, for carrying his Arc in a cart, which by his
ordinance should have been carried on the Priests shoulders only. Was Vzza the
worst man in all the company? No verily; we have rather cause to judge he was a
good man, though he transgressed Gods law in that point. Was God displeased
with Vzza only, or had he respect to his sin only in that judgment? No
verily. For because ye did not carry the Arc at the first (says David to the
Priests, 1 Chronicles. 15.13. because ye set it on a cart) the Lord our God made a
breach upon us. All the congregation were as deep in that sin, as Vzza, the
Lord was as much displeased with them all, as with him: only he made him an
example to them all, that they might see what was due to them all, in the
judgment that fell upon him; and David made that use of it, as you may see, 1 Chronicles. 13.11.12. David was displeased (that is, grieved, and troubled in mind)
because the Lord had made a breach upon Vzza; and David was afraid of God that
day. In like manner did the Lord deal with the young Prophet, that we read of,
1 Kings 13 24. he made him an example to Ierohoam, and to all Israel. Alas (may
you say) was there never a greater sinner in Bethel, nor in all Israel, never a
fitter man to be made an example of Gods severity, then this poor man? I
answer. Greater sinners there were many, we may not doubt but that Prophet was
a good man, and Gods dear child, though (being deceived by the old Prophet)
he did eat and drink in Bethel, contrary to Gods commandment, and so did
justly deserve to dye. Neither had the Lord in that judgment so much respect
to the sin of that good man, as to the sin of Ierohoam and all Israel; that
by his severity toward his own servant for so small a sin, they might either
learn how much more was due to them for their gross idolatry, and so fear,
and repent, or else by the fall and inconstancy of the Prophet, be brought to
esteem the less of his prophecy against them, and so be further hardened in
their sin. And that the Lord had this respect in his judgment on the Prophet,
may appear by that which the holy Ghost says, verse 33. of that chapter.
After this thing (that is to say, After the Prophet had so sinned, and was so
plagued of God for it) Jeroboam returned not from his evil way, but made
again of the lowest of the people, Priests of the high places. As if he had
said thus, He received no good by this example, as he should have done, but
became the worse by it. And certainly, thus are we to judge of the mavelous
severity God has of late showed toward his people in the Palatinate, and
other parts of Germany, and toward the poor Rochellers; think not (beloved)
that they were greater sinners then any other, or then we are. Only the Lord
has made them examples of his severity to us and to all men; and we may say of
them, as the Apostle does, 1 Cor. 10.11. All these things happened unto them
for ensamples. And thus it has seemed good unto God only wise, who is
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works (as the Prophet speaks
Psalm 145.17.) to make his dear servants spectacles and examples of his
severity against sin rather and oftener, then he does the lewdest men that live;
though sometimes he bring them upon the stage also, as he did Korah and his
company Numb. 16. and 26.10.

The fourth and last way whereby God does in this life show more hatred to God
is angry with the wicked (says the Prophet, Psalm 7.11. and pla^ueth one or
other of them) every day. Yet are not his judgments (usually) when they do
fall, so heavy, so sharp, and extreme upon them, as they are upon his own
people. God is very terrible in the assembly of his Saints, in his true Church,
among his own people, says the Prophet, Psalm 89.7. And of his judgments
that he executes upon wicked men in this life, if they be compared with those
whereby he scourges his own people, it may be said, as it is, of the misery
and oppression the people endured under Solomon, compared with that they should
suffer under Rehoboam, 1 Kin. 1^.11 He chasteneth them with whip^, but his
own people with Scorpions. Therefore when the Lord threatens extreme
affliction, he expresses it thus. Micab 6.16. Ye shall bear the reproach of
my people. As if he should say, I will so afflict you, as I use to afflict my
people when they provoke me. See an experiment of this in both the
destructions of Jerusalem. Never did any people in the world endure so great
miseries, as Gods people did there in both of them. Of the first, the Church
thus complains, Lamenta. 1.12. Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like
unto my sorrow, which is done unto me; wherewith the Lord has afflicted me, in
the day of his fierce anger. Under the whole heaven it has not been done
(says Daniel. 9 12.) as both been done upon Jerusalem. And such a destruction
the Lord himself foretold it should be, as never came upon any other people;
such as all other nations should even wonder to see, and hear of, and be
astonished at it. This house which I have sanctified for my name (says the
Lord, 2 Chronicles. 7.20.21.) will I cast out of my sight, and will make it to be a
proverb, and a byword among all nations, and this house which is high, shall
be an astonishment to every one that passes by it. And Ezekiel. 5.9. I will do
in thee, that which I have not done, and whereunto I will not do any more the
like. And of the latter destruction of Jerusalem, our Savior prophesies, Mar.
13.19. In those days shall be affliction, such as was not from the beginning
of the creation which God made unto this time, neither shall be.

And thus have we heard the Doctrine confirmed sufficiently, That the sins of
the regenerate are in sundry respects more heinous and dangerous then the same
sins are, being committed by other men. And this we have had proved, both by
the testimony of the regenerate themselves, and by the Lords own testimony, he
can as ill abide sin in his own people, as in any other, yea, he has showed
more hatred in this life to their sins, then to the sins of any other men.

Let us now come to enquire into the reasons of this. And first let us enquire
what should be the reason, why the Lord is so severe against them, above all
other men. For it may seem strange, that having freely pardoned the sins of
his people, and being fully reconciled to them in Christ, and loving them
dearly with an everlasting love, God should yet deal more severely, and
sharply with them in this life, then with any other. And indeed the Lord
himself tells us, that this should be a matter of wonder, and astonishment
unto all men to see it. All nations shall say (says the Lord Deuteronomy. 29.24)
wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this land? What means the heat of
this great anger? Yea Gods own choice servants have stood amazed at it, and
been troubled exceedingly, because they could not discern any reason for it.
Even when I remember it, I am afraid (says Job 21.6.) and trembling takes
hold on my flesh. And David Psalm. 73.16, 17. When I sought to know this, it was
too painful for me, until I went into the sanctuary of God. Let us therefore
go into the sanctuary of God, and enquire there into the reason of this. And we
shall find it may be referred unto three principal heads. For the Lord does
this out of a respect he has. 1. Unto the regenerate themselves whom he does
thus correct. 2. Unto other men whom he makes them an example unto. 3. Lastly.
Unto the quality and degree of his peoples sin, whom he does deal thus sharply
with.

Reason 1
First. The Lord is thus sharp and severe in correcting his dearest children
out of the respect he has to their persons, out of that eternal and
unchangeable love he bears unto them. Because he would keep them from
sinning as others do, and from perishing as others shall, therefore he
corrects them so sharply as he does. He medleth not with the thorns and
briars, but lets them grow till they be fit for the fire, but his Vines he
will cut and prune ever and anon. Many lewd men (because he cares not for
them) he lets alone, till they have filled up the measure of their sin. Fill
ye up (says our Savior, Matthew. 23.32.) the measure of your fathers. He
loves them not so well, as to correct them always when they offend. I will
not punish your daughters when they commit whoredom, nor your spouses when
they commit adultery, says the Lord, Hosea 4.14. He reserveth wrath for his
enemies, says the Prophet Nahum 1.2. But his own people, because he loves
them, he will be sure to correct them when they do amiss. You only have I
kowne (says he, Amos 3.2. that is, loved and made choice of to be my peculiar
people) of all the families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for all
your iniquities. Job admired the goodness of God in this. What is man (says
he, Job 7.17, 18, 19.) that thou should magnify him? and that thou should
set shine heart upon him; and that thou should visit him every morning and
try him every moment? As if he should say, It is a sign God makes great
reckoning of a man, and sets his heart upon him, when he thus visits him
with his corrections, ever when he offends. Certainly the Lord does not this
willingly. He does not afflict willingly, says the Church, Lam. 3.33. If he
saw any other way so fit as this to keep them from sinning outragiously, and
so from perishing eternally, he would never deal thus with them. Behold I will
melt them and try them (that is, correct them, and correct them sharply, says
the Lord, Jeremy 9.7.) for how shall I do for the daughter of my people? As
though he should have said, How should I keep them from perdition, if I should
not cast them into the furnace of affliction? So the Apostle gives this for
the reason, why the Lord so sharply corrected his people in Corinth with
pestilence, and mortality, even for going unpreparedly to the Lords table. When
we are judged (says he. 1. Cor. 11.32.) we are chastened of the Lord, that we
should not be condemned with the world. As if he should say, The Lord sees,
that if he should not scourge us, and scourge us thus sharply, even for these
negligences of ours, for our loosenes and carelesnes in his service, we would
be apt to grow as profane and lewd, as other men, and so cast our selves into
everlasting perdition. And thus have the faithful themselves judged of the
Lords severity toward them. It is good for me (says David, Psalm. 119.71.)
that I have been afflicted; and verse 75. I know that thou in faithfulness
have afflicted me.

Lecture CX. On Psalm 51.6. February 17. 1628.
IT follows now that we proceed unto the second reason of this severity of
God toward his own people, Reason 2
of his correcting them in this life, more sharply, then the lewdest men. The
Lord does this (secondly) out of the respect he has unto other men, even unto
those wicked men among whom his people do live. In his corrections upon them,
he has sometimes not so much respect unto them and their sins, as he has unto
other men. For the Lord does nor only give unto his dearest servants, such
privy pinches and gripes, as themselves only or some of their nearest friends
are sensible of, but he brings them often upon the stage, he whippeth them
openly, and publicly, of purpose that other men, yea, that wicked men may take
notice of it. He strikes them as wicked men (as Elihu speaks, Job 34.26.) in
the open sight of others. As if he should say, One would think they must needs
be very wicked and lewd men, whom the Lord thus makes examples of, and
whippeth so openly. And yet thus has the Lord dealt with his own people; not
only when their sins have been public, and scandalous; As in the case of
Judah, of which the Lord speaks, Ezekiel. 5.14. I will make thee wast, and a
reproach among the nations that are round about thee, in the sight of all that
pass by. But even when the sins of his people have bin secret, and closely
committed. Thou did it secretly (says the Lord unto David, 2 Samuel 12.1^.)
but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the Sun. Yea, such of
his people as have so lived, that neither others could note them, nor they have
been privy to themselves of any enormious crime, yet even them also has the
Lord often brought upon the stage, and made them examples of his mavelous
severity unto the world. Ye were made a gazing stock (says the Apostle to the
faithful, Hebr. 10.33.) both by reproaches and afflictions.

Now if any man shall ask, Quest.
alas, why does the Lord so? Were it not more for his glory, when his children
do offend him, to take them into a corner, and to whip them in secret, then to
do it thus in the market place, and in the sight of all men? Wicked men will
but rejoice at this, and insult the more against religion for it. And that made
David wish with all his heart, that the judgment of God upon Israel, when Saul
was slain, had not been so public, that it had been concealed from the
Philistines. Tell it not in Gath (says he, 2 Samuel 1.20.) publish it not in the
streets of Ashkelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the
daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

To these I answer. Answ.
That there be two ways whereby the Lord gets glory from wicked men, by
these examples of his severity toward his own children which he sets
before them. For 1. In some of them (even in such as he has appointed unto
life) these examples he sees will be most effectual to bring them to a
serious consideration of their own dangerous estate, and so to help forward
their repentance. 2. In some others (even in desperate and incorrigible
sinners) he sees these examples will be most effectual to harden them, and
make them worse then they were before. That the Lord herein has respect to
both these effects we shall find, Ezekiel. 5.15. So it shall be a reproach and a
taunt, and an instruction, and an astonishment unto the nations that are round
about there, when I shall execute judgments in thee, in anger, and in fury,
and in furious rebukes. As if he should say, The nations when they see my fury
toward thee, shall be diversely affected with it. 1. Some of them being
astonished at it, will receive instruction, and be the better for it. 2. Some
of them again, will taunt, and reproach, and hate thee the more and thy
religion for it.

Of the first effect that this has in the better sort of wicked men, the Lord
speaks again, Ezekiel. ^8.19. All they that know thee among the people, shall
be astonished at thee, and thou shall be a terror. As if he had said, When
they shall see and consider, how the Lord deals with thee, this shall teach
them what they must look for themselves, this shall make them to tremble and
quake. The examples of Gods severity upon his own children, will have more
force to awaken the conscience of such wicked men as belong to God, then all
his judgments they see in the world upon lewd men can possibly have. Every
man's conscience in whom the light of nature is not quite extinguished will be
apt to infer upon the sight of these examples the very same conclusions which
the holy Ghost does, Prove. 11.31. Behold the righteous (I see) shall be
recompensed in the earth, how much more the wicked and the sinner, such as I
am? Weep for your selves, weep not for me (says our Savior, Luke 23.28)
and mark the reason, ver. 31. For if this be done to the green tree, what
shall be done to the dry? And 1 Pet. 4 17. If judgment begin at the house of
God, what shall the end be of them, that obey not the Gospel of God? As if he
had said, If God be so sharp and severe toward such as these be (who are far
more righteous then we are) what vengeance may we look for, what cause of
fear and trembling, and weeping have we?

He has made all things for himself (says Solomon, Proverbs 16.4.) Yea even
the wicked for the evil day. For the experience of all ages, has proved this
to be most certain, that the strange afflictions that they have seen good
men subject unto, has had mavelous force to harden the hearts of wicked men,
in the liking of their own ways, and in the hatred of the ways of God. This
is evident by the complaint, the faithful so often make unto God of this, as of
a thing that did greatly aggravate their afflictions, Psalm 42.10.79.10.115.2.
Joel 2.17. Mic. 7.10. that they could be in no kind of misery, but the wicked
would be ready straight to blaspheme, and insult against religion, and say,
Where is now their God? As if they should say, What is become of their religion
now? What get they by their great profession, by their forwardness, and
running after sermons? And certainly this is a chief cause why some good
souls have fallen into strange afflictions, some in one kind, some in another
(some live in continual pensiveness, and fears, some fall into strong fits
of desperation; yea, and into frenzy also, some have been so far left of God
in these fits, as they have sought even to make away themselves) even that God
might make of these good souls, his dear children, stones of offense for some
desperate sinners and enemies of the Gospel, that live about them, to stumble
at, and harden their hearts by, in the hatred of religion, to their own
perdition. I will lay stumbling blocks before this people (says the Lord,
Jeremy 6.21.) and the fathers and the sons together, shall fall upon them, the
neighbor and his friend shall perish. And thus you have seen the second
reason of that severity God shows in this life toward his own people, even
the respect he has unto other men, whom he is pleased to make them examples
unto.

Reason 3.
The third and last follows, which is indeed the chief of all, even the
respect the Lord has to the quality and degree of his peoples sin. No
marvel though God do in this life, show more hatred and indignation against
the sins of his own people, then of any other, for their sins are in sundry
respects, greater and more heinous then the sins of other men. One dead fly
(says Solomon, Eccl. 10.1. For so some of the best interpreters read it, and
so both the verb of the singular number, and the Apodosis or application of
the comparison shows it ought to be read) One dead fly does cause the
ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a stinking savor, so does a little
folly him that is in reputation, for wisdom and honor. As if he had said,
One dead work, one wicked act, will make a man that is of note for piety
loathsome unto God and men; yea the greater note he was of for piety, the more
odious and loathsome will sin make him to be both unto God and men. As the
greatest candle and that that gave the most light, will yield the filthiest
savor if it go out, and become a snuff^. I have written unto you, If any man
that is called a brother be (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.11.) a fornicatour, or
covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with
such a one not to keep company, no not so much as to eat with him; which he
expressly permits to do, verse 10. with the fornicatours and other lewd
men of the world, that were not brethren. And the Lord that commands his
children to show more detestation to the foul sins that Christians fall
into, then to the sins of other men, does himself doubtless loath them
more, then he does the sins of other men. If you ask me the reason of
this, why the sins of the regenerate are more heinous then the sins of
other men; I answer. The reasons of this are four principally.

First, The regenerate sin against greater means of knowledge and obedience,
inexcusable (as the Apostle speaks, Romans 1.20) that he sins against the
means God has given him to keep him from sin. But Gods people that live in
his Church (in the valley of vision as the Prophet calls it, Esa. 22.1.)
under the ministry of the Gospel, enjoy far greater and stronger means
then all other men do. For that is the power of God unto salvation, as the
Apostle calls it, Romans 1.16. And proportionable to the greatness and
excellency of the means, that God vouchsafes to any to keep him from sin,
is the greatness and heinousness of his sin, in the sight of God. All men
shall find one day that even the having of a sound ministry of the Word
whether they profit by it or profit not, even the having of such means, will
greatly increase the heinousness of their sins. Whether they will hear, or
whether they will forbear (says the Lord, Ezekiel. 2.5.) yet they shall know,
that there has been a Prophet among them. As if he should say, They shall
know, what it is to have had excellent means, and not to be bettered by them.
So says our Savior of the Jews that enjoyed his ministry, John 15.22. If I
had not come and spoken unto them they had not had sin, (that is, their sin
had been nothing in comparison of that that now it is) but now they have no
cloak (no excuse) for their sin. And for this cause he says, Mat. 11.24.
that it should be more tolerable for Sodom, in the day of judgment then for
Capernaum. The sins of Capernaum were more heinous and odious unto God then
the sins of Sodom, because they were committed against greater and stronger
means then the other were.

Secondly, The regenerate sin against greater knowledge, then other John 1.9.
Romans 2.15. And this sinning against their knowledge and conscience is that that
greatly increases the sin of every natural man; Because knowing the
judgment of God ( that they that commit such things are worthy of death says
the Apostle, Romans 1.32,) yet they not only do the same, but have pleasure in
them that do them. This shall stop the mouth of all iniquity (as the Psalmist
speaks, Psalm. 107.42.) at the day of Judgment, when the books of conscience
shall be opened, and men shall be judged according to that that is written
therein. Revel. 20.12. But all that live in the Church, sin more against
knowledge, sin against a far greater light then any other man does. The
light men have by nature, is but a dim light; they that seek God by that
light, do but grope after him, as the Apostle speaks Acts 17.27. The word is
a far clearer light, and they that are instructed by it, have a far clearer
knowledge, then by any other means a man can have. The commandment is a lamp
(says Solomon, Pro. 6.23.) and the law is light. And yet they that are
inwardly enlightened by the spirit of God (as all the regenerate are) have a
far clearer light, and knowledge of God, then any man can have that enjoys
the outward light of the word only; when in the hidden part the Lord has made
a man to know wisdom, as David speaks here. For though the word be a most
clear light, yet every natural man has such a veil over his heart, as he
cannot clearly discern it: but when the heart is once turned to the Lord, and
converted (as the Apostle teaches, 2 Cor. 3.15, 16.) that evil is taken away.
The regenerate man's knowledge is far greater and clearer then any other man's
can be, and consequently his sin must needs be also greater then any other
man's. For the greater measure and degree of knowledge that any man has, the
greater is his sin. To him that knows to do well, and does it not (says the
Apostle, Iam. 4.17.) to him it is sin. What? and to no body else? yes, but not
so much to any other, sin shall not be imputed and laid so heavy to the charge
of any man, as to him that has sinned against his own knowledge and
conscience. If you were blind (says our Savior, John 9.41.) ye should have no
sin; that is, nothing so much sin, so heinous sin, as now ye have. The
servant that knows his Lords will (says our Savior, Luke 12.47.) and
prepared not himself, nor did according to his will, shall be beaten with
many stripes. And no marvel, for all sins against knowledge, are in some
degree presumptuous sins, and are committed with an higher hand, and in more
direct contempt of God, then other sins are; as appears by that opposition
that is made between sins of ignorance, and presumptuous sins, both in Numb.
15.27.30. and Psalm. 19.12, 13.

The Lord is good to all (says the Psalmist, Psalm 145.9.) and his tender
mercies are above all his works. And his sinning against this goodness and
mercy of God, is that that greatly increases the sin of every wicked man, and
will much aggravate his condemnation. This is that that treasureth up wrath
unto them against the day of wrath, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 2.4, 5. But
the mercies and kindnesses that God has showed to any wicked man, are nothing
if they be compared with that, which he has showed to every regenerate soul.
They are but common mercies, they are but as the crummes that fall from their
masters table, as that poor woman speaks, Matthew 15.27. Remember me o Lord
(says David, Psalm 106 4) with the favor that thou bear unto thy people.
The Lord has showed another manner of favor and love to his own people, he
has done more for the poorest wretch that is regenerate, he has given him
more then all the world besides. He has given them his own son. To us a
son is given, Esa. 9.6. He has given them a full and free pardon of all
their sins. Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou have covered
all their sin, says David, Psalm 85.2. He has given them his holy spirit.
Because ye are sons (says the Apostle, Gal. 4.6) God has sent forth the
spirit of his son into your hearts. He will give them the kingdom. Fear not
little flock (says our Savior, Luke 12.32.) For it is your fathers good
pleasure to give you the kingdom. Yea (which adds much to all his former
favors) he gives them to know, that he has done all this for them, We have
received (says the Apostle in the name of the faithful, 1 Cor. 2.12.) the
spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely given us
of God. He has given them the comfortable sense, of this his special love
that he bears to them above any other in the world. They have tasted that the
Lord is gracious as the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 2.3. Now proportionable to the
goodness and bounty that the Lord has showed unto any, must the greatness
and h^inousnes of his sin needs be. If a man be treacherous and unfaithful to
his dearest friend, to his master, to his own father, this (we know) will make
him odious unto all men. To whomsoever much is given (says our Savior, Luke
12.4^.) of him shall much be required; and to whom men have committed much, of
him they will ask the more. And thus does the Lord aggravate the sin of his
people, Deuteronomy. 32.6. yea thus will the conscience of every child of God, when it
shall be awakened aggravate his own sin. Do ye thus requite the Lord, o ye
foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy father, that has bought thee? Has
he not made thee, and established thee?

Fourthly and lastly. The sins of the regenerate, do more hurt then the sins of

First. The evil example of one Christian of note, does more encourage and If
any man see thee that have knowledge, sit at meat in the idols temple (says
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.10 and that which he says of that one sin may be said
of others) shall not the conscience of him that is weak, be emboldened to eat
of meats offered unto Idols? So the Lord says, Ezekiel 16.54. that the Jews
were a comfort to them of Sodom and Samaria. As if he should say, It is a
comfort to lewd men, to see professors as bad as themselves. And this is that
that greatly aggravateth their sin, and will make it lie heavier on their
conscience, even when they have repented, that they have been the means of
the damnation of others. And thus God aggravateth the sin of the Jews, Iere.
6.28. They are all corrupters.

Secondly. There redoundeth more dishonor to God from the sins of the Ye
shall keep my commandments and do them (says the Lord, Levit 22.31, 32.)
neither shall ye profuse my holy name. As if he had said, If ye do not, my
Holy Name will be profaned. All the sins of professors, specially of men of
chief note for piety, will be imputed by lewd men unto the Lord, and cast as
dirt upon his Holy Name and religion. If but a woman that professes religion
be an id^e huswife, or unquiet with her husband, the word of God will be
blasphenied says the Apostle, Titus 2.5. Nay, if but a servant that professes
religion, fail any way in his duty to his master, the name of God and his
doctrine will be blasphemed, says he, 1 Timothy 6.1. When Simeon and Levy had
dealt so lewdly against the Shechemites, Jacob tells them, Genes. 34 30. they
had made him to stink among the inhabitants of the land. Alas, he had no hand
in their sin; he did show his utmost detestation to it, so soon as he knew
of it; True, but the world is wont for the sin of one or two of Gods people
to open their mouths against all of their profession, yea, to loath and
abhor them all, and Gods holy religion it self for it. In which respect it
may be said of Gods own people, as our Savior speaks of the Scribes and
Pharisees, Matthew. 23.13. that by their foul and scandalous sins, they do
even shut up the kingdom of heaven against men, they do utterly alienate the
hearts of men from entering into the way that should bring them to heaven. And
this, this is that that above all other things, does make their sins out of
measure sinful. The sin of Elies sons was very great before the Lord (1 Samuel 2.17.) for men abhorred the offering of the Lord; they loathed the worship
and religion of God for their sin. And this was that that the Prophet laid so
heavily to David's charge, even after he had repented, 2 Samuel 12.14. By this
deed thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme. O
that is an heavy thing.

Lecture CXI. On Psalm 51.6. February 24. 1628.
IT follows now that we proceed unto the uses that this doctrine may serve us
unto. And they are to be referred all unto three heads principally. For 1. Some
of them have relation unto the fitnes and falls of other of Gods people, which
we see or hear of; 2. Some of them have relation unto the judgments of God
executed upon the Church and people of God; 3. Lastly, Some of them have
relat^on unto our own sins, who profess our selves to be the people of God
and in the state of grace.

Use 1.
For the first, The Doctrine we have heard teaches us, how we should judge
of, and be affected with the foul and scandalous sins that we see or hear
that the professors of the Gospel and servants of God do fall into. And
reprooveth three sorts of men that offend much this way.

Hear me (says David, Psalm. 38.16) lest they should rejoice over me; when my
foot flippeth, (and I catch a fall) they magnify themselves against me. 2. Yea
they rejoice not only in the sins that Gods people do indeed fall into, but
(out of the pleasure they take in it, and that they may not want matter of
rejoicing this way) they devise slanders against them and charge them with such
crimes as they were never guilty of. They cast iniquity upon me, says David,
Psalm. 55.3. and 35.11. They laid to my charge things that I knew not. 3. And
the most odious slanders that can be devised against such men, will go for
current every where, and be believed as Gospel. The words of a talebearer (of
a slanderer in this kind especially) are as flatterings (says Solomon, Pro.
18.8. as your old translation reads it; that is, please a man as much as it
does to hear himself flattered) and they go down to the bowels of the
belly; that is, they are received with such delight, that they are perfectly
digested. In these three points it appears, what pleasure lewd men take in
the falls and sins of Gods people. But o that thou would see thy sin and
danger that art of this humor.

Charity rejoices not in iniquity, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.6. And what
comfort can thou have either in life or death, what hope can thou have in
God, if thou be void of charity, if thou nourish malice in thy heart, specially
toward them thou art most bound to love? He that loves not his brother (says
the Apostle, 1 John 3.14.) abides in death, in the state of damnation. And
verse 10. In this are the children of God manifest, and the children of the
devil, whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God, neither he that
loves not his brother. And so he proceeds to show to the end of verse 15.
that the chief fruit of righteousness, that manifests a man to be Gods
child is the love of the brethren; and the chief sin that manifests a man
to be the child of the devil, is the hatred of the brethren.

But secondly (which is worse) this argues that thou rejoycest in the
dishonor I will also laugh at your calamity (says the Lord to such men, Pro.
1.26.) and mock when your fear comes. But let us leave them to God.

Let us that fear God learn, That it is our duty (out of these two respects)
to mourn when we see or hear of the falls of any of Gods people. Paul blames
the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 5.2. because they did not all mourn for the incest,
that one of that Church had fallen into. See how himself was affected with it,
2 Cor. 2.4. Out of much affliction and anguish of heart (says he) I wrote unto
you with many tears. Nay we should be grieved at the heart to hear the
slanders, to hear of the faults that Gods people, are even unjustly charged
with. Remember (Lord) the reproach of thy servants: (says the Psalmist, Psalm.
89.50, 51.) how I bear in my bosom the reproach of all the mighty people;
wherewith thine enemies have reproached o Lord, wherewith they have reproached
the footsteps of thine Anointed. Observe five points in the words. 1. The
mighty men, men of chief place and power in the country were wont to reproach
and slander, and cast odious aspersions upon Gods servants, Gods anointed ones;
nay all the mighty people did so, he was not counted worthy the name of a
Gentleman if he could not do this. Princes did sit and speak against me,
says David, Psalm. 119.23. 2. They that did so were Gods enemies, though they
pretended to dislike only a sort of precise fools that will needs be holier
then all their neighbors and not for their holiness neither but for their
hypocrisy, yet in very deed they that take such pleasure in reproaching Gods
servants, bear more spite to God, then they do to them, they are Gods
enemies. Ye shall be hated of all men, for my names sake, says our Savior,
Matthew. 10.22. The name of Christ, the religion of Christ, the spirit of Christ
that is in them, is the true cause of this hatred whatsoever else is pretended.
3. Remember Lord (says he) the reproach of thy servants. The Lord takes
notice of, he will remember, he will not forget the slanders and reproaches
that are cast upon his servants. 4. The Prophet did bear the reproaches of
Gods servants in his bosom, he took them to heart, he was much affected and
troubled with them. 5. Lastly, he desires the Lord to remember him for this;
he took comfort in this even before the Lord, that he could do so, and
doubted not, but God would take notice of it and reward him for it. And this is
the first sort that are to be reproved by this Doctrine.

The second are worse then these; And those are they that impute all the Tim.
6.1. and Tit. 2.5.) the name of God and his doctrine shall straightway be
blasphemed by these men. These are your professors, (will they cry) this is
their religion, there is none of them any better, they are all such kind of
persons, fie upon such a religion as this is. Three things there be that may
discover unto these men their sin, and their danger too.

First, If malice had not blinded thee thou would never impute, the faults
shine as lights in the world, as Paul says of the Philippians 2.15. 2. Admit
all professors were naught, yet is the religion that they profess pure and
undefiled; it allows of none of those faults that thou usest to blame them
for. For it has no other rule or ground but Gods Word, and that allows of no
sin. All the words of my mouth are in righteousness (says the Lord, Pro.
8.8.) there is nothing froward, or perverse in them. If any professor be
covetous, or malicious, or proud, or censorious, or unfaithful, or idle; blame
not his religion for it, it teaches him no such thing, it teaches him the
contrary, it teaches him as the Apostle says, Tit. 1.12. To deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, and righteously and godly
in this present world* No professor of the Gospel dares justify himself in
the least of his corruptions, much less in gross crimes; by the rules of his
religion, but will be ready to clear his religion and lay all the blame upon
himself as the Apostle does, Romans 7.12. The law is holy, and the commandment
is holy, and just, and good. And verse 14. We know that the law is spiritual:
but I am carnal sold under sin.

Gamaliel spoke to the Council, Acts 5.39. take heed wha^ thou do, for if
this way be of God, in hating it, in railing on it, thou will be found a
fighter against God. And as the Lord says to Sennacharih, Esa. 37.23. Whom
have thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom have thou lifted up thy
voice? Even against the holy one of Israel. In speaking thus against religion
thou set thy mouth against heaven, as the Prophet speaks, Psalm. 73.9 The
hatred and malice of thy heart is bent not against Gods poor servants so much,
as against the Lord himself. And so the Prophet tells David, 2 Samuel 12.14.
that those that would take occasion by his sin to blaspheme and speak
reproachfully of his religion, were the enemies of the Lord. No man will hate
religion and blaspheme it for the faults of such as profess it, but such as
are the Lords enemies, such as hate the Lord himself.

Who has been fierce against him, and has prospered; says Job 9.4. as your
old translation reads it. Did thou ever know any man prosper that was an
enemy to God, and to the power of life and godliness; to the religion that
himself professes, and holds to be the true religion of God? No no, be
thou assured thou art an enemy to him that will be too strong for thee to
encounter with. It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks, says our
Savior to Saul, Acts 9.5. though he did it ignorantly. Whosoever shall fall on
this stone shall be broken (says he, Mat. 21.44.) and on whomsoever it shall
fall, it will grind him to powder.

Ezekiel. 16.54. were a comfort to Sodom and Samaria. It quieteth the mind of
wicked men much* and comfort them against the accusations of their
conscience, for their foulest sins, that they have the examples of Gods own
people, that have done as bad things as they. For thus they are apt to reason
in this case, I may be Gods child and be saved though I be drunk now and then
for Noah was so, though I commit adultery for David did so; and were not these
Gods children for all that, were they not saved for all that? And the best we
see daily have their faults, and in many things we offend all, says the
Apostle, James 3.2. Thus they strengthen themselves in their wickedness* as
the Prophet speaks, Psalm 52.7. Three things I have to say to these men to
convince them of their sin, and discover to them their danger.

Thou wrestest the holy Scripture unto thine own destruction (as the Apostle
speaks, 2 Pet. 3.16.) that make such inferences from the falls of Gods
servants, that are recorded in the Word. Thou pervertest them to a quite
contrary end, unto that the Holy Ghost intended them for. First, The Holy Cor.
10, 11. may be said likewise of the falls of Gods people. All these things are
written for our admonition. This use the Holy Ghost teaches us to make of the
fall of Solomon, Neh. 13.26. Did not Solomon King of Israel sin by these
things? Yet among many nations was there no King like unto him, who was beloved
of his God, nevertheless even him did outlandish women cause to sin. As if
he should say, If Solomon were drawn from God by marrying with Idolaters, how
much more cause have you to fear apostasy if you do so? This is the use God
would have us to make of all the falls we see or hear Gods people have taken.
If such a man as Noah by taking too much wine made himself a beast, Genesis 9.21.
If such a man as David by giving himself to idleness, and neglect of his
calling, by giving liberty to his wanton eye and neglecting his watch, fell
into so shameful adultery, 2 Samuel 11.2. what cause have we that are so far
short of them in grace, to fear such or greater falls, if we give our selves
the like liberty? If such and such as I have known my self, (should every man
say) to be men of far more knowledge far more grace then ever I had, have
taken foul falls, what cause have I to look to my feet? And indeed there is
great force in these examples to make a man afraid to sin. If one should tell
a traveller of one or two that riding not long before him over such an heath,
or through such a lane were robbed, and had much a do to escape with their
lives, though they did ride much stronger and better appointed then he does; or
that such a one riding through such a foard had much a do to escape drowning
though he were better horst then he is; would not that traveller be afraid to
go that way? Would he not either turn back again, or go some other way
(though it were a great way about) rather then he would so far endanger
himself? This then is the first end God aimed at in making known to thee, the
falls of his Saints to make thee afraid to sin; and do thou pervert it to a
quite contrary end even to make thy self more bold to sin? Secondly, Esa.
43.25. that he will blot out their transgressions, and will not remember their
sins; and Ezekiel. 33.16. that none of their sins that they have committed
shall be mentioned. Yet has he seen it necessary, in this respect that many
foul crimes of sundry of his principal servants should be left upon record in
his Word, and so kept in everlasting remembrance. Yea the Lord has been so
careful of this, as he contenteth not himself to mention them once only, or
obiter (as we say) and by the way, but oftentimes and purposely that all that
read the Word, to the end of the world, might be sure to observe and remember
them. He would needs have David's foul sins recorded not only in 2 Samuel 11.
and 12. but here again in this Psalm. And in this Psalm he does not only
mention it again, but commends this Psalm to the chief Musician, to be
sung often in the Temple. How often are the abominable sins of Manasses mentioned
not only 2 King. 21. and 2 Chronicles. 33. in the story of his life, but long after
his death too, 2 King. 24.3. and Ier. ^5.4. And Peter's fall God would have to
be mentioned not by one or two, but by all the four Evangelists, which very
few of the most important passages of the story, are. And why has the Lord
done this? Surely because he saw it was necessary for poor humbled sinners
that it should be so; surely because he saw how apt his poor children would be
(partly through the corruption of their own heart, and partly through the
subtilty of Satan) when they had fallen into gross sins, to despair of
mercy, to think their sin is greater then can be pardoned, that there is no
hope of finding mercy with God if they should turn unto him and repent; that
there was never child of God, that sinned as they have done. For their sakes it
is, to keep them from despair, to encourage them to rise out of their sins,
and to turn to God by repentance, the Lord would needs have these foul sins
of his dearest servants recorded, who though they sinned as grossly as any
humbled sinner can possibly now do, yet upon their rising again by
repentance, and turning unto God, did find mercy with him. And that this was a
maine end God respected in this, the Apostle plainly tells us, 1 Timothy 1.16.
He fell so grievously and yet obtained mercy that God might make him a pattern
to all his poor servants, that should come after him: of his readiness to
receive the foulest sinners unto mercy, upon their unfeigned repentance. This
then is a second end God had in permitting his servants to fall, and in letting
thee to know of their falls; that thou when thou art fallen and humbled for thy
fall might be encouraged to rise again, and do thou pervert it to a quite
contrary end, even to embolden and encourage thy self to fall? These examples
which the Lord intended only for the help of the humbled sinner, as a cord to
pul^ him out of the water, thou that art a presumptuous sinner and have
therefore nothing to do with them, do let Satan use them, as a cord to pull
thee into the water, and to keep thee there to thine own perdition. And this
is the first thing I have to say unto these men.



David was deeply humbled for his sin as appears in the 8. verse of this
Psalm. He watered his bed with his tears, Psalm. 6* 6. Manasses humbled
himself greatly before the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 33.12. Peter wept bitterly, Matthew
2^.7^. If thou could do so, thou might take comfort in the examples of
their falls, but thou know, it is far otherwise with thee.

Noah was never drunk but once David turned not aside from any thing that God
commanded him (says the Holy Ghost, 1 King. 15.5 that is to say, not in any
gross and scandalous crime) all the days of his life, save only in the
matter of Vria the Hirtite. The like may be said of Peter and all the rest. And
therefore what comfort can the common drunkard and adulterer and blasphemer
take in their examples, who though he has fi^s of remorse for his si^s, yet
cannot leave them possibly.

I have said, that I would keep thy words, says David, Psalm 119.57. this
was his resolution, and the settled purpose of his heart. A wise m^n fears
(says Solomon* Pro. 14.16) and departs from evil; he purposes, not to
fall into sin. And therefore the Apostle calls the falls of Gods child an
over-taking in a fault, Gal. 6 1. when he falls into sin it is through the
malice and eager pursuit of his corrupt nature or of the devil whereby he is
suddenly taken and (as it were) circumvented and overcome contrary to his
purpose and resolutions. But (on the other side) thou never purposest or
resolvest to keep Gods commandments and to resist tentations; or if thou do,
yet thou have no care to perform thy vows and promises of obedience, thou
do slight and despise the ways thou should walk in, as Solomon speaks,
Pro. 19.16.

The third and last thing I have to say to these men is this. That admit thy
Noah's drunkenness is recorded and so is the fearful curse also that (by
occasion of that sin) fell upon his son Ham and all his posterity, Genesis
9.25. Lot^ incest is mentioned and so is the judgment also that followed it,
Genesis 19.37, 38. the cursed posterity that came of that sin were a scourge to
Gods people for many generations as you may see Psalm. 83.8. Solomon's fall is
mentioned and so is the judgment that fell on his posterity for it, 1 King.
11.31.33. I shall not need to speak of David, of Hezekiah, of Manasses, or of
Peter all whose sins are recorded indeed in the Word, but it is as well and
as carefully recorded how they smarted for them. And (to conclude) of every
sin of theirs I may say to thee as Abner spoke to Ioab in another case, 2 Samuel 2.26. Know thou not that it was bitterness in the latter end?

Lecture CXII. On Psalm 51.6. March 3. 1628.
THe second sort of uses that this Doctrine serves unto has relation unto the
judgments of God executed upon others specially upon his own Church and
people. Use 2.
The Doctrine which we have heard, teaches us how to judge and how to be
affected with the strange severity the Lord has showed for these sundry
years, and does yet show toward all the Churches almost upon earth, that
profess his Gospel. And it serves to reprove two great faults that we are
all too much inclined to in this case. The first is an over heavy and rigorous
censure we are apt to pass, upon the persons of such as we see the Lord
afflicts, in an extraordinary manner. The second is an over-light esteem of
the judgment it self, that God inflicteth upon any in an extraordinary
manner. For that we are not apt so to be affected with it, nor make that use of
it as we ought to do.

For the first, We are all apt to judge them greater sinners then other men,
Shimei saw the strange judgment that fell upon David how his own son sought
both his kingdom and life, he cries out, 2 Samuel 16.7, 8. Come out, thou
bloody man, thou man of Belial; the Lord has delivered thy kingdom into the
hand of Absalom thy son, and behold thou art taken in thy mischief, because
thou art a bloody man. And this he complains was the common cry of all his
enemies, Psalm. 71.11. when they saw him in any great affliction they were wont
to say, God has forsaken him, persecute and take him, for there is none to
dliver him. Thus the Pharisees argued against the poor man, John 9 34. that he
was altogether borne in sins (that is, a greater sinner even by nature, then
any other) because he was borne blind. And the Barbarians, Acts 28.4. when they
saw the Viper hang on Paul's hand concluded no doubt this man is a murderer. And
it is no marvel though wicked men judge thus of the poor members of Christ,
whom God is pleased in any strange manner to humble, either by inward or
outward afflictions; for thus the Prophet Esaias says, Esa. 53.12. our Savior
himself was numbered with the transgressors; was accounted a most wicked man;
and that by reason of the strange afflictions he endured above others. We
esteemed him (says the Prophet, Esa 53.4. our whole nation esteemed him)
stricken, smi^ten of God, and afflicted. They esteemed him to be hated and
abhorred of God, for his own iniquities, when they saw the extreme misery
that he did endure. But this is not the censure and verdict of natural and
wicked men only; Gods own children are too apt also to judge so. The Disciples
themselves when they saw the man that was borne blind say unto Christ, Ioh.
9.3. Master who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was borne blind?
Either himself or his parents they were persuaded were guilty of some
extraordinary sin, or else such a judgment sure would never have befallen
him. And Jobs three friends (though they were not holy men only, but wise and
learned men too, yet) had they all too much of this humor in them; They judged
him to have been a most lewd and vile man. Is not thy wickedness great, (says
Eliphaz to him, Job 22.5.) and thine iniquities infinite? Yea though they
(being his inward and special friends as they are called, Job 2.11.) had been
(doubtless) witnesses of the piety and integrity he had showed in his whole
conversation; yet now they thought all that had been but in hypocrisy. And so
Eliphaz twitteth him with it, Job 4.6. Is not this thy fear, thy confidence,
the uprightness of thy ways, and thy hope? As if he should say, We may see
now what all that goodness was thou made such a show of. And mark in the
next verse, Job 4* 7. the premises whereupon they infer this conclusion
against him. Remember I pray thee (says Eliphaz) who ever perished being
innocent? or where were the righteous cut off? He says not who ever was
afflicted being innocent, but who ever perished and was cut off? Who ever died
so miserably, who ever was so strangely plagued of God, as thou art, if he had
any goodness in him in truth, if he were not notoriously wicked? And I nothing
doubt but this sentence has been passed by many against Gods poor Churches
in Germany and Rochel. The strange hand of God that has been upon them all
this while, that we have enjoyed such peace and plenty; has made us apt to
think that they have been greater sinners then we; that the Lord loves and
likes much better of us then he did of them, or else he would not have kept us
so free from all the miseries that have been upon them. So that the examples of
Gods severity we have seen upon them which should have humbled us and made us
afraid, have had a quite contrary effect in us, they have made us more secure,
they have puffed us up, and made us think better of our selves then we did
before.

Quest.
You will ask me then, Is it unlawful for us to take notice of the sins of men
in the judgment we see God executes upon them? May we give no judgments of
the sins of men, by the judgments of God that we see upon them, as Physicians
do by seeing the Urine, and feeling the pulse of their patients? May we not
say sometimes, that for these and these sins, God has thus and thus plagued
them?

My answer to this question, must consist of two parts. For I will show you, 1.
How far forth this is lawful to be done. 2. How far forth it is unlawful.

It is lawful for us (first) to judge every man to be a sinner whom we see to
be in any affliction. Answ. 1.
For we may be sure God afflicts not any, who has not by his sins deserved
it; sin is the first cause of all judgments, And we may safely say with the
Church, Lamenta. 3.39. Man suffers for his sin. A man may safely conclude
with the Apostle, Rom, 5.14. that infants are sinners, because they do dye, and
are (besides) subject to so many pains and miseries. And of Job himself, a
man may be bold to say he was a sinner, because he was so grievously
afflicted; yea of him (as good a man as he was, and consequently of the holiest
man that lives upon earth) we may safely say as Zophar said to him, Job 11.6.
(how extreme soever their afflictions be) know thou that God exacteth less of
thee, then thine iniquity deserves. The holiest man that is, has by his sins
deserved much more affliction and misery, then he does endure. Secondly. Where
the gross sins of any have bin notorious, and manifest unto us, before ever we
saw Gods judgments upon them (such as the Apostle speaks of, 1 Timothy 5.24.
Some men's sins are open beforehand, going before unto judgment) specially
such sins as God has threatened to punish with such judgments. In this case,
it is not unlawful for us to judge, surely for these and these sins, God has
thus and thus plagued them. Thus David says, Psalm 52.6, 7. that when the
righteous should see the strange judgments of God that should fall upon Doeg
and his posterity, they should say, Lo^, this is the man that made not God his
strength; but trusted in the abundance of his riches, and strengthened himself
in his wickedness. As if they should say, He thought that so long as he was in
such place and authority, and favor with Saul, he need not care what he did
against David, or against the Lords Priests, but see now the end of this
persecuting wretch. The judgment of God that followed him, kept his sin in
their remembrance, and made them often to talk of it. And doubtless, so should
the judgments of God, that we see upon such as have bin notoriously wicked,
for whoredom, for oppression, for hatred of religion, the judgments (I say)
that we see upon them and their families, should keep their sins in our
remembrance, and cause us often to think and speak of them. Nay, for as much as
those poor Churches of Christ in the Palatinate, and Germany, and Rochel, have
bin notoriously known, to offend generally in the ordinary profanation of the
Sabbath; the sin that God says was a chief cause of the Jews captivity,
Ezekiel 20.13. In the contempt of the ministry, of whom the Lord has said,
Deuteronomy. 12.19. Take heed to thy self, that thou forsake not the Levite, as long
as thou live upon the earth. Forasmuch as I say, they have bin notoriously
known to offend generally this way (besides the looseness of their lives in
drunkenness, and lasciviousness, professing outwardly religion, having a
form of godliness (as the Apostle spreaketh, 1 Timothy 3.5.) but denying the
power thereof) it is not unlawful for us to impute all this marvailous
severity of God toward them unto these their sins.

But then I answer secondly, Answ. 2.
that there be two ways whereby we may offend greatly in this case.

First. When only for the afflictions that they endure, and the judgments Jobs
case. This I say is a great sin. For it is evident by the scripture, that the
holiest of all Gods servants have bin most sharply afflicted. Such, as of whom
the world was not worthy (as the Apostle speaks, Hebr. 11 37, 38.) were
stoned, and sawne asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword, they
wandered about in sheepskins, and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, and
tormented. And God does not always in afflicting his children, correct them
for sin, but he does it sometimes only to try their faith and patience; and to
make them examples of faith and patience unto others. You are in heaviness
(says the Apostle, 1 Peter 1.6, 7.) through manifold temptations; that the
trial of your faith being much more precious then gold that perishes, though
it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise, and honor, and glory, at
the appearing of Jesus Christ. And sometimes he does it for other causes, which
he keeps secret unto himself, and which the wisest, and holiest men under
heaven have not been able to conceive; yea this makes much for his glory that
he does so, as we read, Prove. 25.2. That the Lord is righteous in all his
ways, and holy in all his works, every faithful man has ever been ready to
acknowledge, Psalm 145.17. Jeremy 12.1. But the wisest and holiest of Gods
servants have often been astonished at the beholding of his judgments, and
unable to discern his meaning in them; but have been constrained in a holy
reverence, and admiration, to cry out, as Esa. 45.15. Verily thou art a God
that hidest thy self. And Romans 11.33. O the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom, and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out! As if he had said, His judgments are so deep and
unsearchable, that no man is able to found them, to find out the ground and
reason of them.

Ely, that he should with a fall break his neck, and dye, 1 Samuel 4.18. and
(doubtless) his sin in bearing too much with his children in their profanesse,
was the cause of it; yet he were a madman that would doubt whether he were a
good man, and dyed in Gods favor for all that; or that would think he was a
greater sinner then any other in Israel, because of that. So it was a strange
judgment that befell the young Prophet, 1 Kings 13 24. and certainly his sin
was the cause of it. And yet the old Prophet (by his mourning for him, and
charging his sons verse ^9 -- 31. that when he dyed, they should bury him in
his grave) declared that he was undoubtedly assured that he was Gods dear
child, and dyed in his favor for all that. O take heed therefore of judging of
those poor Churches that have so strangely perished, or of any other persons
to have been hypocrites, and void of true grace; or to have bin greater
sinners, either then our selves, because of the miseries that they have
endured. Take heed of despising, or thinking the worse of any for their
afflictions and miseries. This is a corruption too strong in all men by nature,
Prove. 14.20. and 19.17. Eccles. 9.15, 16. This is the first sin that is taxed
and reproved by the Doctrine that we have heard.

No man (says the holy Ghost. Eccl. 9.1.) knows either love or hatred, by
all that is before him; that is, by any outward thing that does befall men, as
he expresses himself, verse 2. Suppose ye (says our Savior, Luke 13.2, 3.
and to show the certainty and necessity of this truth, he repeateth it again,
and gives another instance of it, verse 4, ^.) Suppose ye that those
Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans, because they endured such
things? They were murdered by Pilate, even while they were sacrificing, and
serving God (a strange judgment) and yet hear what Christ says, I tell you
Nay. As if he should say, you may not judge so, you sin if you judge them the
worst men, upon whom Gods hand lights most heavily in this kind. Secondly.
Psalm. 41.1 -- 3. Blessed is the man that judges wisely of the poor. And he
mentions six special blessings, wherewith God will bless that man. The
sum of all is this, that it is a singular grace of God, and shall never go
unrewarded, to be able to judge wisely of them that are most afflicted, to be
so far from despising, or thinking the worse of any for his afflicted estate,
as that we can pity and love him the more, esteem the better of him, and show
the more respect unto him even for this. Certainly, it is our duty so to do;
not the magistrates duty only (whose special care must be to do so, as we
see, Psalm 82 3, 4.) but every Christian man's also, as is plain by many places
of scripture, Job 6.14. Prove. 29 7. and 31.9, And in this we shall resemble our
heavenly father, He does not (...) nor abhor the affliction of the
afflicted, nor hide his face from him, as David speaks, Psalm. 22.^4. no more
ought we to do, nay no more will we do, if we be his children indeed. And
consequently it must needs be a great sin in any man, and such as God will
surely punish, to judge rashly and uncharitably of such persons. Thirdly. See
Jobs three friends, for the censure they passed upon him. My wrath is kindled
against th^e (says the Lord to Eliphaz. Job 42.7, 8.) and against thy two
friends, for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant
Job has, therefore go and offer up for your selves a burnt offering, and my
servant Job shall pray for you, lest I deal with you after your folly. Observe
in the words two things. 1. That God was highly offended with, and threatens
to take vengeance on these three good holy men, even for judging so hardly of
Job, by reason of his afflictions, though they were strange and wonderful,
greater then ever we read any other mere man did endure. 2. That the Lord
charge them, they had not spoken of him, the thing that was right. Why? what
did they speak against God? All that they spoke was for God, for the clearing
of his justice, and out of zeal to his glory, and so Job charge them, 13.7.
Will ye speak wickedly for God? and talk deceitfully for him? All the bitter
censures they passed against Job, was out of their zeal to God. But yet the
Lord says, that misinterpreting his judgments, and thinking he always hated
them most, whom he does most afflict they spoke against him, and dishonored
him.

The second sin that we are by this Doctrine to be reproved for, in this case,
is Esa. 57.1. The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart. Observe
two things in the Prophets phrase. 1. The people of God are not only taken
away, but they perish* ( Abad, is the word he uses, even the very same that
Eliphaz uses, Job 4.7.) they are cut off by most violent kinds of death, by
most strange and extraordinay judgments, and yet no man lays it to heart. 2.
He says not, the righteous have perished, but in the present tense, he
perishes still, still the enemy prevails against Gods people. The Lord has
stretched forth his hand against them, and has smitten them (as the Prophet
speaks, Esa. 5.25.) and the hills did tremble, and their carcasses were torn
in the midst of the streets (great and unspeakable miseries have for a long
time befallen them) and for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand
is stretched out still, the righteous perishes still, and yet no man lays it
to heart. The heinousness and danger of our sin in this our senslesnesse, will
the better appear by discovering to us four duties that the Lord looks for
at our hands in this case.

Philistines, and had the Ark of God with them in the camp, it is said, 1 Samuel
4.14. that old Ely sat upon a seat by the way side, watching, and harkening how
Gods people sped; and the reason is given. For his heart trembled for the Ark of God; and therefore he sat in that place, watching, that he might hear with
the first, what became of it. So when there came one to David out of the camp
of Israel, 2 Samuel 1.3.5. see how inquisitive David was to know how it fared
with the Lords host. How went the matter? (says he) I pray thee tell me? And
when he had told him that Saul and Jonathan was slain, see how desirous he was
to know the certainty of it. How know thou (says he) that Saul and Jonathan
be dead? The same spirit you shall see in Nehemiah 1.2. so soon as Hanani was
come to him, the first question he asked, was concerning the state of the
people of God that were at Jerusalem. And yet was he then in the palace, as it
is said verse 1. a Courtier, in great place and favor with a mighty King. And
yet Moses did more then this, for when he was in the height of his honor and
greatness in Pharaohs court, he did not content himself to inquire, but it is
said, Exodus 2.11. that he went out unto his brethren, and looked on their
burdens, that he might be the more affected with their estate. And though we
cannot do as Moses did, we cannot go out unto our brethren, and behold with
our own eyes their miseries, as he did. Yet may all these examples teach us
that it is our duty by the best means we can to inform our selves of the
estate of the Church; and certainly if our hearts trembled for the Ark of God,
if we had any care of the cause of religion, we could not choose but do so.
Nay we would look on their burdens, think oftener and more seriously of their
miseries then we do. Come and see the works of God (says the Psalmist.
Psalm 66.5) he is terrible in his doings toward the children of men. But alas
we do not so, but we are like to those the Prophet complains of, Esa. 5.12.
The Harp, and the viole, the Tabret, and the Pipe, and wine are in our feasts,
but we regard not the work of the Lord (in this his mavelous severity
toward his people) neither do we consider the operation of his hands. While
we enjoy our delights in all fullness, we care not a rush what becomes of
the Church of God. But mark how we provoke God against us by our profane
stupidity. Because they regard not the works of the Lord (says David, Psalm
28.5.) nor the operation of his hands, he shall destroy them, and not build
them up. We cannot take a readier way for the hastening of our own ruin, then
to be thus careless, and senseless of the judgments of God upon his people.

Lecture CXIII. On Psalm 51.6. March 17. 1628.
Job took great comfort in his greatest affliction, in this that he had done
so. Did not I weep (says he, Job. 30.25.) for him that was in trouble? Was
not my soul grieved for the poor? And if we must be thus affected with the
miseries of all men, then much more with the miseries of Gods people.

Three sorts of proofs I will give you for this. 1. Examples. 2. A precept.

First. When the holy servants of God did but foresee by the spirit of
prophecy,

The first is of Elisha, of whom we read, 2 Kings. 8.11, 12. that when he
Haza^l, the man of God wept. And when he asked him why he did so; Because I
know (says he) the evil that thou will do unto the children of Israel, their
strong holds will thou set on fire, and their young men will thou slay with the
sword, and wilt dash their children, and rip up their women with child. And
this was certainly no more, nor so much neither, as the bloody Papists have
done to many of Gods people where they have come.

The second example is of the Prophet Esaias. I will weep bitterly (says he,
Esaias 22.4, 5,) labor not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the
daughter of my people. Why? There was no such spoil made of Gods people in all
his time, in the days of Vzzia, Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezechia, in whose times he
prophesied, as you may see, Esa. 1.1. No, but he did foresee by the spirit of
prophecy, a day of trouble, and of treading down (as he says verse 5.) and
of perplexity by the Lord God of hoasts, in the valley of vision, breaking
down the walls, a day of crying in the mountains. The thinking upon the
miseries that the valley of vision, the true Church of God should endure from
the Caldeans (which was to be above an hundred years after his own death) and
considering that this was to be done by the Lord God of hosts, it was to be
the Lords doing, and a fruit of his wrath, I say, the consideration of this,
made the holy man to weep bitterly, and refuse to be comforted.

The third example is of Daniel, Dan. 8. who when he did foresee the miseries
Antiochus Epiphanes (which was not to be before above two hundred years after
his own death) how Antiochus should take away the daily sacrifice, verse 11,
12. and by reason of the transgression of Gods people, should cast down the
truth to the ground; how both the sanctuary of God and the host (and armies of
Gods people) should be given unto him, to be trodden under foot, as it is verse
13. how he should destroy wonderfully the holy people, and prosper in it, as
it is verse 24. When (I say) he did by the spirit of prophecy foresee these
miseries that should befall Gods people, it is said verse 27 that he even
fainted and was sick of grief for it certain days. What would these holy
men have done, how would they have mourned, if they had lived in the times
wherein all this had been fulfilled, which they did prophecy and foretell?
If all these evils had fallen upon the Church in their days, as they have
done in ours? Alas, we have seen a day, a long day of trouble, and of treading
down, and of perplexity, by the Lord God of hosts in the valley of vision. We
have seen, and known the daily sacrifice (the true worship of God) taken away
from many Churches. We have seen the truth of God cast down to the ground in
many places, and abominable heresies, and false doctrine set up in the room of
it. We have seen and known both the sanctuaries of God, and the hosts, and
armies of his people given of God to the enemy to be trodden under foot, and
trampled upon. We have seen the days, wherein the proud enemy has destroyed,
and made havocke of the holy people wonderfully, and prospered in it. Certainly
those holy men that were so affected with the evils they did foresee, would
befall the people of God, would have been much more grieved for them, if they
had fallen out in their days. And it is therefore promised as a great favor
and mercy to Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.28. that he should be gathered to his grave in
peace, neither should his eyes see all the evil, that God would bring upon
Judah and Jerusalem. The Lord knew well how much it would have affected good
Iosiahs heart, if he should have lived to see (though he had been out of the
gunshot himself) all the evils and miseries that Gods people did endure, in
the captivity of Babylon.



Gibeah mentioned, 1 Samuel 11.2.4. when tidings was brought them of the misery
of one poor city ( Iabesh Gilead) how Nahash the Ammonite that besieged them,
would admit of no covenant of peace with them, but upon this condition that he
might thrust out all their right eyes and lay it for a reproach upon all
Israel; (And we know that the Papists have to the poor Christians in the
Palatinate and other places, offered far worse and more reproachful
articles, and conditions of peace then this was) When this tidings I say was
told them of Gibeah it is said verse 4 that as the people lift up their voices,
and wept.

Sam. 1.11, 12. When David heard how the Philistines had prevailed and what an
overthrow they had given unto Gods people (As alas we have heard of a great
many overthrowes that within these few years Gods people have received from as
bad people, as ever the Philistines were) it is said there that David and all
the men that were with him (all his soldiers, though many of them hated Saul
mortally and one would have thought that the cutting off of that wretched man,
in that battle should have mitigated much their sorrow, for the loss of all
the rest) yet it is said there that David and all the men that were with him
rent their clothes, and they mourned and wept and fasted for it.

Nehemiah when Hanani and the rest had told him, Neh. 1.3. that the remnant
that were left of the captivity in the province of Iudaea were in great
affliction and reproach, and that the walls of Jerusalem were broken down, and
the gates thereof were burnt with fire (no worse news then we have often heard
of late of many of the Churches of Christ) When I heard these words, (says he,
verse 4.) I sat down, and wept, and mourned certain days.

Ps. 137. who as they were Church Officers ordained of God for the service of
the Temple, so did they receive such gifts from God for the discharge of that
function, as that they did excel in skill all the musicians that have been in
the world. Of them we read five remarkable things in that Psalm. 1. Verse 1.
By the rivers of Babylon they sat down and wept, when they remembered Zion. The
pleasantness of the country could not make them forget Zion, nor keep them
from grief, nor from weeping when they remembered Zion. 2. Verse 2. They hanged
up their harps. As if the Psalmist had said, As great as their skill was, they
had no mind of music, all that while that they remembered Zion and the miseries
she was in. 3. Verse 3, 4. Though they that carried them captives, and were now
their masters that had power and authority over them (and had heard doubtless
of their excellent skill that way) required mirth of them, were earnest with
them to use their skill in singing and playing upon their instruments to make
them and themselves merry, yet could they not get them to sing so much as one
of the songs of Zion. 4. Verse 5, 6. The reason that they give for this, If I
forget thee o Jerusalem, if I do not remember thee. Mark 1 the change of the
number, they had spoken all the while before in the plural number, and
expressed so the joint affection of them all in this case, now they speak in
the singular number, every man in his own person so say I, and so say I. 2
Mark the reason why they would not obey their masters in this, alas (says
every one) if I should now give my self to mirth and music, it would be an
evident sign I remembered not what case Jerusalem is in, I had quite forgotten
the miseries of Gods Church. 5. Lastly, Observe in the same verses 4. and 5.
the imprecation they make against themselves whereby as by an oath and vow they
bind themselves from mirth and jollity during the time of Ierusalems misery, If
I forget thee o Jerusalem, if I do not remember thee. As if they had said one
by one. If any thing make me forget Jerusalem and her distresses, nay if (as
well as I love mirth and music, specially this, or this kind of mirth or
recreation and delight, as ill as I could live without it) yet if I cannot be
content to abridge my self of it, for Ierusalems sake, let some strange curse
of God, fall upon me. And these are certainly two strange judgments that they
wish against themselves in this their imprecation. 1. Let my right hand forget
her cunning. 2. Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth. For a Minister
whom God has endued with excellent gifts for his service, to have his gifts
blasted and taken from him, to be stricken dumb and loose the use of his
tongue as Zachary did for a time, these are certainly great and strange
judgments. In all these examples we see (beloved) how the holy servants of
God, have been affected with the afflictions of Joseph, and how they have
mourned for them. And I doubt not also but you see that we all ought to be so
affected likewise; and that we could not choose but be so, in some measure, if
the same spirit were in us, that was in them.

And that you may see, they did in this no work of supererogation, I will
Nadab and Abihu; though the cause why he did it, the sin whereby he was
provoked to it, was apparent and notorious to all the people; yet see what a
commandment is given concerning this, Levit. 10.6. Let your brethren, the
whole house of Israel, bewail the burning which the Lord has kindled. That
fire was quenched and ended in the death of those two men. But the Lord has
now kindled a burning which has lasted many years and burns still
outragiously, and has consumed not two of Gods servants only, but many whole
Churches of Christ and ought not then the whole house of Israel, all Gods
people much more to bewail such a burning as this which the Lord has kindled?

But let us see the reason why this ought to be; which is the third proof of

For first this is a sign that they are true and living members of Christ's
mystical body. If one member suffer (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.26) all the
members; he means, if they be true and living members, for a wooden leg, or
an artificial eye cannot. Say not thou art a member of the Church of England,
thou art not a member of the Church of France, or of Germany, or of Bohemiah;
for all the Churches of the world that profess the same faith and religion,
are but one body. There is one body, and on^ spirit, says the Apostle, Ephesians.
4.4. It is not the distance of place, nor the difference of language that can
fever us. There is neither Jew, nor Greek, bond nor free (says he, Gal 3.28.)
but we are all one in Christ Jesus. I believe one Catholic and Apostolic
Church, says the Nicene creed. The true Catholic Church is but one body. If
thou be not a member of the same body, that all those afflicted Churches are,
certainly thou art no living member of any true Church. And how can thou be
a member of the same body with them, if thou have no fellow-feeling of their
miseries?

Thus says the Lord ( Ier. 31.16. to his people that mourned for the captivity
and affliction of his Church) refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes
from tears (mourn not immoderatly, as they that are without hope) for thy
work shall be rewarded, says the Lord; he repeateth this twice in one verse,
for the undoubted certainty of it, Certainly God will not fail to reward
this, as a singular good work when he sees any of his people mourn in
secret, for the miseries of his Church I will restore comforts (many comforts
abundance of comfort) to him (says the Lord again, Esa. 57.18) and to his
mourners. They that have been partakers with the Church in her sufferings, and
have mourned for her shall be partakers also with her in her comforts, and
none but they.

Applic.
Now to make some application of this to our selves, Alas how few are there of
us, to whom these comforts do belong. We hear and talk of the miseries and
troubles of the Churches, as of a matter that concerns not us at all. We read
the Currantoes and listen after this as we do after other news, but are no
more affected with it, then Merchants use to be when they hear of the casting
away of a ship, that themselves have no share in. No man abateth ought of any
of his delights for this matter; but we are even as senseless in this case, as
if we were rather mere professed enemies to the Churches, then their friends,
and members of the same body with them. The King and Haman (says the holy
story, Est. 3.15.) sat down to drink when the whole city Shu^shan was
perplexed. We drink, and quaffe, we flaunt it out in all kind of bravery, we
run into all excess of riot, nevertheless for this, that the whole city of
Shushan is perplexed, that all the Churches of Christ are in so extreme
distress. Our long peace and plenty, the delights and pleasures of all sorts
that we glut our selves withal, make us void of all compassion of the miseries
of our brethren; Like unto those of whom we read, Amos 6.6. They drink wine in
bowls and anoint themselves with the chief ointments, and they are not
grieved for the afflictions of Joseph. But mark what follows in the next
words, verse 7, 8. and tremble at it. Therefore now shall they go captive with
the first that go captive, the Lord has sworn by himself says the Lord the
God of hosts, I abhor the excellency of Jacob, and hate his palaces,
therefore will I deliver up the city with all that is therein; therefore even
because they grieve not, nor are affected with the afflictions of Joseph,
therefore will I thus plague them. In applying of this place to us I cannot say
(as the old translation without any warrant from the original reads it) that
no man is sorry for the affliction of Joseph. For I nothing doubt but there are
in this land many, and even among you some, that have been wont sometimes in
secret to think of, and grieve for the afflictions of Joseph; whose eyes (with
the Prophet, Ier 13.17.) have sometimes in secret wept sore, and run down with
tears, because the Lords flock, is carried away captive; that have sometimes
abridged themselves of their lawful delights, even for this cause. And blessed
be God that has put it into the heart of the King, to proclaim a public and
general fast to be kept on friday next for this cause principally (as it has
pleased his Majesty to express himself in his royal Proclamation) that we
might altogether profess our sorrow and humiliation for the deplorable
condition, of all the Churches of Christ. But alas there be few or none in
comparison, that are at all affected with this matter. And if we shall make a
show of keeping a fast for them, and be not at all humbled for them, nor
touched in heart with a fellow-feeling and grief for their miseries, we shall
but play the part of hypocrites, and be in danger to do them no good at all,
and our selves much hurt by our fast; No temper and disposition of the soul,
does so well beseem us in a fast, as sorrow and humiliation. Sorrow I say, 1.
For our own sins. 2. For the sins of our own land. 3. For the judgments of God
present, and imminent upon our selves. 4. For the Churches of Christ, whose
case we are to commend to God in our prayers. Remember the fearful sentence
of God against that man that shall keep a fast, without this sorrow and
humiliation of soul, Levit. 23.29. Whatsoever soul it be that shall not be
afflicted that same day, he shall be cut off from among his people. Gods curse
will be upon him. And to keep you from this curse, to help both my self and
you to this humiliation of soul upon the day of our fast, I have thus enlarged
my meditations in this point. In the other two that remain I must be the
briefer.

Thirdly. We ought in such times as these are, not only to inform our selves
Yea, that have escaped the sword (says the Lord, Ier. 51.50. as blessed be God
we have hitherto done) stand not still (be not idle, but do what you can)
remember the Lord afar off, and let Jerusalem come into your mind. Though we
be a great way from them, yet may we not forget them, but remember them, and
put the Lord in mind of them, in our prayers continually. Ye that are the
Lords remembrancers (says the Prophet Esaias 62.6, 7. For so I read it, and so
it is in the margin of your Bibles) keep not silence, and give him no rest,
till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. He has
for many years, made Jerusalem his poor Churches a reproach, and an hissing
to the whole world; we that are his remembrancers, and solicitors (as all the
faithful, all that have the spirit of prayer are) should (like the importunate
widow in the Gospel) give him no rest, till he have established and settled
his poor Churches in peace, and given them beauty and glory again, even upon
earth, and in the sight of their enemies. Thus did Nehemiah (though a great
man) testify his compassion of the Churches miseries. Nehemiah 1.4. he sat
down and wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted, and prayed for them.
And even by this means he relieved them greatly, as appeared by the success
he had in the next chapter, in his suit he made unto the King for them. And
certainly so might we even the poorest and meanest of us all, help our poor
brethren much this way if we could do this for them, in that manner as we
ought to do it. Oh let it be our care so to prepare our selves to the fast, to
pray so for our brethren, as we may do them good by our prayers, and prevail
with God for them. When I cry unto thee, then shall mine enemies turn back,
(says David, Psalm 56.9.) this I know (says he) for God is for me. Oh let us
labor so to cry unto God, as we may give the enemy a foil and overthrow. When
Moses held up his hand, Israel prevailed ( Exodus 17.11.) when Moses let down
his hand, Amalek prevailed. Certainly the heaviness of our hearts, and hands
this way, has bin a chief cause why Israel has had so many foiles, why
Amalek has prevailed so much as he has done.

Fourthly and lastly. The example of the Lords so strange severity toward all
other Churches, should make us fear the like toward our selves. When Korah
and his company swallowed up ( Numb. 16.34.) cried, and were afraid that the
earth would swallow them up also. The righteous shall see and fear (says
David, Psalm. 52.6.) when they see Gods strange judgment upon Doeg. But these
strange judgments of God upon his own people, give us much more just cause to
fear our selves.

Observe I pray you these just causes we have to fear our selves, and our own
estate.

Ezekiel. 21.4, 5. My sword shall go forth of his sheath against all flesh
(against all Israel) from the South to the North; that all flesh may know,
that I have drawn forth my sword out of his sheath; it shall not return any
more, till it have gone through all Israel.

Go ye now (says the Lord, Jeremy 7.12.) unto my place which was in Shiloh,
where I set my name at the first, and see what I did unto it, for the
wi^kednesse of my people Israel. As if the Lord should say to us all, Go and
see what I have done to my Churches in Bohemia, Germany, and France, where I
set my name at the first, and that were in Christ before you.

Josiah did, 2 Chronicles. 34.27, 28. we should be safe enough as Josiah was. But
our general senslesnesse in such times as these are, is a most dangerous sign
of some fearful ruin determined against us. It was of the Lord (says the
holy Ghost of the Canaanites, Josh. 11.20) to harden their hearts, that he
might destroy them utterly. And remember what I told you even now out of Amos.
6.6, 7. They were not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph; therefore now
shall they go captive, with the first that go captive.

Lecture CXIIII. On Psalm 51.6. Mar. 31. 1629.
Use 3.
IT follows that we proceed to the third and last use of the Doctrine, which
serves to teach us how to judge of, and to be affected with our own sins,
that profess our selves to be the people of God, and in the estate of grace.
And this is an use of as great, if not of greater importance and necessity,
then either of the former were. In the two former, we were taught how to be
affected with the state and condition of other men; in this we are to be
taught, how to be affected with our own doings. And as it is an use of great
necessity at all times, so never of greater then at such a time as this is; And
that in these two respects. First. Because we all know, that we have cause
daily to expect an evil day, a day of great trial and affliction, wherein it
stands us upon, to have all our evidences in a readiness, and to take to our
selves the whole armor of God, that we may be able to stand in it, as the
Apostle speaks, Ephesians 6.13. And Secondly. Because it is a time wherein
all of us by the custom of our Church, are to renew our covenant with God at
his holy table; and no Doctrine we can hear, is more fit and effectual to
prepare as thereunto, then this that teaches us how to be affected with our
own sins. And I am now to direct my speech, not to such of you as have only a
form of godliness, but deny the power thereof, (such as I fear the greatest
number of you are, to whom my brother spoke worthily the last day out of 2
Timothy 3.5.) which will needs have a form of godliness, they will be
Christians, and have as good a part in Christ and his merits as the best, they
will be Protestants, they will profess a love to the word they would not for
any thing be kept from the Sacrament, at this time especially; But that Christ,
or his word, or the rules of religion, which they profess, should have any
commanding power, to restrain them from any sin they have a mind to, be it
never so gross, from swearing, from drinking, from filthiness, or any other
sin, that they deny, that they scorn as an intolerable slavery and bondage,
and cry out of it, as Psalm 2.3. Let us break their hands asunder, and cast
away their cords from us. To these men I say, I have nothing to say at this
time, but with them to think well of that which my brother spoke the last day
touching their estate. But to you (beloved) I am to direct my speech at this
time, that have more then a form of godliness, that have felt the life and
power of it in your own hearts, to every one of you, that can say with David
here unto the Lord out of the feeling and experience of his own soul. In the
hidden part thou have made m^e to know wisdom. To every one that is such, I
have two words of exhortation to speak from the Doctrine that you have heard.
1. Be thou (above all men) most afraid to fall into any sin for the time to
come. 2. Be thou (above all men) most humbled for the sins that (since thou
were in this estate) thou have fallen into.

For the first. No man has so great cause to be afraid to sin, as the O fear
the Lord, ye his Saints, says David, Psalm 34.9. As if he had said, Though
you be his Saints, in the state of grace, and in his favor, yea, because ye
are his Saints, in his favor, and in the state of grace, therefore you must
fear him; none have more cause to fear him then ye. But to speak distinctly
of this point, I will show you 1. How far forth this fear of sinning must
extend. 2. Reasons why the regenerate, the child of God has more cause to
fear sin, then any other man.

For the first. The extent of this fear is to be observed. 1. In the object

For the first of these (for the help of your understanding and memory) you

First. The child of God has cause to be afraid of falling into gross and
Joseph was, when he was strongly tempted to adultery, and might have committed
it most secretly, and securely, yet he durst not do it. How can I do this
great wickedness (says he, Genesis 39.^) and sin against God? And David when
he was as strongly tempted to take revenge of his mortal enemy, and had such
opportunity also, as flesh and blood would never have let slip (insomuch as
Saul himself wondered at it, 1. Samuel 24 18, 19.) yet he durst not do it.
And why durst he not do it? Was it out of baseness of mind, because he was a
coward? No, no, he was as valiant a man, as ever drew sword. Why then durst he
not do it? Surely he durst not sin, nor do that that would so offend God.
Who can stretch forth his hand (or offer to do such a thing, says he, 1 Samuel
26 9.) against the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? These were gross sins
you will say, and he can be no better then an hypocrite, that is not afraid to
do such things.

Daniel was afraid of the Kings meat. Dan. 1.8. Because it was such as God in
the ceremonial law had forbidden, he knew it would have defiled his conscience.

Nay thirdly. If thou be Gods child, be thou afraid to do any thing that thou
He that doubts, is damned if he eat, says the Apostle. Romans 14.23.

Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart (says the Lord, Deuteronomy.
15.9.) saying, the seventh year, the year of release is at hand.

Serve the Lord with fear, says David. Ps. 2.11.

Work out your own salvation (says the Apostle, Phil. 2.12.) with fear and
trembling. As if he should say, If the work go not forward, if it be not
forwarder then it was many years since, you have cause of fear and trembling,
even for that.

Dare any of you having a matter against another (says the Apostle, 1 Cor.
6.1.) go to law before the unjust, and not before the Saints? Yea why not I
pray you, might some of them have said? What sin, what unlawfulnes is there in
that? Have thou not taught us, Romans 13.1.4. that the law and magistracy is
ordained of God for our use and benefit, whatsoever the man be that executes
it? And did not thou thy self seek the benefit of law before an unbeleever,
when thou did appeal unto Caesar, Act. 25.11. Yes might the Apostle say, But
though the thing in it self be never so lawful, yet because it exposes your
religion to the scorn and reproach of the unbeleevers, you that fear God may
not dare to do it, says he. All things (all such kind of things as he there
speaks of) are lawful (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.12.) but all things are
not expedient. Though the thing be never so lawful, yet if thou see cause to
think that hurt will come of it, thou must be afraid to do it. You see in these
seven degrees, how tender hearted, how cautelous, and precise the child of God
had need to be. The Prophet calls them, Esa. 35.4. such as are of a fearful
heart, and you see they have just cause to be so.

My son (says Solomon, Prove. 23.15.17.) let thy heart be in the fear of the
Lord all the day long. And the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.17. Pass the time of your
sojourning here (all the time of your life) in fear.

Object.
If any man shall object. How can this be? Seeing the Apostle says of the
faithful. 2 Timothy 1.7. God has not given us the spirit of fear. And Romans 8.15.
We have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again, but the spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, father. As if he had said, Before we believed
in Christ, we were indeed subject to much fear, but now we have received
another spirit, and are freed from those fears. And the life of a Christian is
the greatest bondage and slavery in the world, if he must be always of so
fearful an heart.

Answ.
To this I answer, That to live continually in a slavish fear of Gods wrath, is
indeed a great bondage. Fear has torment, says the Apostle, 1 John. 4.18.
That which the Apostle says of worldly and carnal sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.10. may
be said also of worldly and carnal fear. The fear of the world, works
death. And from this fear, the faithful are freed. But it is no bondage, no
enemy to the comfort of a man's life, to live in a continual fear of sinning,
of offending and angring our heavenly father. The Churches walking in the fear
of the Lord ( Acts 9.31.) and in the comfort of the holy Ghost, were
multiplied. As if the Evangelist had said, This fear is no opposite, but a
great help and furtherance unto true comfort. Happy is the man that fears
always, says the holy Ghost. Prove. 28.14. As if he should say, It is an
happiness to a man to fear thus.

But what reason can be given (will you say) why the child of God should be

To this I answer. There be two principal reasons of it.

First. Reason 1
Because God will bear less with them when they sin, and deal more severely,
and sharply with them, then with any other in this life. Beware of him (says
the Lord, of the Angel of his Covenant, whom he sent to conduct his people to
the land of promise, Exodus 23.21.) and obey his voice, provoke him not, for he
will not pardon (nor wink at) your transgressions. Such sins as carnal men go
clear away withal in this life, and never sinart for, if Gods child commit
them, he may not hope to do so. You only have I known (that is, chosen to be
mine own, and loved with a special love, says the Lord to his people, Amos
3.2.) of all the families of the earth, therefore will I punish you for all
your iniquities. Them whom he knows best, and loves best, can have least
hope of all other men to escape his correcting hand when they sin against him.
The Lord thy God is a jealous God, among you, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 6.15. And a
small thing you know will much offend a jealous husband; he cannot abide the
least show of neglect from his wife. A sharp and heavy judgment we know fell
upon the faithful Corinthians, even for going carelessly, and unpreparedly to
the Communion. For this cause (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.30.) many are sick
and weak among you, and many sleep. O how often shall I put you in mind of
this place, before you will believe it, and be moved by it? And as the Lord is
sooner provoked to anger by the sins of his own children, then of any other
men; so is his anger wont to be hotter, and his corrections sharper on them,
then on any other. When the Lord saw it (says Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.19. that is to
say, that his own people fell to idolatry, and other their gross sins) he
abhorred them, because of the provoking of his sons, and of his daughters. As
who would not take the contempt, and indignities that are done to him by his
own children, a great deal worse, then from any other man?

Secondly. Reason 2
The child of God has more cause to be afraid of sinning, then any other;
because, as we know the more any man has, the more fearful he is to run
into the danger of the law; so the child of God having more to loose then any
man in the world has besides, has even in this respect, more cause to be
afraid of offending God, then any other man has. Why (will you say unto me)
what mean you by this? What has he to loose more then any other man? I
answer. Every child of God has received (above all other men) three
inestimable jewels from God, which by sinning against God, he is in danger to
loose.

First. He has the spirit of adoption, which assures him of his peace with We
have received the spirit of adoption (says the Apostle. Romans 8.15.) whereby we
cry, Abba, father. In Christ we have ^oldnes and access with confidence, says
he, Ephesians. 3.12. Now this is such a jewel as he would not loose for all the
world. Thy loving kindness is better then life says David, Psalm. 63.3. And this
he knows he is in danger to loose if he give himself liberty to sin. Indeed
his adoption, and sonship and birthright is of a stronger tenure. The servant
(says our Savior, Ioh. 8.35.) abides not in the house for ever, but the son
abides ever. Yet may he by his sin utterly loose this fruit and operation of
the spirit of adoption, he may loose the assurance of his fathers love, his
peace, his joy, his access with boldness; and that not only by gross and
scandalous sins, but even by his carelessness, and negligence and carnal
security; as we see in that example of the Church. My well-beloved had
with-drawne himself and was gone, says she, Cant. 5.6. And of this
uncomparable loss, the Church has ever had many woeful examples.

whole spirit and soul and body, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
whereby he is made a vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet (as the Apostle
speaks, 2 Timothy 2.21.) for his masters use, and prepared unto every good work.
Now he sets as much store by this jewel as his life, Psalm. 51.11. Cast me
not away from thy presence, take not thy holy spirit from me, and he may loose
the comfortable sense and the vigor and operation of it, and be stricken with
such a dead palsy in his soul, as he shall have little or no use of that life
of grace that is in him. And this loss he may come to, not only by giving
liberty to himself in gross and scandalous sins, but even by his carnal
security and careless neglect of the means whereby he might grow and increase
in grace. Quench not the spirit (says the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.) despise not
prophesyings; even by despising of prophesyings, the spirit may be quenched.

Act. 9.15. that God had appointed him to bear his name before the Gentiles;
So it is said of all the faithful also, Phil. 2.16. that they hold forth unto
men (by their profession and example) the word of life. The Lord has committed
unto us that are his children, his holy name and religion to keep; and that
with a charge that we should so hold it out to the world, by our holy example,
that we may gain honor to it. And that charge which the Apostle gives to
Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.14. (though it be chiefly given to us Ministers yet) it is
given of God also to every faithful man, That worthy (that noble and
excellent) thing, which is committed unto thee, keep by the Holy Ghost which
dwells in us. Spartam quam nactus es, hanc orna, Grace that holy religion
that thou professest, hold it out so that it may be the better thought of, and
have the more honor even for thy sake. For though it lie not in man's power to
add any thing, to the honor of Gods name and religion or to make it greater in
it self, yet with men certainly they may by their holy profession, and good
example make it much greater and more honorable, then otherwise it would be.
Paul was confident, Phil. 1.20. that Christ should be magnified in his body,
whether he lived or died. And of the poor servant he says, Tit. 2.10. that by
his holy life he may adorn the doctrine of Christ, and make it more beautiful
and amiable in the eyes of men. In which respect the Apostle speaking of
certain brethren, that were the messengers of the Churches he calls them, 2
Cor. 8.23. the glory of Christ. These so held out the word of life in their
whole profession and conversation, that they were even a glory to Christ, they
made him and his religion more honorable and glorious in the Church, then
otherwise he would have been. This is such a dignity as the child of God would
not forgo for all the world; the credit and honor of Gods holy name, and
religion which he does profess, is dearer to him then his life. It were better
for me to die (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.15.) then that any man should make
my glorying void. And what was his glorying? Surely that he had so carried
himself in his whole conversation, that the Gospel received no blemish, but
honor by him. See how earnestly David prays against this, Psalm. 69.6. Let
not them that wait on thee, o Lord God of hosts be ashamed for my sake; and he
repeateth it again, Let not those that seek thee, be confounded for my sake, o
God of Israel. As if he had said. O keep me from doing that that may cause thy
people to hold down their heads for shame, because of the discredit I have
brought upon religion. Now this comfort, this glorying the child of God shall
utterly loose if he fall into scandalous sins. Such sins of Gods people, bring
shame and reproach upon the Gospel, they cast dirt and dung upon Gods holy
name and religion, and make it contemptible and loathsome in the eyes of men.
Yea the more note any man has been of for piety the more will his sins make
men to loath religion. So the Lord says of his people that they did by their
sins profane his holy name, Amos 2.7. and pollxte his holy name, Ezekiel. 39.7.

Ye see then there is great cause that the child of God should be more afraid
to offend him, Applic.
then any other man in the world. O that the Lord would give us all hearts to
take these things home unto our selves, to believe and be affected with them,
as we ought to be. For certainly many of us (of whom yet I dare not doubt, but
they are the children of God) do so live as it appears evidently, that either
they believe not, or at least they do not consider and think seriously of
these things.

But I must proceed to the second word of exhortation which I told you I David
watered his couch and made his bed to swim with his tears, Ps. 6.6. Manasseh
humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers, 2 Chronicles. 33.12. Mary
Magdalen wept so abundantly that she washed Christ's feet with her tears, Luke
7.38. Now our sins who are in the state of grace, are (as we have heard) many
ways for degree and quality greater and more odious to God, then the sins of
other men.

For first, They have been committed against knowledge and conscience, the
servant that knew his masters will, and prepared not himself, nor did
according to his will (says our Savior, Luke 12.47) shall be beaten with many
stripes.

Secondly, They have been committed against the mavelous mercy and And to
whom soever much is given, of him shall much be required says our Savior,
Luke 12.48.

Thirdly, Consider with what hazard thou have sinned. What mischief and heart
to be desperately wicked, as the Prophet speaks, Ier. 17.9.

Fourthly and lastly, Thy sins have dishonored God, and caused such as have
The reproaches of them that reproached thee (says David, Psalm. 69.9.) are
fallen upon me.

O this is a most profitable meditation for us all, Applic.
that mean to be partakers at the Lords table. When we are at the Lords table
and hear Gods Minister bid us in Gods name take and eat the body of Christ
which was broken for us, take and drink the blood of Christ that was shed for
us, I grant there be then other meditations and dispositions of our soul that
are needful and fit for us. Then should we stretch out the hand of our soul
with faith and confidence and thankfullnes, to receive that gift the Lord
offers us, and feed upon that heavenly food with joy and gladness of heart.
But for the preparing of our selves to come to the Lords table in a right
manner, certainly no disposition of our soul is so fit, as sound humiliation
and sense of our own sins and unworthines, no meditation is so fit as a serious
calling to mind and consideration of our sins and of all the circumstances,
whereby we may aggravate them against our selves, for our sound humiliation.
And therefore the Apostle makes this the sum of all true preparation, 1 Cor.
11.28. Let a man examine himself; and ver. 31. If we would judge our selves,
we should not be judged. As if he had said, We should escape all the judgments
that the unworthy receiver, has cause to fear. When David had invited
Mephibosheth unto his table, 2 Samuel 9.7, 8. Mephibosheth bowed himself and
said, what is thy servant that thou should look upon such a dead dog as I
am? And has not every one of us much more cause to say thus in our preparatory
prayers unto the Lord, who inviteth us unto his table? Four singular benefits
we should receive by it, if we could be soundly humbled in the sense of our
sins, and which we cannot receive till we be so.

The whole have no need of a Physician (says he, Mat. 9.12.) but they that are
sick. When the fiery serpent had bitten and stung a man (says the holy story,
Numb. 21.9.) then he would run and make use of the brazen serpent, but never
till then.

Phil. 3.8. that he had suffered the loss of all things, and did count them
but dung that he might win Christ. But who was this that said so? Surely Paul
that had so deep a sense of his own sin, and unworthiness that he counted
himself the chief sinner in the world, 1 Timothy 1.15.

Repent and believe the Gospel, said our Savior in his ministry, Mar. 1.15.
No man (ordinarily) can believe the Gospel, till the law have wrought
repentance a sound sense and sorrow for sin in him. And the Centurion of whom
Christ says, Mat. 8.10. he had not found so great faith in all Israel as he
did in him; was a man that was deeply humbled in the sense of his own
unworthiness; as you may see ver. 8, Lord I am not worthy (says he) that thou
should come under my roof; A strange degree of humility as ever you heard,
or read of, if you consider it well.

God forbid (says the Apostle, Gal. 6.14.) that I should glory or rejoice in
any thing, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. He means the passion
and sufferings of Christ. But who was this that did thus rejoice in Christ, and
in his sufferings? Surely it was Paul that was so deeply humbled in the sense
of his unworthines, that he calls himself Ephesians. 3.8 less then the least of
all Saints. See in all these four points the benefit of sound humiliation for
sin and be no longer afraid of it, but strive and labor for it, specially now
that thou art in a special manner to appear before God, and to renew thy
covenant with him.

LECTVRES ON PSALM. LI. 7.
Lecture CXV. On Psalm LI. 7. April XIIII. MDCXXIX.
Purge me with hysope and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter
then snow.
WE have already heard that this whole Psalm (being an humble prayer and
supplication that David made unto God after that by the ministry of the
Prophet Nathan the Lord had effectually discovered his foul sins unto him, and
called him unto repentance) does consist of two principal parts. For 1 He
prays for himself from the beginning of the Psalm to the end of the 17.
verse; And 2 for the Church of God (which he had greatly endangered by his
sin) in the two last verses of the Psalm. And the prayer that he makes for
himself consists likewise of two parts; the 1 concerns his justification,
wherein he beggeth of God the pardon of his sins, and recovery of his favor
in the nine first verses; the 2 concerns his sanctification, wherein he
beggeth of God the mortifying of his corruption, and the renewing of his heart
by his holy spirit; from the beginning of the tenth verse to the end of the 17.

In the petition he makes for the pardon of his sins, two things are to be
observed. 1. The arguments whereupon he does ground his faith and hope to
speed and obtain this his suit. 2. The often repeating of this suit and
petition, to express the vehemence of his desire in it.

The arguments whereupon he groundeth his faith in this petition are two.
First, The knowledge he had of the Lords goodness and of that multitude of
tender mercies that were in him, verse 1. Secondly, The knowledge he had of his
own sins; which he confesses and lays open before God, not only in a
general manner, verse 3. but fully and particularly in the three verses
following, Aggravating them by the consideration, 1. Of the the person against
whom they had been committed, verse 4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned,
and done this evil in thy sight. 2. Of the filthy fountain and bitter root
from which they did spring, verse 5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in
sin did my mother conceive me. 3. Lastly, Of that knowledge and truth of saving
grace which God had wrought in him before he fell into these sins, verse 6.
Behold thou desire truth in the inward parts, and in the hidden part thou
had made me to know wisdom. And thus far we have already proceeded.

Now in this verse and those two that follow, David returns to his first
petition for the pardon of his sin; and (out of the abundance of his heart)
repeateth it over and over again. But in this verse he does not only repeat
and renew his suit for pardon, but he does also show the means whereby he
hoped to obtain it; that is to say, by being purged with hysope and washed
from the filthiness of his sins. Purge me with hysope (says he) and I shall
be clean, wash me and I shall be whiter then the snow.

For the better understanding of the words three questions are to be moved and
resolved.

Quest. 1
First, What is meant by this purging with hysope and by this washing that he
speaks of here?

Answ.
For answer whereunto we must understand. First. That under the law of Moses as
there were diverse ways whereby the people of God, might contract legal
pollution and uncleanness, so there were also diverse washings enjoined them to
cleanse them from these pollutions, as the Apostle teaches us, Heb 9.10. He
that had the leprosy (which is the soulest pollution that the law speaks of)
after all the ceremonies performed by the priest for his cleansing, was to be
washed in water, as you may see, Levit. 14.8. He that is to be cleansed shall
wash his clothes, and shave all his hair, and wash himself in water, that
he may be clean. Yea he that had but touched a dead body, or but been in
the tent where any man was dead (which was one of the least pollutions that one
under the law could be subject unto) could not be cleansed till he had washed
himself in water. He shall purify himself (says the law, Numb. 19.19*) and
wash his clothes and bath himself in water, and shall be clean at even. No
man could be purged from any legal uncleanness (were it greater or smaller)
unless he were washed. Secondly, A bunch of hysope was also used for the
cleansing of them that were any way defiled under the law. The blood and water
(whereby the Leper was to be purified) must be sprinkled upon him with hysope,
or else it could do him no good, as you shall see, Levit. 14.6, 7. Yea in the
least pollutions the party that was to be cleansed, must have the water of
separation sprinkled upon him with a bunch of hysope as you shall find, Number.
19.18, 19.

Quest. 2
But then it is secondly to be demanded, what reason David had to beg this of
God, to purge him with hysope and to wash him, seei^g he might easily have
been thus purged, and washed when he would himself?

Answ.
To this I answer, That he did not here beg of God the benefit and use of the
outward ceremony* but of that inward and spiritual grace that was signified by
it. These ceremonies were but shadows and figures, the substance and body of
them (as of our Sacraments now) was Christ and his merits. They are a shadow of
things to come (says the Apostle, Col 2.17.) but the body is of Christ. The
water of separation and all other waters whe^^y the unclean were purified
under the law (as well as that we use in baptism now) was a type and figure of
the blood of Christ, which is said by the Prophet, Zach. 13.1. to be a
fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
(to all the faithful) for sin and for uncleanness. And the sprinkling of
the water with hysope was a type and figure of the sprinkling and applying of
the blood of Christ, to all them that are to have benefit by it; Which is
therefore called by the Apostle, Heb. 12 24. The blood of sprinkling. So that
when David prays here, Purge me with hysope, etc. his meaning is, as if he
should have said thus, Lord wash me from the filthiness of my sins in thy
sons blood, Lord sprinkle and apply that unto my conscience by thy holy
spirit, and then I shall be clean in thy sight; yea not clean only but
whiter then any snow.

Qu^st 3
But then yet a third Question remains, Why did not David express his request
in such plain terms, but thus darkly under the shadow and veil of these
legal ceremonies?

I answer, Answ.
That he did so out of these two respects. 1. Out of the reverend esteem he
had of the ceremony it self, because it was the ordinance of God. 2. Because
the remembrance and thinking of that ceremony was an help to his faith, and
made him the better able to conceive of the benefit he desired to receive by
the blood of Christ; Namely, that it was as water able to cleanse his soul
from all her filthiness; and that before ever he could have benefit by it, it
must be sprinkled upon his soul by the spirit of Christ, as that water was
wont by the priest to be sprinkled upon the bodies of them, that were to be
cleansed under the law.

The words (being thus opened) do yield unto us sundry very profitable
instructions.

Consider the verse first in the lump altogether, and there be two things to be
observed in it. 1. The reverend account that David a great Prophet makes of a
small ceremony used under the law, and the use he made of it, the help he
received by it, by the washings, and by the bunch of hysope, they used in the
sprinkling of them that were to be cleansed. 2. That he understood the
spiritual meaning of it, and rested not in the outward ceremony, in that which
he might receive from man, but seeks to God to do his work upon him, and
to bestow upon him that inward grace, that was signified by this ceremony.

Secondly, Consider this verse particularly in the several branches of it, and
there be three other points to be observed in it. 1. That the means whereby he
desired and hoped to be cleansed from his sins, was by washing him with water,
which signified the blood of Christ. 2. That the means whereby this water,
this blood of Christ was to be made effectual to him, was by the Lords
sprinkling it upon him as with a bunch of hysope. 3. The benefit he was assured
he should receive by this washing and purging, he should be clean, yea he
should be whiter then the snow.

Of these points I will speak in order.

And first mark here, Nota.
That David a great Prophet esteemed reverently of, and received help to his
faith by a small ceremony appointed of God, by the washings used under the law,
and the sprinkling with hysope that was then in use; Which teaches us.

That the outward helps that God has appointed us in his worship, Doct. 24
yea the least ceremony or circumstance of his worship that he has ordained
(seem it in it self never so mean and of little worth) may not be neglected,
but is reverently to be esteemed of and observed by us.

Before I come to the proof of the Doctrine two things I must premise to
prevent the mistaking of it.

First, Cautio^ 1
These are not the chief things that God stands upon or requires at our
hands. Thou desire not sacrifices (says David here, verse 16.) thou
delightest not in burnt offering; that is, in comparison of other duties thou
carest not for these things. There are weightier matters in Gods law then these
as our Savior teaches us, Matthew. 23.23. The piety of a Christian does not
consist chiefly in these outward things. The kingdom of God is not meat and
drink (says the Apostle, Romans 14.17, 18. about which much of the ceremonial
law is spent as the Apostle teaches us, Heb. 9.10.) but righteousness and
peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, For he that in these things serves Christ, it
acceptable unto God, and approved of men.

Secondly, Cautio^ 2
If these outward things be performed never so constantly without the inward
and spiritual worship of the heart, they cannot please God nor do us any
good, as we shall hear in the next Doctrine. Nay they are most loathsome unto
God, as the body that has been most beautiful, is unto a man, when the life
and soul is departed from it. Incense is an abomination unto me (says the
Lord, Esa. 1.13.) the new Moons and Sabbaths, the calling of assemblies I
cannot away with, it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting, as at your
general fasts, and such like.

But though this be so; yet is the Doctrine that I have raised from these words
an undoubted truth, That those outward helps that God has appointed us in his
worship, even the least of them may not be neglected by us. See the proof of
the Doctrine in two degrees.

David speaks of here those purifications and washings, that were prescribed
in Moses law, though they were but carnal ordinances (as the Apostle calls
them, Hebr. 9.10. that is, such as a carnal man might easily perform, and as
were very suitable to the disposition of a carnal man) and though they were
imposed upon Gods people (not as perpetual ordinances but) until the time of
reformation, as the Apostle there speaks; yet while that law stood in force
they might in no case be neglected. This is evident both by the example of the
blessed Virgin, who made conscience of the law of purification, and observed it
carefully as you may read, Luke 2.22. and by that commandment also which
Christ gave unto the Leper, Mar. 1.44. Go and show thy self unto the Priest,
and offer for thy cleansing those things which Moses commanded. As if he
should say, Neglect not those rites and ceremonies which are appointed for thy
cleansing, by the law of Moses.



Mar. 11.25. and expressing of our reverence by other gestures of our body,
when we cannot conveniently kneel is lawful also in prayer; as we see in old
Jacob who lying on his deathbed though he could not kneel in his thanksgiving
yet lifted up himself to the beds head as well as he could and bowed himself,
Genesis 47.31.) yet see what account is to be made even of the gesture of kneeling
in prayer when we can conveniently use it, see it (I say) in three proofs. 1.
In that direction we have for it, Psalm. 95.6. O come let us worship and bow
down, let us kneel before the Lord our maker. 2. In the example of Gods
servants; of Daniel 6.10. of Ezra 9.5. of Stephen, Acts 7.60. of Peter, Acts
9.40. of Paul, Acts 20.36. yea of our blessed Savior himself. And of these
two last we read that they used this gesture of kneeling in their prayer when
they had nothing to kneel on but the bare ground; our Savior in the garden,
Luke 22.41. and Paul with all the Christians of Tire (that accompanied him unto
the ship) upon the seashore, Acts 21.5. 3. Lastly, In the Holy Ghosts
expressing of the duty of prayer in this phrase of kneeling unto God, Every
knee shall bow to me, Esa. 45.23. For this cause I bow my knees unto the father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.14. that is, I pray unto
him.

Ieroboaem thought that seeing he did not intend to worship any false God (as
Solomon had done, 1 King. 11.4, 5, 7.) but the true God only, it was no great
matter in what place he did worship him; specially though he did it not at
Jerusalem, which he of all other places thought the most inconvenient and
dangerous to him, 1 King. 12.27. therefore he made choice of Dan and Bethel to
be the places of Gods solemn worship, 1 Kings 12.29. But see how the Holy
Ghost notes even this for a most heinous sin, 1 Kings 12.30. Yea see what a
matter God makes even of this, Leviticus 17.3, 4. he pronounces him to be
no better then a murderer that should offer a sacrifice to God in any other
place then before the tabernacle of the Lord.

Thirdly, The persons that by Gods appointment were to meddle with the Vzzah, 2 Samuel 6.7. and of the men of Bethshemesh, 1 Samuel 6.19. Jeroboam thought it a
matter of no great moment though he made other men priests to offer sacrifices
unto God then such as were of the sons of Levi, specially in a case of
necessity when no Levites could be got (as it appears indeed by 2 Chronicles.
11.13, 14. that he could get none) but see how the Lord notes this also for
one of his heinous sins, 1 King. 12.31. and for a chief cause of the ruin
of his house, 1 King 13.34.

Fourthly and lastly, The time when the Passover was to be celebrated
Jeroboam (a worldly wise man) thought it (it seems) a point of foolish
preciseness to think the solemn worship must needs be performed just at
those times that God had appointed in his law; and therefore (out of a
politic respect) he altered the time. But mark how the Holy Ghost notes
this also to have been his heinous sin. He offered upon the altar which he
had made in Bethel (says the holy story, 1 King. 12.33.) the fifteenth day of
the eight month, even in the month which he had devised of his own heart. On
the other side we see the conscience our Savior made to observe precisely the
Lords direction even in this. He received it we know at the same time when he
instituted the Lords Supper, and that was the same night that he was betrayed
as the Apostle affirms, 1 Cor. 11.23. Yea he made it a matter of necessity
to receive it just at the same time that he did, Luke 22.7. Then came the day
of unleavened bread, when the passover must be killed. And yet the whole
Church of the Jews received it not till the day after his passion; for the day
of his passion, was the day of the preparation for the passover, as you shall
find, John 19.14. Why would he differ from the whole Church in such a trifle
as this? Why would he not conform himself to the custom of the Church in
such a matter? O he accounted it no trifle though it were but a matter of
circumstance; because God had given express direction in his Word for that
circumstance, Numbers 9.2, 3. Let the people of Israel keep the passover at
his appointed season, In the fourteenth day of this month at Even, ye shall
keep it in his appointed season; according to all the rites of it, and
according to all the ceremonies thereof shall ye keep it. Ye shall not
neglect any one of the rites and ceremonies of it. Yea the Lord had said, Numb.
9.13. that he that observed not the just time, that God had set for it should
be cut off from his people. So dangerous a thing it is to swerve from the
direction God has given us in his Word, even in the least circumstance of his
worship.

The reasons and grounds of this Doctrine are principally two.

First, Reason 1
The respect we owe to the commandment and ordinance of God. The least thing
in Gods worship that he has appointed must not be neglected, even because
he has ordained it. Circumcision is nothing (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.19.)
and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God.
Though we could see no other reason for them at all, nor had any hope to
receive good by them, yet this is sufficient reason to move us to observe them,
because God in his Word has given us direction so to do. In observing of
them, we do our homage to God, and show our obedience unto him. This reason
prevailed with our blessed Savior. 1. He received the Sacrament of
circumcision in his infancy, Luke 2.21. and afterward the Sacrament of baptism
too, Luke 3.21. 2. He submitted himself to the law of purification, Luke 2.2^.
3. He received the Sacrament of the passover, Luke 22.15. 4. He frequented the
Church assemblies constantly upon the Sabbath, Luke 4.16. and all upon this
ground that these were Gods ordinances and he must show his obedience to God
in all things, Thus it becomes us (says he to John, Matthew. 2.15.) to
fulfill all righteousness. There were other purifications that were in use in
that Church and much stood upon in those days which he made no such reckoning
of (though in themselves a man would have thought they had been every whit as
good as these that he made conscience of) upon this ground that they were not
of Gods ordaining, they were but the precepts of men, Mat. 15.9.

Reason 2
Secondly, These things are ordained of God and enjoined us to observe for our
own good. Keep the commandments of the Lord, and his statutes (says Moses,
Deuteronomy. 10.13) which I command thee this day for thy good. That which is said of
the Sabbath, Mark 2.27. The Sabbath was made for man, for man's great benefit
and help, he could not have been without it; the same may be said of every
thing in Gods worship that he has ordained, he has ordained it for our good
even to further, and increase the work of his grace in our hearts. And we may
confidently expect a blessing from God, in observing the least thing that he
has appointed us to use in his worship, that God will give it virtue, and make
it effectual to do our souls good, if we use it aright. See in three
examples what virtue and force there was even in very small things that were of
Gods ordaining. 1. Numb. 21.9. The very looking up to the brazen serpent cured
all that were stung with fiery serpents. 2 Josh. 6.20. At the blowing of the
trumpets of rams horns, and shouting of the people, the walls of Jericho
fell down flat to the ground. 3. 2 Kings 5.14. By dipping himself seven times
in Jordan, Naaman was perfectly cured of his Leprosy. See what force there was
in small things, that are of Gods ordaining, and how undoubted a truth that is
which the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1.25. The weakness of God is stronger then
man. The ceremonies and religious observations that are of men's devising (as
crucifixes to pray before, crossing of our selves, observing of popish fasts
and superstitious holidays, sprinkling with popish holy water and such like)
though they carry great show of helping us in devotion, yet of them all it may
be said as our Savior said of the Jewish purifyings, Matthew. 15.9. they are a
vain worship: there is no force nor virtue in them, to further the soul one
jot in true piety, and devotion. Yea those very things, that were once Gods
own ordinances (as these washings and sprinkling with hysope that David
alludeth to here, and such like) when they grew out of date, and ceased any
longer to be commanded of God, even they then lost that virtue and strength
that once they had, and became weak and beggarly elements, as the Apostle
calls them, Gal. 4.9.

The uses that this Doctrine serves unto, are two principally, 1. For
instruction. 2. For exhortation.

Use 1.
For the first, Two things we are to learn from this Doctrine.

of his worship; we may not say that in matters of substance we must follow
precisely the direction, but in matters of circumstance we are not bound so to
do. The direction that God has given us in his Word for the least thing that
is to be done in any part of his worship, may not be neglected without great
sin and danger. Admit it were but a matter of circumstance what day we keep
our Sabbath on, so we keep one in seven (as some have conceited it to be) yet
because God has given us express direction in his Word (by the example and
practice of the Apostle, and of those Churches that were planted by him, Acts
20.7. 1 Corinthians 16.2.) to keep it on the first day of the week, the
Church may never keep it on any other day then that. See thou make all things
(says the Lord to Moses as you shall find it, Hebrews 8.5.) according to the
pattern showed unto thee in the mount. The written Word is unto us in stead of
that pattern, that was showed unto Moses in the mount. In every thing we do
about Gods tabernacle and worship, we must precisely look unto and follow
that pattern, observe what he commands.

Secondly, This teaches us how to judge of that imputation that is put Paul
before his conversion, exceedingly zealous of the traditions of his fathers as
he says, Galathians 1.14. Such were the Jews that pressed with great heat
and contention, both Christ's Disciples, Mark 7 2, 3. and John's, John 3.25. to
observe their purifyings. 2. Such as seem to be very precise in smaller
things (as in matters of ceremony, and some outward observations which indeed
God requires them to make conscience of) but make no conscience of the
weightier points of Gods law. This preciseness our Savior taxes, to be no
better then gross hypocrisy, Matthew 23.23, 24. 3. Lastly, Such as out of
ignorance and blind devotion deny unto themselves the liberties and comforts
of this life that God has allowed them, To these Solomon speaks, Eccl. 7.16.
Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self over wise: why should thou
destroy thy self? But so long as a man keeps himself to the direction of
the Word, take heed how thou scorn him, take heed how thou blame him for such
preciseness, for we are all commanded of God to be strict, and precise this
way. What thing soever I command you, (be it great or small says the Lord,
Deuteronomy. 12.32.) observe to do it, thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from
it. And Exodus 23.13. In all things that I have said unto you, be circumspect.
And he instanceth in a point of strange preciseness. Make no mention of the
names of other Gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth.

The second use that the Doctrine serves unto is for exhortation to persuade
every one of us to a more reverent esteem and conscionable use of the whole
outward worship of God, Use 2.
of all those exercises of religion that the Lord has in his Word commanded or
commended unto us; that is to say, the observation of the Sabbath, hearing the
Word and reading of it, receiving the Sacrament, singing of Psalms, all manner
of prayer both public, and with our families, and in secret also. Of never a
one of these any man can doubt, but they are ordained of God, and commended to
his in his Word. Mark how this exhortation rises from the Doctrine. If the
ceremonial worship that was to endure for a time, was so much to be regarded,
how much more is the moral and perpetual worship of God to be accounted of?
It is the Apostles reason, 2 Corinthians 3.11. If that which is done away was
glorious, much more that which remains is glorious. If we may not neglect
the least circumstance of Gods worship, that he has given us direction for in
his Word, how much less the substanciall parts of his worship and service. If
I may not neglect the gesture of kneeling in prayer (when I can conveniently
use it) then much less may I neglect the duty of prayer it self. If I may not
neglect the benefit of mine eye in the Sacrament, but I must desire to behold
and look upon the bread and wine, the breaking of it and pouring of it out,
then much less may I neglect the benefit of receiving the Sacrament it self.

Four motives I will use to enforce this exhortation upon your hearts.

Motive 1
First, These duties (these parts of Gods out ward worship) are enjoined us by
that commandment which our Savior Matthew. 22.38. calls the first and the
great commandment. 1. It is the first commandment, here you must begin, thou
can not make conscience aright of any of the commandments following till
thou begin here and make conscience even of the outward worship of God. In
which respect the Lord calls them (in the reason of the second commandment,
Exodus 20.6.) that make conscience of that commandment, such as keep his
commandments. 2. It is the great commandment, We can in nothing better show
our obedience and do our homage to God, then by the diligent and conscionable
use of his outward worship.

Motive 2
Secondly, The Lord esteems of the love we bear him according to the
conscience we make of the second commandment, according to the account we make
of his outward worship, and our dependence upon his direction in it. This is
plain in the reason of the second commandment, Exodus 20.5, 6. He calls them
that make conscience of this commandment such as love him, and those that do
not, such as hate him.

Motive 3
Thirdly, The best of us have need of every one of them. Adam even in his
innocence had need of the Sabbath, Genesis 2.3. The King (says the Lord, Deuteronomy.
17.19.) must read the Word daily, and had need so to do, as appears by the
reason of that commandment there. Daniel had need to pray every day, Dan.
6.10. And how much more then have we?

Motive 4
Fourthly, Thou shall certainly receive good by them if thou use them
conscionably. 1. Good in thy soul (for which they were chiefly ordained) 1 by
keeping the Sabbath, Esa. 58.13, 14. 2 by hearing, Esa. 55.3. 3 by reading,
Deuteronomy. 17.19. 4 by receiving, 1 Cor. 10.16. 5 by prayer, Phil. 4.6.7. 6 by
singing of Psalms, Ephesians. 5.19, 20. 2. Good even in thine outward estate. The
arc brought a blessing upon the house of Obed-Edom, 2 Samuel 6.11, 12. The true
worship of God used in it strengthened Rehoboams kingdom, 2 Chronicles. 11.17. The
Sabbath shall be a blessing to all that keep it conscionably and no curse,
Exodus 20.11. See what a promise God makes to watch over their families that
worship him, Exodus 34.24. On the other side thou have no cause to expect his
blessing but his curse upon all thou have, if thou neglect his outward worship,
Exodus 5.3. Let us sacrifice -- lest he fall upon us with pestilence or with the
sword.

Lecture CXVI. On Psalm 51.7. April 21. 1629.
IT follows now that we proceed unto the second of those general points
that I told you were to be observed out of the whole verse; Nota.
that is to say. That David did understand the meaning of these legal washings
and sprinklings, that he alludeth to and mentions here, he knew what was
signified by them; and knowing that in those ceremonial washings, there was
not only an outward and material element of water used, but also an inward and
spiritual grace represented and signified by it, and that in those ceremonial
sprinklings with hysope there was not only an outward action and work to be
done by man, but an inward work also to be done by the Lord himself, he
rested not in that which was outward and touched the body only, but seeks
for that inward grace that was signified by it, as appears by this, that he
beggeth of God that he would purge and wash him, that he would do that work
upon his soul, which was signified by this ceremony. Purge thou me with
hysope (says he) and I shall be clean, wash thou me and I shall be whiter
then the snow. And from this point thus observed in the Text this Doctrine
arises for our instruction.

That Gods people must labor to understand what they do in every part of Gods
worship, Doct. 25
and not rest in the outward work, but strive to feel the inward virtue and
power of it, and to find God doing his work upon them, in every one of his,
ordinances. Two branches you see there are of this Doctrine, which we will
handle distinctly and in order.

First, Branch 1
We must labor to understand every thing that we do in the service of God.
This God required of his people even under the Law, Though that were a time of
far less light then the Gospel ( the law had but a shadow of good things to
come as the Apostle speaks, Hebrews 10.1) yet even then God would have his
people to understand what they did in his service, even in his ceremonial
worship. Therefore he did not only command the Levites to teach the children
of Israel all his statutes, and to instruct them in the meaning of them, Levit.
10.11. but he laid this charge also upon every parent to teach their children
the meaning of the whole service of the passover, and of all the rites and
ceremonies used in it, Exodus 12.26, 27. and of the law of offering unto God
the first borne of every thing, Exodus 13.14. and generally the meaning of all
other the ceremonial laws, as well as of the moral and judicial, Deuteronomy.
6.20. The children should ask, and the parents should teach them, the reason
and the meaning of every thing that was done in Gods service. But this is much
more required of Gods people in the moral worship, that we understand what
we do in it, specially now under the Gospel, wherein the Lord requires more
knowledge of his people, then he did under the law; and of which times he did
foretell, Esa. 11.9. That the earth should be filled with the knowledge of
God. Therefore the Apostle alluding to the ceremonial worship which consisted
chiefly in sacrifices and burnt offerings and opposing the moral worship of
God under the Gospel, unto it, Romans 12.1. teaches us, that the only
sacrifice and service that is now acceptable unto God is our reasonable
service, that is, such service as is done unto him with reason and
understanding. See the necessity of this in six several parts of Gods moral
worship.

First, The reading of the Word will do us no good (though we use every thing
that he reads. For 1 even little children are to be trained up in the
reading of them as is plain in the example of Timothy of whom it is said, 2 Timothy 3.15. that from a child he had known the holy Scriptures. And 2 that
which we read (though we understand it not for the present yet) the very
acquainting of our selves with the letter of the Scriptures; by continual
reading or hearing of them read unto us, may be of great use to us hereafter;
as it is plain (by the Apostles putting him in mind of it in that place) that
Timothies reading of the Word in his childhood was a great means to further
him in the knowledge of the Word afterward, and to confirm him in the truth.
But yet this is certain, our reading of the Word will do us no good unless
we endeavor to mark and understand, what we read. Even children should be
taught (according as their capacity serves) to mark and understand what they
read. Train up a child (says the wisdom of God, Proverbs 22.6.) in his way
(that is, in his kind and according to his capacity) and when he is old he
will not depart from it. As if she had said, He will be the better for it
while he lives. This necessity of understanding, what we read, (if we would
please God in this duty of his service or do our selves any good by it) is
plain by two places of the holy Scriptures. 1. By that which is said, Neh.
8.^, 3. of them to whom Ezra was careful to read the law, He brought the law
before the congregation both of men and women, and all that could hear with
understanding; and read therein before the men and the women, and all that
could understand. Mark how he repeateth this twice. He judged that their
coming together to the public reading of the Word, would neither please God,
nor do themselves any good, unless they could understand what was read. The
second place is that speech of Philip to the noble Eunuch, Acts 8.30. when he
heard him reading in private, a Chapter of the Prophet Esaias, Understand thou
what thou read? says he, As if he should say, To what purpose read thou
if thou be not careful, to understand what thou read?

Hearken unto me every one of you, and understand, says our Savior to his
hearers, Mar. 7.14. And after he had preached, his manner was to examine his
Disciples whether they understood that which he had taught, Matthew. 13.51. Have
ye understood all these things? Yea he had so pressed upon them the necessity
of this, to seek to understand whatsoever they had heard him teach, that if
they had heard anything that seemed harsh unto them, or that they could not
understand they (durst not murmur or take offense at it, running away with
their own sense, and leave hearing of him as a teacher of absurd things, as
some other of his hearers did, John 6.66. and as many do now a days, but)
held themselves bound (if they could not be resolved by conference among
themselves) to go unto him, and desire him to make his meaning plainer unto
them. And this we shall find they did oftentimes, Matthew. 13.36.17.10.19.10.
and in other places. They knew well (as our Savior had taught them in the
parable of the sower, Matthew. 13.19.) that of all kind of hearers, those
senseless wretches, that are like to the high way, and understand not what they
hear are most incapable of receiving good by the Word, and that Satan of all
others has most power over them.

the Word. Go and teach all nations (says our Savior, Matthew. 28.19.)
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. As if he had said, First teach them, before you do administer the
Sacraments unto them. Therefore also we shall find that John the Baptist before
he baptized any, first prea^hed unto them. He preached the baptism of
repentace, as the Eva^gelist says, Mar. 1.4. And when the Disciples came
together at Troa^ upon the first day of the week (the Lords day) of purpose to
break bread (to administer the communion, Acts 20.7.) yet did not Paul
administer the communion till he ^e had first preached unto them.

Fourthly, We cannot please God in our prayers, nor receive any good by Cor.
14.16. so neither can I have confidence to receive any good by mine own prayer,
unless I know I pray according to Gods will, as the Apostle says, 1 John
5.14. Therefore hearing is the first duty that is injoined to them that go
into Gods house. When thou go into Gods house (says Solomon, Eccl. 5.1.)
be more ready to hear, then to give the sacrifice of fools. As though he
should have said, All our prayers and other services we do to God in his
house, are but the sacrifice of fools till we have first (by hearing) been
instructed how to do them according to Gods will. For God has no pleasure in
fools, as he there says, verse ^. he takes no pleasure in the prayers or
other services that fools, and ignorant sots do offer unto him.

Fifthly, Our singing of Psalms pleases not God nor can do us any good,
unless we endeavor to understand what we sing. Sing ye praises with
understanding, ^^av^^, Psalm 47.7.

Sixthly and lastly, No man can please God in taking of an oath (which is also
Thou shall swear in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness, says the Lord,
Ier. 4 2. As if he should say. Though it be never so true that any man
swears, though the oath be taken in righteousness and no man wronged by it;
(...) if it be not taken also i^ judgment, with good advisednesse and
understanding, it is an unlawful oath. Therefore in one of the best oaths
that ever was taken, wherein men women and children did bind themselves to
walk in Gods law, Nehemiah 10 28, 29. there was care taken that this holy and
necessary oath should yet be taken only of every one having knowledge, and
having understanding.

You see then in all these particulars that we must labor to understand what
we do in every part of Gods service; and that no ordinance of God will do us
any good, unless we use it with understanding.

The reason of this first branch of the Doctrine is this, Reason.
That as God is a spirit, and therefore delights in that service that is
spiritual, The true wor^^ippers shall worship the father in spirit and in
truth: (says our Savior, Io^. 4 23) for the father seeks such to worship
him; he longs for such worshippers as worship him with feeling and affection;
and they that do not so, worship him not in truth, are no better then
hypocrites; So is it not possible to serve God spiritually and with feeling in
any part of his worship, if we do not understand what we do in it. For the
devotion and good affections that grow not from knowledge, are vain and of no
worth in the sight of God. Knowledge is the root and foundation of all holy
affections. This I pray (says the Apostle, Phil. 1 9.) that your love may
abound, yet more and more in knowledge and in all judgment. And this shall
suffice to have been spoken of the first branch of the Doctrine, David did
understand the meaning of the ceremonial worship, and so must we labor to
understand what we do in Gods service.

Branch 2
Now we must proceed to the second branch of the doctrine; and for the plain
and distinct handling of it, we must observe these four things.

David here alludeth to, man did wash the body, and sprinkle with hysope the
water and blood upon it, for the legal purging and cleansing of it; and God
did wash the soul in the blood of Christ, and sprinkle it upon the consciences
of his people So in circumcision, man did cut of the foreskin of the flesh,
and God did circumcise the heart, Deuteronomy. 30.6. In baptism, John baptized the
body with water (as he says, Matthew. 3.11.) and God himself baptized the
soul with the holy Ghost So in the ministry of the word, man speaks to the
ear and outward man and God opens the heart to attend unto that that is
taught, and believe it, as we see in the example of Lydia, Acts 16.14. Lastly,
In prayer man works, and God works too. The spirit it self makes
intercession for us, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 8.26.

Exodus 20.24. In all places where I record my name (where I establish my
public worship) I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee, says the Lord
to his people. And this promise he has likewise made concerning his worship
under the Gospel, Matthew. 28.19, 20. Go and teach all nations, baptizing them,
etc. (preach my word, administer my sacraments) and lo, I am with you always,
even unto the end of the world. Where men do their parts in the use of any of
his ordinances, God will not fail to do his part also.

I have planted (says Paul, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7.) and Apollo watered, but God gave
the increase; so then neither is he that planted any thing, neither he that
watered; but God that gives the increase. And verse 9. We are laborers
together with God, ye are Gods husbandry, ye are Gods building. And that which
the Prophet speaks of the material building, Psalm 127.1. may much more
truly be said in this case, Except the Lord build the house, they labor in
vain that build it. All that the best man can do in Gods worship, is nothing
worth, unless God do his part, if he work not with him. The inward virtue and
power that God by his blessing and work does give unto it, is the very life
and soul of every part of Gods worship, without it, it is no better then a
dead and loathsome carcass. The kingdom of God (says the Apostle speaking of
preaching, a chief part of Gods outward worship, 1 Cor. 5 20*) is not in word,
but in power. As if he had said, That is the right preaching, where Gods power
appears, wherein God preaches as well as man; God teaches the heart
inwardly, as well as man does teach the outward man. And that that he says of
preaching, may be said of every other ordinance of God; That is only true
complete baptism, wherein God has baptized the party as well as man, that a
true and complete communion which God has administered as well as man; that a
true and complete prayer, when the spirit of God has joined with me, and
prayed as well as I. 1. Then, and then only shall we have comfort in our
baptism, when we can find that we have been baptized of God. He shall
baptize you (says John baptist, speaking to the faithful, Matthew 3.11.) with
the holy Ghost, and with fire. Happy is that soul, that can find he has
been baptized by that hand; that can say thus, As by Gods minister, I had
water sprinkled upon me, by the ordinance of God in mine infancy, when I knew
it not; so now I do verily know, and feel that the Lord himself has by his
spirit sprinkled upon my soul, the blood of his dear Son (that blood of
sprinkling, as the Apostle calls it, Heb. 12.24.) has assured me, that it
was shed for me; and I do verily know and feel that he has saved me (as the
Apostle speaks Tit. 3.5.) by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the
holy Ghost. 2. Then, and then only shall we have comfort in the Lords supper,
when we can find, that as Gods minister has by his appointment given us the
bread and wine, so the Lord himself has given us the body and blood of his
own son, and commanded us to feed upon him. Moses gave you not that bread from
heaven (says our Savior, John 6.32.) but my father gives you the true bread
from heaven; and he shows what he means by that, verse 35. I am the bread
of life. No minister can give thee that true bread from heaven, the body and
blood of Christ to feed upon; the Lord only can give thee that. And as when
thou go to the sacrament at any time, thou must seek, and expect to receive
this from him, thou must cry to God, as they did there, ver. 34. Lord, evermore
give us this bread; So if thou can find that thou have in the Sacrament, by
the eye of thy faith discerned God giving thee this bread, and by the hand of
thy faith received it of him, o happy thou; it was the comfortablest supper
that ever thou were at in thy life. 3. Then, and then only can we have comfort
in our preaching, and you in your hearing, when we and you can find, that the
Lord is with us, and works with us in this ordinance of his. When we that are
preachers, can find that our ministry is not in word only, but also in power,
and in the holy Ghost, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. when we see God
works with us, and blesses our ministry, and it may be said of us, as of
them, Acts 11.21. The hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number
believed, and turned unto the Lord. And when you that are hearers can find that
in your hearing, the Lord opens your hearts to attend (with diligence and
delight) to that that you hear, as he did Lydias, Acts 16.14. when ye can
find, that in the hearing of the word, ye are taught of God, drawn, and
effectually persuaded to believe, and obey the truth that you hear, as our
Savior says all the Elect shall be, John 6.44, 45. when in the hearing of
the truth of God delivered by any of his servants you hear withal, that word
behind you (that is spoken of Esaias 30, 21.) saying, this is the way, walk ye
in it; when in the ministry of the Word, you can feel that mighty power of
God that the Apostle speaks of, 2 Cor. 10 5. casting down your imaginations,
and every high thing in you that exalts it self against the knowledge of
God, and bringing into captivity every one of your thoughts, to the obedience
of Christ; finally, when we can say of your teachers, as that man did, 1 Cor.
14.25. Of a truth God is in you, certainly God works with you; then (I say)
and then only can you have comfort in your hearing, 4. Lastly. Then, and then
only can we have comfort in our prayers, when we can find the Lord has bin
with us in prayer. And when is that? 1. When we find the Lord has prepared
our hearts to pray. Lord (says David, Ps. 10.17.) thou have heard the desire
of the humble, thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear to
hear. When the spirit it self makes intercession for us, quickneth our
prayers, and prompteth us in them. How may we know that, will you say? Surely
by two notes. 1. When in our prayers we can cry, Abba, father, for this is made
a certain note of the spirits helping us in prayer, Romans 8.15. Gal. 4.6. 2.
When (even then when we know not what to pray, we can say nothing almost, but
groan and sigh it out, yet even) the requests that we make, are according to
the will of God; we desire nothing so much as mercy and grace: this second note
also of the spirits helping us in prayer, the Apostle gives, Romans 8.26.27.

Purge thou me with hysope (says David here) wash thou me. And as Moses did
in another case, Exodus 33 15, 16. so should we all importune, and expostulate
with the Lord in this case. If thy presence go not with us (says he) carry
us not up hence; for wherein shall it be known, that I, and thy people have
found grace in thy sight? Is it not in that thou go with us? So may we say,
Lord, if thou accompany not thine ordinances, and work not with us in them, to
what purpose should we perform them? How shall it appear that we have found
grace in thy sight?

The uses that this Doctrine serves unto, are two principally. 1. For
instruction, 2. For exhortation.

Use 1.
And first this teaches us the true cause why in this time of so long
continual use of all Gods ordinances, there is so little fruit to be seen.
This is the general complaint of these times. 1. Gods faithful ministers
complain of this and cry as Esa. 49.4. that they have labored in vain, they
have spent their strength for naught, and in vain; they see no fruit of their
labors. And 2. the carnal man, and enemy to the Gospel, every where casts
this in our teeth. Woe be to the world, because of offenses (says our Savior,
Mat. 18 7.) and surely, this is a chief offense, that many do miserably
stumble at. These that hear so much (say they) and read so much, and pray so
much, what are they the better for it? Wherein are they better then other men?
And alas, what shall we say to these men? How can we deny, but that this is
most true that they say? Only let our selves take notice of the true cause of
this; surely the Lord does not his work in these exercises of religion, that
men do use; the Lord with-draweth himself from his ordinances; and then all
is in vain that man is able to do. The Lords glorious presence which was
wount to dwell in his sanctuary (to accompany his own ordinances, and to work
with them) is now departed, not from his sanctuary only, but from the City too
as once the Prophet in a vision saw it do, Ezekiel 11.23. This reason the
Prophet rendereth, Esa. 53.1. Who has believed our report, and to whom is the
arm of the Lord revealed? Few or none do profit by the ministry of the word,
because the Lord shows not his power in it, he works not with it And why
does not the Lord his work in his own ordinance? Surely as for other our
sins, so for these among the rest.

Son of man (says the Lord to his Prophet, Exekiel 8.6.) see thou what
they do; even the great abominations that the house of Israel commits here,
that I should go far from my sanctuary? If he see any filt by thing in
thee, he will turn away from thee, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 23.14. Can two walk
together (says the Prophet, Amos 3.3.) unless they be agreed? Is it any
wonder that God joyneth not with many of you in any of his ordinances, works
not with you in them, blesses them not unto you, while you live as you do?
Nay, is it any wonder if God withdraw himself from the Sanctuary it self,
from our whole engregregations, for the whoredoms, and drunkenness, and oaths
that break out amongst us, and of which we every one stand much more guilty in
his sight, then the whole congregation of Israel, was of the sin of one
Achan. Joshua 7.11, 12.

Secondly. The second cause why the Lord with-draweth himself from David does
in the duty of thankesgiving, call upon his soul, Psalm 103.1, 2. Bless the
Lord, o my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name; and again,
Bless the Lord o my soul, so we should do in every ordinance of God; we
use to give to the Lord the service of our lip, or ear, or knee, or body
only. And is it any wonder if the Lord withdraw himself from us, and refuse
to join with us in these services, wherein (as our Savior complained of the
hypocrites of his time, Matthew. 15.8.) we draw nigh to him with our mouth, and
honor him with our lips, but our heart is far from him?

A third and last cause may be this, that we rest too much upon, and bless
Lystra you know did of Paul and Barnabas, Acts 14 11 -- 13.) and never seek
to God that he would inwardly work with his ordinances in us, we care not for
that. And even to this, that may be applied which the Apostle speaks of
every natural man, Romans 3.11. There is none that understands, there is none
that seeks after God. And that this will much provoke God, to see his glory
given to his instrument, that ascribed to the means which belongs to him,
you may perceive by that fear and indignation that Paul and Barnabas did
express, when they saw them of Lystra offend this way, Acts 14.14.

Lecture CXVI. On Psalm 51.6. April 28. 1628.
Follows the second use of the Doctrine, Use 2.
namely the use of exhortation, and that is double according to the two
several branches of the Doctrine.

For first, If no duty we perform to God in his worship can please him, nor
With all thy getting (says the wisdom of God, Prove 4 7. with all thy
possessions whatsoever it cost thee) get understanding. And that for this cause
chiefly, because till a man by catechizing and preaching of the word, be
brought unto knowledge; all his prayers and other services he does to God, are
in Gods account no better then the sacrifice of a fool, as you heard the last
day out of Eccl. 5.1. He that said to his people even under the law, Hosea 6.6.
I desire knowledge more then your burnt offerings. As if he had said, I was
ever of that mind, even when I did most straightly command the offering of
sacrifices, and seemed most pleased and delighted with them; he will much more
say to us that live under the Gospel, I desire knowledge, more then your
prayers, more then your coming to the Communion, or any other service you can
do unto me.

Certainly most men do not believe this. And that appears in three things
that may be observed in the dispositions, Applic.
and humors of men.

First. All men hold themselves bound to serve God, all men think they Jeremy
4.22. My people (for so they profess and hold themselves to be) is foolish,
they have not known me, they are sottish children, and they have no
understanding, they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no
knowledge.

Ye fools and blind (says our Savior to the ignorant, and superstitious
Pharisees, Mat. 23, 19.) whether is greater, the gift, or the altar that
sanctifies the gift? So may I say to these men, ye fools and blind, whether
is greater, the Sacrament, or the word that sanctifies the Sacrament? The
seal, or the covenant of God, that is confirmed by that seal?

Ps. 50.17. They hate instruction. Not general instruction it may be, but to
be dealt withal particularly in this kind (which is certainly of all other
the best way to bring an ignorant soul unto knowledge, this was that
reasonning which the Apostles used so much in instructing such as they sought
to bring unto knowledge of which you may read, Act. 17.2.17.18, 19.19.9. and in
other places to be instructed I say thus particularly, they hate it and cannot
abide it. If a master of a family shall constantly use to catechize his
servants, and examine them particularly concerning their knowledge, and what
they have learned, o how will they hate such a service? If a minister shall
examine them concerning their knowledge before they come to the sacrament, and
(finding them ignorant) keep them from it till they be better instructed, they
will hate him for this, more then for any indignity or wrong he can do unto
them. They hate teaching, they hate the best means that can be used to bring
them unto knowledge. O that these men would well consider of two places of
scripture, that do notably set forth their sin and danger. The first is, Pro.
5.12. Where the wisdom of God speaking of that anguish of soul, that many
lewd men feel on their deathbed, brings them in complaining of this, as of
a chief cause of it. Oh says he, how have I hated instruction? As if he had
said, In my youth and health, I could not abide to be taught, and now this is
that, that of all other my sins, lies most heavy upon my conscience.
Certainly, all places do afford daily examples of this. And who knows how
soon this may be his own case? The second place is that in Pro. 1.27, 28, 29.
When distress and anguish comes upon you, then shall they call upon me, but I
will not answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me, for
that they hated knowledge. Observe four things in these words. 1. Distress
and anguish will come one day upon the most secure and senseless sinner, and
who knows how soon this distress and anguish of soul may come upon him? 2.
In distress and anguish, the most secure and senseless sinner, and such as
care least for God and goodness, are wont to seek unto him, then they will
pray and cry unto God, they will make show of much goodness, they will desire
the help of good men in prayer. 3. God uses to despise and reject the prayers
that such men make unto him in their greatest distress, or that others do make
for them. 4. The maine sin that provokes the Lord so against such men, that
causes him thus to reject their prayers, is this, because they hated knowledge
in the days of their health and peace, they had hated and despised the means
of knowledge and grace. And so much shall serve for the first exhortation.

and blessing in the very life and soul of every ordinance of God; that
therefore we would not rest in our performance of any duty of Gods worship, but
make this our chief care to find that God is with us in it, that he works
with every ordinance of his in our hearts, and blesses it unto us. We that
are preachers should labor so to preach, as we may find God working with us,
and blessing our labors. This was Paul's maine desire to see fruit of his
labors. He longed to be with the Romans, as he says, Rom 1.13. that he
might have some fruit among them also, as he had among the other Gentiles. And
he professes, Phil. 1.22. that this fruit of his labor (which he desired,
and looked to find in his ministry) was the only thing that made him willing
to live. And you that are Gods people should look unto, and desire this
chiefly in your hearing, that you may find God in this ordinance, that you may
hear the Lord speaking to your hearts, and feel his arm revealed in it. I
will hear (says the Psalmist, Ps. 85.8.) what God the Lord will speak. And
all of us should strive to find God with us in our prayers, not only by the
help he yields us in them, by quickening and assisting us. This is that
which the Apostle, Jude 20. calls praying in the holy Ghost. But also we
should observe, what answer the Lord returns to our prayers, what fruit we
have of them. In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee, for thou will
answer me, says David. Psalms 86.7. O he stood much upon this, and could
not be satisfied without it. H^are me o Lord (says he, Psalm. 27.7.) when I
cry with my voice have mercy also upon me, and answer me. Certainly so should
every one of us do likewise.

But for the better enforcing of this exhortation, 1. I will give you some
motives to stir you up to seek this. 2. I will direct you to some means
whereby you may obtain it. 3. Lastly, I will answer an objection that many of
Gods people are apt to make against themselves in this case, because they do
not profit by Gods ordinances, nor find his presence in them. For motives
therefore consider.

First. Motive 1
That as it is a curse, and great sign of Gods displeasure, when a man using
and enjoying all outward means of health and strength of body, or of wealth
and increasing in his worldly estate, cannot find that he is ever a whit the
better by them, because God with holds his blessing from them; and so it is
spoken of Haggi 1.6. when a man eats and drinks that that is wholesome and
good, but it neither nourishes, nor satisfies him; when a man labors hard
in his calling, and gets well by his labor, but is never the richer at the
years end. As this I say is a sensible judgment of God, and such a one as
every one will acknowledge to be a sign of Gods displeasure; So is it
certainly as evident a curse, and sign of Gods wrath, when a man enjoying and
using all outward means of grace, he ^^adeth, and hears the word, he
prays, and receives the Sacrament ordinarily, yet thriveth not one jot in
grace by them, because God works not with any of these means, nor gives his
blessing to them. And so is this spoken of, as of a great curse of God, Matthew
13.14. Hearing ye shall hear (that is, ye shall hear my Prophets, mine own
sons (for of such hearing he speaks) ordinarily, diligently) and shall not
understand (as if he had said, you shall be never the better for it) and
seeing ye shall see, (you shall have all the help your eye can yield you, to
bring you to grace, as you know, that not only in the works of God, but in
the sacrament also the Lord has appointed our eye to be a great help to our
faith) but you shall not perceive. The like is also said of a prayer, Esaias
1.15. When ye make many prayers, I will not hear you.

Secondly. Motive 2
As in all other the means of our comfort in this life, this is the maine
ground of our joy, to find that the Lord is with us in them. David behaved
himself wisely in all his ways (says the holy Ghost, 1 Samuel 18.14.) and the
Lord was with him. So it is said of Joseph, Genesis 39, 20.21. that he was cast
into prison, but the Lord was with Joseph. As if he had said, Joseph was a
happy and a comfortable man, even in prison, because the Lord was with him. So
it is specially a maine ground of comfort to us, when we can find God is with
us in his worship, prospering and blessing that unto us; when we can say of
every service we have done unto God, of every part of his worship that we have
performed as the Church does, Esa. 26.12. Lord thou will ordain peace for us,
for thou also have wrought all our works in us.

Motive 3
Thirdly. If we profit not by Gods ordinances, we make our selves guilty of an
heinous sin, even of taking Gods name in vain. For what is it to take Gods
name in vain, if this be not, when we ordinarily read, and hear his word, and
receive his sacraments, and use to pray, and all in vain* receive no profit,
are never the better for it? And certainly God will not hold them guiltless
that take his name in vain, Exodus 20.7.

Motive 4
Fourthly and lastly. If God be not present, if he work not with his ordinances
in us in mercy, he will be present, and work with them in us in judgment. If
we be not the better for them, certainly we shall be the worse for them; where
Gods ordinances prove not a savor of life, they will prove a savor of death,
2 Cor. 2.16. See an experience of this in John 13.27. After the sop (and that
was after he had communicated with Christ in the passover) Satan entered into
Judas. And would to God we had not daily examples of this every where? In
which respect the Apostle bids the Corinthians take heed, 1 Cor. 11.34. that
when they came to receive the Communion, they came not together unto
condemnation.

Now if you would know the means, how we may obtain this, that God may be
with us, and work with us in all his ordinances, making them effectual in us,
to those ends he has ordained them for; they are four principally.

Means 1
First. We must perform every duty of Gods worship with fear, least we should
by our loose and careless performance of it, offend God, and loose that we
come for, miss of his blessing in it. Serve the Lord with fear, says the
Prophet. Psalm 2.11. That which our Savior says of one of Gods ordinances,
Luke 8.18. Take heed how ye hear, may be said to us likewise of every other
duty in Gods worship, take heed how ye receive, and how you pray, and how you
read the word also. You have heard in the motives just cause we have to do so
Let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably (says the Apostle,
Heb. 12.28, 29. And how is that) with reverence and godly fear, For our God is
a consuming fire, says he. As if he had said, We can never serve God
acceptably, unless we do it in an high reverence of his glorious greatness,
and of his ordinances, and with fear of offending him by our loose and
careless performance of it.

Means 2
Secondly. If we would have God to join with us in his ordinances, and to do
his work in our hearts by them, we must strive to come to them in more
humility, and sense of our own unworthiness. The Lord is ^igh to them that
are of a broken heart, says David, Psalm 34.18. This is said to be one of the
maine duties, that God requires of all his people. Micah 6.8. To walk humbly
with thy God. There is no hope that he will walk with us, converse with us,
join and work with us in his service, unless we walk humbly with him. See
an example of this in Paul, he was a man that God did marvellously assist and
work with in his ministry; see the reason of it, Act. 20.19. He served the
Lord with all humility of mind, and with many tears.

Means 3
Thirdly. If we would have God to work with us, and bless his ordinances unto
us, we must come to them in repentance, casting of every known sin before we
approach unto God, with a full resolution, never to take it up again. The
necessity of this the Lord taught his people under the law by this ceremony,
Exodus 30.20. When Aaron and his sons go into the tabernacle of the
congregation, they shall wash with water, that they dye not. And as the Lord
intended by that ceremony, to teach us that are his ministers, how dangerous a
thing it is for us, to meddle with the service of God, till we have
sanctified, and cleansed our selves from all our filthiness, both of flesh and
spirit; so has he taught all his people, that it is no less dangerous for
them to come before him in any part of his worship, being yet in our sins.
See this in the extraordinary worship of God. Sanctify a fast, sanctify the
Congregation, says the Prophet, Joel 2.15, 16. The people of God are not fit
to keep a fast, we cannot expect, that the day of our fast will prove a day
of atonement between God and us, unless we be careful before our fast to
sanctify our selves, to search out, and purge our selves from all our known
sins. See this also in ordinary duties of Gods worship. 1. For the Sacrament,
It is evident by Hezechiahs prayer, 2 Chronicles. 30.19. 1. that God commanded all
his people to cleanse themselves according to the purification of the
sanctuary, before they did presume to receive the passover. 2. That God was
offended with the people there, that neglected this, for he prays that God
would not lay that sin to their charge, and upon his prayer God healed them.
And in obedience to that law, it is said, John 11, 55. that in Christ's time
many went out of the country up to Jerusalem before the passover, to purify
themselves. And our Savior after the passover, before he celebrated the
Sacrament of his body and blood with his disciples, washed their feet, as we
read, John 13.5. And those bodily purifications, and washings, did signify
(certainly) the purging, and cleansing of the soul from sin, by the blood
and spirit of Christ. No man may hope to receive any good by the Sacrament,
that has not care before he go to it, to purge, and cleanse himself from
his sins. 2. For the ministry of the word. Every one (says the Lord, Eze.
14.7, 8.) which separateth himself from me, and sets up his idols in his
heart (every man's lust we know is his idol, covetousness is idolatry, Col.
3.5.) and puts the stumbling block of his iniquity before his face
(affects it, loves it, cannot look of on it) and comes to a Prophet to
enquire of him concerning me (seeks to know my will out of my word) I will
set my face against that man, says the Lord. Certainly that man, that
brings to the hearing of the word, any known sin with him in his heart,
affects it, loves it, is not willing to part with it, separateth himself
from God, can have no hope that God will join or work with him in this his
ordinance, nay he highly provokes God by coming to it in this manner.
Wherefore (says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.1.2.) laying aside all malice, and all
guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and evil speakings, as newborn babes,
desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby. As if he had
said, There is no hope we should ever grow in grace, or thrive by the word in
the best ministry under heaven, if our care be not before we come to it, to
lay aside all our known sins with full purpose of heart, never to take them
up again. 3. Lastly. For prayer. If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out
thine hands toward him (says Zophar, Job 11.13, 14.) if iniquity be in thine
hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles. As
if he had said, If a man before he go to prayer, be not careful to cast
away all his known sins, nay, if he wink at, or bear with any sin that
he knows to be in his family, he can have no hope to find audience or
acceptance with God in any prayer, that he makes unto him. So that you see
how undoubted a truth it is which the Prophet speaks. Esaias 59.2. Our
iniquities will separate between us, and our God. Certainly this is the maine
cause why all Gods ordinances prove so fruitless to us, we read and hear,
and receive the Sacrament and pray ordinarily, yea we sometimes keep fasts
too, and yet are never the better. Though God have promised he will meet with
his people in his public worship, There (that is, in the tabernacle of the
congregation) I will meet with the children of Israel, says the Lord, Exodus
29.43. (And he has bound himself every whit as much to meet with his people
in his public worship under the Gospel as he did then, as is plain, Matthew.
28.^0.) yet we frequenting the tabernacle of the congregation ordinarily, can
seldom or never meet the Lord there, nor find his gracious presence there;
What is the cause of this? Surely some known sin (we harbor in our selves,
and which we have no care to purge our selves of, when we should go to God)
breaks the meeting and seperateth between us and our God. So that to
conclude the third Means, If it be indeed a trouble to us that we feel no
more life and power, no more fruit and comfort in any of Gods ordinances, let
us learn of Saul and do as he did, 1 Samuel 14.37, 38. When he had sought to God
and the Lord answered him not, he resolves to search and find out by the best
means that he could the special sin that was the cause of it. And so should
we do.

Means 4
Fourthly and lastly, If we do indeed desire that God would accompany his
ordinances and work with them in our hearts we must beg this of God by fervent
prayer. This course we should take in all things we are troubled with the want
of, in every thing we do desire. Be careful for nothing (says the Apostle,
Philip. 4 6.) but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thankesgiving,
let your request be made known unto God; As if he had said, Acquaint God with
all your desires. But in our spiritual wants especially we should do this. No
suit we can make to God pleases him so well, as this when we beg grace of him.
It pleased the Lord (says the Text, 1 King. 3.10.) that Solomon had asked this
thing; that is to say, Wisdom and grace to govern well. Neither is there any
suit that we may be so sure to speed in, as this. How much more (says our
Savior, Luke 11.13.) shall your heavenly father give the holy spirit, to them
that ask him?

And thus have I finished the two first things that I promised to handle in the
enforcing of this exhortation; it follows that I proceed to the third and
last thing; that is to say, To answer that, which many good hearts are apt to
object against themselves in this case.

Object.
There is no one thing that many of Gods servants do more complain of and
mourn for then this, that in no action or occasion of their life. they are so
heartlesse or uncomfortable as in the duties of Gods worship; they profit not
by any of Gods ordinances, the Lord works not with them in their hearts. For
this they mourn and vex themselves as judging it to be a certain sign that
they are forsaken of God, and out of his favor; yea they are even apt to
resolve with themselves, as good never a whit as never the better; it is to no
purpose for them to frequent the ordinances of God any longer, seeing they are
never the better for them.

Answ.
To these good souls I have two things to say. 1. Somewhat for their direction.
2. Somewhat for their comfort.

the Apostle says, Gal. 6.9. Let us not be weary of well-doing for in due
season we shall reap, if we faint not. Thou must do as those poor impotent
persons did, Ioh. 5.3. they came to the poole of Bethesda and lay waiting there
for the moving of the water; So must thou still bring thy self to these
ordinances of God, and wait till God shall be pleased to stir and move thy
heart by them. We read of Jacob that when the Lord had wrastled with him, and
seemed desirous to leave him and be gone, Genesis 32.26. Jacob resolved he would
not let him go till he had blessed him; So should all true Israelites do,
follow the Lord constantly in the use of his ordinances, and resolve never to
leave him, nor give him over till he have blessed them.

Secondly, I have four things to say for the comfort of these poor souls

First, It is a blessed sign that thou can thus desire to find Gods gracious
Tell him (says she, Cant. 5.8.) that I am sick of love. And you know who it
was that said, Matthew. 5.3, 4. Blessed are the poor in spirit, blessed are they
that mourn thus.

Secondly, They that can thus desire to profit by Gods ordinances, shall
certainly He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, says the
Prophet, Psalm, 145.19. And this is the happiness (says our Savior, Mat.
5.6.) of them that hunger and thirst after grace, that they shall certainly be
satisfied.

Thirdly, It may be God has already been graciously present with thee in God
speaks once, yea twice (says Elihu, Job 33.14.) yet man perceives it not.
He teaches many a good thing to some of his servants, and they learn it too,
and yet cannot perceive that they have learned any thing, that they have
profited at all. Surely God is in this place (says Jacob, Genesis 28.16. he
perceived it then) and I knew it not.

Fourthly and lastly, Even this is a certain sign they have already profited
Paul, Romans 7.9. I was alive without the law once. What is it then that has
wrought this change in thee? Is it not the Word and Gods working with it.
Whatsoever does make manifest is light, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.13. It is
not corruption but grace that discovers to a man his own wants and
corruptions. And this was a certain sign that that poor man, Mar. 9.24. had
true faith in him, because he mourned so for his unbeleefe, and did so desire
to believe.

Lecture CXVIII. On Psalm 51.6. May 12. 1629.
NOw we are to come unto the several parts of this verse, and to observe in
the words these two things. 1. What he craveth here and beggeth of God. 2. The
Reason he gives whereby he was moved to beg these things of God. His petition
is that God would purge and wash him from his sins. The reason he gives for
this his so earnest a suit, is taken from the benefit and fruit he should
receive by it, he knew if God would be pleased thus to purge him and wash him,
he should then be clean from all the filthiness of his sin, yea he should be
whiter in Gods eye, and account then any snow is in the eye of man.

In the petition two things must be observed. 1. What it was whereby he did
desire to be purged and washed from his sins. 2. In what manner he did
desire to be purged with it. The thing which he desired to be purged and washed
with, was the blood of Christ, that was the thing which he knew was signified
and represented, both by the water and blood that was used under the law, for
the purifying of them that were unclean. So that the meaning of his petition
is this, Lord wash me from my sins in the blood of Christ, Lord sprinkle (as
with a bunch of hysope) and effectually apply to my soul that blood of thy
son.

Nota.
Then the first particular that is to be observed in these words is this, that
though in the first verse when he begged so earnestly of God the pardon of his
sins, he sued for nothing but mercy, he grounded his faith and hope to speed in
that suit only upon the infinite mercy of God; yet here renewing the same suit
and suing still for nothing else but the pardon of his sin, yet he mentions
not mercy now, but shows the way and means whereby he hoped to obtain this
mercy from God for the pardon of his sin; by the blood of Christ, by being
washed in that, by having that sprinkled upon him and applied to him, he
looked to obtain mercy with God for the pardon of his sin, and by no other
means. From hence then this Doctrine arises for our instruction.

Doct. 26
That the only means whereby men obtain mercy with God for the pardon of
their sins, is the blood of Christ.

Two branches there be of this Doctrine which must be distinctly handled. 1. No
mercy can be expected from God but through Christ only. He is the conduit
pipe whereby all mercy is conveyed from God unto us. Of his fulness (says
the Evangelist, John 1.16.) have we all received. 2. Whatsoever mercy we
receive from God by Christ, we obtain it by his blood.

Branch 1
See the proof of the first point in six particulars.

the free gift ((...)) of God, and obtained merely through his mercy; but this
free gift, this mercy we have no hope to receive from God but only through
Christ, The gift of God is eternal life, (says the Apostle, Romans 6.23.)
through Jesus Christ our Lord. In which respect he is called our hope, 1 Timothy
1.1.

without which no man shall see the Lord (as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 12.14.)
are the free gifts of God and obtained merely through his mercy; for he is the
God of all grace, as the Apostle calls him, 1 Pet. 5.10. But this mercy is
obtained from God only through Christ. He has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly places in Christ, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.3. It is he
that gives repentance unto Israel, and forgivenes of sins as the Apostle
speaks, Acts 5.31.

Cor. 1.4, 5. calls them the grace of God which was given them in Jesus
Christ.

Every man to whom God has given riches and wealth (says Solomon, Eccl.
5.19.) and has given him power (a mind) to eat thereof, and to take his
portion, and to rejoice in his labor, this is the gift of God. But this mercy
also the faithful obtain only though Christ. Worthy is the lamb that was
stain (say the holy Angels, Revel. 5.12.) to receive power and riches and
wisdom. As if they had said, All riches as well as all power and wisdom are
his and his only. Him God has made heir of all things, as the Apostle says,
Heb. 1.2. All things are yours, and ye are Christ's, says he, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
As though he had said, Nothing is ours, we have not a spiritual and
comfortable title to any thing, till we be Christ's.

Fifthly, The love and good will of God toward us (which is the only root Luke
2.14. Glory be to God in the highest, and on earth peace good will toward men.
As if they should have said, God could bear no good will toward men, but only
through Christ.

Sixthly and lastly, No man can have any true boldness to go to God or to No
man comes unto the father but by me, says our Savior, Ioh. 14 6. In him we
have boldness and access with confidence, says the Apostle, Ephesians 3.12. and
in him only. Whatsoever good thing we want and would beg of God by prayer, we
must ask it in his name, and look to obtain it only through him and and for
his sake. Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name he will give it unto
you, says our Savior, John 16.23. And whatsoever good thing we have received
from God and would be truly thankful to God for, we must ascribe it only to
Christ and acknowledge we have received it for his sake alone, Giving thanks
to God and the father by him, as the Apostle teaches us, Col. 3.17. And thus
we have seen the first proof of the Doctrine. No mercy can be expected from
God, but through Christ alone.

The second follows. Branch 2
No mercy can be expected from God by Christ, but only through his blood; if
he had not suffered and endured that for us which he did, both in his soul
and body, we could never have found any mercy from God at all. See the proof
of this also in three particulars.

First, All the mercies of God that concern our justification, the acquitting
Being justified by his blood (says the Apostle, Romans 5.9.) we shall be saved
from wrath through him. In Christ we have redemption though his blood (says
he, Ephesians. 1.7.) the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his
grace. As if he had said, It is of the riches of Gods free grace, that any of
us obtain the forgiveness of our sins, but the riches of Gods grace are
procured to us by the blood of Christ, and by no other means. Him has God set
forth (says he, Romans 3.25.) to be a propitiation through faith in his blood.
Three things are to be observed in these words. 1. God has made Christ the
mercy-seat. The mercy-seat under the law was but a type and figure of him; They
that would obtain any mercy from God, must seek it in and through him only.
2. Whereas the mercy-seat under the law stood in the holy of holyes, within the
veil and was hiden not only from the people but from the priests also, the
High Priest only had access unto it, and that but once a year, the Lord has
now by the ministry of the Gospel set forth this mercy-seat, openly to the
view of all men, all men may have access unto it. 3. As the Hhigh-Priest who
was a type of Christ came not to the mercy-seat, could find no mercy with God
nor make atonement between him and his people, without the blood of a
sacrifice, Levit. 16.14. so may no man come to the true mercy-seat nor hope to
find mercy with God through Christ, but only by faith in his blood.

Romans 6.6. ascribe our mortification to the death of Christ. Our old man (says
he) is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
hence forth we should not serve sin. So that ability that is given us of God
to lead a new life and to walk in his ways is ascribed to the passion and
sufferings of Christ. It is the blood of Christ (says the Apostle, Heb. 9.14*)
who through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot unto God, that
purges our conscience from dead works, to serve the living God. And that
strength that any child of God has to resist tentation, is to be ascribed to
the passion and sufferings of Christ. By Christ crucified (says the Apostle,
Gal. 6.14.) the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.

We have boldness (says the Apostle, Heb. 10.19.) to enter into the Holiest
(into heaven whereof the holy of holyes in the temple was a figure) by the
blood of Jesus. As if he should say, There is nothing that can make a man die,
and go to God with true boldness and expectation of a better life, but only
faith in the blood of Christ. And in this respect it is that the Apostle
calls his whole ministry the preaching of the cross of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.18.
and we preach Christ crucified, says he, verse 23. that was the whole matter
and scope of his ministry, to teach men to look for all mercy and comfort
from God only through the passion, and sufferings of Jesus Christ. Yea he
tells the Corinthians, 1 Cor 2.2. that when he was among them (where learning
and eloquence did abound) he determined not to know any thing save Jesus
Christ and him crucified, he resolved with himself to show no other learning
but this, to set forth to them in the best manner he could, the sufferings of
Christ and the benefit and fruit that comes to Gods people by them. Nay he
professes of himself, Gal. 6.14. that the cross of Christ his passion and
sufferings, was the only ground of all his comfort, he rejoiced and gloryed in
nothing else. God forbid (says he) that I should glory, save in the cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ. And thus we have heard the Doctrine confirmed unto us
sufficiently.

Reason 1
Let us now proceed to the reasons and grounds of it, and they are two
principally according to the two several branches of the Doctrine.

First, No man can expect any mercy from God but only through Christ, Because
he knows that he is by nature the child of wrath. We all (says the Apostle,
Ephesians. 2.3.) were by nature the children of wrath, even as others, the elect as
well as the reprobate, the blessed Apostle as much as any other man, was by
nature the child of wrath. And as he knows he is in this estate by nature;
so by falling into and living in known sins, he knows likewise that he
provokes the Lord afresh oftentimes, and makes him his enemy. Thou hate
all workers of iniquity, says David, Psalm. 5.5. They rebelled and vexed his
holy spirit (says the Prophet, Esa. 63.10. speaking of Gods own people)
therefore he was turned to be their enemy. And who can expect mercy and
kindness from him whom he knows to be his enemy? No no, no mercy, no comfort
can be looked for at Gods hands, nothing but terror, nothing but indignation
and wrath, while God is our adversary, till we be reconciled unto him. Till
then (if a man's conscience be not senseless) there can be nothing in him but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment (as the Apostle speaks, Heb.
10.27.) and of fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries. Now
Christ is the only mediator between God and us to go between us, and make
reconciliation, There is but one Mediator between God and man, (says the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.5.) the man Christ Jesus. And Col. 1.19, 20. It pleased the
Father by him to reconcile all things unto himself.

Secondly. Reason 2
No man can expect any mercy from God, till he know first that the justice of
God is satisfied for him. As the Lord has set this law unto all men to look
first to justice, and then to mercy, not to show mercy unto any wi^h neglect of
justice. What does the Lord require of thee (says he, Mic. 6.8.) but to do
justly and to love mercy? Thou shall not respect the person of the poor in
judgment says the Lord, Levit. 19.15. As if he had said; Thou shall not out
of compassion to his distressed estate, neglect to do justice: So has he set
this law unto himself, to look first to justice, and then to mercy, not to
have compassion upon any man's misery, or to show mercy on him, with neglect of
his justice. For God is infinite in justice, and will have his Law satisfied to
the full. It is easier for heaven and earth to pass (says our Savior, Luc.
16.17.) than for one title of the law to fail. As though he should say; The
Lord had rather heaven and earth, and all the creatures therein should come to
naught, and perish everlastingly, than that one word or title of his Law should
fail and be unfulfilled. And this is the irrecoverable sentence of his Law
which the Apostle mentions, Galat. 3.10. Cursed i^ every one that continues
not in all things that are written in the Law to do them. Till therefore a man
know that this sentence of the law be fulfilled, till a man know that this
curse is borne for him, he cannot expect to find any mercy with God. See how
the Lord has expressed himself in this point, even in that place where he
has amplified his mercy most, and set it forth to the full: I mean Exodus
34.6, 7. The Lord is merciful and gracious, long s^ffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and
transgression and sin. What can be said more for the amplifying of Gods mercy
than is said here? And yet mark what follows in the very next words; and that
will by no means clear the guilty. As if he had said; As infinite as the Lord
is in mercy, yet will he by no means clear any man that is guilty of the
transgression of his law, without satisfaction be made to his justice for him.
And who is able to make satisfaction to the justice of God for the sin of
man? Who is able to satisfy the law, and to bear this penalty and curse that
is due unto him for the least transgression of it? Who can stand before his
indignation (says the Prophet, Nah. 1.6.) and who can abide in the fierceness
of his anger? Surely all the Angels and Saints in heaven and earth could not do
it. Only Christ Jesus who was more than a man, was able to do it, and did it
for his elect to the utmost. The Lord has laid upon him (says the Prophet,
Esa. 53.6.) the iniquity of us all; that is, the full punishment of all our
iniquities. Christ has redeemed us (says the Apostle, Gal. 3.13.) from the
curse of the law, being made a curse for us. He trod the winepresse of the
fierceness and wrath of almighty God, says John, Rev. 19.15. There was not
one jot of the fierceness and wrath of God that was due to the sins of any
of the elect, but he trod it out, it came all upon him. Christ himself our
blessed Mediator could not make our peace with God, nor get him to pardon our
sin and show us mercy, by entreaty, or intercession, or by any other means,
till he had satisfied the law for us, till he had paid every farthing of our
debt, till he had borne the curse and punishment that was due to us for our
sins, even to the uttermost. When we were enemies (says the Apostle, Romans
5.10.) we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; nothing but the
death of his Son would do it. This truth the Lord taught his people even
under the Law. Without a sacrifice, without shedding of blood there was no
remission of any sin says the Apostle, Heb. 9.22. It is the blood (says the
Lord, Levit. 17.11.) that makes atonement for the soul. And these are the
reasons and grounds of the Doctrine.

Now before we come to the uses of it, a question must be resolved to prevent
the misunderstanding of this that has been delivered, and to make way for the
uses that are to be made of it.

Quest.
How can it be said that no mercy can be obtained of God for us by any other way
but by the bloody passion of Jesus Christ, seeing the Scripture so often
ascribes our whole salvation to the mere grace and goodness of God only. By
grace ye are saved, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.5. And for the undoubted
certainty of this truth, he repeateth it again, Verse 8. in the very same
words, and teaches us that our whole salvation comes most freely unto us. I
will love them freely, says the Lord, Hos. 14.4. We are justified freely by
his grace, says the Apostle, Romans 3.24. And thus runs the promise, Revel.
21.6. I will give to him that is a thirst, of the fountain of the water of
life freely.

Answ.
To this I answer; that though the pardon of our sins and salvation of our souls
be (in respect of Christ our surety) no free gift but a dear purchase, neither
do we obtain it till it was dearly bought and purchased for us. Ye are bought
with a price, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.20. Yea such a price as the Apostle
(1 Timothy 2.6.) calls (...), fully answerable in worth to the souls of all
Gods redeemed ones, and to that which God has given us; yet in respect of our
selves and of our obtaining of it, it is merely of grace, it is the free gift
of God; It is merely of mercy and free grace that any of us are saved. This
will evidently appear unto us in five points.

He purposed this in himself, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.9. there was nothing
out of himself that moved him to it. He devised this way how to make
satisfaction unto himself. God was in Christ (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.19.)
and reconciled the world (of the elect he means, for certainly all are not
reconciled unto him) to himself. This was certainly the free grace and mere
mercy of God, and nothing else that moved him to do this. Yea his love and mercy
to his elect appeared more in this, than if by his absolute prerogative and
sovereignty he had forgiven us, without exacting any satisfaction for us at
all, God so loved the world (says our Savior, Ioh. 3.16.) that he gave his
only begotten Son, etc.

He predestined us (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.5.) unto the adoption of
Children, by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his
will. As if he had said; The good pleasure of his own will, and nothing else
moved him to do this. In this respect our Savior says of his faithful
Disciples, Ioh. 17.6. Thine they were, and thou gave them me; And Verse 9. I
pray not for the world, but for them that thou have given me, for they are
thine.

No man can come to me (says our Savior, Ioh. 6.65.) except it were given
unto him of my Father.

Ephesians. 1.6. that it is to the praise of the glory of his grace, that he has
made us accepted in his beloved, nothing has bound him to do it, but his own
free promise and grace only.

Fifthly and lastly, It is the free grace of God, and nothing else, that moves
Solomon break forth into those terms of admiration and wonderment, 1 King.
8.23. O Lord God of Israel, there is no god like unto thee, who keep
covenant and mercy with thy servants, that walk before thee with all their
heart. As if he should have said, It is the mavelous mercy of God, that he
keeps covenant even with the best of his servants, considering how many their
failings be. And thus have I finished my Answer to the Question, and showed
you, that though our salvation were not free to Christ, but he paid dear for
it, yet to us it is free, we obtain it only through the free grace and mercy
of God.

Lecture CXIX. On Psalm 51.7. May 26. 1619.
IT follows now that we proceed unto the uses that this Doctrine serves
unto; and those are three principally. 1. For instrustion. 2. For exhortation.
3. For comfort.

For the first. Use 1.
This Doctrine will teach us to judge rightly of sin, and to esteem of it as
it does deserve. Four points there are to be observed in this Doctrine, that
do notably set forth the odiousness and heinousness of sin.

First, no creature in heaven or earth can cleanse thee from the least of all
He is the propitiation for our sins, says the Apostle, 1 John 2.2. and he
alone. In Popery men are taught that many will do it. Pardons may be bought of
the Pope we know; and the larger sum a man is content to disburse for it, the
larger shall his pardon be. They teach also that men may by their almsdeeds and
good works (specially by doing good to the Church) redeem and buy out their
iniquities, and make satisfaction to the justice of God, for the temporal
punishment that is due to them for sin; so that the more bountiful a man is
that way, the less he shall need to fear the fire of Purgatory, or any other
temporal punishment whatsoever. And this has certainly been a most profitable
and gainful Doctrine to the Church of Rome. But a most blasphemous Doctrine it
is, and such as m^keth the Cross of Christ of none effect; a Doctrine directly
contrary to the holy Scriptures, and to that which the Apostle Peter (whom they
make the rock upon which their Church is built) did teach. Ye know (says he, 1
Pet. 1.18.) that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and
gold from your vain conversation received by tradition from your feathers. No
silver and gold (though we had never so many thousands to give unto pious uses)
can redeem and buy out the least of our sins no not our vain conversation,
our unprofitable walking, our sins of omission, or any part of the punishment
that is due to us for it. And this ye know, says the Apostle, this was a truth
clearly known to all Gods people then. The Churches that were planted by the
Apostles were fully persuaded of it. And if the present Church of Rome had
been of the Apostle Peter's founding (as they pretend) certainly silver and
gold could not be of such use and worth there for procuring pardons for sin,
as all the world knows that now it is. But what speak we of silver and gold?
Not all the Angels or Saints in heaven or earth were ever able by all their
holiness and good works, by all their prayers and intercessions to merit of
God for any man, the pardon of the least sin. And in this also, Popery does
miserably and damnably deceive the world. We know they teach men to trust, and
expect mercy from God in the pardon of their sin, by the merits and
intercession of the Saints, specially of the blessed Virgin. And it is
notorious to the world, that their whole Church in their public Liturgy do
often beg of God the pardon of sin and deliverance from his wrath, for the
merits and intercession of such and such Saints. Miserable comforters are they,
that teach poor souls in this case, to lean upon the staff of this bruised
reed. Of all the Saints that have been most rich in grace and good works,
that may truly be said which David speaks of the worldly rich men. Psalm.
49.7, 8. None of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give unto God
a ransom for him; for the redemption of the soul is precious. No Saint was
ever able with all his holiness and good works, to pay a price sufficient to
satisfy the justice of God, for one soul. Nay (I say more) no Saint or Angel
durst ever so far mediate with God, as to entreat him for his sake, to pardon
any one sin to any soul. If one man sin against another (says old Ely to his
sons, 1 Samuel 2.25.) the judge shall judge him: (satisfaction may be made for
the offense, by the authority of the magistrate) but if a man sin against the
Lord, who shall entreat for him? As if he had said, No Saint or Angel dare
presume to be so much as a mediator of intercession unto God, for any that
has sinned against him. Call now (says Eliphaz to Job 5.1.) if there be any
that will answer, or speak for thee, and to which of the Saints will thou
turn? No, none but Christ only durst ever do so much for any poor sinner.
And this is the first point in this Doctrine, that does discover to us how
heavy and heinous a thing sin is.

fulfilling all righteousness as himself speaks, Matthew. 3.15.) was
(doubtless) of great merit, and we received much benefit by it. As by one
man's disobedience many were made sinners (says the Apostle, Romans 5.19.) so by
the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous. We are justified in part,
even by his active obedience, for by it we obtain the imputation of that
perfect righteousness, that gives us title to the kingdom of heaven. For
seeing it was not possible for us to enter into life, till we had kept the
commandments of God, Matthew. 19.17. and we were not able to keep them our
selves, it was necessary our surety should keep them for us. And he by
performing to the full for us, not for himself; for he being God and not man
only, and his manhood having no personal substistance without the Godhead, was
not bound to keep the law for himself) he (I say) by fulfilling the whole law
of God, did thereby purchase heaven for us, and merit that God should account
us righteous, and perfect fulfillers of his law. By this means he brought in
everlasting righteousness, as the Prophet speaks, Dan. 9.24. In which
respect also the Apostle says, Romans 10.4. that Christ is the end of the law
for righteousness to every one that believes. As if he should say, The end of
the law is to justify them that fulfill it, and this Christ has done for
every one that beleveth in him, and so has made him righteous before God. And
for this cause the Apostle says also, Romans 3.31. Do we then make void the law
through faith? God forbid. Yea we establish the law. As though he had said.
The Doctrine of justification by faith in Christ, does no way derogate from the
law, for it acknowledges a necessity, not only of satisfaction for the penalty
that is due to the transgression of it, but also of a full and perfect
observation of it, in all points, by them that would enter into life. But
though this be so, yet Christ's active obedience, his good works and holy life,
could never have bin meritorious for us, could never have justified us, nor
brought us to heaven, if he had not dyed for us. And therefore both our
justification, and our obtaining of heaven, is ascribed to his blood, as if
that alone had done both. Being justified by his blood (says the Apostle, Romans
5.9 we shall be saved from wrath through him. And we have boldness to enter into
the holiest (that is, into heaven, Heb. 10.19.) by the blood of Jesus. So the
scripture ascribes much to the intercession that our Savior daily makes for
us in heaven, and much comfort (doubtless) we may receive by this, that we
have such a friend in the court, such an advocate to speak and plead and pray
for us unto his father He is able (says the Apostle, Heb. 7.25.) to save them
to the uttermost, that come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them. But his intercession could never have bin meritorious
for us, it could never have prevailed with God for us, to the procuring for us
the pardon of the least sin, if he had not by his death given full satisfaction
to the justice of God for us. When Christ is described unto John, Rev. 5.8, 9.
as the only mediator of intercession, for his Church, (unto whom the four and
twenty Elders representing the whole Catholic Church, and company of all Gods
Saints, do bring their golden viols full of odours which are the prayers of the
Saints, to be presented by him unto his father) he is represented to him in the
likeness of a lamb that was slain, ver. 6.11. And the four and twenty Elders,
ver. 9. give this for the reason why they bring their prayers unto him, and
make him their only mediator of intercession, as well as their only Prophet and
interpreter of his fathers will. Thou art worthy (say they) to take the book,
and to open the seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to
God by thy blood. He could not have been our Prophet, neither could his
intercession and prayers have ever been meritorious for us, if he had not
dyed for us. It is the death of Christ that gives virtue and merit to his
intercession and prayers for us. It is the blood of sprinkli^g, that speaks
better things then that of Abel, says the Apostle, Hebrews 12.^4. It is that
that speaks for us, and pleads with God continually for mercy, as the other
did for vengeance.

Thirdly. Christ himself could not by dying for thee, have cleansed thee from
Christ both redeemed us (says the Apostle, Gal. 3.13.) from the curse of the
law, being made a curse for us, for it is written. Cursed is every one that
hangs on a tree. The scripture indeed seems to ascribe our redemption wholly
to his bodily death, and to the blood that he shed for us. We have redemption
through his blood, even the forgiveness of our sins, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1
7. And Revel. 5.^. Thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood. But we must
understand, that in these and such like places, the holy Ghost uses a
Synechdoche; that is* puts one part of Christ's passion for the whole. And
two reasons there are, why his whole passion is expressed by this part of it,
rather then by the other. 1. Because the shedding of his blood, was the most
apparent and sensible sign and evidence that he did indeed lay down his
life, and dye for us, yea, that he dyed a violent death. For the life of the
flesh, is in the blood, says the Lord, Levit. 17.11. 2. This did best declare
him to be the true propitiatory sacrifice, that was figured by all the
sacrifices under the law, that lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world, as John Baptist calls him, Ioh. 1.^9. But it was not that alone that
could have done the deed, all the pains and torments he endured in his body for
us, could not have obtained for us the pardon of any one sin. He suffered much
more in his soul for us, then he did in his body. He made his soul an
offering for sin, as the Prophet speaks, Esa. 53.10. His soul was exceeding
sorrowful, even to the death. Mat 26.38. He endured the torments of the soul
as well as of the body for us. Yea the curse of God, and those unspeakeable and
unconceivable torments that were due to all the sins of all Gods Elect, both
in body and soul he endured to the uttermost. The Lord spared him not, as the
Apostle says, Romans 8.32. nor abated him one farthing of our debt, but made him
pay it all. The Lord laid upon him (says the Prophet Esa. 53.6.) the iniquity
of us all; that is, the punishment due unto all our iniquities. And verse 4.
Surely he has borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows, the sorrow and
anguish that was due to us for our sins, he has borne it all, and every jot
of it, and so he made full satisfaction to the justice of God for us, and
unless he had so done, he could never have redeemed us from our sins. He made
our peace through the blood of his cross, says the Apostle, Col. 1.20. by no
death but by that cursed death, he could have made our peace with God.

Their worm shall never dye (says the Prophet Esaias 66.24.) their fire shall
never be quenched) Christ being God, mighty in strength, as Job speaks, Job
9.4. was able to bear altogether, and at once, in that short time that he was
upon the Cross. The Apostle calls the blood of Christ whereby we are
redeemed, a precious blood, 1 Pet. 1.19. And indeed it must needs be precious,
of infinite price and merit, able to countervaile and answer for the
everlasting torments that were due to the sins of all Gods elect, because it
was the blood of God himself. God purchased his Church with his own blood
says the Apostle, Acts 20.28. God laid down his life for us, says the
Apostle 1 John 3.16. The Lord of glory was crucified, says holy Paul, 1 Cor.
2.8. Nothing but the infinite suffering of such a person, could have procured
us the pardon of the least of our sins.

Applic.
Now to conclude this use of instruction, and to make some application of it,
Learn by this that thou have heard, to judge rightly of sin, of every sin, of
thine own sins especially. Labor to have a sound judgment in this point, to
be persuaded in thy judgment, that every sin is a most deadly and heinous
thing. Know thou, and see (says the Lord, Ier. 2.19.) that it is an evil
thing, and bitter that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear
is not in thee. Judge not according to the appearance ( Ioh. 7.24. of this
matter) but judge righteous judgment. Judge not of sin according as the world
judges of it, nor according to those colors that Satan and thine own
foolish heart is apt to put upon it, but judge of sin, as God in his word
judges of it, for his judgment will stand when all is done. Account it a
point of extreme folly in thy self, and a sign that thou have lost all
judgment, and that thou art strangely blinded besotted and bewitched by the
devil, even this I say, that thou can think of any sin that it is but a
small matter, that thou can so slight and make nothing of many sins that
thou do in thy heart so scorn and befoole them, whom thou see so precise,
and fearful to do the least thing that might offend God. Fools make a mock
of sin, says Solomon, Prove. 149. They are fools certainly, and stark
fools, that make so small a matter of any sin.

But for the better persuading you to hearken to my counsel in this, I will 1.
give you two motives to seek for soundness of judgment in this case. ^. I
will show you the means whereby you may rectify your judgments in this point.

And for the Motives, consider.

Motive 1
First. That no man can truly repent of his sin, nor be affected with it, as
he ought to be, till he can rightly judge of sin, and know how heinous and
dangerous a thing it is. The will and affections of a man are swayed by his
judgment. Be ye changed by the renewing of your mind, says the Apostle, Romans
12.2. All saving repentance, and change of the heart, begins in the
renewing, and rectifying of the mind and judgment. This will the better
appear, if we consider five things that are required in true repentance. 1.
We and say to it, get thee hence, Esaias 30.22. 2. We must hate and abhor
sin. Levit. 11.10. says, that it should be an abomination unto them. And
verse 43. he gives a good reason for it, for he tells them, that even a
small sin being wittingly committed, would make them abominable unto him. And
have not we just cause to abhor that that will cause the Lord to abhor us?
3. We must They shall mourn for him (says the Prophet, Zach. 1^.10.) as one
mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that
is in bitterness for his first borne. 4. We David does in this Psalm, after
Nathan had been with him, and threatened such heavy judgments against him and
his house. And Elihu reproves Ioh. 36.^1. For choosing iniquity rather then
affliction. A man that is wise and well advised, will choose rather to endure
any affliction, then to commit any iniquity whatsoever. 5. Lastly. We must be
more afraid of sin, of offending God Fear not their fear (says the Prophet,
Esa. 8.12, 33.) nor be afraid, but let the Lord be you-feare, and let him ^e
your dread. And who can possibly thus repent him of his sin, that is not in his
judgment fully persuaded how heinous and odious a thing every sin is.

Secondly. Motive 2
Consider, that till we can rightly judge of our sins, Christ can profit us
nothing. He came to call none but sinners, yea, such as so know, and can judge
of their own sins, as that they are sick at the heart with sorrow and trouble
of mind for them. Mat. 9.12, 13. But of this point I shall have occasion to
speak more in the next use.

Now the means whereby we may come to a right judgment of sin, are five
principally.

First. Means 1
Consider with thy self seriously, that every sin is an offense, and a
contempt done against the infinite Majesty of the eternal God. Against thee,
thee only have I sinned, says David here, verse 4. And therefore it must needs
be a thing infinitely evil and dangerous.

Secondly. Means 2
Consider the only punishment that the Lord in his righteous judgment, has
appointed after this life, for every sin, is everlasting death, in the lake
that burns with fire and brimstone for evermore. The wages of sin, (of
every sin) is death, says the Apostle, Romans 6.2^. even eternal death,
Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, (says he, Romans 2.8, 9. shall
be on every soul that does evil. And how great must that offense needs be,
that the righteous God has appointed such a punishment unto, as no tongue can
express, no heart can conceive, how great and how extreme it is?

Thirdly. Means 3
Think seriously of this, that all the miseries of this life, all the
bitterness we taste of, in all our bodily pains and diseases, in all the
anguish and trouble of our minds, in all our outward wants and distresses, in
the unseasonablenesse of the weather, in all public calamities, come all from
sin. Let no man deceive you with vain words, (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.6.
or tell you, it is nothing to be merry and wanton a little (I would none did
worse then so) or it is nothing to use a little craft and fraud in buying and
selling, alas they that will live in the world must do as the world does) let
no man deceive you with such vain words; says he, for because of these things
comes the wrath of God, upon the children of disobedience. All our woe and
misery comes from our sin, so that there is no day passes over our heads
wherein the Lord does not really teach us how to judge of sin. The Lords
voice cries unto the city (says the Prophet, Mic. 6.9.) and the man of
wisdom shall see thy name, hear the red and who has appointed it. As if he
had said, By his rods and corrections the Lords voice cries unto men. And
though in some rare and extraordinary judgments God does lift up his voice and
cry louder unto men then in others, yet in every one of his judgments and
corrections that do befall us the Lord cries thus to every one of us, Taste and
see in this what it is to sin, what it is to offend God.

Means 4
Fourthly, Consider of this that you have heard now in this Doctrine, what a
price was paid by thy Savior to redeem thee from thy sins, even from the
least of them. Never did God so fully declare his hatred of sin and how
heinous a thing it is in his sight, by all the judgments that he ever executed
upon men or Angels, as he did in the cross of Christ, and in that extreme
abasement and humiliation that he did endure for us. No, if it were possible
for us to see and feel the torments that the damned in hell do endure, yet
could not that be so effectual a means to persuade us what the true desert of
sin is, as the meditation of the cross of Christ, if God would please to give
us hearts to behold it, and meditate of it as we ought to do. They shall look
upon me whom they have pierced (says our Savior, Zach. 12.10.) and then they
shall mourn abundantly. O if we could look well upon Christ crucified (but
that can we never do till the spirit of grace be powered upon us as the Prophet
there speaks) it would not be possible for us to esteem lightly of any
sin, we could not choose, but be deeply affected with our own iniquities

Means 5
Fifthly and lastly, Because (by reason of our natural blindness and the
mavelous cunning and power that the world and Satan have to bewitch us in
this thing) all these considerations and means can never prevail with us,
till God open our eyes; it must be the mighty work of God (specially in so
profane an age as this is) that must persuade us to judge rightly of sin. Who
has believed our report? (say the Ministers of the Gospel, Esa. 53.1. which
may be applied to this as well as to any other Doctrine that we teach in our
ministry) and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? As if they had said,
Why do so few believe any thing we teach out of Gods Word, touching the
heinousness and danger of sin? Surely because there be few upon whom the Lord
is pleased to show his mighty power, in the opening of their eyes. Therefore in
the use of these or any other means for the rectifying of our judgment in
this case, we must cry unto God as Job did, Job 13.23. Make me to know my
transgression and my sin. It is meet to be said unto God (says Elihu to Job,
when he would persuade him to think and judge rightly of his sin, Job 34.31,
32.) that which I know not teach thou me. It is fit and necessary we should cry
unto God, that he would open our eyes and not suffer us to be deluded by
Satan, that he would by his holy spirit teach us to judge rightly of this
matter, to know how heinous and dangerous a thing sin is.

Lecture CXX. On Psalm 51.7. June 9. 1629.
IT follows now that we proceed unto the second use of the Doctrine and that
is for exhortation. Use 2.
For if this be so that no man may hope to find mercy with God for the pardon
of his sin, but only through Christ and his blood, then must we all labor to
know that we have our part in Christ's blood, that we are of the number of them
that he did undertake for. O this is the excellent knowledge when all is done.
This was the knowledge that Paul made such reckoning of as he professes to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 2.2. He determined not to know any thing, among them, save
Jesus Christ and him crucified. Three points are to be observed in that speech
of his. 1. That though he did so excel in knowledge as he durst (without
vainglory) compare with the very chiefest Apostles, as he says, 2 Cor. 11.5,
6. Though I be rude in speech (says he) yet not in knowledge, but we have
been made thoroughly manifest unto you, in all things. As if he had said, There
was no point of religion needful for you to be instructed in, no difficult
case of conscience that any of you had occasion to propound unto me, but I was
able fully and clearly to resolve you in, He had received that abundance of
revelations from the Lord as he was in danger to be exalted above measure
with them, as himself confesses, 2 Cor. 1^.7. Yet does he profess here, that
he made no reckoning of all the rest of his knowledge in comparison of this,
To know Jesus Christ and him crucified was the only knowledge, the only high
point of learning, that he made account of and gloryed in. 2. That this was the
only point of knowledge that in his whole ministry, in all his preaching
among the Corinthians he labored to bring them to, To know Jesus Christ and
him crucified, this was the whole scope and drift of his ministry. In which
respect also he calls his ministry, 1 Cor. 1.18. The preaching of the
cross; and verse 23. The preaching of Christ crucified, as if he preached
nothing but that, all his preaching tended to bring them to this point of
knowledge to know Jesus Christ and him crucified. 3. Observe that he says he
did this advisedly and upon judgment (...) says he I determined and resolved
with my self before I preached among you, that this should be the only point
of knowledge that I would profess my self to have skill in, and which I would
in my whole ministry labor to bring you unto To know Jesus Christ and him
crucified. O that we were all of Paul's mind; o that we all that are preachers
of the Gospel were of Paul's mind; that we would not so much affect and admire
the knowledge of nice and intricate speculations, and busy our own and other
men's heads with unprofitable controversies, with oppositions of science, falsely
so called, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 6.20. that we would not count it our
glory to excel others in such points of knowledge and learning as are vain
and unprofitable, but study this point better and strive to bring our selves
and others to this skill To know Jesus Christ and him crucified. To this end
mark how that blessed Apostle does further express himself in this matter,
Phil. 3.8, 9. Doubtless I count all things but loss, for the excellency of
the knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of
all things, and do account them but dung that I may win Christ and be found in
him, etc. Four things are worthy to be observed in this speech of that holy
man. 1. That there is an excellency in this knowledge, in the knowledge of
Christ above all other knowledge in the world. 2. That he himself had suffered
the loss of all things for Christ's sake, the cause of all his losses, of all
his troubles and persecutions was the constant profession he made of his love
to Christ, and the high and account he made of him, that he would not shrink
from him nor forgo the comfort and sweetness he found in him. 3. That he did
not this out of a rash zeal and headstrong affection, but advisedly and upon
good judgment and mature deliberation, I account all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord, I account them but dung.
As if he should say, I see good reason why I should be content to purchase this
knowledge with the loss of all things, yea that I should even loath all things
as the filthiest dung and cry fie upon them, when they come in competition with
Christ and I cannot enjoy them, but I must loose my comfort in Christ. 4.
Lastly, Observe what a kind of the knowledge of Jesus Christ it was that he
made so great account of, I count all things but loss (says he) for the
excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord; and again, I count all
things but dung that I may win Christ and may be found in him. As if he had
said, To know Christ to be my Lord and Savior, that he did undertake for
me, to win and wear him as mine own, to know that I am in him as the branch
is in the vine, and the sience in the stock, o this is an excellent knowledge
(says he) this is such a knowledge as a man should be willing to purchase
with the loss of any thing that is dearest to him in the world. And this is
the knowledge of Christ that I would feign persuade my self and every one of
you (beloved) to make high account of and to give no rest to our selves, till
we have attained unto it.

And for the better enforcing of this so necessary an exhortation, I will 1
give you some Motives to quicken and stir up this desire in us. 2 Because
most men are too light of belief and confident in this point that Christ is
theirs, I will give you some signs and notes out of Gods Word, how we may know
this and not be deceived in it. 3. Lastly I will show you the Means that they
who have not yet, but would feign win Christ and be found in him, must use to
obtain their desire.

And for Motives there be four that may serve in stead of many, that might be
given.

Motive 1
First, Till thou know that Christ is thine, and that thou art one of them that
he did undertake for, thou can have no assurance that any sin that ever
thou did commit is pardoned, but have cause to judge that thou art still in
thy sins, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 15.17. And consequently that thou art
under the curse of God. He that believes not the son (says our Savior
himself, I^h. 3.36. that is, on the son as is plain by the beginning of the
verse) shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

Motive 2
Secondly, Till thou know Christ is thine, thou can have no hope of mercy from
God in any distress, but though thou be jocund and joviall now in thy health
and prosperity, and gloryest much in God and in his mercy (as many a vile
wretch has done. Thou make thy boast of God says the Apostle, Romans 2.17. of
the Jew that had no part in Christ but hated and blasphemed him; and the
Prophet Mic. 3.11. says of many most lewd men that they leaned upon the Lord)
yet when some sharp and bitter affliction shall awaken thy conscience, thou
can have no hope no comfort in God, thou will find nothing but terrrour in
thinking of him. I remembered God and was troubled, says the Prophet, Psalm.
77.3. And if it were so with that holy man (whom Christ had but withdrawn
himself from for a time, and who had this help to recover himself by, he
could consider his former estate, and call to remembrance his songs in the
night as he says, ver. 5. and what will thy case be that never had any
assurance that Christ is thine?

Motive 3
Thirdly, Till thou know that Christ is thine, and thou art one of them that he
did undertake for, thou can have no assurance of any blessing from God,
spiritual, or corporal. For all the promises of God in Christ, they are yea,
and in him they are Amen; that is, sure and certain as the Apostle speaks, 2
Cor. 1.20. They that are not in Christ have no promise of God, for any thing.
The Lord has made Christ his steward and put all his goods into his hand. All
things are delivered to me of my father, says he, Mat. 11.27. Nothing can come
to us, but through him. Nay God has made him heir of all things, says the
Apostle, Heb. 1.2. All things are his own, and therefore we can have nothing
but from and through him.

Fourthly and lastly, Motive 4
Till thou know that thou art in Christ, and one of those that he did
undertake for, though thou do possess any blessing of God in never so great
a measure, yet can thou not enjoy them nor have any sound comfort in them,
for thou can have no assurance that they are given thee in mercy, and in
love. And that is it that gives the sweet relish to all Gods blessings when a
man can say of them as Jacob does of his children, Genesis 33.5. These are the
children which God has graciously given thy servant. And as David does, 2
Samuel 22.20. He delivered me, because he delighted in me. Then are Gods
blessings sweet to us indeed, when we can relish Gods love in them; when the
heart is persuaded God has given us them in love. Alas we know God has
powered his blessings abundantly upon many men, not in love but in much wrath. I
gave them a King in mine anger, says the Lord, Hos. 13.11. He gave them their
own desire (says the Prophet of the rebellious Israelites that perished in
the wilderness, Psalm 78.29 -- 31.) but while the meat was yet in their
mouths, the wrath of God came upon them; they had the blessing, but they had
it with Gods curse and vengeance. And had they not better have been without
it, then to have had it so? I will curse your blessings, says the Lord, Mal.
2.2. And surely the great hurt which many receive even by Gods blessings, which
they have ( The prosperity of fools shall destroy them says Solomon, Prove.
1.32.) proves evidently that God cast them upon them in wrath, rather then in
love. And a man were better to be without them then to have them without his
love. And no man can be assured God gives him any thing in love, till he be in
Christ. For it is he only that has reconciled us to God and made him our
friend as the Apostle teaches us, Romans 5.10. These points if we could rightly
weigh them will be Motives strong enough, to every one of us to seek to make
this sure to our selves, that Christ is ours, that we are of the number of
those that he did undertake for.

But what needs all this may some say? Object.
I thank God I do verily believe to is already and am confident in this, that
Christ is my Savior, he undertook for me, he died for me. And who but an
Infidel and a beast, will doubt of this, seeing the Scripture says expressly
he died for all mankind. John Baptist calls him, Ioh. 1.29. The lamb of God
that takes away the sin of the world. And the Apostle John (1 Ioh. 2.2.)
says, he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only but for the
sins of the whole world; And the Apostle Paul expresses this plainly, by an
excellent comparison, Romans 5.18. As by the offense of one, judgment came upon
all men to condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift
came upon all men unto justification of life.

But for answer unto these men, Answ.
I shall not need to enter into the controversy which has much troubled the
Church whether Christ died for all men; or whether the Lord in sending his
son into the world, intended that all men should have benefit by him. But
this I say (wherein we all agree, and of which there is no controversy; and
which is as much as need be said for the purpose we have now in hand) that
certainly all men shall not have benefit by him, he has not made all men's
peace with God, he has not undertaken for all men in particular nor satisfied
Gods justice for them, his death is not effectual for all men. No no (beloved)
be not deceived with this conceit, but know. First, There is now and ever has
been a world of men that shall have no benefit by him at all. I pray for them
(says he himself, John 17.9.) I pray not for the world. Secondly, There are
now, and ever have been many even of those that have professed faith in
Christ, that have been most confident in this, that he is their Savior, he
died for them that yet shall have no benefit by him at all. Not every one that
says unto me, Lord Lord (says he, Mat. 7.21 -- 23. he brings them in
doubling that word, to express their earnestness of affection and confidence
that they have in him) shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. Many will say
unto me Lord Lord, and then (then in that dreadful day when they shall have
most need of me, they shall find they were miserably deceived) then will I
profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me, avaunt ye wretches, fie
upon you, out of my sight, I cannot abide you. O (beloved) let every one of us
take heed we be not found among them in that day whom Christ shall so
disclaim. Thirdly, Know that those general speeches of holy Scripture
touching the large extent of the merit of Christ's death which thou buildest so
much upon (and which the Holy Ghost to a singular purpose is pleased to use for
the comfort of Gods elect) are in many other places in a special manner
appropriated to a certain choice and peculiar people. For the transgression of
my people was he smitten, says the Lord himself, Esa. 53.8. And this Church
and people of God for whom Christ in a special manner was stricken, to whom
his death is effectual, is not the common field, the vast wilderness of this
wide world but Gods several and peculiar plot of ground. A garden enclosed is
my sister, my Spouse (says our Savior, Cant. 4.12.) a spring shut up, a
fountain sealed. And thus did our blessed Savior himself (who best knew who
should have benefit by him) profess. I lay down my life for the sheep, says
he, Ioh. 10.15. And John 17 9.) I pray for them that thou have given me, for
they are thine. And for this cause does the Church admire and magnify the love
of Christ, toward them in their solemn song of thankesgiving, Revel. 5 9. Thou
have redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue and
people and nation. See an universal grace, see how universal a redemption
Christ has made; thou have redeemed (say they) by thy blood us out of every
kindred and tongue and people and nation. Fourthly and lastly, Know that the
number of this peculiar people that shall have benefit by Christ, and whose
peace he has made with God, is very small, is nothing if it be compared with
the number of them that shall have no benefit by him. We know that we are of
God (says the Apostle, 1 John 5.19.) and that the whole world lies in
wickedness. The whole world (in a manner) lies in wickedness, and shall
perish in their sins; few or (...) (in comparison) shall have benefit by
Christ. O therefore (beloved) be not deceived or made secure any longer with
this vain conceit that because Christ died for the world therefore that Christ
has paid every man's s^or^, ^at^fied Gods justice for every man's sin. But
seeing there be very few (in comparison) that he has in special undertaken
for, let thou and I labor to know that we are some of those few, of that small
number, of that remnant (...) he has answered for.

And to that end I will show you out of Gods Word (which is the second thing I
promised to handle for the enforcing of this exhortation) the signs and notes
whereby we may know this and not be deceived in it.

Sign.
One sign and note the Holy Ghost has given us to know this by Hereby we know
(says the Apostle, 1 John 4.13.) that we dwell in him and he in us (that he is
ours and we have good title unto him) because he has (...) us of his spirit.
If thou can find that the spirit of Christ dwells in thee, and thou art
guided by it, thou may be sure that Christ is thine.

But if thou have nothing in thee but nature (be it never so good a nature)
thou can not say thou have any part in Christ. If any man has not the Spirit
of Christ (says the Apostle Romans 8.9.) He is none of his.

But this sign is somewhat too general. I will therefore give you four
particular effects and fruits of this Spirit of Christ whereby you may judge of
this.

First, They that are Christ's (says the Apostle, Gal. 5.24.) have crucified
the If any ^inne reign in thee, and thou obeyest it in the lusts thereof; nay
if thou do not make conscience even of thy evil affections, and passions, and
desires, if they be not grievous to thee, if they never trouble thee, certainly
thou can not say that thou art Christ's, that thou art one of them, that he
did undertake for.

Secondly, If any man be in Christ (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.17. he is a If
there be no change wrought in thee by Gods Spirit, in thy mind, in thy
affections, in thy words, in thy company, in thy whole conversation, but thou
art the same that ever thou wast (if not worse) certainly thou can not say
that thou have any part in Christ.

Thirdly, Christ became the author of eternal salvation (says the Apostle,
Hebr. 5.9.) to all them that obey him. Till thou can be content to take
Christ's yoke upon thee, and resolve with thy self willingly to obey him in all
his commandments; so long as thou bear this mind that thou will bear no
yoke, thou will be a free man, thou will live as thou liftest, Christ shall
serve thy turn, but thou will not serve him; thou say, all that he did and
suffered was to save thee, but thou will neither suffer nor do any thing to
honor him, certainly thou can not say, He is become an author of eternal
salvation unto thee.

Fourthly and lastly, I will power upon them (says our Savior, Zachar.
12.10.) the spirit of grace and of supplications; and they shall look upon me
whom they have pierced, and then they shall mourn and be in bitterness. If
the knowledge of this that Christ died for thee, keep thee from being troubled
at all in thy mind for any of thy sins; nay if thou have not felt more hearts
grief and bitterness in thy soul for thy sins, and can more heartily sue
to God for the pardon of them since thou did believe in Christ, than ever
thou did before, certainly it was never the Spirit of grace, but thy own
foolish fancy that has persuaded thee that Christ was pierced for thy sins,
or that thou have any thing to do with the merits of his passion. O think of
these things (beloved) and suffer not thy heart to be any longer deluded in
this matter, that so much concerns thee; but by these notes examine thine
own heart, and labor to be assured upon good grounds, that thou art Christ's;
so as when thou shall appear before him, either at the hour of thy death, or
at the dreadful day of judgment, he may not renounce thee.

And if thou can not find that thy title to Christ is so good, as thou
though^st it had been, and would feign mend it; I will show you how that
must be done, which is the third and last thing I promised to do for the
enforcing of this exhortation.

I will not now speak of the outward Means whereby God has ordained to bring
his people unto faith; Means.
that is to say, the word and prayer, I will speak only of three things
whereby every man's heart must be prepared to receive Christ, and without which
he shall never be able to know Christ to be his, though he use the outward
means of the word and prayer never so long.

First, He that would know indeed that Christ is his, and undertook for
Prophet speaks, Psalm. 42.1, 2. As the heart pants after the water-brookes;
so pants my soul after thee O God, my soul thirsts for God. And as the
Church Esa. 26.9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea with my
spirit within we will I seek thee early: Such as these are Christ inviteth and
bids come and welcome, and take their part in him and all his merits, Esa.
55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts come ye to the waters. Upon such as these he
has promised to bestow himself and all his merits, Rev. 21.6. I will give to
him that is a thirst of the fountain of the water of life freely. But so long
as thou desire many other things as much as Christ, or more than Christ, thou
shall never have sound assurance that Christ is thine, that he has undertaken
for thy sins.

Come buy and eat (says our Savior in that gracious invitation I told you of,
Esa. 55.1. and he repeateth it again and says) yea come, buy wine and milk;
and so he speaks again Revel. 3.18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold, and
raiment, and eye salve; Nothing will be had of him but it must be bought. And
what must we pay for it? Surely all that we have; as you may see in the Parable
of the wise merchant, Math. 13.46. When he had found one pearl^ of great price,
he went and sold all that he had and bought it. And in the example of blessed
Paul: For him (says he, Philip 3.8.) I have suffered the loss of all things,
and do count them but dung that I may win Christ. Why Paul? Could not thou
have won Christ unless thou had suffered the loss of all things? No verily,
says he, unless I had counted all things but as dung in comparison of Christ,
and had been willing to lose all rather than him, I could never have won
him. He that loves father or mother (says our Savior, Matthew 10.37.) more
than me, if not worthy of me. And he that loves son or daughter more than
me, is not worthy of me. Of thee then that say Christ is thine, let me
ask this one question, I pray thee what did he cost thee? What payedst thou
for him? What did thou ever part with that was dear unto thee that thou
might win him? Sure I am thou must buy him before thou have him or else thou
never came honestly by him, thou can have no just title to him. And to thee
that complainest thou have no assurance that Christ is thine; I say, and what
marvel is there in that? Thou that wilt part with nothing that is dear unto
thee for his sake; with no one of thy lusts; with nothing that may yield thee
either profit, or credit, or pleasure; Nay that art willing with Judas to sell
Christ for a little credit, or profit, or pleasure in the world; what hope
can thou have to win Christ, or ever to have any sound comfort in him?

Matthew. 8.25. Lord save us, we perish. These are they whom Christ inviteth, and
promises to refresh, Math. 11.28. even such as are ready to faint and sink in
despair, through the intolerable burden of their sins. Yea he professes
none else shall have benefit by him but such only. I am not come to call the
righteous but sinners, says he, Mat. 9 13. and whom he means by sinners, he
had expressed, Verse 12. such as are even sick and pained at the heart for
their sins. Certainly no man is so fit to receive comfort from Christ, as he
that is most deeply humbled in the sense of his own unworthiness, and is
even apt to judge himself unworthy of mercy; and to say to God as Mephibosheth
did to David, 2 Samuel 9.8. What is thy servant that thou should look upon
such a dead dog as I am? Three notable examples we have to prove this. The one
of the Centurion, Matthew. 8.8. that judged himself unworthy that Christ should
come under his roof. The second of the woman that had the bloody issue, who
judged her self unworthy to ask help of Christ, Luke 8.44.47. but came
stealing behind him in the throng, to touch but the border of his garment, and
when she found her self discovered, came trembling and fell down before him.
The third of the woman of Canaan, Matthew. 15.27. who judged her self to be no
better than one of the dogs which eat of the crummes that fall from their
masters table. Alas then, so long as thou remainest so heart-whole, and art
never sick of thy sins, never pained or troubled with them, thou can run
and skip and dance with thy sins on thy back, and feel them to be no
burden at all unto thee, how should thou ever come to a sound and
comfortable assurance that Christ is thine? And thus have I finished this use
of exhortation; and should now come to that of comfort, which is the third use
I promised to make of this Doctrine. But I must be your debtor for that till I
come to the next Doctrine, whereof I shall have every whit as fit occasion to
handle that Use.

Lecture CXXI. On Psalm 51.7. June 23. 1629.
WE have already heard, that in this petition of David that God would purge and
wash him from his sins (which is the first part of this Verse) two things are
to be observed. 1. The matter, the thing that he desired to be purged and
washed with; that is to say, the blood of Christ; which was represented and
signified by all that water and blood that was used under the Law for the
purifying of them that were legally unclean. 2. The manner how he desired to
be purged and cleansed with it, Purge me with hysop, says he. The former of
these two points we finished the last day; and now it follows that we proceed
unto the latter of them.

And that we may the better receive the instruction that the Holy Ghost
intends to teach us in it, Nota.
we must call to mind that (which we heard in the opening of the words) the
hysop had no other use in the purging of them that were legally unclean, but
only to sprinkle the blood of the sacrifices, and of the water of expiation
upon them. In which respect scarlet wool also was used with the hysop to take
up the more of the blood and water which by the bunch of hysop was to be
sprinkled upon them. Moses took the blood of calves and of goats (says the
Apostle, Hebrews 9.19.) with water, and scarlet wool and hysop, and sprinkled
both the book and all the people. And by this sacramental rite of sprinkling
the blood and water upon the people, with a bunch of hysop, the Lords meaning
was, to apply the blood of the covenant particularly unto them, and to teach
them sensibly, that it did belong unto them. This appears by the words that
Moses used to the people, when he sprinkled the blood of their sacrifices upon
them. Behold (says he Exodus 24.8.) the blood of the covenant which the Lord
has made with you. As if he had said, the covenant is made with you, this
blood whereby the Lords covenant is ratified belongs to you. So that David's
meaning here is to beg this of God, that he would sprinkle the blood of Christ
upon him, and (as with a bunch of hysop) apply it particularly unto him, assure
him it was shed for him, and so purge him from his sins by it. This was the
only way by which he hoped to receive benefit by the blood of Christ, and
whereby he looked to obtain comfortable assurance of the pardon of his sins,
if the Lord would please (as with a bunch of hysope) to sprinkle the blood of
that sacrifice upon his heart. The Doctrine then that we are to receive from
hence for our instruction, is this.

Doct. 27
That no man can receive comfort by the blood of Christ, till it be sprinkled
upon his heart, and applied to him by the spirit of God, till God by his spirit
do assure him that it is his, that it was shed for him.

Two branches there be of the Doctrine you see. 1. No man can receive comfort
by the blood of Christ, but he that has it sprinkled upon his heart, and
applied unto him. 2. None but the Lord himself by his holy spirit can apply
and sprinkle the blood of Christ upon the heart of any man, and assure him that
it does belong to him.

Branch 1
For the first branch of the Doctrine, I will give you three sorts and degrees
of proofs.

David here alludeth too; the Leper could not be cleansed by the blood of his
sacrifice, till it was sprinkled upon him, Levit. 14.7. nor he that had
touched a dead body, by the water of expiation, till it was sprinkled upon him,
Number. 19.18, 19. So speaks the Scripture likewise of the blood of Christ,
which was signified by those types, it ascribes the virtue of it, and the
benefit Gods people receive by it to the sprinkling of it upon them. I will not
trouble you with many proofs, I will give you two only out of the old
Testament, and two out of the new. The Prophet foretelling, Esa. 52.15. the
benefit that the Gentiles as well as the Jews, should receive by Christ, says
he, should sprinkle many nations. As though he had said, he should by his
Gospel apply himself and his merits unto them, and persuade them, that they
as well as the Jews, had interest in them. And I will sprinkle clean water
upon you ( Eze. 36.25. that is, I will by my spirit apply unto you the blood of
my son) and you shall be clean from all your filthiness, and from all your
idols I will cleanse you. Then we shall be clean from all our filthiness,
when this blood is once sprinkled upon us, and not before. And in the new
Testament the Apostle Peter says 1 Pet. 1.2. that we are elected to be saved
through sanctification of the spirit unto obedience, and through the sprinkling
of the blood of Jesus Christ. As if he had said, None are elected unto glory,
but they must come to it this way, they must be sanctified by the spirit of
God, and made obedient to the will of God in all things, and they must be
justified by the blood of Christ from all their sins. And this our
justification is thus expressed by the Apostle, it is said to consist in the
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, in the applying of it unto our selves,
and making it our own. And the blood of Christ, which is said to speak better
things then the blood of Abel, that is, to plead and cry for mercy unto God for
us, is called by the Apostle, Heb. 12.24. the blood of sprinkling; that is,
that blood which is sprinkled and applied to us. It is the purging of us with
hysope you see, the sprinkling and applying of the blood of Christ to our own
hearts, that yields us all the comfort that we have by it.

Romans 13.14. to a healing and sovereign salve, Esa. 53.5. that must be laid to
the very part that is sore; to meat and drink, John 6.53. that must be eaten
and digested unto every part before it can nourish us.

word and sacraments to apply Christ particularly unto his people. As this was
the form of Gods covenant with Abraham, and all his seed, all the faithful,
Genes. 17.7. I am thy God, and the God of thy seed. So has he commanded his
servants in the ministry of his Gospel, to make particular application of
Christ and his merits, to his people. Speak to the heart of Jerusalem (says
the Lord to his servants, Esa. 40.2.) and cry unto her, that her warfare is
accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned. And so our Savior charge the
Apostles, Mark. 16.15. to preach the Gospel to every creature, to every man
that he should send them unto. And what is it to preach the Gospel unto a man,
but to say unto him as the Angels did unto the shepherds. Luke. 2.11. Unto you
is borne this day a Savior, which is Christ the Lord? And as for both the
Sacraments, the chief use they were ordained for, is to apply Christ
particularly to every worthy receiver, and to assure him of his own special
interest he has in all his merits. Thus speaks the Apostle of baptism,
Galat. 3.27. As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ. Thus speaks he also of the Lords supper, 1 Cor. 10.16. The cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? As if
he had said, Is it not the making of it our own?

Thus you have seen the first branch of the Doctrine confirmed to you that no
man can receive comfort by the blood of Christ, but he that has it sprinkled
upon his heart, and applied unto him.

The second branch of it, Branch 2
that none but the Lord himself can thus apply and sprinkle the blood of
Christ upon the heart of any man, is also evident by the holy Scripture, I will
say unto them (says the Lord, Hos. 2.23.) thou art my people, and they shall
say unto me, thou art my God. When God shall once by his spirit say unto any
soul of ours, thou art mine, one of my people, of my redeemed ones, when he
shall (as with a bunch of hysop) sprinkle the blood of his son upon our heart,
and say to any of us as he did to his people, Zac. 9.11. it is the blood of thy
covenant, of the covenant which I have made with thee, then shall we have
sound comfort in it, and be able with confidence to say to him again, thou
art my God, and to cry to him, as poor weak Thomas the Apostle did, Job.
20.28. My Lord and my God, and till then we shall never be able to do it The
spirit it self (says the Apostle, Romans 8.16.) hears witness with our
spirit, that we are the children of God. As if he had said, Though our own
spirit and conscience be never so confident in this point, that we are Gods
children, and Christ by his blood has made our peace with God; this is to no
purpose, till Gods sanctifying spirit be in us, and does bear witness with
our own spirit in this point, and assure us that Christ is ours, we can never
have sound comfort in him. It is the spirit that bears witness (says the
Apostle, 1 Ioh 5.6.) because the spirit is truth. As if he had said, no
witness is infallible, or any thing worth in this case, but the spirit of God.
And in this respect, is the spirit of God called the comforter, Ioh. 14.26. He
could never be our comforter, if he did not thus bear witness with our spirits,
that we are Gods children, that Christ is ours, that his blood was shed for us.

The reasons and grounds of the Doctrine are two, according to the two several
branches of it.

First. Reason 1.
If you ask me, Why can Christ's blood do us no good, unless it be sprinkled
upon our hearts, and applied to us? I answer, Because reason and experience
teaches us, that as the propriety a man has in any good thing, does much
increase his comfort in it. (And to this the holy Ghost alludeth Pro. 5.15.
Drink waters out of thine own cistern, and running waters out of thine own
well, and 2 Thessalonians. 3.12. Let them work with quietness, and eat their own
bread. A little of a man's own, is a great deal sweeter to him, then a great
deal that is another man's, though he have some use of it) so it is a great
vexation and increase of misery to a man many times to see others enjoy a
benefit, which themselves have as much need of, and can have no part in it. And
the greater they know the benefit to be, the more are they vexed in this case.
Thus is it with a rebel that knows a pardon is granted to a great number
that were every whit as unworthy of it, as deep in the rebellion as himself,
and yet he can have no benefit by it. And with a poor man that sees a great
dole given, and multitudes releived by it, and he can get nothing. So is it
certainly in this case, the more any man knows of Christ, and of the all
sufficiency of that redemption that he has made by his blood, the greater must
his torment and horror needs be when he shall find that he has no part in it.
When (like Tantalus) he shall see there is water of life before him, which
others drink of, and quench their deadly thirst by and he can get none of it
himself. This is that which the Apostle says increases the torments of the
devils themselves James. 7.19. The devils also believe and tremble. They know
Christ full well to be an all-sufficient Savior. I know thee who thou art
says he, Mar. 1.24.) even the holy one of God. But they tremble so much the
more for that, because they know withal, that they neither have, nor ever
shall have any part in him.

Reason 2.
Secondly. If you ask me, Why can none but God himself by his holy spirit
sprinkle this blood of his son upon our hearts? I answer, Because there is in
every one of us an evil heart of unbelief, as the Apostle calls it, Heb.
13.1^. and (though in our peace, and jolity, we think it is nothing to
believe in Christ, it is as easy by faith to feed upon his body and blood in
the Sacrament, as it is to take and feed upon the bread and wine) when our
conscience shall be once awakened, we shall find our hearts not so strongly
inclined to any sin as infidelity, utterly unable to apply to our selves the
blood of Christ, or to believe that God should ever love us so dearly, as to
give his son to dye for us. We will be apt then to fly from God, as Adam
did, when his eyes were opened, Genesis 3.8. And therefore the Apostle tells us,
Ephe. 1.19. it is a work of the exceeding greatness of Gods power, that any man
is able to believe this.

Let us now make some use of this Doctrine unto our selves, 1. For instruction,
2. For exhortation. 3. For comfort.

Use 1.
First. This Doctrine teaches us how to judge of popery, that it is not only a
false and antichristian Doctrine that directly opposes Christ, and that in the
most fundamental point of his holy religion, in the Doctrine of justification,
but that it is also a Doctrine of desperation, and such as depriveth them that
believe it, of all true comfort in the hou^e of death, and time of distress.
In which respect the holy Ghost has most fitly resembled the teachers of it,
by those Locusts mentioned, Rev. 9.5.10. 1. They had faces like men, and their
Doctrine in show has no terror in it. 2. They have the hair of women, their
Doctrine has many inticements to allure men to the liking of them, and to
provoke unto spiritual lust and fornication. 3. They have crowns of gold upon
their heads, they prevail much, and have great reverence and authority where
they come. But 4. they have tails like unto scorpions, and they have stings in
their tails, says the holy Ghost, their Doctrine is such as will certainly in
the end torment the conscience of them that receive it intolerably. They can
never have sound peace and comfort in their conscience, that do believe it.
Their torment was (says the text, ver. 5.) as the torment of a scorpion when
he stingeth a man^, so intolerable as men shall seek death, and shall not find
it, shall desire to dye, and death shall fly^ from them. Mark but four
Doctrines which they teach, and this will be evident unto you. 1. Their
Doctrine of justification, that a man must be justified in Gods sight, by a
righteousness inherent in himself, and by his good works; a broken reed (God
knows) for a weary and fainting soul to rest upon. 2, Their Doctrine of
purgatory, that when men dye there is a fire prepared for them in purgatory,
that their souls must go to, and remain in, no man knows how many hundred
years, which fire is no less painful and intolerable, then the fire of hell
is. 3. Their Doctrine of doubting, that no man can be in this life, certain
that he is in the state of grace, hope well he may, but sure he can never be
that his sins are so forgiven that they shall never be laid to his charge
again, he must be in doubt continually; nay it is sin and blasphemy (say they)
for any man to say he is certain of his salvation. 4. Lastly. Their Doctrine of
saving and justifying faith, that it is nothing but a persuasion of the mind
that whatsoever God has revealed, is undoubtedly true (which we have learned
out of the Apostle, is in the devils themselves) That special faith that
applies Christ and his merits particularly to every believer, that has in it
an affiance of the heart, and a resting upon Christ for a man's own salvation;
this blood of sprinkling that you have now heard of, that they disdain, and
scoff at, and persecute as vain presumption. Alas, how can these poor
wretches that receive these teachers, that believe these Doctrines, have any
comfort in death? How can they choose but be then in intolerable terror and
torment of conscience? certainly many Papists are so, and all would be, were
it not that they are made drunk with a wine of spiritual fornication, which
the whore of Babylon has made them to drink of, as the spirit of God in Rev.
17.^. has foretold it should be. And who would wonder to see senslesnesse and
stupidity in a drunken man?

O therefore (beloved) 1. Pity your friends and kinsmen that are seduced by
these wretched teachers, Applic.
and do what you can to reclame them. 2. Consider how small cause there is,
that we have so long enjoyed and professed the Gospel, which is the only way of
peace, as Zachary calls it, Lu. 1.79. And of which the Lord has so often
spoken by his spirit to our hearts, as he did, Esa. 28.12, This is the rest
wherewith y^ may cause the w^ary to rest, and this is the refreshing. As if he
had said, this is the Doctrine wherein the weariest and faintest, and most
afflicted soul may find rest and refreshing. How small cause is there (I say)
that we should now grow weary of the Gospel, and entertain thoughts with
those rebels, Number. 14.4. of returning into that Egypt again, that house of
bondage, Exodus 13.3. where no true rest or comfort is to be found for the
conscience. Nay consider 3. how just cause of fear we have, lest the Lord,
because we have lost our first love to him, and his blessed Gospel, will remove
our candlestick, and deprive us of it, as he threatens Ephesus, Rev. 2.4, 5.
And take heed we grow not weary of him, as he charge Israel, Esa. 43.22. and
loath his Gospel, lest he loath us, and grow weary of us, and spew us out, as
he threatens the Laodiceaus, that had lost their zeal Rev. 3.16. And let us
take heed of doting upon antichrist, his altars, and his images, and his apish
ceremonies, or any part of his damnable doctrines, left the Lord let antichrist
enter, and prevail again in this land, that we may know by woeful experience
the difference of his service, and the service of Christ, the difference
between popery and the Gospel; as the Lord threatened his people. 2. Chr. 1^.8.

The second use that this Doctrine serves unto, Use 2.
is to exhort us that seeing none can have comfort in the blood of Christ, till
it be sprinkled upon him. and applied to him, till the spirit of God have made
him to know, it belongs unto him, that therefore every one of us would labor
to find that it is so with himself, that we would give no rest to our selves,
till we find we have our part in this blood of sprinkling, till the spirit of
God have applied it unto us, and assured us that it, and all the virtue, and
merit of it belongs unto us, O beloved. 1. Content not thy self to know that
God loves thee so far, as he gives thee life and health, he lets thee live
in peace, and wealth, and credit here, alas he loved Cain and Dives, and many
more that now fry in hell so far; but labor to know that he loved thee so
far, as that he gave his son to dye for thee, let no fruit of Gods love so
satisfy thee but that. In this, was manifested the love of God toward us
(says the Apostle, 1 Ioh 4, 9, 10.) because that God sent his only begotten
son into the world, that we might live through him, herein is love. No fruit
of Gods love is worth the having, is worth the speaking of, in comparison of
this. Neither content thy self to know this in general that God so loved the
world that he gave his Son to redeem all that can believe in him, but labor
to know in particular that which Paul knew, Gal. 2.20. that he loved thee and
gave himself for thee. 3. Neither content thy self to think and hope well
that Christ died for thee, Go not by thinking in this case, but make this sure
to thy heart upon good grounds, Give diligence to make thy calling and election
sure, says the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.10. Neither 4 content thy self to say
carelessly, though not yet sure of this, I hope I shall be before I die, I hope
God will purge me with hysope one day, and sprinkle this blood of his Son upon
my heart, but labor speedily and without delay to get this assurance and cry
with the Church unto God, Psalm. 90.14. O satisfy us early with thy mercy: that
we may rejoice and be glad all our days.

But to enforce this so necessary an exhortation both upon my self and you. I
will 1 give you some Motives to persuade you to seek this assurance. 2 I will
give you some signs whereby you may discern whether you have yet obtained it
or no. 3 I will show the means that must be used, for the attaining to it.

And for Motives I will give you but two; the one taken from the possibility of
attaining in this life to this assurance; and the other from the necessity and
benefit of it.

Motive 1
For the first, Know this (beloved) that though 1 It be a very difficult thing
to get this assurance and few attain to it; 2 They that have attained to it
cannot have it all times, nor when they do enjoy it can have it in perfection,
but with some mixture of doubting and unbeleefe (as I shall show you when I
come to the use of comfort) yet may the poorest and weakest Christian attain
to it in some measure, if he be not wanting to himself, if he will use the
means and do what in him lies to obtain it. See two proofs of this.

First, We have Gods express promise for this that all the faithful shall
attain unto this assurance, Esa. 60.16. Thou shall know that I the Lord am thy
Savior, and thy redeemer.

Secondly, We have the experience of Gods people in all ages for it. Job had
this particular assurance that Christ was his. I know (says he, Job 19.25.)
that my Redeemener lives; And so had David, Psalm. 6.1. O God thou art my God.
Yea he had it even then, when he was most strongly assaulted with a tentation
of infidelity, Ps. 22.1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. And so had
Paul, He loved me (says he, Gal. 2.20.) and gave himself for me. And 1 Timothy
1.15. He knew certainly that he was one of those sinners, Christ came to save,
yea a chief one amongst them. And though these were rare persons indeed and
had a gr^^ter measure of faith and so of this particular assurance (happily) then
any of us, yet is the faith of the meanest of us the same in nature with
theirs, we have obtained the like precious faith with the best of them as the
Apostle teaches us, 2 Pet. 1.1. we have the same spirit of faith with them
says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.13. But least we might think that none but some
rare persons have ever attained to this assurance, the Apostle speaking in the
name of all the faithful says, 1 Ioh. 3.14 We know that we are translated
from death to life, and 5.19. We know that we are of God. And the Prophet
makes this the profession of all the faithful, Esa. 45.24. Surely shall one
say (one as well as another even all the seed of Israel as he expresses
himself, ver. 25.) in the Lord have I righteousness, the righteousness of
the Lord Jesus belongs unto me, I have it, it is mine own. Yea this is the
profession of the whole Church the mother of us all, Cant. 2.16. My
well-beloved is mine and I am his. And this is the first Motive. If the popish
conceit were true (and we are all by nature in this and sundry other points
rank Papists) that we may hope well that Christ died for us and we shall be
saved, but sure of it we cannot be, it is presumption for any man to say he is
certain of his justification, then were we not to be blamed for neglecting to
get this assurance; but seeing it may be had, how can we be excused that make
so light account of it.

Secondly, Motive 2
Consider the great and unspeakable necessity and benefit of it. See this in
three points.

First, This and this only, will free thy heart from all those changes and
armies For what is our life? (says the Apostle, Iam. 4.14) ^t is even a vapor
that appears for a little time, and then vani^^eth away. And if we be without
this assurance when death comes, how full of terror must our hearts then
needs be? Whereas if we were once sure that Christ is ours, this would quiet
our heart from this and all other fears. So soon as Christ was come into the
shi^, Mar 6.51 the wind ceased presently and there was a calm. Get Christ
once into thine heart, and it will be quiet. For what need we fear any thing
if we be once assured of Gods favor in Christ. The Lord is my light and my
salvation (says David, Ps. 27.1.) whom shall I fear? The destroying Angel
might smite none in any house where the blood of the paschall lamb was
sprinkled, Exodus 12.23. Come not near any man (says the Lord to the
destroyer, Ezekiel 9.6) upon whom is the mark. If once this blood be sprinkled
upon us, if this mark be upon us we need fear no destroying angel. We may be
cast down but destroyed we cannot be, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 4.9.
Whereas (on the other side) though we be of the number of those that Christ
shed his blood for, and so God has decreed never to lay our sins to our
charge; yet till we know so much, till the spirit of God have sprinkled Christ's
blood upon our hearts, we can never be freed from the accusations and terrors
of a guilty conscience. Our hearts must be sprinkled from an evil conscience,
says the Apostle, Heb. ^0.32. Nothing will free us from an evil and guilty
conscience, but only the sprinkling of Christ's blood upon it.

Secondly, This and this only is able to make our hearts lightsome and
comfortable He that spared not his own son but delivered him up for us all:
(says the Apostle, Romans 8.32.) how shall he not with him also freely give us
all things? 2 This will give a sweet relish to every comfort of our life. They
did eat and were filled (say the holy Levites in their thanksgiving, Neh.
9.25.) and became ^at, and deligh^ed themselves in the great goodness. So
David professes, Psalm. 4.8. when he had seen the light of Gods countenance
and rejoiced in it, I will both lay me down in peace and sleep, says he;
this would make his sleep sweet unto him. Yea 3 this will make the bitterest
afflictions sweet unto a man. Son be of good comfort (says our Savior, Mat.
9.^. to the poor man that was sick of a cold palsy, a most heavy and
uncomfortable sickness) thy sins are forgiven thee. On the other side what
true sweetness can that man find in any pleasure or wealth that doubts of
Gods love in Christ, when his conscience being awakned by God (as that may fall
out in the midst of his greatest jollity as it did with Baltasar, Dan. 5 5.)
shall tell him thou may be a vessel of Gods wrath and damned when thou die
for all this.

Thirdly and lastly, This and this only will give a man boldness and liberty
of Aaron nor his sons could be consecrated nor made fit to serve God in the
priesthood, till the blood of their sacrifice was sprinkled upon them, Exodus
39.21. And the Apostle tells us, Heb. 10.22. we can never draw near to God
with a true heart, till our hearts be sprinkled from an evil conscience.

Lecture CXXII. On Psalm 51.7. July 7. 1629.
NOw for the signs of true assurance, it is necessary that every one of us
should hearken unto them and examine diligently by them whether his assurance
be sound or no, whether God have purged him with hysope and sprinkled the blood
of Christ upon his heart, and assured him it is his, or whether he has only
done it himself, or Satan has done it for him.

Two things there be that may assure you of the necessity of this.

Baalam could call God his God, Numb. 27.18. I cannot go beyond the word of
the Lord my God, says he. And of Israel the Lord says, Hos. 8.1, 2, 3. that
even then when they had transgressed his covenant, and trespassed against his
law, when they had cast off the thing that is good, yet even then Israel would
cry unto him, my God, we know thee. Yea the lewdest men are usually more
strongly persuaded of this, make less doubt, have less fear of this, then
the best of Gods servants are wont to have. The wise man (says Solomon, Pro.
14.16. that is, the godly man) fears, but the fool (the profane and
ungracious man) is confident, makes no doubt of his salvation at all. Yea it
is certain many notorious sinners live and die in this strong persuasion. One
dies (says Job 21.23.) in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet;
no trouble of mind, no scruple or doubt of this matter, ever enters into his
heart no not upon his death bed. And can any of you think that the assurance
that such men have is of God? These men seem to be purged with hysope, to have
Christ's blood sprinkled upon their hearts and applied unto them, but by what
hand, by what spirit was it done? Certainly not by the hand and spirit of God,
God will speak peace to his people and to his Saints, says the Prophet, Psalm.
85.8. He never spoke peace to such men as these are, he never gave them
assurance of his favor.



The wise man fears (says Solomon, Pro. 14.16.) and departs from evil,
his fears restrain him from sin; but the fool rages and is confident, the
more confident he is, the more outragiously he sins.

The full soul (says Solomon, Pro. 27.7.) loatheth an honey comb (the
sweetest the best means of grace) but to the hungry soul every bittter thing
is sweet, the meanest, the coursest ministry is sweet to that man.

troubled with in this kind, the measure of their assurance and peace is wont
to be in the end. Your sorrow says our Savior, John 16.20.) shall be turned
into joy. Mark the perfect man (says David, Psalm 37.37.) and behold the
upright, for the end of that man is peace. Whereas (on the other side) false
assurance and confidence uses to end in despair; and the less doubt, the
more assurance any man seems to have now of his salvation, if it be false,
the more danger he is in to fall one day into desperate fears and terrors.
His confidence shall be rooted out of his tabernacle (says Bildad, Job
18.14.) and it shall bring him to the king of terrors.

It stands us therefore upon (you see) to examine well and try that assurance
we seem to have that Christ is ours whether it be wrought in us by Gods
spirit yea or no. No assurance of our spiritual estate can be sound or such
as will yield us true comfort but such as the good spirit of God works in us.
David prays here to God to purge him with hysope, to sprinkle Christ's blood
upon his heart, none but the Lord can do it. It is the spirit that bears
witness, because the spirit is truth, as you heard the last day out of 1 John
5.6. No witness is sure and beyond exception in this case, but the spirit
only. And in this respect the spirit of God is called the Comforter, John 14
26. There is also an assurance and peace of the devils working, he can cause
peace too, Luke 11.21. When a strong armed man keeps his palace, all his
goods are in peace. But that peace cannot be found and true peace; that spirit
cannot be a true comforter. He is a roaring lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. He is a fierce
red dragon, Rev. 12.3. And so shall they all find him in the end, whom he
seems to give greatest peace unto. Try thy assurance therefore whether it be
of God yea or no.

And there be three sorts of signs and notes whereby we may judge of this. 1.
By the qualification of the subject, of the person in whom this assurance is
wrought. 2. By the ground upon which this assurance is built. 3. By the effects
and fruits that this assurance produces in him that has it.

For the first, Sign 1.
The spirit of God is not wont to sprinkle the blood of Christ, nor to work
this comfortable assurance in any heart, that was not first humbled and
troubled with much fear and doubting. Ye have not received the spirit of
bondage again to fear (says the Apostle, Romans 8.15.) but ye have
received the spirit of adaption whereby we cry, Abba, Father. Intimating
plainly that the spirit of adoption that bears witness to our spirits that
we are Gods children, uses not to enter into any heart where the spirit of
bondage has not been before; that is, Where the spirit of God has not first
effectually discovered to a man his bondage unto sin and to the curse of God,
and wrought fear and terror in his heart thereby. The spirit of the Lord is
upon me (says our Savior, Luke 4.18.) because he has anointed me, to preach
the Gospel unto the poor, to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance
to the captives, and bondslaves; that is to say, To them that by the spirit of
bondage are troubled with fears and terrors in their hearts. And as he uses
not to sprinkle Christ's blood upon any heart that was not first troubled with
these fears and terrors; so they whom he has thus besprinkled, are never
perfectly freed from these doubts while they live here. The flesh lusts
against the spirit, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 5.17. And they have in them a
combat often times between faith and infidelity. The spirits indeed of just men
that are translated into heaven are made perfect, as the Apostle teaches us,
Heb. 12.23. But the regeneration of the justest man while he is upon earth, is
not so perfected but that even after the spirit of God has sprinkled the blood
of Christ upon him, and given him a comfortable assurance of Gods special love
to him in Christ, yet there will be doubting and infidelity remaining in him
still. Yea he is subject also often to such spiritual desertions that he
loses the sense of his assurance and is visited ever and anon with his old
fears and terrors and troubled with them again. David was so when he cried,
Psalm. ^2.1. that God had forsaken him. And Heman was so when he complained,
Psalm. 88.15. that by suffering these terr^urs he was even distracted. And Paul
was so when he said, 2 Cor. 7.5. Without were fightings; that is, strong and
violent oppositions of persecuters and heretics, and within were fears,
through the doubting and infidelity that he found in his own heart. Finally the
Church the dear Spouse of Christ, was so more then once; when Cant. 3.1. She
sought him whom he soul loved, she sought him, but she found him not; and
again, when Cant 5.6. Her beloved had with drawn himself, she sought him,
but she could not find him.

Applic.
Let us then make application of this, and try our assurance by this first note.
Many men there be that never doubted of their salvation in their lives, were
never acquainted with these fears and terrors that you have heard of. They
are and ever were most confident that God is their God, they are in his favor;
they wonder to see many Christians so full of doubts and fears this way and
are apt to conclude from thence that certainly they are hypocrites and guilty
of some gross sins; according to that complaint of Job 12.5. He that is
ready to slip with his feet, is as a lamp despised in the thought of him that
is at ease. To such men I may fitly say of their freedom from all doubtings
and fears as the Apostle speaks to them that are free from all affliction,
Hebrews 12 8. If ye be and ever have been without doubtings and fears
whereof all are partakers, thou are ye bastards and not sons. If thy
assurance of thy salvation was bred and borne with thee and thou were never
without it, if it be so perfect that thou have no doubts, no motions of
infidelity this way, then thou have just cause to judge thy assurance not of
Gods making, it is but a counterfeit assurance and a very delusion of the
devil; and I will apply to thee that saying of Eliphaz, Job 15.31. Let not him
that is deceived, trust in vanity, for vanity shall be his recompense.

Sign 2.
Secondly, By the grounds upon which our assurance is built, we may judge
whether it be sound or no. That assurance of Gods favor which the spirit of
God works in any heart (as it is wrought by the Word, so it) is grounded
only upon the most sure and infallible testimony of Gods holy Word. The
testimony that a false and erroneous spirit gives, is to be discerned from
that which the spirit of God gives by this note. If they speak not according
to this Word (says the Lord, Esaias 8.20.) it is because there is no light in
them. Whatsoever is wrought in us by Gods spirit is agreeable to Gods Word. The
spirit and the Word go always together. My spirit which is upon thee, and my
words which I have put into thy mouth (says the Lord, Esa. 59.21.) shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed. So that, that
assurance of Gods favor that is wrought in any heart by the spirit of God, is
grounded upon the Word of God only. In which respect the Apostle calls it
the Word of faith, Romans 10 8 because all true faith is grounded upon it, and
upon it alone. I trust in thy Word, says David, Psalm 119.42. As if he had
said, Upon that do I build that confidence that I have in thy mercy. The
Papists tell us that no man can be sure certitudine fidei with the assurance
of faith, of his own particular estate of grace; Because faith must have the
Word to ground it self upon, and no particular man has any Word of God, to
assure him that he is in Christ. And indeed if this were true, that they do
assume, that no particular man has any Word of God to assure him, that he is
in Gods favor, their argument were unanswerable. But blessed be God, that
every true Christian has Gods express Word, to assure him in particular, that
he is in the state of salvation. I cannot now stand upon all those grounds that
he has in the word to build this assurance upon. I will mention but four
only.

First, The Scripture expressly says, that whosoever has truly repented and If
the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed (says the
Lord, Ezekiel. 18.21.) and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and
right, he shall surely live, he shall not die.

Secondly, the Scripture expressly speaks, that whosoever loves the Lord, If
any man love God (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.3.) the same is known (that is,
approved and beloved) of him.

Thirdly, the Scripture expressly says, that whosoever loves the godly Hereby
we know that we are of the truth (^aith the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 3.19.) and shall
assure our hearts before him.

Fourthly and lastly, The Scripture expressly says, that whosoever with an
Whosoever belieueth in him (says our Savior John 3.16.) shall not perish, but
have everlasting life. Two things (I know) are objected against this.

First, Object. 1
That these are general speeches, and here is no word of God brought to assure
such and such a particular of his personal estate.

I answer; That because these speeches are so general, therefore every
particular man that finds himself thus qualified, Answ.
may assure himself (even by the certainty of faith) that he shall be saved,
as verily, as if God should have said to him by name, as once Christ did to the
man that had the palsy, Matthew. 9 2 Son be of good comfort, thy sins are
forgiven thee, thou shall be saved. Why so? Because he has Gods written Word
to assure him of it. Else how can any particular man be assured ( certitudine
fidei) that his body shall rise again at the last day, as every Papist as well
as every Protestant professes that he is? Has he any Word of God to assure
him by name, that his body shall rise again? No, but because God in his Word
has said, Ioh. 5.28.29. that all that are dead, good and bad, shall rise at
the last day and come unto judgment, therefore every true Christian does as
undoubtedly believe it, as if God had named him in his Word (as he did Josiah
and Cyrus long before they were borne) and said unto him, thy body shall rise
again at the last day.

But then it is objected secondly; Object. 2
That he that is so qualified as is mentined in these four places that I have
alleged, shall indeed be certainly saved, but who can be assured that he is so
qualified, that he has truly repented, that he truly loves God, and his
children, that he truly believes in Christ? Specially how can he be assured of
that by the Word of God? The heart of man (we know) is deceitful, as the
Prophet speaks, Jeremy 17.9. And experience prooveth, that many that seemed
to have truly repented and believed, have (by their falling away) declared that
it was nothing so.

Two answers I have to give unto this.

First, Answ. 1.
That though many have deceived themselves in this point, yet it is evident by
the Scriptures that a true Christian may be assured, he has all these four
graces in him in truth and sincerity. Hezekiah was undoubtedly assured that
his life was truly reformed, that he had truly repented, or else he could not
have said as he did in his extream^ ^ffliction, Esa. 38.3. Remember now O Lord,
I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect
heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. Peter was undoubtedly
assured (and that even in the time of the great dejectedness of his spirit)
that he loved the Lord in truth, or else he would never have said as he did,
John 21.17. Lord thou know all things, thou know that I love thee. The
faithful (in whose name the Apostle speaks 1 John 3.14.) were undoubtedly
assured that they do truly love the children of God, or else they could not have
said as they did there, By this we know that we are translated from death to
life, because we love the brethren. The poor man whose child was possessed,
was undoubtedly assured that he had true faith, or else he could never have said
as he did to the Lord himself, Mark 9.24. even then when he was so humbled
in the sense of his own infidelity, Lord I do believe, help thou m^ne
unbelief. In a word; All that have true grace in them, may undoubtedly know
they have it in them, in truth, for the Spirit of God is given to that end
principally, to give them a comfortable assurance that they are in the state of
grace. We have received not the spirit of the world (says the Apostle, 1 Cor.
2.12.) but the spirit that is of God, that we might know the things that are
freely given us of God.

Answ. 2.
Secondly, A man may be assured by the word that he has these graces in him in
truth and sincerity, so as he cannot be deceived in them, because the word
cannot deceive him. For as God gave Moses in the mount a pattern according to
which he would have all things made in the Tabernacle; See (says he) that thou
make all things according to the pattern showed to thee in the mount, Hebr.
8.5. so that when he viewed the work, and saw all was done according to that
pattern, he was sure they had done right, and blessed them, as we read Exodus
39 43. So has the Lord given us a pattern in his Word, according to which he
would have everything in his spiritual Tabernacle (says, repentance, love,
obedience) to be wrought. And if a man can find that that grace that he has is
according to this pattern (as if the fault be not in himself, if he will take
pains to view the work well, as Moses did, he may. Let every man prove his
own work (says the Apostle, Gal. 6.4.) and then shall he have rejoicing in
himself alone, and not in another) then may he be sure it is right, then shall
he certainly be blessed of God, as Bezaliel and Ab^liab were of Moses, when all
that they had done was found to be according to the pattern that was given in
the mount. And thus you have seen that all true assurance of salvation is
grounded upon the Word of God, and upon it alone.

Applic.
Let us now make some application of this second sign in two points unto our
selves, and examine our own assurance by it.

He that trusts in his own heart is a fool, says Solomon, Pro. 28.26. Gods
Spirit must witness with our spirits that we are his children (as the Apostle
speaks, Romans 8.16.) or else we can never be sure of it. And Gods Spirit gives
no testimony (as we have heard) but according to the Word; so that no man can
have any sound comfort in the assurance he seems to have of Gods favor,
unless he have the Word of God to confirm it unto him. In God will I praise
his Word (says David, Psalm* 6.10, 11.) in the Lord will I praise his Word. In
God have I put my trust. As if he had said, I thank God for his Word, for that
is the only ground of my comfort, of all that trust and confidence I have in
him, of all that assurance that I have of his favor in Christ. 2. Thou must
look to have thy evidence questioned one day. He that desired to have the
Apostles in fingering, (as our Savior tells them, Luke 22.31.) that he might
sift them as wheat, be sure will deal with thee also in this kind one day. And
nothing will be able to convince him, to stop his mouth and beat him from thee,
but the word only. That is the only sword of the spirit, as the Apostle
calls it, Ephesians. 6.17. That is the only weapon whereby Christ our Captain
did fight against him and overcome him, Matthew. 4.4, 7, 10. And if thou can be
able to allege the Word for thy assurance and claim to heaven; to prove by
the Word that thy faith, thy repentance, thy love is sincere, then shall thou
be able to overcome ^im also; but not else. 3. Lastly, the Lord himself will
judge thee at the last day by his Word, and by that only. The word that I have
spoken (says our Savior, Io^. 12.48) the same shall judge him at the last
day. And therefore it stands thee upon to judge thy self by that too.

Secondly, Now (alas) most men (though they say they be undoubtedly assured
Psalm. 119.155. Salvation is far from the wicked: for they seek not thy
statutes: Yet many a one that never seeks after Gods Statutes, takes no
pains for the Word, nay shunneth it all that ever he can, and though he may
enjoy it without any labor or charge at all, will not stir out of his doors
for it, nay that counts you all arrant fools and hypocrites that take so
much pains for it as many of you do; yet is this man (I say) as sure of his
own salvation as any of you can be. Though the Scripture say expressly, yea
though he that must judge us all at the last day say expressly, Matthew. 5.37.
Whatsoever is more than yea and nay (the least oath that is in our ordinary
communication) comes of that evil one, (...) from the Devil; And though the
Apostle say, Iam. 5.12. Above all things my brethren swear not by any oath,
least ye fall into condemnation, least ye be damned; yet have we many a one
that swear ordinarily, not by faith and troth only, but by fowler oaths a
great deal, that yet never doubted of their salvation, but are confident
Christ died for them, his blood has been sprinkled upon their hearts. Though
the Scripture say expressly, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Neither fornicators, nor wantons,
nor thieves, nor drunkards, nor raylors, nor extortioners shall inherit the
kingdom of God; yet where have you any in Gods Church that are more
confidently assured, that have less doubt of their salvation than these men
have? But let God be true (says the Apostle, Romans 3.4.) and every man a liar.
Thou will one day find that the Lords testimonies (against thee) are very sure,
as the Psalmist calls them, Psalm. 93.5. and that thine own heart has
prophesied a lie unto thee that thou might perish, as the Lord says of them
that prophesied peace unto the Jews, Ier. 27.10. I know thou art apt to
allege that thou have repented, and that thou do believe in Christ, and
therefore thou have the Word to build thy assurance upon. But because neither
thy faith nor thy repentance are according to the pattern, according to the
Word, I may say of thy confidence thou reposest therein, as Bildad does of the
hope of all hypocrites, Job 8.14. Thy hope shall be cut off, and thy trust
shall be as the spiders webb.

Lecture CXXIII. On Psalm 51.7. July 21. 1629.
Sign 3.
THE third and last sign whereby we may judge of our assurance, and discern
whether God by his holy spirit has sprinkled upon our hearts the blood of his
son, and certified us that it was shed for us, whether that assurance we
seem to have, be of God or no, is to be taken from the effects, that this
assurance has wrought in us. It is not possible for any man (that knew before
his own wretchedness by nature) to be assured by Gods spirit, that God has
so dearly loved him, as to send his own son to shed his blood for him, but
this must needs work a great change and alteration in him. It must needs
kindle in his heart, an unfeined love to God. Faith works by love, says the
Apostle, Galat. 5*6. As if he should say, It cannot be idle, but it is
operative, and full of virtue, and the hand and instrument it works by, is
love. It must needs make him that has it, desirous and studious to express
his love to God by all means he can; and to say with David, Psalm 116.12.
What shall I render unto the Lord? Yea, the deeper sense a man has had of his
own sin and wretchedness before, the more will his heart be inflamed with
love to God; when once he feels the blood of Christ sprinkled upon his heart
by Gods spirit, the more studious will he be to express his love by any duty
he is able to perform. Mary had had many sins forgiven unto her, and
therefore she loved much, as our Savior says, Luke 7, 47. she thought no
service too base, too much for her to do unto Christ, who had so dearly loved
her. She wa^hed his feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hairs of
her head, as you may see, verse 38. of that chapter.

The Papists blaspheme our Doctrine touching this certainty a man may have of
Gods favor, and say it tends to looseness of life, and liberty. But they
speak of it by hearsay, as strangers do of a thing that they never knew, or
had experience of in themselves. For the true assurance of salvation, which the
spirit of God has wrought in any heart, has that force to restrain him from
looseness of life, and to knit his heart in love and obedience to God, as
nothing else has in all the world. It is certainly either the want of faith
and assurance of Gods love, or a false and carnal assurance of it, that is the
true cause of all that licentiousness and lewdness that reigns in the world.

But to speak distinctly (yet briefly) of this point, you shall see the
effects that true assurance will work both in the inward and outward man.

True faith (whereby we receive and apply Christ unto our selves) will purify
the heart, as the Apostle speaks, Acts 15.9. It will work a through change
and reformation even in the hidden part. This difference the Apostle observes,
Hebr. 9.13, 74. between the sprinkling of the blood of the sacrifices upon the
people, by the Priest under the law, and the sprinkling of Christ's blood upon
the heart by the spirit of God, that sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh,
says he; that is, that made a man legally in the judgment of men clean from
all outward pollutions; but Christ's blood being sprinkled by the spirit of God
upon any heart, will purge the conscience from dead works (that is, from all
sins, which as they deserve, so will they certainly bring death eternal upon
all that are not purged from them) this (says he) will purge the conscience
from dead works, to serve the living God. There is certainly an admirable
virtue in the blood of Christ, when it is once by the spirit of God sprinkled
and applied to the heart of any man, it will purge and heal it from all the
corruptions that were in it before. Unto you that fear my name (says the
Lord, Malachi 4.2.) shall the sun of righteousness arise, with healing in
his wings. This sun did never arise and shine upon any heart, but it brought
an healing virtue with it. See the proofs of this, in four particulars.

First. This will soften the heart more, and make it apter to mourn for sin I
will power upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem
(says the Lord, Zach. 12.10.) the spirit of grace, and of supplications, and
they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for
him, as one mourns for his only son. As if he had said thus, When the
spirit of grace has made a man able to see that his sins pierced Christ, that
Christ's blood was shed for his sins, this will break his heart, and make him
mourn, and grieve more for his sins, then for any other thing in the world.

Secondly, this will make a man more afraid to sin, and to offend God, then any
other The children of Israel shall return and seek the Lord their God, and
David (that is, Christ the son of David) their King, and they shall fear the
Lord and his goodness in the latter days, that is, in the days under the
Gospel, says the Prophet, Hos. 3.5. As though he should say, When Gods people
have once by seeking, found the Lord their God, and Christ their King, know him
to be their God, and their King, and tasted of his mavelous goodness and
love unto them, this will make them ever after, more fearful to offend him
then any other thing can possibly do.

Thirdly. This will breed in a man a greater delight in the word, and As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby
(says the Apostle, 1 Peter 2.2, 3.) if so be that ye have tasted that the
Lord is gracious. As if he should have said, The man that knows the Lord is
gracious, and gracious to him, and that has also tasted the sweetness of this
assurance of Gods special love to himself, must needs desire, and long after
Gods word, as much as ever babe did after the mothers breast.

Fourthly and lastly. This will make a man more careful in all his ways I
have walked in thy truth, (says David, Psalm 26.3. and made conscience to
do, and practice what thou teach me in thy word, and he had given this for
the reason of it in the beginning of the verse) For thy loving kindness is
before mine eyes. As if he should say, I know and am fully assured (as if I
saw it with mine eyes) of thy loving kindness and special favor toward me,
and that makes me walk in thy truth. And these are the effects that the true
assurance will work in the heart, and inward man.

But secondly. It will not rest there, he that has it, cannot content
himself Ezekiel. 9.4. Rev. 7.3. so as those among whom they live, may discern
and take notice that they are Gods people. When once God has said to any man's
heart by his spirit, as he does to his people, Esa 43.1. I have called thee by
name, thou art mine; that man cannot choose but say to him again, as David
does, Psalm. 116.16. O Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant. Nay what
he has heard in the ear (as our Savior speaks in another case, Matthew
10.27. he cannot but preach on the house tops. He cannot but declare, and
profess himself openly to be Gods servant, and one of his people. Thus the
Prophet Esa. 44.5. brings in the faithful, glorying in this open profession
of their homage. One shall say, I am the Lords, another shall call himself by
the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord. As
if he had said, Every one shall be ready upon all occasions, and by all means
to declare himself, to be one of Gods people, of his Church and household. And
2. for that care that all such have to do God all the honor that possibly
they can, in the places and callings that God has set them in, we have three
notable examples. The first is of Ioshuah, as he was the master of a family.
Who as he was a man that had obtained this particular assurance, that God was
his God, God had said unto him, Josh 1.15. As I was with Moses, so will I be
with thee, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. So does he profess, not
only that he would be Gods servant, and at his command, but that his whole
family should be so too. As for me and mine house (says he, Josh 24*15.) we
will serve the Lord. The second example is of Paul, a minister and preacher of
the Gospel. Who when he had spoken of his mavelous diligence and faithfulness
in his ministry gives this for the reason of it, 2 Cor. 5.14.15. For the love
of Christ constrains us (says he) because we thus judge, that one dyed for
all, then were all dead, (we were all by nature dead and damned men) and that
he dyed for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live to
themselves, but unto him which dyed for them, and rose again. As if he had
said, I that know I was a dead and damned man, and that Christ dyed for me, to
save and deliver me out of that estate, hold my self bound to do him all the
honor and service that I can, by enlarging his kingdom, and know, I can never
do enough for him, that has done so much for me as he has done. The third
and last example is of David, a magistrate, of whose noble resolution you may
read, Psalm 1 18.28. Thou art my God, and I will praise thee (says he) thou art
my God, and I will exalt thee. As he was confidently assured that God was his
God (out of the abundance of his heart, his mouth speaks thus once, and
again) so was he resolutely determined to improve his power and authority to
the uttermost in standing for God and advancing of his honor.

Applic.
Let us now make some application of this, and examine our selves by this third
and last sign, and we shall find that the assurance of their salvation, that
most men glory in, is vain and counterfeite, such as Satan or their own
deceitful hearts, not the holy spirit of God has wrought in them; Because
they are so barren and unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,
as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 1.8. They say they know him to be their Lord
and Savior, but this knowledge is no way effectual in them, to the
reformation either of their hearts or lives. Nay, this their assurance has
wrought in them quite contrary effects, unto those that I have proved unto you
to be the kindly fruits of that assurance, which the spirit of God works in
the heart of any man. Nothing does so evidently discover the falsehood of this
their assurance, as the fruits that it does produce in them. In which respects,
a man may fitly say of them as our Savior does of the false Prophets, Matthew.
7.20. By their fruits ye shall know them. This will the better appear, if the
confidence of these men be examined particularly, according to those six
several effects of true assurance which we have heard of.

First. Though they say they are assured that Christ so dearly loved them, as
soul was heavy ( Mat. 26.38.) to the death, for my sins says he, what need I
be heavy for them my self? Thus turning the grace of God into lasciviousnes,
as the Apostle speaks Jude 4. As if he should say, The very knowledge of this
mavelous grace and mercy of God, makes them so lascivious as they are,
makes them so joviall in their sins, so void of all remorse and sorrow for sin
as they are.

Secondly. They are not the more fearful to offend God in any thing because
Mat. 4.6. that though they do cast themselves headlong into any sin, yet Gods
mercy and love to them is such, as he will never suffer them to perish by it.
Tush (says he) I know God will give me grace to repent of it before I dye,
and therefore what need I be so scrupulous or fearful to enjoy the pleasure
or profit of this sin. He besseth himself in his own heart (as Moses
speaks, Deuteronomy. 29.19.) saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of my heart.

Thirdly. They say, they have tasted that the Lord is gracious, and that they
Corinth, of whom the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 1.12. that gloried they were
neither followers of Paul, nor of Apollo, nor of Cephas, but of Christ only.
They did so depend upon Christ, that they cared for never a preacher in the
world, nor regarded to hear them.

Fourthly. Though they speak and glory much of the Lords mercy, and loving are
not under the law, but under grace, as Paul brings in wicked men, objecting,
Romans 6.15. Because they know Christ dyed for their sins, and that we must not
be saved by our works, but by faith in him only, therefore they think it
folly in them to be precise in their practice, or to do any good works at all.

Fifthly. They say they are the Lords, and have received his spirit, which
witnesses light a candle and set it under a bushel; as our Savior speaks,
Mat. 5.15. shall we think that the most wise God, will set the light of his
grace so in any man's heart, as that none that are in the house with him are
able to discern it.

Sixthly and lastly. They say confidently, the Lord is their father, and If I be
your father (says the Lord, Malachi 1.6.) where is mine honor? Such as are by
the spirit of adoption assured indeed, that God is their father, cannot but
desire with all their hearts to honor him what they may. Ye are bought with a
price (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.20.) therefore glorify God in your body and
in your spirit, which are Gods. And they that know indeed that they are not
their own (as the Apostle there says) but bought with such a price cannot
choose but endeavor to do so. Whether we live (says he, Romans 14.8.) we live
unto the Lord, or whether we die, we die unto the Lord, whether we live
therefore, or die, we are the Lords. He that lives so as God has honor by
his life, and he that dies so as that God has honor by his death, may be
sure he is the Lords and none but he. And surely this proves demonstratively
that most men (whatsoever they pretend) have no true assurance that they are
the Lords; because it is neither any trouble at all to them to see God
dishonored by others, neither have they any care at all to gain any honor to
God themselves. The Lord upbraideth the Jews with this as with a great sin.
Zach. 7.6. When ye did eat and when ye did drink, did ye not eat for your
selves, and drink for your selves? Why what fault was that may you say? Whom
should they eat and drink for else, but for themselves? Yes the Apostle tells
you, 1 Cor. 10.31. that whether we eat or drink or whatsoever we do, we should
do all to the glory of God; that is, eat and drink and sleep and recreate our
selves that we may become the fitter, to do God some honor in our places. If
we seek our selves only in all that we do, if we live to our selves and die to
our selves, certainly we can never say that we are the Lords.

I might show you hear how every Christian (even the meanest and poorest) may
in this place gain honor to God. But I will tie my self to the method I
have already followed, and instance only in those three callings which I have
given you examples of; 1 the Master of the family; 2 the Minister; 3 the
Magistrate and governor in the Commonwealth.

First, Such as are masters of families have a great opportunity to honor God
by reforming their families and planting religion in them. Thus David vowed he
would honor God and show himself to be his servant, Psalm. 101.6, 7. Mine eyes
shall be upon the faithful in the land, that they may dwell with me, (As if he
should say, I will get me such servants as fear God if they be to be had in
the whole land) he that walks in a perfect way he shall serve me. He that
works deceit (and bears a false heart and secret hatred to religion though
he be not openly profane, when I once know it) shall not dwell in mine house.
Of this also Hezekiah speaks, Esa. 38.19. The living, the living he shall
praise thee as I do this day (and who among the living has best opportunity to
praise and honor God?) the father to the children shall make known thy truth.
As though he had said, Parents by deriving religion unto their posterity, may
greatly honor God above others. And therefore also we shall find this often noted
in the scripture that so soon as any became Gods people themselves, they
showed themselves careful that their whole families might be so too. See an
example of this in a mean man the Iailour of whom it is said, Acts 16.34. He
rejoiced that he with all his household believed in God. Yea see an example of
it in a weak woman, Acts 16.15. Lydia was baptized and her household too, Yea
see an example of it in a soldier and great Captain, Acts 10.2. Cornelius
feared God with all his house. Yea see an example of it in a Magistrate and one
that was in commission, Acts 18.8. Crispus the chief ruler of the Synagogue
believed on the Lord with all his house. Lastly, See an example of it in a
Nobleman, Ioh. 4.53* the Nobleman of Capernaum, himself believed and his whole
house. And what shall we say then of those men that profess confidently God
is their God and they are his people and yet show no care at all to honor God
this way by reforming their families? Nay it is held a great disgrace to a man
to show any care at all or endeavor this way. If Ioshuah should have lived now
and held that resolution which he professed, Josh. 24.15. certainly he would
have been counted a rank puritan amongst our gallants. For a man of his
place, a master of so great a family, to be so precise that he will keep never
a blasphemer, never a whoremaster, never a drunkard in his house, what a base
and unworthy speech would this be accounted in these days? Many profess
themselves to be Gods servants, but whether they of their family serve God or
the devil it is all one to them, so they serve their turn. They like never
the worse of a servant for being a common drunkard, or whoremaster, or
blasphemer, though he dishonor God never so much, so he have any one quality
whereby he may be useful unto them. That it may be said now of the families
of many a one that challenge as great interest in Christ as any of his people
do, as the Holy Ghost speaks of Babylon, Revel. 18.2. (though in another
sense) they are become cages of every unclean and basefull bird.

Secondly, We that are Ministers may in our places greatly honor God above I
am glorified in them, says our Savior, Ioh. 17.10. In which respect Paul
calls the messengers of the Churches (2 Cor. 8.23. who were preachers as
appears, verse 18.) the glory of Christ. And our Savior bids Peter
thrice, Job. 21.15 -- 17. show his love to him that way even by ^eeding his
lambs and sheep. We can no way glorify God so much as in winning souls unto
him; we can no way express our love to Christ so much as by feeding his
people with knowledge and understanding. If it be the love of Christ that
constrains us to preach so diligently so painefully; if we show our selves in
our ministry to be the friends of the bridegroom (as John speaks, Ioh.
3.29.) we woo for him only and not for our selves, we seek his honor only and
not our selves; we preach as we do, not because we think this kind of
preaching will gain us more applause with the people, but because we are
persuaded this kind of preaching will feed them best and be most effectual to
save their souls; then may we by every Sermon we preach get further assurance
to our selves that we are the Lords. Otherwise if 1 either we preach not; 2 or
we preach so unprofitably as we gain God no honor by our preaching, feed
neither his sheep nor his lambs by our preaching; or 3 if we do preach
profitably yet we do it out of self-love, we seek our selves in it not the
Lord. Certainly we can have no assurance that Christ is ours, how well so ever
we can speak of Christ; but when we have preached unto others (as the Apostle
speaks, 1 Cor. 9.27.) our selves shall become cast awayes.

Thirdly and lastly, Such as are Magistrates may in their places greatly honor
Judge. 17.6. and elsewhere) to be this that there was in those days no King in
Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes. And a
Magistrate may by this show himself to be the Lords and one that has true
assurance of his favor, if he show most zeal in executing justice upon such
offenses whereby God is most dishonored. God gave to Phinehas his covenant of
peace (that is an increase of comfortable assurance of his special favor, as
we read, Number. 25.11, 12.) because he had showed himself zealous for the Lord
in punishing of filthy whordome. And Nehemiah knew that God was his God and
would remember him in goodness (as is plain by his prayer, Neh. 13.22.)
because he had showed such zeal in punishing the profanation of the Sabbath
day. And what shall we say then of such Magistrates as having good law and
authority to punish swearing, and whoring, and profanation of the Sabbath, have
no zeal at all for the execution of such laws but when any come to them for
justice against such offenses, they are ready to put them off as much as is
possible, and to extenuate such faults, and to say with Gallio, Acts 18.15. I
will be no judge of such matters; and verse 17. Gallio cared for none of those
things. Certainly these men (whatsoever they say) have no true assurance that
Christ's blood was shed for them, if they had, they would show more love to God,
and care of his honor.

Lecture CXXIIII. On Psalm 51.7. August 4. 1629.
NOw concerning the means whereby we may attain to a particular assurance of
the pardon of our sins, we must first understand, that this is a supernatural
work of the spirit of God and that no man is able of himself and by his own
endeavor in the use of any means whatsoever, to attain unto it. It is the
spirit that bears witness, says the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 5.6. And again, The
spirit it self (says the Apostle Paul, Romans 8.16) bears witness with our
spirits, that we are the sons of God. Yet does the spirit work this assurance
in the heart of man, not by immediate and extraordinary inspirations and
revelations, but by ordinary means. And he that shall with an honest heart,
use these ordinary means, has no cause to doubt, but that the Lord will be
pleased by his holy spirit to work it in him. And these means we find are of
two sorts. The first are more outward and bodily; the second more inward and
spiritual.

Means 1
The first are those ordinances of God and exercises of his holy religion which
he has appointed and sanctified; which as they were all ordained for this end
principally to bring us unto salvation, and to work in us a comfortable
assurance of it, so he that uses them diligently and conscionably, may obtain
it by them. Of them all in general specially of all the parts of Gods solemn
and public worship it is to be observed that David professes this to be the
cause why he was so in love with it, why he desired the comfort and benefit of
Gods worship and ordinances, more then he did any thing in the world besides,
why he resolved to make this his only suit unto God that he might never be
deprived of them. One thing (says he, Ps. 27.4.) have I desired of the Lord,
that will I seecke after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of my life. It is to be observed I say that he professes this to be the
chief cause why he was so highly in love with Gods house and ordinances, That
I may behold (says he) the beauty of the Lord and visit his temple. And what
means he by beholding the beauty of the Lord? That he expounds himself in
Ps. 48.9. We have thought of thy loving kindness O God in the midst of thy
temple. The loving kindness of God and his special mercy to his elect in
Christ, his favorable and cheerful countenance upon his servants, that is
the Lords beauty, that is it that makes him amiable to his people; and that
Gods people do behold, they do think and meditate upon it far more clearly
and comfortably in his house and temple in the use of his ordinances, then any
where else, or by any other means in the world besides. This made him in his
troubles and banishment thirst and long after the sanctuary of God so as he
professes he did, Psalm. 63.1. Every place he lived in (where he was deprived
of the liberty and comfort of the sanctuary) was unto him as a dry and thirsty
land where no water is, he could find nothing in it, to refresh and satisfy
the thirst of his soul. And verse 2 he gives the reason why he did so long
after the sanctuary. To see thy power and thy glory (says he) so as I have
seen thee in the sanctuary. As if he had said, I shall never see it so as I
have seen it there. And what means he by the power and glory of God which he
had seen in the sanctuary? That he expresses verse 3. Because thy loving
kindness is better then life. He had seen the mercy and loving kindness of
God toward him in Christ, he had obtained a more comforaable assurance and
feeling of it in the Sanctuary, in the use of Gods solemn worship and
ordinances there, then ever he did or could do in any place, or by any means
in the world besides. All other places were to him as a dry and thirsty land
where no water is, in comparison of the sanctuary. And certainly they that
believe this, to be so as David did; they that know this to be so in their own
experience as he did (and as many of you I doubt not have done) will stand
affected to Gods house and ordinances as he was, will highly prize and esteem
of a sound ministry as he did, will desire this above all things (as he did)
that they may never want the benefit and comfort of it.

But (to speak of this point distinctly) I will instance in three parts of
Gods worship only for this, and show you what force there is in them to breed
in the heart of Gods child the assurance of his favor, to make him able to
behold the beauty of the Lord and the light of his countenance.

The first of them is diligent and conscionable use of the Word of God both

For the first, Of the Word in general it is said that it was written
principally Whatsoever things were written asoretime (says the Apostle, Romans
15.4.) were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of
the Scripture might have hope. These things have I spok^n unto you (says our
Savior, Ioh. 15.11.) that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy
maybeful. These things write we unto you (says the Apostle, 1 Job. 1.4) that
your joy maybefull. The spirit of God (you see) did indite and write the holy
Scripture, to this end principally, to comfort his people, to work in their
hearts sound joy and comfort. And consequently to work in them assurance of his
favor. For how can a man have any sound joy or comfort in him without that?
Therefore also it is expressly said that the Scripture was written to work this
assurance in us. So after the wisdom of God had spoken other things in the
commendation of the Word, Pro. 22. he adds, ver. 19, 20. That thy trust may
be in the Lord, I have made known unto thee this day even unto thee; Have not
I written unto thee excellent things in counsels and knowledge? The excellent
things that are written and made known to us in the Word, are written and made
known to us to this end principally, that we might learn to put our trust and
affiance in him and grow confident of his favor. These things have I written
unto you (says the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 5.13.) that believe in the name of the Son
of God, that ye may know ye have eternal life. And if it were intended, and
written for that purpose by the spirit of God, certainly in it and by it this
comfortable assurance may be found by Gods people, if the fault be not in
themselves. So is this said to be the maine end, for which God ordained the
preaching and ministry of his Word even to work in Gods people the assurance
of Gods favor. Thou child shall be called the Prophet of the highest (says
Zachary of his son John, Luke 1.76, 77) to give knowledge of salvation unto his
people, by the remission of their sins. So when God had promised, Esa. 57.18.
that he would restore comfort to Jacob, and to his mourners; that is, to his
people that had lost the comfortable assurance of his favor; he tells them
in the next words, ver, 19* by what means he would do it, even by the
ministry and preaching of his Word. I create the fruit of the lips; peace,
peace, to him that is far off, and to him that is near, says the Lord, and I
will heal him. God has promised (you see) to work by the ministry of the
Word, uttered and applied by the lively voice of his servants (which is
therefore called the fruit of the lips) peace, peace; that is, abundance of
peace and comfort in the hearts of his people, and to heal all that anguish of
heart, which the doubting of his favor did work in them before.

Esa. 59.21. This is my covenant with them (with my people and Church, says
he) my spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of
the mouth of thy seeds seed; says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.
Observe three things in this promise. 1. That the Lord promises (and to add
strength to the promise it is said, this is his covenant with his people, and
in this one Verse it is twice repeated that the Lord said this) that his Word
shall never depart from his Church, his Church shall be the pillar and ground
of truth, as the Apostle calls it, 1 Timothy 3.15. Every fundamental truth (the
knowledge whereof is necessary unto salvation) shall abide in it for ever. The
true Church shall never in any age of the world be without it. 2. That this
word shall be ever in the mouth of Gods people, the Church shall never utterly
want the Ministry of the Word, it shall never want preachers and publishers of
the Word, 3. That the Spirit of God in the true Church shall ever go with the
Word; yea with the Ministry of the Word it shall be in the mouth of Gods
servants and Ministers, according to that which our Savior promises to his
Apostles and successors, Matthew 28.20. L^^ I am with you always, even unto
the end of the world. So that the humbled Christian that would feign be
assured of Gods favor in Christ, and goes to this Ordinance of God, to that
end that he may be so, may confidently expect to be taught of God in it; and
that the Spirit the Comforter will by it sprinkle the blood of Christ upon his
heart, and give him a comfortable assurance that it was shed for him; according
to that which the Spirit speaks to the Church, Esa. 54.13. All thy children
shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy children. Yea
the Lord has further promised, that whatsoever any of his Ministers shall
speak to his people for their comfort by warrant of his Word, he will ratify
it in heaven, and make it good to their souls. He confirms the word of his
servants (says the Prophet, Esa. 44.26) and performs the counsel of his
messengers. Verily, verily I say unto you (says our Savior, Matthew 18.18.)
Whatsoever ye shall loose upon earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Whosoever
you shall assure by the warrant of my Word, that their sins are forgiven,
that they are in the state of grace, I will from heaven assure their hearts of
it by my holy Spirit.

Applic.
Now to make some application of this. I know well the experience of these times
makes much against this. The Word read and preached both, is unto most men a
matter of mere ceremony and formality, of no more force and virtue than the
ceremonies of Moses were after they were antiquated, which the Apostle calls
Galat. 4.9. Weak and beggarly rudiments. They cannot find that the Spirit does
accompany the Word in their reading or hearing of it, but it is unto them as a
dead letter, they feel no life or power in it at all. Yea many a good soul is
apt to object, I have been a constant reader and hearer of the Word a long
time, but can get no comfort, no assurance by it. To both these I answer, that
this fault and defect must be imputed, not unto the Word, but unto our own
sins. God has promised that his Spirit shall accompany his Word in the
hearts of his people; and the cause why we find them not go together is this,
that our sins have parted them. These things which God has joined together,
we have put asunder. Our sins have separated between us and our God, as the
Prophet speaks, Esa. 59.2. There is great force in the Word to work in the
heart a comfortable assurance of thy salvation; but thine own corruption
hinders the efficacy and working of it in thee. And what corruption
principally does this? Surely the infidelity that is in thy heart. The word
preached did not profit them (says the Apostle, speaking of the Israelites
that perished in the wilderness, Hebrews 4.2.) not being mixed with says, in
them that heard it. Nay it is said of our blessed Savior, Mark 6.5, 6. that
he could do but a little good in Nazareth because of their unbelief. Thou do
not (in thy reading and hearing of the Word) believe and make claim unto these
promises, that God has made to this his Ordinance, thou do not look to
receive this benefit by it, and what marvel is it then, if it do thee so
little good? Learn in thy reading and hearing of the Word to wait upon God for
the performance of these promises with David, Psalm 85.8. I will hearken what
the Lord God will speak, for he will speak unto his people, and to his
Saints. If thou can with an honest and humble heart wait upon God for comfort
in the use of his Ordinance, thou shall certainly find a great deal of
comfort by it in the end. For they shall not be ashamed that wait for me, says
the Lord, Esa. 40.23.

The second ordinance of God that has great force to work and preserve
Hezekiahs time with good hearts, 2 Chronicles. 30. that they found mavelous
comfort in it, Verse 21. They kept the feast with gladness. And Verse 26.
There was great joy in Jerusalem. And what was the cause of this great joy?
Surely, they had prepared their hearts to seek the Lord and his favor in this
Ordinance, as we read, Verse 19. And in the conscionable use of this Ordinance
they found assurance of Gods favor, and that was the cause of their joy.

Two things there be that will make it evident to us, that there must needs be
great force in the conscionable use of the holy Sacrament, to sprinkle Christ's
blood upon our hearts, and to give us assurance it was shed for us.

First, That in this Ordinance Christ and his blood is applied to us more
particularly than by any other means that ever God ordained. His body and Cor.
11.24. Take, eat, this is my body, which was broken for you.

Secondly, Christ and his blood is in this Ordinance not only thus
particularly Romans 4.11.) to be a seal of the righteousness which is by faith.
And our Savior calls the bread his body, and the wine his blood, Mat.
26.26.28. This is my body, this is my blood, says he. As if he had said, As
verily as the one is present unto, and received by the body, so verily is the
other present unto, and received by the soul of the worthy receiver. And the
Apostle moves a Question, as appealing thereby to the conscience of every true
believer, 1 Cor. 10.16. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
communion of the blood of Christ? Is it not an applying of Christ's blood to our
selves, and making of it our own.

Applic.
And how falls it out then, that we that have so often received this holy
Sacrament, have gotten so little assurance by it, that Christ is ours? That
there is never a whit the more joy in Jerusalem, Gods people are never a whit
the more comfortable in themselves, for being at our Passover? Surely, 1 We do
not beforehand prepare our hearts to seek the Lord our God in this Ordinance,
as they did in Hezekiahs time. 2. We do not when we are at this Ordinance
stir up our selves with humble and thankful souls to receive that mercy
that is offered us from the Lord. But that complaint may be taken up in this
case, which the Prophet makes, Esa. 64.7. There is none that stirs up
himself to take hold of thee. Christ comes to us in this his Ordinance, and
offers (as with a bunch of hysop) to sprinkle his blood upon us, and we will
not open our hearts to receive it from him.

David does here, and cry unto him as he does likewise, Psalm 35.3. O Lord
say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. Great is the force of humble and fervent
prayer, as in all other cases, so in this especially. Two things we have to
assure us of this.

First, The promise of God. I will make my people joyful (says the Lord, Esa.
56.7.) in my house of prayer. What is the thing that makes Gods people joyful
and comfortable? Surely, when the Lord lifts up the light of his countenance
upon them, and gives them assurance of his favor, as we see plainly, Psalm
4.6, 7. How and by what means will the Lord work this joy and comfort in
them? By prayer. I will make them joyful (says he) in my house of prayer. So
speaks our Savior, Ioh. 16 24. Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may
be full. So the Lord promises unto his people, Levit. 23.27. that the day of
their most solemn and fervent prayer, wherein they should humble themselves by
fasting, and afflict their souls, to that end that they might pray the more
fervently, shoud be a day of atonement and reconciliation between him and
them; they should obtain more comfortable assurance of his favor upon that
day and by that means, than by any other.

David. The first is set down in Psalm 6. For, when he made that Psalm, it
is evident that he was in great anguish of heart by the loss of his assurance
of Gods favor, as appears by the seven first verses. To recover his comfort
he falls to servent prayer. And before he had ended his prayer, he was so
filled with the assurance of Gods favor, that he breaks forth into these
patheticall expressions of his joy, Verse 8, 9. The Lord has heard the voice
of my weeping, the Lord has heard my supplication, the Lord will receive my
prayer. The second experiment of this in him is in Psalm 31. Where we find
that when he had so far lost his assurance, that he thought (as he says,
verse 22.) he was quite cut off from God, as a dead and rotten branch; he
betook himself to prayer, he cried, and made many supplication unto God, and
had such success in this course, that he bursteth forth into these words,
verse 21. Blessed be the Lord, for he has showed me his mavelous kindness,
as in a strong city.

And how falls it out then (will thou say) that I have been so long a suitor
to God for this, Applic.
and cannot yet obtain it? I answer thee in the words of the Apostle, Iam.
4.3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss.

Five defects there be in thy prayer, that this is to be imputed unto.

First, Either thou prayest not fervently, and earnestly for this, but there
are David does, Psalm. 63.3. Thy loving kindness is better then life.

A second defect in thy prayer may be this, that thou live in some known If
thou prepare thine heart (says Zophar, Job 11 13, 14) and stretch out thine
hand toward him, if iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not
wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles. He, whose conscience tells him, he
does somewhat daily, and purposes still to do that he ought not; or somewhat
he daily omitteth to do, and does not yet resolve to do, which he ought to
do, can have no hope to find comfort by his prayer.

A third defect in thy prayer, that may be the cause why thou speedest no
Mark. 9.2^. This kind can come forth by nothing, but by prayer and fasting.
Remember what I told thee out of Levi. 23.27. Of all the days of thy life, the
day of humiliation, wherein thou afflictest thy soul in prayer and fasting,
will prove the day of atonement between God and thy soul; thou can use no
means to get assurance of thy atonement and reconciliation with God, better
then that.

A fourth defect in thy prayer, that may perhaps be the cause why thou John 16
22. Verily, verily, I say unto you; Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my
name, he will give it you. And that Luke 11.13. If ye being evil, know how
to give good gifts to your children, how much more shall your heavenly father
give the holy spirit to them that ask him? And this holy spirit is the spirit
of adoption, that witnesses with our spirit that we are Gods children, as the
Apostle speaks, Romans 8.16. These, and those other promises we heard of
before, we should think on when we pray, and verily expect the performance of
them. Thus did David. I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried (says
he, Psalm 119.147.) I hoped in thy word. As if he should say, The gracious
promises thou had made in thy word, encouraged me to it. So do not thou,
Thou prayest for comfortable assurance of Gods favor, but thou do not look
to obtain it by thy prayer, nay thou had no hope to obtain it. And so by
this thy infidelity when thou prayest, thou setttest up a wall of partition
between God and thy prayer, to keep it from having any access unto him. Let
not that man think (says the Apostle, James 1.7) that he shall receive any
thing of the Lord. The Lord uses to answer his people in their suites, as he
did the two blind men. Matthew 9.29. According to your faith be it unto you.

limited the holy one of Israel, as they did, of whom the Prophet complains,
Psalm 78.41. whereas our Savior has taught us by the parable of the
unrighteous judge, and the widow, Luke 18.1. that we ought always to pray,
and not to faint. Blessed are all they that wait for him, says the Prophet
Esa. 30.18. As if he had said, They that wait, shall not loose their labor,
they shall certainly obtain their suit in the end. This is a blessing (I tell
thee) worth the waiting for. Many a Saint of God has waited many years for
this suit before they have obtained it, and when they have obtained it at the
last, have thought themselves happy men. And thus much shall serve to have
been spoken of the first sort of means; the other we must leave till the next
day.

Lecture CXXV. On Psalm 51.7. Aug. 11. 1629.


The work of righteousness shall be peace (says the Prophet Esaias 32.17.)
and the effect of righteousness, quietness, and assurance for ever. As if he
had said, A righteous and godly life, will certainly work peace in the heart,
and no marvel, for it will work assurance of Gods favor; yea, assurance for
ever, a constant assurance of it, an assurance that we shall have it for ever,
and shall never loose it. In the fear of the Lord (says Solomon. Pro. 14.26.)
is strong confidence. As if he should say, Fear God, be careful not to offend
him in any thing, and thou shall be confident of his favor, yea strongly
confident of it. Yea, this care to please God in all our ways, and fear to
offend him, will preserve in the heart of a man, the assurance of Gods favor,
even in the time of the greatest trial, and tentations that he can fall into.
Whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them (says our Savior,
Matthew, 7.24.25. whosoever he be that is not a hearer of the word only, but
makes conscience to practice whatsoever he hears) I will liken him unto a
wiseman, that built his house upon a rock, and the rain descended, and the
winds blew, end the floods beat upon that house, and it fell not, because it
was founded upon a rock. In which respect the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.19. calls
good works, a good foundation for the time to come, whereupon men may lay hold
upon eternal life. As if he should have said, A man may in the time to come;
that is, in the time of sickness, and trial, build a well grounded assurance
of eternal life, even upon them. I know well, that experience seems to make
much against this. Many that are most careful to please God in all their
ways, and fearful to offend him, are of all other people in most doubt of
their salvation, and are furthest off from confident assurance of it. And on
the other side, they that live most licentiously are of all men freest from
these doubts, most confident of Gods love, and of their own salvation. But to
this I answer. Let God be true, and every m^n a ly^r. Romans 3.4. Certainly a
constant care to please God in all our ways, will bring us to a comfortable
assurance of Gods favor, sooner or later, in one measure and degree or other,
and without this, it is not possible to ^^taine unto it. Two things there be
that may undoubtedly assure us of this, 1. The promise of God that cannot lie.
2. The nature of God.

First. See what rich and precious promises we have from God, concerning To him
that orders his conversation aright (says the Lord. Psalm. 50.23.) will I
show the salvation of God. As if he had said, I will cause him to see, and know
that he shall be saved. And again, Mal. 4.2. To you that fear my name, shall
the sun of righteousness arise, with healing in his wings. To every soul
among you that truly fears God, I may boldly say, that though it be night
with thee now, thou see no light, no comfort, thou art continually disgui^ted
with fears and doubts of thy salvation, yet certainly the sun of
righteousness will arise upon thee one day with healing in his wings; thou
shall see the comfortable light of Gods countenance, and have a sweet and full
assurance of his favor. Light is sown for the righteous (as the Prophet
speaks, Psalm. 97.11) and gladness for the upright in heart. There is not a
soul that unfeinedly fears God, but he has in him the seed of true comfort
and assurance, and he shall certainly one day both see it spring, and taste of
the fruit of it. If ye love me, keep my commandments (says our Savior, John
14.^5, 16.) and I will pray the father, and he shall give you another
comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. If any man keep his
commandments, keep them Evangelically, that is, out of love to God, endeavor
to keep them, let him not doubt of comfort, certainly the comforter will come
unto that man, and abide with him for ever. But you will say, When will the
comforter come? I have long desired to fear God and endeavored to please him,
yet could I never attain to this comfort hitherto. I answer, Do so still, and
the comforter will certainly come, For Christ (whom his father always hears,
John 11.42) has prayed that it may be so. Yea, it will not be long too. Yet a
little while (says the Apostle, Heb 10.37.) and he that shall come, will come,
and will not tarry. And for this also we have a promise, Psalm 8^.8, 9. For
when the Prophet had said. God will speak peace unto his people, and to his
Saints. God will certainly speak peace to the heart of every godly man; he
adds, Surely his salvation is nigh unto them that fear him. As if he had
said, Certainly it will not be long before God gives to every soul that
truly fears him, a comfortable assurance of his favor, though he do delay
it for a time, surely he will do it ere long.

The second evidence for this, is from the nature of God, It must needs be The
righteous Lord loves righteousness (says David, Psalm 11.7.) his countenance
does behold the upright. And Prove. 15.9. The Lord loves him that follows
after righteousness. He must needs have the love and favor of the holy God,
that leads an holy life. Thus speaks our blessed Savior, John 14.21. He
that has my commandments, and keeps them, is he that loves me. And he
that loves me, shall be beloved of my father, and I will love him, and will
manifest my self unto him. As if he should say, As I and my father both cannot
but love him, that out of love to me makes conscience of all my commandments,
so he shall know it and feel it, and hide the assurance of it in himself, I
will manifest my self unto him, says he.

On the other side, It is not possible for any man to have true assurance of
his salvation, and of Gods favor that does not fear God, and is not careful
in all his ways to please him. And certainly the want of assurance that is in
any of us, is chiefly to be imputed unto this that we have not been so
fearful to offend God, so careful to please him as we ought to have been. I
speak not only of such as are wicked men, There is no peace says my God to
the wicked, Esaias 57.21 (that is, no true and sound peace) But I speak of Gods
dearest children. Let a man that has the strongest faith, the most comfortable
assurance of Gods favor, once give himself liberty unto any gross sin,
though he loose not his faith utterly thereby (Christ prayed for Peter that
his faith should not fail, in that his most fearful fall, Luk 22.3^. and the
same prayer that he made for Peter, he made for all that truly believe in his
name, as you may read, John 17.20.) yet shall that man certainly loose his
assurance and comfort by it. Your iniquities (says the Prophet to Gods own
people Esa. 59.2. have separated between you and your God, and your sins have
bid his face from you. You need no other experiment of this then in David. What
man has ever had more comfortable assurance of his salvation, and of the
favor of God in Christ, then he sometimes had. Thou art my God, and I will
praise thee (says he, Psalm. 118.28.) thou art my God, and I will exalt thee.
And Ps. 27.1. The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom shall I fear? But
when this man had once given liberty to himself to sin against his conscience,
in the matter of Vriah, see how his assurance and comfort was quite lost, and
how much ado he had to recover it again, Make me to hear joy and gladness,
says he here, verse 8. and verse 12. Restore me to the joy of thy salvation.
But what speak I of gross sins? Let a Christian but grow worldly and secure,
let him but remit any thing of that watchfulnes, and care to take heed to his
ways, of that fear to offend God in any thing that was wont to be in him, and
his comfortable assurance of Gods favor will be lost. See an experiment of
this in the Church and spouse of Christ, the mother of us all, Cant. 5.2 -- 6.
She complains ver. 6. that her wellbeloved had with-drawne himself, and was
gone, she had lost the comfort and assurance of his love; and both in that
verse and those that follow, it appears, she had much ado to recover him
again. She sought him, but she could not find him, she called upon him, but
he gave her no answer, And how came this to pass? What had she done? Surely
she came to this woeful loss, not by any foul sin she had fal^e into, but
only through a spiritual laziness, and wretchlesnesse, and worldly security
that was crept upon her, as appears by her answer, verse 3. I have put off my
coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them?
She answered him as a lazy sluggard newly awakened out of his sleep, and
loath to arise out of his bed, and the effect of her answer was this, I am now
at ease and quiet, and by opening my heart unto thee, by receiving thee to rule
and govern in it, by hearkening and yeeldding unto thee in every thing, I
shall put my self to a great deal of trouble and labor, that I am now eased
of. Certainly this is an answer that many a poor soul has often made unto
Christ. He has fallen asleep in worldly security, and Christ both by his word
and spirit knocked often at the door of his heart, and sought to enter, and take
full possession of it; and because this could not be without trouble to the
flesh, it would put him to labor and pain, therefore he has refused to open
unto Christ, and so has lost him, and the comfortable assurance of his love.

Applic.
Let us now make some application of this unto our selves.

can have no hope at all to recover the assurance of Gods favor. Sin
unrepented of, is like a filthy vapor rising out of the soul, that will cause
such a mist and thick fog between God and us, as will keep the light of his
countenance from shining upon us. That remedy therefore that is prescribed unto
us in all other afflictions, Lamenta. 3.39.40. must be used in this case.
Wherefore does living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sin, Let
us search, and try our ways, and turn^ again unto the Lord. Search thine own
ways, and crave help of God also, crying to him with Job, 10.2. Show me
wherefore thou contendest and art angry with me? and with the Church, Psalm 44
24. Lord, wherefore hidest thou thy face? If thou can find out thy sin that
is the cause of this, and humble thy self, and return unto God by unfeined
repentance, thou need not doubt of recovering thy assurance again. Return
unto me, and I will return unto you, says the Lord of hosts. Mal. 3.7.

Secondly. Let this restrain us from sin. For is there not force enough in
Absalom was, yet he professes, 2 Samuel 14.32. that it was no comfort to him at
all to be restored from his banishment to his own house and land, nay, it was
no comfort to him to live, so long as his father refused to look upon him.

Thirdly and lastly. Should not this make every one of us in love with a
Christian walk circumspectly, and exactly, as the Apostle speaks. Ephesians.
5.15. To watch end be sober, as the Apostle Peter exhorts us to be. 1 Peter
5.1. to grow in grace and take heed of decaying in zeal or (...). If you grow
remiss and careless, though you loose not your salva^^^^, yet the full and
comfortable assurance of it, you will certainly loose. I know this will not
be done without pain and labor. But of all the labors in the world this is
the most profitable, yea the most comfortable and sweet labor. The labor of
the righteous tends unto life. says Solomon, Proverbs 10.16. And who would
not labor for life, specially for life eternal? That which Solomon says of
bodily labor. Ecclesiast. 5.12. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet,
whether he eat little or much, may much more be said of this labor, it will
make both our food, and rest, and all other comforts sweet unto us, for it will
preserve in us the assurance of Gods love in Christ, which will give a pleasant
relish unto them all.

The second of these more inward and spiritual means of assurance, that
Hereby we know (says the Apostle, 1 Ioh 3.19.) that we are of the truth, and
shall before him assure our hearts. When once we know we are of the truth, of
the number of those that are sincere and upright hearted, then shall we assure
our hearts even before God. Now no man can know this well, that is not careful
to observe, consider, and examine his own ways. Ponder the path of thy feet
(says the Holy Ghost, Pro. 4.26.) and let all thy ways be established. As if
he had said, By pondering and considering our doings well, we may have them
established, make them stable and firm such as we may build sound comfort and
assurance upon. He that does truth (says our Savior, Ioh. 3.21. that is, he
that is indeed and in his practice not in profession only a godly man) comes
to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in
God. As if he should say, He does by the Word examine his deeds whether they
be so performed, as God may be pleased with them. Certainly there is never a
good duty we perform at any time, never a prayer we make, never a Sermon we
preach or hear, never an alms we give, nay I say more, never a bargain we
make, never a duty we perform even toward men in our particular callings,
but it may give us assurance of Gods love if we can find it has been wrought
in God; that is, done by the guidance of his spirit, and with an upright heart.
For no man can do any thing with an upright heart (that is, in faith, and
obedience, and love to God) till he be in Gods favor, till he be in the state
of grace, and a justified man. A corrupt tree (says our Savior, Mat. 7.18. a
man that is in his natural estate) cannot bring forth good fruit. As many as
are led by the spirit of God (says the Apostle, Romans 8.14.) they are the sons
of God certainly. Therefore also he tells poor servants, Col. 3.24. that did
their service to their idolatrous and bad masters in singleness of heart,
fearing God, that they knew (even by this) that they should receive of the
Lord, the reward of inheritance. They might grow assured of their salvation
even by doing the duties of servants, with good and upright hearts. And as any
one duty performed with a good heart will give assurance of this in some
measure; so the more good works any man knows he has done, the longer he
knows that he has continued in a constant care to please God in all his
ways, the stronger his assurance shall be. A strong and full assurance of
salvation, will not be gotten in a day or two by one or two good actions, but
by a constant continuing in well doing and by long proof and experience of the
working of Gods grace, in our hearts. We desire (says the Apostle, Heb. 6.11.)
that every one of you, do show the same diligence to the full assurance of
hope unto the end. As if he should say, You have good things in you now, and
such as accompany salvation, such as may give you good assurance of your
salvation, you show much labor of love, ye have ministered to the Saints and
yet do minister, but if you would get full assurance of hope, you must hold out
and do so still to the end.

Two things there be that are wont to be objected by many a good heart against
this.

Object. 1
First, If a man could certainly know that the duties he performs were done
with an upright heart; that in his conversation and course of life, he were led
by the spirit of God, then he might indeed thereby get this assurance. But
there is all the difficulty, every man may find by experience, the truth of
that which the Prophet speaks, Ier. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all
things, and desparately wicked who can know it?

Answ.
To this I answer that though this be indeed an hard thing, yet this is not
impossible. The Lord that knows our hearts (as deceitful as they be as the
Prophet there speaks, verse ^0.) makes his children also able to know their
own hearts, and the uprightness of them. Hezekiah knew he had walked before
God in truth, and with an upright heart, as himself professes, Esa. 38.3. And
Peter certainly knew that he did unfeignedly love the Lord and durst call the
Lord himself to witness for this, Ioh. 21.17. And there is no Christian but
if he would ponder the path of his feet and take heed to his to his ways
according to the word and take pains to examine them by the rules thereof, he
might know the uprightness of his own heart in them, it might be made
manifest unto him that they are wrought in God, as our Savior speaks, John
3.2^. Yea when he is at the worst and most destitute of his assurance, if he
could examine his own heart, he should find in it evident arguments of
uprightness (as fear to offend God in any thing, longing after his favor and
prizing it above all things; love of the brethren, poverty of spirit and grief
of heart for it) upon which he might ground good assurance that he is in the
favor of God. O the wrong we do to our selves in the careless neglect of
observing and examining our own ways! This is a maine difference between the
upright hearted Christian, and the natural man. The one is ever best persuaded
of his own estate when he thinks least of his own ways and doings, he
cannot abide to examine his own ways, or to think seriously of his own
doings. If by any hand of God upon him, or by a searching ministry they be
brought into his mind, it is a death unto him. Like unto the broken merchant
that cannot abide to go into his counting house to cast over his books. On
the other side, The upright hearted Christian is never so comfortable, as when
he has most seriously co^si^ered his own ways, when his heart has been so
searched as he can look into the bottom of it: Let every man prove his own
work (says the Apostle, Gal 6.4.) and then shall he have rejoicing in
himself alone and not in another. A good man shall be satisfied from himself,
says Solomon, Pro. 14.14. He shall (if he will take pains to examine his own
heart) find sufficient ground of comfort in himself.

The second thing that many a good soul will object against this, Object. 2.
is, That he has done what he can to examine his own heart, and he can
find no truth of grace in himself nothing to ground any good assurance upon.

To this I answer, Answ.
That this may be indeed for a time the case of a dear child of God, as we
shall hear in the next use. They cannot discern in themselves for the present
any goodness. But even in this case, observation and examination of their own
ways will be of great use unto them. For then it will be good for them, to
call to mind the times that are past; and those evidences they have had of the
truth of grace in them in former times. This course Job took to recover his
comfort sundry times, as you shall find, Chap 23.11, 12. and in three whole
Chapters together, 29.30 31. And so did the Prophet likewise, Psalm. 77.6. I
call to remembrance my long in the night, I commune with mine own heart, and
my spirit made diligent search. He did (by communing with his own heart and
searching it diligently) call to mind that there was a time when he could sing
in the night, when the spirit of adoption had given him such assurance of Gods
love, as made him full of joy and comfort even in the night season. And this
course the Apostle prescribes to Gods people, Heb. 10.^2. as a singular means
to preserve and recover their confidence and assurance of Gods favor. Call to
remembrance (says he) the former days, in the which after ye were
illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions.

Alas (will you say) what comfort is it to me to remember what goodness has
been in me in times past, Object.
which I am now fallen from, and have lost?

I answer, Answ.
That if ever thou had grace in thee in truth, although the sense and feeling
of it thou may loose for a time, the vigor and operation of it may be nipt
and interrupted for a time; but the grace and seed of regeneration is an
incorruptible seed, as the Apostle calls it, 1 Pet. 1.23. where it is in
truth it is lasting. I will pray the father (says our Savior, John 14.16,
17.) and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for
ever. Even the spirit of truth whom the world cannot receive, because it sees
him not: neither knows him; but ye know him, for he dwells in you and shall
be in you. Look what heart the spirit of God did ever dwell in, there he
shall be, there he will abide for ever, Christ has prayed the father that it
may be so. The poor humbled sinner therefore that did ever in his life, at
any one time, in any one action discern the truth of grace in himself (though
now he can discern none) may from thence conclude infallibly that there is
truth of grace in him still; and consequently may receive great help from
thence for the recovery of his assurance again.

O what cause is there then that we should continually in all our ways commune
with our own hearts about this; and search diligently to find this truth of
grace in our selves, seeing this will stand us in such stead at a dead lift (as
we say) in our spiritual desertions to recover our assurance again?

Lecture CXXVI. On Psalm 51.7. August 18. 1629.
Psalm. 77. who when he had so far lost his assurance that it was a trouble to
him to remember God and his spirit was overwhelmed in him as he complains,
ver. 3. and that he cried out, ver. 7, 8, 9. Will the Lord cast off for ever,
and Will he be favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? Has God
forgotten to be gracious? He had strong tentations to doubt he should never
recover Gods favor again. Now to raise himself out of this woeful estate, he
resolves thus with himself, ver. 10. But I will remember the years of the
right hand of the most high; that is, the years and times of my life wherein I
had sweet experience of Gods mercy and love, For so is this phrase interpreted,
Psalm. 17.7. Show thy mavelous kindness o thou that savest with thy right
hand them that put their trust in thee. And 80.17. Let thy hand be upon the man
of thy right hand. This course also David took at another time, Psalm. 143.5,
6. When his spirit was overwhelmed within him, and his heart within him was
desolate, then I remember (says he) the days of old, I meditate on all thy
works, I muse on the works of thy hands. He called to mind and seriously
thought upon the passages of Gods providence toward other of his people, but
specially toward himself in former times, and sought to recover his comfort
and assurance this way. And see what success Gods servants have found in this
case, how they have grounded their assurance upon this. I will cry unto thee
(says David, Psalm. 61.2, 3.) when my heart is overwhelmed for thou have been
a shelter for me, and a strong tower from the enemy. Because thou have been my
help (says he, Psalm. 63.7.) therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I
rejoice. And 71.20. Thou which have showed me great and sore troubles, shall
quicken me and shall bring me up again from the depthes of the earth. And
whereupon grounded he this assurance and confidence? That he had expressed
before, ver. 5, 6. Thou art my hope, o Lord God, thou art my trust from my
youth; by thee have I been holden up from the womb, thou art he that took me
out of my mothers bowels my praise shall be continually of thee.

Object.
But you will (happily) object and say, Can any man ground true assurance of Gods
love upon the experience he has had of Gods goodness toward him in these
temporal and common favors? Such experiments of Gods love as these are I
could record a great many. But (alas) these are poor grounds for any man to
build his assurance and comfort upon. 1. No man can say because God has
formerly been good to him in this kind, therefore he will be good to me
again. God repented that he had made Saul King, 1 Samuel 15.35. God gives such
gifts as these unto many and takes them quite away again, and so seems to
repent the bestowing of them. Nay 2 no man can judge of Gods love or hatred by
such things though he were sure to enjoy them always, as the Holy Ghost
teaches us plainly, Eccl. 9.1, Many castawayes (and Esau by name) have had
abundant experience of Gods goodness in such things, and yet the Scripture
says expressly that God hated him for all that, Mal. 1.3.

But to this I have two things to answer. Answ.


First, Though these outward blessings be to reprobate men no arguments By
this I know (says David, Psalm. 41.11.) that thou favourest me, because mine
enemy does not triumph over me. Even by a temporal deliverance he had received
from the practices of Saul, he gathered assurance that the Lord loved him. And
Psalm. 18.19. He delivered me, because he delighted in me. So Jacob tells his
brother, Genesis 33.10. that in the strange alteration he found in him and in the
great kindness he received from him he saw the face of God; that is, the
loving countenance of God toward him. Thou that fear God may certainly
confirm thy self much in the assurance of Gods love, even by calling to mind
the manifold experiments thou have had of Gods goodness toward thee even in
these outward things, from thy youth up hitherto. Nay I will say more, The
observation of the common goodness that God shows unto all men, yea even
unto all his creatures* may help thee much (that desire to fear God) to grow
assured and confident of his special love unto thee. Your heavenly father
(says our Savior to his Disciples, Mat^h. 6.26.) feeds the fowls of the
air; and are not ye much better then they? Thus David, from the consideration
of this common goodness of God to all the creatures, falls into an
admiration of his goodness to his people, Psalm. 36.6, 7. Thou preservest both
man and beast. How excellent is thy loving kindness o God? Therefore the
children of men, put their trust under the shadow of thy wings. As if he had
said, Therefore the children of men (poor sinners) are apt to put their trust
in thee, and grow confident of thy special love toward them; because they,
seeing how good thou art to all thy creatures, conclude thereupon that thy
loving kindness toward such as desire to fear thee, must needs be
excellent. So having spoken at large, Psalm. 107. of the providence and
goodness of God toward all men; he infers, verse 42, 43. The righteous
shall see it and rejoice, they shall take comfort even in this. And he gives
the reason in the next words. Who so is wise and will observe these things
(that is, the goodness of God that appears in the ordinary passages of his
providence toward all men) even they shall understand the loving kindness of
the Lord; that is to say, toward righteous men, toward such as fear his name.

But then secondly I answer, That though the observation of Gods goodness love
much better, then by any outward blessing that ever thou receivedst from God.
See how David did ground his assurance and confidence upon this. Hear me when
I call (says he, Psalm. 4.1.) o God of my righteousness; thou have enlarged me
when I was in distress, have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer; and thereupon
inforceth, verse 3. The Lord wi^^ hear me when I call upon him. He was
confident God would return to him again, and give a gracious answer unto his
prayer, because he had had experience that God had formerly when he was in like
distress enlarged his heart and given him much comfort in prayer. So Psalm.
22.21. Save me from the Lions mouth, for thou have heard me from the horns of
the Unicorns; The experience he had had of Gods power and goodness formerly in
the like tentation, gives him assurance of help in this also. So Ps. 27.9, 10.
Hide not thy face from me (says he) put not thy servant away in anger, Thou
have been my help (in such like distresses as I am now in) leave me not
neither forsake me o God of my salvation. And see in the next verse the
confidence he grew unto upon this experience, When my father and my mother
forsake me, then the Lord will take me up.

Applic.
Let us learn therefore (beloved) to take notice of and observe all the
special favors of God and experiments we receive of his love from time to
time; Yea let us labor to remember them, to keep a register of them; and to
repeat them often to our own souls. Consider how great things God has done
for you, says Samuel to the people, 1 Samuel 12.24. Yea we should call upon our
hearts as David does, Psalm. 103.2. Bless the Lord o my soul; and forget not
all his benefits. Gods people have been so careful to keep in remembrance
Gods special favors, that they have used to give names to persons, and
places, and times of purpose to help their memories in this case. Hannah
called her son whom she had obtained by prayer Samuel begged of God, 1 Samuel
1.20. that so often as she heard him named, she might be put in remembrance of
the respect God had had to her prayer. Abraham called the place where God had
spared Isaak, and provided another sacrifice in his room Iehovah-jireh God
will provide, Genesis 22.14. that he might never forget that experiment he had had
of Gods gracious providence. Jacob changed the name of Luz into Bethel the
house of God, Genesis 28.19. that he might ever remember how graciously and
comfortably God had revealed himself to him in that place. Iehosaphat and Gods
people (that they might never forget the mavelous comfort they had received
from God after a general fast, in a strange deliverance from an invincible
army of the Ammonites, and Moabites, and Edomites, 2 Chronicles. 20.26.) called the
place where they met together to praise God for this mercy the valley of
Berachah; that is, the valley of blessing. So Mordecai and Gods people to keep
in perpetual remembrance another mavelous deliverance which they had
obtained by fasting and prayer from the conspiracy of Haman, did not only keep
those days which he (according to the counsel of his judicial astrologers
and magicians) found to be the most lucky and fit days for to put the decree
against the Jews in execution, as days of rejoicing every year; but called
them also the days of Purim as you may read, Est. 9.26. They would have the
Lords defeating of Hamans lottery and magic, never to be forgotten.
Certainly these examples are written to teach us that we who have received the
like blessings from God; who have had experience 1 of Gods mavelous
providence in sundry extreamities, as Abraham had; 2 of Gods gracious presence
revealed to us in his house, and in the use of his ordinances as Jacob had; 3
of the comfortable answer that God has given to our prayers, as he did to
Hannah; 4 specially of the fruit and happy success we have found in our fasts
and the great deliverances we have received by them, as Gods people in the
days of Iehosaphat and Mordecai did; that we should likewise take heed of
forgetting these experiments and use all the means we can to keep them in
remembrance for ever. And that for this very cause, because (as the Apostle
says Romans 5.4.) Experience works hope. And that upon this ground, because
though we be variable, the Lord is constant in his love; Whom he loves he
loves to the end, John 13.1. In him is no uariablenesse, or shadow of turning,
James 1.17.

The fourth and last means that they must use, who desire to obtain assurance
Chron. 20.12. We know not what to do, but our eyes are upon thee; he may
obtain assurance and comfort by this means, when he cannot do it by any
other. By this means David looked to receive his comfort and assurance, as you
may find by that speech he uses to his own soul, Psalm 42.5. which he
repeateth again verse 12. Why art thou cast down O my soul, and why art thou
disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him for the
help of his countenance. He looked verily to recover the comfortable assurance
of Gods favor. How looked he to recover it? Surely by hoping in God, and
resting in his mercy. So by this means the faithful profess they looked to
obtain the comfortable assurance of Gods love, Psalm. 33.20 -- 22. Our soul
waits for the Lord, for our heart shall rejoice in him, because we have
trusted in his holy name, Let thy mercy O Lord be upon us according as we hope
in thee.

Why but you will say, Object. 1
can any man hope for mercy from God that can find no goodness in himself at
all? The righteous God loves righteousness, as we have heard out of Psalm.
11.7. Ye that fear the Lord trust in the Lord, says David, Psalm. 115.11. The
mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting (says David, Psalm.
103.17.) upon them that fear him. But on the other side; Such as have no
goodness in them, but are wicked men, his soul hates, as David teaches us,
Psalm. 11.5.

To this I answer, That though no impenitent sinner can expect mercy from God,
Answ.
neither would I have any such snatch at any thing that I shall say, they have
nothing to do with it, yet the humbled and penitent sinner may, as may appear
by examples. Sundry that could find no goodness in themselves at all, and
therefore judged themselves utterly unworthy of mercy, have yet relied upon
God, trusted and looked to receive mercy from him, nevertheless for that. Such
a one was the Centurion Matthew. 8.8. who though he judged himself unworthy that
Christ should come under his roof, yet did trust to receive mercy from Christ
for all that. And the woman of Canaan, who though she knew no goodness in her
self, but counted her self no better than a dog, Mat. 15.27. yet trusted
confidently in Christ for all that. And two plain reasons there be for this.
First, because they knew Gods mercy is free, and not grounded upon any
goodness that is in us. I will love them freely, says the Lord, Hos. 14.4. I
will be gracious to whom I will be gracious (says the Lord Exodus 33.19.) and
will show mercy on whom I will show mercy. Secondly, Because they have trusted
to receive mercy from God only through Christ. In him (they knew) there was
goodness enough, though there were none in them; Look upon the face of thine
anointed, says David, Psalm. 84.9. As if he should have said, Though thou
can see no goodness in me for which thou should show me mercy, yet thou
may see enough in him to content thee. Cause thy face to shine upon thy
Sanctuary that is desolate (says Daniel 9.57.) for the Lords sake. Christ has
deserved that God should be merciful to all the believe in him. And whatsoever
goodness is in him is theirs. He is made to us of God (says the Apostle, 1 Corinthians. 1.30.) wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption. So that
an humbled sinner may rely upon, and expect mercy of God through Christ, though
he can discern no goodness at all in himself. Nay, I say more, that because
thou find in thy self no goodness at all, therefore art thou of all men
the fittest to receive mercy from God through Christ. H^e every one that
thirsts (says the Lord, Esa. 55.1.) come ye to the waters, and he that has
no money. As if he had said, He that has no goodness in him, nothing whereby
he may hope to purchase and deserve mercy, is nevertheless capable of mercy
for that; nay he is the more capable of it, because of that, that he finds
himself so. As, the emptier a glass is, the fitter it is to receive any
precious liquor that should be put into it. Blessed are the poor in spirit,
says our Savior, Matthew. 5.3. And, To him that works not, but believes in
him that justifies the ungodly (says the Apostle, Romans 4.5. To him that has
not any goodness, not one good work to trust unto, but can do God that honor
as to believe in him, expect and rest upon him for mercy, though he know
himself to be an ungodly man, and void of all goodness) to him his faith is
imputed for righteousness. As if he should say, O that is a justifying, that
is an excellent faith indeed.

Object. 2
But though a man that feels no goodness in himself, may yet expect to
receive mercy and assurance of favor from God, if he can rest himself upon
the free grace and mercy of God in Christ, and trust to receive it that way,
and that way alone; yet how can such a one as I that am so full of fears, and
doubts, and infidelity, ever be able to do that; my infidelity barreth me from
all hope of mercy. If Christ could do no mighty work in Nazareth because of
their infidelity, as the Holy Ghost witnesses, Mar. 6 5. how can I ever hope
to obtain mercy and assurance of favor from God this way?

Answ.
To this I answer, First, Thou may notwithstanding thine infidelity, so long
as the infidelity that is in thee reigns not, but thou discernest, bewailest,
and strivest against it. David had doubting, and fear, and infidelity in him,
when he cried Psalm. 13.1. How long will thou forget me O Lord? For ever? How
long will thou hide thy face from me? And yet even then he trusted in Gods
mercy, and hoped to recover assurance of his favor that way, as appears by
his words in the fifth verse. And when I am afraid (says he, Psalm. 56*^. when I
am disquieted with fears, and doubts of any kind) I will trust in thee. So
Psalm. 143.7, 8. he professes that when his spirit fa^led, when his spirit was
overwhelmed, and his heart within him was desolate, as he had said before Verse
4. (and consequently when he had much infidelity in him) yet even then he did
trust in God, an^ lifted up his soul unto him. And was not the poor woman
that had the bloody issue ( Luke 8.47.) troubled much with doubts, and fears,
and infidelity, when yet notwithstanding she did trust and look to receive
mercy and help through the free goodness of God in Christ. Secondly, Though
thou feel thy self never so unable through thy infidelity to cast thy self
upon the free grace and mercy of God in Christ; yet if thou can bewail, and be
soundly humbled for thy infidelity, God will make thee able to do it. For, he
has promised to give grace (even this as well as any other) to the humble,
Iam. 4.6. He will keep thee from sinking under, and being overcome of thy
infidelity. And Gods people have never found him readier to show them mercy
this way, that when they have felt most weakness and infidelity in
themselves. When the Apostle had been pressed out of measure above his
strength, (as he speaks 2 Cor. 1.8, 9) and had the sentence of death in
himself, God sustained and delivered him; and that for this very cause, as he
says, to teach us that we should not trust in our selves, but in God which
raises the dead; which causes him to profess, 2 Cor. 12.10. When I am weak,
then am I strong. He never felt Gods strength more in supporting him and
keeping him from sinking under the burden of any tentation, than when he found
his own weakness and readiness to sink most of all.

Now (to make some application of this) we shall find that many of Gods people
do greatly offend in this point. Applic.
For they make that inherent grace which they find in themselves the only
ground of all their comfort and assurance of Gods favor; while they discern
that in themselves they are quiet and comfortable, when they cannot, they are
utterly out of hope. Two evils they commit in this, one against themselves,
another against the Lord.

First, resting upon that grace they find in themselves, and so trusting in
their David complained that it was with him, Psalm. 143.4, 7. Though that grace
that is in them (if ever it were in them in truth) do not utterly fail, yet
their heart and spirit, the knowledge and feeling of that grace they have, may
quite fail them for a time. This made David say as he does, Psalm. 73.26. My
flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion
for ever. Make God himself thy rock and portion, the only ground of all thy
hope and comfort, and he will never fail, though thine own flesh and heart do.

Secondly, In doing thus we make an idol of that inherent grace that is in us;
we go a whoring after our own hearts, as the Lord speaks, Number. 15.39. For no
inherent grace that is in us is God, but the gift of God only, and therefore
cannot be fully trusted in without sin.

Let us therefore learn to praise God for any grace he has wrought in us by
his holy Spirit; yea let us take comfort in it as in a fruit of his eternal
and unchangeable love, but let us not so rest upon it, as to make it the only
or chief ground of our hope and comfort, but learn to renounce our selves,
and all confidence in any goodness that is in us, and with humbled souls cast
our selves wholly upon the free grace and mercy of God in Christ; and say with
the Apostle Phil. 3.3. We are the circumcision which -- rejoice in the Lord
Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

Lecture CXXVII. On Psalm 51.7. Septem. 1. 1629.
NOw the third and last use that this Doctrine serves unto, Use 3.
is, (as I said) for the comfort of such of Gods people, as though they fear
God unfainedly and are careful in all their ways to please him, yet complain
greatly of this, that they cannot feel that the blood of Christ is by the
Spirit of God sprinkled upon their hearts, they cannot attain unto this
sensible assurance of the favor of God in Christ. And though 1 I know well
that in this profane and loose age few have need of this use of comfort,
because most men are confident enough of their salvation; they are not troubled
at all with any doubts or fears his way; and the whole have no need of a
Physician, Matthew. 9.12. Doctrine of humiliation and terror were fitter for
most of our hearers than Doctrine of comfort. The fat and strong (among Gods
sheep) should be fed with judgment, as the Lord speaks, Ezekiel. 34.16. Yea, 2
I know well, that some will be more likely to receive hurt than good by that
which you shall now hear. For Christ and the Doctrine of Gods mercy in him, is
a stumbling stone and rock of offense to disobedient and wicked men, as the
Apostle teaches us, 1 Pet. 2.8. And 3. though in handling of the means
whereby true assurance may be obtained, I have spoken much already for the
comfort of such persons.

First. Because I doubt not but there are some of you that hear me, have
present need of it. And if there were but two or three such among you all, I am
bound in my ministry to have more respect unto them, then to all the rest. For
to such principally are we sent to preach. He has sent me (says our Savior,
Esa. 61 1, 2. and that which he that is the great Shepherd of the sheep
said* it becomes us all that are under him t^ say likewise) he has sent me
(says he) to bind up the broken hearted, and to comfort all that mourn in
Sion.

Esa. 42 23. Who among you will give ear to this? who will hearken and hear
for the ^^me to com^? As if he had said; who is there among you all, that has
not just cause to give ear and hearken unto it, if not for the present need
you have of it, yet because of the need you may have of it in time to come?

Two things there be that I have to say for the comfort of such of Gods people
as being humbled for their sins, and careful in all their ways to please
God, cannot yet attain to a sensible assurance of the favor of God in Christ.
The blood of Christ may be sprinkled upon thee, and applied unto thee by the
spirit of God though thou perceive it not 2. The blood of Christ is certainly
sprinkled upon thee, and applied unto thee, by the spirit of God, though thou
perceive it not, if thou have any measure of true faith in thee.

David here. So soon as ever he had humbly confessed his fou^e si^ and
repented, he presently obtained pardon of it from God, and consequently he was
justified from it in Gods sight. For so Nathan the Prophet does (in the name of
God) assure him, 2 Samuel 12.13. The Lord also has put away thy sin, thou shall
not dye. And yet though he were now reconciled unto God, and in the state of
grace, it appears plainly by many petitions in this Psalm, and specially by
the next words to my text, that he had not now the comfortable assurance of
his reconciliation with God, in his own heart. It falls out often with Gods
servants, as it did with the two disciples that were traveling toward Emaus,
Luke 24.14, 15. Christ drew near unto them, and was with them, and that in a
most gracious manner, and yet they perceived it not Their eyes were holden
(says the Evangelist) that they should not know him. And as it was with Mary
Magdalene, Ioh. ^0.14, 15. Christ was with her, and stood by her, and spoke to
her, and she perceived it not, but sought for him, and wept because she could
not find him. Many a good soul have Christ dwelling in their hearts by faith,
and yet perceive it not; their eyes are holden so, as they know him not to be
with them; they have him already, yet they seek for him with Mary, and weep
because they cannot find him. As in the bodily senses it is one gift and
blessing of God to have them, and another to have ability to make use of them,
and to exercise the operation of them for our comfort. The bearing ear, and
the seeing eye, the Lord has made even both of them, says Solomon, Pro.
20.12. Where God gives the one, he denies the other sometimes. Those that
were in Paul's company when Christ struck him down, and spoke to him from
heaven, had at that time the faculty of hearing, but God suspended the exercise
and operation of it; so that though Christ spoke many words to Paul in a most
audible voice, yet they could not hear them, as you may see, Act. 22.9. And
Hagar had her eyesight well enough when (the water being spent in her bottle
and her child ready to perish with thirst) she sat her down in the
wilderness of Beersheba over against the child, as you may read, Genesis
21.16.19. but God with held from her the use of her sight so at that time, as
though there was a well in the place, and she had (doubtless) s^ught about
every where for water, yet she could not see it till the Lord (upon her own,
and the child's vehement crying unto him) had opened her eyes, And even so it is
in the sanctifying and saving graces of Gods spirit. Having eyes, see ye not?
(says our Savior to his own Disciples, Mar. 8.18.) and having ears, hear
ye not? Gods own people oftentimes, though they have eyes, yet see not, though
they have ears, yet hear not, though they have faith, yet want the
comfortable use and operation of it for a time. It is one grace and mercy of
God to have true faith, repentance, love, and the like; and another to know and
perceive sensibly in our selves, that we have them. So speaks the Apostle, 1
Cor. 2.12. We have received the spirit which is of God, that we might know the
things that are freely given us of God. He makes the things that are freely
given us of God (under which words, doubtless all saving graces* which God
works in us, are comprehended) one thing, one gracious work of the spirit of
God, and the knowing and perceiving that we have these things freely given us
of God, that he makes another distinct work and grace of Gods spirit. And
where the Lord does give the one of these graces, he is sometimes pleased to
deny the other for a time. At that day (meaning after his ascension into
heaven, says our Savior to his elect disciples, after Judas was gone from
them, John 14.20.) Ye shall know, that I am in my father, and you in me, and I
in you. Christ was already in them, and they in him, as he plainly tells
them, Ioh. 15.5. I am the Vine, ye are the branches. But they knew it not yet,
they had no feeling, no comfort of it to speak of. It is therefore evident
(you see) that a man may have saving grace in him, and not perceive it
himself; a man may have true justifying faith in him, and not have the use and
operation of it so far as to work in him a comfortable assurance of his
reconciliation with God. Nay I will say more, a man may be in the state of
grace, and have true justifying faith in him, and yet be so far from
sensible assurance of it in himself, as in his own sense and feeling he may
seem to be assured of the contrary. I will give you three most plain and
pregnant examples for this, and so conclude this first point. Job was certainly
in this case when he cried thus unto God. Job 13.24. Wherefore hidest thou thy
face, and hold me for thine enemy? And 16.9. Mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes
upon me; He saw not Gods loving countenance at all, he apprehended him as a
mortal enemy. And David was in this case when he cried unto God, Psalm. 22.1.
Why have thou forsaken me? And He man was in this case when he prayed thus,
Psalm. 88.14. Lord, why castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face
from me? Can any man think that these men had at these times any sensible
assurance in themselves of their own salvation and of Gods favor, when they
did thus complain? No will you say; neither does it appear, that they were in
the state of grace in the favor of God, or had any true says in them, when
they did thus complain. Though these were good men, and did recover themselves
afterward, yet when they spoke thus, they were fallen from grace, they had lost
their faith, or they could never have spoken in this sort. But to this I
answer, That it is evident by the Scripture, that they had not lost their faith
at these times; though they had lost their assurance, they had not lost their
faith, they were not in the state of grace, even then when they spoke thus. Job
had true faith in him even at that time as appears by his words verse 15. of
that very thirtieth chapter, Though he slay me (says he) yet will I trust in
him. And David had true faith in him, even then when he said God had forsaken
him, or else he could not have cried as he did, My God, my God, neither could
he have persevered in prayer, day and night, without ceasing as he did, verse
2. of that 22. Psalm. And Hema^ had true faith even then when he complained
that God had cast of his soul, or else he could never have prayed as he did
verse 1. of that 88. Psalm. O God of my salvation, I have cried day and night
before thee.

And this is the first thing (beloved) that I told you I had to say to you for
your comfort, though it be a just cause of trouble to thee, that thou want
the sensible assurance of Gods love. It was so to David, Thou did hide thy
face and I was troubled, says he, Psalm 30.7. And Psalm. 13.1, 2. He
complains of this as of a great affliction. How long will thou hide thy face
from me? How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart
daily? So long as God hid his face from him, and did not look cheerfully upon
him, his heart was full of sorrow; and so it must needs be with thee, if thy
heart be sound. Yet be not overmuch dismayed with it; For thou may be dear
unto God (as thou have heard) and highly in his favor, though thou perceive it
not, though thou have not the sensible assurance of it in thy self.



received him as the free gift of God, John. 1.13. And what is more our own,
then that that is freely given us, and we have received? So Christ is said,
Ephe, 3.17. to dwell in our hearts by faith, and to have taken full possession
of them; if thou have faith, thou art Christ's proper possession; and if thou
be his, he is thine also certainly. Yea, the true believer is said to have
eaten the flesh of Christ, and to have drunk his blood. Ioh. 6.54. And what is
more our own, what is so nearly applied unto us, as that which we eat and
John 6 47. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me, has
everlasting life. So that suppose a man never have in himself the sensible
assurance of Gods favor all the days of his life (though his estate should
be in that respect very uncomfortable) yet believing in Christ, he should be
a most happy man nevertheless for all that. For he has that in him, which is
the only root and foundation of all true comfort and happiness. Christ and
all his merits are his; the kingdom of heaven, and everlasting salvation, is
made sure unto him. And that made the Apostle to say, 1 John 5.10. He that
believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself, he need not go far
to seek it, he has that in himself that will witness for him, and prove
that he is an happy man, the child of God, and heir to the kingdom of heaven.

Object.
But it may be some will object and say, Alas, there is small comfort in this
point. For how can a man have true faith, that has in himself no comfortable
assurance of the pardon of his sins, and of his own salvation? And what is
faith, but a full persuasion and certain assurance of this?

Answ.
To this I answer, That is a dangerous error to define faith so. This assurance
is indeed a sweet fruit, and effect of faith, but it is not faith it self; the
essence and being of faith, consists not in this.

Wherein then consists the essence and being of faith, Quest.
will you say?

Surely in an obedientiall a^^iance and trusting in Christ, and in him alone
for the pardon of our sins, and for our eternal salvation. When an humbled
sinner feeling his own misery through sin, can believe that in Christ there is
help and comfort enough to be found, and rest, and rely upon him only for
mercy with a mind willing to obey him in all things, this man certainly has
true faith, though he have no assurance. In this the being and essence of true
faith does chiefly consist. This is evident by the terms and phrases, whereby
the holy Ghost does in the Scripture describe and express true faith.
Sometimes he calls it a believing on Christ, as Ioh 3.18. sometimes a
trusting in Christ, as Ephe. 1.12. sometimes a resting upon God. 2 Chronicles.
14.11, a relying upon God, 2 Chronicles. 16.8. sometimes a cleaving and sticking
close to him, Act. 11.^3.

Now to make some application of this. Applic.
Let me say to every one of you, as the Prophet does. Esa. 50.10. Who is there
among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant, that
walks in darkness and has no light? Let him trust in the name of the Lord,
and stay himself upon his God. If thou be of the number of them that fear
God, and desire to obey Christ in all things though thou have in thee no
light, no comfort) no assurance, or feeling of Gods favor, though thou walk
in darkness and art ever full of fears, and doubts in thy self; yet stay
thy self upon Christ for all that; and because of Gods word and promise
resolve with thy self, that thou will put thy trust in him. The just shall
live by his faith, says the Prophet Habacuk 2.4. It is not our feeling, but
our faith that we must live by. Take two examples to persuade and encourage
thee to this. The one in David, the other in Abraham. What time I am afraid
(says David, Psalm 56.3.4. whenever I am most disquieted with doubts and
fears in my self) I will trust in thee. How could he do so will you say?
That he will tell you in the next words. In God (says he) I will praise his
word, In God have I put my trust. As if he had said, What cause of fear soever
I find in my self, yet I thank God I have the word and promise of God, that
he will be merciful to me, and that I will trust unto. Our other example is
in Abraham, recorded by the Apostle, Romans 4.19, 10.21. He believed that he
should have a son by Sarah, in whose seed himself and all the nations of the
earth should be blessed, though he saw and ^elt in himself great cause to
doubt that this could never possibly be. For his body was now dead (that is
the strength and vigor of it was quite gone) and so was Sara^s too. How could
he then believe this? Why he had Gods word and promise for it; and that
(though it were contrary to his sense and reason) he gave credit and trusted
to. He staggered not at the promise of God through unbeleefe (says the
Apostle) being fully persuaded that what he had promised, he was able also to
perform. And in thus doing, the Apostle says, he gave glory to God. By how
much the more matter of doubting, and fear, and despair, we feel in our
selves, by so much the more glory we give unto God, when notwithstanding this,
we can give credit unto, and rest upon the word and promise of God.

O but you will say, Abraham was strong in says, he staggered not through
unbelief, as the Apostle says of him there. Object. 1.
No marvel though his faith were imputed to him for righteousness, though it
justified him in Gods sight. What speak you of his example to such a one as I
am, that am so weak in faith, and am ever staggering through unbelief, can
such a faith as mine is, justify me in Gods sight, and make Christ and all his
merits mine?

I answer* yes, the weakest faith will do it, if thou can receive Christ, and
rest upon him even with the weakest faith, it will serve thy turn. The weak
faith of the poor man that came to Christ for his child that was possessed,
Mar. 9.24. though he staggered much through unbeleefe which made him cry with
tears Lord I believe, help mine unbelief; yet this weak faith of his served
his turn, and obtained mercy from Christ. Take heed thou think not that it is
the strength of thy faith that justifies thee; no no, It is Christ and his
perfect righteousness which thy faith receives, and rests upon that does
it. He that has the feeblest and weakest hand may receive an alms and apply a
sovereign plaster to his wound* as well as he that has the strongest and
receive as much good by it too. Thy blessed Savior that gave that charge
concerning such as thou art, Matthew. 18.10. Take heed that ye despise not one of
these little ones, will not despise or reject thee for the weakness of thy
faith (which thou mournest for and strivest to amend) but will have tender
respect to thee in it. A bruised reed (says the Evangelist, Mat. 12.20.) shall
he not break, and smoking slax shall he not quench.

Object. 2
This is a comfortable speech indeed will you say for them that can believe and
trust in Christ though but with a weak faith. But (alas) I find my self to be
^ou^worthy a wreth, so oppressed many times with the sense of my unworthiness,
that I cannot believe, I cannot rest upon Christ, nor hope and look for mercy
through him.

Answ.
When thou art so, yet lift up thy heart to God, crave help of him in this
case, beg of him that he would make thee able to go to Christ and to rest upon
him. Do as David did, When my heart is overwhelmed (says he, Psalm. 61.2.) lead
me to the rock that is higher then I. And what was that rock I pray you?
Surely the Lord Jesus (of whom himself says, Matthew. 16.18. Upon this rock
will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.)
Was the rock that David desired God to lead him unto; when thy heart is
overwhelmed with fears and doubts, and thou can get no sensible assurance of
Gods favor nor comfort in thy self, nor have power to go unto Christ, pray
thou likewise to God with David that he would lead thee to this rock, that he
would make thee able to stay and rest thy self upon Christ; and then the gates
of hell, all the subtlety and power of the devil shall never be able to
prevail against thee.

Object. 3.
This is all true indeed, If I could pray I were happy; when I find my self
able to pray then am I safe; but alas my heart is so overwhelmed many times
that I cannot pray.

Answ. 1.
To this I answer, First, That it may well be so with thee, for so it has
been with many a good servant of God. Thus David complained, Psalm 77.4. I am
so troubled that I cannot speak. Thus good Hezekiah said of himself, Esa.
38.14, Like a cra^e or a swallow so did I chatter, I did mourn as a dove. And
the Apostle tells us, Romans 8.26. it is thus often with Gods people in
extreme affliction, We know not (he puts himself in the number) what we
should pray for as we ought. 2.
But then I say secondly, When thou find thy self thus unable to pray, yet
do what thou can, pray as well as thou can; chatter unto God as Hezekiah
did; sigh and groan unto God as the Apostle there says the faithful often do,
they pray with gronings which they cannot utter; and even this will prevail
with God as much as any prayer which with the greatest liberty and freedom of
spirit thou ever made unto him in all thy life. David found it to be so for
he says, Psalm 77.1. the Lord gave ear unto him, even when he cried to him
in such a troubled manner. And Hezekiah found it to be so, for he says that
after that chattering prayer of his he found abundance of comfort, Thou have
(says he, Esa. 38.17.) in love to my soul delivered it from the pit of
corruption, for thou have cast all my sins behind thy back. And the Apostle
gives us this reason why it must needs be so, Romans 8.27. He that searches
the hearts (says he) knows what is the mind of the spirit, because he
makes intercession for the Saints, acrording to the will of God. As if he
should say, Those prayers that are made with sighs and groans which we cannot
utter, proceed from Gods spirit as well as any other that ever we made; and
the Lord that searches the heart knows the meaning of his spirit in them, as
well as if we expressed it in the best words and method in the world. And thus
have I finished this Doctrine with all the uses that are to be made of it.

Lecture CXXVIII. On Psalm 51.7. September. 15. 1629.
WE have already heard that this verse consists of two parts. The first is an
earnest petition, wherein David beggeth of God to be purged and washed from his
sins by the blood of Christ, and to have that sprinkled upon him, and applied
to him by the spirit of God. The second is the reason that moved him to beg
this of God so earnestly; which is taken from the fruit and benefit he knew he
should receive by it, and that is double. 1. He knew that (being thus purged)
he should be clean, no filthiness should remain upon him, no sin that ever
he committed should be imputed to him. 2. He knew that (if he were thus washed)
he should be whiter then the snow, he should have so perfect righteousness
imputed to him, as should make him beautiful and glorious in the sight of God.
The petition we finished the last day; and now it follows that we do proceed
to the reason of it.

And herein we are to observe how confidently David speaks here of the
blessed estate of them whom God has washed and sprinkled with the blood of
Christ; Nota.
yea of the blessed estate that he knew himself should be in so soon as God
should have vouchsafed that mercy unto him; notwithstanding the foulnes and
odiousness of his sins was more then ordinary, yet he knew that when once God
should have washed him with, and applied to him the blood of Christ, he should
have no spot of his sins remaining upon him, yea he should be whiter in Gods
eye then the very snow. And from this point thus observed in the words of
David, this Doctrine does arise for our instruction,

That all such as have their souls washed, and sprinkled with Christ's blood
(that is, Doct. 28
all that truly believe in him) are perfectly cleansed from all their sins, and
are as pure and white in Gods sight, as any snow.

Now the best and plainest way I can think of for confirming this Doctrine unto
you will be by answering of a doubt and Question which every one of your hearts
will be apt to move against it. Quest.
For who is there among us all that marketh and considers this Doctrine well
that will not see cause to be amazed at it, as it is said, Matthew. 19.25. that
the Disciples of our Savior once were at the hearing of a certain Doctrine
that he taught? Which of us will not be ready to say of this Doctrine as they
did of that, Who can then be saved? Who then can be said to be a true believer?
Is no soul washed or sprinkled with the blood of Christ, does no man truly
believe in him that is not so white, so perfectly cleansed as he has no
filthiness at all, no one spot of sin remaining on him? Who then can say he
does truly believe in Christ, that ever he was washed or sprinkled with his
blood? Or if others can say so surely (will thou say) I cannot say so, For I
know and feel there is still a great deal of filthiness, many a foul and
black spot remaining in my soul.

For answer unto this, Answ.
we must understand that all true believers are cleansed and washed from their
sins two ways. As you shall find the Apostle teaches us, 1 Cor. 6.11. Such
were some of you (says he) but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye
are justified, in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. He
speaks this for the comfort of such as before their conversion had been
guilty of those foul crimes he had spoken of in the 9. and 10. verses. Some of
them had been idolaters, some adulterers, some Sodomites and buggerers, some
thieves, some drunkards, some extortioners. No marvel though such persons were
apt often to call in question their own estate, though they were subject to many
doubts and fears in themselves. And therefore two things are remarkable in this
manner of speech, which he uses of purpose that he might speak the more
effectually to their comfort. The first is his so often repeating of his words,
But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified. As if he had
said, Though some of you were guilty of such foul sins, I say unto you, and
(for your better assurance) I say it to you again and again, you are now
fully acquitted of all those sins, no one of them shall ever be laid to your
charge again. The second is this, that he names their sanctification in the
first place, which (as the effect and fruit) did in order of nature come after;
and their justification in the second place, which (as the cause and root of
it) did go before, of purpose (as I said) to increase their comfort; As if he
should say, Ye are sanctified by the spirit of our God; yea and more then that
(for your sanctification you will be apt to say is but poor and weak) ye are
justified also from all these your sins in the name of the Lord Jesus. So
that you see here that the Apostle speaks of a twofold washing that the
faithful have received from all their sins. 1. They are washed from their
sins in the name of the Lord Jesus; that is in Christ, and through the merit
of his blood, which he calls there justification. 2. They are washed from
their sins by the spirit of God which he calls there sanctification. Now
although these two go always together, Christ justifies no man by the merit
of his blood but he sanctifies him also by his holy spirit; the Lord
accounts no man righteous by imputing Christ's righteousness unto him, but he
makes him also righteous by a righteousness inherent in himself. And the
surest way for a man to know himself to be one of those that are justified by
the blood of Christ, is to find himself to be one of th^se that are sanctified
by the spirit of Christ. Let no man deceive you (says the Apostle, 1 John
3.7.) he that does righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righteous. As
if he had said thus, He that has inherent righteousness and he only is the
man that is righteous by imputation; he that is sanctified is justified and
none but he. And therefore also the Apostle calls all them that receive
benefit by Christ the sanctified ones, Heb. 2.11. Both he that sanctifies and
they that are sanctified are all of one nature. And 10.14. By one offering he
has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. Though this (I say) be so,
yet between these two kinds of washing there be four notable differences to
be observed, which it is profitable for us all to be acquainted with.

First, The cleansing from sin that is wrought by the spirit of God in our I
will put my spirit within you (says the Lord, Ezekiel. 36.27.) and the kingdom
of God is within you, says our Savior, Luke 17 21. So are we by the spirit of
God made agents in it our selves. Let us cleanse our selves (says the Apostle,
2 Cor. 7.1.) from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and finish our
sanctification in the fear of God. But that cleansing from sin which is
wrought by the blood of Christ in our justification, as it is a work done
without us, and for us by Christ with his father, he by the merit of his blood
wipeth all our sins out of his fathers debt-booke, so as none of them shall
ever be imputed to us, nor we called to account for them; so are we no agents
in it at all our selves, but this work is wholly ascribed unto Christ alone.
He washed us from our sins (says the Apostle, Rev. 15.) in his own blood.
And though we be often said in Scripture to be justified by faith, which is a
grace inherent in us, and an act of our understanding and will, yet is not that
to be understood so as if our faith had any hand at all in the washing from our
sins or procuring our pardon of God, but because faith receives and
accepts this our pardon, which Christ only has purchased, applies it unto
us, and rests in it; therefore (and for no other cause) is our faith said to
justify us in the sight of God.

Secondly, The cleansing from sin which is wrought by the spirit of God
Nehemiah says of his brother Hanani, Neb. 7.2. that he feared God above many.
And of Job the Lord himself says, Job 1.8. that there was none like him upon
earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil.
His three friends that came to visit him Eliphaz, Zophar, and Bildad were all
good men doubtless (and so was Elih^ especially) they all feared God and
eschewed evil, they were upright hearted men; but they came all far short of
Job in grace and piety. Yea it is strange to see, what a distance God puts
between his faithful servants this way, how great a measure of sanctifying
grace he gives to some of them, and how little unto other some. Some of Gods
good ground (as our Savior teaches us, Mat. 13.23.) brings forth an hundred
fold, and some but sixty, and some but thirty fold, and yet all good ground
too. A point which if it were well understood would much abate that vein of
bitter censuring which so much abounds in these days. But on the other side,
The cleansing from sin that is wrought by the blood of Christ in our
justification is equally vouchsafed unto every true believer, without any
difference at all. Every one has as free and large a pardon, and is as fully
discharged from all his sins as any other; every one is as perfectly righteous
in the sight of God, as any other is. So says the Apostle, Romans 3.22. The
righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ (that is, by that faith
which is reposed in Jesus Christ) is unto all, and upon all that believe; for
there is no difference. Mary Magdalen that had been a notorious harlot, after
that once she had truly repented and became a true believer* had all her sins
as fully forgiven her and was as righteous every whit in Gods sight as the
greatest Saint; and the penitent thief that died with Christ upon the Cross
as either Peter or any other of the elect Apostles was. In which respect the
Apostle says of all the faithful to whom he wrote, 2 Pet. 1.1. that they had
obtained the like precious says with himself and the rest of the Apostles.
His meaning is not that every true believer had obtained the like measure and
degree of faith, that he and his fellow Apostles had; but that that faith they
had, being true how weak soever it was, was every whit as precious, as much
worth to them, would do them as much good in respect of the perfect
righteousness which it did apprehend and apply unto them (in which respect
only he calls their faith precious as appears plainly in his next words,
Through the righteousness of God (says he) and of our Savior Jesus Christ)
in this respect (I say) he says the faith of the poorest and weakest Christian
was every whit as precious as his own or any other man's could be.

The third difference between that cleansing we have from sin by our
sanctification and that we have by our justification is this. The first is
wrought in us by the light ( Pro. 4.18.) that shines more and more unto the
perfect day. And Ephesians. 4.16. to the body of a man which grows and increases
in stature and strength till it be come to the full (...) and perfection of it.
So the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 3.18. that we are changed into the image of God
from glory to glory (that is, from one degree of holiness to another) even as
by the spirit of the Lord. Insomuch as the man that stands at a stay and
grows not in grace has just cause to suspect, that the spirit of God has
not yet sanctified him, nor wrought any truth of grace in him. The righteous
shall grow (says the Prophet, Psalm. 92.12.) like a Cedar in Lebanon. And he
that has clean hands (whom the spirit of God does cleanse and sanctify
(says Job 17.9.) shall be stronger and stronger. But on the other side, The
cleansing that is wrought by the blood of Christ in our justification, is all
done at once, it never grows and increases at all, but is every whit as much
at our first ingrafting into Christ by faith, as it is ever after. Our faith
indeed whereby we do apprehend it, our sense and assurance of it likewise, is
not perfected at once, but grows and increases as our sanctification does.
The righteousness of God (that whereby we stand just and righteous in the
sight of God, says the Apostle, Romans 1.17.) is revealed (and made known to
our hearts) from faith to faith; that is, by such a faith as grows and
increases, from one degree unto another. But the work of our justification is
done all at once. Therefore Baptism is said to seal unto us the forgiveness
and washing away of all our sins, not original only, but actual also.
Arise and be baptized (says Ananias to Paul, Acts 22.16.) and wash away thy
sins; that is, all thy sins, as Paul himself expounds it, Col. 2.12, 13.
Which is also a chief cause why it is but once administered to us, in all our
life time. Then washed I thee with water (says the Lord to his Church, Ezekiel.
16.9.) yea I thoroughly washed away thy blood from thee. When was that that God
did thus thoroughly wash his people from all their blood, from all their
filthiness? That he tells her, ver. 8. When I entered into covenant with
thee, and thou becamest mine. At that very time when first we received grace
truly to believe in Christ, when God first entered into covenant with us and
made us his people, then did he thoroughly wash us from all our sins.

Who can say (says Solomon, Proverbes 20.9.) I have made my heart clean, I am
pure from my sin? John Baptist himself who was sanctified in his mothers
womb Cried unto Christ, Mat. 3.14. I have need to be baptized of thee, As if
he had said, I have need to be better washed and cleansed from my sins by thy
spirit, then yet I am. Paul he complains, Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I
am: who shall deliver me from the body of this death? It is the peculiar
privilege of the Saints in heaven, Hebrews 12.23. they are just men made
perfect. They and they only are so. But that cleansing that is wrought by the
blood of Christ in our justification is so perfect that it leaves no filth no
spot at all upon the soul. Thou art all fair my love (says Christ to his
Church, Canticles 4.7.) there is no spot in thee. And in this respect it is
that David says here that if the Lord would once purge and wash him with that
blood of Christ, he knew then he should be clean, perfectly and thoroughly
clean, yea he should be whiter then any snow. Though in respect of our
sanctification we be not througly cleansed from all our sins, yet in respect of
our justification we are; though the pollution of many sins does remain in us
and is not by the spirit of God quite done away; yet the blood of Christ
cleanses us from all sin (says the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 3.7.) so as no pollution
of any sin shall ever be imputed to us. So soon as we do truly believe in
Christ, and are by his blood reconciled to God, and have our pardon, we are in
his account as if we had no sin in us, as if we had never offended him in all
our lives.

See the proof of this, and how large a pardon every true believer has, how
fully he is acquitted and discharged of all his sins, see it (I say) in five
points.

First, He that truly believes in Christ has all his sins pardoned; his
pardon is general, no one sin that ever he committed (how heinous soever it
I will cleanse them (says the Lord, Ier. 32.8.) from all their iniquity
whereby they have sinned against me; and I will pardon all their iniquities
whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against me. Though
your (...) he as scarlet (says he again Esa. 1.18.) they shall be as white as
snow. David's sins certainly were as scarlet, of a most deep dye, and yet he
knew here that if he were once washed in Christ's blood, if that were imputed
unto him, he should be whiter than the snow. True it is, there is one sin
(the sin against the Holy Ghost) that is unpardonable, as our Savior
affirms, Mat. 12.32. but that is such a sin as none that does truly believe
in Christ, or does desire unfainedly to believe in him, did ever commit. And of
all other sins whatsoever they be, our Savior says, Mar. 3.28. Verily I say
unto you; all sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and blasphemies
wherewith soever they shall blaspheme; that is, they are pardonable, and shall
certainly be pardoned unto them that repent and believe in Christ.

Secondly, Whom once God pardons in Christ, he is said to pardon them so
fully, as he will never remember nor think of their sins any Thou have cast
all my sins behind thy back, says Hezekiah, Esa 38.17. that thou may
never see nor look on them again. I will forgive their iniquity (says the
Lord of his people that are in covenant with him, Ier. 31.34) and I will
remember their sin no more; he will forgive their sins, and forget them too.

Thirdly, Such as of all other have been the most heinous sinners, yet after
once they have been reconciled to him, and obtained their pardon, the Mary
Magdalen that had been a most infamous and notorious sinner. For, 1. He
accepted of that kindness from her as he never did from any other woman, Luke
7.38. He let her wash his feet with her tears, and wipe them with the hairs
of her head, and kiss them, and anoint them. And 2. After his resurrection it
is said Mar. 16.9. that he appeared first unto her of all persons in the world.
So of all the elect Apostles we shall not find that he showed so much respect
unto any as he did unto Peter, who had sinned more shamefully than they all had
done. He was seen of Cephas (says the Apostle 1 Cor. 15.5.) then of the
twelve. He showed himself after his resvrrection first unto Peter, before all
the rest.

Fourthly, Though there be much corruption remaining in the faithful after
they be reconciled unto God, and have obtained their pardon, yea so much, as
All our righteousnesses (says the Church Esa. 64.6.) are as filthy
(menstruous, plaguey, loathsome) rags; and his eyes are so pure (as the Prophet
speaks Hab. 1.13.) that he cannot behold sin; but he loatheth it more than
the daintiest eye in the world can do the most filthy thing that is; yet is his
love so dear unto all them whom he has once pardoned and is reconciled unto,
that he sees not any of their sins which he has pardoned, so as to loath
them for it. And so is that speech to be understood, Numb. 23.21. He has not
beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen perverseness in Israel. He
sees it only as a tender mother sees the filthiness and deformity of her
little child, to cleanse it, and cure it, and show the more compassion unto it.
Yea, the Lord sees the corruptions and blemishes of such as he has once
pardoned and received into favor, with a far more tender eye, and a heart
much further off from loathing them for it, than ever could be in the tenderest
hearted mother in the world. Can a woman (says the Lord, Esa. 49.15.) forget
her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her
womb? Yea they may forget, yet will not I forget thee. Yea he not only
loatheth them not for that sin that remains in them, but delights and
takes pleasure in them nevertheless for all that. The Lord takes pleasure
(says David, Psalm. 147.11.) in them that fear him, in those that hope in his
mercy.

Hos. 13.14. Repentance is hid from mine eyes. Whom he has once ^ustified and
received into his favor, he will never reckon with them again, nor reverse
his pardon. He fors^^eth not his Saints (says David, Psalm. 37.28) they are
preserved for ever. In which respect the Apostle ( Heb. 13.20.) callet^ Christ's
blood the blood of the everlasting covenant. The righteousness we have by
Christ is an everlasting righteousness, Dan. 9.24. And from hence it is (even
from the consideration of this largeness and fullness of their pardon, and how
perfect the work of their justification is) that the faithful have borne
themselves, and rested much more upon their justificatio^, than upon their
sanctification; as you may see in these three points. First, They have placed
their happiness in this, and not in any inherent grace that was in them; as
the Apo^tle teac^eth, Romans 4.6 -- 8. David thus describes (says he) the
blessedness of the man to whom the Lord imputes righteousness without works,
saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities ^^e forgiven, etc. Secondly, They
have also grounded their peace of conscience, their spiritual joy, their
glorying and boasting in their own estate, not so much upon their
sanctification, or any goodness they found wrought in themselves (which they
knew was weak and unperfect, subject to many changes and alterations) as upon
their justification by the righteousness of Christ imputed to them, which they
knew was most perfect and unreversible. Being justified by faith (says the
Apostle, Romans 5.1 -- 3.) we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ;
ye^ (we are not only at peace, but) we rejoice also, and are cheerful and
comfortable in hope of the glory of God; yea we glory also in our estate even
in tribulations; as you know Paul did when he was in chains, Acts 26.^9
Thirdly and lastly, They have so borne themselves upon the assurance and
comfort of their justification and pardon, as they have been able to lift up
their faces unto God, and to go to him in their prayers with a holy boldness;
as it is strange to see what boldness and familiarity both David and other of
Gods servants have expressed this way. By him we have boldness (says the
Apostle Ephesians. 3.12) and access with confidence, and boldness, through faith in
him.

Now the reasons and grounds of this Doctrine are three principally.

Reason 1
First, Why does not the Lord impute unto the faithful any of their sins? Why
does he not account, nor esteem of them as sinners that are sinners indeed?
Surely, because he fully imputed all their sins with all the foul
circumstances of them unto Christ their Surety. The Lord laid upon him (says
the Prophet, Esa. 53.6.) the iniquities of us all. He made him to be sin for
us (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.31.) who knew no sin, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him.

Reason 2
Secondly, How is it possible that the soul of any so foul a sinner as David
was, should be made so clean in Gods eye, as no one spot should remain in it?
Surely because the blood of Christ was the blood of such a person as was God
as well as man. God purchased us (says the Apostle, Acts 20.28.) with his
blood. And therefore was of infinite merit and virtue, sufficient, and more
than sufficient perfectly to cleanse the fowlest soul. It is therefore
compared by the Prophet Zach. 13.1. not to a cisterne or poole that may be
drawn dry, but to a fountain, opened to all Gods people for sin and for
uncleanness. With him is plenteous redemption, says the Prophet, Psalm. 130.7.
The ransom that he paid was enough and enough again to satisfy Gods justice
for all our sins.

Thirdly and lastly, Reason 3.
But how is it possible (will you say) that the soul of any so foul a sinner
as David here was, a filthy adulterer, a murderer should ever become in Gods
sight not only clean, but whiter than the snow, beautiful and glorious in
the eyes of God? Surely because to whomsoever the Lord does give for Christ's
sake the pardon of his sins, which is the first part of our justification, to
him he does also impute the righteousness of Christ, which is the second part
of our justification before God. Thus David describes (says the Apostle, Romans
4.6, 7.) the blessedness of the man, to whom the Lord imputes righteousness
without works, saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and
whose sins are covered. To whom the Lord forgiveth his sins, to him he does
impute righteousness also. Take away the filthy garments from him (says the
Lord of Iehoshuah, Zach. 3.4) and be said unto him, behold, I have caused thine
iniquity to pass from thee, and I will cloth thee with change of raiment. And
what was that change of raiment? Surely the perfect and more than sufficiently
meritorious obedience and righteousness of the Lord Jesus which God does
impute unto us. In which respect also we are said by justifying faith to put on
the Lord Jesus, Romans 13.14. Gal. 3.27. and to be clothed with him as with a
garment. And no marvel, if being so apparelled we appear whiter than the
snow, beautiful and glorious in the sight of God. To her (that is, to the
Spouse and Church of Christ says the Apostle, Rev. 19.8.) was granted that
she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white; for the fine linen is
the righteousness of Saints. This perfect righteousness of Christ which the
Lord imputes to us, and where with (as with a garment) he cloatheth us, is the
only righteousness that any of Gods Saints have to stand before God with, and
having that, they may stand with boldness even before the judgment seat of
God.

Lecture CXXIX. On Psalm 51.7. Septem. 29. 1629.
IT follows now that we proceed unto the uses that this Doctrine serves
unto. And they are of two sorts. First, Such as tend to the informing and
establishing of our judgments in this most weighty and fundamental article of
our faith; and that is for confutation of error that is maintained against it.
Secondly, Such as tend to the working upon our hearts, and directing us how we
should be affected with it; and of this sort there are two; First for comfort,
and for exhortation secondly.

The use of the first sort, Use 1.
that is to say, the use of confutation, though it be not so plausible and
delightsome to you in hearing as the other, (And even unto that I confess we
must have respect in our preaching, that both the matter we teach, and our
manner of handling it, be such as you may hear with delight and affection, The
preacher sought and studied (says Solomon Eccles. 12.10.) to fi^d out
acceptable words; words of delight, as your margin reads in that Place) yet
of the handling of them, I may say to you as the Apostle does to the
Philippians ( Phil. 3.1.) of his teaching them the same things that he had
taught them before. To me it is not grievous (though I could with more delight
to my self speak of other things than of matters in controversy) and for you
it is safe. It is very profitable and necessary for you to have your judgments
well informed and settled in the truth. For,

This I pray (says the Apostle Philip. 1.9.) that your love may abound yet
more and more in knowledge and in all judgment.

Hebrews 5.12. Whereas for the time (and means you have enjoyed) ye ought to
be teachers, ye have need that one teach you again, Applic.
which be the first principles of the oracles of God. O the need that most of
you have (notwithstanding all the time you have spent in hearing and in the
profession of the true Religion of Christ) to be soundly and substantially
catechized in the grounds of Religion.

Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.4. and 2 Timothy 2.23. to meddle with; but about a matter that
tends to godly edifying which is by faith, as the Apostle there speaks.
About a truth that is most useful and profitable, that touches (as we say)
the free hold of every one of you; about the Doctrine of your justification
before God; about the way and means how you may be discharged of all your
sins, and become righteous in his sight.

To begin therefore with the use of Confutation (which I will handle with
as much plainness and brevity as I can) the Doctrine which I taught you the
last day, does evidently convince the Papists of three foul and dangerous
errors. The first is against the first branch of the Doctrine; the other two
against the second branch of it. The first is against the first part of our
justification, which consists in making of us clean in the remission of our
sins by the merit of Christ's blood; the other two against the second part of
our justification which consists in the making of us whiter than the snow, in
the imputing of Christ's perfect righteousness unto us.

Error 1
First, They deny that Christ by his blood has made any believer so clean,
has purchased for him so full and absolute a pardon of his sins, as we hold
he did. He has indeed answered for, and so obtained for us the remission and
pardon of the fault (say they) and of the eternal punishment that is due to us
for any sin that ever we committed, but he has not answered for, nor obtained
for us the remission of the whole punishment, not of the temporal punishment
that is due to us for sin, but that we must answer and satisfy Gods justice
for our selves, either in this life, or in Purgatory after we are dead.

For convincing of this error, I will 1 give you evident testimonies and
grounds of Scripture against it. 2 I will answer some of the chief reasons
that are alleged for the defense of it.

Four arguments the Lord in his Word has given us against this error, which
though they will not stop the mouth of an obstinate Papist, (for there be some
men that will never be convinced, but as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, so
they will still resist the truth being reprobate concerning the faith, as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 3.8. that is, such as can never be brought to believe
the truth) yet are these arguments such as may make the wilful folly of any
Papist in maintaining this error manifest unto all men, and fully satisfy the
conscience of any Christian in the falsehood of it.

First, The Apostle expressly teaches Romans 8.1. that there is no condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus, that is, to the true believer; or as the
vulgar Latin (which the Papist most absurdly holds to be more authentical
then the sacred original is) reads it, Nihil damnationis, not one jot of
condemnation. And if there be no condemnation reserved for the true believer,
then is the whole punishment due to his sin remitted. For what is
condemnation but the adjudging of a man to punishment? And so is the word used
every where in the Scripture. Mat. 20.18. They shall condemn him to death.
Mar. 14.64. They all condemned him to be guilty of death. So that if no
condemnation at all belong to them, or is due to them that are in Christ, and
have their sin forgiven, then no manner of punishment belongs to them, or
is to be endured by them, neither eternal nor temporal neither.

Secondly. Christ has redeemed the faithful from the whole curse of the
Christ has redeemed us (says the Apostle, Gal. 3.13) from the curse of the
law, and he gives this for the reason of it, because he was made a curse for
us; that is, he bare it for us himself, and so fully answered and satisfied
the justice of God for it. Surely (says the Prophet, Esaias 53.4 he has borne
our griefs, and carried our sorrows Now the temporal punishments that are
due to us for sin, are part of the curse of the law, as it is plain by Deu^
28.16 -- 22. where among the curses that the law threatens against sin, a
number of temporal judgments are threatened. And our Savior did bear and
endure for us, not that part only of the curse and punishment due to our sins,
that should have bin eternal, but that part also of the curse and punishment
due to our sin which is temporal. As 1. Poverty, he for our sake^ became poor
(says the Apostle, 2 Corinthi. 8.9. that we through his poverty might be
rich. And 2. reproach and contempt, such as no man ever endured. I gave my back
to the smiters (says he, Esaias 50.6.) and my cheeks to them that plucked off
the hair, I hid not my face from shame and spitting. 3. He endured all sorts
of temptations, that any of the faithful can be subject unto. He was in all
points (says the Apostle, Heb. 4.15) tempted like as we are, yet without
sin. And why did he bear these temp^rall curses and punishments? Certainly
to deliver us from them, that n^ne of these things might become curses and
punishments unto us. And therefore it is evident, that Christ has redeemed us,
not only from the eternal, but even from all the temporal judgments also
that were due to us for sin.

Thirdly. Whose sins soever the Lord does for Christ's sake forgive, he
forgiveth I, even I am he (says the Lord, Esa. 43.25) that blotteth out thy
transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. And I will
forgive their iniquity* (says he again, Ier. 31.34.) and I will remember
their sin no more. And if he will never remember them, then will he certainly
never punish them for them. For in the Scripture phrase, to remember men's
sins, signifies nothing else but to punish them He will now remember their
iniquity (says the Prophet Iere. 1^.10) and visit their sin. And again* Now
will he remember their iniquity (says the Prophet Hosea 8.13.) and visit
their sins, they shall return into Egypt.

Fourthly and lastly, The Lord does so (and much more fully) forgive the sins
the very pattern we should work by, so to forgive one another, as he
forgiveth us. Forgiving one another (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.32.) even as
God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. But he requires of us, that in
forgiving one another, we should remit, not the fault only, but the punishment
also; not in rendering evil for evil, nor railing for railing (says the
Apostle, 1 Pet. 3.9.) but contrariwise, blessing.

And thus you see how clear the holy Scripture is against this first error of
the Papists, how full and absolute the pardon is, that Christ has purchased
for any soul, it discharges and acquitteth him fully, not only from all his
sins, but from the whole punishment that is due unto them.

Two maine objections there be which every man's heart is apt to make against
this truth, touching the ful^es of that pardon which Christ has purchased by
his blood for every one that truly believe in him.

Object.
First. If this be so (may you say) how falls it out that God inflicteth so
many punishments in this life upon the faithful? What are all the miseries
that the best of Gods servants are subject unto, but punishments for their
sins? Wherefore does a living man complain? (says the Prophet, Lam. 3.39.) a
man for the punishment of his sins. Of many of Gods people that dyed in the
wilderness, David expressly says, Psalm 99.8. Thou wast a God that forgavest
them, though thou did take vengeance of their inventions. Though Moses and
Aaron did (doubtless) obtain of God the pardon of that unbelief they showed
at the waters of Meribah, yet they dyed for it in the wilderness, and for that
very sin God would not suffer them to enter into the promised land, as we
may see plainly, Numbers 27.13.14. And though God did pardon David's foul
sins upon his repentance, and gave him assurance of it also by the Prophet, 2
Samuel 12.13. yet did all those plagues (nevertheless) light upon him which
God threatened against him for those sins, before he had his pardon. His
pardon (it seems) exempted him not from the temporal punishments that were
due to his sins.

Answ.
To all this I answer. That though all the miseries and afflictions of this life
be in their own nature punishments for sin, because they are all fruits of
sin, sin first brought them into the world; and therefore also be often in the
Scripture called punishments, Levit. 26.41, 43. Amos 3.2. yet are they not
punishments to all men.

Two evident demonstrations there be for this.

John 9.2.3. thought it to be a punishment of some sin that either himself
or his parents had been guilty of; but our Savior disalloweth their judgment
in that point, and says, neither has this man sinned nor his father. As if
he should say; Neither this man's sins nor his parents, were the cause why
the Lord smote this man with blindness; But that the works of God might be
made manifest in him. So Jobs friends judged his grievous afflictions to have
been punishments of some grievous sins he had been guilty of; but the
Lord sharply reprooveth them for this rash censure, Job 42.7. Yea, he tells
Satan, Job 2.3. that he had moved him to destroy him without cause. Why (may
you say) had not Job in him sin enough to deserve as much as he endured? Yes
verily, for the wages and due desert of every sin is death, as the Apostle
teaches, Romans 6.23. And Job was not without sin, as himself confesses, Job.
7.20. I have sinned, what shall I do, o thou preserver of men? Yea he imputes
all his afflictions to his sins, and thought them to be the cause of them all.
Thou writest bitter things against me (says he Job 13.26.) and make me to
possess the iniquities of my youth. He thought the sins of his youth had
brought all this upon him. Therefore also he f^ll to a diligent search and
examination of his own heart and ways (as the best of Gods servants should do
in the like case) that he might find out the special sin that moved God thus
to afflict him. Yea, he craveth Gods help in this. Show me (says he Job
10.2.) wherefore thou contendest with me. And 13.23. How many are min^
iniquities and sins? Make me to know my transgression and my sin. As if he
should say, I know I have many ways offended thee, but show me the special
sin that has thus provoked thee to afflict me. Why then does the Lord say,
that Satan moved him to afflict Job without cause? Surely his meaning is, that
there was nothing in him that was the cause whereby God was moved thus to
afflict him; he did not therein punish his sin; there were other causes of it,
even that by this trial of his, he might make him a pattern and example of
faith and patience to his Church for ever. So when our Savior tells his
Apostles of the manifold miseries that they should endure. They shall put you
out of the Synagogues (says he, John 16.2.) and whosoever kills you, will
think he does God service. And unto Peter he says, John 21.18. When thou
shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee,
and carry thee whither thou would not. Shall we think his meaning was this,
Thus and thus will God correct and punish you for your sins? Or were any sins
that ever they committed, the cause whereby God was moved to bring them to
these afflictions? No verily, for he tells them all, Matthew. 10.^2. that
these things should befall them, not for their sins, but for his names sake.
And in speaking so to Peter, he signified to him, by what death he should
glorify God, as the Evangelist says, John 21.19. The cause why Peter dyed so
violent and shameful a death, was not any sin of his, but that he might so
glorify God.

Secondly. Neither are those afflictions that God inflicteth upon the faithful
I make peace, and create evil, says the Lord, Esaias 45.7. And shall there be
evil in a city (says the Prophet, Amos, 3.6.) and the Lord has not done it?
But 1. all the afflictions of the faithful are unto them blessings, and not
curses. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest o Lord, says the Prophet,
Psalm 94.1^. and James 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures tentation.
Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, rejoice and be
exceeding glad, says our Savior Mat. 5.11, 12. 2. They are fruits of his
special love to them, and not o^ his wrath. Whom the Lord loves (says the
Apostle, Heb. 12.6.) he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives.
As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten* says our Savior Rev. 3, ^9. 3 He
seeks their good in it, and not their destruction or the satisfying of his
law, and glorifying of his justice upon them. We know (says the Apostle, Romans
8.28. speaking there specially and purposely, of the afflictions of the
faithful) that all things work together for good, to them that love God. When
we are judged (says the Apostle, 1 Corinthians 11.32.) we are chastened of
the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world. Every father usually
in correcting his child, seeks nothing but his good in it. Thou shall beat
him with the rod (says Solomon, Proverbes 23.14.) and shall deliver his soul
from hell. He would not beat him but to do him good. But howsoever mortal
parents fail often in this, they correct their children sometimes in a rage
without respect to their good, our heavenly father never does. The fathers of
our flesh (says the Apostle, Hebrews 12.10.) chastened us after their own
pleasure, but he for our profit; that we might be partakers of his
holiness. Yea if he could procure their good, their repentance, their
holiness, their keeping of them in awe and so from perishing any other way so
well, he would never scourge nor afflict them at all. Behold I will melt them
and try them (says the Lord, Jeremy 9.7.) for how shall I do for the daughter
of my people? As if he had said, How should I else keep them from perishing,
how should I bring them to heaven, if I should not deal thus with them. And
many of Gods people have been able to say with David, Psalm 119.71. from
their own experience. It is good for me that I have been afflicted. Perijssem
nisi perijssem. I have received more good by my affliction then by any other
thing in the world.

And thus have I answered this first objection, that notwithstanding all the
afflictions the faithful endure in this life yet the pardon that Christ has
purchased for them by his blood is most full and absolute, they are perfectly
discharged by it not only from all their sins, but also from the whole
punishment that was due to them for sin.

Object. 2.
But then it may be objected secondly, If so soon as ever we be purged with
hysope, so soon as ever the blood of Christ is applied to us by the spirit of
God, we be made perfectly clean from all our sins as we have been taught,
what need we and why are we commanded to pray daily unto God for the
forgiveness of o^r sins as our Savior teaches us to do, Mat. 6.12? Have
we so full and absolute a pardon and yet must we sue and seek for it all the
days of our life?

Answ.
To this I answer, Yes verily though Christ has by his blood purchased for us a
most full and general pardon, yet must we sue to God for the forgiveness of
our sins every day.

Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions, says David,
Psalm 25.7. And o remember not against us (cries the Church, Psalm 79.8.)
out former iniquities. Which though the Lord has forgiven, and we do in some
measure believe that they are forgiven, yet our faith is so weak that we have
need to pray daily, for increase of assurance of the forgiveness of them.
David upon his repentance obtained a full and general pardon from God of all
his sins, and he did (doubtless) believe it to be so, for it had been
strange infidelity for him not to believe that which the Prophet of the Lord in
the Lords name did so expressly and directly pronounce unto him, 2 Samuel 12.13.
The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not die; and yet because this faith
of his concerning his pardon was but very weak, he prays often in this Psalm
for pardon most earnestly, ver. 2, 9, 14. So that in this first respect our
daily prayer for forgiveness is no other in effect then that which the
Apostles make, Luke 17.5. Lord increase our faith, our assurance of pardon.

David does, Psalm. 19.12. Cleanse thou me from secret faults.

Object.
What needs that (will you say) seeing the blood of Christ once applied by faith
cleanses us from all our sins, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Ioh. 1.7. past,
and present, and future too; and when God pardons sin, he pardons all at
once.

To this I answer, Answ.
That though in respect of God and of the merit of Christ's blood so general a
pardon be purchased and given, yet in respect of us, in respect of the benefit
of this pardon that comes to us, no sin is pardoned unto us actually,
before it be committed, nay before we do repent and believe in Christ.
Christ commanded that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in
his name, Luke 24.47. no actual remission of sins without repentance. And
Act. 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness that through his name
whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins. As if he had
said, No man can receive remission of his sins, nor benefit of his pardon,
till he does truly believe. So that in this respect, in respect of the new
sins that we fall into every day it is necessary that we should in praying
for pardon of them renew our repentance and faith every day.

Thirdly and lastly, In respect of the desert of our sins. For though Luke
15.20, 21. even after that his father had forgiven him and fully expressed also
so much unto him by running to meet him, and falling on his neck and kissing
him, yet he still cries unto him. Father I have sinned against heaven and in
thy sight and am no more worthy to be called thy son. As if he had said,
Father forgive me, though thou have forgiven me yet I cannot choose but beg
pardon still, because I know my self unworthy that thou should forgive me.

Lecture CXXX. On Psalm 51.7. October 13. 1629.
IT follows now that we proceed unto the two other dangerous errors that
the Papists hold which do concern the second part of our justification before
God. For if a Papist be asked whether a poor sinner may attain to so perfect
a righteousness in this life, as whereby he may become whiter then the snow
in Gods sight. He will grant that he may. But if he be further asked how he
may attain to this, and what that righteousness is, that makes a man so
perfectly white and righteous before God. 1. He denies that it is the
righteousness of Christ that is imputed unto us, whereby we are made so white
and pure. 2. He affirms that it is an inherent righteousness which is
wrought in us by the spirit of Christ, whereby we are made so perfectly
righteous in the sight of God.

For the convincing of these two dangerous errors, these two contrary truths
are to be confirmed to you out of Gods Word against their cavills. 1. That we
are not justified before God by any inherent righteousness that is wrought in
us by the spirit of God. 2. That we are justified before God by the
righteousness of Christ imputed to us and by that alone.

For the first of these truths before we do confirm it, five points are
necessarily to be premised for the opening and unfolding the meaning of it.

First, Whosoever God does justify and account to be just in his sight, If
any man be in Christ (says the Apostle, 2 Corinthians 5.17.) he is a new
creature, old things are past away, behold all things are become new. No man
can say, he is justified before God, no man truly believes in Christ, that
remains still the same man that he was when he first obtained mercy. No man
can have any comfort in his justification that finds not himself to be
sanctified. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord, says the Apostle,
Heb. 12.14. nor lift up his face with boldness and comfort unto him.

Christ gave himself for his Church (says the Apostle, Ephesians 5.25 -- 27.)
that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water, by the Word,
that he might present it to himself a glorious Church not having spot or
wrinkle or any such thing; but that it should be holy, and without blemish. As
if he had said, So soon as ever we become members of his body (true
believers) he begins this work of sanctifying us and cleansing of us, and
will never leave it till he have pefected the work. But he will be doing of
this work so long as we live and will never perfect it while we are here.
Therefore the Apostle prays for the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians 3.12, 13. that the
Lord would make them to increase in love to the end that they might be
unblameable in holiness before him, at the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ
with all his Saints. As if he should say, Then (and not before) shall the
faithful be unblameable in holiness before God. Those spirits of just men
that are separated from their bodies are made perfect, as the Apostle says,
Heb. 12.23 and none but they. In which respect also the Apostle says, Ephesians.
1.3. that those spiritual blessings and graces whereby God blesses his Church
are in heavenly places: because from thence they come, there they had their
spring and beginning, and there also they must have their perfection and no
where else.

It shall be our righteousness (says Moses, Devt. 6.25.) if we observe to
do all these commandments, before the Lord our God, as he has commanded us.
So that which Job called his integrity, Job 27.5. he calls verse 6. his
righteousness. My righteousness (says he) I will hold fast and will not let
it go. I will behold thy face in righteousness, says David, Psalm. 17.1^. And
they that in uprightness of heart do desire and endeavor to please God in all
things and to do his will; are often in the Scripture called (according to Gods
gracious acceptance in Christ) righteous, and just, and perfect men.

Iam. 2.21.25. that both Abraham and Rahab were justified by works; that is,
their faith was thereby justified and declared to be a true and living, not a
false and dead faith; yea themselves were thereby justified and declared to be
true believers indeed, truly righteous before God and not so in show and
profession only

Noah, G^n 6.9. that he was a just man. And of Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6,
that they were both righteous before God. So Solomon prays, 1 King. 8.22.
that the Lord would justify the righteous, to give him according to his
righteousness.

You see then we do not deny (as the Papists falsely slander us) all inherent
righteousness, no nor all justification by inherent righteousness neither.
But this is that we believe and teach according to the Scriptures, That this
inherent righteousness is not that righteousness whereby any poor sinner in
this life can be justified before Gods tribunal and judgment seat, for which
he is pronounced to be innocent, absolved from death and condemnation and
adjudged unto life eternal. Of this justification, as it is opposed unto
condemnation (as the Apostle uses the word, Romans 8.33, 34 It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? and as our Savior uses it, Matthew. 12.37. By
thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned) is
the Question between us and them. And that we are not thus justified in Gods
sight by any inherent righteousness, I will first give you evident proof out
of the holy Scripture; and secondly, I will show you good reason out of the
Word, why no man can be so justified in Gods sight.

For the first, Nothing is more clearly taught in the holy Scripture then
this, By the deeds of the law (says the Apostle, Romans 3.20.) there shall no
flesh be justified in his sight. And again, Knowing (says he, Gal. 2.16.)
that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by
the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law; for by the works of the
law shall no flesh be justified.

True (says the Papist) the Apostle says so indeed; Object. 1
but by the works of the law he means the works of the ceremonial law,
which many false teachers in those days did maintain to be necessary unto
justification. And those be the works he speaks of, Romans 4.10. Abraham was
justified before he was circumcised (which was a work enjoined him by the
ceremonial law) therefore it was not his circumcision nor his obedience to
that law, that justified him. So Gal. 2.16 when he denies we are justified by
the works of the law, he means those works of the law he had spoken of in the
former verses, and for which he had reproved Peter; and that was about his
conforming himself to the Jews in works enjoined by the ceremonial law.

But to this I answer, Answ. 1.
First, It is true that he speaks in those two places of the works of the
ceremonial law, and excludes them from having any hand in our justification.
But even in those places he excludes not the works of the ceremonial only,
but all works of the law even of the moral law also. For 1 his words are
general and without any limitation, Romans 4.6. David describes the
blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works;
without any works. And verse 5. To him that works not, but believes in him
that justifies the ungodly, to him h^s faith is imputed unto righteousness.
And what good works are they, the want whereof makes one an ungodly man? Are
they the works of the ceremonial law only, are they not rather the works of
the moral law. And in Gal. 2.16. his words are general, Knowing a man is not
justified by the works of the law. 2. He excldeth the works of that law, that
was given to all men, to the Gentiles as well as to the Jews, and whereby the
Gentiles as well as the Jews, might have some hope to be justified. For he
says, Gal. 2.16. By the works of the law shall no flesh be justified. As if
he had said, Neither Jew nor Gentile. We have before proved (says he, Romans
3.9. that is to say, In his former dispute against justification by works)
both Jews and Gentiles that they are all under sin. And verse 28, 29.
Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith, without the deeds of
the law. Is he the God of the Jews only, is he not also of the Gentiles? As
if he should say, Neither the deeds of the law, that the Jews were bound unto,
nor the deeds of the law that the Gentiles were bound unto, can justify a man
before God. And what law was that which the Gentiles were bound to observe?
Certainly not the ceremonial but the moral law only.

Answ. 2.
Secondly I answer, The Apostle does exclude from justification the works of
that law whereby comes the knowledge of sin. For these are his words, Romans
3.20. Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in
his sight, for by the law comes the knowledge of sin; As if he should have
said, The use that the law serves unto, is not to justify us in Gods sight,
but to discover our sin and misery to us, and so to drive us to seek
justification by faith in Christ. And what law is that whereby comes the
knowledge of sin? Certainly the moral law principally.

Object. 2
But then they object secondly, Admit the Apostle do speak of the works of the
moral as well as of the ceremonial law, yet he means not those works of
the moral law that are done by the faithful through the grace of Christ, but
those that are done by men while they are in the state of nature before their
conversion, before they do believe. And such works of the moral law (say they)
we confess cannot justify a man before God.

Answ.
To this I answer, 1. That the Apostles words are general as I showed before,
and we must use no limitation where he uses none. 2. The Apostle Romans 4.2.
denies that Abraham was justified by his works though he were one of the
faithful, yea the father of the faithful as he calls him, ver. 11. no not
by those works of his whereof he might seem to have cause to glory; which he
could never mean of those works he did before he was a believer, for he was an
idolater before as we read, Josh. 24.2 And the Apostle would never have said he
might seem to have had matter of glorying in those works he did while he was
an idolater, but matter of shame and confusion rather. 3. The Apostle speaking
unto men that feared God, Act. 13.16. tells them, ver. 39. that they could
not be justified by the law of Moses; that is, by those works which were
commanded in the law of Moses. 4 Lastly, David when he was the servant of God
and a true believer professes that he could not stand before Gods judgment in
the confidence of his own righteousness, it could not justify him in Gods
sight; and therefore cries, Ps. 143.2. Enter not into judgment with thy
servant o Lord, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. And thus you
see, No man, no not the best man that ever lived can be justified before God by
any righteousness that is in himself. Now I will give you two reasons of it out
of Gods Word.

First, The righteousness and goodness that is in the best man is lame and
imperfect and far short of that God in his law requires of him; Reason. 1
yea it is also spotted and defiled with the Leprosy of his original
corruption; and therefore it cannot justify him in Gods sight, it cannot stand
before God, nor abide the trial at his judgment seat. The blessed Apostle
himself professes, Phil. 3.12. that he was not perfect. John Baptist though
he were sanctified in his mothers womb, yet avoucheth, Mat. 3.14. that he had
need to be baptized of Christ, he was not washed and cleansed sufficiently, his
sanctification was imperfect. And the Church complains, Esa 64.6. We are all
as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness are as filthy rags. There is
not a just man upon earth (says Solomon, Eccl. 7.20) that does good and
sins not. In many things we offend all, says the Apostle, Iam. 3.2. If we
say (says the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 1.8. we have no sin we deceive our selves and
the truth is not in us.

Object.
True (says the Papist) the justest man is not free from venial sins but that
is no hinderance to his justification by his inherent righteousness.

To this I answer, First, (...) no sin is so venial, but it justly deserves
et^r^all ^eath, The soul that ^^nneth it shall die, says the Prophet, Ezekiel.
18.4 And the wages of sin is death, says the Apostle, Romans 6.23. And Gal. 3.10
Cursed is he that continues not in all things that are written in the law, to
do them. Not only every thing that is done against Gods Law how small soever
it be, but every thing that is lest undone which the law commands, how small
soever it be, makes a man liable to the curse of God.

Secondly, The holiest men that have ever lived, and such as the Holy Ghost
Zachary though he were a just man before God, as the Holy Ghost says of him,
Luke 1.6. yet was he guilty of gross infidelity in not believing the Word that
God spoke to him by the Ministry of an Angel, Luke 1.20. yea the holiest men
have had that deep sense of their own sinfulness and corruption, as they
durst not stand before God in their own righteousness, they have freely
professed they could not be justified by it in Gods sight. Thus was Job
persuaded of his own righteousness, though he were a man of whom the Lord
himself gives testimony, Job 1.8. that there was none like him upon the
earth, an upright and a perfect man. Though I were righteous (says Job 9 15.)
yet would I not answer him, but I would make supplication to my Judge. And
10.15. If I be righteous, yet will I not lift up my head. As if he should say,
I will not plead my righteousness before thee, I will not trust to be
justified by it in thy sight. And thus was David persuaded of his own
righteousness, of whom yet the Lord says, that he was a man after his own
heart, 1 Samuel 13.14. If thou Lord should mark iniquities (says David
Psalm 130.3.) O Lord who shall stand? Lastly, Thus was blessed Paul persuaded
of his own righteousness. I know nothing by my self (says he 1 Corinthians.
4.4.) yet am I not thereby justified, but he that justifies me is the Lord. As
if he had said, Though I should discern no defect in mine own righteousness
(as for the maine bent of my heart and course of my life I do not) yet dare not
I plead it before God, nor hope to be justified by it, for the Lord that is my
Judge can epsy in me much more than I can in my self: And certainly (to
conclude this first reason) there is no Papist under heaven that has not lost
all conscience, but his heart must needs give his tongue the lie, when he says
he believes to be justified before God by that righteousness and goodness
that is inherent, and dwelling in himself.

A second reason against it is this. Reason 2
If a man could be justified by that righteousness that is inherent in
himself, then might he have in himself just cause of boasting and glorying
before God; neither should the whole glory of man's salvation and justification
be due unto the free grace and mercy of God in Christ. This argument the holy
Apostle presses against justification by works, and for justification by faith
only. Where is boasting then (says he, Romans 3.27.) it is excluded. By what
law? (or doctrine) Of works? Nay, but by the law (or doctrine) of faith. And
again, Romans 4.2. If Abraham were justifified by works, he has whereof to
glory, but not before God. By grace ye are saved through faith (says he Ephesians.
2.8, 9.) not of works, least any man should boast. So 1 Cor. 1.30, 31. he
gives this for the reason why Christ is all in all to us in the matter of our
salvation, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption, that
according as it is written, he that glories let him glory in the Lord. As if
he had said, God cannot abide that man should glory before him, but would have
him to be humbled to the very dust; but if he could be justified before God by
any goodness that is in him, then might he have just cause of glorying even
before God.

Object.
True (says the Papist) if a man could be justified by his own works, by such
works as he does by the power of nature, then had he indeed matter of glorying
and boasting in himself. But not when he is justified by such works only as
are wrought by the power of Gods grace in him. For these works are not his
own, but the works of Christ and his grace in him, according to that speech of
the Church, Esa. 26.12. Lord thou have wrought all our works in us. And that
of the Apostle, Romans 15.18. I will not dare to speak of any of those things,
which Christ has not wrought by me. We do not therefore (say they) by our
doctrine ascribe unto man any matter of glorying at all, we give the whole
glory of man's justification unto Christ a^ore.

Answ. 1.
To this I have two things to answer. First, the Apostle says, Romans 3.27. that
boasting is not excluded by any doctrine but by the Doctrine of justification
by faith only; that the Doctrine of justification by works, by any works
whether done before or after grace, does leave unto man some matter of
boasting. And Ephesians. 2.8, 9. he tells us plainly, that if we could be saved
by such works as we that are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good
works (that is, regenerate persons) do perform, we might have matter of
boasting in our selves.

2.
Secondly, Though the good actions that are wrought by the faithful after grace
received be wrought in them by the special assistance of the grace of Christ,
yet are they not Christ's actions but their own. When they believe, or repent,
or pray, it cannot be said that Christ believes, repents, or prays in
them. If their actions were merely the actions of Christ and his grace, then
indeed we could not deny them to be perfect, undefiled, and meritorious also;
then though they were justified by them, they could have no cause of glorying
or boasting at all, but the whole glory of it should redound unto Christ alone.
But because we are immediate agents in them our selves, therefore the Holy
Ghost cal^eth them our own, and not Christ's works. So Paul calls all that
goodness that was in him, that care and conscience he made to keep Gods law (
Phil 3-9.) (...) own righteousness. And so does our Savior also call the
good works of the faithful their own works. Let your light so shine before
men (says he Matthew. 5.16.) that they may see your good works. And Rev. 2.9. I
know thy works. And from hence also it comes (even from the imperfection and
corruption that is in us who are the immediate agents in them) that they are
both imperfect and defiled also: For who can bring a clean thing out of (...)
unclean? Not one, says Job 14.4. Though the fountain from whence they first
sprink be most pure, yet they receive such pollution from the filthy channels
through which they pass, as were it not for Christ, they could not at all be
accepted of God. And from hence also it comes, that if we were justified by
them, we should have some just cause of glorying before God. And thus have I
confirmed to you the first of those truths which I propounded; that is to say,
That we are not justified before God by our inherent righteousness, by it we
can never be made whiter than the snow in Gods sight.



For proofs I will give you six that are plain and pregnant. 1. The Apostle
says Romans 4.6. that to the blessed, that is, to the justified man, the Lord
imputes righteousness without works. And what righteousness can that be?
Inherent righteousness it cannot be, for that is not without works; it must
needs therefore be Christ's righteousness. 2. He says expressly, Romans 5.19 that
by the obedience of one (that is, of Christ) many (that is, the whole number of
Gods elect) are made righteous, not efficiently and meritoriously only, but
formally, as by Adams disobedience we were made sinners, not efficiently and
meritoriously only, but formally, his first sin was made our sin. 3. The
Apostle 1 Cor. 1.30. says that Christ is made to us of God, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; where 1 he expressly
distinguishes righteousness from sanctification, imputed righteousness from
inherent righteousness; and 2 says that Christ's righteousness is made ours
of God. 4. 2 Cor. 5.21. He says we are made the righteousness of God in him;
where observe, 1 That he says we are made the righteousness of God; that is,
righteous by such a righteousness as God requires. 2. That he says not only
in the concrete we are made righteous, but in the abstract righteousness; that
is, perfectly and fully righteous. 3. That we are made so in him, not in our
selves inherently. 5. The Prophet Jeremiah ( Ier. 23.6.) says, this is the
name whereby Christ should be called (by all Gods people) the Lord our
righteousness. As if he had said, All Gods people should profess they have no
other righteousness to stand before God with, but only Christ his
righteousness, and his alone. They should say as David does Psalm. 71.16. I
will make mention of (speak of, glory in, trust unto) thy righteousness, even
of thine only. 6. Lastly, This is the confession of all the Saints in that
Hallelujah whereby they do solemnize the marriage of the lamb, Revel. 19.8. To
his spouse was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and
white. For the fine linen is the righteousness of Saints. Where observe, 1.
That that made Christ's Spouse and Church most beautiful, whiter than the snow
in his eye, was not so much her own beauty, any righteousness of her own or
inherent in her self, as the robe, the fine linen, that was granted to her,
put upon her, none of her own. 2. That this robe, this fine linen is said to
be the righteousness of Saints. Not in our first justification only (as the
Papists fondly distinguish) but in our second justification also (if there were
any such) even when we are Saints we have no other righteousness to make us
beautiful in God's eyes, but this robe, this fine white linen that is put
upon us, granted to us, and none of our own. 3. Observe the confirmation and
ratification that is given to these words, Verse 9. The Angel said unto John,
These are the true sayings of God. And what is this robe, this fine linen that
is the righteousness of all the Saints? Surely Christ and his perfect
righteousness which is given and imputed unto us of God. In which respect they
that are baptized into Christ, and truly believe in him, are said Gal. 3.27. to
have put on Christ. And Paul desires that he may be found in Christ, Phil.
3.9. clothed with this robe, not having his own righteousness which is of
the law (which consists in obedience to the Law of God) but that which is
through the faith of Christ. The righteousness which is of God by faith. As
Jacob got the blessing by having the goodly raiment of his elder brother put
upon him, Genes. 27.15. so must we.

Now the reason why this must needs be so, Reason.
is evident; Because that righteousness only is able to justify us before
God, which is perfect and absolute, that has no defect nor blemish in it, such
as may ablde the trial before his judgment seat, such as may fitly satisfy
his justice, and make our peace with him, and consequently such as whereby the
Law of God is fulfilled. Therefore it is called the righteousness of God, Romans
10.3. such a righteousness as he requires, as will stand before him, and
satisfy his justice. So the Apostle says, the righteousness of the law must
be fulfilled in us before we can be justified, Romans 8.4. Now by no other
righteousness but Christ's alone the law of God was ever perfectly fulfilled;
none but his righteousness was ever able to abide the trial at Gods judgment
seat, and fully to satisfy his justice. And therefore the Apostle calls the
righteousness which is by the faith of Jesus Christ, Romans 3.22. the
righteousness of God, that is the righteousness of God, and none but that. Of
Christ, and none but him, the Lord has said, Matthew 17.5. In him I am well
pleased. He is our peace, as the Apostle calls him, Ephesians 2.14. and none
but he. No righteousness can make our peace with God, or bring peace to our
own hearts, but only his.

Three maine objections are made against this most clear and comfortable
truth, which I will briefly answer.

Object. 1
First. It is against all reason and sense, that a righteousness which is
without us, and none of our own, but another man's should justify us; And with
what comfort and peace of conscience can any man rely upon such a
righteousness?

Answ.
I answer, 1. It stands with reason, that that satisfaction should be imputed
unto me, which my surety has made for my debt. And Christ was our surety, as
the Apostle calls him. Hebrews 7 22. 2. Adams first sin, was justly
imputed by God to all his posterity; though it were not their own inherently,
nor actually, as the Apostle teaches, Romans 5.14. And the sins of all Gods
Elect, were imputed unto Christ, though they were not his own inherently and
actually. He made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, says the Apostle, 2 Corinthians. 5.21. And to prefigure this, all the iniquities of Gods people were
imputed to their sacrifice, though they were not inherently his own, as we
read, Leviticus 16.^1, 22. Aaron shall put all the iniquities of all the
children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their sins, upon the
head of the Goat, and the Goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities. And
why then should it seem strange, that the perfect righteousness of our
sacrifice and surety, though it be not our own inherently, should be imputed
to us by the Lord, and made ours.

Object. 2
Secondly. It is objected. How can it stand with the infinite knowledge and
wisdom of God, to account and esteem them to be righteous, that are
inherently and indeed impious and wicked men? Them that are like those painted
sepulchers that our Savior speaks of, Mat. 23.27. covered outwardly with the
white robe of Christ's righteousness, but void of all inherent righteousness
in themselves.

Answ.
To this I answer. No true believer is void of all inherent righteousness,
though it be not so perfect as is able to justify him in Gods sight. Christ
cannot be the head of an impious body. But the Lord sanctifies all such, and
makes them inherently righteous by his holy spirit, whom he does justify and
esteem righteous by the imputation of Christ's righteousness unto them, as you
have heard.

Object. 3
Thirdly and lastly. It is objected. But how can it stand with the justice of
God, of whom it is said, Exodus 34.7. that he will by no means clear the
guilty to pronounce and account them to be perfectly righteous, who do indeed
still remain full of corruption?

Answ.
I answer. Because all their sins were imputed unto Christ their surety, and he
has fully satisfied the justice of God for them. The Lord (says the Prophet,
Esa. 53.6.) has laid upon him the iniquity of us all.

And thus have I finished this first use of the Doctrine, and maintained it
against these three foul errors that the Papists do hold against it. Now
from this that you have heard these two points (for conclusion of all) do
necessarily follow.

First, That every Papist that holds, and believes these errors (as every
one of them professes that he does, for they are expressly decreed in the
Council of Trent, which is the rule of every Papists faith) especially if he
holds them practically, and with reference to his own works, is in a most
lamentable and damnable estate. Because the Apostle directly affirms, Gal.
3.10. As many as are of the works of the law (and look to be justified by
their works and inherent righteousness) are under the curse. And 5.4. Christ
is become of no effect to you, whosoever of you are justified (hope to be
justified) by the works of the law, ye are fallen from grace; ye can have no
benefit at all by Christ.

Secondly. That the present Church of Rome cannot be the true Church of
Christ, as they boast of themselves, but of it may be said, as Revelat. 2 9.
It is the Synagogue of Satan; because it holds not this foundation; that is
to say, the Doctrine of justification by Christ. And other foundation of Gods
Church can no man lay, says the Apostle, 1 Cor 3.11. 1. They deny
justification by the imputation of Christ's righteousness; yea, they scorn it,
and call it a putative righteousness. 2. They hold justification by inherent
righteousness; that is, by the works of the law. 3. They make justification
and sanctification all one, and so indeed deny, and shut out of Gods Church the
Doctrine of justification altogether.

Lecture CXXXI. On Psalm 51.7. October. 27. 1629.
IT follows now that we do proceed unto the second sort of uses that I told
you this Doctrine serves unto, and show you how it should work upon our
affections.

And there be two uses of this sort principally. The first is for comfort, and
the second is for exhortation.

For the first. Use
It is not possible for any man to understand, and receive, and meditate
seriously of this Doctrine, that he that is once purged and washed by the
blood of Christ, that is, he that truly believes in him, is not only
perfectly clean in Gods sight from all filth and spot of sin, but whiter
also then snow, perfectly just and righteous before God, I say it is not
possible for any man to know and think of this, but if himself be a true
believer, he must needs take comfort in it, it must needs warm, and revive,
and glad his heart. And certainly no man does truly believe in Christ, that
takes not comfort in this Doctrine. We find in Luke 2.25. that our Savior is
called, and was ever so accounted by Gods people, the consolation of Israel;
that is, the only ground of comfort to the Israel of God. And the Angel when
he tells the shepherds of the birth of Christ, says Luke 2.10. he brought
them glad tidings of great joy, that should be to all people; As if he should
have said, All Gods people throughout the world should greatly rejoice in
Christ. And the Apostle makes this a special note of a true Israelite, Phil.
3.3. that he is such a one as does rejoice in Christ Jesus. And the Apostle
Peter, 1 Pet. 1.8. says of all the elect strangers to whom he wrote, that
believing in Christ, they did rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious. And
though all these places do prove, that we are in a woeful and wretched
estate, none of Gods Israel, no better then infidells, if Christ be not the
only ground of our consolation, if we cannot rejoice in him; yet alas to many
that think themselves to be good Ch^istians, this Doctrine yields no
comfort at all, they hear it without all joy; the reason is, because they have
no need of comfort, they have other comforts that do fully satisfy and
content their souls for the time. The full soul loatheth an houy comb, says
Solomon, Proverbs 27.7. The sweetest and comfortablest Doctrine that is, is but
unsavory to the soul that is full of comfort already; but the humbled soul,
the soul that has need of comfort, (and such may the soul of every one of us
be we know not how soon) will find more sweetness and comfort in this Doctrine,
then in any thing in the world besides. To the hungry soul (says Solomon
there, Pro. 27.7.) every bitter thing is sweet, that that seems bitter to
others, is sweet to him. To the soul that does indeed hunger and thirst for
comfort, Christ is most sweet, notwithstanding all the bitterness that the
flesh finds in him, and in those terms and conditions upon which he is to be
received by us. And to these hungry and thirsty souls am I to direct the word
of consolation, that I shall now deliver, and to none other persons. Hoe, every
one that thirsts (says the Prophet in the name of Christ himself, Esa.
55.1.) come ye to the waters. Thou that art most deeply afflicted in spirit,
that think thy thirst to be insatiable* such as can never be quenched, come
thou to these waters, and thou shall find them abundantly sufficient to quench
and satisfy the thirst of thy soul; come unto Christ, and thou shall find
there is in him, and in that that he has done for thee, comfort enough to
raise up, to refresh thy spirit, though it be never so much dejected in thee.
Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall giv^ him (says our Savior, John
4.14) shall never thirst (with a tormenting and deadly thirst) but the water
that I shall give him, shall be in him a well (or fountain) of water
springing up into everlasting life. Come unto me (says he again, Mat.
11.28.) all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
Certainly the cause why we have so little rest, so little comfort, is because
we come not to him, because we seek not comfort in him; if we would come to
him, we might find comfort enough in him, against all the angvish of our
souls, be it never so great. A man shall be (says the Prophet Esa. 32.2.
speaking of Christ) as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the
tempest, as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in
a watery land. See in how many words, and with what variety of most apt
Metaphors the holy Ghost teaches, that there is no kind of affliction, or
distress of mind, that any of Gods people can be subject unto, but there is
sufficient ease and comfort to be found in Christ against it. He is able to
save them to the uttermost (says the Apostle, Hebr. 7.25.) that come unto God
by him. And what are the grounds of this abundant and all-sufficient comfort,
that the humbled and afflicted soul of every believer may find in Christ?

Surely these inestimable benefits that we have heard in the Doctrine, every
true believer receives by him. 1. Because he has purchased by his precious
blood our pardon, and blotted all our sins out of God debt-booke, and made us
as clean in Gods sight, as if we had never sinned. 2. Because by his perfect
righteousness, and fulfilling of Gods law for us, and in our stead, he has
made us more perfectly righteous before God, then if we had in all points
observed the whole law our selves. Both these points I will handle distinctly,
and show you that they are sound grounds of comfort, yea the only sound grounds
of true comfort.

Esa. 40.1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God, speak ye
comfortably to Jerusalem. See how earnest God is in charging his ministers to
comfort his people, yea to comfort them effectually to be diligent, and zealous
in this work, and beat much upon this: and whereas they might have said, Alas,
how should we comfort thy people, that are so much dejected and afflicted in
spirit? To this the Lord answers. Cry unto her that her warrefare is
accomplished (all the enemies of her salvation are fully vanquished) her
iniquity is pardoned; for she has received at the Lords hand (in Christ her
surety) double for all her sins. As if he had said, persuade her in this,
assure her of this, and this will comfort her abundantly. So when our Savior
would comfort Mary Magdalene, who was as much humbled and troubled in mind, as
any poor Christian can be (her sorrow was so abundant, as she was able to
wash his feet with her tears) how does he seek to comfort her? Woman (says
he Lu. 7 48, 50.) thy sins are forgiven thee, go in peace. As if he had
said, Thou have cause to be comfortable, and cheerful, for thy sins are
forgiven. O this peace of God (the comfort and joy that rises from the
knowledge of the pardon of our sin and reconciliation with God) is said,
Phil. 4.7. to pass all understanding. No heart can conceive how sweet, how
blessed and comfortable a thing it is, but that only that has felt, and
enjoyed it. David could tell what it was from his own experience; and
therefore says, Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed is he (or the blessednesses of that
man; for the word that he uses there, is not an adjective, but a substantive;
he speaks not in the concrete (as we say) but in the abstract, neither is
it a word of the singular, but of the plural number, that he uses to
express himself by. As if he should say, o the complete, the full, the
infinite; happiness of that man) whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is
covered, o the infinite and unspeakable happiness of that man unto whom the
Lord imputes not iniquity. As though he had said, This is even enough to make
a man perfectly happy, if his sins be forgiven him; nothing can make that
man miserable, that has once obtained this. And the reason of this is evident.
For, 1. sin is the only cause of all the evils and misery that can befall
a man. In them all it may be said, as the Church speaks, Lamentations 3.39.
Man suffers for his sin. 2. Sin is the only thing that makes all
misery to be misery indeed, all crosses, and afflictions so intolerable to
us as they be, Jeremy 8.14. The Lord our God has put us to silence, and given
us water of gall to drink, because we have sinned against the Lord. The sting
of death is sin, says the Apostle, 1 Corinthians 15.5, 6. Neither poverty, nor
sickness, nor death it self could sting and pain us, as they do, if our
sins were pardoned. 3. If all the crosses and miseries of the world, should
fall upon us, the burden and bitterness of them could not be so intolerable
unto us, nor torment us so much as our sin will do, when God shall charge it
upon us. O that will bite like a serpent (says Solomon, who spoke this from
experience too, Prove. 23.32.) and sting like an adder. A wounded spirit (says
he, Proverbs 18.14.) who can bear? 4. Lastly, Sin and nothing but sin
separateth between God and us. Your iniquities (says the Prophet, Esaias 59.2.)
have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face
from you, that he will not hear. You see then how sound a ground of true
comfort this is, and how just cause every humbled soul has to rejoice in
Christ, in respect of this first benefit we receive by him, that through him
our sins are pardoned, that the blood of Jesus Christ has cleansed us from
all our sins, As the Apostle speaks, 1 Ioh. 1.7.

And for the second of those benefits which every true believer receives by
Esaias 61.10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord (says the true beelever) my
soul shall be joyful in my God, for he has clothed me with the garments
of salvation (he has imputed and given unto me the perfect holiness, and
obedience of my blessed Savior, and made it mine) he has covered me (all
over from top to toe) with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh
himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth her self with her jewels.
Great is the comfort that the soul of a Christian finds in that inherent
righteousness, which God by his spirit has wrought in him, though it be so
poor and unperfect, and maimed, and slained as it is. When he can find that he
has been able to pray, or to confess and mourn for his sin, or to do any
other service to God with an honest and upright heart, O what a comfort it is
unto him? And certainly, if Christians did think well of this, it would make
them look better to their hearts when they perform good duties, and take heed
of slubbering them over, it would make them careful to perform spiritual
duties spiritually. The people rejoiced (says the Holy Ghost, 1 Chronicl.
29.9) for that they had offered (toward the building of Gods house) willingly,
because with a perfect heart they had offered willingly to the Lord. And our
rejoicing is this (says the Apopostle 2 Cor. 1.12.) even the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not in fleshly wisdom, but
by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world. And it is joy
(says Solomon, Proverb. 21.15.) unto the just man to do judgment. As if he
had thus said, He joyeth not so much in all the gain that he gets by his
trading, his buying and selling, and dealings with men, as he does in this,
that his conscience bears witness with him, that he has dealt justly with
all men, he has gotten it justly whatsoever he has. But if this poor and
imperfect righteousness that is in us will yield us such comfort; how just
cause of comfort and rejoicing has every true believer in this, that he has
another manner of righteousness than this is, the perfect righteousness of
Christ Jesus is his. Job says of his inherent righteousness whereby he had
been so rich in good works, so abundant in the works of mercy to all that
stood in need of him, Job 29.14. that he put on his righteousness, and it
clothed him; my judgment (says he, this care I had to deal justly and
uprightly with all men) was as a robe and a diadem unto me. And a goodly
garment and robe (doubtless) that was. As comely apparel is known to set
forth much and adorn the person of a man (O that men and women specially knew
not this too well; O that by their pride in this, by their overmuch care to
adorn and deck their bodies this way, they did not make both their bodies and
souls loathsome unto God) as comely apparel (I say) if it be used in
sobriety, and moderation, does much set forth and adorn the body in the eye of
man; so do those graces of the Spirit, that Job speaks of, even our inherent
righteousness, much more beautify and adorn us in the eye both of God and
man. Be ye clothed with humility, says the Apostle 1 Pet. 5.5. to all
Christians. As if he had said, That is a goodly garment, a goodly robe for any
Christian to wear. And speaking of Christian women he says, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4.
their adorning should not be that outward adorning of plaiting the hair (no,
nor of cutting and shearing it, would he have said, if he had lived to see the
fashions of these days) nor in wearing of gold or jewels says he, nor in
putting on of any apparel. Why how then should a Christian woman dress and
deck her self, will you say? Surely, with the ornament of a meek and quiet
spirit (says he) which is in the sight of God of great price. Grace is a
goodly garment certainly. But if this garment of inherent righteousness that
has so many spots and rents in it, will adorn us so much, if that be so much
to be joyed in, what a beauty and glory is that which the Lord our God has put
upon us wretched sinners, in clothing us with the robe of Christ's
righteousness? In that he has not only taken from us our own filthy
garments (as he did from Iehoshua, Zachary 3.4.) but clothed us with change of
raiment, with a righteousness sufficient, and more than sufficient to make us
comely and beautiful in his eyes; In granting to us that we should be
arrayed in that fine linen clean and white, as we heard the last day out of
Revelation 19.8. This robe the Lord has put upon thee beloved, I speak to the
poorest, to the weakest of all Gods servants, that hears me this day, this
perfect righteousness of Christ is thine. O that thou had eyes to see thy
happiness in this; O that thou had an heart to be affected with it, and
rejoice in it, as thou ought to do. Great was the glory of man in his first
creation, and in that righteousness wherewith he was clothed then. God
created him in his own image, says Moses, Genesis 1.27. and he repeateth it
again in the same Verse, In the image of God created he him, says he. And
this is expounded by Solomon, Eccles. 7.29. God made him righteous. And by
Paul; this image of God says he, Ephesians. 4.24. was righteousness and true
holiness. And great was our loss (doubtless) in being stripped by his fall
of this garment. But we have recovered more by Christ than we lost by Adam;
the robe of righteousness which we have gotten by Christ the second Adam, is
far more glorious than that which we were deprived of by the fall of the
first Adam. Every true believer is in a more blessed estate by Christ, more
white and beautiful in Gods eye, than Adam was in his innocence, before he
had ever sinned. And that in these three respects.

First, That righteousness that Adam had was uncertain, and such good part
yea the best portion of that good part which Mary had chosen, of which our
Savior says Luke 10.42. that it should never be taken away from her. And
indeed how is it possible we should be spoiled of it? Who should take this robe
from us, or spoil us of it? Who shall separate us (says the Apostle, Romans
8.35.) from the love of Christ? And he concludes verse 39. I am persuaded that
neither height nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. 1. Not all the policies
of the world how strong soever they be. It is not possible (says our Savior,
Mat. 24.24.) that false Christ's and false Prophets with all their great signs
and wonders should be able to deceive the elect of God. 2. Not Satan with all
his strength and subtilty; he that is built upon this rock (says our Savior,
Matthew. 16.18. he that has gotten Christ and his righteousness) the gates of
hell shall not prevail against him. 3. Lastly, Not the corruption of our own
heart. He that is borne of God (says the Apostle, 1 John 3.9.) cannot sin,
he means the sin unto death. It is not possible for an elect child of God
so to sin, as that he should utterly lose Christ, and this robe of
righteousness which he has received from him.

Secondly, the righteousness that Adam had, was in his own keeping, Luke
15.12, 13.) had all his portion, his blessedness and righteousness in his
own hands, and so made it quickly all away, as he did. But the righteousness
we have by Christ is in our Fathers keeping. Our life is hid with Christ in
God, says the Apostle Colos. 3.3. The cause why it is not possible for any of
our ghostly enemies to spoil us of it, is not any inherent strength that is in
us, to keep and hold it fast, but the faithfulness and power of God whereby
he watches over us and keeps us from sinning that sin which is unto death,
whereby we should lose Christ. The Lord is thy keeper says David to his own
soul, Psalm. 121.5. We are kept by the power of God unto salvation, says the
Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.5. My sheep shall never perish (says our Savior, Ioh.
10.28, 29.) neither shall any pluck them out of my hand; my father that gave
them me is greater than all, and none is able to pluck them out of my fathers
hand.

Adam had in his creation had been unchangeable, and that he could never have
lost it, yet had it been but the righteousness of a man. But the
righteousness that we have by Christ is the righteousness of such a person as
was God as well as man. And therefore as the second Adam was a far more
excellent person than the first Adam was, The first was of the earth earthy,
(as the Apostle speaks, 1 Corinthians. 15.47.) The second was the Lord from
heaven; So his righteousness also must needs be far more absolute and
sufficient to satisfy the infinite justice of God, and the exact perfection of
his holy law than Adams righteousness could possibly have done. That
righteousness that we have by faith in Christ, is the righteousness of God,
says the Apostle, Roman. 3.22. He made him to be sin for us, (says he, 2 Corinthians. 5.21.) who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him.

Applic.
Now to make some application of all this that you have heard. You see how just
and sound a ground of true comfort this Doctrine is unto all true believers.
Let us then stir up and provoke our selves to take comfort in it, to rejoice
in Christ, as we have just cause to do. Are the consolations of God small with
thee? says Eliphaz to Job 15.11. and so should every one of us say to our
souls. We should check and chide our selves for this, as David often does even
thrice in two short Psalms, Psalm 43.5, 11. and 43.5. Why art thou cast down
O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Why take thou no more
comfort in Christ, why do thou not rejoice in him? As every breach of Gods
commandment is a sin, so it is certainly a sin and a just cause of
humbling to every true believer, that he does not rejoice in Christ. For this
is also a breach of Gods express commandment. Rejoice in the Lord (that is,
rejoice in Christ) always (says the Apostle Phil. 4.4.) and again I say
rejoice. Nay in some respect it is a greater sin than the breach of any of
the commandments of the moral law, for it is a breach of the commandment of
the gospel, which is greater than the law, as is plain by that comparison the
Apostle makes between them, Hebr. 2.2, 3. 8.6.10.28, 29. It is a sin that
carries in it a contempt and light esteem of Christ thy Savior, and wherein
can thou sin more hainously than in this? Charge therefore this sin upon
thine own heart, be humbled for it, and strive against it. Labor to find out
in thy self the cause of it, and purge thy heart of it, strengthen thy self
against it. For certainly it is some dangerous humor and corruption or other
that distempereth thy soul, so as thou can relish no more sweetness in
Christ than thou do.

Three things there are principally that Gods poor servants that Christ has
done all this for, object and allege for themselves, why they cannot rejoice
nor take that comfort in him, that they ought to do; which I will endeavor to
strengthen you against.

Object. 1
Alas (says one) how can I be joyful or comfortable in Christ, that have the
hand of God so heavy upon me many ways as I have, both in outward and inward
afflictions, and which (though I have often and long sought to the Lord to be
eased and delivered from them) yet I cannot prevail?

Answ.
To this I answer: Remember what thou have heard in the Doctrine* 1. Thou may
be as dear to God as any is upon earth, though thou be thus afflicted. For
whom the Lord loves he chasteneth (says the Apostle Heb. 12.6.) and scourges
every son whom he receives. 2. Thou can not justly say that those
afflictions that thou complainest so much of, are certain arguments that God
is angry with thee for some sin that thou art guilty of; For it may be he
has no respect at all in them to thy sins, but either to keep thee from
some sin that he sees thou art in danger to fall into, if thou should not
be thus kept under, as it was in Paul's case, 2 Cor. 12*7. or to try thy faith
and patience, and make thee an example of faith and patience unto others, as it
was in Jobs case. 3. Admit God has respect to thy sin in keeping thee thus
under the rod so long; yet are not thy afflictions punishments whereby God
takes vengeance on thee for thy sins, but fatherly chastisements only
whereby he intends to do thee good. Christ thy Savior has borne the whole
punishment due to thy sins. The Lord has laid upon him (says the Prophet,
Esa. 53.6.) the iniquity of us all. And thou may be sure, that God has
pardoned and will never lay to thy charge that sin, that he thus corrects
in thee, because thou do what thou can to find out thy sins, and the sins
thou have found out, thou art unfeignedly humbled for and resolvest to forsake.
For repentance and remission of sins are never separated, as is plain by that
speech of Christ, Luke 24.47. 4. Lastly, So long as thy sins are pardoned
thou may be and have just cause to be comfortable, what ever thine
afflictions be. Son be of good cheer (says our Savior, Matthew. 9.2. to the
man that had as uncomfortable a disease upon him, as a man can lightly have)
thy sins are forgiven thee. As if he had said, This is a sufficient cause of
comfort unto thee what ever thy distresses and afflictions be.

How can I take comfort in Christ (says another) that am privy to my self of
such odious and enormious sins as I have been guilty of in times past, Object.
2.
yea as I find in my self continually, such cursed and blasphemous thoughts,
as never child of God was troubled with?

To this I answer, Answ. 1.
First, Christ has satisfied the justice of God not for small and ordinary and
common sins of his people only, but for all their sins how great, and
heinous soever they have been. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses
us from all sin, says the Apostle, 1 John 1.7. As all bodily diseases were
alike to him. He healed every disease (says the Evangelist, Mat 9.35.) and
every sickness among the people; so all sins (which are the diseases of our
souls) are alike to him. Bless the Lord o my soul (says David, Psalm. 103.2,
3.) who forgiveth all thine iniquities, and heals all thy diseases. Let
Israel hope in the Lord (says David, Psalm 130.7.) for with the Lord there is
mercy, and with him there is plenteous redemption, As if he had said, The
redemption that Christ made, the ransom that he paid was not scant but
plenteous, enough and enough again for all the sins of his people how many
or how heinous soever they were. Where sin abounded (says the Apostle,
Romans 5.20.) grace did much more abound. As if he should say, No sin of
any of Gods elect can be so great, but the merit of Christ and Gods mercy in
him is far greater.

Secondly, 2.
The benefit of this ransom that Christ has paid does certainly belong to
thee, because those heinous sins that thou complainest of are a burden to thy
conscience, thou yeeldest not to them, but labourest and strivest against them.
For our Savior expressly says, that such shall find rest and comfort by him,
Come unto me (says he, Mat. 11.28.) all ye that labor, and are heavy laden
and I will give you rest.

Thirdly and lastly, 3.
The consideration of the heinousness of thy sins which thou art thus troubled
with and consequently which Christ has purchased thy pardon for should be so
far from making thee unable to rejoice in Christ, as none under heaven has
so much cause to rejoice and take comfort in him as thou have. They to whom
many and foul sins (such as that poor woman's were of whom Christ speaks,
Luke 7.47) are forgiven, will love (Christ and consequently rejoice in him)
much, but to whom little is forgiven, the same will love but little. Paul that
counted himself chief of all sinners as he says, 1 Timothy 1.15. found more joy
and comfort in Christ, then we shall read of any other to have done: this he
often makes profession of, 1 Cor. 15.31. Gal. 6.14. Phil. 3.3. and sundry
other places. Nay in that very place where he calls to remembrance how
horrible a sinner he had been and what mercy he had found with God through
Christ, he bursteth forth into this doxology, 1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto the King
eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory for ever
and ever, Amen.

Object. 3.
There is yet a third objection, A third reason that many a poor soul
alleges why he cannot rejoice in Christ, nor take comfort in him He that
truly believes in Christ has just cause indeed to rejoice in him (says he)
As Elizabeth said of Mary, Luke 1.45. Blessed is she that believes; so says
he, o they are happy that can truly believe in Christ. But (alas) I cannot
believe.

Answ.
Now unto this poor soul I have these two things to say.

Go and preach the Gospel (says Christ, Mat. 16.15. that is, offer this
pardon) to every creature. 2. Christ has in his Word made offer of himself
and all his merits to such as thou art more then to any other. 1. Thou know
and feel the burden of thy sins. And such he inviteth above all others to
come to him, Matthew. 11.28. and assures them they shall receive benefit by him.
2. Thou thirstest after nothing so much as after Gods favor in him; and such
he inviteth above all others to come to him and to partake of all his merits.
In the great day of the feast (says the Evangelist, John 7.37.) Jesus stood
and cried saying, that all might hear him, If any man thirst let him come unto
me and drink. In which respect I may say to thee as they said to the blind
man, Mar. 10 49. Be of good comfort he calls thee. 3. If thou being thus
invited to come, go to Christ and lay hold on him, certainly he will not
reject thee, he does not make show of more mercy to thee then he intends, he
means as he says. Him that comes to me (says he, Ioh. 6.37,) I will in no
wise cast out. I said not in vain (says the Lord, Esa. 45, 19) seek ye me, I
the Lord speak righteousness. 4. The Lord has expressly commanded thee to
believe in Christ, that he died for thee. And counts it the greatest sin thou
can commit if thou will not believe it. This is his commandment (says the
Apostle, 1 Job 3.23.) that we should believe on the name of his son Jesus
Christ. And our Savior says, Ioh. 16.9. that this is the chief sin the Holy
Ghost should convince the world of, Because they believe not on me, says he.

Mat. 5.3, 4. they are blessed that are poor in spirit, and do mourn for it;
which they could not be unless they had true faith. 2 Else thou could not so
unfeignedly and earnestly desire to believe and to be partaker of Christ as
thou do. For he says likewise, Mat. 5.6. that he that hungreth and thirsts
after righteousness is a blessed man, which he could never be unless he had
true faith.

Lecture CXXXII. On Psalm 51.7. November. 10. 1629.
IT follows we proceed unto the second of those uses that tend to the working
upon our hearts and directing us how we should be affected with this Doctrine;
Use 2.
namely unto the use of exhortation. And this use of exhortation though it have
great afinity with that which you have formerly heard, in the use that was made
of that Doctrine I taught you out of the first part of this verse, touching the
necessity of having the blood of Christ sprinkled and applied to our own
hearts; yet is it so useful and necessary that I dare not omit it. And yet
will I not trouble you with repeating and saying over again the same things
which you have heard already, but I will endeavor (through Gods gracious
assistance) so to handle it, as that that which you shall now hear may serve
for a necessary addition and supplement unto that which you have heard
formerly; and so be neither tedious nor unprofitable unto you. And indeed what
one exhortation can any of us that are Gods messengers insist upon, that is of
so great necessity to be pressed upon us all, as this is? For if they that
have Christ (that truly believe in him) be so fully and perfectly justified in
Gods sight, if they have obtained through him such a robe of righteousness as
will not only cover them from top to toe so as no jot of their filthy
nakedness shall ever appear again to make them loathsome unto God; but also
adorn and deck them and make them more comely and beautiful in his eye, more
perfectly righteous then if they had never sinned, then if they had in all
points kept his righteous law. O then why are we not all of us more in love
with Christ? Why long we not more after him? Why labor we not more
diligently to make him and this robe of his righteousness our own? I counsel
thee (says our blessed Savior to the lukewarm Laodiceans, Revelation 3.18.
and the same counsel do I give to my self and to you all (beloved) who are
too like unto the Laodiceans in this point, lukewarm and indifferent whether
we have Christ made sure unto us or no) I counsel thee (says he) to buy of
me this white raiment, that thou may be clothed and that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear. As if he had said, This raiment, this robe (which
thou can never get of any but of me only, and which thou can never get of
me unless thou buy it, and be content to part with all that thou have for it)
is not only able to cover all thy nakedness (the filthy nakedness of thy
soul which is much more shameful then the nakedness of the body ever could
be) but it is also white and shining, such as will make thee most comely and
glorious in the eyes of my father. This is also the exhortation that the
Apostle gives to the Romans, Romans 13.14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ,
says he. He had exhorted them before, verse 12. to put on the armor of
light; that is, to cloth themselves with inherent righteousness, as he
expounds himself, verse 13. and that is surely (as I showed you the last
day) a goodly garment, and such as will greatly adorn and beautify a man; nay
it is not only as a garment to clothe, to deck and adorn a man, but it is as
armor also that will defend a man from the danger of many a tentation that
might hurt and wound him; but in this 14. verse he exhorts them not to rest
in that, but labor to get them a better garment then that. Put ye on the Lord
Jesus, says he. As if he should say, This garment will be far more useful
unto you, will adorn and beautify you much more then the other can do. See
what account the Apostle himself made of this robe. Doubtless (says he,
Philip. 3.8, 9.) I count all things but loss (I judge them not worth the
keeping, things that I care not for loosing and casting them away) for the
excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord (as if he had said o that
is the excellent knowledge when all is done, to know Christ to be mine, to be
my Lord) for whom (says he) I have (indeed in the resolution of my mind)
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung (in comparison)
that I may win Christ and make him mine own. And be found in him, not having
mine own righteousness which is of the law, but that which is through the faith
of Christ; the righteousness which is of God by faith. He makes this (you see)
the highest pitch of his happiness and that which he did desire above all
things in the world that he might be found of God (when he should call him to
appear before him) neither naked nor clothed only with the garment of his
own inherent righteousness, but in the pure and glorious robe of Christ's
righteousness. And this is that that I desire to exhort and persuade both my
self and every one of you that you would be of the same mind that blessed Paul
was of, account of Christ as he did account of him, labor as he did to win
Christ and make him our own, strive that we may be found in him, covered and
clothed in the robe of his righteousness.

And for the better enforcing of this so necessary an exhortation I will 1.
Give you some Motives that may be forcible and effectual to provoke and
quicken your appetite unto Christ, and to move you to hunger and thirst after
him and his righteousness.

2. Because nothing does so much dull and deaden men's appetite unto Christ and
keep them from hungring and thirsting after him as does this persuasion that
they have him already sure enough, they have already fed sufficiently upon him;
I will therefore show you some Signs and notes out of Gods Word how this may
be known.

3. Lastly, I will direct such as would feign win Christ as do indeed hunger
and thirst after him and his righteousness, what Means they should use to get
him and make him their own.

And for the Motives I will give you, they are four principally.

Motive 1
First, Consider how woeful thy case will be when extreme affliction or death
shall seize upon thee if thou be not in Christ, if thou have not gotten this
robe of righteousness before that time come. Consider (I say) distinctly of
this point.

Man is borne unto trouble (says Eliphaz, Job 5.7.) as the sparks fly upward.
Yea death will come certainly and cannot be avoided. It is appointed (says
the Apostle, Heb. 9.27. decreed) unto men (unto all men) that they shall once
die.

Man knows not his time (says Solomon, Eccl. 9.12.) as the fishes that are
taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare; (while
they think least of it, and are skipping and eating their meat securely) so are
the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them.

The cup of affliction is in the hand of the Lord (says David, Psalm 75.8.)
and it is he that mixeth and tempereth and pours it out also as seems good
unto him.

Fourthly. The natural and ordinary effect of extreme affliction is to awaken
When men are bound in setters (says Elihu, Job 36.8, 9.) and holden in the
cords of affliction, then he shows them their work, and their
transgressions that they have exceeded in. As if he should say, Then his
manner is to set their sins in order before them, and all the foul
circumstances whereby they may be aggravated. See an example of this in Gods
own people, When Joseph's brethren saw themselves taken for spies in Egypt, and
so in present danger of death, Genesis 42.21. the sin that they had committed
against their brother many years before, came as fresh into their remembrance,
and lay heavy upon their conscience, as if it had been but newly done. See
also an example of this, even in an heathen man. When Adonibezek was in
extreme pain and misery, and saw he must dye, then comes his sins into
his remembrance, Judges 2.7. Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbs, and
their great toes cut off (says he) gathered their meat under my table, as I
have done, so God has requited me. I know well that affliction, nor
sickness, nor the grisly visage of death it self does use to awaken the
conscience of every man, some (through the fearful judgment of God) go to
hell in a sleep. The Lord has powered upon them (as the Prophet speaks, Esaias
29.10.) the spirit of dead sleep and has closed their eyes. But yet this is
the ordinary effect of extreme affliction, and that that every one of us must
look for, when the evil day shall come upon us, our consciences will put us
in mind of our sins as you see; yea, it will put us also in mind of the
judgment we must go unto, and ever be ringing that in our ears that Solomon
speaks, Ecclesi. 11.9. Know thou, that for all these things, God will bring
thee into judgment.

Fifthly. If a man have not gotten faith and comfort in Christ before then, he
Moses came from God to the children of Israel, with a most comfortable message,
it is said, Exodus 6.9. they could not hearken unto him for anguish of spirit,
and for crue^l bondage.

Sixthly and lastly. The man that is then without Christ, without any assurance
Christ is our only hope, as the Apostle calls him, 1 Timothy 1.1. And they that
are without Christ, have no hope, says he, Ephesians. 2.12. O then let us count
it our wisdom, to seek without delay, to make Christ our own before the
evil day, before death do seize upon us. This Motive the holy Ghost often uses,
to rouse wicked men out of their carnal security. And what will ye do (says
he, Esaias 10.3.) in the day of visitation? To whom will ye fly for help? And
Jeremy 13.21. What will thou say when he shall punish thee? Shall not sorrows
take thee as a woman in travail? And so may I say to you all beloved, though
you can be quiet and comfortable enough, now in the days of your health and
peace without Christ, without all assurance that he is yours, how will you do
for comfort, when affliction and death shall come? What comfort can you have
then, without you have him made sure unto you? Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the Son lest
he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a
little, Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

On the other side. Contr^.
The man that is in Christ, and has through him, gotten his pardon, and made
his peace with God, and that is clothed with the robes of his righteousness,
may be comfortable in the greatest affliction, and even in the hour of death.
The rain descended (says our Savior, Matthew 7.25.) and the floods came, and
the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell not, because it was
founded upon a rock. As if he should say, Nothing can overthrow or hurt him
that is built upon the rock. In all these things (says the Apostle, Romans
8.37. And what were those things? See verse 35. In tribulation, distress,
persecution, in famine, nakedness, peril, sword. And what greater evils then
these can befall a man? In all these things says he) we are more then
conquerours, through him that loved us, that is, through Christ. Yea the
faithful have never found so much true comfort, in all their lives, as they
have done in their greatest and most extreme afflictions. This has been
evident in the experience of the blessed Martyrs, and this God has made an
express promise for. Unto the righteous (says the Psalmist, 112 4.) arises
light in darkness. As if he had said, In times of darkness and affliction,
then has their light been wont to rise most. Thy light shall rise in
obscurity (says the Lord, Esaias 58.10.) and thy darkness shall be as the
noonday. And if there were nothing else to make us in love with Christ, to
long after him, to strive to make him sure to us, this were enough to do it,
even the sweetness that we shall find in him in the time of affliction. A
friend loves at all times (says Solomon, Proverbs 17.17.) and a brother is
borne for adversity. As if he had said, There is the trial of a true friend,
and of a kind brother indeed, when they will stieke close to a man in his
adversity. Surely there is not such a friend, such a brother in the world for
this as Christ is, we shall feel the sweetness of his love to us most, in
our greatest affliction.

Motiv: 2
Secondly. Admit a man had never so good assurance to be exempted from all
trouble and affliction, and to spend all his days in peace and prosperity, as
much as his heart can wish, yet can he have no true comfort in any blessing
that he does enjoy till he be in Christ. Two evident reasons there be for
this, 1. They will do him no good at all, but much hurt. 2. God gives them not
to him in love.

Every creature of God is good, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.4. yet to thee
that have not Christ, they are not good things, they can do thee no good, it
had been much better for thee to have been without them. To the unbeleeving,
nothing is pure says the Apostle, Titus 1.15. That which the Lord says of
some wicked men, Malachi 2.2. I will curse your blessings, may be understood,
as spoken to all that are without Christ, though these things be blessings in
themselves, yet to thee they will prove curses. There is a sore evil which I
have seen under the sun (says Solomon, Ecclesiast. 5.13.) namely, riches
kept to the owners thereof to their hurt. The prosperity of fools shall
destroy them, says he, Proverbs 1.32. Yea, the more thou have of them (if
thou have not Christ withal) the more hurt they will do thee. The meat that
is in their bowe^^s (says Zophar of wicked men. Job 20.14.) shall be as the
ga^^ of aspes (which verse 16. he calls the poison of aspes within him. And
you know the more poison any man takes, the more it will torment him. And how
is impossible that the riches of such as are out of Christ, should do them any
good? how can they choose but do them much hurt? Daily experience proves,
that men seldom have good of that that they come unjustly by, that they have
no just title to, that is not their own. If a rich man that has his grounds
never so well stockt with cattle, bring but one bullock that he has stolen
and put among them, will it do him any good? Will it not consume all the rest
and undo him? Gods curse shall dwell in the tabernacle of the oppressor (said
Bildad, Job 18.15.) because it is none of his, he has no just title to it,
he came not justly by it. On the other side, That is only a man's own that
he comes rightly by, and that that is thus his own, he may enjoy with
comfort. Let them work with quietness (says the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 3.12.) and
eat their own bread. Now none of all the comforts of this life that we possess
are our own, neither have we just title to them (a just civil title unto them
I know a wicked man may have, so as no man may justly take them from them, but
a spiritual a sanctified a comfortable title to them can we never have) till
we be Christ's.

I pray consider the reason of this and you will find it to be a most evident
truth. The Lord when he made man gave all his creatures unto him and made him
Lord over them all. Thou made him (says David, Psalm 8.6.) to have dominion
over the work of thy hands, thou did put all things under his feet. But we
by our fall in Adam forfeited all this title and right we had to any thing
that God has made; and made the good creatures of God accursed unto us. Cursed
be the earth for thy sake, says the Lord to man after his fall, Genesis 3.17.
Now this title which we had forfeited in the first Adam is restored to us in
the second, and this curse which we had brought upon the creatures by our
sin, is taken away by Christ and by him only. For God has made him heir of
all things and given them all to him, as the Apostle teaches us, Hebrews 1.2.
and through him only we come to have this blessed title unto them. And how
then can a man have any comfort in any thing that he possesses? How can they
be good to him that is not in Christ?

Secondly, God gives none of these things in love to the man that is his love
to the stranger (says Moses, Deuteronomy. 10.18.) that he gives him food and
raiment. And a man may safely conclude God is good to me and loves me, or else
he would never preserve me and provide for me as he does. Yet this love of
God that appears in any of these outward things, is such as a man can take no
sound comfort in, till he be in Christ. For alas that is but a common love
extended to the bruit beasts as well as to thee, O Lord thou preservest man and
beast, says David. Psalm 36.6. There is many a bruit beast that lives longer
and in better health, more fully provided for of all things fit for the
preservation of this life, and that with less care and trouble, then any man
is. Yea this love God extends unto his very enemies and such as he has
ordained to everlasting confusion. Cain had a greater portion of them then
Seth, and Esau then Jacob. And what comfort can a man have in such fruits of
Gods love as these are? What comfort can the traitor take in that goodness of
the King, that being apprehended he gives order that he may have a fair and
good lodging in the tower and a good diet too, till matters be ripe and ready
for his arraignement and execution? No no he takes small comfort in all this;
nothing will assure him of the Kings mercy and love till his pardon be brought
him. So may I say of all these outward blessings thou can have no sound
comfort in them, till thou have Christ, and have through him gotten the pardon
of thy sins. These are indeed fruits of Gods common love, but these are no
fruits or signs of Gods special or everlasting love, of that love that he
bears to them whom he means to save eternally. No man knows either love
or hatred by any thing that is before him, says Solomon, Eccl. ^.1. A man
cannot argue God loves him with his special love, because he enjoys these
things, nor that God hates him because he wants them. And it is not that
common but this special and everlasting love of God only that we are to make
reckoning of, and to take comfort in. In this was manifested the love of God
toward us (says the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 4.9, 10.) because that God sent his only
begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him, Herein is love,
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins. If thou can say God has given Christ unto thee,
and to thee an heart to receive him, then thou may be bold to say, God loves
thee indeed. But thou can never say God loves thee indeed, till thou be in
Christ. He is called the Son of his love, (...), Col. 1.13. He has made us
accepted in the beloved, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.6. As if he had said, He
loves us for his sake, and he loves none but for his sake, and with respect
unto him only. And what good will it do thee to have all the world, if thou
have not Gods love? What comfort can thou take in any thing thou have* if God
have not given it thee in his love?

Now on the other side (that this Motive may have the more force in thy heart)
consider what a happiness it is for a man to be in Christ, even in respect of
these outward things. The true believer and he that knows Christ is his, may
take great comfort even in these outward and common blessings of God. God
gives to him (says Solomon speaking of these things, Eccles. 2.26.) that is
good in his sight (reconciled to him in Christ, and justified before him)
wisdom, and knowledge, and joy. He joyeth even in these outward blessings, he
uses them with joy and comfort. In which respect it is said by David Psalm.
37.16. that a little that a righteous man has, is better than the riches of
many wicked men. Have he little or have he much, he has more comfort in that
he has, than any wicked man in the world can possibly have. For,

All things are yours (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.21, 23.) and ye are Christ's.
In giving Christ unto us how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things? says the Apostle, Romans 8.32.

The blessing of the Lord it makes rich (says Solomon, Proverb. 10.22.) and
he adds no sorrow with it. As if he had said, He that has wealth with Gods
blessing, shall have no cause to repent him another day that he lived so
prosperously. Thus God promises his people that are in covenant with him,
Deuteronomy. 30.9. The Lord thy God will make thee plenteous in every work of thine
hand, in the fruit of thy body and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the
fruit of thy land for good: for the Lord will rejoice over thee for good as he
rejoiced over thy fathers. Mark how the Lord does not only promise unto his
people these outward things that he would increase them in their children and
in their estates, but that he promises them also (and repeateth this promise
twice in this one Verse) that he would give them these things for their good,
they should have good of them, they should receive good and no hurt by them. To
have the things is nothing, unless we have them with the blessing, unless God
give us good of them. When the Apostle had said, 1 Timothy 4.3, 5. that God has
created all meat to be received with thankesgiving, of them that believe and
know the truth, he adds in the next words, that every creature of God is
good. As if he had said, To the believer all Gods creatures are good and to
none but him; and he gives this reason, For it is sanctified (says he) by the
word and prayer. As though he should say, When Gods creatures are sanctified
unto us, when we have a holy use of them, and are made the better by them, then
are they good to us and not else, and to the true believer they are sanctified,
and to none but him.

Thirdly and lastly, Whatsoever the true believer, he that is in Christ has in
these outward things, he has it in Gods love, and therefore he may well take
comfort in it. We are wont to say, that an hearty welcome is the best cheer
that any friend can make us. Though our fare be but mean, yet if we can find
we have it with a good will, and that our friend is glad of us, and thereby we
discern that he does unfeignedly love us, this we esteem of more worth than
the best cheer in the world, this makes the homelyest fare most sweet and
acceptable unto us. And certainly it is much more so in this case. When a man
once knows he has Gods love, and that that which God has given him (be it
little or much) is given to him in love, O this gives a most sweet and
pleasant relish to all Gods blessings that we do enjoy, this makes a man to
take true and solid comfort in them. Thus Jacob speaks of his children
Genesis 33.5. These are the children that God of his grace has given unto thy
servant; and Verse 11. of his cattle, Because God has dealt graciously with
me, and because I have enough. He tasted Gods special love unto him even in
these things. I told you even now that no unbeliever can take any sound comfort
in any of Gods outward blessings, because he cannot conclude from thence that
God loves him with a special love; but though he cannot, he that is in Christ
may. These common things are to him pledges of Gods special and eternal love,
and therefore are they sweeter unto him than they can be unto any other man. By
this I know thou favourest me (says David, Psalm. 41.1^.) because mine enemy
does not triumph over me. Was this such a token of Gods special favor toward
him? Why God has done thus much for many a wicked man, he has granted
temporal deliverances from their enemies to many a one whom he did never bear
any special favor unto. Well, though this be so, yet to David this was a
strong argument of Gods special favor, he relished Gods love in it. And that
made this temporal blessing so sweet unto him, that made him take such joy and
comfort in it, as we may see he did by his breaking forth into so hearty and
patheticall a thanksgiving for it, Verse 13. Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, from everlasting to everlasting, Amen, and Amen. He respected the
mind and aff^^tion of the giver toward him, more than of the gift it self a
great deal. And that is the cause why the true believer can rejoice more in,
and give God thanks more heartily for his meat and drink, and for all other of
Gods common mercies, than any other man can do.

O that we could believe that that has been said for this second Motive,
Applic.
and lay it to our hearts. It is a lamentable thing to see how all men dote
upon these outward and common blessings of God; how light account they make of
Christ in comparison of them. They think they can never spend time enough in
seeking after them The six days that God has allowed them to spend (for the
most part that way, saving only a small portion of every day for a morning and
evening sacrifice to be offered unto him) are not sufficient, but they must also
rob the Lord of his Day, and spend part of that that way too. O the toil and
labor that men willingly and gladly take for the getting of these things! For
this men will rise up early, and sit up late, and eat the bread of sorrows, as
the Prophet speaks. Psalm 127.3. And on the other side (alas) how little
time are men willing to spend, how little labor and diligence do men use to
get Christ. Nay the maine cause why Christ is so lightly esteemed of, why he is
so little sought after, is the high esteem men make of these common blessings,
if they have them they think themselves happy, though they want Christ, and
miserable if they want them, though they should have never so good a portion in
Christ and his merits. If thou mark well the parable of the guests that were
invited unto the great supper, Luke 14.18. thou shall find that the only thing
that made them set light by that great mercy that was offered them was, the
respect they had to their worldly profits and pleasures. They had somewhat else
to do then to come to that feast; they had other matters, (matters of their
profit, and matters of their pleasure) which it more concerned them to look
after then after Christ. O that men would see their folly and madness in this.
1. These things can stand thee in no stead in the evil day nor yield thee any
comfort then, when thou shall stand in most need of comfort. That which Solomon
says of riches, Proverbes 11.4. that they avail not in the day of wrath, may
be said also of all other outward blessings. Nothing but Christ will yield
thee comfort then. 2. For the present thou can take no sound comfort in them
as thou have heard now. 3. Thy preferring of these base things in thy mind and
affection before Christ and prising them above him, is an high contempt done
unto him. A goodly price (may I say of you as he did of the Jews, Zachary
11.13.) that I was prised at of them. 4. Remember the fearful sentence that
was given of them that did as thou do; that out of respect to their profits
and pleasures neglected to come to the supper when they were invited, Luke
14.24. I say unto you (says the Lord) that none of those that were bidden
shall taste of my supper. It seems they neglected the time and offer of grace
that the Lord of the feast had made unto them, out of this conceit that the
Lord that by his servants invited them now to that supper, was so bountiful
and kept so good a house that though they did not come then, they might come
soon enough on the morrow or some other day (when they had nothing else to do)
and find good cheer enough left to serve their turn; as no doubt most men
conceit God is so merciful and Christ is so easy to be had, as that any time
will serve, if it be but half an hour before they die (when they can follow
their profits and pleasures no longer) to seek after Christ. But mark how
these guests were deceived, because they came not then when the Lord invited
them, and specially because they neglected to come upon this ground that they
thought their profits and pleasures were more worth, more to be regarded then
any of the dain^ies that they might feed upon at that feast; therefore the Lord
vowed that none of them should ever taste of his supper. And surely it is much
to be feared that as many of you (specially of you of this Town) do match
these guests in their sin so you do also match them in their punishment; and
that the Lord has already passed this dreadful sentence upon you, None of
these whom I have so often, and so long invited to come to my supper to receive
Christ and all his merits in those means of grace that I have offered unto
them, and that have all this while neglected and despised this mercy of mine,
shall ever taste of my supper, shall ever feed upon Christ or receive true
comfort by him while they live.

Lecture CXXXIII. On Psalm 51.7. November. 24. 1629.
THe third Motive that may persuade us to seek without delay and labor to
find that we are in Christ, Motive*
that we are fully and perfectly justified in Gods sight through him, is this,
That we can have no true comfort in any goodness that seems to be in us,
till we know our selves to be in Christ. This Motive is in this respect
necessary to be insisted upon, because nothing has more force to dull our
appetite unto Christ, and keep us from seeking comfort in him, then that
contentment and comfort we find in some goodness that we think is in our
selves. Great is the contentment that men find in the outward and common
blessings of God, and great force there is even in that (as we heard the last
day) to keep men from hungring and thirsting after Christ. But the comfort and
content a man takes in the least goodness that he finds in himself is
far greater; and he is apt to bless himself more in that, then in any
outward blessing that he does enjoy. Not of works (says the Apostle, Ephesians.
2.9. good works he means) least any man should boast. As if he should say, A
man is exceeding apt to boast of his good works, though not outwardly in
words, yet inwardly in heart, he blesses himself and secureth his heart in
nothing so much as in his good works, in any good work he knows by
himself, And when he had said, 1 Cor. 1.30. that Christ is made unto us of God
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification and redemption. As if he had
said, We have all in him; he gives this for the reason of it, verse 31. that
he that gloryeth, might glory in the Lord. As if he should have said, If we
had any of this without Christ, we would be apt to glory in it and care but a
little for him. And therefore it is so often said that the poor and such as find
themselves to be utterly destitute of all goodness, are the only men that are
fit to seek and receive comfort by Christ. The Lord has anointed me (says
our Savior, Luke 4.18.) to preach the Gospel to the poor. As if he should
say, Small hope there is, that any but they will receive it. Ho every one that
thirsts, (says he, Esa. 55.1.) come ye to the waters, and he that has no
money. Where it is to be observed that he makes the man that thirsts, and
the man that has no money all one. As if he had said, None will thirst after
Christ but only those poor wretches that have no money, nothing of their own
to take unto. So he says likewise, Zach. 11.11. that they were the poor of
the flock that waited on him. And who are meant by these poor ones in all
these places? Surely not such as lived in the want of bodily and worldly
wealth, but such as are poor in spirit and feel an utter want of all
goodness in themselves, these are the only men that will thirst after Christ,
and are fit to receive him. And so the Apostle interprets that metaphor when
he says, Romans 4.5. to him that works not (that has no work no goodness
at all to trust unto) but believes in him that justifies the ungodly (knows
himself to be void of all goodness full of ungodliness and therefore flies
to Christ and believes in him) to him his faith is counted for righteousness.
Ye see then how apt we are to be kept from Christ, from prising him and
desiring him as we ought even by those good things that are in us This
impediment will easily be remooved if we consider well the force of this third
Motive, we can have no true comfort of any good thing that is in us, till we
be in Christ. To speak distinctly of this point, you shall see the truth of
it 1 In those good things that are in many a natural man. 2 In those good
things that are in many an hypocrite. 3 Lastly, In those good things that are
in the regenerate man himself. And in handling these three I will observe this
method. 1. I will show you that there are in every one of these some good
things. 2 That there is no true comfort to be found in any of this goodness
till we be in Christ.

For the first, It cannot be denied but there are many good things in some
natural men. That that we call civil and moral honesty is certainly in it
self a good thing. That many men live so unblameably free from any open or
known offense, specially against the second table. The care that many natural
men have to keep their word, to deal justly with all men, to be helpful and
merciful to such as stand in need of them, and many such like things, that may
be discerned in them are doubtless very good things. The conscience that
Abimele^h the King of Gerar made of adultery, and that integrity of heart that
was in him that way, of which we read, Genesis 20.5. was a very good thing.
Yea those are good things not only in the esteem of men but even in the
account of the Lord himself. We read Mark 10.20, 21. when our Savior heard
the young man say that he had observed all the commandments of the second
table from his youth, and knew well that (in respect of the outward observation
of them) be had spoken the truth, that beholding him he loved him for this.
Certainly God loves and likes well of these moralities and civil virtues
that are in natural men; Yea and he uses to reward them also. Let me show you
the proof of this in three degrees.

Esa. 16.3. advises them that by executing judgment and showing mercy to the
oppressed, they would labor to prevent it. And the Prophet Daniel, Daniel
4.27. gives hope unto Nebuchadnezzar himself that by righteousness and
showing mercy to the poor, he might obtain a lengthening of his tranquillity.

Exodus 1.20, 21. that God dealt well with the midwives of Egypt and made them
houses because of the mercy they showed to the Hebrew infants, they feared God
so far that they durst not make them away though the King so straightly
commanded them to do it.

I know (says the Lord to Abimilech, Genesis 20.6.) that thou did this in the
integrity of thy heart; for I also withheld thee from sinning against me,
therefore suffered I thee not to touch her.

Two evident reasons there are why the Lord must needs love and reward these
moral parts, these civil virtues that are in many natural men.

Nebuchadnezzar and his army for the service they did against Tyrus, Ezekiel
29.20, Because they wrought for me says the Lord God. As if he had said, They
were instruments of my good providence in the just rui^e and destruction of
that wicked people. And if God do reward them often that serve his providence in
his justice for the ruin and destruction of men, though they have no goodness
in them at all; it is no marvel though he reward them much more who by some
goodness that is in them do serve his providence in the preservation and
welfare of men.

Secondly, These civil virtues must needs be good things and such as God The
Gentiles (says the Apostle, Romans 2.14, 15.) do by nature the things
contained in the law; and show the work of the law written in their hearts. As
if he should say, These things do evidently show and declare that the law of
God is written in their hearts. You see then (Beloved) we do not discommend
civil honesty; we do not discourage natural men from doing good works; we
do not condemn all the works of natural men; nor say that whatsoever they
do that are not religious is abominable and naught. Nay we heartily wish
there were much more civil honesty in the world then there is. He that is
truly religious would be ashamed that any natural man should be more honest
then he. True religion is no enemy to civil and moral honesty nay it is a
great nourisher and increaser of it. It is a dangerous error that most men are
grown now unto, to think it indiscretion and want of learning and judgment
in a Minister to stand much in pressing of points of morality in his Sermon; or
in particular reproof of such faults as are committed by men in their buying,
and selling, and such like passages of their ordinary conversation and dealings
one with another. It is thought now adays there is no divinity in this, they
go besides their Text when they deal in these things. No no beloved, be not
deceived, Those points that God in his Word stands most upon, we must press
most in our ministry; and those are these matters of your common practice. It
is a strange thing to observe how plentiful and particular and precise the
Holy Ghost is in pressing men to deal justly in all their dealings with men
even in weights and measures of all sorts. You shall do no unrighteousness in
judgment (says the Lord, Levit. 19.35, 36) in m^^eyard, in weight, or in
measure. Just balances, just weight, a just Ephah and a just Hi^ shall ye
have. I am the Lord your God that brought you out of the land of Egypt. And
again, Deuteronomy. 25.13 -- 16. Thou shall not have in thy bag diverse weights (of
one kind he means) a great and a small. Thou shall not have in thine house
diverse measures, a great and a small, one to buy by, another to sell by. But
thou shall have a perfect and a just weight, a perfect and just measure shall
thou have, that thy days may be lengthened in the land which the Lord thy God
gives thee. For all that do such things, and all that do unrighteously
(mark it I pray you, all that do unrighteously in what kind soever) are an
abomination unto the Lord thy God. Mark also (I pray you) how much the
Apostles in the New Testament do press upon Gods people in their
exhortations, that they would be careful to walk honestly. Walk honestly,
toward them that are without, says the Apostle Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4.12. And the
Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 2.12. Have your conversation honest among the Gentiles.
And the Apostle Paul again, Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are honest, think on
these things. As if he had said, Be not forgetful or careless of such things.
And Romans 13.13. Let us walk honestly as in the day. And in the following words
he instanceth in some special points of dishonesty he would have them to take
heed of It is dishonesty to be drunk, yea to use rioting,
idle-company-keeping, haunting and sitting at the alehouse to drink or to
game, though a man be never drunk (...), says he. It is dishonesty to use
chambering and wantonness, secret familiarity and dalliance with a woman,
lascivious speeches and gestures though a man never commit whordome; Yea it is
dishonesty (says the Apostle) for a man to live in strife and envying to be a
contentious person, unpeaceable, unquiet, though he never oppress or defraud
or wrong his neighbor any other way. Provide things honest (says he again,
Romans 12.17.) In the sight of all men. The word he uses there is worth the
observing (...), As if he had said, Cast for this before hand, take care of
this, that you do nothing that is dishonest, that you fail not in any point of
honesty by no means. And he professes, Heb. 13.18. that this was a thing
himself took much comfort in that he had a good conscience in all things
willing to live honestly. And what means he by honesty? Surely such duties of
the second table which the light of nature teaches men, to make conscience of.
And why (I pray you) do the Apostles stand so much upon commending honesty
unto Gods people? Surely for two causes.

Pet 2.12. Having your conversation (says he) honest among the Gentiles, that
where as they speak against you as evil doers they may by your good works
which they shall behold (that is, by your honesty, such works as they by the
light of nature know to be good works) glorify God in the day of visitation.

Jacob had done to the Shechemites how they had broken their promise and
covenant with them, how cruelly and barbarously they had used them, and all
under a color of zeal for their own religion, this made Jacob and his
religion (though alas he was far from approving or consenting to this that
they had done) stink among the inhabitants of the land, as himself says, Genesis
34.^0.

Applic.
You see (beloved) what moved the Apostles to commend honesty so much unto Gods
people in their times; and surely the same reasons have moved me to speak so
much in the commendation of it unto you at this time. Never was it more
neglected by some professors of religion then now it is; never did the Gospel
receive more dishonor and reproach through the neglect of it then now it does.
I beseech you (beloved) so many of you as have given your names unto Christ
look unto this. Count it a foul shame for thee that art a Christian when a
natural man, or one that thou take to be far short of thee in religion
shall justly tax thee with dishonesty in any kind. When Abimelech had told
Sarah of her fault in dissembling her husband, thus was she reproved says
Moses, Genesis 20.16. As if he should have said, That was a shameful reproof
indeed for a woman of her note, to be taught her duty and upbraided with her
fault by an heathen man. Surely it cannot but grieve every good heart to hear
that which is too truly spoken to the shame and reproach of the Gospel that
there is more truth and fidelity, more just dealing, more care of their word,
more good neighborhood and kindness, more charity and mercifullnesse among a
number of mere natural men, nay among Papists, nay among Turks and infidels
then among a great many that are of chief note for the profession of the
gospel. O that God would be pleased to open the eyes of such professors to see
how great their sin and danger is. To this end consider with thy self these
three things.

First, that for thee to fail in these duties which are clear not by the
light of the Word only, but even by the light of nature also, is a greater
sin than for thee to fail in those duties only that are clear unto thee by
the light of the Word only. I know well that the sins against the first
Table are in some respects greater than the sins against the second are. But
in this respect it is certain that some sins against the second Table, these
sins against common honestly, are more heinous than the most sins against
the first, that they are committed against greater and clearer light than the
other are. And the greater the light is against which any man offends, the
greater is his sin. To him that knows to do well and does it not, to him it
is sin, says the Apostle, James 4.17.

Secondly, Consider that these faults of thine will be imputed by the world
Jacob said Genesis 34.30. to Simeon and Levi, Ye make me to stink among the
inhabitants of the land. And should not this trouble thee much? Let not them
that wait on thee O Lord God of Israel (says David Ps. 69.6. be ashamed for my
sake, Let not those that seek thee be confounded for my sake, O God of Israel.
See how earnest he was with God to keep him from doing any thing that might
bring reproach upon Gods servants, or make the professors of his name odious
to the world. And so would thou be too, if thy heart were truly religious as
David's was.

Thirdly and lastly, Consider that the shame of thy sins rests not upon thy
The name of God is blasphemed through you, says the Apostle, Romans 2.24. And
does this seem a small thing in thine eyes? Will ye pollute me among my people
(says the Lord, Ezekiel. 13.19.) for handfuls of barley, and for pieces of bread?
As if he should say thus: Will ye for the gaining of a trifle make my name and
religion odious and loathsome to the people? When Jacobs sons had given that
occasion to the Canaanites to reproach religion, he cries out unto them, Genesis
34.30. Ye have troubled me. It was a great trouble of mind to the good man,
that any occasion should be given to wicked men to hate or speak evil of
religion, specially by him or any of his. And certainly, if the glory of God,
and the credit of his gospel be not dearer to thee than any thing in the
world, if thou had not rather die than bring reproach upon the Gospel, thou
can have no comfort in thine estate. If thou can not say with David Psalm.
69.9* The reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me. As if he
had said, The words that are spoken against thee, and thy holy religion are a
greater burden to me, and trouble me more than any thing that can be said
against my self does; certainly thou have no zeal of God in thee at all.

Now though all this be true that you have heard; though the civil virtues
Ghost for most unhappy men, and such as none of us would be in their case for
all the world. The Pharisee could boast, Luke 18.11. that he was neither
extortioner, nor unjust in his dealings with men, that he was no adulterer nor
filthy person. How dutiful a child was Esau to his father, how careful to
please him, how fearful to offend him? As you may read, Genesis 27.31, 41. and
28.8. Of how bountiful a disposition and free from covetousness? When Jacob
brought him a royal present, he refused it and said Genesis 33.9. I have enough
my brother, keep that thou have unto thy self. And where shall we read of such
an example of kind-heartednesse and pitifulness and aptness to forgive an
insolent, and proud, and inveterate enemy as we have in Ahab toward Benhadad 1
King. 20.31.34? And what man in the world could ever live a more unblameable
and honest life, than that rich man Mat. 19.20. that had kept all the
commandments of the second Table from his very youth to that day? Of whom yet
our Savior gives us just cause to judge (by that fearful sentence he gives
upon that occasion of all that trust in their riches) that he could never get
to heaven. But the example of the Apostle Paul may serve instead of a thousand
for this point. Never did man live a more unblameable life, nor excel in all
civil and moral righteousness, than he did when he was a natural man.
Insomuch as he says of himself, Phil. 3.4. If any other man thinks he has
whereof he may trust in the flesh, much more I. And Verse 6. he says that
touching the righteousness which is in the law, he had been blameless. But
did he find any sound comfort in all this? No, no, when God opened his eyes,
and let him see his own estate, he found himself to be a most wretched man
for all his moral righteousness. O says he, there was not a viler wretch in
the world than I was for all that. Of all the sinners in the world (says he 1 Timothy 1.15.) I was the chief. He esteemed no better of all his civil
righteousness than of dung, that he might win Christ, which he knew he could
never do, so long as he put any confidence in that, till he renounced and
loathed that. And so will it be with every one of you (beloved) when God shall
be pleased to open your eyes as he did his servant Paul's; you will see then
your case is most wretched for all your civil honesty; you will see that you
that took your selves to be such honest and just men, are the chief of
sinners; you will see that though (as you have heard) your just dealing with
men, your fidelity, your kindness and mercifulness are in themselves good
things and pleasing to God, yet God is never a whit the better pleased with you
for them. They that are in the flesh (in their natural estate, unregenerated,
unconverted by the Word and Spirit says the Apostle, Romans 8.8.) cannot please
God. Nothing that is in them, nothing that they do can please God. And Heb.
11.6. Without faith it is impossible to please God. Till by a lively faith thou
know thy self to be in Christ, thou can have no hope that any thing thou
do does please God.

Two evident reasons there be for this.

As the branch (says our Savior himself Ioh. 15.4.) cannot hear fruit
unless it abide in the vin^, no more can ye except ye abide in me. And Verse.
5. Without me ye can do nothing. Till by faith we are ingrafted into Christ, we
can bear no good fruit.

The Lord looks to the heart, says he, 1 Samuel 16.7. Give to every man (says
Solomon in his prayer at the dedication of the temple, 1 King. 8 39.) according
to his ways whose heart thou know (As if he had said, As thou see his
heart to be) for thou even thou only know the hearts of all the children of
men. Now no natural man, no man that is out of Christ, can possibly do any
good thing with a good heart. For, it is faith that purifieth the heart, Acts
15.9. And nothing is done with a good heart, that is not done out of love to
God and care to please him. By this we know (says the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 5.2.)
that we love the children of God, when we love God and keep his commandments.
Observe two things in these words. 1. That we can never love our neighbor
aright unless we first love God; and the love we bear to our neighbor does
proceed and grow from the love we bear to God. 2. That we can never do any
thing that God has commanded us well and with a good heart, till we first love
God, and do it out of love unto him. Now no natural man can do that that he
does in love to God and care to please him, but out of self-love and
by-respects. For if he did, he would love Gods Word; he would make conscience
of one commandment of God as well as of another, specially of the commandments
of the first Table which are the greatest commandments, Mat. 21.38. Nay it is
not possible for any man truly to love the Lord, till he be first by faith
persuaded of Gods love to him in Christ. It is faith that works by love,
says the Apostle, Galat. 5.6. We love him (says the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 4 19.)
because he loved us first. And what love of God to us is it that breeds in us
a true love to him again? Surely not his common love, but when we once know by
faith that he so loved us that he gave his Son for us, then we shall truly
love him, and out of love keep his commandments, and never till then. Herein
is love (says the Apostle, 1 Job. 4.10.) not that we loved God, but that he
loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.

And thus you see no natural man can find sound comfort in any goodness that
is in him, or done by him.

Lecture CXXXIV. On Psalm 51.7. December. 8. 1629.
IT follows now that we show the truth of this third Motive in that goodness
also that is to be found in many an hypocrite. And in the handling of this we
will observe the same method that we did in the former.

First, It cannot be denied but there is some goodness to be found in many an
hypocrite, yea much more goodness is to be found in him, than in the mere
natural man. This will evidently appear unto you in three points.

First, The goodness of the civil and moral man is seen only in the duties
the first and the great commandment, as our Savior himself calls it,
Matthew. 22.38.

Secondly, The civil man's goodness is moved and guided only by the Herod
Mark 6.20. that when he heard John he did many things; Yea he is (in some
sort) made partaker of the Holy Ghost, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6.4.



I will instance but in five particulars, wherein you may see how much
goodness there may be in the man that is but an hypocrite, above that that
there is in the mere natural man, be he never so civil and moral a man.

They seek me daily (says the Lord of such, Esa. 58.2.) and delight to know my
ways, as a nation that did righteousness (as if they were the uprightest
hearted people in the world) they ask of me the ordinances of justice, they
take delight in approaching unto God. Yea he will commend and extol the best
Preachers, and profess great love unto them. They come unto thee, (says the
Lord to Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 33.31, 32. And he was certainly no flatterer, no
man-pleaser, he was a most faithful and powerful Teacher, They come unto
thee, says the Lord) as the people comes (as far as any, as constantly as
any of my people use to come) and sit before thee as my people, yea they show
much love with their mouth, and thou art to them as a very lovely song of one
that has a pleasant voice. As if he should say, O how they will admire thee,
with what delight they will hear thee? Thou art never tedious unto them though
thou be never so long. Now there is no such thing as this in the civil man. He
cares not a rush for the sound Ministry of the Word; nay he despises it, and
counts them all fools that make such reckoning of it.

Luke 18.12. that he fasted twice a week. And for seventy years together the
hypocritical Jews keep a solemn fast constantly four times a year, as you
may find by comparing Zach. 7.5. and 8.19. together. And in this point also the
civil man comes far short of him. He seldom or never prays, unless it
be in his bed when he is between sleeping and waking; ye shall have no prayer
in his family, you shall see him sit down and rise up from his meat like a
bruit beast; without ever lifting up his eyes or heart unto him in prayer, that
has given him his food, and without whose blessing when he has eaten it, it
can do him no good. Much less does he ever use to pray in secret unto God; and
as for keeping a religious fast, he knows not what belongs to it.

Luke 13.15.) with great indignation and zeal reproves the people for
traveling and coming to be healed on the Sabbath Day; and tells them Luke
13.14. that there were six days in which men ought to work, in them therefore
they should come to be healed, and not upon the Sabbath Day. And the
hypocritical Jews blame the poor man greatly, whom Christ had cured at the
poole of Bethesda for carrying away his bed upon the Sabbath Day. It is the
Sabbath Day (say they to him Ioh. 5.10.) It is not lawful for thee to carry
thy bed. On the other side, the civil honest man cares not for the Sabbath at
all. Though the respect he has to his credit, and because he will be
neighborlike, bring him to Church sometimes (if he live where the fashion is
to do so) yet has he no zeal for the Sabbath, it never troubles him to see
it profaned by others; nay he puts no difference between it and another day
for any business he has, so far forth as he may do it without discredit and
danger. And as for going abroad to visit his friends, or to send his servants
forth about any business, he thinks it the fittest day in all the week.

Fourthly, You shall have many an hypocrite that loves the sincerity of Thou
abhorrest idols, says the Apostle to the hypocritical Jew, Romans 2.22. On the
other side, He loves the sincerity of religion, and gloryeth greatly in this,
that he professes the Gospel and serves God according to his Word. Thou
make thy boast of the law, says the Apostle of such, Romans 2.23. But so does
not the moral man; all religions are alike to him, if they be commanded by
authority. He willingly walks after the commandment, as the Prophet speaks
of Ephraim, Hos. 5.11. He sees no great hurt in Popery; he loves their rites
and inventions with all his heart. And of all religions he likes that best
that has most of them. In which respect the Apostle calls Gods own
ceremonial law a carnal commandment, Heb. 7.16. and carnal ordinances,
Hebr. 9.10. because they are so agreeable to the disposition and liking of a
carnal and natural man.

Fifthly and lastly, Many an hypocrite goes a great deal further in the
reformation have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of
the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, as the Apostle speaks 2 Pet. 2.20. As if
he should say, even that superficial knowledge they have of Christ and of the
Gospel, has made them leave many sins, not gross sins, but even such as
are small in comparison of others (as the least oaths, wanton words, games
that are doubtful or of evil report, etc.) The hypocritical Pharisee (as our
Savior tells us, Luke 11.42.) would not fail in the tything of mint and
rue, or the least herb that grew in his garden: and stood much upon this, made
great conscience of it, as you shall find Luke 18.12. I give tithes (says he)
of all that I possess. Whereas your civil man makes no bones of such petty
sins (as he calls them) but counts them all precise fools that make any
scruple of them.

Now all these things that I hvae noted to be in some hypocrites are certainly
all of them in themselves excellent good things. 1. To frequent constantly the
sound Ministry of the Word: 2. To hear the Word not drowsily and heavily, but
with delight; 3. To love and commend good Preachers; 4. To use prayer
constantly; 5. To be zealous for the Sabbath, and make conscience of traveling
or doing any worldly business on that day; 6. To love the sincerity of
religion, and hate will worship and idolatry; 7. Lastly, To abstain from the
smallest sins, and even from all appearance of evil; All these (I say) are
very good things; Neither may any man dislike and despise these things (as alas
too many do) because they have been found in the practice of some notorious
hypocrites.

Let no man that has heard me this day teach that these things are to be
found in some hypocrites, rejoice in his heart (as I fear some of you will)
and say, these gadders after Sermons, these holy brethren that stand so much
upon sincerity, and can abide nothing that savours of Popery, these precise
fools that must be singular forsooth, that dare not swear by small oaths,
were all well taxed to day. We see they are no better than hypocrites; all
these things have been found in hypocrites we hear. Let no man (I say) say
so. For though these things have been found in some hypocrites; yet are they
no signs to know an hypocrite by; neither are they all hypocrites that do
thus; neither is an hypocrite that does thus, an hypocrite for that cause,
because he does thus. But thou in scorning any man for this very thing, because
he makes profession of religion, because he goes to Sermons, because he uses
prayer, and so seems more holy than his neighbors, because he is scrupulous
in the smallest thing that he thinks to be a sin, bewrayest the
profaneness of thine own heart, and openest thy mouth against heaven, as the
Prophet speaks, Psalm. 73.9.

All these five things that I have instanced in, are such things as God is
highly pleased with, and has promised great reward unto; as I will show you
particularly.

Great peace have they (says David, Psalm. 119.165.) that love thy Law, (And by
the Law and Word of God, the same thing is meant throughout that Psalm) and
nothing shall offend them. And on the other side, That man can have no true
goodness in him, that has no love to the Word, that cares not for it. For,
faith comes by hearing of the Word, as the Apostle says, Romans 10.17. Yea he
must needs be in a most woeful estate though he feel it not. For, He that
turns away his ear from hearing the Law (says the Holy Ghost Prove. 28.9.)
even his prayer shall be abomination. And what shall other his actions be, if
his prayer be so?

Cornelius for this Acts 10.2 that he prayed unto God always. As if he should
have said, He kept a constant course in prayer. He that uses it must needs
receive a blessing from God by it. This is so ordinary a thing with God, to
bless them much that pray much, that our Savior says Matthew. 7.8. Every one
that asks receives. It is said of Obed-Edom 2 Samuel 6.11. that while the Ark of God continued in his house the Lord blessed him and all his household. And
the blessing that he received by it was so sensible and apparent, that others
were able to take notice and to tell David of it. It was told to David (says
the holy story 2 Samuel 6.12) that the Lord had blessed the house of Obed-Edom
and all that pertained unto him, because of the ark of God. And certainly
there is no family where prayer and Gods Worship is constantly used morning and
evening, but the whole family uses to receive a blessing by it. Yea God has
been wont to show such respect unto this duty, that he has often rewarded it,
and given a blessing unto it (a temporal blessing I mean) not only when it
has been performed by his own faithful servants with a good heart, but even
when it has been used also by such as have had no truth of grace in them at
all. As appears in the example both of Iehoabaz the King of Israel, 2 King.
13.4, 5, and of the mariners, Ion. 1.14, 15. And on the other side, as they can
have no true goodness in them but are Atheists in heart that use not to pray,
Psalm. 14.14. The fool has said in his heart, there is no God; He calls not
upon God; so the many houses where no prayer is used seem to prosper as well
as any other do, yet certainly God has given sentence already against them in
that Prophetical prayer which we read Ier. 10.25. Power out thy fury upon the
heathen that know thee not, and upon the families that call not on thy Name.
There wants nothing but that God give order for the execution of this
sentence which he has already given against them; which how soon and in what
manner he will do it, is known only to himself, no man can tell.

Lecture CXXXV. On Psalm 51.7. December. 22. 1629.
IT follows now that we confirm the same unto you in the other three
particulars.

And for the third. Although there be (as I showed you) some hypocrites that
seem to be strict observers of the Sabbath Day; yet is that no sign of an

To keep a bodily rest upon that day from all our own works, is but one
particular that is required of us in the observation of the Sabbath. Nay, that
is (as I may say) but the outside of the commandment, and concerns only the
outward man, the outward and bodily observation of it. Of the fourth
commandment (as well as of all the rest) that may truly be said which the
Apostle speaks Romans 7.14. of the whole Law. We know (says he) that the law
is spiritual. The spiritual observation of it by the inward man, when we
call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, as the Prophet
speaks Esa 58.13. That is; When we can joy in that day, as in the Lords own
holy Day, and esteem it in our heart a far greater and more honorable Day
than any other day, keeping the rest and performing the duties of the Day
cheerfully, reverently, conscionably, spiritually: This spiritual observation
of it (I say) by the inward man, is the chief thing that God requires of us
in the fourth commandment. The outward and bodily observation of it (which may
be performed by a man that has no truth of grace in him at all) is nothing in
Gods account in comparison of this. And yet of this bodily observation of the
Sabbath by the outward man, the resting from our own works is but the least
part. The exercising of our selves upon that day in doing of the Lords work,
the spending of it in such holy duties both public and private as may breed
and increase grace and sanctification in us, is a greater matter and more
pleasing to God a great deal than that is. No man may think he has kept the
Sabbath well, because he rests from all the labors of his calling upon that
Day: So far forth the bruit beast, thy ox, and thy horse keeps the Sabbath
as well as thou. For, so is the express commandment, Deuteronomie 5.14.
Neither thy ox, nor thy ass, nor any of thy cattle, shall do any work upon
that Day. Of thee that art a man, and a Christian man, God requires more than
so: He will have thee not only to rest from thine own labors, but to spend
the Day (so far as thy bodily necessity will permit) in such religious
duties as may make thee a more holy and a better man. The Hebrew word Sabbat
(from whence the Sabbath Day received the name) signifies not such a rest as
wherein one sits still and does nothing (as the word Noach does) but only a
resting and ceasing from that which he did before. So God is said Genesis 2.2.
to have rested the seventh Day, not that he rested from all works; For, My
Father works hitherto, and I work, says our Savior John 5.17. but because
he rested from all the work that he had made, as Moses says there. As if he
had said, He rested from creating any thing more. And so we likewise are
expressly commanded to rest upon the Sabbath not from all works, but from such
works as we did and might do upon the six days. God never allowed us any day
to spend in idleness and doing of nothing; specially not that day. But he
has appointed us works and duties for that Day, which he would have us as
careful to go about them, as we are upon any other day to go about the
works of our calling; and when we are at them, to perform them with every
whit as much diligence and care to do them well, as we do any work we take
in hand upon the six days. Let no man say, what would you have us to do, if
we may do no business upon the Sabbath? Would you have us spend the time in
sleeping, or talking, or sitting at our doors, or walking abroad? How would
you have us pass the time for the whole day? To such a one I answer, Thou have
so much work to do, as if thou were as thou should be, thou would
complain that thou want time to do it. And yet this work that God has
enjoined us to spend this day in, has such interchange and variety in it, as
no good hearth has cause with those carnal professors Malachy 1.13. to
snuff at it and to cry, behold what a weariness it is, how ^edious and
toylesome a thing it is to keep the Sabbath as these men would have us to do?
But the true Christian finds just cause to call the Sabbath a delight (as the
Prophet speaks Esa 58.13.) for all this work and labor that God has
enjoined us in it. We have public duties to perform on that day in Gods
house. And both the family duties and secret duties which we are bound to
perform every day, are (by the equity of that law Numbers 28.9, 10.) to be
doubled upon the Sabbath Day. And in very deed the Lord has for that very
cause (chiefly) commanded us to rest from all our own work upon the Sabbath
Day, that we might the better attend upon, and profit by these holy works,
these duties of piety and religion which are the proper works of that Day.
For, that is the chief end that the Sabbath was ordained for. Remember the
Sabbath Day to keep it holy (says the Lord in the fourth commandment, Exodus
20.8. And Deutero^omie 5.12.) Keep the Sabbath Day to sanctify it. And I gave
them my Sabbaths (says the Lord Ezekiel 20.12.) to be a sign betwixt me and
them, that they might know that I am the Lord that sanctify them. As if he
had said, He remembers not, nor keeps the Sabbath, he regards it not, nor
cares for it (how strict soever he be in resting from his own labors) that
keeps it not holy, that spends in not in such religious duties as wherein
we may know and feel by experience, that it is the Lord who (by his
ordinances) does sanctify him, who does both begin and increase grace in his
soul. And yet though this be so; though the bodily observation of the Sabbath
and that that is performed by the outward man only be nothing in Gods account
in comparison of the spiritual observation of it with the heart and inward
man; and though our resting from our own labors in that Day, be the least
part even of the outward and bodily observation of it; Yet see what account the
Lord makes even of that, and how highly he is pleased with it. This will
sufficiently appear unto you in that promise the Lord has made unto it, Ier.
17.24 -- 26. wherein he plainly declares, that the flourishing estate both of
Church and Commonwealth depends greatly even upon this; even upon the strict
observing of the bodily rest from our own works upon the Lords holy Day. Two
things are to be observed in this promise. 1. The duty unto which the promise
is made, ver. 24. If ye diligently hearken unto me, says the Lord, to bring in
no burden through the gates of the City on the Sabbath Day, but hallow the
Sabbath Day to do no work therein. As if he should say, If ye carefully
look to this, that no burdens, no carriages go in and out at the gates of
Jerusalem on the Sabbath Day, that the Sabbath may be but so far hallowed
that no work be suffered to be done upon that Day. You see the promise is made
even unto the bodily rest; even unto so much as an hypocrite and carnal man
may perform; and which every Magistrate, and Master, and Father has power to
compel such unto as are under their government; Even to this (I say) the
promise is made. Then secondly observe the blessing and reward that is promised
even unto this, and that is twofold. The first concerns the commonwealth and
civil state, Verse 25. Then shall there enter into the gates of this City
Kings and Princes sitting upon the Throne of David, riding in chariots, and
upon horses, they and their Princes, the men of Judah and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and this City shall remain for ever. As if he should say, I will
maintain the honor and dignity, the wealth and strength, the peace and safety
of this State and Kingdom. The second blessing that is promised concerns the
Church and State of Religion, Verse 26. And they shall come from the Cities of
Judah, and from the places about Jerusalem, etc. As if he should say, My solemn
assemblies shall be duly frequented, there shall be no sects and heresies, no
schism or separation, I will continue mine own worship and the purity of my
holy Religion among you.

You see (beloved) by this one place how much God is pleased even with the
outward rest from our own works upon the Sabbath Day; and what a happiness it
would bring both to the Church and Commonwealth, if even that were observed.

On the other side, it is worth the noting how all public judgments and
common calamities that ever befell Gods people are imputed by the Holy Ghost to
no one sin more than to the profanation of the Sabbath, yea even to the
neglect of this outward rest from our own works on that day. If you compare 2
Chronicles 36.21. with Leviticus 26.34, 35. you shall find this noted for a
chief cause of that miserable captivity that Gods people did endure in
Babylon, Because the land did not rest in your Sabbaths (says the Lord) when
ye dwelt upon it. And Nehemiah tells them so much after their return from
that captivity, Nehemiah 13.18. that God did bring all the evil that was come
upon them and upon Jerusalem, because their fathers had profaned the Sabbath
so as they then did. How was that? Surely they suffered men to tread
wine-presses on the Sabbath (a work that is not in use among us, but our
grinding of corn and making of malt is equivalent unto it) and they suffered
men to go in and our with burdens and carriages, and to buy and sell wares
upon the Sabbath, as you shall find Verse 15, 16 of that Chapter. And these
are the things of which he says Verse 18. Did not your fathers thus, and did
not our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon this City? And look what
has been said of every Church and Kingdom, that the flourishing estate or
ruin thereof depends greatly upon the observation or neglect even of this
outward rest; the same may be also said (doubtless) of every town and family,
and particular person, that their welfare and undoing depends much upon this.
Never was any man made the poorer by the strict observation of the Sabbath Day;
by refusing to buy or sell, or do any of his worldly business upon that Day.
But the more conscionable any man is in resting from all his own works upon
that Day, the more plentiful a blessing he shall be sure to receive from God
upon the labors of his calling in the six days. And it is not thine own
labor or toyling, but the blessing of God that makes rich when all is done,
as Solomon teaches us, Proverbs 10.22. I know well that the worldly man cannot
believe this, but thinks this would be the way to undo him. How should I
live (says he) if I should do no business on the Sabbath Day? I cannot
maintain my charge by going to Church and doing nothing for a whole day. But
mark I pray you how God answers these men, Leviticus 25. The Lord gave his
people then a commandment to keep every seventh year a Sabbath all the year
long, thus far forth The seventh year shall be a Sabbath of rest to the land
(says the Lord there, verse 4, 5.) a Sabbath for the Lord, thou shall neither
sow thy field nor prune thy vineyard; no nor reap and gather that that grew of
it own accord to thy private use (for so the 5 verse is to be understood.)
And if ye shall say and object (says the Lord, verse 20, 21.) what shall we
eat the seventh year? As if he should say, How shall we live then that year,
seeing we shall neither sow nor reap (As indeed they had much more reason to
object this against the keeping of one year in seven, then we have against
the keeping of one day in seven for a Sabbath) the Lord answers this, verse
21. I will command my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring
forth fruit for three years. So may I say to thee, Keep the Sabbath
conscionably, remember the Sabbath day before it come and cast for it by
dispatching before hand all that thou have to do, as neither thou nor thy
servant, may have any thing left to be done upon that day, and the Lord will
command his blessing upon thy labors in the six days accordingly, so as thou
shall not be impoverished ever a whit but enriched by it. On the other side
the Lord has been wont to reveal his wrath from heaven upon towns and
families and upon particular persons as much for this one sin of profaning
the Sabbath, as for any other. And namely by that fearful judgment of
consuming fire by which specially and by name he has in his Word threatened to
punish this sin. If you will not hearken unto me (says the Lord, Jeremy
17.27.) to hallow my Sabbath day, and not to bear a burden, even entering in at
the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day, then will I kindle a fire in the
gates thereof, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem and it shall not
be quenthed. And thus have I showed you in this one particular how highly God
is pleased with the strict observation of the Sabbath day. And if it please him
so well to see men rest from their own works upon that day (which yet as I
told you is but the least thing that belongs to the right observation of it)
you may be sure he is much more pleased to see men spend that day in doing of
his works, in exercising themselves in those duties of piety and mercy which
he has appointed to be done upon that day, especially in seeing them keep
his Sabbaths spiritually and conscionably. Certainly they that do so, shall
be sure to be blessed and rewarded of God for it. To this purpose it is worth
the observing that as our Savior says, Mark 2.^7. that the Sabbath was at
the first made for man, for the great benefit and behoof of man. Man could not
(no not Adam in his innocence) have been without it, but with great danger and
loss unto him; So the Holy Ghost says that twice of the Sabbath, Genesis 2.3.
and Exodus 20.11. that he never said of any other day, that the Lord blessed
that day; that is, appointed it to be a mean of a greater blessing to man (if
he keep it as God has commanded him to do) then any other day, or any of
the ordinary works of any other day can possibly be.

Two sorts of blessings there be which the conscionable observer of the Sabbath
shall be sure to receive by it.

The first are spiritual. And they indeed are the chief blessings of things.
So the Lord says, Ezekiel 20.12. that he gave his Sabbaths to his people to
that end that they might know that he was the Lord that sanctified them. We
shall know and find that the Lord will sanctify us, both begin and increase
saving grace in our hearts, if we keep the Sabbath conscionably. Yea the Lord
has promised, Esa. 56.6, 7. to every one, that keeps his Sabbath from
polluting it, that he will make them joyful in his house of prayer. And Esa.
58.13, 14. that if a man shall keep the Sabbath heartily and spiritually then
he shall delight himself in the Lord. By these two places it appears that
God has bound himself by promise to them that keep his Sabbath (not only to
work sanctification, increase of holiness, and power over their corruptions
which he professes in that former place of Ezekiel was the very end he gave
his Sabbath for, but also) by his spirit of adoption to increase in their
hearts a lively sense of his favor, assurance that he hears and accepts
their prayers, peace of conscience, joy in the Holy Ghost; which are blessings
the Christian soul prizeth above all things in the world.

Why (may you say) may not a man receive increase of grace and spiritual
comfort in the use of Gods ordinances on any other day, Object.
but only on the Sabbath?

I answer, Answ.
Yes verily; but these promises may give him assurance to receive them more
richly and plentifully upon the Sabbath then on any other day.

The second sort of blessings that the conscionable observers of the Sabbath
receive by it, are temporal; For concerning them also we have a promise, Esa.
58.14. that he that heartily and spiritually keeps the Sabbath God will cause
him to ride upon the high places of the earth (he shall have honor and esteem
in the world so far as it shall be good for him) and he will feed him with
the heritage of Jacob; that is, he shall continue and abide safely in the land
of Canaan, which God promised to Jacob for his inheritance, Genesis 28.13.48.4.
Yea the Lord will nourish and feed them, he shall eat the good things of the
land, as the Lord promises, Esa. 1.19. to all that yield willing obedience
unto him.

Lecture CXXXVI. On Psalm 51.7. December 29. 1629.
IT follows now that we make some application of that which we have heard
touching the Sabbath; Applic.
and so proceed unto the two last particulars of those five, which I have
proved to be in many a man, that is no better then an hypocrite.

And that which I have to say by way of application, is first of all more
general and concerns all other persons and places as well as this; secondly
more special, and concerns this place principally.

Of all I may say o that God would give us hearts to believe that which John
12.48. O that we could believe that the surest way to make our Church and
State to flourish; to secure us from enemies abroad and Papists at home, to
maintain Gods Gospel and the purity of his religion amongst us; that the
surest way to make our Towns and families and persons to prosper and do well,
were to keep the Lords rest upon his holy day. If we could believe this, then
would we be the more careful to keep the Sabbath better our selves, and
then would we do what lies in us that it might be better kept by others
also. I know our corrupt hearts are apt to have in them many reasonings against
the strict observation of the Sabbath day. And these imaginations and
reasonings that we have in us against the truth of God, the Apostle, 2 Cor.
10.4, 5. calls strong holds and high things that exalt themselves against the
knowledge of God. But of all these strong holds and high things, I may say as
our Savior says in another case and another sense speaking of the faith of
miracles, Matthew. 17.20. If we had but as much faith as a grain of musterd
seed, but a little faith to believe the promises and threatenings that we have
heard concerning the observation or neglect of the Sabbath, we might easily
remove all these mountains out of our way. Diverse notable good laws we have
had made of late years for the better observation of the Sabbath day. Some to
restrain men from doing their own works; some other to compel men to do
the Lords work by frequenting diligently the Church assemblies upon that day.
And blessed be God that has given that heart to our King and State to make
such laws. In respect whereof it may be fitly said of them as Deborah speaks
in another case, Judge. ^.9. My heart is toward the governors of Israel that
offered themselves willingly among the people, Bless ye the Lord. The hearts
of all Gods people should be toward the governors of Israel, for showing
themselves so willing to provide for the sanctifying of the Lords Sabbath, we
should all bless the Lord for them. The whole land (I nothing doubt) fares
the better and has had the tranquillity thereof lengthened the rather, even by
the zeal that our governors have showed in this point toward God, and
toward his house. But that which is said of the days of King Iehos^phat, 2 Chronicles. 20.32, 33. may fitly be applied to our times, Iehosaphat did that which
was right in the sight of the Lord. Howbeit the high places were not taken
away, for as yet the people did not prepare their hearts unto the God of their
fathers. Our gracious King in Parliament has done that which is right in the
sight of the Lord, in making these good laws. Howbeit the Sabbath is still in
most places shamefully profaned, these good laws are not executed; for the
people do not prepare their hearts unto God, they have no heart to his honor
or service at all. And indeed in nothing does it better appear that the hearts
of the people generally are not prepared unto God, but utterly alienated and
estranged from him then in this; that when they have but the least color and
semblance of law to justify any of their unwarantable practices whereby they
may trouble any of their brethren, and devise deceitful matters against them
that are quiet in the land as the Prophet speaks, Psalm. 35.20. there they
will seem wondrous zealous for the laws and press them hotly, they frame
their mischief by a law as the Prophet speaks, Psalm. 94.20. they pretend
nothing so much for their deadly hatred against others that are innocent as
that they do not obey the law. This was Hamans outcry against Gods people in
his time, Est. 3.8, These keep not the kings laws; And of Daniels adversaries
against him, Dan. 6.13. He regards not thee o king, nor the decree that thou
have signed. And of those lewd fellows of the baser sort which we read of,
Acts 17.5, 7. against Paul and the brethren with him. These all (say they) do
contrary to the decrees of Caesar. Whereas I say to color their malice against
God and his people they seem zealous for the law and for the Magistrate; Let
the Magistrate make laws that tend most directly to the honor of God, that
concern the weightiest matters of Gods law (as our gracious Iehosaphat has
done for the observation of the Sabbath, for the punishment of swearing, for
the suppressing of the multitude and disorders of alehouses, the very chief
nurseries of all profanesse and impiety) these laws you shall find they have
no zeal for at all; they will never count a man the worse subject for breaking
of them; they count it a most odions thing for any man (yea though he be an
officer that is bound by his oath to do it) to seek or urge the execution of
these laws against any offender. And so much may serve for that part of my
application which is more general.

The other part I must direct to you of this Town and Congregation more
specially. And yet not so to them of this Town as if I thought none of you
that hear me were to be blamed for these faults that I shall now reprove but
only they of this Town; but because my self have discerned them and been
grieved and troubled in my soul for them in this place more then in any other.

But before I begin this part of my application, let me (by way of preface)
Esa. 58.1. Observe four points in that charge. 1. Cry aloud, it must be done
feelingly and with affection. 2. Spare not, it must be done without partiality.
3. Lift up thy voice like a trumpet, it must be done zealously and vehemently.
4. Show my people their transgressions and the house of Jacob their sins, it
must be done plainly and particularly. The other place is 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. I
charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ who shall judge the quick and
dead at his appearing, and in his kingdom: preach the Word, be instant, in
season, and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and
doctrine. Observe three things in this place. 1. That this duty of our
ministry is twice pressed upon us, reprove, rebuke. 2. That we are charged to
be instant in it (...) stand much upon it. 3. With what a charge this is
pressed upon us, verse 1. As if he should say, Thou can never answer it unto
God, and unto Jesus Christ at the day of judgment, if thou do it not. Ye see
what a commission and charge we have and that there is nothing more pertinent
to our ministry, then plainly and roundly to reprove sin. If we see any
sin among you, and discover it not, reprove it not, the Lord tells us
plainly, Ezekiel. 3.18. that he will require your blood at our hands. But if we
discharge our duty this way, though you will not be reclaimed and leave your
sin (as I fear many of you whose sin I shall now reprove will not) yet we
have delivered our own souls, as the Lord tells us, verse 19. Yea the Lord
observes this in the false Prophets as a chief note of an unfaithful
Minister, Lam. 2.14. They have not discovered thine iniquity unto thee, says
he. Howsoever therefore you take it, you see we must do our duty. And of sundry
of you, I make no doubt but you will be ready to say of that which I shall
deliver unto you out of Gods Word, against any of your sins, as good Hezekiah
did in the like case, 2 King. 20.19. The Word of the Lord is good, Whatsoever
is taught me by good warrant of Gods Word though it be never so much to my
reproach and shame is good, and I will receive it and yield unto it. And indeed
if you yield to Gods Word and reform your selves in those things that shall be
reproved by it, the reproof that shall be given will be nothing to your
reproach but to your credit, and honor rather. For so says the Holy Ghost,
Pro. 25.12. As an earing of gold and an ornament of fine gold; so is a wise
reprover upon an obedient ear. As if he should say, No Jewel can so much
adorn and beautify a Christian, as this will do, when he can receive and
submit himself to the word of reproof, that is wisely given and by good
warrant of Gods Word. And upon this ground I will now proceed.

Of this Town my self can say that I have known the time, when it did shine
as a light to all the country, and was famous among the Churches of Christ for
the religious observation of the Sabbath day. And to this day (blessed be God)
for the means of sanctifying the Sabbath by the public ministry in our
Church assemblies, I dare say it is little or nothing behind any other Church
in the country. And of many of the people also I may say that they do as
diligently frequent them; and our Congregations on the Lords day both in the
forenoone and afternoon too, are as full and populous as can lightly be found
in any other place. And yet for all that by many amongst us the Sabbath is as
much profaned in all the three branches of the commandment touching the right
observation of it, which I told you of the last day, as it is (I think) in any
part of all the country besides.

The true worshippers (says our Savior, Ioh. 4.23. shall worship the father
in spirit and in truth; for the father seeks such to worship him. And on the
other side he tells us, Matthew. 15.8, 9. that they who when they seem to
worship God have their hearts far from him, worship him in vain. It is but a
mock worship when men will seem to serve him and have no heart to it at all.

And against this first branch we have many amongst us that do transgress
notoriously. Many that frequent our Church Assemblies on the Sabbath day
ordinarily and constantly, seem to be hearers of the Word upon that day, yet
make open profession when they are here that they have no delight in it, as
the Prophet speaks of them in his time, Jeremy 6.10. they have no heart to it
at all. You shall hardly come into any Church upon a Sabbath day where you
shall see so many sleepers old and young, yea such as would be thought to be
of chief credit among their neighbors not for moral honesty only but even
for religion too. And this I have (to my grief) heard many strangers observe
and wonder at.

Object.
I know many of you will be apt to say, Is that such a matter for a man (an
ancient man especially) to be a little sleepy and drowsy some times? And that
it is not well done of me thus openly to disgrace men for their weaknesses and
infirmities.

Answ.
But to such I answer, First, I do not publish or lay open any man's secret or
private faults. I speak of a sin that is public and open to the
Congregation. Of a sin of which it may be said as the Prophet speaks, Esa.
3.9. They declare their sin as Sodom they hide it not. And it is the Apostles
rule, 1 Timothy 5.20. Them that sin thus rebuke openly. Secondly, I speak of a
sin that is so grown into fashion here, in so common and general use, that
no man seems to count it any shame at all to him to do it. Were they ashamed
(says the Prophet, Ier. 8.12.) nay they were not at all ashamed neither could
they blush. Thirdly, I speak of a sin that (together with the profaneness of
the children in laughing out and sporting and fighting in the Church ordinarily
every Sabbath day) is a great blemish to our Church assemblies, and such as may
provoke the Lord to say of them as he does of those, Esa. 1.13. The Sabbaths,
the calling of assemblies I cannot away with, it is iniquity even the solemn
meetings. 4. To be overtaken with drowsinesse and sleepiness sometimes even
in the Church even at a Sermon may well be an infirmity, specially in an aged
man. And I were much to blame, if I should censure any man for this rigorously.
I know well the Apostles rule, Gal. 6.1. If any man be overtaken with a fault
(a frailty and infirmity, he means) ye that are spiritual restore such a
one, in the spirit of meekness, considering thy self least thou also be
tempted. And what man is there that is not subject to natural infirmities? But
if thy sleeping were only an infirmity, thou would not be so pleased with
thy self in it; it would trouble thee more: thou would by standing up and
rowzing thy self strive against it; thou would count it a kindness in thy
neighbor that sits next thee to jogge thee and waken thee, yea thou would
pray to God for help and strength against it. I know it is the ordinary plea
that is made for many foul sins, the drunkard will say so too; It is but my
infirmity. Call thou these infirmities? I tell thee there is a damnable
weakness and infirmity. The Lord speaking to Jerusalem who was now become an
imperious whorish Woman says Ezekiel. 16.30. How weak is thy heart? It was a
damnable weakness. There is a spiritual spirit of infirmity, Luke 13.11. The
Devil has made thee so weak that thou can resist no temptation, that thou
art as unable to stand against temptation as the chafe is to withstand the
power of the wind, Psalm. 14. It is a cursed infirmity when thou art so weak
as that thou can not cease from sin, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 2.14.
But the Apostle speaking of the frailties and infirmities that were in
himself, and the rest of the faithful, Romans 7. and 8. Gives us four notes
whereby a sin of infirmity may be known from a reigning sin. The first is
in the fifteenth Verse of the seventh Chapter. What I hate (says he) that do
I. He was is convinced in his judgment that it was a sin, and therefore
hated it; so can not thou say of thy sin. The second is Verse 19. The evil
which I would not, that I do. His will the purpose and resolution of his heart
was against it. Knowing his weakness he armed himself aforehand against it,
by purposing with himself to take heed to himself that he might not fall into
it, as David did, Psalm. 39.1. I said, I will take heed to my ways that I sin
not with my tongue, I will keep my mouth as with a bridle. He strove against it
by prayer and all other good means; so can not thou say of thy sin. The
third is Verse 24. O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the body
of this death? He was much troubled and grieved when he was overtaken with it,
it was a great burden to his soul; so can not thou say of thy sin. The
fourth and last is, Romans 8.1. They that are in Christ Jesus, walk not after
the flesh. It is not their custom and ordinary practice to do so; so can
not thou say of thy sin. No no, I assure thee; to sleep ordinarily a great
part of the Sermon while (as many of you use to do) nay to sleep at all in
the Church without shame, without fear, without stirring up your selves; and
striving against it, is more then an infirmity: it is certainly a gross
sin. And God will judge thee a prophaner of his Sabbaths that do so,
though thou come to Church never so diligently. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths and
reverence my Sanctuary, says the Lord twice to his people Levit. 19.30.26.2.
God will never account thee a keeper of his Sabbaths that show no more
reverent respect unto his Sanctuary. I tell thee there is a reverence due from
the greatest man in the world, unto the Lords Sanctuary; in three respects. 1.
In respect of the people and servants of God that are met there to worship him.
Despise ye the Church of God? says the Apostle 1 Cor. 11.22. 2. In respect of
the holy Angels who are then chiefly present with Gods people and have a charge
to attend them when they are assembled together to worship God, both to be as
a guard unto them, as also to be witnesses and observers of their behavior
then. This was tipified by the figures of the Cherubins that were carved round
about upon the walls of Salomons Temple as we read 1 King. 6.29. And more
plainly taught us by the Apostle 1 Cor. 11.10. For this cause (says he in the
congregation) ought the woman to have power on her head (that is, her veil
which is a sign of her husbands power and superiority over her) because of the
Angels. 3. In respect of the Lord himself who is in a special sort present
there where his people are assembled to worship him. Where two or three are
gathered together in my Name, (says our Savior Matthew. 18.20.) There am I in
the midst of them. And can thou then call it thine infirmity to show no more
reverence in such a presence, to sleep at a Sermon ordinarily without fear,
without shame, when thou know that all these eyes are upon thee? When the
people of God and the holy Angels of God, yea the Lord Himself do all look
upon thee and behold thee? And so much shall serve to be said in reproof of
that fault which is committed against the first branch of the commandment.

Levit. 23.2. a holy convocation, as if it were nothing else, as if the whole
day were to be spent at Church and in keeping of holy assemblies. And indeed
that place proves well that as much time should be spent on that day in Gods
public worship as the convenience, and edification of the Church will well
permit. And for this we have the example of our blessed Savior who though he
was able to spend the day in private duties of piety a thousand times better
then ever any other man was; and though also the Church assemblies that he had
then to go to, were never a whit better but worse a great deal then ours are;
yet it is said Luke 4*16. His custom was to go to the Synagogue to the Church
every Sabbath day. And yet though (as I said before) our Church assemblies be
as well frequented in this Town by many as in any other place, and though
there be never a Popish recusant amongst us; yet shall you hardly find in any
place more Atheist recusants, more that do seldom or never come to Church,
that do so ordinarily and constantly serve the Devil in the Alehouse when we
are serving God here in his house, then are to be found in this Town.

Israelites did keep holy day to the golden calfe. Of them it is said Exodus
32.6. That they sat down to eat and to drink and rose up to play; and Verse
17. It is said that in their sporting and playing they kept such a shouting and
noise as Moses when he heard it wondered what it should mean. And surely
amongst our youth such a shouting and hollowing may be heard as a man would
think there were some Bull or Bear baited in our streets every Sabbath day.
Has God threatened to burn that Town with unquenchable fire where men are
allowed to do the work of their callings upon the Sabbath day (as you have
heard out of Ier. 17.27.) and do you think he can endure to see his Sabbath
or any part of his Sabbath spent in ryoting and disorder? Specially, so openly
and with so high a hand? No no be not deceived. God will not be mocked; he
hates ryoting on the Sabbath, much more then he does working on the Sabbath.
As is plain by Esa. 58.13. Where in one verse he names and forbids twice
the following of our pleasures as the chief profanation of the Sabbath day.

I know some of you will think this to be great indiscretion in me to preach
thus against childrens faults.

But to these I have two things to answer?

believe the Scriptures, and were not Atheists in heart when you read in 2
Kings 2.23, 24. what befell the children of Bethel; you would be of my mind.

Secondly, In speaking of these faults in the youth I do not so much Exodus
20.10. I tell thee thou art to answer for the breach of the Sabbath that is
committed by any stranger thou receivest into thy house, and much more then for
that that is done by thine own child and servant. When Nehemiah saw how the
Sabbath was profaned in Jerusalem by buying and selling of victuals, it is said
Nehemiah 13.17. he contended with the Nobles and Governors of Judah, and
blamed them for it. And be ye sure God will one day contend with you
(whosoever you be) that have authority and power to redress these things, and
do it not; he will charge you with all this. We have heard of a ruler of the
Synagogue, Luke 13.14. that could not see the people do that which he thought
to be a profanation of the Sabbath, without great indignation. O that our
Magistrates and inferior officers, that our parents and masters of families
had but some of his zeal for the Lords Sabbath, that they could not without
indignation see or hear of the profanation of it? Then should we (doubtless)
have no such buying and selling, such loading and traveling; no such disorder
and hooting in our streets; no such ordinary absenting from the
Church Assemblies; no such sleeping and snorting in our Church on the Sabbath
Day as we ordinarily have.

Lecture CXXXVII. On Psalm 51.7. Ian. 5. 1629.
IT follows now that we proceed to prove that the two last points of
goodness that I told you are to be found in some hypocrites, are likewise in
themselves very good things, and never a whit the more to be misliked, because
they are found in some such men.

And for the fourth of them. To love the sincerity and purity of Gods holy
religion and worship; and to hate idolatry with all false worship, is certainly

For the first of these. No man is to be blamed for desiring to see warrant
Deuteronomy. 12.32. What thing soever I command you observe to do it, thou shall not
add thereto, nor diminish from it; that is, neither do more nor less than I
have commanded; that charge (I say) concerns the matters of Gods worship
principally. And how highly this pleases God when we do nothing to worship
him by, but that only that he has given us direction for in his Word, is
evident by the reason of the second commandment, Exodus 20.5, 6. Where the
Lord calls them that will observe that commandment, and will worship him
only according to his own direction, and not after the will and inventions of
men, (which is indeed the very sum of all that that God requires of us in
that commandment) he calls them (I say) such as love him; and promises to
show mercy unto them even unto the thousand generation. And on the other side,
he calls the transgressors of that commandment, such as dote on
will worship, and on that service that is done unto him according to the
inventions of men; he calls them (I say) such as hate him, and threatens to
visit that sin of the fathers upon the children to the third and fourth
generation. Yea the Lord has so far forth liked this sticking to the purity
of his worship, and refusing to admit any mixture of humane corruptions with
it, in any man where he has seen it, that he has been wont to reward it
even in them that have been no better than hypocrites. For this we have a
plain proof in two notable examples, first of Rehoboam, and then in his son
Abijah after him. Of Rehoboam we read 2 Chronicles 11.17. that so long as he
walked in the ways of David and Solomon (that is, maintained the purity of
Gods worship, and received no mixture of idolatry with it) he was strong and
prospered. And of Abijah it is said, 2 Chronicles. 13.9 -- 1^. that in the great
battle he fought against Jeroboam, he grounded his hope of victory on
nothing so much as this, that Jeroboam had corrupted Gods worship, so had not
be, but he had maintained the pure worship of God which he had in his Word
prescribed, without any mixture or corruption at all. And accordingly God gave
him a wonderful victory, and the kingdom prospered under him all his days,
as you shall find from Verse. 17. to the end of that Chapter. And yet if you
look into 1 King. 15.3. you shall see that neither of these two men was any
better than an hypocrite.

And on the other side, for a man to hate all idolatry and every thing that
belongs to it or proceeds from it, is not to be blamed as a fault in any
man, nay it is a very good thing and highly pleasing unto God. You shall see
this made evident unto you out of Gods Word in four particulars.

Moses, of whom we read Exodus 32.20. that he took the golden calfe which
Aaron and the people had made, and burnt it in the fire, and ground it to
powder, and strawed it upon the water, and made the Israelites to drink it.
The second is of Josiah, of whom we read 2 King. 23.4, 6. that he burnt the
very vessels that were made for Baal and the grove, and stamped it to powder,
and cast the powder thereof upon the graves of the idolaters. And this zealous
hatred he showed not against the monuments of that idolatry only that had
been committed in the worship of false gods, but even against the monuments
also of Ieroboams idolatry which was committed in the false worship of the true
God; as you shall see Ver. 15. Moreover the altar that was at Bethel, etc. And
thirdly, of Hezekiah we read 2 King. 18.4. that he did more than so, and is
highly commended of God for it. For he did not only remove the high places, and
break the images, and cut down the groves, but he brake also in pieces the
brazen serpent which Moses had made, and called it (in scorn and contempt)
Nehushtan, a piece of brass; and all because the people had burnt incense unto
it, they had abused it unto idolatry.

And why did they thus? Might not these goodly images have been retained still
for the adorning and beautifying of the Temple? Might not the matter of them,
and of the vessels that were used in the service of idols (being doubtless
many of them of gold and silver, as is plain, Deuteronomy. 7.25.) and the wood and
timber of the groves have been reserved and put to some good use, must they
needs thus be burnt and stamped into powder? Alas what hurt was there (would a
natural man say) in the images or groves; specially in the gold or silver, or
wood of them? All the hurt was in them that did abuse them to idolatry, in the
things themselves there was no hurt at all. But specially what reason had
Hezechiah to use the brazen Serpent so, that was first of divine institution,
and might have been profitably retained (one would have thought) for
historical use to keep in remembrance the better that wonderful work of God
in curing his people that had been stung with fiery Serpents by looking up unto
it?

Surely, Answ.
besides other reasons that concerned them especially, both Moses, Josiah, and
Hezekiah did this to show their detestation to idolatry, and thought they could
never have showed their detestation to it sufficiently if they had not done
thus. And see how highly the Holy Ghost commends Hezekiah upon this very
occasion, and for this thing, Verse. 5 and 6 of that Chapter.

Why but (you will say) may things that are of divine institution (as the
brazen Serpent was) be rejected by us, Object.
because Idolaters have abused them?

I answer, Answ.
No, if by divine institution they be to continue and remain. We may like
never the worse of the Word or Sacraments, because Popish Idolaters do abuse
them both. While that divine cure was to be done upon. Gods people that were
stung with fiery serpents, the brazen serpent was by divine institution a holy
and sacred thing. After that time there was not by divine institution any
holiness in it at all. If God had after that ordained that it should be kept,
though but for historical use, as he did for the pot of Mannah, Exodus 16.33.
and for Aarons rod, Numbers 17.10. Hezekiah would not have broken it to pieces,
though the people had abused it to superstition and idolatry never so much, he
would have showed his detestation to their Idolatry some other way. It had
been indeed long retained in the Church (even from the days of Moses until
Hezekia^s time) as a monument of Gods mercy to his people, but without any such
commandment of God as the other were, and therefore when it became a stumbling
block and occasion of idolatry, it was lawfully removed.

Secondly, God has in his Word commanded his people to show this detestation
Deuteronomy. 7.25, 26. where the Lord not only commands his people to burn the
silver and golden images of their gods, and charge them to take heed of
desiring any of that silver, or of that gold, or of bringing any of it into
their houses; but he gives this for the reason, Thou shall utterly detest it,
and thou shall utterly abhor it, for it is a cursed thing. As if he should
say, any idol set up by idolaters, we must utterly detest and abhor it, for
it is a cursed thing; and if any of Gods people receive it, it will make him a
cursed thing like unto it, as the Lord speaks in that place. Ye see what a
strange preciseness this way God requires of his people; he would not have us
so much as to name an idol without expressing our detestation to it. Make no
mention of the name of other gods (says the Lord Exodus 23.13.) neither let it
be heard out of thy mouth. He would have us do what lies in us, that the very
names, the terms and phrases that idolaters have used might be utterly
abolished and remembered no more. Thou shall destroy the names of them out of
that place, says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 12.3. And the Lord promises this as a great
mercy to his Church, Hos. 2.17. I will take away the names of Baalim out of her
mouth, and they shall be no more remembered by their names. And according to
this commandment we read that when the children of Reuben came to take
possession of certain cities of the Amorites that had borne the names of their
idols, it is twice said of them in one verse, Numb. 32.38. that they changed
the names of those cities and gave other names unto them.

Through thy precepts (says David, Psalm 119.104.) I have gotten
understanding, therefore I hate every false way. As if he should say, So soon
as ever Gods people have gotten any saving knowledge of the truth, they grow to
a dislike and hatred of Idolatry and false worship presently. Two places only
I will name for this though I might do many. The first is that Esa. 30.22.
Where after the Lord had spoken of the effectual calling and conversion of his
people in the two former verses, he mentions this as the first fruit and
work whereby it should show and declare it self. Ye shall defile also (says
the Lord) the covering of thy graven images of silver, and the ornament of thy
molten images of gold, thou shall cast them away as a menstruous cloth, thou
shall say unto it, get thee hence. As if he had said, Thou shall loath them and
show utter detestation unto them. The other place is Ezekiel. 11.18. where when
the Lord had promised that he would gather his people again into Israel and
give them a new spirit and a new heart, And they shall come thither, says he;
And what is the first thing they shall do when they come thither? They shall
take away all the detestable things thereof, and all the abominations thereof
from thence. And what means he by these detestable things and abominations
(the abolishing whereof should be the first thing they would do after their
second conversion?) Surely their idols as you shall find the same Prophet
interprets himself, Chap. 7.20. 37.23.

Iehu unto whom the Lord promised, 2 King. 10.30. that his children should sit
upon the throne of Israel to the fourth generation, because of that zealous
detestation he had showed unto the Idolatry of Ahab; And yet it is evident
both by the next verse 31. and by Hos. 1.4. that therein his heart was not
upright in him.

You see then (beloved) that no man is to be blamed for the hatred he bears
unto popery, and to all kind of idolatry; no no, our general coldness and
luke-warmenesse this way is much to be blamed rather. And if we did zealously
love the Lord and his Gospel indeed, we could not choose but hate all popery
more then we do. And the world is foully deceived in judging the preciseness
or strictness of any man in this kind, to be a certain sign of hypocrisy in
him.

In all things that I have said unto you (says the Lord, Exodus 23.13.) be
circumspect and wary. And I say unto you swear not at all, says our Savior,
Matthew. 5.34. Yea it is a good thing for a man to make conscience of that that
has but the appearance of evil. Abstain from all appearance of evil, says
the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. 2 He that makes not conscience of the least thing
that he knows to be a sin and forbidden of God, makes not conscience of
any sin beause it is sin, and forbidden of God. This is the Apostles
reason, James 2.10, 11. Whosoever shall keep the whole law and yet offend in
one point; that is, wittingly and willingly give himself liberty to do so, he
is guilty of all. For he that said, do not commit adultery, said also, Do not
kill.

That is true (will you say) every man must make conscience of the least thing
that he knows to be a sin; Object.
neither would any man blame them for doing so; But this is their odious
hypocrisy that they make more sins then God has made, they must be so
precise and scrupulous (forsooth) in indifferent and lawful things; in such
things as wiser men and godlier men then they make no scruple of at all This
singularity of theirs, this judging and condemning by their example the
practice of other men, is the thing that proves them to be hypocrites, and
makes them so odious to all men as they be.

To this I have three things to answer. Answ. 1.
First, The things that they are so scrupulous in, and which they dare not do
may be in their own nature not indifferent but unlawful and sinful, yea
well known unto them to be so, though both thy self, and others that are no
whit inferior unto them, but far beyond them in knowledge and grace, do
think otherwise of them. There may be difference in judgment even between
godly and good men; and one may see that to be a sin which another man (every
whit as good as he) cannot be persuaded to be so. The Apostle Paul and those
that joined with him, Galathians 2.12, 13. knew it was a sinful and unlawful
thing to withdraw and separate themselves from eating and conversing with the
believing Gentiles in the presence of the Jews and for fear of offending
them; though neither Barnabas nor Peter (men no whit inferior to them in
knowledge and grace) could discern it to be so. Christians may not condemn or
judge one another to be hypocrites, for their difference in judgment in these
smaller matters. Who art thou (says the Apostle, Romans 14.4.) that judge
another man's servant? To his own master he stands or falls.

Secondly, Answ. 2.
It may well be that some men (even some good men) are (through want of
knowledge, and weakness of judgment) righteous over much, and make scruple of
those things which no law of God binds them to make scruple of. Else Solomon
would never have said, Eccl. 7.16. Be not righteous over much, neither make
thy self over wise. Such a one was he of whom the Apostle speaks, Romans 14.2.
Another that is weak eats herbs. As if he should say, It was his ignorance
and weakness of judgment, that made him so scrupulous and fearful to eat
any thing which by the ceremonial law (which was now abrogated) had been
forbidden. But no man must be despised or judged to be an hypocrite because of
this For that is directly against the Apostles rule, Romans 14.3. Let not him
that eats, despise him that eats not.

Thirdly, Answ. 3.
There is no just cause why we should judge or think the worse one of another
either for using or not using our liberty in this case. Because the thing that
is in it own nature lawful and lawfully also used by one man, it may be in
another man a damnable sin to do it. And that upon these two grounds.

I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus (says the Apostle, Romans 14.14.)
that there is nothing (no creature of God) unclean of it self: But to him
that esteems any thing to be unclean to him it is unclean. Why will you
say, Can the opinion of man make any thing clean or unclean, lawful or
unlawful? No, not in it own nature, but to himself it may. For a man to do
any thing that he doubts to be unlawful is a damnable thing. He that
doubts (says the Apostle, Romans 14.23.) is damned if he eat, because he
eats not of faith. For whatsoever is not of faith is sin. The conscience of
a man (though it be deceived though it be erroneous yet has a binding power;
and it is a matter of great danger for any man to go against it. All men must
seek to inform their conscience aright by the Word of God which is the only
true rule to guide our conscience by. Let every man be fully persuaded in his
own mind, says the Apostle, Romans 14.5. But though it be a sin for a man
not to seek to have his conscience rightly informed and instructed by the
Word; yet is it a double sin in him to do any thing against his conscience. If
thou therefore see a man (who is otherwise conscionable in all his ways)
scrupulous and fearful to do that which thou know and art fully persuaded
he may lawfully and ought to do, pity him, inform him, instruct him, and
labor to bring him out of his error, but scorn him not, hate him not,
malign him not for it.

All things are lawful for me (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.12) but all things
are not expedient; all things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought
under the power of any. And certainly this is the thing that restrains many
a good man from the use of sundry recreations which he does not doubt to be
lawful in themselves, because he finds his own weakness to be such as he
cannot use them without receiving much hurt by them. And this would restrain
many more from them, if they had that care of their own souls as they ought
to have.

Applic.
To conclude therefore this first branch of the point we have in hand. If thou
see any man that loves the word; that uses constantly prayer in his family;
that seems to be a strict observer of the Sabbath day; that hates popery,
that is strict and precise even in the smallest things. If thou see (I say)
any such a one to be a drunkard, or an unclean person, or unjust in his
dealings, or careless of his Word; or a busy body; or negligent in his
calling; hate these things in him (in Gods name) nay hate them in him, more
then in another man, because he makes so good a profession, and because his
sin brings more reproach upon the Gospel then another man's would do. But
take heed thou hate him not because of his profession, because of any of those
good things thou discernest in him. For if thou do, thou will be found to be
a hater of God and of his grace, and near unto that sin that can never be
pardoned; which the Apostle calls, Hebrews 10.29. A doing of despite to the
spirit of grace. And what comfort can thou have either in life or death, if
thou be a hater of God, if thou do despite unto the spirit of grace? What
remains for thee when God shall open thine eyes and cause thee to see thine
own estate but a certain fearful looking for of judgment (as the Apostle
speaks there, ver. 27.) and of fiery indignation which shall devour the
adversaries, the adversaries of God, the haters of God. O it is a fearful
thing to hate any man for his goodness, take heed of it I beseech you. As we
have no surer note that we are translated from death to life, that we are in
the state of grace then this, if we love the brethren, as the Apostle teaches
us, 1 John 3.14. If we can love a disciple in the name of a disciple, as our
Savior speaks, Matthew. 10.42. so can we have no certainer a sign that there
is no grace in us but we are in the very gall of bitterness and bond of
iniquity, as the the Apostle speaks, Acts 8.23. then this, when we hate the
brethren, when we hate a disciple a professor in the name of a disciple and
professor, even for this very cause because he professes goodness.

I know every man will say, he hates no professor for his profession nor for
any good thing that is in him, but only for such faults as I named which they
find to be in them. And so the cursed Jews could say for themselves, John
10.33. For thy good works we stone thee not, but for thy blasphemy. Whereas
indeed they hated him only for his good works. And so it is certain there
have been always many in the world yea in the Church too, that have hated a
disciple even in the name of a disciple. Cain hated Abel, because (says the
Apostle, 1 Ioh. 3.12.) his own works were evil and his brothers righteous.
And David says of himself, Psalm. 38.20. that he had many adversaries for this
very cause because he followed the thing that was good. And our Savior tells
his Disciples, John 15.19. that the world should hate them for this very cause
because they are not of the world, but he has chosen them out of the world.
Whereby it is plain that the most that hate the professors of religion hate
them not for any of their faults but only for the goodness that they make
profession of. O take heed (beloved) that thou be none of those. And I will
give thee three notes to discern this by.

First, If thou did hate and dislike them only for their faults and not for
They cast iniquity upon me (says David, Psalm. 55.3.) and in wrath they hate
me. This casting of iniquity upon professors and aptness that is in men to
surmise and report evil of them without cause, argues a deadly hatred not to
their faults, but to their persons and profession.

Secondly, If thou did dislike or hate them for their faults only, then thou
Thou hate them that are good, and love them well enough that are naught, as
the Prophet speaks of lewd men in his time, Mic. 3.2. And therefore it is
evident thou hate them not for their faults, but for their goodness only.

Thirdly and lastly, If thou did hate them only for their faults, thou
would I beheld the transgressors and was grieved (says David, Ps. 119.158.)
because they kept not thy word. But thou have no greater joy then to hear and
speak of the faults of professors, and to blaze them abroad as far as thou
can; yea thou art apt to glory in the advantage thou have gotten against
religion by it, Like those that David complained of, Ps. 38.16. When my foot
slippeth, then they magnify themselves against me. And therefore it is evident
thou hate them not for their faults, but for the goodness that is in them.

And thus have I finished the first branch of that point that I instanced in
touching the good things that may be found in many an hypocrite. I have showed
you that though all these five things may be found in some that are no better
then hypocrites, yet are they all very good things for all that, and such as
God is highly pleased with.

Lecture CXXXVIII. On Psalm 51.7. January 19. 1629.
IT follows now that we proceed unto the second branch of the point (which
is indeed the maine thing I aimed at in propounding it unto you) to show you
that though all these be very good things in themselves, yet can no man that
has them, find any sound comfort in them, till he be in Christ. For a man
may have these good things in him and yet be in a most woeful case, he may
perish everlastingly for all that. Further proof I need not bring for this,
then that which you have already heard, that every one of these five good
things have been found in some that have been no better then hypocrites. And
every hypocrite certainly is in a most woeful case, he can have no sound joy
nor comfort in him. The joy of the hypocrite is but for a moment, says the
Holy Ghost, Job 20.5. and 8.13, 14. The hypocrites hope shall perish, his hope
shall be cut off and his trust shall be a spiders web. As if he should say, He
may for a time bless himself in his estate by reason of these good things he
finds in himself, he may have some hope and confidence in himself that he
shall go to heaven, and in this hope he may find some comfort and joy; but if
he be an hypocrite, if his heart be unsound this hope and joy of his will
not last, it will fail him, when he shall have most need of it. When the hour
of tentation shall come fearefullnesse will surprise the hypocrite, as the
Prophet speaks, Esa. 33.14. And though in some respect the case of the open
profane man be worse then his; he dishonors God more and sins with a
higher hand and with more contempt of God, and does also more hurt to men by
his example then the hypocrite does; in which respect God uses in a more
exemplary manner to plague him in this life, then he does the hypocrite; and
has also prepared for him in hell a greater measure of confusion and torment
then for the hypocrite. She set her blood (and murders says the Lord, Ezekiel
24.7, 8. and that that is said of murder may be said of beastly filthiness
also, and of all other sins that are committed impudently and with a high
hand) she set her blood (says the Lord) upon the top of a rock (and cared
not how many were eyewitnesses of it) she poured it not upon the ground to
cover it with dust (she did not desire to have it concealed and hidden from
any) that it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance. As if he should
say, The sins of profane men so desperately and impudently committed, do use
to provoke God unto furious vengeance even in this life. And for their portion
in hell, the Prophet speaking of such men, Esa. 5.11, 12. says verse 14. that
for them hell will enlarge her self, and op^n her mouth without measure.
Although (I say) that in these respects the case of the profane man be worse
then the hypocrites; yet is the hypocrite also, and every thing that he does
most odious unto God. The ^ncense which they offered was an abomination unto
him (as the Lord speaks, Esa. 1.13, 14.) their new moons and their sabbaths
and their solemn assemblies (all good things in themselves and commanded of
God) his soul hated, they were a trouble to him, he was weary to bear them.
Yea the more good things the hypocrite does the more odious he makes himself
unto God. The hypocrites in heart (says Elihu, Job 36.13. not the gross
hypocrites only and such as whose life discovers them to be so, but the most
close and secret ones if their hearts be false and unsound) heap up wrath.
Yea in some respects certainly his case is more woeful then the case of the
most profane man both in this life, and in the life to come also.

How can this be? Object.
(will you say) can the profane man's case be worse then the hypocrites both in
this life and the life to come also (as you have taught us now) and yet the
hypocrites case be worse then his, both in this life and in the life to come?
Are not these propositions directly contradictory, and therefore impossible
that both of them should be true? Answ.
I answer, No. But as the sins of the one are in one respect greater and in
another lesser then the sins of the other are; so the Lord in the
infiniteness of his wisdom and power can and will make this possible which
to our shallow understandings seems to be most impossible. And this we are
sure of that both these propositions that seem so contradictory are
undoubtedly true because God has in his word taught us both. What he has said
touching the open profane man you have heard before; and that the hypocrites
case is in some respects worse then the state of the most profane man both in
this life and in the life to come is evident by these two proofs. First, in
this life he is hardlier brought to the sight of his sin and to repentance
for it, without which there is no possibility of salvation then the profane
man is. The Publicans and Harlots go into the kingdom of God before you;
says our Savior to the Pharisaicall hypocrites, Matthew. 21.31. See an example
of this also in Judas. And secondly. In the life to come because they have
sinned against greater means and against greater light, they shall receive the
greater damnation, as our Savior speaks, Mat. 23.14. It shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom (a far more profane people then they were)
in the day of judgment then for thee, says our Savior unto Capernaum, Matthew.
11.24. In which respect we shall find, there is no one sin that our Savior
did more bitterly inveigh nor denounce more woes against, then he did against
hypocrisy; and though the Pharisees were guilty of many other foul sins, as
appears by that which our Savior says of them, Matthew. 23.3. Yet he taxes
them for no sin so much as for their hypocrisy, Matthew. 23.13. and in many
other places. So that (to conclude this point) I must say unto you all as our
Savior spoke unto his Disciples first of all in a mighty audience Luke 12.1.
Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees which is hypocrisy. As if he had
said, ye that are the Disciples of Christ and profess Religion above all
other men, and above all other sins beware ye of hypocrisy; content not
your selves with any good things that be in you, with any good things that ye
do, that you love the word, that you use to pray, that you observe the
Sabbath, that you hate popery and all will worship, that you are strict in the
smallest things; but take heed that you do these things in truth and
soundness of heart; remember that hypocrisy is the leaven of the Pharisyes,
it will make all that you do sour and unpleasing unto God.

Alas (will you say) we know this is most true; Object.
but how shall we know whither we be hypocrites or no? If the hypocrite may
go so far, as you have taught us out of Gods word he may; we see just cause
to fear we are no better then hypocrites. And I know well that some of you
that are freest from hypocrisy, ever since you heard me prove how far the
hypocrite may go, have longed much to hear this, how the true Christian may
be distinguished and known from the hypocrite in these things; and what it is
wherein he goes further then any hypocrite in the world can go.

Now to give satisfaction to these good souls. Answ. 1.
First of all I say that this is a good sign thou art no hypocrite because
thou art so fearful least thou should be one, because thou art so desirous
to get good evidence to thy self, that thou have more in thee then an
hypocrite can have. To fear our selves least our hearts should be unsound is
part of that poverty of spirit of which our Savior says Matthew. 5.3. that they
are blessed that have it in them. David suspected his heart to be unsound when
he prayed as he did Verse 10. Create in m^e a clean heart o Lord and renew a
right spirit within me. And so did all the elect Apostles when Christ having
told them, that one of them should betray him there was a false hypocrite among
them, every one of them was exceeding sorrowful and cried to him Matthew. 26.21,
22. Lord is it I?



They made many prayers (as the Prophet speaks of them Esaias 1.15.) they used
to pray often yea they did spread forth their hands in prayer, and seemed to
pray with great zeal and fervency of spirit; but their hands were full of
blood. As if he should say, they were savadge bloud-suckers, and most cruel
oppressors of poor men. So speaks the Lord likewise of them, Esa. 58.3.4.
that used much, not ordinary prayer only, but extraordinary fasting, and
prayer, yea seemed in their fasts to afflict their souls, and to be much
humbled; but even then when they seemed so devout and holy, they lived in
strife and debate, they used to smite with the fist of wickedness. Though they
seemed to be very religious yet were they most malicious men. Now they that
live in gross and notorious sins (oppression malice uncleanness,
drunkenness, cousenage, and such like) though they make never so good a
profession (as in all ages the Church has had many such) are most palpable and
gross hypocrites. Neither ought they to be ever a whit the better thought on
for their good profession. Let such either leave their gross sins, or
forsake their good profession; or else the better profession and show of
goodness they make, the more odious they will make themselves both to God and
man.

Luke 13.14, 15. he could not without great indignation see Christ heal, and
the people come to be healed by him on the Sabbath day; and our Savior calls
him hypocrite for this. Why? Because he could not see the Sabbath broken
without great indignation? Or because he (out of his ignorance) took that to
be which was not indeed any breach of the Sabbath day? No verily our blessed
Savior would never have passed so sharp a censure upon him for either of these
causes. But Christ knew that not his zeal for the Sabbath, but his malice
against him was the true cause of his indignation; and therefore the Evangelist
Verse 17. Calls him Christ's adversary. This malice against Christ he durst
not (for fear of the people) make open show of. He finds no fault with
Christ's healing but with the peoples traveling to be healed on the Sabbath
day. He cloaketh his malice against Christ with this ^aire pretense of his
great zeal for the Sabbath day. This also is most gross and palpable
hypocrisy, yea the most odious kind of hypocrisy that can be, when men shall
use Religion as a cloak to hide sin, when men shall profess goodness of
purpose that they may the more safely and with the less suspicion commit any
sin. And yet many such vile wretches have been in all ages and are still to
be found in the Church of God. One example only I will give you for this
(though I might give many) which happily you may out of your own knowledge
parallel in these times. And that is that woman of whom we read Pro. 7. who
though she were a most impudent Whore, yet could say to the fool whom she
entised unto lewdness, Verse 14. I have peace offerings with me, this day have
I paid my vows. She did use to perform not the ordinary duties of Religion
only, and such as God did enjoyne and require of all men (such as peace
offerings were) but to show more then ordinary zeal and love to piety she made
vows also unto God (which was a free and voluntary service whereunto by no
express law she was tied) nay and she duly paid her vows too. How could her
husband or any body else ever suspect this devout and religious woman to be a
Whore? Nay, this was certainly one of the strongest arguments she used to
allure the young man to folly, and to cloak, and hide from him her extreme
filthiness that she seemed so Religious and good a soul. For this was the
effect of her speech unto him, though the love I bear to thee above all men in
the world, make me desire to enjoy and take my pleasure with thee, yet I would
not have thee think me to be a profane and lewd, and common strumpet; No, I
fear God, love Religion, and goodness, I thank God, I have peace offerings
with me, this day have I paid my vows. Would any honest heart think it
possible that one, that lives so lewdly should seem so Religious; yea that
they should seem so Religious for this purpose only, that they might live so
lewdly? Yet you see so it has been, and so it is with too many in these
days; they would not come so constantly to Church as they do, but only for
this cause that they might more freely and with less suspicion continue the
dishonesty and lewdness that they use at home. These persons certainly take
Gods Name in vain, in an high degree, and let them be sure The Lord will not
hold them guiltless that take his Name in vain, Exodus 10.7. specially in so
foul and odious a manner as this is. To every such a one I may say as the
Apostle does in another case unto Ananias Acts 23.3. God shall smite thee thou
whited wall that usest to cover thy rottenness with this vernish. How soon he
will smite thee, or in what manner or degree he will smite thee is known only
to himself, but certainly God shall smite thee thou painted wall that make
Religion a cloak for any lewdness whatsoever it be. The sacrifice of the
wicked is abomination (says the Holy Ghost Pro. 21.27.) How much more when he
brings it with a wicked mind? The hearing of the word, and receiving of the
Sacrament, and prayer that any lewd man uses is abominable unto God; how much
more the hearing and receiving and praying of these men that do these things
to this end that they may sin the more freely?

Now these two sorts that I have already named are so gross and palpable
hypocrites as many of you will easily discern your selves to be better then
they. The other three are closer hypocrites a great deal, yet hypocrites too
and odious unto God.

The third sort of those I told you of that had very good things in them and
yet were no better then hypocrites, were such as though they lived not in
gross sins, yet the Religion and goodness they made profession of had no
power in them to reform their hearts and lives. Of this sort were they I told
you of, out of Ezekiel. 33.30, 32. 1. They came constantly to the Ministry of the
word. 2. Even to the Ministry of Ezekiel who did not use to preach Placentia
unto them but was wont plainly and roundly to reprove their sins, they
shunned him not, nor liked the worse of him for that. 3. They took great
delight to hear him, his preaching was to them as a very lovely song of one
that has a pleasant voice and can play well on an instrument. 4. They
professed great love to his person. 5. They used when they had heard him, to
talk and confer together (not against him as some translations reads it,
but) of him and of his Doctrine (as the most and best interpreters read it, and
the context plainly shows it ought to be read so) 6. Lastly, they liked his
Ministry so well that every one called upon and did what he could to draw his
friends and kinsfolk to go with him to it. Is it possible (will you say) that
these could be hypocrites that went thus far? Yes verily they were no better
then hypocrites for all this.

How may that appear, will you say? By what note does the Holy Ghost discover
them to be so? Surely by this that he says twice of them, They hear thy words
(says he Verse 31.) but they will not do them; and again Verse 32. They
hear thy words but they do them not. They would not be ruled by the word,
they would not obey nor practice what they heard, they would not reform their
hearts and lives by it. And the Lord instanceth in one particular corruption
that they would not leave Their heart goes after their covetousness still
says he. He charge them not with any gross act or work wherein they showed
their covetousness (neither Usury, nor bribery, nor oppression, nor extortion)
but with mental covetousness only. Because they did not practice what they
heard, nor reform their lives according to it; because the word that was so
faithfully preached unto them and which they did hear so constantly and with
such delight, had not power to bridle and mortify the very lusts and
affections of their hearts, therefore they were hypocrites. Mark this
(beloved) and take it to heart every one of you. In those six good things that
the Holy Ghost has noted in Ezekiels hearers none of you go beyond them, most
of you come far short of them. 1. You frequent not the Ministry of the word
so constantly as they did. Many of you that did constantly frequent our
ministry at the first while it was somewhat new and fresh and strange unto you
like those Athenians Acts 17.21. are grown weary of your diligence that way.
Your goodness (as the Lord said of Ephraim Hos. 6.4) Was as a morning cloud,
and as the early dew it is gone away. I speak not of such whom distance of
place, or shortness of days, or foulness of weather and ways, or infirmity
of their bodies do keep away; but of such only whom nothing but their decay
of affection and love to the word has made so slack in coming to it. 2. You
cannot so well brook a faithful ministry that will plainly reprove your
sins as they would. 3. You hear us not with that delight and alacrity but
more heavily then they did. 4. You show not that love to our persons as they
did to his. 5. You use not to confer together of that you have heard as they
did. 6. You labor not to draw and win others to the love of the word as they
did. But in that brand and character of an hypocrite that the Holy Ghost
sets upon them the most of you do match them fully; You hear our words,
but you will not do them; our Ministry is of no power at all with you to
reform either your hearts or lives. Many of you have by hearing of us gotten
store of that knowledge that the Apostle speaks of 1 Cor. 8.1. of that
knowledge that puffs you up and makes you proud censurers and contemners of
other men, and even of your teachers too. You come still to our Ministry not
as Disciples to learn and be guided by us, but only as judges to hear what we
can say and pass your censure upon us. And that which the Apostle speaks in
another sense James 4.11. may fitly be applied to sundry of our hearers, Thou
art not a doer of the law, but a judge. None of us are good enough to teach
you; but you will hold opinions and do things in your practice which no
Minister of God that ever you heard does approve of. Even such of you as hear
us constantly, and praise our preaching, and seem both to love us well and to
admire and magnify our Ministry, as Ezekiels hearers did, yet will you not
practice or do any thing that we teach you. I will not speak of the
unreformed lives of ordinary hearers. But is it not strange that some of our
hearers of best note should be implacable and irreconciliable? A property
whereby the Apostle describes them Romans 1.31. whom the Lord has given up
unto a reprobate mind. And implacable toward whom? Even toward their
brethren that are of the same judgment and profession with themselves. I
cannot stand upon this or any other particular wherein our hearers declare
themselves to be like Ezekiels hearers, They hear our words, but they will not
do them. But this I affirm confidently unto you all, that you can never get
assurance that you have upright hearts, that you are any better than
hypocrites, till you can find that every truth that you hear in the Ministry
of the Word has a divine power and authority in your hearts; And though you
be not able in all things to do as you are taught, but notwithstanding you
have been constant hearers of the Word a long time, yet there remains a
deal of corruption still in you that you cannot mortify and subdue; yet you
dare not resist any truth that you hear; but you yield unto it, make
conscience of it, desire and endeavor to obey it, and put it in practice.
David comforted himself in this testimony of his uprightness, Psalm 119.161.
His heart stood in awe of Gods Word, he durst not do any thing against it.
And Paul commends the Thessalonians for this, 1 Thessalonians 1.5. that his
Gospel and Ministry came unto them, not in word only, but in power: And 1
Thessalonians 2.13. that it wrought effectually in them. And he says of them,
2 Thessalonians 3.4. That he was confident in the Lord concerning them, that
they both did and would do the things that he commanded them. Nay, he says
expressly (2 Corinthians 2.9.) that herein stands the trial of a true
Christian and sound-hearted hearer, To this end also (says he) did I write (as
I did, and reprooved you so sharply for your connivance toward the incestuous
person) that I might know the proof of you, whether you be obedient in all
things. As if he had said, He is no true-hearted hearer nor sound Christian,
that will not be obedient to his teacher in all things.

True (will you say) they whom the Prophets and Apostles did teach were bound
to obey them in all things, Object.
because they could not err in their Ministry; but must we therefore obey you
in all things, who we know may be miscarried in your Ministry, sometimes
through want of judgment, sometimes through passion?

I answer, Answ.
No verily, thou must not obey us any further than we bring the Word of the
Lord for every thing that we teach you, to do or to leave undone. As we must
take heed what we teach Eccles. 12.9. and look that we have good ground in
Gods Word for all that we teach you, and perform the work of our Ministry
not without fear and trembling, 1 Corinthians 2.3. So you must take heed what
you hear, Mark 4.24. You must prove all things that we teach you, 1 Thessal.
5.20. Examine the proofs we bring out of Gods Word, whether we allege them
rightly or no, as they of Beraea did, Acts 17.11. We may none of us deny you
liberty to come and question with us about any thing we teach, if you
understand it not, nor can conceive how it should be found, seeing our Savior
allowed that liberty even to his hearers, Matthew. 13.36.19.10. Luke 18.26. John
16.19. Provided always you do it in humility and reverence to the holy
function of your faithful Teachers; that you do it as disciples, not as judges
and controllers of your Teachers. But whatsoever we teach you by good warrant
of Gods Word, if you obey it not, if it be not of divine authority in your
hearts, certainly you will be found to be no better than hypocrites. For, while
we do thus, thou art charged to obey us as much as if we were Prophets or
Apostles either. Obey them that have the rule or oversight of you (says the
Apostle, Heb. 13.17.) and submit your selves. And even of the Scribes and
Pharisees (while they sat in Moses chair and taught nothing but the doctrine
of Moses) our Savior gives a charge to his Disciples, Mat. 23 3. All
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do. And our Savior says of
the meanest Minister that he sends while he does thus, Luke 10.16. He that
hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises me. And the Apostle
1 Thessalonians. 4.8. He that despises, despises not man, but God. To conclude
therefore this third note, By your care to obey and practice what you hear,
take notice of the soundness of your own hearts. It is the note that our
Savior gives us to try uprightness and hypocrisy by, Mat. 7.24.26.
Whosoever hears these sayings of mine and does them, is like the wise man
that builds his house upon a rock; and every one that hears these sayings
of mine and does them not, is like the foolishman, that built his house upon
the sand.

Lecture CXXXIX. On Psalm 51.7. Febr. 2. 1629.
IT follows now we proceed unto the two last defects that the Holy Ghost
notes to have been in the goodness that has been found in any hypocrite.

Romans 2.22. Thou that abhorrest idols (says he) do thou commit
sacrilege? Who would not have taken these Jews that did thus abhor idols
and were so zealous against idolatry for right good men? But see how they
discovered the falsehood of their hearts, they hated one sin, but not another;
idolatry, but not sacrilege. And yet sacrilege was a gross sin as well as
idolatry; and such a sin as God straightly charged his people to take heed
and make conscience of, as well as of the other. When the people were to bring
their first fruits unto God, he commanded them to make this solemn
protestation, Deuteronomy. 26.13, 14. I have brought away the hallowed thing out of my
house. As if he should say, I durst not keep any part of that which is
dedicated to God, and consecrated for the maintenance of his worship; I have
not eaten thereof in my mourning. As if he had said, what want soever I have
been in, how woeful and distressed soever my state has been that way, yet
durst I never relieve my necessity by robbing God of his part, by appropriating
to my self, or employing to mine own private use, any thing that did belong
unto him. And yet you see those Jews that seemed so zealous against idolatry,
they abhorred idols, had no zeal against sacrilege at all; they were so far
from abhorring it, that they lived in the daily practice of that sin; and
thereby discovered the hypocrisy of their hearts. As alas many in our Church
have also done, not only in the beginning of our reformation, but at this day;
they seem to be very zealous in the hatred of Popery, but of sacrilege, of
spoiling the Church and robbing God of his part of that that was given to him
and dedicated to the maintenance of his service, they make no scruple, no
conscience at all. Take another example of this in Herod, Mark 6.20. Who would
not have hoped well of him, and highly commended him too, when he saw him being
a King; 1 Frequent constantly such a Ministry as John Baptists was; 2 Hear
him so gladly with such delight and joy, as it is said there he did; nay 3 he
feared John and observed him, reverenced and highly esteemed of him, and that
upon this ground too, because he knew him to be a righteous and a holy man. 4.
He was much reformed also by John's Ministry, he did many things, left many
sins, performed many good duties in obedience unto John's Ministry, the
Doctrine of John had great power and authority in his heart and life; and yet
the Holy Ghost has detected him to have been no better than an hypocrite in
all this. Why what was the thing that did discover the falsehood and hypocrisy
of his heart? Surely this, that though he went thus far, and though he left
many of his sins, yet there was one sin as gross as any of those that he had
left, which he could not forsake, he could not leave the incest he had lived in
with his brothers wife; nay in the end he could not endure (though a great
while he did) that John should speak against that sin. Only one other example
I will give you for this, that the living in any one sin though he forsake all
the rest, and forsake them also out of conscience and obedience to the Word (as
it may seem) though the sin he lives in be nothing so great as those that he
has forsaken, yet even the living in any one sin is sufficient to prove a man
to be no better than an hypocrite. Take an example for this in John, O how
far did he go? 1 He destroyed the idolatry of Baal and rooted it quite out of
Israel, as it is said of him, 2 King. 10.28. 2 He did it with a mavelous
zeal, even with the zeal of God, Come with me (says he to good Iehonadab, 2
King. 10.16.) and see my zeal for the Lord. 3 He did it (as it may seem) out
of obedience to the Word which he bare a most reverent and religious respect
unto, as you may see in sundry passages of his story 2 King. 9.25, 26, 36, 37.
and 10.13, 17. 4 He did it so, as God himself says of him 2 King. 10.30. that
he had done well in executing that that was right in his eyes, Thou have done
to the house of Ahab (says the Lord there) according to all that was in mine
heart. Yea the Lord promises there to reward him for it, Because of this
(says he) thy children of the fourth generation shall sit upon the throne of
Israel. And yet of this man that went thus far, the Holy Ghost says
expressly, 2 King. 10.31. that he did not take heed to walk in the law of the
Lord with all his heart; that is, he was no better than an hypocrite. How did
that appear? What was it that did discover the falsehood and hypocrisy of his
heart? Surely this, there was one sin that he could not leave; as zealous as
he was against idolatry, there was one kind of idolatry he could not leave. He
hated the idolatry of Ahab, but not the idolatry of Jeroboam. He departed not
from the sins of Jeroboam (says the text 2 King. 10.31.) which made Israel
to sin. Ieroboams idolatry was but a small sin in comparison of Ahabs: so
says the Holy Ghost expressly in the story of Iehoram, 2 Kings 3.2, 3. He
wrought evil in the sight of the Lord, but not like his father and his mother,
for he put away the image of Baal which his father had made, nevertheless he
cleaved to the sins of Jeroboam. Ahab worshipped Baal a false God, Jeroboam
the true God in a false manner. And yet for continuing in this one sin,
though it were nothing so great a sin as that which he had with so great
zeal and detestation forsaken and abolished (for it may appear by many
passages in the story that in the days of Ahab his master, he had been a
worshipper of Baal too) the Holy Ghost (you see) has branded him for an
hypocrite.

Applic.
Learn therefore (beloved) by these three examples, that as you can have no
more sure and sensible a sign of the uprightness of your hearts than this,
when you can find you make conscience of every commandment of God, of one as
well as of another; you make conscience of every sin, of one as well as of
another; you make conscience of every duty God requires of you, of one as well
as of another; there was never hypocrite in the world that went thus far;
Then shall I not be ashamed (says David, Psalm 119.6) when I have respect
unto all thy commandments; So is this also certainly a note of a false and
hypocritical heart, when a man (in matters that God has in his Word commanded
or forbidden) will take and leave at his own pleasure; some commandments and
doctrines of God seem to have divine authority in his heart, but others none
at all; some sins he hates and dares not commit them, others he cannot
leave, but says of some one sin as Naaman did in another sense, 2 Kings
5.18. In this thing the Lord pardon thy servant; some duties God requires of
him he will constantly perform and practice, but some other he does wholly
neglect. This man certainly cannot have an upright and sound heart. Nay, that
man that does not make conscience of every known sin, and of every duty that
he knows God requires of him, did never abstain from any one sin, nor
perform any one duty of conscience toward God. Whosoever shall keep the
whole law (says the Apostle, James 2.10.) and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all. He has not kept any one commandment, he has not done any duty
with an honest heart, and so as God accepts of, if he wittingly give himself
liberty to offend in any one point, be it never so small a point of Gods law.
So says the Lord when he had reckoned up many sins, Ezekiel. 18.10. He that
does the like to any of these things, that man (says he Verse. 11.) does not
any of these duties. As if he had said, He does not any duty that God has
commanded of conscience toward God, that gives himself liberty to live in
any one sin.

Lay this to your own hearts (beloved) every one of you; and labor to find
this one note, that there is more in you than can be in any hypocrite. I do not
say he is an hypocrite that commits any one sin, or that fails in any
one duty that God has commanded. For, Who can say I have made my heart clean,
I am pure from my sin? says the Holy Ghost, Prove. 20.9. and In many things
we offend all, says the Apostle, James 3.2. But if thou wittingly give thy
self liberty to live in any one sin, be it great, or be it small, certainly
thy heart is not upright within thee. When David had said, Psalm 119.1.
Blessed are those that are upright in their way; he adds Verse 3. Surely
they work no iniquity. As if he had said, They commit no sin wittingly and
willingly. If thou would know that thou art upright in the way, and so in a
blessed and comfortable estate, try thy self by this, Is there no sin that
thou allowest thy self in that thou art a worker of? If thou be afraid to
live in any sin, and can desire of God as David did, Psalm 139.24. Lord
see if there be any wicked way, and lead me in the way; As if he should say,
If I do any thing to offend thee, if I live in any sin, Lord discover it
unto me that I may leave it: If thou can say of every sin that thou know
to be a sin, as David does Psalm 119.101. I have refrained my feet from
every evil way; As if he had said, I strive and endeavor to eschew every
known sin. If thou can say specially of that sin which by nature or
custom thou have been most inclined to, as he does likewise, Psalm. 18.23. I
kept my self from mine iniquity; As if he should have said, I am most
watchful over my self against that sin specially, I complain most unto
God, and beg strength of him against that sin (as I doubt not but many a
soul here can say all this of himself) then I dare boldly say unto thee for
thy comfort, thou art far enough from hypocrisy; And though thou have heard
that many an hypocrite has had much goodness in him, thou have that in thee
that never hypocrite had, and thou may say as David said there, Psalm 18.23.
I am upright before him. And so much shall suffice to have been said of this
fourth note of hypocrisy, of this fourth defect that is to be found in the
goodness that has been in the best hypocrite; his obedience is not
universal.

The fifth and last is this, Admit that some hypocrite might be found There is
a generation that are pure in their own eyes, says Solomon, Proverbes 30.12.
In all my labors (says Ephraim, Hosea 12.8. they shall find no iniquity.)
admit (I say) that this were so; yet is there this defect in the goodness of
the best hypocrite in the world, he does nothing with a good heart. Every way
of man (says Solomon, Proverbes 21.2.) is right in his own eyes, but the Lord
pondereth the hearts. As if he should say, Man is apt to flatter himself and
to think passing well of every thing he does, but the Lord in weighing, and
valuing the actions of men, has an eye always to this, with what heart every
thing is done. When the counsels of the hearts shall be made manifest (says
the Apostle, 1 Cor 4.5. As if he had said, With what intent and purpose of
heart men have done that which they did) then (and not before) shall every man
have praise with God. Now no hypocrite did ever any good thing with a good
heart; he abstaineth from no sin nor performs any good thing he does, out
of obedience and love to God, but out of some by respect or other. Take a
proof for this in the example of those Jews that we read of, Zachary 7. for
seventy years together during the whole time of the captivity, they kept a
solemn fast four times in the year. Was not this a singular good thing? And
yet the Lord plainly tells them that the most of them in doing of this were
no better then hypocrites. And why so? will you say. What defect was there in
this goodness of theirs? What was it that did discover the falsehood and
hypocrisy of their hearts, in this holy and good action? Certainly no outward
thing; nothing that the eye of man was able to discover (as in the four former
sorts that I have spoken of) the Lord that pondereth the hearts he found that
they had not done this with a good heart. As he tells them, verse 5. When ye
fasted and mourned (says he) in the fifth and seventh month, even these
seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me, even unto me? Which interrogation
has the force of a vehement denial, As if he had said, Ye did not at all
fast unto me. And he enforces this denial with a most emphaticall
repetition, appealing withal to their own conscience, Did ye at all fast unto
me, even unto me? No you did not and that your own consciences do know full
well. To whom then did they keep these fasts? Surely to themselves as it
appears in the next verse. They kept them not to please the Lord, to show
their love and obedience unto him, to testify their obedient submission unto
his correcting hand, and their grief for offending and provoking him, their
unfeigned desire to recover his favor. But they kept them merely out of
self-love, to please and give contentment to themselves. They grieved for the
destruction and burning of the Temple and City which was in the fifth month as
you may read, Ier. 52*12, 13. and for the slaughter of Gedaliah, which was in
the seventh month as you may read, Ier. 41.1, 2. upon whose death followed the
utter dispersion of the remainder of the Jews; they mourned and took on for
the ruin of their state and sighed under the burden of their present misery;
they thought their fasting to be a satisfactory work, that would merit Gods
favor. But for offending God by their sins they mourned not, they did not in
their fasts by unfeigned repentance and reformation of their lives seek
atonement and reconciliation with God; and therefore the Lord says they did
not at all fast unto him but unto themselves only. Here then you see is
another note of difference between that goodness that seems to be in the
best and most glorious hypocrite; and that which is in the weakest and poorest
Christian under heaven. The hypocrite in the best duties that he performs,
serves not the Lord at all, but himself only; in seeming to serve the Lord,
he still seeks himself only and not the Lord. Thus God taxes the
hypocrisy of Israel, Hos 10.1. Israel is as an empty vine, he brings forth
fruit to himself. As if he had said, All good things that he does, he does
them out of self-love, he seeks himself only in them. In doing of any
good he seeks. 1 Either the good opinion of men and the advantage that may
grow to him thereby, as the hypocritical Pharisees did, All their works they
do to be seen of men, says our Savior, Matthew. 23.5. Or 2 out of hope to
merit somewhat of God and to bind him thereby the rather to bear with him in
some other things, as those hypocrites did, Esa 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted
say they and thou see it not; Or 3 at the best he does it to avoid Gods
wrath which he knows is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, as those did which the Prophet speaks of, Psalm.
78.^4. When he slew them then they sought him, and they returned and inquired
early after God. On the other side the true hearted Christian, even the weakest
and poorest soul amongst them; though in eschewing evil and doing good he
have some respect to himself, the fear of hell and of the wrath of God due to
sin and the desire he has to escape damnation has great force to restrain
him from sin, Knowing the terrors of the Lord (says the Apostle, 2
Corinthians 5.11.) we persuade men; and the hope and desire of the reward that
God has promised to a godly life has great force to persuade him unto
godliness. Moses had respect unto the recompense of reward, as the Apostle
teaches us, Heb. 11.26. Yet the chief thing that moves him to hate sin and
to love goodness, is the desire he has to please and honor the Lord. Every
good thing he does, he does it to the Lord; he serves God in that he does; the
maine intent of his heart in doing it, is that he may be accepted of God and
please him. It is said of Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35.1. that he kept a passover unto
the Lord; As if he had said his care was that it might be so administered and
received, as God might be pleased in it. And the Apostle professes of
himself, 1 Thessalonians. 3.4 that in preaching his care was so to speak, not as
pleasing men, but God which tries our hearts. His maine care in preaching was
not to do his task, to get the credit and reputation of a diligent preacher,
or to obtain a good applause among men, but to preach so as he might please
God and approve his heart unto him. Yea he tells us that even in singing of
Psalms we must look to this, we must sing unto the Lord, Ephesians 5.19. We
must make a melody in our hearts to the Lord. As if he had said, We seek in
that duty not to please our selves or others but the Lord. And that which has
been said of the Sacrament and of preaching and of singing of Psalms must be
understood likewise of hearing the Word, and of prayer, and of every other good
duty we perform either of the first or second table, if our hearts be
upright we must do it as unto the Lord, the maine intent and purpose of our
heart in doing of it must be, to please the Lord and approve our selves unto
him. So the Apostle tells servants that in doing their service unto their
masters, Ephesians 6.5, 7. they must do it as to Christ, as unto the Lord. And
verse 9. he tells masters they must do the same things unto their servants
(a strange speech, but the meaning is that) they also in their carriage toward
their servants in doing the duties of masters must do it as unto the Lord;
that is, both the servants and masters care in their mutual duties one to
another, must chiefly be this, to please and approve themselves unto God. In a
word, The Apostle speaking of himself and of all the faithful, 2 Corinthians
5.9. Wherefore we labor (says he) that whether present or absent, we may
be accepted of him. As if he should say, This is our maine study and
endeavor that while we live, and when we die we may please and be accepted
of him. He that can find this in himself, may be certain that he is no
hypocrite, that his heart is upright within him. This is the reason the Apostle
gives, Romans 14.6. why the faithful should not judge one another, for
indifferent things, He that regards a day, regards it unto the Lord; and
he that regards not a day, to the Lord he does not regard it. As if he
should say, Both he that observes the ceremonial law in that point and he
that observes it not, does it not out of any carnal or worldly respect, but
out of a care he has to please God and fear to offend him, therefore you may
not judge him to be an hypocrite, therefore he has an upright heart. He
that finds this in himself may have comfort in his own estate, and none but
he. Neither can any man find this in himself that the maine end he aims at
in every good thing he does, is to please God unless he does that which he
does out of love unto God. If any man love God (says the Apostle, 1
Corinthians 8.3.) the same is known of him. As if he had said, The Lord
approves and highly esteems of that man. No good thing that we do, can
please God unless it proceed from the love we do bear in our hearts unto
him. He keeps covenant and mercy (says Moses, Deuteronomy. 7.9.) with them that
love him, and keep his commandments. First we must love him, before we can
keep any of his commandments so as we may please him therein. Neither can
any man truly love the Lord nor do any good thing out of love to him, till he
first know that God loves him in Christ. Herein is love (says the Apostle, 1
John 4.10.) not that we loved God, but that he loved us and sent his son to
be the propitiation for our sins.

And thus you have heard it sufficiently confirmed unto you that

Let us now come to the third part I instanced in; that is to say, the
regenerate themselves. In every regenerate man there is true goodness indeed,
and that that far surpasses any goodness that ever was found in any moral
man, or in an hypocrite. Three notable differences you may observe between
them.

First, Though they may do many good things in themselves, yet of them it
Barnabas it is said, Act. 11.24. that he was a good man. Do good (says David,
Ps. 125.4.) o Lord unto them that are good, and to them that are upright in
their hearts. As if he had said, Every upright hearted man is a good man.

The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, Psalm. 147.11. Such as are
upright in their way, are his delight, says Solomon, Pro. 11.20.

Paul in his greatest afflictions. Our rejoicing is this (says he, 2 Cor.
1.12.) even the testimony of our conscience. So did Hezekiah even then when he
thought he should die, Esa. 38.3. Remember now o Lord God I beseech thee (says
he) how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have
done that which is good in thy sight.

But though all this be so, Yet could not the best of Gods servants take any
comfort at all in any goodness that is in them, were it not for this that they
know themselves to be in Christ and reconciled unto God by his blood. God
forbid (says the Apostle, Gal. 6.14.) that I should glory save in the cross
of the Lord Jesus Christ. Make this sure to thy self (beloved) that Christ is
thine, and then may thou find sound comfort in that goodness, that God has
wrought in thee. But it is but cold comfort thou can have in any good thing
that is in thee, or done by thee till thou know thy self to be reconciled
unto God by Christ, rest not in it, trust not to it. For (alas) all our
righteousnesses are as filthy ragge, as the Prophet speaks, Esa. 64.6. And if
our high priest did not bear the iniquity of our holy things (as Aaron did,
Exodus 28.38.) our holiest duties could never be accepted of God, but would be
most loathsome unto him. All our most spiritual sacrifices are acceptable to
God by Jesus Christ, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Pet. 2.5. and through him alone.

Lecture CXL. On Psalm 51.7. February 16. 1629.
Motive 4
IT follows now that we proceed unto the fourth and last of those Motives
which I promised to give you to persuade you to seek without delay to know
that you are through Christ justified in Gods sight. And that is this, That
when a man is once justified then he shall be sure to be sanctified and never
till then. If any man desire to get strength against any lust or corruption
that troubles him most, or to obtain any grace that he stands most in need
of, let him first labor to know that he is justified and that his sins are
forgiven him. That is the only sure way to attain unto both; till a man know
himself to be justified, let him use never so many means, to attain either
of them he shall but loose his labor. I will give you the proof of this;
first in the general by showing you that all true sanctification proceeds
from justification; secondly in both the parts of sanctification; that is to
say, mortification of the old man, and vivification of the new.

sorts of proofs I will give you for this. 1. The inward instrument whereby
the spirit of God works sanctification in the heart of man, the inward
principle and root of all grace, is faith that justifies a man, and makes
known the love of God to him in Christ. 2. The outward instrument whereby the
spirit of God works sanctification in the heart of man is the preaching of
the glad tidings of the Gospel unto him.

For the first. I will give you four plain places of Scripture for the proof
of it.

The first is that speech of our Savior unto Paul, Acts 26.18. where speaking
are sanctified by faith in him. As if he had said, It is faith in Christ, such
a faith as assures a man that Christ is his, and that God is through Christ
reconciled unto him, that sanctifyeth a man and nothing but that.

The second place is Heb. 9.14. Where the Apostle comparing the blood of Christ
with the blood of the legal sacrifices, and having showed in the former verse
that the sprinkling even of that upon the people did work a kind of external
and legal sanctification in them. How much more (says he) shall the blood of
Christ being sprinkled upon you and applied to your hearts by the spirit of
God, purge your consciences from dead works to serve the living God. As if he
should say, so soon as the blood of Christ is sprinkled upon the conscience,
so soon as ever the spirit of God has by faith assured a man that the pardon
which Christ by his blood has purchased does belong unto him, this will
certainly follow of it, his heart and conscience will be purged and cleansed
from dead works, from those works which while he was a natural man dead in
trespasses and sins he lived in, and he shall be enabled to serve God in
newness of life.

The third place for the proof of this is in 2 Pet. 1.4. Where the Apostle
says that by the knowledge of Christ are given unto us exceeding great and
precious promises, that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature
having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust.

Two things are to be observed in these words of the Apostle. 1. How come Gods
people to escape the corruption that is in the world through lust? How come
they to forsake and be preserved from those sins, that both themselves in
times past, and the whole world still (through the strength of our natural
concupiscence) lives in? How come they to be partakers of the divine nature?
How come they to have the Image of God which consists in true holiness and
righteousness renewed in them? Why says the Apostle we attain unto all this,
this change is wrought in us by the exceeding great and precious promises of
God which are given unto us; not by any thing we were able to do, by any
endeavor we could use; by any penance we could put our selves unto; no nor by
the law or judgments of God: but by receiving and believing the exceeding
great and precious promises that God has given us of pardon and mercy, was
this blessed change wrought in us. But then. 2. How came we to have interest
in these exceeding great and precious promises of God? Surely says the Apostle
(Verse 3. And in the very first words of this verse) through the knowledge of
him that has called us to glory and Virtue; that is, through the knowledge of
Christ. By knowing Christ to be ours ( In whom all the promises of God are yea
and Amen, as the Apostle speaks 2 Cor. 1.20.) we come to have Title to all
the exceeding great and precious promises of God.

The fourth and last place of Scripture which I promised to give you for
confirmation of this first point, is that speech of the Apostle Ephesians. 3.19.
Where the Apostle praying for the Ephesians that God would make them able to
know the love of Christ that passes knowledge which was so infinitely great
unto every poor sinner that believes in him as no heart of man is able fully
to know and comprehend it, he gives this for the reason of that prayer that he
made for them, that ye might be filled (says he) with all the fullness of
God. As if he had said, the more knowledge you shall have of the wonderful
love that Christ has borne unto you, the more that you shall be assured of it,
the more you look into it and meditate of it; the more you shall be filled
with all the fullness of God, the more shall you abound in sanctification and
in every saving grace.

Cor. 3.6, 8. where the Apostle having spoken of the fruit of his Ministry in
the hearts of the Corinthians, he tells them; God had made him and his fellow
Apostles able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter, but of the
spirit. As if he had said, by my preaching of the new testament, the new
covenant, the covenant of grace, you were converted, the spirit of God was
conveied into your hearts. And making a comparison between the Ministry of
the law and of the Gospel in the next verses, he calls the preaching of the
Gospel in the new Testament, the ministration of the spirit, that ministry
whereby the spirit of grace is infused into the hearts of men. The other
testimony which I will bring you for this is that of the Apostle Gal. 3.2.
where appealing unto their own consciences, he asks them how and by what
means they first received the spirit of God, This only would I learn of you
(says he) received ye the spirit by the works of the law or by the hearing of
faith? that is, by the hearing of the doctrine of faith, the doctrine of the
Gospel which teaches justification by faith only. And thus have I confirmed
this fourth Motive unto you in the general, that we can never be sanctified
till we be justified first; that the man that desires to amend his heart and
life, must first seek to know that his sins are forgiven, that he is
reconciled unto God in Christ



Faith purifieth the heart; says the Apostle Acts 15.9. It purges out the
corruption that it finds in it, it kills sin wheresoever it comes. Not
all at once indeed, but by little and little; so soon as ever it enters into
the heart, it gives sin the deaths wound so as it shall languish ever
after, and never recover the strength and vigor again that it had before.
Every faithful man has this promise given him of God Romans 6.14. Sin shall not
have dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law, but under grace. So that
the man that knows himself to be in Christ, and so within the covenant of
grace, may go boldly to the throne of grace when he finds himself unable to
subdue any strong lust, and corruption and even ready to be mastered and
overcome of it, nay he ought then to exercise and make use of his faith by
challenging and making claim to this promise of God, and say, Lord thou have
promised that no sin shall have dominion over them that are not under the law
but under grace; and I know that thou art faithful that have promised this,
and able to perform what thou have promised; Lord make good this promise of
thine now unto me, let not this lust and corruption have dominion over me. But
I shall make this plainer to you, and show you what force there is in
justifying faith that assures us of Gods favor in Christ to mortify sin,
by instancing in four of the strongest lusts and corruptions, that the
faithful are wont to be cumbred with all.

The first is covetousness and the love of the world. And for the force that
Abraham and Sarah and some others of whom the Apostle speaks Heb. 11.8, 14,
15. of whom the Apostle says that they willingly forsook their own country,
and all the comforts that they had there, and went willingly (upon the Lords
call) they knew not whither, and had no desire to return to their own country
again, nor were so much as mindful of it, they never thought of it nor
looked back as Lots Wife did, and he tells us plainly it was nothing but
faith, that did thus weane their hearts from the world, and made them so
willing to part with it. See an example of this in Zach^us like wise Luke 19.
Of him we read Verse 2. That he was the chief among the Publicans, and Verse
7. That he was a sinner, a noted and infamous man. And for what sin? Surely
for covetousness, for getting his wealth by extortion and such like unjust
means. And yet so soon as this man had received Christ not into his house
only, but much more into his heart; when he considered and weighed with
himself the wonderful love and goodness of Christ toward him, that was so
vile and unworthy a wretch, how Christ took particular notice of him, and
called him by his name, how he offered himself unsought to, to be his guest
to abide in his house (which was no more then he has done for every poor
soul amongst us that truly believes in him) when Zacheus (I say) saw and
considered this wonderful love of Christ toward him, see what a change it
wrought in him, how it mortified that lust that had so reigned in him before;
he became presently a most liberal man, as you may see Verse 8. both by his
bounty toward the poor, and by his readiness to make restitution to all such
as had been wronged by him. And thus does the Apostle teach us to mortify
this corruption Heb. 13.5, 6. Let your conversation be without covetousness;
and be content with such things as you have, for he has said I will never
leave thee nor forsake thee; so that we may boldly say, the Lord is my helper
and I will not fear what man shall do unto me. As if he should say, If thou
would purge thy heart from covetousness and get strength against it, make
use of thy faith, remember the promises that thou being in Christ, have title
unto. If thou had no body to take care for thee, but thy self thou had
some reason to toil and moile, to carke and care for this world, as thou do,
but being in Christ and having these promises, it is madness for thee to do
it.

A second strong corruption and lust that Gods people are troubled with, is
Luke 17.5. where when they had heard our Savior teach if a brother trespass
against us seven times in one day (and what hope will you say can a man have of
such a one?) yet upon profession of his repentance we must forgive him, and
when they heard him press this with such earnestness as Verse 3. he did take
heed to your selves: As if he should say, I know well how heard and difficult a
thing it is to flesh and blood, that I shall now require of you, but take heed
you do so, your case is woeful if you do not this; the Apostles all of them
with one voice cry unto Christ, Lord increase our faith; As if they had said,
he had need have a great deal of faith, that should be able to do this, and
yet Lord if thou will be pleased to increase our faith we shall be able to do
it. Why? How can a man's faith help him in this case? Surely two ways. First,
if a man would stir up and exercise his faith by considering what the Lord
for Christ's sake has done for him, how he has forgiven him a debt of ten
thousand talents and how apt he is still upon his repentance to forgive him
though he trespass against him more then seven times every day, this will make
a man able and willing to forgive his brother upon his repentance, any wrongs
whatsoever; which are but as a debt of an hundred pence in comparison of that
which God has forgiven him: and make him say to his own heart as we read
Matthew. 18.33. the wicked servant should have said, Should not I have compassion
of my fellow servant, even as the Lord has had pity on me? Therefore the
consideration of that which God for Christ's sake has done for us, is also used
by the Apostle, Col. 3.13. as the strongest motive to make us willing to
forgive wrongs. Secondly, if a man would make claim to that promise that he
being in Christ has just title to, which we find made, Esa. 11.6 -- 9. to all
the subjects of Christ's kingdom, The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, etc.
They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain. The effect of which
promise is this, that all that belong to Christ's kingdom shall have the spirit
of meekness given unto them, and though they were by nature like Wolves and
Leopards and Lions and Bears and Aspes and Cockatrices; that is, fierce and
cruel apt to do hurt and mischief, when once they believe in Christ their
natures shall be quite changed, all bitterness of spirit shall be taken from
them, they shall have no desire to hurt, to be revenged of any that have done
them wrong. If I say a Christian that finds himself troubled with
maliciousness and bitterness of spirit, would in humble and faithful prayer
make claim to this promise and challeng it at Gods hands doubtless he might
have more power over that corruption then he has.

Fear has torment, says the Apostle 1 John 4.18. And there is scarce any one
corruption that the dearest of Gods servants are more subject to then to this
slavish and distrustful fear. In which respect the Lord Esa. 35.4. calls
them such as are of a fearful heart. And upbraideth them with this as with a
great sin, Esa. 51.13. Thou have feared continually every day, because of the
fury of the oppressor, as if he were even ready to destroy. If they hear of
any troubles approaching, of any practices of the enemy either at home or
abroad, their hearts are surprised with strange fears continually every day,
as if the enemy were already entered into their houses and ready to cut their
throats. Alas my weakness is such (says this poor soul) as I shall never
be able to abide such a trial, I shall be apt to deny God or do any thing
when such a day comes. This is too true, and this is my very case will many a
one of you say; and I know it is my great sin to be so fearful as I am, but
how should I help it? How may I be able to mortify and subdue this
corruption? I answer, get assurance by faith that thou art reconciled to God in
Christ, that thy sins are forgiven thee; and that will free thee from thy
fears and make thee strong against them. See an experiment of this in them
that endured as great trials as thou shall ever endure, and felt themselves
before their trial as fearful and weak every whit as thou art; I mean them
that the Apostle speaks of Hebr. 11.33 -- 37. Observe these four things
distinctly in that example. First, How great their trials were, Verse 37. They
were stoned, sawne asunder, tempted, they were slain with the sword, they
wandered about in sheepskins and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted;
tormented. Is it possible that thou can ever be brought to greater trials
than they were? Secondly, How strong and resolute, how void of fear they were
even in this fiery trial, Verse. 35. not accepting deliverance; they had
deliverance, and peace, and freedom from all these miseries offered them, upon
condition that they would yield a little and forsake their Religion, but they
would not accept of it. Thirdly, Consider how weak and fearful they had
been before the very time that they came to this trial, Verse. 34. Out of
weakness they were made strong. Fourthly, Lastly, What it was that made them
thus strong, Verse. 33. Through faith they attained to this strength. The
assurance they had of their reconciliation with God in Christ, and of the
forgiveness of their sins, was that that made them overcome their
fearfulness, and become so strong. And no marvel for all the faithful in
this case have these promises of God to rest upon. 1. That God will certainly
have an eye to them, and a care of them in the worst times that can come. When
he makes inquisition for blood (says David, Psalm. 9.12. when he comes to
visit a land for the murders and other horrible sins committed in it) he
remembers them. And 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of
his Saints. He makes precious account of them. The hairs of their head are
numbered, as our Savior speaks, Matthew. 10.30. and therefore much more their
lives. They shall not lose their lives, unless God shall see that will be most
for his glory and their good. 2. The Lord will certainly proportion their
trials to their strength, and as their trials shall increase, so shall their
strength increase to bear and get through with them. The Lord will give
strength unto his people, says the Prophet, Psalm. 29.11. Fear thou not, for I
am with thee (says the Lord, Esa. 41.10.) be not dismayed, for I am thy God, I
will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the
right hand of my righteousness. And Verse. 14. Fear not thou worm Jacob (thou
that art so base and contemptible in thine own eye) I will help thee, says
the Lord. Yea of all the faithful, those that are now beforehand so fearful
and weak, have most promises of God that he will give them strength sufficient
when the time of trial shall come; Out of weakness they were made strong, as
you heard H^b. 11.34. My grace is sufficient for thee (says the Lord to Paul 2
Cor. 12.9.) for my strength is made perfect in weakness. He gives power to
the saint (says the Prophet Esa. ^0.29.) and to them that have no might he
increases strength. Certainly if Gods people would make use of their faith, in
making claim to these promises of God, and challenging of him in humble prayer,
the performance of them unto themselves, they could not be so tormented with
slavish fears as they are.

The fourth and last corruption that much troubles the best of Gods people, is
the hardness of their hearts; they cannot mourn (they say) nor weep Esa
63.17. Why have thou hardened our heart from thy fe^r^? Now the best way that
any soul can take to cure this stoninesse of the heart, to make it soft and
tender, able to mourn kindly for sin, and to serve God with feeling and
affection, is to get assurance by a lively faith of Gods love to him in Christ,
and of the forgiveness of his sins. Four notable experiments we have for
this, two in the old Testament, and two in the new. The first is that of Gods
people mentioned in Ezekiel. 36.28 -- 31. after that they were become Gods people,
and God was become their God, and he had saved them from all their
uncleanness, as you read Verse. 28, 29. that is, after that they were entered
into the covenant of grace, assured of Gods favor, and of the forgiveness of
their sins; then shall ye remember (says the Lord of them Verse. 31.) your
own evil ways and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your
selves in your own sight for your iniquity and for your abominations. Nothing
has that force to make a man loath himself for his sins, as the knowledge
and consideration of Gods love in the pardoning of his sins, and the
receiving of him into a covenant of grace and mercy, that has been so
extremely unworthy of it. The second experiment of this force of faith to
soften the heart, is that of Gods people whom the Prophet speaks of, Zach.
12.10. that they should mourn as one mourns for his only son, and be in
bitterness as one that is in bitterness for his first borne. And the Prophet
alleges two causes of this. 1. The Spirit of grace that God had powered upon
them; that is, the Spirit of adoption whereby God had assured their hearts of
his favor and love in Christ. 2. The looking upon Christ whom they had
pierced; that is, the weighing with themselves seriously what Christ had done
and suffered for them. And therefore also it is said they mourned for him, they
were in bitterness for him. It is the Spirit of grace and adoption assuring us
of Gods fatherly love to us in Christ, it is the weighing with our selves
seriously how dearly Christ has loved us, that will make us mourn for sin
more than for any thing in the world, all the terrors of the law, all the
judgments of God are of no force to soften the heart, in comparison of this.
The third experiment of this is in Mary Magdalen, Luke 7. Of her we read Ver.
38. that she had a very soft heart, she was able to weep abundantly for her
sins, so abundantly as she could wash Christ's feet with her tears. And what
was it that made her heart so soft? Surely, the knowledge and assurance she had
of Christ's mavelous love to her in pardoning her sins, her so many and so
heinous sins, was that that did it, as our Savior plainly tells us, Verse.
43 and 48. The fourth and last example is that of Peter, of whom we read Luke
22.62. that he had a most soft heart, he was able to weep bitterly for his
sins. And what was it that wrought so upon his heart? That the Holy Ghost
tells us Verse. 61. The Lord turned and looked upon Peter; and Peter remembered
the Word of the Lord, how he had said unto him, before the cock crow thou
shall deny me thrice. When he considered the mavelous love of Christ to him,
that though he had so shamefully denied and forsaken him, yet he was pleased
still in the midst of all his troubles to think upon him, to have care of him,
to turn himself about, and cast a gracious eye upon him, this brought Peter to
remember what he had done, this even broke his heart, and made him weep
abundantly. And surely look what force a true and lively faith had in all these
examples, the same it would have in us, if we did stir it up and make use of it
as they did. The true cause why our hearts are so hard, is this, that either we
have no faith, no assurance of Gods love to us in Christ; or if we have it, we
make not use of it unto this work of softning our hearts. For all that are in
the covenant of grace, reconciled to God in Christ, have this promise given
them of God, Ezekiel. 11.19. which is also repeated 36.26. I will take (says the
Lord) the stony heart out of their flesh, and I will give them an heart of
flesh. And if any of the faithful when they are most troubled with the
hardness of their hearts, could make claim unto this promise, and press the
Lord with it (as he loves to be importuned, as you may see Luke 18.1, 7)
certainly they might have help against it. And so much for the force that
faith has in the first part of our sanctification for the mortifying of sin.
The second part I must leave till the next day.

Lecture CXLI. On Psalm 51.7. Febr. 23. 1629.
IT follows now that I show you likewise the force of justifying faith in the
Galat. 2.20. The life that I now live (As if he had said, The reformed,
religious and holy life, that I now live since my conversion and calling) I
live by the faith of the Son of God, that faith I have in Christ, who loved
me and gave himself for me. As if he had said, This faith that assures me of
that special interest that I have in Christ, of that special love that Christ
has borne to me, is the only cause of whatsoever goodness is in me. And for
the second, that nothing but faith will breed true goodness and grace in the
heart, we have as plain a proof Hebrews 11.5, 6. Enoch had this testimony
given of him that he pleased God, but without faith it is impossible to please
God. As if he should have said, A man cannot please God in any thing that he
does, till he have faith, till he be justified by faith, and reconciled unto
God through Christ. Though the habit of faith and all sanctifying graces which
the Apostle 1 John 3.9. calls the seed of God, be by the Spirit of God
infused into the heart of man altogether, and at one time, yet the act and
exercise of faith, is the first of all, and that that sets every other grace
on work. As the earth, though it be made soft by those showers that fall upon
it in the wintertime, and bring forth some blade of the seed that is cast into
it, yet is it not thereby made fruitful unto man; it never yields any good
and perfect fruit, till it have received the sweet heat of the Sun into the
bowels of it in the spring time; even so is it with the heart of man. It may
be, and is often softened by the judgments of God and terrors of the Law. God
makes my heart soft (says Job 23.16.) and the Almighty troubles me. Even by
the trouble of his mind, and terrors that God disquieted him with, his heart
was softened. And some beginnings also of reformation and goodness have been
thereby wrought in it (such was that confession of sin, and goodly words that
God often wrung from Pharaoh by his judgments, Exodus 9.27. I have sinned, the
Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked; and 10.16. He cries unto
Moses to this effect; Good Moses forgive me, and pray to the Lord for me. Such
was that repentance and reformation of the wicked Israelites that the Prophet
speaks on Psalm. 78.34. When he slew them, then they sought him; and they
returned and enquired early after God. And such is the repentance and goodly
words that many a wretched man in his sickness is wont to utter) thus far
forth the winter-showers and storms of Gods judgments and terrors may work
upon man's heart. But till Christ Jesus the Sun of righteousness, as the
Prophet calls him Mal. 4.2. (like the comfortable and quickening heat of the
Sun in the spring) do shine upon a man and be by faith received into his
heart, it can never bring forth any fruit that is good indeed, and acceptable
unto God. And the true cause why some are fruitful in grace and goodness, and
some other, though they enjoy the same or greater means, yet no grace will
grow in their hearts, nor come unto any perfection is this, which the Apostle
gives 2 These. 3.2. All men have not faith. But though the Lord let this
visible Sun shine upon all men indifferently, upon the reprobate as well as
upon the elect he makes his Sun (says our Savior Matthew. 5.45.) to rise on
the evil and on the good; yet does he not let the Sun of righteousness to
shine into every heart, but to his elect and peculiar people only. The Lord
God is a Sun and shield (says David Psalm. 84.11.) but to whom? To them that
walk uprightly. Unto you that fear my name (says the Lord Mal. 4.2.) shall
the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings. Not that their
walking uprightly and fearing of his name, was the cause that moved God to be
as the Sun unto them, but because it was a mark and note of them whom God
would vouchsafe this mercy unto.

Now if any man shall ask me how faith comes to be the breeder and worker,
and increaser of all true goodness in a man? I answer you two ways.

First, By receiving Christ into his heart, by making Christ his, by uniting
him unto Christ, as nearely and as truly as the members of the body are united
unto the head, and as the branch is unto the vine. By faith we receive Christ
and make him our own, as the Evangelist teaches us, John 1.12. By faith he
dwells in our hearts, as the Apostle speaks Ephesians 3.17. And as it is
not possible, but that heart in which Christ dwells, must needs be renewed,
and have saving grace bred in it. He that abides in me and I in him (says our
Savior, John 15.5.) the same brings forth much fruit. If any man be in
Christ (says the Apostle, 2 Corinthians 5.17.) he is a new creature. As the
living members must needs receive sense and motion from the head, and the scion
sap from the slocke it is ingrafted into. And this is that which the Apostle
teaches 1 Corinthians 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit. As
if he had said, No man can by faith receive Christ, and be united unto him, but
he must needs together with Christ receive the Spirit of Christ also; So till
we be thus united unto Christ, it is not possible for us to have any true
goodness in us. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self (says our
Savior John 15.4.) except it abide in the vine, no more can ye except ye abide
in me. And 6.53. Verily verily I say unto you; except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. I know well that
this union that faith makes between Christ and the soul, is mystical, and
such as the reason of man is not able to comprehend. And so the Apostle
speaks of it. This is a great mystery, says he Ephesians 5.32. But yet you
see this is clearly taught us in the holy Scripture; and this every faithful
soul does (in some measure) feel to be true in his own experience. So soon
as ever thou do truly believe in Christ, and renouncing all other
confidence, do wholly rest and put thine affiance in him, thou have received
Christ, and made him thine own; and so soon as thou have received him, thou
have also with him received into thine heart his holy Spirit, the Spirit of
grace and sanctification, whereby thou art made a new man. He that has the
Son (says the Apostle 1 John 5.12.) has life (that is; the life of grace
here which is the beginning and pledge of that life of glory which he shall be
sure to have in heaven) and he that has not the Son, has not life.

Secondly, The faithful soul by exercising and making use of his faith in
meditating and feeding upon the goodness and love of God toward him in
Christ, and of those promises of God which through Christ he has title unto,
does quicken and increase every saving grace in his heart. And nothing has
that force to quicken and increase grace in us, as this has. The better we
know the love of Christ that passes knowledge, the more assurance we have of
it, the more often, and seriously we think of it, and meditate upon it, the
more we shall be filled with all the fulness of God, that is, with all
spiritual and saving and sanctifying grace, as I showed you the last day out
of Ephesians. 3.19. And the apprehending and believing of the promises of God these
exceeding great and precious promises that God has made to us in Christ has
great force to quicken and increase grace, in the heart of man. By them (says
the Apostle, 2 Peter 1.4.) we are made partakers of the divine nature. O Lord
(says Hezekiah in the prayer that he made after that God had given him a
promise to restore him to life, Esa. 38.16.) o Lord (says he) by these things
(by these gracious promises of thine) men live, and in all these things, is the
life of my spirit, so thou will recover me, and make me to live. As if he
should say, Though I be not fully recovered yet having thy promise for it I am
revived in my spirit; by these promises of thine thy people do live, thy
promises are the life of their spirit. If you ask me what promises of God
they be that are so effectual to breed and quicken grace in the heart of man.
I answer, All Gods promises are very forcible and effectual that way for in
them all Gods mavelous love and goodness toward us is manifested. And these
bands of love as the Lord calls them, Hos. 11.4. have great force to draw the
heart of Gods child unto him. By them thou have quickened me, says David,
Psalm 119 93. But yet there is a special promise which (above all other) is
most effectual this way; and that is, that God has promised to all them that
are in the covenant of grace, that are reconciled to him in Christ, that he
will give them his holy sanctifying spirit. A new heart will I give you (says
the Lord, Ezekiel 36.26, 27.) and a new spirit will I put within you; and I
will put my spirit within you and cause you to walk in my statutes. As if he
had said, He will by his holy spirit work sanctifying and saving grace in his
people. And yet more particularly God has promised, that as wheresoever Christ
came, when he was upon earth, he restored the deaf to their hearing and the
blind to their sight, and the lame to their lims and even the dead to life, as
we read, Matthew 11.5. Yea he made that woman go straight and upright that
had had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years and was so bowed together, that
she could not lift up her self, of whom we read, Luke 13.11, 13. Even so the
Lord has promised to work the same mighty works in the hearts of all his
people, that have by a lively faith received and entertained Christ. The eyes
of the blind shall be opened (says he, Esa. 35.5. that is, they that were
ignorant shall have knowledge wrought in them) and the ears of the deaf shall
be unstopped (they that could not hear heavenly things with any affection or
fruit, shall be made able to hear the Word feelingly and fruitfully) the lame
man shall leap as a heart (they that were before reprobate to every good work,
shall be made able cheerfully and willingly to walk in Gods ways) and the
tongue of the dumb shall sing (they that could not speak of any goodness
before, shall be able to speak graciously) for in the wilderness shall
waters break forth, and streams in the desert, they whose hearts were most
barren before of all goodness, shall be made most fruitful in grace and good
works. Now the promises of God all that are reconciled to God in Christ, all
true believers have just title unto, they are all heirs of the promises of God
as the Apostle calls them, Hebrews 6.17. the promises of God are their
chief inheritance. They are set down in Christ's testament and we may
challenge them as our legacy. And if we would make use of our faith (when we
find in our selves most want of any grace, or are most troubled with the
poverty of our spirits) and lay claim to these promises of God that in Christ
we have so just title unto, certainly we might be far more rich in grace
then we are. Why are we still so blind and so deaf, so dumb and so lame, so
barren and unfruitful? Surely because though God have made us promises to
help us in all these things, we do not stir up our faith to lay hold of
and make claim unto them, and therefore we have so little benefit by them.
That as we read Christ did not many mighty works in his own country,
Matthew 13.58. nay it is said; Mark 6.5. he could do no mighty works there;
and the reason is given, because of their unbeleefe: so it may truly be said,
that the true cause why the Lord has not in all this time wrought more
spiritual miracles in our hearts, is because of our unbeleefe, either we do
not at all believe these promises, or at least we do not stir up our faith,
nor make use of it in making claim unto them and challenging our right in them
as we ought to do. But I shall make this plainer unto you by handling it more
particularly and distinctly, and showing you the force that is in justifying
faith, 1 to breed every saving grace in the heart, 2 to enable a man unto every
good duty.



Judas his was of whom we read, Matthew 27.3. that when he saw Christ was
condemned (and what a gulf of misery he had cast himself into by his sin)
he repented himself) that is wrought thereby. But this will never work
saving repentance in a man, it will never cause him to turn unto God and seek
reconciliation with him; no no, it will make a man hide himself from God and
fly from him if possibly he could, as Adam did, Genesis 3.8. It is the
apprehension and persuasion the heart has of the mercy of God and of his
readiness to forgive him upon his repentance and turning to him, and that
only that gives a man a heart to repent and turn unto God when he has
offended him. As the thing that made the servants of Benhadad seek unto Ahab,
1 Kings 20.31. with sackcloth upon their loins and ropes about their necks
(whereby they professed their sorrow for offending him and that they were
worthy to die for it) was this only thing that they had heard the kings of
Israel were merciful kings. This is the Motive that good Hezekiah used to
persuade Israel unto repentance, 2 Chronicles. 30.6. Turn again unto the Lord God
of Abraham Isaac and Israel (he puts them in mind of the covenant God had
made with their fathers) and he will return unto you. And that also which the
Prophet uses to the same purpose, Esa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way
and the unrighteous man ( the man of iniquity the worst man that is) his
thoughts, and return unto the Lord and he will have mercy upon him, and to
our God for he will abundantly pardon. Thus does the Apostle likewise, James
4.8. persuade unto repentance, Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh unto
you. And (to conclude) this was the maine thing that drew the prodigal unto
repentance even the consideration of the fatherly affection that he knew
remained in his father toward him though he had so hainously offended him, as
we may perceive by his words* Luke 15.18. I will arise (says he) and go to my
father and say to him, father I have sinned against heaven and before thee and
am no more worthy to be called thy son. And certainly if the vilest sinner
among you all, could thus be persuaded of Gods merciful disposition and
readiness to forgive you, upon your repentance, you would come in and not
stand out in rebellion against him as you do.

The second grace wherein the force of faith appears is the true fear of
Luke 12.5. Fe^re him which after he has killed, has power to cast into hell,
yea I say unto you fear him. But the apprehension and persuasion a man has of
Gods mercy and goodness toward him in Christ, is much more effectual to make
a man afraid to offend God; and all fear that is wrought without this is but a
slavish tormenting fear. Fear has torment, says the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 4.18.
It is not a child-like and saving fear. There is forgiveness with thee (says
David, Ps. 130.4.) that thou may be feared. And Hos. 3.5. They shall fear
the Lord and his goodness in the latter days. And certainly (beloved) if you
were any of you by a lively faith assured of the forgivenes of your sins, and
of Gods mavelous goodness toward you in Christ you would be much more
fearful to offend him, then the most of you are.

Thirdly, The third grace wherein this power of faith appears is Obedience.
hedge of thorns that the Prophet speaks of, Hos. 2.6.) be able to stop a man
from going on in an evil way; but a willing obedience shall a man never be
able to yield unto God, till he have faith. When David, Psalm. 26.1, 2. makes
profession of his integrity even unto God and comfort himself against the
malice of his enemies by that testimony that his conscience gave him that he
had walked in his integrity, he had walked in Gods truth, his honest and good
meaning he knew would have yielded him small comfort (...) had not guided his
says by the direction of Gods Word; nay he (...) God to examine and try him
whether it were not so; he gives verse 3. this for the reason and cause of
this care he had to walk uprightly and to follow the direction of the Word in
all things. For thy loving kindness (says he) is before mine eyes. Nothing
has that force to make a man upright and constant in a Christian course, as
the knowledge and consideration of the mercy and loving kindness of God
toward him in Jesus Christ. I delight to do thy will o my God, (says David,
Psalm 40.8.) and thy law is within my heart. Till a man know God to be his
God, reconciled unto him in Christ, he will never delight to do his will, his
law will not be in his heart, he will never heartily affect it. It was the
love of Christ that constrained Paul to do him so diligent and faithful
service in his ministry as he did, 2 Corinthinas 5.14. the assurance he had
of Christ's mavelous love to him, in dying for him, made him force himself to
do him the uttermost service he was able, and to think he could never do
him service enough. And where the Apostle speaks of the mavelous obedience
of Abraham to every thing that God commanded; when God bad him get him out of
his own country and from his kindred and come into a land which he would
show him, he left all presently; when God ^ad him circumcise himself, and
every male that was in his family, he did presently upon the selfsame day,
though himself were then ninety nine years old, Genesis 17.23, 24. and he had
in his house three hundred and eighteen valiant men at that time, Genesis 14.14.
when God bad him cast out him son Ishmael out of his house (though he loved
him dearly) yet he did immediately, Genesis 21.14. Nay when God bad him
sacrifice with his own hands his son Isaac of whom it was said in Isaac
shall thy seed be called, as the Apostle speaks, Hebrews 11.18. yet he was
ready to do it and that presently too, as you may see, Gen 22.3. But what was
it that made Abraham so obedient to God in all things, even in such hard
commandments as these were? Surely says the Apostle, Hebrews 11.8, 17. he
did all these by faith. He knew God was his God, and his exceeding great reward
as he promised to be, Genesis 15.1. He was strong in faith, as the Apostle
says, Romans 4.20. and therefore was so ready and cheerful in his obedience
unto God. Certainly it is our want of faith (beloved) that makes every
commandment of God, so grievous unto us, if we had more faith and assurance of
Gods favor in Christ, we could not be so slack, and backward in our obedience
as we are.

We love him (says the Apostle, 1 John 4.19) because he first love us. And
when once a man is assured by faith, that God has so loved him he cannot
choose but love him again and serve him out of love and not out of fear
only. Faith works by love, says the Apostle, Galathians 5.6. As if he had
said, The first and chief fruit that it puts forth, and whereby it shows
that life and efficacy that is in it, is this, it breeds in the heart that
has it, an unfeigned love unto God. Yea proportionable to our faith and the
assurance we have of Gods love, to us, will our love unto God be. Many sins
are forgiven her (says our Savior, Luke 7.47.) for she loved much, but to
whom little is forgiven the same loves but a little. Certainly (beloved) the
true cause why the most of us bear no more love to God and goodness, then we
do, is this that either we have no faith, no assurance of Gods love to us, in
the pardon of our sins, or else we have known but few sins by our selves
and have been but a little humbled for sin, and therefore we are not much
affected with the mercy and love that God has showed to us in the pardon of
our sins.

David was wont to prepare himself to Gods public worship. I will go to
thine house (says he, Psalm 5.7.) in the multitude of thy mercies. But I
will instance (and that briefly too) but in two particular duties; that is to
say, the hearing of the word and prayer.

As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the Word (says the Apostle, 1
Pet. 2.2, 3.) that you may grow thereby: if so be ye have tasted, that the
Lord is gracious. As if he should say, Then and not till then, you shall be
able to do it. God has made many promises to such as hear his Word. General
promises. 1. He will ever assist this ordinance and work with it, Matthew
28.20. Go teach all nations, and lo I am with you to the end of the world. 2.
That he will save the souls of his people by this ordinance, James 1.21. Esa.
55.3. 3. That by this ordinance he will begin grace and convert the soul,
Psalm 19.7. 4. That by this ordinance he will increase and perfect grace
where he has begun it. Unto you that hear shall more be given, says our
Savior, Mark 4.24. And Acts 20.32. I commend you to God, and to the Word of
his grace, which is able to build you up. And particular promises God has also
made to them that attend upon this ordinance. 1. That he will by this
ordinance give them strength to overcome their strongest corruptions. Even a
young man may cleanse his way thereby, Ps. 119.9. 2. That he will by this
ordinance, work peace in their consciences, Esa. 57.19. How falls it out
then that many of us hear constantly and find no such thing? Surely the cause
is rendered, Hebrews 4.2. The Word preached did not profit them, not being
mixed with faith, in them that heard it. In our hearing we make not use of our
faith to make claim to these promises and expect the performance of them unto
us.

Secondly, For prayer. Till a man have some assurance by faith of the pardon
Romans 10 14. How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? It is
the spirit of grace, that is the spirit of supplications, Zach. 12.10. He that
goes to God must apprehend him and conceive of him as of his father, Matthew
6.9. And on the other side he that is by faith persuaded that God is his
gracious father, cannot choose but resort much to him in hearty prayer,
Galathians 4.6. O God thou art my God (says David, Psalm 63.1.) early will I
seek thee. And 86.4, 5. Unto the Lord do I lift up my soul for thou Lord art
good and ready to forgive and plenteous in mercy, to all that call upon thy
name. Many are the promises that God has made unto prayer. General promises
that he will hear and answer us, Esa. 30.19. He will be very gracious unto
thee at the voice of thy cry, when he shall hear it, he will answer thee. And
John 16.23. Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name, he will give it
unto you. And particular promises. 1. Deliverance from any trouble and
affliction, Psalm 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble I will deliver
thee; Or strength and patience to bear it, James 1.5. If any of you lack
wisdom let him ask of God and it shall be given him. 2. Whatsoever spiritual
grace we stand in need of, Luke 11.13. Your heavenly father will give his holy
spirit, to them that ask him. 3. Inward joy and peace of conscience, Job
33.26. He shall pray to God and he will be favorable unto him, and he
shall see his face with joy. Ask and ye shall receive that your joy may be
full, John 16.24. Why then have we no more heart to prayer? Why receive we no
more good by it? Surely we do not make use of our faith in thinking of and
trusting to these promises of God, when we go to prayer and that is a maine
cause of it. And let not that man think (says the Apostle, James 1.7.) that
he shall receive any thing from the Lord. And thus have I finished those four
Motives I promised to give for the enforcing of this exhortation.

Lecture CXLII. On Psalm 51.7. March 2. 1629.
Signs.
IT follows now that we proceed unto those signs and notes that I promised to
give you, whereby they that have received Christ, and are justified by him may
be known. And surely there is great need that we should have signs and notes
given us in Gods Word whereby this may be discerned and judged of. For we find
by experience of all ages that many do verily think that Christ and all his
merits do belong to them, who yet did never receive him nor have any title to
him at all. Many will say to me in that day (says our Savior Matthew. 7.22,
23.) Lord Lord have we not prophesied in thy Name. Many that are such as of
whom Christ himself will profess that he never knew them yet are confidently
persuaded that they have good title unto him. And there is no one thing that
does more dull and deaden men's appetite unto Christ, and keep them from
hungring and thirsting after him and his righteousness, then does this
persuasion that they have him already sure enough; or at least they may have
him when they list. Christ dyed for all men, say they: and therefore I were a
very beast if I should make any doubt of this, that Christ died for me. Know
therefore (beloved) which is (I assure you) a matter of great importance for you
all to know, that it is a most dangerous delusion of Satan whereby men are
persuaded that all men shall have benefit by Christ. No, no, the spirit of God
teaches us expressly the contrary in the holy Scriptures, that all men shall
not be the better for him, but only a certain choice and peculiar people. Ye
are a chosen generation (says the Apostle 1 Pet. 2.9.) a peculiar people. Nay
the Scripture teaches us, that there be but a few (in comparison) that shall
have any benefit by him. And there are three evident reasons to prove this.

He was in the world (says the Evangelist Ioh. 1.10.) and the world knew him
not. No this is appropriated to the Church of Christ only. The people that
dwell therein (says the Prophet Esa. 33.24.) shall be forgiven their iniquity.
And the Angel gives this for the reason why he should be called Jesus Matthew.
1.21. Thou shall call his name Jesus (says he) for he shall save his people
from their sins. He is the Savior of his body, of his Church, says the
Apostle Ephesians. 5.23. Now (alas) the Church of Christ is but a little flock as
himself calls it Luke 12 32. If the whole world were divided into thirty
equal parts there would not be found above five of them that do so much as
profess the name of Christ. And of those five, the Papists and Protestants
(taken all together) will not make three. And of those three the number of the
Papists whose persons I will not judge but their doctrines are damnable does
far exceed the number of the Protestants. So that you see if none but the
Church of Christ, shall have benefit by Christ, the number of them that shall
have benefit by Christ is but very small in comparison of them that shall have
no benefit by him at all.

He came unto his own (says the Evangelist John 1.11.) and his own received
him not. There be but a few of them neither that shall have any benefit by him.
So that look what the Apostle says of Israel Romans 9.27* may truly be said
likewise of the whole Church of Christ and of such as profess the true
Religion, Though the number of them be as the sand of the sea, yet but a
remnant of them shall be saved. And it is worth the observing how often, and
how plainly, and how earnestly our Savior himself was wont to press this
point in his preaching. He taught his hearers in the parable of the sower
Matthew. 13. that this field of Christ where he is pleased to sow the seed of his
word and Gospel, has four sorts of ground in it, and of those four but one
that is good. He taught them in his Sermon on the Mount, Mat. 7.14 That the
way that leads unto life, is a narrow way and that there be few that find it.
He taught them in the parable of them that were bidden to the Kings marriage
feast Mat. 22.14. that even of them that were called to the profession of the
truth by his own gracious and powerful Ministry there were but a few that
were chosen. And in the parable of the laborers that were hired to work in the
Vineyard Matthew. 20.16. he affirms the like of the state of his Church, in
time to come, Many shall be called but few chosen. As if he had said, Though
the number of them that by any outward calling are brought to a profession of
the truth may seem to be great (as indeed it is) yet there be but a few even
of them that make so good a profession, that are chosen of God and consequently
that are inwardly and effectually called, and that shall be saved and receive
benefit by Christ. The Lord discribeth to us the course he is wont to take, in
calling his elect inwardly and effectually. Ier. 3.14. I will take you one of a
City and two of a family (or tribe.) Think not (beloved) nor look for it that
every one that gives his name to Christ, and joyneth himself to Gods people,
and professes the truth with much forwardness and zeal, is inwardly and
effectually called of God, or shall have benefit by Christ. No, no remember and
forget not but think often and seriously of that saying of Christ, Many are
called but few are chosen.

Thirdly, Nay many that live in the Church of Christ and profess the true
Behold (says old Simeon to the blessed Virgin Luke 2.34. When he had Christ
in his arms) Behold (says he, as if he should have said, It is a strange
thing but yet a most certain thing, that I will tell thee Mary) this child is
set (and appointed of God by an unchangeable decree) as well for the fall as
for the rising again of many in Israel. He is unto many in Israel, to many
that live in the true Church of God a stone of stumbling (as the Apostle
speaks 1 Pet. 2.8.) and a rock of offense; though not a cause yet an
occasion of their utter ruin and perdition. They would not have been so lewd
men as they are, nor continued with that quietness and contentment of mind in
many foul sins, had it not been for that, that they have heard of Christ,
and for that confidence that they have in him, that he will pay all their
scores and answer the justice of God for whatsoever they have done amiss.

But how can this be (will you say) that there should be but a few that shall
have benefit by Christ? Object.
Seeing the Scripture says expressly 1 Timothy 2.6. That he gave himself a
ransom for all; And Heb. 2.9. That he tasted death for every man; and 1 John
2.2. He is the propitiation not for our sins only, but also for the sins of
the whole world.

I answer, That (not to enter into the controversy of universal redemptino)
it is agreed on by all divines, Answ.
that none shall receive benefit by the death of Christ but such only as do
believe in him. God so loved the world (says our Savior himself Ioh. 3.16)
That he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should
not perish, but have life everlasting. And it is certain that all men have not
faith, as the Apostle speaks 2 These. 3.2. Nay it is evident that there be but
very few of them that live in the Church, and profess the truth that have true
faith. And when thy conscience shall be awakened (beloved) thou will find that
there is in thee an evil heart of unbeleefe as the Apostle calls it Heb.
3.12. that there is no one sin that thou art more strongly inclined to, then
to infidelity; that (though now in the time of health and peace thou think
it the easiest thing in the world to believe in Christ) it is a matter of of
extreme difficulty to believe aright, Two evident reasons there are for it.

a fountain opened to us by the Gospel for sin, and for uncleanness, as
the Prophet speaks Zach. 13.1. And if we could get into that fountain, if we
could make use of and apply to our selves the water of that fountain,
certainly it would cleanse us perfectly from all our sins. But alas we are
like unto that poor impotent man that lay at the poole of Bethesda Ioh. 5.7.
he knew well enough that if he could have got into the poole, so soon as the
Angel had stirred the water, he should have been perfectly cured, but he
could not of himself get into the poole. And so is it with every one of us by
nature, the fountain of Christ's blood is able to cleanse us thoroughly from all
our sins, and this fountain is by the Ministry of the Gospel opened even
unto us, it is not shut against any of us, none of us are barred or excluded
from it; but though it be thus opened, we cannot get into it of our selves. No
man can come to me (says our Savior Ioh. 6.44.) Except my Father which has
sent me do draw him. The Lord must by his spirit change our hearts, he must
draw us unto Christ by his mighty and out stretched arm, and make us able to
believe in him, or we shall never come unto him. Yea the Apostle calls this
Ephesians. 1.19. a work of the exceeding greatness of Gods power that any man is
made able to believe in Christ aright. And this help, this grace, God does not
vouchsafe to all; he draws not all but whom it pleases him. The wind
blows where it lists (says our Savior Ioh. 3.8.) So is every one that is
borne of the Spirit. The Son quickneth whom he will, says he Ioh. 5.21. Nay
he vouchsafes this mercy but to few. Who has believed our report (says the
Prophet Esa^ 53.1.) And to whom is the arm of the Lord reveiled? And this is
the first cause why so few do truly believe.

Esaias Ioh. 12.39, 40.) because God had blinded their eyes, and hardened their
hearts.

Applic.
Oh then (beloved) seeing there be so few (in comparison) that shall have any
benefit by Christ, it stands us upon, to take heed we be not deluded any
longer with a conceit of the common interest that all men have in Christ; but
diligently to enquire whither we our selves be of that small number or no;
whether we can find in our selves, those notes whereby Christ has marked his
own sheep, and whereby he will own them for his. Certainly as the Lord
himself knows them that are his, as the Apostle speaks 2 Timothy 2.19. so he
has set that mark upon them, as whereby themselves also may know that they
are his. I know my sheep (says he Ioh. 10.14,) And I am known of mine. We
know (says the Apostle 1 Ioh. 4.13.) that we dwell in him and he in us. O what
a happiness is this to a Christian to be sure of this? And on the other side,
what sound comfort can a man have in life or death if he be not sure of this?
Alas the more confident that any man is of his interest in Christ, the more
woeful will his case be if when he shall appear before Christ, Christ will
not own him because he finds not his mark upon him; or if when his own
conscience shall be awakned he shall look and search for Christ's mark upon
himself, and cannot be able to find it. When Christ shall say to them that
were confidently persuaded that they had great interest in him, I tell you I
know you not, whence you are, depart from me (as we read Luke 13.27, 28. he
will one day say to many such persons) there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth, says our Savior.

If you ask me, What mark is that Christ uses to brand his sheep withal,
whereby he will own them, and whereby themselves may know that they are his?

I answer, It is his holy Spirit which he gives to all that truly believe in
him. He that is joined to the Lord (says the Apostle 1 Corinthians. 6.17.) is one
spirit; As if he had said, He has in him the very same spirit that is in
Christ. If any man have not the spirit of Christ (says the Apostle Romans
8.9.) he is none of his. Therefore also is the holy Spirit called the Lords
seal that he sets upon his, and whereby he does use to mark them. After ye
believed in Christ (says the Apostle Ephesians. 1.13.) ye were sealed with the
holy Spirit of promise. When once a man finds that he has this seal, this
mark upon him, he may confidently and comfortably conclude, that certainly he
is Christ's, and Christ is his; and till then he can never know it. Hereby we
know (says the Apostle 1 John 3.24.) that he abides in us, by the spirit
which he has given us; and 4.13. Hereby we know that we dwell in him and he in
us, because he has given us of his spirit. But may not this mark be
counterfeited, will you say? May not a man easily mistake and be deceived in
this, and think he has the Spirit of Christ when he has it not indeed? I
answer, Yes that he may; or else we should not be so often and so earnestly
charged as we are, 2 Corinthians. 13.5. to examine our selves, to prove our own
selves; and Galat. 6.4 Let every man prove his own work. But yet by the
fruits and effects of the Spirit that he finds in himself, the true believer
may certainly know, that the Spirit of Christ does dwell in him indeed. I have
o^t had occasion heretofore to speak of sundry fruits of faith, and effects of
the Spirit, whereby he that is in Christ and has the Spirit of Christ may be
known, which I will not therefore now make any mention of. I will instance
only in four effects of the Spirit whereby you may be able to judge whether
you have received not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God,
as the Apostle speaks 1 Corinthians. 2.12. The first is your Charity; the second
is your Constancy in cleaving to the truth which you have received; the third
is your Taking to heart the cause of God and religion; the fourth and last is
your Sympathizing with the fellow members of Christ's mystical body.

For the first of these. There is no one grace whereby the Spirit of Christ may
be better and more sensibly known to dwell in us, than charity and meekness of
spirit. John Baptist saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it
abode upon Christ, as we read John 1.32. I beseech you (says the Apostle 2
Corinthians 10.1.) by the meekness and gentleness of Christ. As if he had
said, Of all the graces of the Spirit that did abound in Christ, his meekness
and gentleness did most excel. And we shall find, that this is often mentioned
for a certain sign of a man that is in Christ. By this shall all men know
that ye are my disciples (says our Savior John 13.35.) if ye have love one to
another. As if he should say, This is so evident and conspicuous a mark of
one that is in Christ, as not themselves only, but others also, all men may
know them by this. Beloved let us love one another (says the Apostle 1 John
4.7.) for love is of God; and every one that loves is borne of God, and
knows God. He that loves not, knows not God, for God is love, says he
Verse. 8. And Verse. 12. If we love one another, God dwells in us, and his
love is perfected in us. And Ver. 16. He that dwells in love dwells in God,
and God in him. My little children (says he again 1 John 3.18, 19.) let us
not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth. And hereby we
know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him. As if he
had said, A man may confidently assure himself that he is in Christ, and that
he has the Spirit of Christ in him, if he love his neighbor unfeignedly,
not in word only, but in deed, if he unfeignedly desire to do him what good
he can.

Applic.
O that we would impartially examine our selves in this first point beloved; now
especially that we are to prepare our selves to the Lords Table. If thou be not
in charity, certainly thou have not the Spirit of Christ; and consequently
thou art none of his. I know well that many that have not Gods Spirit, but are
mere carnal men, use to glory much in their charity, and think they far
excel any that profess religion in this virtue. But if there could ever have
been any true love to man (and such as God approves of) in any soul that is
not regenerated and sanctified by the Spirit of God; certainly neither our
Savior himself, nor his holy Apostle would have spo^ken so of love as you
hear they have done. No, no, the holy Scripture is most plain in this point,
that no man has any true charity in him, but he only that is truly regenerate.
By this we know that we love the children of God (says the Apostle 1 Ioh.
5.2.) when we love God and keep his commandments. As if he should say, All
true love to men proceeds from the love we bear to God, as from the root and
fountain. This is love (says he 2 Ioh. 6.) that we walk after his
commandments. As if he had said, We cannot love our neighbor as we ought,
unless we love him out of conscience toward God, and in obedience to his
commandment. The end of the commandment is love (says the Apostle, 1 Timothy
1.5.) out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned. As
though he should have said, No man can have true love, till he have first a
pure heart, and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned. I will therefore show
you how true Charity is to be tried; how you may discern and know whether you
love your neighbor as you ought to love him, and as no man that has not the
Spirit of Christ, was ever able to do. Try this, First, By the love thou
bear to all men. Secondly, By the love thou bear to them that have
wronged thee, and are thine enemies. Thirdly, By the love thou bear to them
that fear God especially.

Lecture CXLIII. On Psalm 51.7. March 23. 1629.
NO man has true charity in him, First, that does not love all men; Secondly,
that does not love his enemy, Thirdly, that does not love such as fear God
especially.

These. 3 12. The Lord make you to increase and abound in love (says he) one
toward another, and toward all men.

Object.
How can this be, will you say? Must we love such as are wicked men? Does not
the Holy Ghost make this a special note of a lewd and graceless man to love
them that are wicked? They hate the good (says the Prophet Mica 3.2.) and love
the evil. Was not Iehosophat (though otherwise so good a man) greatly blamed
for this? Should thou love them (says the Prophet Iehu to him, 2 Chronicles.
19.2.) that hate the Lord? Therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord.
Does not David glory in this, as in one principal evidence of the truth of his
heart that he did hate wicked men? I have hated them (says he Psalm. 31.6.)
that regard lying vanities; that is, I have hated all idolaters. And 139.21,
22. he appealeth to the Lord concerning this, and glories of this even before
the Lord, Do not I hate them O Lord (says he) that hate thee? I hate them with
a perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies.

I answer, Answ.
That in all these places there is no more meant but this. First, That we must
hate their sin, and that that is evil in them. And that we are bound to hate
even in the best men, and in those persons whose persons we are most bound to
love. Ye that love the Lord (says the Psalmist Psalm 97.10.) hate that that
is evil. There is no love of God in that man that hates not sin wheresoever
he sees it, even in his own child, in them whom he does most dearly love.
Secondly, that we must show our dislike even to the persons also of sca^dalous
and lewd men. For first, we may give them no countenance, but show our dislike
by shunning all voluntary familiarity and kindness unto them, while they
continue such. Have no company with him (says the Apostle 2 These. 3.4.) that
he may be ashamed. I have hated the congregation of evil doers (says David
Psalm 26.5. the assemblies and meetings that they have together) and will not
sit with the wicked. Secondly, We must oppose and set our selves against them,
in their evil practices, and profess our selves to be their adversaries
therein. They that forsake the Law (says Solomon Proverbes 28.4.) praise the
wicked, sooth them up and flatter them, commend and encourage them; but such as
keep the law, contend with them. As if he had said, They are not so far in
love with peace, but they are willing to be seen in contention and opposition
against lewd men. Thirdly, We must do what lies in us to procure the
punishment and rooting out of notorious offenders. David as a King voweth to
God that he would do so. I will early destroy all the wicked of the land (says
he Psalm 101.8) that I may cut off all wicked doers from the City of the
Lord. And even to private men this charge is given against seducers to
idolatry, Deuteronomie 13.6 -- 9. that if any man's own brother, or his own
child, or his own wife, or his dearest friend, that is as his own soul,
should entice him unto idolatry, his eye most not petie him, he must not spare
nor conceal him, but he must surely kill him; that is, complain to the
Magistrate of him, that he may be put to death; yea (in his execution by
stoning) his hand must be first upon him, and afterward the hands of all the
people. I know well that they that shall do thus, that shun the company of
lewd men, that oppose them i^ any of their lewd practices, that have any hand
in procuring the punishment of them, shall be judged by the world to be most
uncharitable and malicious men, but this is indeed no breach of charity at all
to do thus. A man may love their persons; though he both hate their sins;
and show thus much dislike also to their persons. Though a a man dare not be
familiar with them, nor keep them company, (as is plain by that speech of the
Apostle, 2 Thessalonians 3.15. yet count him not as an enemy) nay, though a
man do his uttermost to have notorious sinners punished and cut off; yet may
he be void of all malice to their persons, he may love them for all that.
This is plain by the example of Ioshuah toward Achan. Greater severity in the
cutting off of a lewd man you shall not read, than was showed toward Achan,
Ioshuah 7.24, 25. And yet you shall find Verse 19. that Ioshuah was far from
hating his person. My son (says he) give I pray thee glory unto God. Though
we must thus show our detestation to the sins of all wicked men, yet must we
love their persons for all that. Yea it is a most dangerous sin to bear
malice or ill will to the person of any man. Let all bitterness, and wrath,
and anger (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.31.) and clamor and evil speaking be put
away from you, with all malice. Neither is there any corruption that is in us,
that is so great an enemy to our comfort, as is this bitterness of our spirit.
1. No Sermon we hear will do us any good, if we bear malice to any man, as is
plain by that speech of the Apostle 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. 2. No prayer we make will
do us any good if we be in wrath, as is plain by that of the Apostle, 1
Timothy 2.8. 3. We cannot feed upon Christ our Passover in the holy Sacrament
with any comfort, if we bring to it in our hearts the old leaven of malice, as
the Apostle speaks 1 Corinthians. 5.8. Nay, if we do not bear a true and
unfeigned love to all men, we can not have any comfort in our estate. And you
shall see what a manner of love we are bound to bear unto the persons of all
men in these nine degrees.

Let none of you (says the Lord, Zachary 7.10.) imagine evil against his
brother in his heart. Charity thinks not evil, says the Apostle, 1
Corinthians 13.5. This is a strong corruption in all our hearts, and the root
of much malice. If thou have any true love in thee, thou will rather interpret
all thy neighbors actions and words in the better part. Charity believes all
things, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.7.

Put them in mind (says the Apostle, Tit. 3.1.2.) to speak evil of no man.

Romans 12.18. If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably with
all men.

Put them in mind (says the Apostle in that Tit. 3.1, 2.) to be gentle,
showing all meekness to all men.

Let not thine heart envy sinners, says the Holy Ghost Proverbs 23.17. And
that which the Apostle wishes unto Gaius 3 John 2. Beloved I wish above all
things, that thou may prosper, even as thy soul prospers; We are bound by
the eight commandment to wish unto all men, though not in that degree as to
the faithful.

Was not my soul grieved for the poor? says Job 30.25.

and ye shall be (says he Luke 6.35, 36. that is, ye shall be found and
manifested to be) the children of the highest; for he is kind to the
unthankefull and to the evil, be ye therefore merciful (says he) as your
father also is merciful; that is, to all men, even to evil and bad men. Let
us do good to all men (says the Apostle Galat 6.10.) as we have opportunity.

I beheld the transgressors and was grieved (says David Psalm. 119.158.)
because they kept not thy word. And Paul protests deeply Romans 9.2. that he
had great heaviness and continual sorrow in his heart for the Jews that were
at that time as wicked a people as lived upon the earth.

Ninthly and lastly, We must unfainedly desire and do what lies in us to My
hearts desire (says the Apostle Romans 10.1.) and prayer to God for Israel is,
that they might be saved. We must pray for them you see; What for all men?
May we pray for professed idolaters and enemies to the religion of God? Yes
even for idolaters and enemies to the Gospel, and for worse than them too, if
worse can be. We may pray for any wicked man, excepting him only that has
committed the sin against the Holy Ghost. There is a sin unto death (says
the Apostle 1 Ioh. 5.16.) I do not say that any man shall pray for it; that is,
for the pardon of that sin. But that sin no blind idolater certainly,
specially none that has been borne and bred in idolatry, can possibly have
committed. Moses (being required so to do) prayed even for Pharaoh, yea he
prayed often for him, as we may read Exodus 8.12.30. and 9.33. and 10.18. So did
the man of God also for Jeroboam a gross idolater, 1 Kings 13.6. And Stephen
of his own accord, though he were not required to do it, prayed for them that
stoned him, Acts 7.60. Said I, we may pray for idolaters? Nay, we must pray for
them, specially if they be such as God has placed in any degree of
pre-eminence over us; we sin if we do it not. See two express commandments
of God for this, one in the Old Testament, another in the New. What more gross
idolaters were there ever in the world (both for Prince and subjects) than the
Babylonians were at that time when Gods people lived in captivity under them?
Yet were they expressly commanded to pray even for them. Ier. 29.7. Seek the
peace of the city (says the Lord) whither I have caused you to be carried away
captives, and pray unto the Lord for it. And were there ever more foul
idolaters than the Roman Emperors were in the days of the Apostles? And yet
God gives an express commandment, 1 Timothy 2.1. that in all Church-meetings
there should be first and principal care taken for this, that supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks might be made, as for all other
men, so specially for kings and all that are in authority. Three things are to
be observed in this commandment. First, That whereas the former commandment
seems to reach no further than unto temporal blessings that Gods people were
to beg of God for Babylon (as did also Moses his prayer for Pharaoh; and that
of the man of God for Jeroboam) in this we are charged to pray for the
conversion of idolatrous Princes, and for the salvation of them. Secondly, That
this is given for a reason why we should pray for them, That we may live a
quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty; As if he had said,
If Gods people can by their prayers prevail for the conversion of such as are
in authority, these three benefits will be obtained by it. First, The Church
shall enjoy more peace by this means. Secondly, Honesty; that is, justice, and
equity, and fidelity in the civil conversation of men, will be the better
preserved. Thirdly, Godliness, true piety and religion will prosper the better
by this means. When Kings and Queens are converted, they will become nursing
fathers and nursing mothers to the Church, as the Lord promises Esa. 49.23.
And therefore we are bound first of all and above all others to pray heartily
to God for their conversion. Thirdly, Lastly, Another reason is to be observed
which the Apostle gives for this, Verse. 3, 4. For this is good and acceptable
(says he) in the sight of God our Savior who will have all men (that is, of
all sorts of men, Gentiles as well as Jews, Kings and Princes as well as men
of meaner condition: though this may seem never so unlikely a thing unto you,
because ye see none such converted hitherto, yet be not out of hope of it, God
will have of them also some) to be saved and to come unto the knowledge of the
truth. As if he should say, These Princes as bad as they be now, may belong to
Gods election for ought you know; and certainly some such as they are (heathen
and idolatrous Princes) are in Gods eternal counsel ordained to salvation.
And who knows whether you prayers be not also ordained to be the means
whereby it shall be procured? Therefore pray for them, says he. And out of
doubt, there is great cause to hope that our superiors who are yet in error,
might be sooner reclaim^d, and such of them also that do profess the truth,
might become more religious and zealous than they are, if Gods people could
(according to their bounden duty) pray more fervently unto God for them than
they do. And thus must we try the truth of our charity by the love we bear
unto all men. If we bear not such a love as this is unto all men, certainly
our charity is not such as it ought to be.

I say unto you (says our Savior speaking of and describing true love, Mat.
5.44, 45.) love your enemies; that you may be (that is, that you may know your
selves to be) the children of your father which is in heaven. As if he had
said, you can never be assured that you are Gods children till you can do this.

Now that we may the better understand and be affected with this point, I will
show you more particularly what a manner of love God requires of us toward
our enemies in these eight degrees.

Dearly beloved (says the Apostle Romans 12.19) avenge not your selves, but
rather give place unto wrath (As if he had said, Let God alone with that) for
it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay says the Lord. Say not (says
Solomon, Prove. 24.29. that is, purpose not, nor resolve with thy self thus) I
will do so to him as he has done unto me (As if he should say, I will do him
no wrong; and so long as I do him no wrong* I hope I cannot be blamed) I will
render to the man according to his work. Why, what wrong is there in that? Is
not this a most just and equal thing to render to every man according to his
work? I answer, That in the Lord himself it is indeed so, and in the
Magistrate which is Gods deputy it is so too; but in a private man it is not
so, it is a wrong, it is wickedness for him to do it, because he usurpeth
Gods office. Nay it were unjustice even in a Magistrate to revenge his own
private wrong. Fear not (says Joseph to his brethren, Genes. 50.19. when they
feared he would have been revenged of them for the wrong they had done him,
Fear not (says he) I dare not do it) for am I in the place of God?

Rejoice not when thine enemy falls (says the Holy Ghost, Prove. 24.17, 18.)
and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth, lest the Lord see it, and
it displease him, and he turn away his wrath from him.

Forgive one another (says the Apostle, Coloss. 3.13. (...) freely forgiving)
If any man have a quarrel (or cause to complain and find fault) against any
(whosoever he be, what wrong soever he has done) even as Christ forgave you
so also do ye. If we do not thus forgive Christ has assured us Matthew. 6.15.
that God will never forgive us our sins. Nay if we do it not from our
hearts. So likewise (says he Mat. 18.35.) shall my heavenly father do also
unto you (that is, he shall in his wrath deliver you unto the tormentours, unto
hell) if ye from your hearts, forgive not every one his brother their
trespasses.

Fourthly, We must strive to forget and be unwilling to think of the wrongs
Thou shall not avenge (says the Lord Leviticus 19.18.) Nor be mindefu^l of
wrong, against the children of thy people. As if he should say, thou must both
forgive and forget. If thou strive not to forget and put quite out of thy mind
the wrongs that has been done unto thee, thou will hardly be able to forgive
them, but thy heart will be apt to rise against thine enemy, and to boil in
revenge against him.

Fifthly, We must unfeignedly desire to be at peace with him that has Seek
peace and ensue it, says the Psalmist Psalm. 34.14. Study to be quiet, says
the Apostle 1 These. 4.11. As if he had said, cast about which way thou may
best compass it, strive earnestly for it.

Sixthly, If when we have sought peace, and used the best means of
reconciliation My soul has long dwelt with him that hates peace (says David
Psalm. 120.6, 7.) I am for peace (says he, I seek it, and use all means I
can to be reconciled) but when I speak they are for War. But look back to
Verse 5. and you shall see what a grief and vexation this was to the good man.
Woe is me (says he) that I sojourne in Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of
Kedar; that is, with such inhumane and savage people, that will by no means be
woone to peace.

Seventhly, We must pray heartily to God, for them that have done us Pray for
them (says our Savior Matthew. 5.44.) that despitefully use you, and persecute
you.

Eighthly and lastly, We must be willing to do our enemy good, if he stand If
thou meet thine enemies Ox or his Ass going astray (says the Lord Exodus
23.4, 5.) Thou shall surely bring it back to him again. If thou see the Ass
of him that hates thee lying under his burden, and would forbear to help
him, thou shall surely help with him. Nay we should be glad of such an
opportunity to overcome the malice of our enemy and to win him unto peace. If
thine enemy hunger (says the Apostle Romans 12.20, 21.) feed him, if he thirst
give him drink. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.

Oh let us think seriously of these things (beloved) and examine whither we can
in this sort love our enemies. Applic.
I know well you will be apt in your hearts to say at the hearing of this
Doctrine as the Disciples did Mat. 19.25. Who then can be saved? If none can
have benefit by Christ, but they that have the spirit of Christ; and none have
the spirit of Christ but they that have true charity; and none have true
charity but they that can in this manner love their enemies. Who then can be
saved? It is impossible for flesh and blood to love an enemy in this sort.

But to this I answer, that it is true indeed that he that has no more in him
then flesh and blood can never do it; and he that has no more in him then
flesh and blood can never be saved. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom
of God, says the Apostle 1 Cor. 15.50. Except a man be borne again (says
our Savior Ioh. 3.5.) of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. And every one that is regenerate by the spirit of God, is made
thereby able thus to love his enemy. Though not legally according to the rigor
of the law, yet in an Evangelicall manner so as God in Christ will accept. And
thou can never have comfort in thy estate (beloved) unless thou find thy
self able in an Evangelicall manner to keep this commandment of loving all
men, even thy greatest enemy in this sort as I have described unto you.

In an evangelicall manner (will you say) how is that? I will express it unto
you in five particulars. If thou have the spirit of Christ in thee. 1. Thou will be made able in thy mind to serve the Law of God, as the Apostle
professes of himself Romans 7.25. that is, thou will consent to Gods Word in
this, and acknowledge that indeed thou ought to do thus Verse 16. The
Commandment is holy and just and good, as he says there Verse 12. 2. To will
is present with thee, as he also says there Verse 18. Thou do unfeignedly
desire and strive to love all men, even thine enemies in this manner. 3. Thine
own heart will smite thee for thine uncharitableness; thou will find thy
self able to mourn and to be troubled in thy mind for it; and even to cry
out against thy self for it as he does there Verse 24. O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from this froward, envious, revengefull, malicious
heart? 4. Thou will use to cry to God for help and strength to vanquish and
mortify this cankred humor and corruption in thee; as the Disciples to Christ
when he had pressed the Doctrine of forgiving such as had wronged them Luke
17.5. Lord increase our faith. 5. Lastly, thou will now when thou renewest thy
covenant with God at his Table vow and bind thy self by promise unto God;
that though thou have been heretofore malicious and given to revenge, thou will be so no more, but thou will through his grace strive thus to forgive and
love all men, even them that have done thee most wrong. We read 2 Cron.
34.31, 32. compared with 35.1. that Josiah and his people before they
celebrated the passover bound themselves unto the Lord by solemn covenant
that they would keep his Commandments and his testimonies, and his statutes
with all their heart. And it is said Chap 35.18. that that was such a Passover
as was never kept in Israel from the days of Samuel to that time. And
certainly if we would also thus prepare our selves to the Sacrament (afer our
examination of our selves) by binding our selves to God in solemn vows and
promises to forsake our special corruptions and walk more circumspectly

The third and last way to try it is by the love we bear to them that fear
God especially. To them we are bound to bear special love above all other
men. Above all things (says the Apostle 1 Pet. 4.8.) have fervent charity
among your selves. No love that we bear to any man will give us that assurance
that we are in the state of grace, that the spirit of Christ dwells in us, as
when we can find, that we love a godly man, more for the Image of God we
discern in him, then either a wordly friend for our commodity sake, or a
kinsman for the nearenesse of blood that is between us. For this we have
Christ's own example Matthew. 12.50. Whosoever shall do the will of my Father
which is in heaven, the same is my brother and sister and mother. He that
receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man (and for no other
respect, says he Matthew. 10.41.) shall receive a righteous man's reward; that is
shall be undoubtedly saved. We know that we have passed from death to life
(says the Apostle 1 Ioh. 3.14.) because we love the brethren. And on the
other side, there is no more certain sign of a man that is void of all grace,
and abides in the state of death and damnation then this is when he cannot
love such as fear God. He that loves not his brother (says the Apostle 1
Ioh. 3.14.) abides in death. For their can be no love of God in that man, that
loves not such as fear God. Every one (says the Apostle 1 Ioh. 5.1.) That
loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him. But how may we
(that have so false and deceitful hearts in us) know that we do indeed love a
Christian in the name of a Christian? I answer that the surest proof of that
is this, when we can find that (though we love them most, in whom we see most
grace) yet we do unfeignedly love all in whom we see the true fear of God,
howsoever they differ in judgment from us in some things: yea what weaknesses
soever we discern in them other ways. By this note the Apostle often describes
that love to the brethren which is true and unfeigned Ephesians. 1.15. Col. 1.4.
Philem. 5. that is to say, that it extends it self to all the Saints, to all
the brethren. And Romans 14.1 -- 6. he gives a particular example for this, by
directing the faithful how they should stand affected toward those brethren
that were weak in faith, that is in judgment and in the knowledge of the
truth. It was certainly a weakness in judgment that made any Christian to
think those things to be unlawful, that were indeed in their own nature
indifferent and lawful, as those which he instanceth in Verse 2. And so it
was a weakness in judgment (on the other side) that made any to think those
things necessary and fit to be observed, which indeed were not so as those he
instanceth in Verse 5. But how should the faithful stand affected toward them
that were thus weak in faith, and did so differ from them in judgment about
these things. First he tells them Verse 3,4. they should not judge nor
despise one another for this; they should not esteem one another to be void of
true and saving grace because of this. Secondly, Verse 1. They should receive
him that is thus weak in faith; that is, esteem well of him, love him, be
not strange to him, keep him company for all this. For God has received him,
says he Verse 3. And how dare thou despise, or judge, or think hardly of,
or be strange unto him whom God has received?

Let me make some application of this (beloved) unto you all. Aplic.
And I am sorry that the time enforces me to be so brief as I must be in
applying of it.

It is utterly a fault amongst you that the difference in judgment and
practice about the ceremonies of our Church has caused such strangeness and
allienation of mind and affection between such as do truly fear God, both
Ministers, and people. We are so far from receiving, esteeming, loving, and
maintaining society one with another nevertheless for this difference in
judgment about these things; that we are apt to despise and judge one another
for it; and to doubt whither there be any truth of grace in them that differ
from us in these things. Surely (says the one side) the differency and
lawfulness of these things is now so clearly manifested; as these men must
needs be wilfully blind that do not see it. Nay certainly they cannot choose
but see it well enough; and were it not for a carnal respect to their credit
with the people, among whom they have gotten a great name and applause for
their standing out so long, they would (doubtless) conform themselves. And
surely (says the other side) the utter unlawfulness of these ceremonies is
now so clearly reveiled that these men must needs be wilfully blind that see
it not. Nay they do see it well enough; and were it not for a carnal respect
they have unto their worldly peace and estate they would neve use them;
certainly they sin against their conscience in observing of them. And what
truth of grace can there be in them that are wilfully blind, and for carnal
respects do thus sin against their own conscience. And thus do both sides
grossly and dangerously err and sin against their brethren. And when ye
sin so against the brethren (says the Apostle 1 Cor. 8.12.) yea sin against
Christ. For the experience of all times and of this present age proves
evidently that there be of both sides that fear God unfeignedly, and in the
whole tenor and course of whose conversation the life and power of true
godliness does manifestly appear. And if thou do not see this (whosoever
thou art, that art most bitter and violent of either side) then art thou
certainly thy self most wilfully blind. And I do assure thee (in the name of
the Lord and by good warrant out of his word) that if thou can not
unfeignedly love every one that truly fears God (whither he conform or not
conform) if thou can not bewail and strive against these hard conceits thou
have been wont to entertain against such, thou can have no comfort at all
in thine own estate before God. Let there be no strife I pray thee (says
Abraham unto Lot Genesis 13.8.) between me and thee; for we are brethren. And it
is noted by the Holy Ghost Verse 7. for a circumstance that did much aggravate
the sin of Lot, and the grief of Abraham for that variance, that the
Cananite and the Perizzite dwelt then in the land. Certainly all that truly
fear God are brethren. And have not we Cananites and Perizzites enough in our
land, Papists and Atheists and profane persons that do mortally hate us all
that have any true fear of God in us and rejoice much in our variances? Or is
the number of them that truly fear God so great that we must dishearten and
weaken one another by nourishing heart burning and discord among our selves?
But the time will not permit me to enlarge my self in this point, as I desire
to do. I will therefore conclude my speech with the words of the Apostle Iam.
5.9. Grudge not one against another brethren, lest ye be condemned.

Lecture CXLIV. On Psalm 51.7. August. 2. 1631.
IT follows now that we proceed unto the second of those four effects, and
fruits whereby a man may certainly know whether he has the spirit of Christ,
and consequently whether he has Christ, and is by his death, and obedience*
perfectly justified in the sight of God: and that is, constancy in Religion.
This is then the Doctrine that I am now to insist upon.

That he that has the spirit of Christ in him, will be constant in his
Religion above all things. Now before I give you the proof of the point, I
must explain first, and prevent the mistaking of it, by answering three
questions, and removing three doubts that may rise in your minds against it.

Quest. 1.
First, You may ask me. Is it a certain note of a man that has the spirit of
Christ, to be constant in his religion?

Answ.
I answer, No; unless it be the true Religion that he does profess. It is
indeed a moral virtue, and one of the best things that are to be found in a
natural man, to be constant in his Religion be it true or false. And so the
Lord notes it to be Ier. 2.10, 11. Pass over the isles of Chittim, and see,
and send unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and see of there be such a thing
(and to be found even among them) has a nation (has any nation) changed their
gods? As if he should have said. Has not even the light of nature discovered
thus much unto all nations, that it is a shameful, and odious thing for a
people to be variable, and unconstant in their Religion? But my people have
changed their glory, their Religion he means. For this constancy in a man's
Religion which he is persuaded is true (though it be false) argues a zeal of
God in him, though it be not according unto knowledge. And that the Apostle
speaks of you know To. 10.2. as of a good thing i^ it self, as of one of the
best things, that can be in a natural man. But yet this is no sign of grace,
no fruit of the spirit of Christ to be constant, in an erroneous, and false
way. It was no commendation either to Jeroboam himself or to Iehu or to any
other of the Kings, and people of Israel that they abode (even to the
dissolution of that state) in that Religion that Jeroboam did at the first
establish, and would by no means be drawn to forsake it. The children of
Israel (says the Holy Ghost 2 King. 17.22.) walked in all the sins of
Jeroboam, that he did they departed not from them. This constancy in their
Religion is often mentioned in the story, to their great shame and reproach. It
is no praise at all, nor sign of grace in a Papist or any other Heretic or
Schismatic whatsoever, that they have been constant in their Religion, even
unto death. It is not the punishment that a man indures, but the cause for
which he suffers, that makes him a Martyr. It is not constancy, but obstinacy
in a man to abide so resolute, and unmovable in any error, as he will admit
of no means that may inform him better, to be like the a^afe Adder ( Psalm.
58.4, 5.) that stops her ear, which will not hearken to the voice of the
charmers charming never so wisely. Yea it is not only a great sin but a
fearful judgment, and curse of God too. He has blinded their eyes (says
our blessed Savior Ioh. 12.40.) and hardened their hearts that they should not
so with their eyes, and understand with their hearts, and be converted, and I
should h^^le them. So that when I say constancy in Religion is a note of him
that has the spirit of Christ, I mean constancy in the true Religion. It is
the cleaving to the truth of God, that is such a note.

But then you will ask me secondly. Quest. 2.
How shall I know (in that great difference of opinions in Religion that is in
the Church, and that even among learned, and good men too) which is the truth?
Whether that that I hold, and profess be the truth, that so I may constantly
hold it, and cleave unto it? When our Savior had said Ioh. 18.37, 38. (and it
was that good confession that the Apostle 1 Timothy 6.13. says he witnessed
before Poncius Pilate) to this end was I borne, and for this cause came I into
the world that I should bear witness unto the truth; Pilate said unto him,
what is truth? And certainly we have many now, that were borne, and bread in
the Church, that know no more what the truth is, then Pilate did, but (like men
utterly ignorant. and unsettled in Religion) are as ready to say as he he was;
Answ.
What is truth? Now to these men I answer with the words of our Savior Ioh.
17.17. Sanctify them with thy truth, thy word is truth. If that Religion that
thou professest, be no other, then that which God has taught thee in his holy
word, then is it doubtless the true Religion. If thou hold nothing in
Religion but that thou can warrant, and prove by Gods Word, then hold thou
the truth, and thou must hold it fast, and cleave constantly to it. It is the
word of truth Ephesians. 1.13. it can never deceive thee. Thy testimonies are very
sure, says David Psalm. 93.5. This sacred book of the holy Scriptures; and
writings of the Prophets, and Apostles, is the foundation, upon which God
builds his Church, as the Apostle teaches us Ephesians. 2.20. If thou build thy
faith, and Religion upon this foundation thou art sure enough.

But yet there is another doubt apt to rise in your minds, Quest. 3.
and you will ask me this third, and last question. How can I be certain,
that that which I hold in Religion is grounded upon the holy Scripture rightly
understood. The Scripture is obscure, and hard to be understood: and all
religions (Papists, and Pelagians and Anabaptists, Answ.
all) do allege Scripture for that that they hold. To this I answer. First,
that there are indeed some things in the holy scriptures hard to be understood
as the Apostle says 2 Pet. 3.16. there are in that Epistle that Paul wrote
unto the Hebrews. Secondly, there is nothing (no one Article of faith) so
plainly set down in the holy Scripture, but wrangling, and profane wits, have
been apt to pervert, and wrest the words, to a quite contrary sense, unto that
that the Holy Ghost intended. You shall see the Prophet Jeremy 23.36. charge
the Prophets, and Priests of his time with this, and I pray you mark how
emphatically he expresses the heinousness of this their sin. Ye have
perverted (says he) the words of the living God, of the Lord of hosts our God.
But yet for all this, every point of Religion the knowledge whereof is
necessary to the salvation of Gods people, is so plainly expressed, and taught
in the holy Scripture (in one place or other) that not only learned men, but
the simpliest Christian, may clearly understand it, and be undoubtedly
certain that it is indeed the infallible truth of God. I pray you mark the
proof of this point in five dgrees.

The Commandment is a lamp (says Solomon Prove. 6.23.) and the law is light.
Yea the Apostle calls the very Scripture of the old Testament (which yet was
much darker then the new is) 2 Pet. 1.19. a light that shines in a dark place.

Psalm. 19.8. The Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. It
gives light, and sight to the eyes of Gods people that were dim, and blind
before.

Psalm. 119.130. The entrance into the word gives light. Mark, it is not only
light, but it gives light; yea so soon as a man with a good heart is entered
into it, he shall receive that light by it; But to whom gives it this light? It
gives understanding to the simple.

My people (they that belong to me, my elect says the Lord Esa. 52.6.) shall
know my name (my word, and will) they shall know in that day, that I am he that
does speak, behold it is I. The sheep of Christ know his voice, Ioh. 10.4.
they understand his language well, and understand his meaning too. You know the
truth (says the Apostle 1 Ioh. 2.21. not to the clergy but even to the meanest
Christian, such as Verse 18. he had called little children) you know the truth
(says he) and that no lie is of the truth. The meanest Christian (being one of
Gods elect, and having a good heart) may clearly understand the Scriptures, in
those points that are necessary unto salvation, and attain to a certain
knowledge of them; as the Apostle says of the Thessalonians 1 These. 1.5. that
the word came unto them, and was received by them in much assurance.

Psalm. 25.12. What man is he that fears the Lord? Him shall he teach in the
way that he shall choose. If any man will do his will (and resolve to practice
what he knows, says our Savior, Ioh. 7.17.) he shall know of the doctrine
(concerning the Doctrine which I teach) whether it be of God or whether I
speak of my self. So that (to conclude my answer to this third and last
question) let no man pretend for his profane ignorance and unsetlednesse in the
matters of religion the obscurity of the holy Scriptures, or say thus in his
heart, I mean well, and I will do well, and I will hope well, but I will never
trouble my brains with the matter of religion; to that side that I see to be
strongest, and that the times shall favor most I will most incline; but to
attain to any settled judgment in these matters, I need not, I cannot. Our
Preachers and learned men cannot agree about points of religion, and I am glad
with all my heart that it is so, for that will be a good excuse for me I hope.
Let no man I say please himself in these conceits. For thou have heard that
the Scripture is not so obscure (in these necessary points) as thou would
feign have it to be; but if thou had any true fear of God in thee, if thou
did belong to God, thou might clearly and certainly know the truth. And
it is a more fearful sign against thee, than thou art aware of, that the
Word of God is so obscure to thee, that thou can attain to no certainty of
knowledge in the matters of religion by it. To them that are without (that
belong not to Gods kingdom, says our Savior Mar. 4.11.) all these things are
done in parables All the Doctrines of Gods Word are parables and hidden
mysteries to them that are without, and shall never go to heaven.

And now having removed these doubts, and taken away these stumbling blocks out
of your way, I will come to the proof and confirmation of the Doctrine that I
propounded, That he that has the Spirit of Christ, will be constant in the
religion of Christ; he will firmly cleave to the truth that he has learned out
of Gods Word.

Two evident proofs I will give you for this, and then I will show the reason
and ground of it; for so must I lay the foundation of that application, and use
that we must make of this so necessary a truth to be insisted upon. My first
proof is the testimony that the Lord has given unto them that cleave
constantly to his truth. The second is the comfort that Gods people themselves
have found, Proof 1
and the confidence they have reposed in that: Of the first sort of proofs I
will give you but three.

The first is that which you shall find Esa. 26.2. Open ye the gates that the
Mark three things in this first proof. 1. God makes it the character of the
righteous nation, the true Church, the whole company of true believers that are
made righteous by the imputation of Christ's righteousness unto them, that they
are such as keep the truth. Yea that he says, they are such as 2 keep the
truths, all truths, every truth that God has in his Word revealed unto them.
3. Mark what is said Verse. 1. of this nation that keeps the truth, and what
security they may have that are of that nation; We have a strong City,
salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks. The nation that keeps the
truth, yea every truth of God, is as a strong city, Gods salvation and
protection shall be in stead of all walls and bulwarks unto that nation.

My second proof of the first sort is that speech of our blessed Savior Ioh.
8.31. If ye continue in my word then are ye my disciples indeed: and not in
name and profession only. He that is Christ's disciple indeed, taught of God, a
true believer, will continue in Christ's word, in the truth he has learned of
him, and not be drawn away from it.

And the third is like unto this, 2 John 9. Whosoever transgresses (He There
is no man that sins not, 1 Kings 8.46. and every one that sins
transgresses the law, 1 Ioh. 3.4 But he speaks here of such as transgress in
judgment; forsake the right way as they did, 2 Peter 2.15. and fall from the
truth. Whosoever (says he) transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of
Christ, has not God, has no part in God, no saving knowledge of God, no
comfort in him; He that abides in the doctrine of Christ, has both the Father
and the Son; has God for his father, and the Son of God for his Savior.
And this is my first sort of proof, the testimony that the Lord has given of
them that cleave to the truth, and are constant in his holy religion; you see
what account the Lord makes of such.

Proof. 2
My second proof is the testimony that Gods people themselves from their own
experience have given unto this, even of the comfort that they have found in
this in the times of their greatest trials and a^flictions, that they have been
constant in their religion, and faithfully persisted in the truth of God. And
for this kind of proof, I will give you three particular examples of most holy
men; and one more general of the whole Church.

Job, who when he was overwhelmed (almost) with tentations of all sorts, found
not more comfort, and strength against them all in any one thing, than he did
in this, Job 23.11, 12. My foot has held his steps, his way have I kept, and
not declined; neither have I gone back from the commandment of his lips, I
have esteemed the words of his mouth more than my necessary food. As if he had
said, How many and how great soever my frailties and corruptions have been,
whereby I have justly deserved the Lord should thus afflict me, yet I thank
God, this my Conscience can witness with me, and this is my comfort, that I
have never been variable in my religion, I have been constant in that.

David's, who when his soul cleaved to the dust, Psalm. 119.25. and melted for
heaviness, as he says Verse. 28. when he was brought very low by outward and
inward affliction, raises up himself with this testimony that his conscience
gave him, as with a principal comfort, Verse. 30, 31. I have chosen the way of
truth; thy judgments (thy Word, for so is that word taken most commonly in
that Psalm) have I laid before me, I have stuck unto thy testimonies; O Lord
put me not to shame. As if he should have said, I have deliberately, advisedly,
and upon good grounds I find for it in thy Word (not out of any carnal
respects, because it is the religion of the time and State I live in) made
choice of this religion which I do profess, and I have stuck to it, and would
never be drawn from it; therefore O Lord put me not to shame, forsake me not,
nor leave me not without comfort.

Tim 4.6, 7. I am now ready to be offered (as a sacrifice in martyrdom) and the
time of my departure is at hand; that was a time certainly wherein he should
need to bethink himself of the best grounds of comfort he had: and what was the
chief thing that he grounds his comfort and confidence upon at that time?
Surely this which he expresses in the next words, I have fought a good fight,
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. As if he had said, Though by
many oppositions of false teachers, and bitter persecutions, I have been
strongly assaulted to forsake it, yet I have (I praise God, and this is my
comfort) even to the finishing of my course and end of my days kept the faith,
that is, the doctrine of faith, as the word is taken Acts 6.7. Romans 1.5. Gal.
1.23. and in many other places. And mark how confidently he infers even upon
this ground in the next words Verse. 8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at
that day.

Psalm. 44.17, 18, 19 All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee,
neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant; our heart is not turned back;
neither have our steps declined from thy way; though thou have sore broken us
in the place of dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death. As if they
had said, No reproach or persecution that ever we endured (all which we might
easily have escaped if we would have dealt falsely in thy covenant, and forsaken
thy truth) could make us (so much as in heart) to turn back from thy way, as
our forefathers did in the wilderness, of whom it is said Acts 7.39. that in
their hearts they turned back into Egypt, they could have found in their
hearts to be there again; but so could not we; and this testimony of our
uprightness we have to comfort our selves with in all the miseries that have
befalne us. And thus have I given you the proof of the point, that a man's
constancy in the true Religion, is a sure argument that he has indeed the
Spirit of Christ: and that that may give him great comfort in his estate.

Lecture CXLV. On Psalm 51.7. August 16. 1631.
IT follows now that we proceed to the reasons and grounds of this point, and
show you why it must needs be so, that he that has the Spirit of Christ is
constant in his religion, he cannot be like the reed shaken with the wind,
variable and wavering in his religion, nor apt to be drawn away by any means
from the truth that he has learned and received from the Word of God. Two
evident reasons there be for this. 1. The Spirit of Christ wheresoever it dwells
will teach and persuade the conscience effectually in the truth of God. 2. He
that is taught his religion by the Spirit of God, will certainly be constant in
it.

The first reason (because it is of great importance, Reason 1
and concerns the maine ground of that certainty that any of Gods people have
in their faith and religion) I will distinctly and plainly for the help of
your understanding and memory, declare and confirm unto you in six several
propositions, and then I will answer the maine objection that is made against
it.

First, the Lord has promised that he will by his holy Spirit instruct and
teach his people in the way to life. See this promise Ioh. 14.26. The
comforter, (says our blessed Savior) whom my father will send in my name,
through my merit and mediation, he shall teach you all things. All things (he
means) that are necessary unto your salvation for you to know, and to be
persuaded of. And if any man shall say (as the Papist does) tush this promise
was made to the Apostles only who represented the whole Church of Christ: and
that therefore from hence it may be well concluded indeed, that to the whole
representative Church in a general Council lawfully assembled; the Spirit is
promised to teach and guide them infallibly in all things; but can every
private man or woman conclude from hence, that the Spirit of God will teach
them all things? I answer, That though these words were spoken to the Apostles
only, (for they were spoken in that Sermon our Savior made at his last Supper
where none were present but they) yet does it not follow from thence that they
were spoken of the Apostles only, as not concerning any other but them: for
there were many things spoken in that Sermon that do undoubtedly concern all
the faithful as much as them: viz. that which is in Chap. 13.34, ^5. 14.21,
23, 24. 15.1, -- 10. 16.23, 24.

But for further answer unto this, I add this second proposition. That the
promise All thy children (says the Lord to his Church, to his Catholic
Church, the whole company of his elect and called ones Esa. 54.13.) all thy
children shall be taught of the Lord. And our Savior citing this place John
6.45. delivers the promise in these general terms; It is written in the
Prophets (says he) and they shall be all taught of God. He is then no member
of the Catholic Church (out of which as out of Noah's Ark there can be no
salvation) he is none of Gods elect, that in the matters of his religion, has
no other teacher then man, that is not therein taught of God, and instructed by
his holy spirit. Ye have an unction (says the Apostle in his general Epistle
that he wrote to all the faithful, 1 John 2.20. Yea even to such among them as
verse 18. he calls little children the weakest, and meanest of all the
faithful) ye have an unction from that holy one (says he even unto them) and
know all things: that is, ye have received from Christ the Holy Ghost the
Comforter, and he has taught you, and instructed you in all things that are
necessary to the salvation of your souls, for you to know, and to be
instructed in.

Genesis 1.3. so is it also in the new creation. Be ye transformed (says the
Apostle, Romans 12.^.) by the renewing of your mind. So soon as a man is
transformed, and has that blessed change wrought in him, his mind will be
renewed, and his judgment cleared in spiritual things. When their heart
turns unto the Lord (says he, 2 Cor. 3 16.) so soon as a man is once
converted by the spirit of God, the veil that darkened the understanding, and
kept a man from seeing, and discerning the things of God shall be taken away.
That man whom Gods spirit has not enlightened to see the truth (in some
comfortable measure) in the matter of religion, that is ignorant therein, or
has no knowledge but such as he has received by tradition from men, had never
any other teacher then man; holds nothing in religion but humanafide, upon that
credit that he gives unto man, it is the religion of the time, of the state,
and country he lives in, it is that which he knows many learned and good men
do teach, and hold, and therefore he holds, and professes it, but he was
never inwardly, and firmly persuaded in his conscience of these things; that
man certainly never had the spirit of Christ; It cannot be idle wheresoever it
is, it will be working* and if it have not renewed thy mind, and judgment, if
it have not taught, and instructed thee, which is the right way to heaven,
which is the true religion; it never had any work in thy heart at all, thou
have certainly no one work of saving, and sanctifying grace wrought in thy
soul.

Abraham had not been undoubtedly certain of that, he would never have been
so ready as he was, Genesis 22.2, 3. to sacrifice his own son: Neither would
Joseph being a just man have taken Mary his wife after she was found with child
as he did, Matthew. 1.20, 24. nor would he have taken her, and our blessed Lord
immediately after he arose, by night; and have fled into Egypt, as he did, Mat.
2.13, 14. if he had not been certainly assured that that was the will of God
that was so revealed to him, the spirit spoke expressly in those cases, as the
Apostle teaches us, 1 Timothy 4.1. So does the spirit of God also in his ordinary
manner of teaching the heart of man, by the holy Scriptures (which the Apostle
2 Pet. 1.19. calls a more sure word of prophesy then any of those
extraordinary revelations were) speak so expressly as the people of God that
have been taught by him, have been so certain of the truth, that they have
been willing to seal it even with their dearest blood. So the Evangelist
says, Luke 1.1. that all the parts of the Gospel all the articles of our
faith were most surely believed among the faithful. And Peter says of
himself, and the rest of the elect Apostles, Ioh. 6.69. We believe, and are
sure that thou art that Christ the son of the living God. And our Savior
says of them all, Ioh. 17.8. that they knew surely that be came out from God,
and believed that God did send him. The people of God by the teaching of the
holy spirit, do attain (you see) not unto a probable opinion only, but to an
undoubted certainty of knowledge, and faith. And from this certainty, has
grown that mavelous courage, and comfort that the holy Martyrs have
expressed in all their sufferings. They were ^laine for the Word of God, (says
the Apostle, Revel 6.9.) and ^or the testimony which they held. They did
profess, and give testimony to the truth of God which they had learned in his
Word; and they did hold fast this their testimony, and would not by any means
be drawn from it, and therefore they were slain. If a man have no certainty
in the matters of religion, but is wavering, and unsettled in it certainly he
was never yet taught of God.

Fifthly, No man can attain to this undoubted certainty in religion by any
Peter had made this confession of his faith, Matthew. 16.16. Thou art Christ the
son of the living God. Jesus answered, and said unto him, verse 17. Blessed
art thou Simon Bar-jona for flesh, and blood has not revealed it unto thee,
but my father which is in heaven. Mark two things in this speech of our
blessed Savior. 1. That till a man be taught of God he can never understand
and know, no not thus much. 2. That he is a blessed, and happy man that can
find in himself that he is taught of God. Why but may you say? May not flesh,
and blood reveal so much to a man? May not a natural man be persuaded of this
that Jesus is Christ the son of the living God? I answer that he may say so;
and he may think so, and he may in some sort know it to be so, and be able to
prove it to be so; but he cannot be fully persuaded of this article; he cannot
believe it with all his heart as Philip speaks, Acts 8.37. till God by his
holy spirit have revealed it unto him, and persuaded his heart of it. No man
can say that Jesus is the Lord, (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.3.) but by the
Holy Ghost. As if he had said, He cannot say, and profess it from the full
persuasion of his heart, till the Holy Ghost has taught it him, that he is so
indeed. No man can have a clear, and certain persuasion in matters of
religion, but only he that has the spirit of sanctification, and is
instructed, and guided by it. Certainly (says Elihu, Job 32.8.) there is a
spirit in man, and the inspiration of the almighty gives them understanding.
There be many arguments whereby a man may be convinced and forced to
acknowledge that the holy Scripture is undoubtedly the Word of God. 1. The
mavelous consent of all the holy Writers that penned it. 2. The certain
fulfilling of all the Prophesyes contained in it. 3. The strange miracles that
have confirmed it. 4. The admirable providence of God in preserving of it. 5.
The testimony that the Church, and Saints of God in all ages have given unto
it. 6. The divine and supernatural doctrine contained in it. But none of all
these arguments can undoubtedly persuade the heart certitudine fidei that the
holy Scripture or any doctrine contained in it is the Word of God, till we be
taught it of God, till the holy spirit of God, have inwardly certified, and
assured us of it. Therefore is this knowledge, this clear, and certain
knowledge in matters of faith, and religion called, Pro 30.3. the knowledge of
the holy: and 9.10. The knowledge of the holy, is understanding. A carnal man
by his natural parts, and by the help of learning, of hearing, of study, and
conference may know much in religion, and teach it also excellently, and
maintain it strongly against any adversary; but this clear, and certain
knowledge, this (...) that carries with it, as with full sail the whole man
to the love, and obedience of it, that makes a man able, and willing to suffer,
and die for the truth; can no man have, till the holy spirit of God have
sanctified his heart, and persuaded him in the truth.

Cor. 2.15) by whom (though he oppose him to the natural man) he means not
every one that has the spirit, and is regenerate but him that has the spirit
in a greater measure then many other of the regenerate have, as appears by the
opposition he makes, Chap. 3 1. between them that are spiritual, and them
that are ^a^es in Christ. He that is spiritual (says he) judges all things;
that is to say; is not only certain of the truth that himself holds, but
can judge, and clearly discern, and reject any error that is held by other
men; yet he himself is judged of no man: As if he had said, He is so
certainly assured of the truth that he holds, that the contrary judgment
of other men, whatsoever they be* cannot over-sway him or cause him to
stagger. Grow in grace (says the Apostle, 2 Peter 3.18.) and in the knowledge
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. The holyer, and more spiritual a man is,
the more he grows in grace, in the fear of God, in sorrow for sin, and
hatred of it, and in the love of goodness: the better, and with the more
certainty of assurance shall he know the mystery of Christ, the clearer, and
more certain assurance shall he have in spiritual things.

Object.
And (thus having opened, and confirmed this first reason of the Doctrine) I
come to answer a maine objection which the Papist does make, and which may rise
in your minds against it. And indeed if it were an objection of Papists only
I would never trouble you, or my self about it. But we are all by nature
rank Papists in this, and in many other points of religion; and I know this
first reason will seem strange, and absurd to many of you: and that you will
be ready to say, what? Shall every man in the matter of religion rest upon the
instruction, and persuasion he has from his own private spirit. This fond
conceit (says the Papist) has already, and still must needs bring into the
Church an infinite variety of opinions in religion. Quot capitatot sensus, so
many men, so many minds, and opinions there must needs be in religion, if
every ones private spirit be supreme judge, and determiner what is truth in
the matter of religion. Is it not a far surer way for all men to depend, and
rest upon the Doctrine, and instruction of the Church (according to the
ordinance of God) then upon that which their own private spirit teaches them?
Ask the priests concerning the law, says the Lord, Hag. 2.11. and again, The
priests lips shall keep knowledge (says the Prophet, Mal. 2.7.) and the
people should seek the law at his mouth.

Answ.
Now unto this I have Four things to answer.

sensual not having the spirit, as the Apostle speaks of some, Jude 19. and
indeed to every natural man; yet to the regenerate man it is not so. The
spirit of truth (says our Savior, John 14.17.) the world cannot receive,
because it sees him not, neither knows him, but ye know him, for he
dwells in you, and shall be in you. Every true believer, every true
Christian has the spirit of God, and knows, and finds in himself that he
has it. Because ye are sons (says the Apostle, Galathians 4.6.) God has
sent forth the spirit of his son into your hearts, crying Abba, father: He
could not pray else nor cry Abba father unto God. And he that has it not (let
him scoff, and ^lout at it never so much) is in a woeful case certainly, and
will find it to be so one day. He that has not the spirit of Christ, is none
of his, says the Apostle, Romans 8.9.

Secondly, The spirit that every faithful man has to teach, and instruct We
have received (says the Apostle, ^ Cor. 2.12.) not the spirit of the world,
but the spirit which is of God, that we might know the things which are freely
given us of God. And 2 besides, it is not man's private spirit because it is
one, and the same in all the faithful throughout the world, and teaches them
all one, and the same thing. By one spirit (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.13)
we are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, bond or
free, and have been all made to drink into one spirit. As if he should have
said, As all the faithful throughout the world enjoy the same outward
Sacraments, so is the inward grace that is sealed thereby, one and the same in
all the faithful throughout the world, and teaches them all one and the same
thing. So that this teaching that every true believer has, and must have, from
the spirit, is no cause of the diversity of opinions that is in the world; no
no it is the following, and harkening unto our own natural, and carnal
spirits, that is the true cause of that, if we were all taught by the spirit of
God, we should agree better in opinion then we do. Yea it is one, and the same
spirit, that is in all the faithful that are now living, that it was in all
the faithful in old time, and teaches us now no other thing, then it did
teach all the faithful from the beginning of the world. So the Apostle
alluding unto David and to the faithful in his time says, 2 Cor. 4.13. We
having the same spirit of faith according as it is written I believed, and
therefore have I spoken, we also believe, and therefore speak.

Thirdly, We do not say, that that teaching, and persuasion which Beloved
believe not every spirit (says the Apostle, 1 John 4.1.) but try the spirits,
whether they be of God. But how shall we try whether the Doctrine that our
teachers bring us be such as they received, and learned of Gods spirit or no?
Why we must try it by this rule. To the law, and to the testimony (says the
Prophet, Esa. 8.20.) if they speak not according to this Word, it is because
they have no light in them. As if he should have said, they were never taught
of God. And this is also the rule whereby we must try every opinion in
religion that we hold, every motion, and inclination that we find in our
hearts whether it be of the spirit of God yea or no; the spirit never
disagreeth from the Word. Behold (says the wisdom of God, Proverbes 1.23.) I
will power out my spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you. And
Esa. 59.21. This is my covenant with them, says the Lord, my spirit that is
upon thee, and my word which I have put in thy mouth. The spirit, and the Word
go always together.

Cor. 3.8. the ministration of the spirit. As if he had said, The means
whereby the Lord conveyes his spirit into the heart of man, and whereby the
spirit works grace in man's heart, is the ministry of the Word. Received ye
the spirit (says he, Galathians 3.2.) by the works of the law, or by the
hearing of faith, that is the Doctrine of faith preached? So speaking of faith
(the greatest work of the spirit) he says, Romans 10.17. faith comes by
hearing. Therefore when our Savior had said, John 6.45. It is written in the
Prophets they shall be all taught of God, he adds immediately, every man
therefore that has heard, and learned of the father comes unto me. As if he
had said, The father teaches no man (ordinarily) but in, and by the hearing of
his Word preached. Therefore when the Lord makes that gracious promise to every
faithful man, that he will by his spirit plainly teach, and direct him which
way to take, even then when he is in most danger to be mislead, and seduced,
Esa. 30.21. Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee saying, this (not that
but this) is the way walk ye in it (continue, go on in it, leave it not)
when thou turnest unto the right hand, and when thou turnest unto the left. As
if he should have said, When thou shall be in danger to be seduced, and drawn
out of the right way even then my spirit shall resolve, and confirm thee in
the truth, and keep thee in it. I say when the Lord does promise thus
plainly, and particularly to teach, and guide his people aright by his spirit,
even in controverted truths, you shall find in the former, verse 20. how, and
by what means the spirit will thus teach, and guide his people. Thy teachers
(says he) shall not be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall
see thy teachers, and then follows, and thine ears shall hear a word behind
thee. As if he should say, I will accompany the ministry of my Word with the
efficacy, and operation of my spirit, and by the ministry of thy teachers my
spirit shall instruct, and guide thee in the right way. And thus you see the
first reason of the Doctrine opened, and confirmed unto you that the spirit of
God, wheresoever he dwells will teach and persuade the heart in the truth of
religion.

The second reason of it is this, That when once a man is taught of God, and
instructed by his spirit in the truth, Reason. 2
he will certainly cleave unto it, and hold fast whatsoever he has learned
of that heavenly teacher. Teach me O Lord (says David, Psalm 119.33.) the
way of thy statutes; that is, that way unto life, and salvation which thou have
in thy Word prescribed (a plain periphrasis of the true religion of God) and I
shall keep it unto the end. As if he had said, I shall never fall nor be
drawn away from it when once thou have by thy spirit instructed, and resolved
me in it. And verse 102. I have not departed from thy judgments, says he, but
have been constant in thy truth for thou have taught me. So says the Apostle
also of all that are taught of God, 1 John 2.27. The same anointing (says he;
the spirit of God he means) teaches you of all things, of all things that
are necessary for you to know, and it is truth, and is no lie, this teaching of
the spirit is clear, certain, and even as it has taught you ye shall abide
in him. As if he should say. Ye shall abide in Christ; and in the profession of
every truth of his, because ye have been taught by his holy spirit.

And thus have I showed you the reasons, and grounds of this point, that he
that has the spirit of Christ will be constant in the Religion of Christ, and
firmly cleave unto the truth of God.

Lecture CXLVI. On Psalm 51.7. Aug. 30. 1631.
IT follows now that we proceed to make some application of it unto our
selves. Aplic.
For seeing (as we have heard) the Spirit of God wheresoever it dwells will
teach, and resolve the heart in the truth of Religion; and he that is thus
taught of God, cannot but be constant in the truth; seeing the Lord makes so
great account of them that cleave to his truth; and the faithful themselves
have found such comfort in this, when they have been in great distress, we
are therefore to be exhorted that every one of us would labor, by this note to
approve our selves to have the Spirit of Christ, and so to be his, even by our
resolution, and constancy in our Religion, and cleaving fast unto the truth of
God, which we have received, and do make profession of. This is an
exhortation, which we shall find much pressed upon Gods people by the Holy
Ghost, specially in the New Testament. Watch ye, take heed unto your selves
(says the Apostle 1 Cor. 16.13.) stand fast in the faith, in the Doctrine of
faith, quit ye like men, in withstanding manfully all such as would seduce
you, be strong and resolute in the truth. Observe his earnestness in the many
words he uses. So Phil. 4.1. Stand fast in the Lord in the faith, and Doctrine
of Christ my dearly beloved. And 2 These. 2.15. Therefore brethren (says he)
sland fast, and hold the traditions the doctrines delivered unto you which you
have been taught, whether by word by lively voice in the Ministry of the
word, preached which you hear, or by our Epistle, or by the holy Scripture
which ye read. And again Heb. 4.14. Let us hold fast our pro^ession says
he, And again Heb. 10.23. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without
wavering: Remember how thou have received, and heard says our Savior Revel.
3.3. and hold fast. And if the people of God then had such need to have this
exhortation pressed upon them, while the Apostles themselves lived, by whom
they had been taught and confirmed in the truth, with far more evidence and
demonstration of the spirit, and of power (as the Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 2.4.)
then is it to be found in the Ministry of any of Gods servants now, how much
more necessary is this exhortation for us all in these days.

No, not so will you say. For those were days of bloody persecution, Object.
and of a fiery trial. The Magistrate was a mortal enemy to Christ, and his
Gospel, and the Jews every where incensed him against it; but we (thanks be
to God) live under a Christian Magistrate, and in days of great peace, we have
peace at home, and peace abroad.

To this I answer that though we (through the great mercy of God) do enjoy the
Gospel in great peace, Answ.
and have it also maintained, and countenanced by public authority; and though
the religious disposition of our gracious King (who has both heretofore, and
of late so fully declared himself to be for the Gospel, and against Popery)
may give us great hope of the continuance of this blessing, and may seem to
free us from fear of any alteration of Religion in our days. Yet are there
three things that make this exhortation every whit as needful for our times,
and for us, as it was for the people of God in the Apostles days.

First, The great danger we are in that popery may prevail and steal in upon
us (and with it a fiery trial) before we be aware; not withstanding all that
has been said of the hopes we have. Surely the great increase of Papists that
we daily hear of, together with the mavelous declining of many declared by
the ready receiving of such Doctrines as any seducing Spirit will offer to them
may give us just cause of this fear.

Matthew. 13.27, 28) spied their Masters field so full of tares, they said unto
him. Sir did not thou sow good seed in thy field, from whence then are these
tares? They do not lay the fault upon the seed their Master did sow. The
Papists, and Atheists when they hear either of Heresies that spring in the
Church, or of hypocrites, and scandalous sinners that break out amongst such as
profess Religion, are apt still to impute all to our Masters seed. This comes
of following Sermons, a goodly Gospel say they this is, that brings forth such
fruits. And the servants of God themselves, that know how good the seed was
that their Master did sow in this field, how sound, and pure the Doctrine has
been which our state, and Church has professed, and which has been preached
in it above 70. years without interruption, and see what a number of strange
opinions are now risen in it, are apt to wonder and cry Lord whence come all
these tares? But mark what answer the Lord of the field gives unto his
servants The enemy has done this, says he. Satan the enemy of God, and
mankind, is the sower of all these tares, the author of all the heresies (and
scandalls too) that rise in Gods Church. And the men that broach these errors
(how learned or good soever they may seem to be; as Satan himself says the
Apostle 2 Cor. 11.14. is of transformed into an Angel of light) are set on work
by him, his agents his seeds-men they are. Our Savior foretelling the
destruction of Jerusalem and of the whole state, and the judgments whereby God
would plague that nation, for the contempt of the Gospel: and which should be
signs, and forerunners of his taking it away from them, and bestowing it upon
some other nation that would bring forth better fruits of it, names this for
one, Matthew. 24.11. Many false Prophets (says he) shall arise and shall deceive
many. Certainly the many sects, and errors that arise in our Church as it is
to be esteemed a most just judgment of God upon this nation for the contempt
of the Gospel, so is it a fearful sign of a more grievous judgment
approaching, and namely of the removing of our candlestick, and taking away the
Gospel from us. And surely these false teachers (increasing as they do) will
steal away the truth of Religion from us before we be aware (as the Lord
speaks of the false Prophets in Ieremies time Ier. 23.30.) unless we stir
up our selves to hold it fast, and to cleave so much the more steadfastly unto
it, because we see it so many ways questioned, and contradicted by
fantastical spirits.

Thirdly, and lastly. The general decay of the love of Religion in all places,
with our long peace, and plenty makes us to esteem lightly, and to grow weary
of it, as Israel of old was of Mannah, though it were both the most wholesome,
and the most delicate food also that ever man tasted of: In which respect the
Prophet Psalm. 78.25. calls it Angels food, such a food as (if they had needed
meat) the very Angels might have fed upon. Yet grew they so weary of it that
they preferred the cucumbers, and onyons, and garlic of Egypt before it Number.
11.5, 6. any thing rather then Mannah then that food that came down from
heaven. And so does the Apostle prophecy 2 Timothy 4.4. of a time that should
come (and we have just cause to judge that this is the very time he
prophesies of) wherein such as had professed the Gospel should turn away
their ears from the truth and be turned unto fables. No doctrine can be so
fabulous, and fantastical but men will be ready to turn unto it, and to
embrace it, rather then the present truth, as the Apostle calls it 2 Pet. 1.12.
Any thing that will oppose, and contradict the present truth this Mannah that
is before our eyes as the Jews speak there Number. 11.6. shall be welcome unto
them. This is not the disposition of a few (of here, and there one) but it is
the humor of the very age and time we live in, that strongly inclines unto
epicurisme and irreligiousnesse. Therefore the Apostle in another prophecy of
his 2 Timothy 3.1. wherein he sets down the general sins of those perilous
times that shall come in the last days (whereinto we are fallen) notes this as
a chief one Verse 5. Having a form of godliness, an outward profession of
the true Religion, but denying the power thereof; that the Gospel should have
such a commanding power over them as to restrain them from any sin they were
inclined unto (especially if it be in fashion) this they should not abide, this
being the general disease of the time we shall all be in danger to be carried
away with the stream, and sway of it; if we discern it not to be a forerunner
of the removal of our candlestick the Gospel, and in time take heed, and
repent, and do our first works, Rev. 2.5. and if the general inclination
unto profanesse, that we discern in all men, cause us not to love the truth,
and cleave to it so much the more, and to take up David's cry, and resolution
Psalm. 119.126 -- 128. It is time for thee Lord to work, and to show thy power
for the maintaining of thy truth, and Gospel, for they have made void thy law;
thy word, and truth is of no reckoning* and account with men therefore (even
for this very cause; Oh happy man that can say so) therefore love I thy
Commandments above gold, yea above fine gold, therefore I esteem all thy
precepts concerning all things, to be right, and I hate every false way.

And now that I have thus showed you how much need we have of this exhortation
to constancy in our Religion, I will (for the better enforcing of it) first
give you some motives to persuade, and provoke you to it, and then show you the
means how it may be obtained. And the Motives I will give you shall be but two.

First, take heed how you suffer your selves to be corrupted in judgment,
Motive 1
how you approve in your judgment of any erroneous Doctrine, for corruption in
judgment is the most dangerous corruption of all others, worse then corruption
in manners is, specially in a man that has been formerly enlightened with the
knowledge of the truth. To allow of any evil we do in our judgment, and to
defend it as lawful, is a greater sin, and argues a man to be more under the
power, and dominion of sin, then the committing of sin does. Therefore the
Apostle (in the person not of a natural, but of a regenerate man) comforts
himself in this Romans 7.15. That which I do I allow not, and Verse 16. I
consent to the Law that it is good, and Verse 25. With my mind I serve the Law
of God. The Leprosy in the head was of all kind of Leprosies most dangerous.
The Priest shall pronounce him utterly unclean (says the Lord Leviticus
13.44.) his plague is in his head. As the soul is the excellency of a man; so
is the spirit, and judgment the excellency of the soul, and that that God
has set in a man to guide, and govern all other the powers, and facultyes of
it. The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord, says Solomon Prove. 20.27. a
divine light set in the soul to direct the whole man. And if the light that is
in thee be darkness (says our Savior Matthew. 6.23. if thy mind, and
judgment be once corrupted) how great, how dangerous is that darkness. Take
heed therefore (says he Luke 11.35.) that the light that is in thee be not
darkness: take heed that thy judgment be not corrupted. Most men are of
opinion that if a man's life, and conversation be honest, and good it is no
great matter what his opinion in Religion be. But they are much deceived. An
unsound, and corrupt judgment in Religion will make a man more odious unto
God, then many foul corruptions in life and conversation will do. To the
unbeleeving (says the Apostle Tit. 1.15.) Nothing is pure, for even their
mind, and conscience is defiled. Even their mind is defiled, says he. The
corruption of the mind, is the highest degree of corruption that can be. Nay
it is not only an high degree of corruption, to be corrupt in judgment, but it
is also a grievous punishment of God when a man (through want of judgment to
discern between truth, and falsehood) shall receive error, and forsake the
truth. This is said to be the judgment that God did make choice of, to punish
the Gentiles for their most heinous sins; God gave them over (says the Apostle
Romans 1.28. to a reprobate mind (...) to a mind void of judgment, as your
margin well renders it. When thou once losest thy judgment, that thou can
not discern between truth, and error in the matters of thy faith, and
salvation, know that thou art under a most heavy curse of God.

Motive 2
Secondly, If any of you shall change your judgment in Religion, and be apt to
embrace error, and forsake the truth, you shall thereby declare your selves
never to have been taught of God, never to have had any truth of grace, or
goodness in you.

Object
What? (will you say) is every one that holds any error in Religion utterly
void of all grace? Answ.
For answer unto this you must understand that there is great difference in the
errors that men hold, and in the manner of their holding them also. As in the
law of God (which is the rule of our practice) there are some more weighty
matters (as our Savior speaks Matthew. 23.23.) and some that are less
weighty. So among those truths in Religion that are to be known, and believed
there are some that are more fundamental of more absolute necessity to
salvation, to be known, and believed then some others are. As in the body of
man some wounds are mortal, Viz. such as touch the brain, or heart, or other
vital parts, some others though they be very deep, and grievous yet are not
mortal; so it is in the errors of the mind, some of them touch the head (
not holding the head says the Apostle Col. 2.19.) and destroy the faith as he
speaks 2 Timothy 2.18. they overthrow the Doctrine of justification only by
faith in Christ (which is the very life of a Christians soul) but some of them
do not so. To answer therefore more distinctly unto the question, I say.

Moses days had made holy, and to abstain from all those meats that by that
law were made unclean; did (out of doubt) hold an arrour in Religion; and yet
the Apostle Romans 14.1 -- 6. speaks of such a man as of the dear child of God,
and says plainly of him Verse 3. That God had received him into favor, yea
he shall be holden up, says he Verse 4. he shall persevere in the state of
grace, for all the error that he holds. Yea he forbids Gods people, that were
sounder in judgment than he, to despise him, or judge him to be void of grace;
nay, he commands them to receive him, converse with him, think well of him,
love him, notwithstanding this error of his. As every error of judgment does
not separate a man from Christ, so neither should it separate the members of
Christ in love and affection one from another. When any two of us differ in
judgment in any matter of religion whatsoever, the one of us certainly must
needs be in an error. And he that is in the error (so it be but an error of
this kind) may be every whit as holy a man (yea and holier too) than he that
holds the truth. For the dearest of Gods children in this life, may be
subject unto such errors. The best may say of themselves as the Apostle does,
1 Cor. 13.9, We know but in part. And every man is a liar, says he, Romans 3.4.
the best man is subject to err, and to be deceived in some things. We shall
never all come to unity of faith, unity of judgment in all truths that are to
be believed, till we come to be perfect men, as the Apostle teaches us Ephesians.
4.13. While we live here, there will be difference of judgment in some things
between the best of Gods servants. And that which the Apostle says Iam. 3.1,
2. My brethren be not many masters, let not every one be so apt to censure and
judge his brother for every failing and slip in their practice and
conversation, for in many things we offend all; the same may fitly and truly be
spoken in this case also: My brethren be not many masters, let not every one be
so apt to censure and judge his brother for every error that he holds in his
judgment, for in many things we err all.

Yea I say secondly that a man that is in the state of grace may possibly hold
Mar. 10.37.41. Yea they held this error even after they had been eyewitnesses
both of his passion and resurrection too, as is plain by their question Acts
1.6. And the whole Church of the Galatians did for a time hold an error in
that maine fundamental article of our religion in the doctrine of our
justification. For they held that a man could not be justified by faith in
Christ only, without the works of the Law, as is evident by that pains the
Apostle takes to convince them of that error, Gal. 3 and 4 and 5 Chapters.
Though we may therefore judge of such errors as these, that they are most
odious and damnable, and can never speak nor think too hardly of them; yet may
we not judge every one that holds them to be in a damnable estate, neither must
their persons be odious unto us, so long as they do not trouble the Church, nor
seek to corrupt others by broaching of them: for of such the Apostle has a
bitter speech (yet not more bitter than holy and wholesome) Gal. 5.12. I would
they were even cut off which trouble you.

Thirdly, These errors that are so gross and dangerous, that tend directly to
David speaks Psalm. 119.21. Cursed are they that do err from thy
commandments. None but they that are accursed of God, and ordained to
damnation can fall into them and persist in them. If ever thou that have known
and professed the truth shall turn Papist, or Pelagian, or Libertine, or
Antinomian, certainly thou never had the Spirit of God, there was never any
true goodness or grace in thy heart. They that worship the beast (that turn
Papists) are many indeed (they may well brag of universality and multitude, the
Pope could not be Antichrist, he could not be that beast spoken on in the
Apocalypse, if he could not plead this universality) for all that dwell upon the
earth (in a manner) shall worship him, says the Holy Ghost, Rev. 13.8. But who
are they? None but they whose names are not written in the book of life, says
the text.

Fourthly and lastly, A wavering mind in religion, an aptness to forsake the
truth, and to receive new opinions and errors is a dangerous sign of an heart
that never had truth of grace in it. The ungodly (says the Prophet Psalm. 1.4)
are like the chafe which the wind drives away. To be so light of belief that
every wind of Doctrine will carry us away, is a sign of an ungodly man, of a
naughty and unsound heart. They that at such a time as there were many
Antichrists and false teachers in the Church, did receive their errors, and
were drawn from the truth, did thereby make it manifest (as the Apostle
speaks 1 Ioh. 2.18, 19.) that they were never any of Gods elect. If they had
been of us (says he Verse. 19.) if they had ever been any of Gods elect, they
would no doubt have continued with us, but they went out that they might be
made manifest that all (that once joined with us in the profession of the
truth) were not of us, but that we had some hypocrites among us. And so on the
other side they that in such a time, when there are many heresies and false
doctrines broached in the Church (and that with great show of reason, and
truth, and holiness too) shall yet cleave constantly unto the truth, are even
by this made manifest to have upright hearts to be the elect of God, and
precious in his sight. Thus our Savior describes his sheep (his elect) John
10.5. a stranger (one that teaches strange and false doctrine) they will not
follow, but will flee from him, shun, and avoid him as much as they can, for
they know not the voice of strangers, they approve not of, they like not the
doctrine of false teachers. Yea the Lord does for this very cause permit so
many spirits of error to swarm in his Church, as there do at this day, that
by this means of trial ^e might make it manifest, which among all them that
have professed his religion are his elect ones and approved of him, and which
are not. There must be heresies among you (says the Apostle 1 Cor. 11.19.)
that they which are approved, a^^ allowed of God may be made manifest among
you. Consider well of these motives, and you shall find there is great force in
them to persuade you to c^^ave resolutely and constantly to the truth you have
received: and to make you fearful to decline and fall from it.

Lecture CXLVII. On Psalm 51.7. Sept. 13. 1631.
Means.
IT follows now that we proceed unto the means that they who desire to be
constant in the truth, and to keep themselves from being corrupted in their
judgment by any of those erroneous spirits that the Church at this day is so
pestered with, must use. Our standing fast in the faith depends chiefly
indeed (not upon our selves, or upon any thing that is in us, or upon any thing
we are able to do, but) upon the Lord only, and upon these two things that
are in him. First, Upon that grace, and free love of God that moved him in his
eternal counsel to elect and ordain us unto life: And secondly, upon that
omnipotent power of his, whereby only we are preserved from falling away.
There shall arise (says our Savior, Matthew 24.24.) false Christ's, and false
Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders (the Priests and Jesuits
boast much of miracles you know. Their miracles for the most part are palpably
detected to the world, to be but tricks of legier de-main. And if they were not
so, if they were indeed great signs and wonders that they do, yet might they
be false Prophets for all that) false Prophets (says our Savior) shall show
great signs and wonders, in so much that (if it were possible) they shall
deceive the very el^ct. If it were possible, says he. It is not possible for
any of Gods elect to be so deceived by any false teachers, as that they should
fall into those errors that are fundamental, and persist in them. The
foundation of God (says the Apostle 2 Timothy 2.19. this decree of God which
is the maine foundation of our whole salvation) that stands sure, and can
never be moved or altered. And secondly, we are kept (says the Apostle 1
Peter 1.5.) by the power of God through faith unto salvation. And by our faith
we have in these things, and in other the promises of God we stand, as the
Apostle says 2 Corith. 1.24. and not by any thing that is in our selves. But
though this be so, yet has the Lord appointed some things for us to do, to
preserve our selves from falling away from the truth. And though he at the
first made us without our selves (not of our first creation only, but of the
first forming of the new creature principally is that to be understood which
the Church speaks Psalm 100.3. It is he that made us and not we our selves,
as appears by the words that follow, We are his people and the sheep of his
pasture; we were mere patients in both those first works of God) yet will he
not save us without our selves, he will not preserve us in the state of grace,
nor bring us unto glory without our own endeavor, he will have us to be
agents in this work our selves, and co-workers with him. Work out your own
salvation, says the Apostle Phil. 2.12. and Jude 20, ^1. Build up your selves
in your most holy faith: and keep your selves in the love of God. And
whomsoever God has elected and decreed to preserve, so as they shall never be
deceived, and drawn from the truth in them he will work a care and endeavor
to use all means to preserve themselves. Yea he will make them to be diligent
and painful in working for themselves this way, in doing their endeavor, and
using of the means whereby they may be kept from falling away from the truth.
The Apostle writing to the Hebrews that had done much already to make sure to
themselves their own election and calling And we desire (says he Hebrews
6.11, 12.) that every one of you do show the same diligence, to the full
assurance of hope unto the end. That ye be not slothful, but followers of
them who through faith and patience inherit the promises. No man can have full
assurance of hope to be preserved from falling away, unless (even to the end
of his days) he be diligent in using the means to preserve himself. No man
may look to inherit Gods promises, that is a sloathfull man, that relyeth
wholly upon Gods mercy, and power, and gracious promises, and will use no
endeavor, take no pains to keep himself from falling from God. On the other
side, he that will diligently endeavor himself to do that that God has
directed him to do, and to use Gods means, shall not need to doubt, but that
God will uphold him, though the times were far more dangerous than they are.
He that upheld Noah, Genesis 6.9. and Obadiah, 1 Kings 18.3. in such times as
these were, can certainly uphold us in these times. God is able to make him
stand, says the Apostle, Romans 14.4. Yea, and he will cetainely do it, if
we be not wanting to our selves. Arise and be doing (says David to Solomon,
1 Chronicles. 22.16.) and the Lord will be with thee. Do thy endeavor in the use
of Gods means conscionably, and thou shall not need to doubt of success. In
all labor there is profit, says the Holy Ghost, Prove. 14.23. which is to be
understood as well of the pains we are to take for our souls and for heaven,
as for that we take for our bodies in our worldly callings. Yea the Lord (to
show the necessity of our own endeavor to encourage us unto this, and to
honor the use of his means) is pleased to ascribe our preservation from
falling, and standing in the state of grace (which is indeed his own work
only) unto this our care of keeping of our selves. He that is begotten of God
keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not, says the Apostle, 1
John 5.18. A regenerate man may by a conscionable use of the means (yet not
he (says the Apostle, 1 Corinthians 15.10.) but the grace of God that is with
him, and with all others also that faithfully do their endeavor) keep
himself, so as that Satan nor any of his agents shall ever be able to touch
him mortally, to draw him to that sin that is unto death. Yea he that will
carefully do what lies in him (I speak still of the regenerate man) may
preserve himself (though not from all sin, from all humane frailties, and
infirmities) yet certainly from all gross, and scandalous sins, even from
such, as he has been by nature or custom most strongly inclined unto. And I
kept my self from mine iniquity says David, Psalm 18.23.

You will ask me then what is it, that God would have us to do to preserve
our selves from falling into error, and to keep our selves constant in his
holy truth. I answer they be two things principally: some things we must
avoid and some things we must do. 1. We must carefully beware of, and shun
those things whereby we are in danger to be corrupted in our judgment, and
drawn away from the truth. 2. We must diligently use the means whereby we
may be established, and preserved in it. Of the first kind there are two
wholesome, and necessary directions given us in Gods Book.

Cease my son to hear (says the Holy Ghost, Proverbes 19.27.) the
instruction, that causes to err from the words of knowledge. As if he should
have said, Thou have received the knowledge of the truth from the Word of God
(the writings of the Prophets, and Apostles are the words of knowledge) and
these men would instruct thee, and by great probability of reason persuade thee
another way. Give over hearing of such men says the Holy Ghost. This direction
the Apostle gives, Romans 16.17. Now I beseech you, brethren (says he
observe his earnestness in this matter) mark them which cause divisions, and
offenses (are authors of new sects) contrary to the doctrine which ye have
learned, and avoid them. And this note our blessed Savior gives to know his
Elect by, John 10.5. a stranger (one that brings new, and strange Doctrine
other Doctrine then such as their shepherd does teach) they will not follow,
but will flee from him Lest they should follow him and be mislead by him they
will flee from him, if they should not flee from him, they fear they might be
seduced by him. Yea though Timothy was himself a preacher, and a man of rare,
and excellent gifts too, yet the Apostle forbids him to reason much with
wrangling spirits, and such as would use their wits to dispute against the
truth. Perverse disputings (says he, 1 Timothy 6.5.) of men of corrupt
minds, and destitute of the truth. From such withdraw thy self. And if such a
man might not be allowed to reason much with heretics, nor to delight to
hear what they could say against the truth, and for their errors, how much
less may a private Christian be allowed to do thus.

Say not I shall (by hearing, and reading what they say) discern the absurdity
of their opinions the better, and be confirmed in the truth. For first, This
is not the mean that God has sanctified to confirm his people in the truth
but expressly forbidden it as you have heard, hear them not says he, avoid
them, flee from them. Secondly, The way that God has sanctified to confirm
thee in the truth sufficiently, and abundantly, is the sound ministry of his
Word. Paul, and Barnabas by their preaching confirmed the souls of the
Disciples, Act. 14 21, 22. And Paul sent Timothy by his ministry, and
preaching to establish the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 3.2. Thirdly, This will be a
mean to weaken thee rather, and breed doubts in thee, and pervert thee, then
to confirm thee in the truth. Remember what Eve got by giving her self
liberty to confer, and reason with the Serpent, specially when she was alone,
yet was she then in the state of innocence, Genesis 3.1, 2. If thou will needs
hear and read what such men can say, be sure thou have some with thee that is
able to detect, and confirm thee against their errors.

Neither say secondly, But I know my self to be so settled in the truth that
nothing they can say against it, shall be able to move me, but I shall be
rather able to convince them. For first, Many that oppose the truth, and teach
error are full of slight, and cunning craftiness as the Apostle speaks,
Ephesians. 4.14. and will speak with far greater probability and show of reason
then thou art aware of. Secondly, Heresies are works of the flesh as the
Apostle teaches us, Galathians 5.20. and therefore we are all by nature much
more apt and inclined to receive any heresy, then the truth. No tow, no tinder
is apter to take the fire then we are to receive error. Thirdly, Of the
Minister of God it is (indeed) required that he should be able by sound
Doctrine to convince the gainesayers, Titus 1.9. he has a calling unto it;
and therefore he may safely (so far as the necessity of the Church shall
require it) hear, and read what they can say for themselves. For while we
walk in any of our ways that God has appointed us to walk in, we have a
promise of protection from God, Psalm 91.11. He will give his Angels charge
over us to keep us in all our ways. But of every private Christian God
requires not this, that he should be able to convince the gaine-sayer, and
answer all his cavills; they have no calling unto it, and therefore cannot
expect the like protection from God to be kept from taking hurt by it.
Fourthly, and lastly, Thou have just cause to fear, that because thou
presuming upon thine own strength do wilfully disobey his commandment, who
has forbidden thee to hear them, commanded thee to avoid them, to flee from
them, God will leave thee, and suffer thee either to be corrupted, or unsettled
in thy judgment by them. Take Solomon for an example of this; who because he
did contrary to the commandment of God presume upon his own understanding,
and strength; he was so forsaken of God that every one of his strange wives
corrupted him in his judgment, and drew him to approve of, and practice their
several idolatries, 1 Kings 11.8. And certainly many now adays are daily
either altogether corrupted, or made unsettled in religion, by their voluntary,
and needless reasoning with, and reading the books of Papists, and other
heretics. To conclude therefore this first direction. Be not so desirous to
hear what such men can say, but rather as our Savior, Matthew. 10.16. commands
us to be wise as Serpents, learn that wisdom of the Serpent which the
Prophet speaks of, Psalm 58.4, 5. Stop thine ear and hearken not to the
voice of these charmers, charm they never so wisely.

The second direction of the first kind is this. If thou do desire to be
constant in people are to be exhorted unto; and there is a desire of knowledge
that is most dangerous, and which we must warn you all to beware of.
Concerning the The things revealed (says Moses, Deuteronomy. 29.29.) belong unto us,
and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of this law. There
is no part of Gods revealed will but it would further us in our obedience to
God, if we understood it as we ought to do, Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were
written aforetime (in the Old Testament, and then much more in the New) were
written for our learning, that we through patience, and comfort in the
Scriptures might have hope. Whatsoever is written in the holy Scriptures, would
further us in our faith, and increase our patience and comfort, and hope in all
our afflictions if we did understand it aright.

We do not cease to pray for you (says the Apostle, Col. 1.9) and to desire
that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his will. Nay though any of our
people should equal our selves who are their teachers in the knowledge of the
Word, and be able to discern when any of us teach unsoundly, or mistake the
meaning of the Scripture, or play the trevants, study not for our Sermons, but
do the work of the Lord negligently, this should not discontent us neither
(so long as they keep themselves within the bounds of modesty, and sobriety)
but we should rather all say as Moses did, Number. 11.29. would to God that all
the Lords people were Prophets; would to God that all our hearers were so
understanding a people.

But though this be so, yet is there a kind of desire of knowledge that is a
most dangerous thing, and which all that desire to keep themselves steadfast
in the purity of Gods religion, must be admonished to take heed of. The bait
whereby the Devil caught our first parents, and whereby we were all undone,
was the desire of knowledge. God does know (says he, Genesis 3.5.) that so soon
as ye shall eat of the fruit of this tree, your eyes shall be opened, and ye
shall be as Gods for knowledge. And you shall find verse 6. that this was the
maine thing that prevailed with them, that it was a tree to be desired to get
knowledge. And this hurtful, and dangerous desire of knowledge may be Moses
in the bush, Exodus 3.5. he charged him not to come too nigh him draw not nigh
hither, says he. And when he was pleased to reveal his glory unto his
people upon mount Sinai he set bounds unto them; and charged them upon pain
of death ( Exodus 19.12, 21.) not to pass those bounds to gaze and pry too
farte. The Lord has set bounds for our knowledge in these heavenly mysteryes
and those are the holy Scriptures. Remember what a plague came upon the men of
Bethshemesh, 1 Samuel 6 19. because they looked into the Arc; they would see,
and know more in the matters of God, then he would have them to do. And see
how God was offended with Zachary the father of John Baptist for this. God had
told him by his Angel, that he should have a blessed son by his wife
Elizabeth, Zachary said to the Angel, Luke 1.18. Whereby shall I know this?
Gods Word could not suffice him for his knowledge in this matter, but he would
have it made evident unto him by reason how such a thing could be. In all
matters of faith it becomes a Christian to enquire, and seek to know what God
has in his Word revealed; yea he may enquire even into the reason of any
divine mystery, so far forth as God has in his Word revealed it. What has
the Lord answered? and what has the Lord spoken? must Gods people say Ier.
23.25, and there they must rest. That which we cannot conceive the reason of
we must reverently adore, and cry out with the Apostle, Romans 11.33. o altitudo
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom, and knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out. There is a
kind of holy ignorance, and simplicity (a desire not to see too much, nor to
pry too far into the things of God) that is much commended to us in the Word
of God. The Lord preserves the simple says David, Psalm 116.6. When we can
mortify our wit, and reason, and bring it into captivity into the obedience of
Christ, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 10.5. When we can bring our selves unto
the obedience of faith as the Apostle calls it, Romans 16.26. When we make our
reason subject unto faith. And on the other side as the gazing upon the sun
in his brightness, will make a man blind, so this seeking to make the matters
of faith subject to our reason, and giving our selves liberty to question, and
dispute too much of the mysteries of God, is the readiest way to loose all
sound judgment in heavenly things. Where is the disputer of this world? (says
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.20.) has not God made the wisdom of this world
foolishness?

The second way whereby that desire of knowledge which is dangerous, and milk
which the youngest, and weakest child may feed upon, and receive nourishment
by, Heb. 5.12. There are some other points of religion (which though they be
also taught in the Word, and in their order profitable to be known) yet are
they not so plainly taught in the Word as every one of Gods people can
understand them, in which respect the Apostle compares them to strong meat
which belongs only to them that are of years, Heb. 5.14. And as the feeding
of a little child strong meat is the way to overthrow the stomach of it, and so
to kill it; even so is this the utter overthrow of many Christians, that being
children in understanding before they have been well fed, and nourished with
milk, they will feed upon nothing but this strong meat, they busy themselves in
seeking the knowledge of nothing in religion, but of those high points that are
matters of controversy even among the most learned men. We read of our blessed
Savior that in teaching of the people he had respect always unto this, to
give them that food that their stomachs would bear, and so might be
wholesome, and fit to nourish them. He spoke the word unto them as they were
able to hear it, says the Evangelist, Mar. 4.33. and Ioh. 16.12. I have yet
many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. As if he had said,
they would do you more hurt then good, as that food will do a man, which his
stomach is not able to bear, and digest. So the Apostle charge the Church,
Romans 14.1. not to trouble the weak Christian with doubtful disputations.
And as these two precedents must teach us preachers not to trouble the people
(more then needs we must) with matters of controversy; so must this teach you
that are Gods people not to busy your heads too much with these high points,
feed better of your milk before you meddle with strong meat, be not like to the
child that will be at the latter end of his book before he have learned the
first leaf. If any of you shall say, but I thank God my capacity will serve
to understand any point of controversy, I am past a child in religion* I
answer, First, I doubt many that think so well of themselves if they were
examined would be found ignorant enough in the maine principles of our
religion. Sure I am it becomes the best to think more meanly of themselves.
Our Savior calls his elect Apostles, John 13.33. and the Apostle all the
faithful that he wrote to, 1 John 5.21. little children. Secondly, As though a
child can never without danger feed upon strong meat, yet a man of years may
safely eat milk: so though the weak Christian can never without danger busy
himself in intricate questions, and controversies, yet may the strongest
Christian with profit seek to be better grounded in the maine principles of
religion. As newborn babes (says the Apostle, 1 Peter 2.2. to all the
faithful) desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby.

Paul did so himself, Acts 20. I kept back nothing that was profitable; and
he charge Titus to do so too, Titus 3.8. These things (speaking of matters
of faith, and practice) I will that thou affirm constantly, these things are
good, and profitable unto men. And this is the rule you should follow in
learning. Teach me good judgment, and knowledge says David, Psalm. 119.66.
Such knowledge as will do me good, and make me good. The true religion that
God has taught us in his Word is called, Romans 10.8. The Word of faith: and 1 Timothy 3.16. The mystery of godliness: and 1 Timothy 6.3. The Doctrine which is
according to godliness. And if thou desire the knowledge of any thing in
religion to any other end then to increase faith, and godliness in thy heart,
thou take Gods name in vain even in thy desire of knowledge, and be thou
sure that God will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain, Exodus
20.7.

Lecture CXLVIII. On Psalm 51.7. October 18. 1631.
IT follows now that we proceed unto the second: viz. to show you the means
that we must use to keep our selves constant in the truth of religion, and
preserve our selves from falling away from it. Four principal directions I
find given in Gods Book to this purpose.

Continue thou (says the Apostle unto Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.14.) in those
things which thou have learned, and have been assured of. No man can hope to
continue steadfast in any truth of God that he has not learned well, nor
unless he be assured upon good grounds that it is indeed, the truth of God:
If ye continue in the faith grounded, and settled says he Col. 1.23. As if he
had said. No man can continue in the faith that is not grounded, and settled in
it, that finds not good grounds for that he holds, and believes. I have chosen
the way of truth (says David Psalm 119.30, 31.) Thy judgments have I laid
before me; I have stuck unto thy testimonies. No man can stick to Gods
truth, that is drawn by others or carried by example, or by the sway of the
time to a liking of it, but he only that has chosen the way of truth, that
is, he that has advisedly, and upon good grounds, undertaken the profession
of it. They that are children in understanding, are apt to be tossed too, and
fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, as the Apostle says Ephesians.
4.14. A man shall be apt to receive Popery or any other heresy if he be either
ignorant, or weak and ungrounded in the knowledge of the tuth; as alas most of
our people though they have been hearers so long, and professors of the
truth, will be found to be, if ever a time of trial shall come. On the
otherside knowledge will preserve a man from that danger, Discretion shall
preserve thee (says Solomon Pro. 2.11.) and understanding shall keep thee.
When a man's judgment is once convinced that it is the truth that he holds, it
will be hard for him to forsake i^; because the more light a man has in his
heart, the more strongly will his conscience reprove, and check, and smite him
when he begins to forsake it, and to go against it. And that is the reason as
our Savior teaches us John 3.20. why lewd men shun, and hate this light,
that their deeds may not be reproved. If therefore beloved you desire to hold
fast your profession, ground your selves well in that knowledge of the truth
that you do profess. Wisdom is the principal thing (says the Holy Ghost
Pro. 4.7.) therefore get wisdom and with all thy getting (withal that thou
have gotten, and do possess) get understanding. As if he had said: sell all
that thou have to purchase this pearl according to that in Pro. 23.23. Buy the
truth, and sell it not, also wisdom, and instruction, and understanding. Now
he that would ground self well, in the knowledge of the truth must observe
these two rules.

First, he must acquaint himself well with the first, and maine principles of
Romans 6.17. speaks of a form of Doctrine, that was delivered unto them: And 2 Timothy 1.13. he charge Timothy to hold fast the form of sound words, which he
had heard of him; which both in the next words Verse 14. And 1 Timothy 6.20. he
calls his depositum that worthy thing that was committed to his trust to keep,
and which he charge him to see that it be kept pure, and uncorrupted by
himself; and all the teachers in the Church of Ephesus. He gave them this
form of Doctrine, this sum of Religion to be as a pattern both for the
Ministers in teaching, and the people in learning to follow, that Doctrine that
was proportionable, and agreeable unto it, they should hold to be sound, and
good, and no other. And this is the Apostles meaning in that speech of his
Romans 12.6. Let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith. In this
catechism this form of Doctrine; (this sum of the maine, and plain
principles of Religion) they were wont to instruct, and ground the people,
first of all before they taught them other things; as is plain by that which
the Apostle speaks. Ye have need (says he Heb. 5.12.) that one teach you
again, which be the first principles of the Oracles of God: And 6.1. Leaving
the principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection. He had
before taught them the first principles of the Oracles of God, the principles
of the Doctrine of Christ. Therefore also he calls these points of Catechism
these principles of Religion (whereof he names there, six heads) the
foundation Heb. 6.1. They that think, by their reading or hearing, to attain
unto sound knowledge in Religion, before they be well instructed in the
principles, they go preposterously to work, they build without a foundation,
they build upon the sand, and there is small hope they should stand in the time
of trial. If the Apostles who were the wise Master builders 1 Co^. 3.10.
thought this the fittest course to bring the people unto sound knowledge by,
what Minister can ever hope to have an understanding people, that neglects
catechizing, or what Christian can hope ever to be well grounded in the
knowledge of the truth, that thinks catechizing belongs unto boys, and girls
only, that never was, nor seeks to be well instructed in the catechism in the
first principles of the Oracles of God. To conclude therefore this first rule.
Let me exhort every one of you that desire to be established in the truth to
acquaint your selves with this catecheticall doctrine and exercise your selves
in it, seek to be perfect in it, so shall you be able to judge of that that
you hear, and read, and profit more by one good Sermon that you hear, or
Chapter that you read, then you shall be able to do by twenty otherwise.

Apollos Act. 18.24.28. so did the Apostle Paul 26.22. yea so did our blessed
Savior himself Luke 24.27. And it must be your care to get good proof out of
the Scripture, for whatsoever you hold in Religion; and to receive nothing from
any of us (how well soever you think of us) but what we confirm unto you by
the word, yea to examine how fit the proofs that we bring are to conclude the
point that w^e allege them for. When the Apostle had said Despise not
prophesyings 1 These. 5.20. he adds presently Verse 21. prove all things. As if
he should say. It is no disparagement to the best Ministry, to examine by the
Scripture what is taught in it, nay it is the way to make us honor it the
more, when by this proof and trial, we find it to be substantial, and sound.
This course did the Bereans take when they heard Paul, and Silas (great men
both, the one an Apostle, the other an Evangelist) and are commended by the
Holy Ghost for it Acts 17.11. They searched the Scripture daily, whether those
things were so. Paul, and Silas confirmed their Doctrine by Scripture (as their
manner was,) and these good hearers examined their proofs. Till we do this,
we shall never grow to any settled, and sound knowledge in Religion, we shall
never see with our own eyes, but (like blind men) go as our guides, and
teachers shall lead us, which the Apostle 1 Cor. 12.2. notes for a great part
of their misery while they were Gentiles. You were carried away unto these
dumb idols, even as you were led.

On the other side three great benefits you shall receive by this.

of faith Romans 10.8. And the foundation that all the faithful are built upon
Ephesians. 2.20. When the Bereans had by searching the Scriptures daily, found that
that which Paul, and Silas taught was just so as they had said; that is, that
the proofs that they brought for their Doctrine were rightly, and fitly
alleged Acts 17.11, 12. it is said that therefore many of them believed. And
when the Apostle had exhorted Timothy to continue in the truth which he had
learned, and had been assured of 2 Timothy 3.14 15. he alleged this for one
maine reason of it, why he should do so, and why he doubted not but he would
do so, that he had known the holy Scriptures from his very childhood, that
were able to make him wise unto salvation: As if he should have said. By the
knowledge of the holy Scriptures, and being well exercised in them a man may
grow to such a certain, and grounded knowledge, and assurance of the truth, as
will cause him to continue constant in it unto the end.

Secondly, this will strengthen you, and make you able to stand against the By
the words of thy lipp^s (says David Psalm. 17.4.) I have kept me from the paths
of the destroyer, from all the paths of the destroyer, from corruption in
judgment, as well as from corruption in manners. When the Apostle had
forewarned Gods people 2 Pet. 2.1. of false teachers that would bring in
damnable heresies into the Church, and 3.3. of profane scoffers that would
deride all Religion, and piety he gives them 2 Pet. 3.2. this preservative
against them both, he bids them be mindful of the words of the holy Prophets,
and Apostles. As if he had said. If ye were well acquainted with the holy
Scriptures, and could remember what ye have learned there, ye should not much
be moved, with that that any, either Heretic or Atheist could say against the
truth.

Thirdly, and lastly. By this we shall be able to convince, and stop the The
Scripture is profitable, and has great efficacy, and force (...) to convince
says the Apostle 2 Timothy 3.16. it is the sword of the spirit Ephesians. 6.17. the
weapon whereby the spirit of God fights with great power, and efficacy
against every adversary. Thus did our blessed Savior put to silence the
tempter himself (the grand Master, and father of all Heretics, and seducers)
with Scriptum est by alleging plain places of Scripture against him Matthew
4.4, 7, 10. And therefore there is in it a more divine power to convince the
conscience, of any gaine-sayer and to stop his mouth, then in all the
testimonies of counsels or fathers that ever lived in the world. And therefore
to conclude this first direction as this may discover to us what small hope
there is of the greatest number of those that profess the truth in these days
of peace, and join with us in the use of all Gods ordinances, that they should
ever persevere, and hold fast their profession, being so extremely ignorant,
and unacquainted with the principles, and grounds of the Religion that they do
profess, strangers in the holy Scriptures; so may this assure the best of us
all (beloved) that if ever a time of trial shall come, our hearts will smart
and ache for this, that we have not grounded our selves better in the knowledge
of the truth; that when we shall hear what the adversary will object against
it, we shall find our selves so apt to stagger for want of grounded knowledge;
when we shall find so small comfort in suffering for it, which we have so
small assurance whether it be the truth or no. Certainly he that desires to
persevere, and hold fast the truth, he must (while he has time, and means)
ground himself well in the knowledge of the truth, by acquainting himself,
and seeking to be perfect in the principles of Religion, and points of the
Catechism; and by getting good proofs of Scripture for every thing that he
does hold, and profess.

The second is this, He must take to heart that which he knows, love it, and
Luke 8.15. resembled unto the good ground did keep the word, and bring forth
fruit with patience, did persevere, and hold out to the end, and none but they,
because they and they only did hear the word with honest, and good hearts. The
man that hears the word, and uses the means of knowledge with an honest, and
good heart, that is with desire, and purpose of heart, to practice that which
he knows, with such a heart as was in David Psalm 86.11. Teach me thy ways
o LORD, and I will walk in thy truth; And 119.34. Give me understanding, and I
shall keep thy Law, yea I shall observe it with my whole heart. He (I say)
that has such an honest, and good heart he shall certainly keep it, and hold
out to the end. Many promises are made to such. The righteous is an everlasting
foundation says the Holy Ghost Prove. 10 25. And the Prophet having spoken
Psalm. 112.1 -- 5. of many privileges that belong to the man that fears God,
(to the good, and upright hearted man) he adds this to all the rest Verse 6.
surely he shall not be moved for ever, no temptations, no persuasions, no
persecutions shall ever be able to remove him. If ye will fear the Lord
(says Samuel to Israel 1 Samuel 12.14.) And serve him, and obey his voice and
not rebel against the commandment of the Lord, then shall both ye, and also
the King that reighneth over you, continue, following the Lord your God. Be
you confident in this (beloved) even such of you as (when you forecast the
prevailing of Popery, and danger of persecution) have been most apt to fear,
and doubt your selves that you shall never be able to hold out to the end; if
you truly fear God, and make conscience to practice whatsoever he has taught
you, be you confident I say in these promises, and how weak soever you feel
your selves, know that the Lord will show his strength in your weakness he
will certainly uphold you The eyes of the Lord (says the Prophet to King Asa
2 Chronicles. 16.9.) run too, and fro throughout the whole earth, every nation,
every Town, every family to show himself strong in the behalf of them, whose
heart is perfect toward him. This the faithful have ever had good experience
of in the times of most fiery trial. What an admirable strength, and constancy
shall we read of in the Book of Martyrs to have been in sundry simple men,
and women whose knowledge was very weak, and mean? A well grounded knowledge
is a notable means to help unto constancy as we have heard. But there is more
force this way in one ounce of true piety, and uprightness of heart, then in a
pound of knowledge without this. Let a man abound in knowledge never so much,
if he fear not God, if he makes not conscience of his ways, he may turn
Papist before he dye, notwithstanding all the knowledge that he has. Hold
faith, and a good conscience (says the Apostle to Timothy 1 Timothy 1.19, 20.)
which some having put away, concerning faith have made shipwreck of whom is
Hymeneus, and Alexander. A pure conscience is that golden Pot wherein this
heavenly Mannah of faith, and sound judgment in Religion must be kept.
Holding the mystery of faith in a pure conscience says he 1 Timothy ^.9. This
golden Pot, this precious cabinet, will keep it safe, and sure, so as we shall
never lose it, and nothing else but this will do it. And what means he by a
pure conscience? Surely such a one as does not willingly admit of the least
spot, the least sin, that may defile it. A good conscience in all things as
Paul calls it Heb. 13.18. He that dares not give liberty to himself to offend
God in any thing, he, and he only shall hold fast the mystery of faith. That
Alexander which the Apostle speaks of, had not only been a constant hearer
of the Apostle, but had been his constant companion in travel, a zealous
professor of the truth, and very near unto Martyrdom for it also, as it may
appear Acts 19.33, 34. yet fell this man so fearfully from the truth, that he
became a blasphemer of it, as is plain 1 Timothy 1.20. and a most bitter enemy
and persecutor of it, one of the greatest enemies that ever Paul had. Alexander
the copper-smith (says he 2 Timothy 4.14, 15.) did me much evil, the Lord reward
him according to his works, of whom he thou aware also for he has greatly
withstood our words. And what was the cause of his falling thus fearfully? That
the Apostle has told us, he forsook a good conscience. He gave liberty to
himself to sin against his conscience, to live in some known sin.
Corruption in manners will breed corruption in judgment. A man that has once
known and professed the truth, is seldom known to fall into Popery or any
other heresy, till he had first forsaken a good conscience, and by living in
known sins provoked God to give him over thus far. So among other
judgments this is one whereby God threatens to punish the disobedience of his
people, Deuteronomy. 28.36. Thou shall serve other gods of wood and of stone; thou
shall become a gross and senseless idolater. And the Apostle speaking of them
that in this last age should be drawn unto Popery, 2 These. 2. he speaks of it
Verse. 11. as of a fearful judgment of God upon men for some sins they had
been guilty of. For the cause (says he) God shall send them strong delusi^^s,
that they should believe a lie. They shall be strongly deluded. How? By the
learning, or holiness, or miracles of their Priests? No, but by the most just
hand, and curse of God upon them. God shall send them strong delusions, that
there shall be no error in Popery so gross, no lie so palpable, but they
shall verily and undoubtedly believe it. Marvel not then at their confidence.
For this cause, says the Apostle. For what cause? What is the sin (...)
provokes God to plague men in this manner? He names two, one in Verse. 10
because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved: the
second Verse. 12. because they took pleasure in unrighteousness. To conclude
then this second direction; what hope can there be that many common
Protestants, though they be willing to hear and make profession of the truth,
should ever be able to continue constant in the truth, in the time of trial,
but that they will be apt to turn Papists, blasphemers and persecutors of the
truth when a time of trial shall come; seeing 1 they bear no love to the
truth at all, take no delight in it, love every trifle and vanity better than
it; 2 they give liberty to themselves to live in known sins, and take
pleasure therein; 3 they content themselves with a form of godlinsse, as the
Apostle speaks 2 Timothy 3.5. but deny and renounce the power of it, and hate it
mortally wheresoever they see it, casting the most odious aspersious upon it.

Lecture CXLIX. On Psalm 51.7. Nouem. 1. 1631.
IT follows now that we proceed unto the third Direction, and that is this:

First, That there be many good and worthy men that see not, nor make any of
saving grace, and yet he cannot see nor be persuaded of some truths that God
has taught us in his holy Word, but his judgment is erroneous and unsound in
some points, yea though he has had great means to inform him in the truth,
yet he cannot see it. And that therefore difference in judgment in some things
(which cannot be without error on the one side) should not alienate the hearts
of brethren one from another, as I showed you in my last lecture but two out of
Romans 14.1-6.

Mat. 23.24. against them that strain at a gnat and swallow a camel. But
though these two things I say be so, yet for a man to be wilfully ignorant of
the truth of God in any thing wherein he is pleased to reveal his will unto us
in his holy Word, or to forsake it when he has once been convinced of it, out
of this conceit that it is but a small matter, a trifle, a man may be saved
though he never know nor hold such a truth, is a very dangerous sin. Observe
I pray you the proof of this in three points.

Mat. 23.23. some matters of the Law and Word of God are weightier than others,
yet is not any one truth of God to be accounted small, or of little or no
moment, even of those points of the law which he calls but gnats in comparison
of others, our Savior says Mat. 23.23. these ought ye to have done, and not
to leave the other undone; even those small things ought not to be neglected,
ought not to be left undone. I have written to them (says the Lord Hos. 8.12.)
the great things of my Law. They are all great things that God has written and
revealed to us in his holy Word. All the truths of God which the Apostles when
the Spirit fell upon them in cloven tongues like fire did utter and teach, are
called (...), Acts 2 11. Magnalia Dei, the great things of God. Yea the least
truth of God that he has revealed in his Word is to be esteemed of greater
moment and weight than heaven and earth and all the creatures contained in
them. It is easier for heaven and earth to pass (says our Savior Luke
16.17.) than that one title of the law should fail. It is therefore a great
contempt done unto Gods Word to think so lightly of any thing he has taught us
in it, as if it were not worth the knowing, or not worth the holding and
sticking to when we do know it. When David has professed his high esteem of
Gods Word, Psalm. 119.127. I love thy commandments (says he) above gold, yea
above fine gold; adds presently Ver. 128. Therefore I esteem all thy precepts
concerning all things to be right; and I hate every false way. He that does not
esteem highly of that that God has taught us in his Word concerning all
things, concerning the smallest matters as well as concerning the greatest, he
that does not hate every false way, every error in the matters of religion,
error about the smallest things as well as error about the greatest,
certainly he does not love and esteem of Gods Word as he ought to do.

Ye shall not make your selves abominable (says the Lord Lev 11.43.) with any
creeping thing, by eating of it he means (and what commandment did ever God
give that was less, than those concrning meat and drink) so may a man do by
receiving wittingly the least known error, or forsaking wittingly the least
known truth. See how earnest the Apostle is 2 These. 2.1-3. in dissuading them
from receiving an error which of all errors that they could receive might seem
the least dangerous, yea a most wholesome error; that is, that the day of
Christ was then at hand. Yet see I pray you, and mark how earnest he is in
this matter. Now I beseech you brethren by the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and by our gathering together unto him; that ye be not soon shaken
in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as
from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. Let no man deceive you by any
means. To receive any thing as a divine truth which God has not taught us in
his Word (though it carry never so good a show of piety and devotion) is
certainly a very dangerous thing, else would not the Apostle have been so
earnest in this case as he was.

Thirdly and lastly, The surest way to keep our hearts from forsaking and Job
knew well, and therefore to preserve himself from the odious sin of adultery
or fornication, he durst not give himself liberty to look or think of that
that might provoke him to lust. I made a covenant with mine eyes (says he Job
31.1.) why then should I think upon a maid? David also knew this well, and
therefore that he might keep himself innocent from the great transgression,
he was afraid to commit any presumptuous sin, any sin against his knowledge
and conscience, yea he was afraid even of his secret faults, of such sins as
he knew he was many ways guilty of in thought, word and deed, though he knew
them not in particular, nor discerned them to be sins. This is evident by
that earnest prayer he makes Psalm. 19.12, 13. Who can understand his errors?
cleanse thou me from secret faults; keep back thy servant also from
presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me, then shall I be
upright, and I shall be innocent from the great transgression. And even so it
is in this case, the surest way to keep our judgments uncorrupted in the
matters of greatest moment, is to keep them sound in those matters that are of
least weight. He that will give liberty to himself to reject and forsake the
truth in the smallest matters, will be in danger to forsake it, and fall from
it in the greatest matters, if he be pressed to it. Our Savior speaking of
that mavelous blindness of mind that by the just judgment of God was come
upon the Jews, Matthew 13.14. Hearing they should hear, but should not
understand; and seeing they should see, but they should not perceive, he gives
this for one reason of it, that they had closed their own eyes first. If a man
do wilfully refuse to see any truth, that God would reveal unto him, it is
just with God to blind him so, that he shall not be able to see, or to have any
comfortable certainty in any truth of God. When the Apostle speaks of his
zeal and resolution against such false brethren, as taught circumcision to be
still necessary (even after the abrogation of the ceremonial law, had been
sufficiently published, for it was above fourteen years after Paul's
conversion, as you may see Gal. 2.1.) We gave no place by subjection to them
(says he Ver. 5.) no not for one hour. If some politicians had been then to
confer with him, they would have said to him, alas Paul, why art thou so
obstinate and peevish in such a trifle? Circumcision is nothing, and
uncircumcision is nothing, as thy self have taught, 1 Cor. 7.19. But he gives
this reason why he was so resolute in opposing an error even of that nature,
that the truth of the gospel (says he) might continue with you. These errors
in smaller matters being received, will by little, and little deprive us of the
truth, and sincerity of the Gospel, and usher in such errors as are more
gross and fundamental. Let no man say, what unlawfulness is there in bowing
before a crucifix in a decent manner: for if we shall comply with Papists in
such things, it may be just with God to give us over to greater delusions, and
to apostate quite with them. When Ioshuah a little before his death exhorts
Israel to cleave constantly to the Lord, and to take heed of being drawn by
the Canaanites that lived among them unto their idolatry, he inforceth his
exhortation thus, Josh. 23.12, 13. Else (says he) if ye do in any wise go
back and cleave unto the remnant of these nations, know for a certainty, that
the Lord your God will no more drive out any of these nations from before you;
but they shall be snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your sides, and
thorns in your eyes, until you perish from the good land which the Lord your
God has given you. If we shall in any wise go back from the truth of God,
be it in greater matters or in smaller, if we shall in any wise go back,
and decline to gratify the Papists, and to conform unto them, we may know
for a certainty that God will forsake us, and Popery will prevail against us.
So that to conclude this third direction, we must every one do that for our
selves, which Epaphras did for the Colossians, Colossians 4.12. We must labor
fervently in our prayers with God, that we may stand perfect and complete in
all the will of God. If we be desirous to hold fast our profession, we must
labor to stand perfect and complete in all the will of God, stand steadfastly
in every truth of God, even the least truth that God has taught us in his holy
Word.

The fourth and last direction is this. He that desires to abide in the truth,

Ephesians. 4.14. that God ordained it for this end that we should no longer be as
children tossed to and fro of every wind of doctrine. And as God ordained it to
that end, so he has given to us his promise, Esa. 55.11. that it shall prosper
in the thing whereunto he sent it. Certainly they that frequent it, and depend
upon it with honest and good hearts, shall not like children be tossed to and
fro with every wind of doctrine, nor seduced by erroneous spirits. When the
Apostle had said, Heb. 10.23. Let us hold fast our profession without wavering,
he adds Ver. 25. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together as the
manner of some is. He that gives liberty to himself to forsake or neglect the
Church Assemblies, how is it possible that he should hold fast the profession
of his faith without wavering? And this is the reason that the Spouse and
Church of Christ gives of that prayer she makes unto him Cant. 1.7. Tell me O
thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou make thy flock to
rest at noone; that is, direct me to the place where I may enjoy the sound
Ministry of thy Word (for by that Christ uses to feed and refresh his flock)
and then mark the reason she gives for this suit. For why should I be (says
she) as one that turns aside by the flocks of thy companions? Why should I
harken unto or follow after any of these heretics and seducers, who though
they pretend to be thy companions, and friends ( as the false Apostles
transformed themselves into the Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.13.) yet indeed
are not so. Certainly if ye be true members of the Church of Christ, if ye
be such as can truly say Christ, is he whom your soul loves above all other
things, ye will highly esteem of a sound ministry, ye will seek it, and
enquire after it, you will take pains to enjoy it, and when you have it you
will be thankful for it, and make much of it. For 1 without it you will never
attain to that knowledge, and understanding as shall feed, and nourish you,
and make you thrive, and grow in grace. This is the means whereby Christ the
great, and master shepherd of the sheep (as the Apostle calls him, Heb.
13.20.) does feed his flock. I will give you pastors according to mine own
heart (says the Lord, Ier. 3.15.) which shall feed you with knowledge, and
understanding. 2 Without it, you will never attain to that sound comfort as
may be able to refresh your souls in the scorching heat of all persecutions,
and tentations, for this is the means whereby Christ makes his flock to rest
at noone when the Sun is at his height. I create the fruit of the lips (the
preaching of the Word says the Lord, Esa. 57.^9) to be peace peace, that is
the means of abundant, and constant peace, to him that is a far off, and to
him that is near, that is to all mine elect Gentiles, and Jews, says the
Lord, and I will heal him by this means I will cure all the wounds, that do
put his soul to anguish, and pain. In this plac^ ( Hag. 2.9. in mine house
which is the place, and seat of the sound Ministry, in this plac^) will I
give peace, says the Lord of hosts. 3. And lastly, Without it you will be
ready ever, and anon to be seduced, and drawn into one error or other by
those false companions that by much flight, and cunning craf^iness^, lie in
wait to deceive as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians 4.14. For it is the means that
God has sanctified to preserve you from that danger as the Apostle teaches us
in that place. And the Church here (you see) had no hope to keep her self
from turning aside by the flocks of such companions unless Christ would direct
her to the place where she might enjoy a sound ministry where he feeds his
flock, and makes them to rest at noone.

The second ordinance of God that is effectual this way is the Sacrament to
strengthen man's heart, Psalm 104.15. and it must needs therefore be most
effectual to make us stand fast in the faith, and to be strong in it. 2. This
Sacrament is a seal of that everlasting covenant whereof the Lord speaks,
Ier. 32.40. whereof this is one branch that we shall never depart from God;
and (consequently) never fall away from his truth. 3. And lastly, In and by
this Sacrament is represented, and confirmed to us the communion that we have
both with Christ himself, and with all his faithful people throughout the
world. The bread which we break (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.) is it
not the communion of the body of Christ? for we being many are one bread, and
one body for we are all partakers of that one bread. And while we hold, and are
confirmed in our communion with Christ, and all his faithful people we are
safe enough from forsaking his truth, and falling into any dangerous error;
for that would separate us from Christ, and from his faithful people.

The third, and last ordinance I said I would instance in, is prayer. Fervent,
the sense of his own ignorance, unsetlednesse, weakness, and unability to
stand against the subtilty of seducers can flee to God this way, and depend
upon him for strength, is safe enough. Therefore have godly people ever been
wont by this means to seek help of God, in this case, even to keep
themselves from all kinds of declining, and falling from God, either in
judgment or practice. Give thy strength unto thy servant, says David, Psalm.
86.16. and 119.117. Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe. So Cornelius when his
mind was much perplexed, and troubled with the great difference of opinion, and
doctrine which he found among the teachers in his time, took this course to
settle himself in the truth, he gave himself much to fasting, and prayer, as
you may read, Acts 10.30, 31. Yea see what confidence, and boldness they have
used in their prayers in this case. You heard even now out of Cant. 1.7. how
familiarly, and boldly the Spouse of Christ (finding her self to be in danger
to be seduced) expostulateth with him; and teaches us by her example that we
may, and should do so in the like case. O thou whom my soul loves (says
she) why should I be as one that turns aside, by the flocks of thy
companions? As if she had said. Why should thou suffer me to be mislead by
any false teacher or seducer whatsoever. The like familiar expostulation you
shall find David using in this case, Psalm 56.13. Thou have delivered my soul
from death, wilt not thou deliver my feet from falling? that I may walk before
God in the light of the living. As if he should say, Thou have redeemed me,
and effectually called me and justified, and sanctified me in some measure,
and wilt not thou keep me from falling from thy truth into any damnable
error? And thus have I finished that which I have to say touching this second
fruit, and effect whereby a man may know himself to have the spirit of Christ;
that is, Constancy in the true religion of Christ.

Lecture CL. On Psalm 51.7. November. 15. 1631.
Doct.
He that has indeed the spirit of Christ in him, and is in the state of grace
will take to heart the cause of God, and of his holy religion, nay he cannot
choose but do so. I will give you both the explication, and the proof of the
point together, that is, I will both show you what it is to take to heart the
cause of God, and religion, and also prove that he that has the spirit of
Christ in him, cannot choose but do it. And this I will do first generally,
and then more particularly. And my general proofs shall be an introduction
unto the particulars. In my general proofs I will observe three degrees.

Mar. 12.30. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, etc. If any man come to me
(says our Savior, Luke 14.26.) and ^ate not (that is love not less then me
as it is to be interpreted out of Mat. 10.37.) his father, and mother, and
wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life also he
cannot be my Disciple. He cannot be in the state of grace, he cannot have the
spirit of Christ, that does not thus love the Lord. And on the other side he
that can find in himself that he does thus love the Lord (though he have
otherwise many defects in himself) may be assured that he is in the state of
grace, that he has the spirit of Christ in him, If any man love God (1 Cor.
8.3.) the same is known of him, he is approved, and beloved of God. Therefore
when Christ would comfort Peter after his grievous fall, he examineth him
thrice (and by his examining of him so, provokes him to examine himself about
this, Ioh. 21.15.) Simon son of Jonas love thou me? As if he had said then
all is well, be of good comfort, thou art in a happy state.

Secondly, No man can thus love God, but he must needs have the zeal David had
said, Psalm. 119.158. I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved because they
kept not thy word. He gives in the next words the reason of it, verse 159.
Consider how I love thy precepts. Because he loved God, and his Word, he could
not but grieve to see him dishonored. See an example of this in Eliah, I have
been very zealous for the Lord of hoasts (says he, 1 King. 19.10.) He was so
troubled for the dishonor he saw done to God, under the government of Ahab
and Iezabel, that it made him weary of his life as you may see, verse 4. See it
also in David, Psalm. 69.9. His zeal had even eaten him up he says, and the
reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen upon me, as an intolerable
burden that I cannot bear. See lastly an example of this in Hezekiah and his
Nobles, 2 King. 19.1 -- 4. We read that Hezekiah rent his clothes, and clad
himself in sackcloth, and so did his Princes too, they were in great grief,
and trouble of mind And what was the cause of it? Not the extreme danger they
were in, of the sword of Sennacherib who had proclaimed war against them, and
had already taken all the defensed cities of Judah, Chap. 18.13. and was so
potent an enemy, that he was able to besiege Jerusalem with an army of above an
hundred, fourscore, and five thousand, Chap. 19.35. No no, the blasphemy that
Rabshakeh had belched out against God, and the reproach, and dishonor he had
cast upon him, troubled them more then all the danger they were in. In craving
the Prophets prayer he mentions this more then the other. This is a day of
trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy says he, ver. 3. and ver. 4. It may
be the Lord thy God will hear all the words of Rabshakeh whom his master has
sent to reproach the living God. And in his prayer unto God, verse 16. he
complains most of this, Hear the words of Sennacherib, who has sent him to
reproach the living God.

Thirdly, and lastly, He that has any true zeal of God in him, will show
David show his zeal for God, The zeal of thy house (says he, Psalm 69.9.)
has eaten me up. And so did Iehojada, 2 Chronicles. 24.16. the cause of that great
honor that was done him after his death is said to be this, Because he had
done good in Israel toward God, and toward his house; he had restored and
established the pure worship of God in Judah. And so did Nehemiah express his
zeal for God, and took great comfort in expectation of reward from God for
it, Remember me (says he, Neh. 13.14.) o my God concerning this thing, and
wipe not out my good deeds, that I have done, for the house of my God, and ^or
the offices thereof. And indeed there is no way whereby we can express our
love to God so well as by loving, and delighting in, and taking care for the
house, and pure worship of God. Therefore in the reason of the second
commandment (as I told you the last day) they that make conscience of that
commandment (that use, and love that worship only that he has in his Word
appointed) are called such as love God, Exodus 20.6. and they that are addicted
to will worship, and care not for the true worship of God are called, ver. 5.
haters of God. Thus did David express his love to God, Psalm. 26.8. Lord I have
loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honor dwells.
He that cares not for the house, and worship of God, whether it be maintained
in purity or be corrupted, whether it prosper or no, certainly has no love of
God, no zeal of Gods glory in his heart. And this shall serve, for my first
sort of proofs which I told you should be more general.

Now you shall see the point opened, and confirmed unto you in four
particulars.

David, when the Ark of God was brought to Jerusalem, 1 Chronicles. 15.28. And in
the days of Hezekiah when the Sacrament had been celebrated according to the
first institution of it which it had not been of a long time before in such
sort as it was written, (says the Text, 2 Chronicles. 30.5. and verse 26. from
Salomons reign to that time there had not been such a Passover kept) it is
said, ver. 25, 26. All Gods people did marvellously rejoice in it. So when
Nehemiah had reformed, and purged the house, and worship of God from sundry
corruptions, and restored it to the primitive purity, and sincerity thereof. It
is said, Neh 12.43. That Gods people did rejoice, for God had made them to
rejoice with great joy; their wives also and their children rejoiced, so that
the joy of Jerusalem, was heard even a far off. Nay he that has the spirit
of God in him, will rejoice to see any beginnings of reformation in places that
were rude before, to see religion get any entrance or footing, any beginnings
of a Church in such places. It is said, Ezra 3.11. that all Gods people shouted
with a great shout when they praised the Lord, because the foundation of the
house of the Lord was laid. On the other side he that has the spirit of God in
him cannot choose but grieve, to see or hear that the true religion, and
worship of God, is banished from any place, and that Idolatry and a false
worship is set up in it. Old Ely is noted by the Holy Ghost, 1 Samuel 4.17, 18.
to have grieved much more deeply, for the taking away of the Ark of God, then
either for Isreal's flying from before the Philistines, or for the great
slaughter that had been made of Gods people, or for the death of his two
sons, Hoph^i and Phineas? It came to pass (says the Text) that when the
messenger made mention of the Ark of God, he fell from of his seat backward,
and his neck brake, and he died. And this is also noted to have been the
chief grief of his daughter in law, and maine cause of her death too, verse
22. this would never out of her mouth in all the extremity of her pain, and
anguish, while breath was in her body, the glory is departed from Israel, for
the Ark of God is taken away And this was that that troubled that zealous man
of God Eliah and made him even weary of his life through grief, and
coffeehouse, 1 King. 19.10. The children of Israel have forsaken thy
covenant (says he, they are fallen from thy holy religion) they have thrown
down thine altars; that is, they have abolished, and showed contempt and
hatred to thy true worship; and why should I desire to live any longer in such
a time? He that has any love or zeal of God in him, cannot but grieve to see
or hear that idolatry is set up in any place, that it grows, and increases
any where specially in any place where God was truly worshipped before. We read
of blessed Paul, Acts 17.16. that when he saw even the city of Athens (where
God had never been truly worshipped) wholly given unto idolatry, his spirit
was stirred in him, he was incensed with zealous grief, and indignation to see
it. O how would it have troubled the good man, to have seen or heard of such a
thing in Corinth or Galatia or Ephesus that were true Churches of Christ where
the Gospel had been, and still was faithfully, and plentifully preached? Nay
he that has any true love or zeal of God in him, cannot but grieve at the
least Eclipse that religion suffers in any place; though the substance of it
does still remain, yet if it have lost any thing of that luster, of that
purity, sincerity, and power that once it had, even that is sufficient cause of
grief to every good man. We read that when in the days of Zerubbabel the
foundation of the second Temple was laid, and Gods people that had seen no
better did greatly rejoice in it, Ezra 3.12. Many of the Priests, and Levites,
and chief of the fathers who were ancient men that had seen the first house,
wept with a loud voice, even when the rest shouted for joy, and the noise of
their weeping, was as great every whit as the noise of the others rejoicing?
And why did they so. Surely it grieved their hearts to see how far the house
that God was now to have in Jerusalem, was short in beauty, and glory, of that
that God had, had before in that place.

Secondly, He that has the spirit of Christ in him will joy in the frequency,
David to aggravate the misery of his present estate, Ps. 42.4. speaks of the
joy, and comfort that he had formerly taken in going to the house of God, he
names this twice in that verse as a maine cause of that great joy he took in
going to the house of God, that there went such a multitude with him. And this
is noted for one cause of that great joy the people of God expressed at the
celebration of that Passover in Hezekiahs time, 2 Chronicles. 30.26. that the
number of the communicants was so great, as it is said, verse 13. There
assembled to Jerusalem much people to keep the Passover, a very great
Congregation. On the other side even this has grieved Gods people to see the
Church Assemblies neglected, and unfrequented to see the Congregations much
thinner then they had wont to be. I will gather them (says the Lord, Zeph.
3.18.) that are sorrowful for the solemn assembly, who are of thee, to whom
the reproach of it was a burden. Observe in the Lords speech five things. 1.
This was one of the greatest sorrows of Gods people, in their captivity, that
they wanted then their solemn assemblies. Though they might have some
religious meetings, for Gods moral worship (yea they had public fasts then,
four times a year as appears, Zach. 8.19.) yet their assemblies were nothing
so solemn, so populous as they were wont to be at Jerusalem. 2. The Caldeans
their enemy were wont to reproach them for this, and to say to them to this
effect where are your solemn assemblies now as it is said, Lam. 1.7. they did
mock at their Sabbaths, they joyed to see they could have no such solemn
assemblies as they were wont to have, as indeed the solemnity, and greatness
of the Church Assemblies, has ever been a great eyesore to wicked men. 3. It
was a burden to Gods people to have this reproach cast upon them, they could
have twitted them with nothing, that would have grieved them more. 4. That the
Lord says to his Church, of these that were so sorrowful for the solemn
assembly these are of thee, these are indeed natural, and kindly children, and
members of the true Church that do stand thus affected. 5. And lastly, The
promise that the Lord makes to such. I will gather them, says the Lord. I will
have a special respect unto them, and though they be thus scattered, and
dispersed, not one of them shall be lost, but I will bring them back again to
their own land.

Thirdly, He that has the spirit of Christ, any true love or zeal of God
Matthew. 9.37. that there were so few laborers about Gods harvest, he commands
his Disciples Verse 38. To pray unto the Lord of the harvest (...) that he
would cast forth (speedily, and without delay send forth or by a strong hand
(as in a case of present necessity) thrust forth laborers (many laborers,
laborers indeed he would have them to be, not loiterers or such as should do
the work of the Lord negligently) into his harvest. Brethren (says the
Apostle 2 These. 3.1.) pray that the word of the Lord may have a free course
(...) that it may run freely, that preaching of it may not be hindered, or
interrupted by any means. And Col. 4.3. Pray for us (says he) that God would
open to us a door of utterance, that we may have free liberty to preach the
Gospel. And as all men you see, are bound to pray to God for the increase, and
liberty of faithful preachers; so will every one that truly loves God, and
has any zeal for his glory, rejoice greatly in the liberty of the Gospel,
and when the truth is plentifully preached. We read in the reformation that
Nehemiah wrought Neh. 12.44. That Judah rejoiced for the priests, and for the
Levites that waited, that stood says the original. They joyed in this (as in
the chief part of the reformation of Religion) that they had store of
faithful, and able Priests, and Levites; and that they also stood, and were
settled, and established in their places with liberty, and maintenance, and all
good encouragements. And the Apostle Paul was so z^alous for much preaching,
and rejoiced so much in the glory he knew redounded to God by it, that speaking
of some in Rome, that preached the truth, and sound Doctrine, without all truth
and soundness of heart, he says Phil. 1.18. Nothwithstanding every way
whether in pretense or in truth Christ is preached, and I therein do rejoice,
and I will rejoice, says he. Surely they were very bad men of whom he says
Verse 15.16. that they preached Christ even of envy, and strife even to add
affliction to his bonds to increase his grief, and trouble, who was then in
bonds, and prison for the Gospel. How could Paul rejoice in such men's
preaching will you say? Certainly he knew that (though they were so bad in
themselves yet) their Doctrine which was both for matter and manner sound,
might through Gods blessing upon his own ordinance) become effectual to the
conversion, and comfort of Gods elect. For be you s^re of this, that if Paul
had been of that mind, that he that is a wicked man himself, cannot by his
Ministry be the instrument of the conversion of another, he would never have
said of such men as these I do rejoice that Christ is preached by them yea,
and I will rejoice in it. On the otherside he that has any true love or zeal
of God in his heart cannot but grieve for the want of preaching, that preaching
should be hindered, that good Preachers and such as God has made able, and
willing to do him, and his Church service should have cause to complain as
Paul does 1 These. 2.18. that Satan hinders them. No good man will rejoice in
this, but grieve, and mourn for it. It is said of out blessed Savior Mat.
9.36. that when he saw the multitude to be like sheep without Shepherds, that
the harvest was great, and the laborers so few, that there was such want of
preachers (...) says the Holy Ghost, his bowels eraned in him with inward
grief, and compassion of their misery. And which of us should not desire to be
affected as our blessed Savior was? When Eliah would give unto the Lord
himself, a reason of that grief, and passion he was in, which made him weary
of his life, he alleges this for one chief cause of it, and healledgeth it
twice in that one Chapter 1 King. 19.10.14. They have slain thy prophets with
the sword, and it was a death to the good man to think of that.

Fourthly, and lastly. He that has the spirit of Christ in him will rejoice to
see the Ministry of the word fruitful in them that do enjoy it, and
powerful to bring them to the obedience of it; when it goes forth conquering
men, and to conquer more as it was Revel 6.2. said to do in the primitive
Church, in those Apostolical times. This made Paul to rejoice, and praise God
for the Thessalonians 1 These. 1.5, 6. For our Gospel came not to you in word
only, but in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and ye became followers of us and
of the Lord. This is that that every good heart ought to desire, and beg of
God not only that the word of the Lord may have a free course, but also that it
may be glorified as the Apostle speaks 2 These. 3.1. that it may have good
success, and prosper in that that God sent it for, that is to reform the
hearts, and lives of men. He that has any true love or zeal of God in him,
will rejoice to see this. When the faithful Jews that had been before much
offended with Peter, for going unto Cornelius, heard of the fruit, and success
of his Ministry there, it is said Acts 11.18. That they h^ld their peace, and
glorified God saying, then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance
unto life. Though we know that the Jews naturally fretted at nothing so much
as this, to hear that the Gentiles should become Gods people (as every
natural man does to see others more Religious then him self) yet the Jews
that were converted joyed greatly in this. When Paul and, Barnabas Acts 15.3.
declared to them the conversion of the Gentiles, they caused great joy unto all
the brethren. He that has any grace in his own heart, will joy in the
conversion of others. And on the other side, he that has the spirit of Christ
in him, cannot choose but grieve to see how unfruitful the Gospel is in most
places, how little power it has in the hearts of men. This the Prophet
foretold Esa. 53.1. should be the complaint, and lamentation of the Ministers
of the Gospel (and daily experience proves it to be so) Who has believed our
report; and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? And of our blessed
Savior it is said Mar. 8.12. that when he saw the infidelity, and hardness of
heart, that was in the Pharisees, and Jews, who (though they had seen so many
miracles of his, and heard so many of his gracious, and powerful Sermons)
could not believe but asked still for a sign from heaven that he sighed
deeply in his spirit to see, and think of this. And so will every one in some
measure do that has the spirit of Christ in him, when he sees the
mavelous senselessenesse of most men under the powerful, and excellent
means of grace that they do enjoy. The reasons of this point, and the
application of it I must defer till the next day.

Lecture CLI. On Psalm 51.7. November 29. 1631.
IT follows now that we proceed to give you the grounds, and reasons of this
point and then make some application of it unto our selves. The reasons then
why we should thus take to heart the cause of God, and of his holy Religion;
why we should joy in the liberty of the Gospel, and in the fruitfulness, and
good success of it, and mourn for the contrary; are three principally,
according to the respect we ought to have unto three several persons that are
interested in it, in respect had. 1. Unto other men. 2. Unto our selves. 3. And
principally unto the Lord.

The first reason I will (for the help of your understanding, Reason 1.
and memory) deliver distinctly unto you in three degrees.

First, we are bound in conscience to love the persons of all men, and we can
The Lord make you (says the Apostle 1 These. 3.12.) to increase and abound in
love one toward another, and toward all men.

Secondly, If we do not love their souls and unfeignedly desire their
salvation, another souls. But be not deceived (beloved) the holy Word of God
by which thou must be judged, at the day of thy appearing before the judgment
seat of Christ; defines love otherwise then thou do and says thou bear
no true love at all to the person, whose soul thou have no care of. Thus Paul
expressed, and proved his unfeigned love to the Jews his country men Romans
10.1. Brethren my hearts desire, and prayer to GOD for Israel is, that they
might be saved. Because we are bound to love all men, we are bound to desire
the salvation of all men, that God would give to all places, to all people the
means of their salvation, and make them effectual in their hearts. This is
plain by that prayer of the Church Psalm. 67.2, 3. That thy way may be known
upon earth, thy saving health among all nations; let the people praise thee, O
God, let all the people praise thee. If we do not grieve to see how people lie
in ignorance and infidelity, and profaneness, and so under the power of Satan,
we bear no true love to them at all. The Apostle professes his love this way
also unto his country men Romans 9.1, 2. his conscience did bear him witness in
the Holy Ghost, that he had great heaviness, and continual sorrow in his
heart for their blindness, and obstinacy. Nay he hates them in his heart;
that cannot grieve to see them live in this estate Thou shall not hate thy
brother in thy heart (says the Lord Levit. 19.17) thou shall in any wise
rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. If we suffer men to live
in any sin (were it in our power to help it, if we be utterly careless of
it, and it never trouble us to see it) the Lord you see says plainly, that we
hate them in our hearts. And whosoever hates his brother is a murderer (says
the Apostle 1 Ioh. 3.15.) and ye know that no murderer has eternal life
abiding in him or is in the state of grace. If this be so (as doubtless it is)
alas how heinous a sin are we all guilty of, that neither do any thing to
bring them out of this misery they lie in, nor are at all grieved, and troubled
for it.

It has pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that
believe, says the Apostle 1 Cor. 1.21. that is first by preaching he works
faith in men (according to that faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17.) and
then by faith he saves them. But why does he call it the foolishness of
preaching? Not that it is so indeed, but that carnal men do account it so,
for so he expounds himself Verse 18. The peeaching of the cross, is to them
that perish foolishness, they that perish, and shall go to hell, account so
of it.

Object.
But you will object, and say cannot men be saved without preaching?

Answ.
I answer that preaching is the means that he has appointed to do this work
by ordinarily. Other sheep I have (says our Savior Job. 10.16.) which are
not of this fould; are not yet come into the true Church, are not yet called to
the knowledge, and profession of the truth, them also I must bring, they must
needs be brought into this fould, they must needs be made members of the true
Church, and brought into the number of them that profess the truth. And how
must that be done? And they shall hear my voice, says he. If Christ intend to
bring them into his fould to save them they shall hear his voice. And how
shall they hear without a Preacher? Says the Apostle Romans 10.14. So that when
God withholds from a people the Preaching of his word (though we may not
presume to judge of his secret counsel, and decree concerning any man, or to
limit his power) yet may we boldly say that this is a fearful sign, that
Christ has no sheep there, whom he means to bring unto his fould, no elect
people there whom he means to save. And when God restraines preaching, and
takes it away from a people (for whosoever be the instrument, this is his doing
certainly. Is there any evil in a city, and the Lord has not done it? Amos
3.6.) we may take it for a sign that the Lord has no more sheep there whom he
means to bring into his fold. If God should send upon a land such weather
either in seed-time, as should rot all the seed in the ground, and make it
unfruitful, or in the harvest, as should rot all the corn when it is come
even unto ripeness, or if (sending a plentiful and seasonable harvest) he
should send such a general mortality and sickness among men, as none could be
got to reap and gather it, all men would take this for a sign that God meant
to bring a famine upon that land, and destroy both man and beast by it, yea
they would be much affected and mourn extremely for such a judgment, it would
be a day of grief and of desperate sorrow, as the Prophet speaks Esa. 17.11.
And yet men know well enough that God can keep men from famine, and feed them
sufficiently though they have no corn at all; as he did all Israel for forty
years together in the wilderness. Even so it is in this case, the Apostle
speaking of the state that the Athenians and all other Gentiles had been in
before Christ's ascension into heaven, says Acts 17.30. that the time of that
ignorance (while God withheld from the Gentiles the means of knowledge the
Ministry of his Word) God regarded not (as the old translation well renders
it (...)) he did look over it, he did not vouchsafe to look or set his eyes
upon it, that is, regarded them not, cared not what became of men that lived in
those days; For that this is the meaning of the phrase appears by the
contrary, Psalm. 34 5. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, that is, he
respects them, and has a care of them in a special manner. The people that
God denies his Word unto, it is a fearful sign that they are such as God
regards not, cares not what becomes of them. And have not we just cause then
to mourn when we see preaching restrained? Surely if our Savior had not
thought so, his bowels would not so have yerned in him, to see so few
Preachers, to see the people like sheep scattred upon the mountains, without
Pastors to look to them, and feed them, to see the Lords harvest like to be
lost for want of laborers, as we see he did, Matthew. 9 36.

But you will object again. Object.
It is no marvel sure you should so plead for preaching: We have preaching
enough in these days, if that be good. Are all saved that have preaching?
Where have you worse people then where is most preaching?

I answer, Answ.
That though all be not saved that have preaching, but preaching is sent to
some obstinate people and continued to them only to be a witness against
them, and to increase their condemnation, as our Savior speaks Mat. 24.14.
yet is it a just cause of comfort and rejoicing to all Gods people, to see
sound preaching abound, to see store of good Preachers raised up by God,
Preachers of Gods sending. For how can they preach (says the Apostle Romans
10.15. that is, preach profitably and effectually) except they be sent of God?
Yea (will you say) it is indeed a just cause of joy to see store of those
Preachers in the Church that are of Gods sending. For those surely are not
only good Preachers, but good men too. I answer: none are Preachers of Gods
sending so qualified in all points as he requires, but such as are orderly
approved to be 1 men able to teach profitably, 2 men of unblameable lives. But
a man may be a Preacher of Gods sending though he be an hypocrite, and have no
truth of grace in his heart, as those were I told you of the last day out of
Phil. 1.18. and as Judas was, he was sent of God to preach, Matthew. 10.4, 7. yea
and God wrought with him ^oo, as is plain by that we read Luke 9.6. and yet he
was but an hypocrite in heart, he never had truth of grace in him when he was
at the best. When therefore we see store of such Preachers as are men able to
teach profitably, and we may be sure such are of Gods sending, and we have just
cause to rejoice in it. For it is a certain sign not only that God has a
true Church among us, a company of elect ones, but also that he has among us
more people to be gathered and brought into his fold, that he means not yet to
remove our candlestick, but to continue and enlarge the bounds of his Church
amongst us. For, God did never send the Ministry of the Word to such as were
all reprobates, or for the reprobates sake only, or principally, to harden
them, and increase their condemnation, but for his elects sake principally he
sends his Word to any people. This was the cause (says the Apostle Ephesians. 4.12.)
why God gives Preachers, For the perfecting of the Saints, and for the edifying
of the body of Christ. So the Apostles were sent ( Mat. 6.10.) to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel, to bring the Lords sheep, his elect that were
in Israel, into his fold. So when God sent Paul to Corinth, and maintained his
liberty there a year and a half, he gives this for the reason of it, Acts
18.10. For I have much people in this city, says he. It is a sign God has
much people there, where he places able and good Preachers, and maintains
them in peace and liberty for any time. So you see, to conclude this first
reason of the point, that in respect of the love we owe to all men, and the
desire we should have of their salvation, we are bound to rejoice in the
liberty of the Gospel, and grieve to see it hindered and interrupted any way.

Reason 2
The second reason is the respect we owe unto our selves, and to the Church Ier.
29.7. Seek the peace of the city whether I have caused you to be carried away
captives, and pray unto the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof shall ye have
peace. But we are more bound to desire the peace and prosperity of our own
country, specially of the Church of God in it. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem
(says David Psalm. 122.6.) they shall prosper that love thee. Let no man look
to prosper that loves not the Church of God unfeignedly that does not heartily
desire that it may flourish and prosper.



Romans 9.4. that to them pertained the glory; that nation excelled all the
nations of the earth in glory and honor. And what was it that procured them
that honor? Surely this, they only enjoyed the Word and true worship of God.
This was their chief honor and preferment, says the Apostle Romans 3.2. that
unto them were committed the oracles of God; and 9.4. they had the glory
because they had the covenants of God, to them the law was given, they had the
service of God. And therefore when the ark (which was then the principal means
of Gods worship) was taken from them, then was the honor of that nation gone,
the glory was departed from Israel, 1 Samuel 4.21. And they are now by rejecting
of the Gospel and persecuting of the true religion of God, become the most
contemptible nation under heaven. Nothing will make a person, a family, a State
so honorable as religion will do, nothing so contemptible and vile as
irreligiousnesse and profaneness. Since thou wast precious in my sight (says
the Lord to his people that feared his name Esa. 43.4. For all such are his
jewels Mal. 3.17.) thou have been honorable; and 1 Samuel 1.30. Them that
honor me will I honor, and they that despise me shall be despised, though all
the world say nay to it.

Secondly, Nothing will make a kingdom so strong, and free from all danger God
is known in her palaces for a refuge, for lo (says the Psalmist Psalm. 48.3,
4, 5.) the kings were assembled (many great Kings often joined together in
battle against it) they went together, they saw it, and so marvelled; they
well discerned how invincible that nation was, and they wondered at it. Never
was any nation so admirable in victories and deliverances as Israel was. And
what was the strength of Israel? Surely the Sanctuary of God, the true worship
and religion of God (which they and they only did enjoy) was the excellency of
their strength, as the Lord calls it Ezekiel. 24.21. The faithful Prophets and
Preachers were the strength of the kingdom, the chariot of Israel, and the
horsemen thereof, as the King of Israel himself acknowledged Elizeus to be, 2
King. 13.14. So it is said, 2 Chronicles. 11.16, 17. of those godly Levites, and
people that would not conform to Ieroboams idolatry, but came to Jerusalem
where they might enjoy the pure worship of God, that they strengthened the
kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam strong three years; for three years they
walked in the ways of David and Solomon. Observe two things in this example.

1. The Levites and people that set their hearts to seek the Lord, that were
zealously religious, they strengthened the kingdom of Judah, and the King;
such Levites and such people are the best subjects that any King can have, the
best members that any commonwealth can have, they are the very props and
pillars of the State and Kingdom. 2 Though Rehoboam himself was not soundly
religious, nor the most of his people neither; yet so long as he walked in the
ways of David and of Solomon, professed and maintained the true relion, he was
strong, and his kingdom was strong. So long as the Gospel is soundly and
freely preached in a nation, and the pure religion of God professed and
maintained in it (though many or most that prof^sse it have no truth of heart
in them) that nation will be strong; the Lord will be as a wall of fire round
about it, as he promises Zach. 2.5. On the other side; Nothing can make a
nation strong or secure from danger, that shall forsake or decline from the
true religion of God. They chose new gods (says holy Deborah of Israel, Iud.
5.8.) then was war in the gates. While Israel was without the true God,
without a teaching Priest, and without the Law (as the Prophet Azariah told
king Asa 2 Chronicles. 15.3.5.) in those times there was no peace to him that went
out, nor to him that came in* but great vexation was upon all the inhabitants
of the country. Every one then that desires that the strength and peace of
the king and kingdom may continue, will joy in the liberty that the Gospel
has in it, in the store of able Preachers and Prophets that are in it, that
the pure religion of God does prosper in it; and will mourn to see the course
of the Gospel hindered any way, to hear of any declining in it from the
sincerity of the holy religion of God.

Thirdly and lastly, Nothing will make a kingdom so prosperous and plenteous
Iehoshaphat had reformed religion in Judah, and established it in sincerity and
purity, it is said of him, 2 Chronicles. 17.5. that therefore God established the
kingdom in his hand, and that he had riches, and honor in abundance. And when
he had taken order that there might be a preaching ministry in all
Congregations within his kingdom, and that they might have also all good
encouragement given them in their ministry ( He sent as we read verse 8, 9.
Levites, and Priests throughout all the cities, and towns of Judah to teach
the people, and as it appears verse 7. he sent of his chief Princes, and
Nobles with them to countenance them in their work) when he had done this I
say, it is said ver. 12. that Iehosaphat waxed great exceedingly; he and his
kingdom prospered wonderfully by this means. Consider now from this day
(says the Lord, Hag. 2.18, 19. he had spoken before, verse 16, 17. of a
strange curse had been upon them while his house, and worship had been
neglected) consider now from this day, even from the day that the foundation of
the Lords Temple was laid, consider it (says he again) from this day I will
bless you, with outward blessings he means as appears by the former verses.
Certainly the place where Gods house, and worship is erected and maintained
shall be blessed of God with blessings of all sorts. It is said of Vzziah the
King of Judah, ^ Chro. 26.5. that he sought God (that is, professed, and
maintained the true religion of God) in the days of Zechariah who had
understanding in the visions of God; and as long as he sought the Lord, God
made him to prosper; and yet there was no truth of heart in him at all. For it
is said, verse 4. that he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord,
according to all that his father Amaziah did; and of his father it is said, 2 Chronicles. 25.2. that he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord (that
is, he professed, and maintained the true religion of God) but not with a
perfect heart. Let the true religion of God be professed, and maintained in
any kingdom (though many that profess it have no power of religion in their
hearts) yet will God make that kingdom to prosper even for that. Believe it
(beloved) believe it, true religion never found entertainment any where, in
any family town or kingdom, but it brought a blessing with it to the place.
While the Ark of God was in the house of Obed-edom, 2 Samuel 6.12. God blessed
the house of Obed-edom, and all that pertained unto him because of the ark of God. But what speak I of Obed-edom that was a good man and entertained it with
a good heart. I will say more then so, it will bring temporal blessings upon
them that give entertainment unto it, though themselves be such as regard it
not, nor make any reckoning of it. The religion, and piety of Jacob brought a
blessing even into Labans house, so sensibly, that he could say, Genesis 30.27.
Tarry with me I pray thee for I have learned by experience that the Lord has
blessed me for thy sake. And the religion, and piety of Joseph brought a
blessing into Potiphars family, for so we read, Genesis 39 5. The Lord blessed the
Egyptians house for Joseph's sake, and the blessing of the Lord was upon all
that he had both in the house, and in the field. On the other side, no sin
that a land can be guilty of will sooner deprive it of all Gods blessings, nor
bring all manner of calamities upon it, then this neglect of religion will do.
See a plain proof of this, 2 Chronicles. 29.6 -- 9. Where Hezekiah imputes all
the miseries that had come upon the state, and kingdom of Judah, unto this,
(though doubtless they were guilty of many other grievous sins besides this)
that they had turned away their faces from the habitation of the Lord, and had
turned their backs, they had showed no respect nor zeal toward the house, and
worship of God, they had shut up the doors of the porch, and put out the
lamps, and had not burnt incense nor offered burnt offerings, in the holy
place, unto the God of Israel, therefore the wrath of God was upon Judah and
Jerusalem, says he. He says nothing there of the idolatry, and false worship
they had set up (which doubtless was a higher degree of sin) but he speaks
only of the neglect of the true worship, and want of respect and love unto it;
even to this sin he imputes all the calamities which that state, and Church
had endured. And so does the Lord by the Prophet, Hag. 1.9. and 2.15 -- 17.
impute many strange curses that he had brought upon that people, after their
return from the captivity, even to the neglect of building his house, and
setting up of his true worship among them. And if the neglect of religion will
make a land so liable to Gods curse what will the setting up of a false
religion? or the hindering, and stopping of the course of the Gospel do? Surely
this must needs provoke God much more. Forbidding us to preach to the Gentiles
that they may be saved (says the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 2.16.) to fill up their
sin always; this does fill up the measure of sin, it is the height, and
perfection of sin in any person, in any nation to do so. So that to conclude
this second reason; he that desires the prosperity, and wealth of the
kingdom, that it may be kept free from famine, and pestilence, and all other
calamities, will joy to see the pure religion of God to be maintained, and
countenanced in it, to see the sound preaching of the Gospel to abound, and
become fruitful; and he will grieve to see it otherwise.

The third, Reason 3.
and last reason of the point, respects the Lord himself. No man can have
the spirit of Christ, that does not desire unfeignedly, and rejoice to see Gods
honor and glory advanced among men, to see his kingdom enlarged, to see men
live in dutiful obedience unto him. This our Savior teaches us in the Lords
prayer to make our chief suit to God whenever we pray to him. Our three
first, and principal petitions, Matthew. 6.9, 10. Hallowed be thy name, thy
kingdom come, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. And he that cannot
heartily desire this, yea desire it more then any thing else, never knew what it
is to pray aright, never made any prayer that was acceptable unto God, in all
his life. And he that desires this cannot but rejoice to see the Gospel
soundly, and freely, and plentifully preached, to see Gods pure religion
professed, and practiced. For 1 nothing advances Gods glory so much as the
faithful preaching of the Gospel does. It is called therefore 2 Cor. 4.2. the
Gospel of the glory of Christ, (...). And 1 Timothy 1.11. The Gospel of the
glory of the blessed God. And the faithful Ministers are called the glory of
Christ, 2 Cor. 8.23. Christ receives not so much glory by any as by them. The
preaching of the word is the Scepter of Gods kingdom, and the means whereby he
subdueth men, and brings them under his obedience. This is that rod of Gods
strength, which he sent out of Zion spoken of Psalm. 110.2. whereby he rules in
the midst of his enemies. And it is therefore called the Gospel of the
kingdom, Mat. 4.23. And 2 where true religion is professed, and practiced,
there God is in his kingdom, and receives more honor then he does from all
the world besides, I will place salvation in Zion for Israel my glory says the
Lord, Esa. 46.13. his Israel is his glory. And those that are his people are to
him for a name, and for a a praise, and for a glory as he speaks, Ier. 13.11.
As if he should say; were it not for them, I should have no name, no honor,
and glory upon earth at all. So speaks our blessed Savior likewise, Ioh.
17.10. All mine (all that I make intercession for, and am to ransom, and
redeem, that are to have benefit by me) are thine, thine elect, and chosen
people, and thine are mine, all thine elect shall have benefit by me; and I am
glorified in them; the glory, and honor that I have in the world, is in, and
by them, and them only. And thus have I given you the reasons and grounds of
the point, the application of it I must defer till the next day.

Lecture CLII. On Psalm 51.7. December. 27. 1631.
IT follows now that we proceed to make some application of it unto our
selves. And that by way of confutation first; 2 Of exhortation; 3 Of reproof.

Applic. 1
An error there is in judgment, which men do hold against the necessity of
preaching. Some men are strongly persuaded that much preaching is not in these
days, in such a state of the Church as ours is, so necessary as we pretend,
whatsoever it has been formerly, it is not so now. And that they may seem to
have good reason for this that they hold, four things they allege for this
their conceit, which I will answer in order yet with as much brevity as I can.

Object. 1
First, Prayer (say they) is to be preferred before preaching. It is written
(says our Savior, Mat. 21.13.) my house shall be called the house of prayer.
Lo (say they) prayer is the chief duty that is to be performed in Gods house,
and (consequently) the chief work that the man of God, the Minister of God,
has to do.

Now for answer unto this first argument of theirs in particular I have three
things to say.

Answ. 1.
First, That prayer is indeed a chief work of the ministry. The duty of
taking care to provide for the necessity of the poor Saints, was a duty well
beseeming the holy Apostles themselves, to be exercised in. All that was given
to that use was laid down at the Apostles feet, Acts 4.35. and (by their
direction) distribution was made unto every man, according as he had need. None
that are Churchwardens, and overseers for the poor in our Parishes now a
days should think much to be employed in this office to enquire into the
estate of the poor, and into their wants and necessities, and with care, and
compassion to provide for their relief, it is an office that the blessed
Apostles, did not disdain to be employed in. But yet prayer (I mean public
prayer) is a greater duty and more proper to the Minister then that is. And
therefore the Apostles gave over that duty, and caused seven Deacons to be
chosen that being eased of that duty, they might the more freely exercise
themselves in this, for this reason they give for it, Acts 6.3, 4. Those seven
men whom you shall choose we will appoint over this business; But we will
give our selves continually unto prayer, and to the ministry of the Word.
Neither can it be denied but prayer is a chief part of Gods public worship,
a chief duty to be performed in all our Church Assemblies. When the Apostle
gives direction unto Timothy, touching the Church meetings he begins it
thus, 1 Timothy 2.1. I exhort (says he) that first of all supplications
(under which word he comprehends confession of sins and craving pardon for
them) prayers (that is petitions for blessings of all kinds that we stand in
need of) intercessions (...) by which he means deprecation of those evils,
and judgments which we see cause to fear, and giving of thanks be made.
Prayer (you see) is a chief part of Gods public worship, not to be
neglected in any of our Church Assemblies, yea long prayer too. The prayers
cannot be very short, that consist of all those parts which the Apostle
prescribes; specially seeing he will have all those parts of prayer to be
used for all men, for kings, and all that are in authority especially. It is
therefore no marvel though our Savior says that Gods house should be called
the house of prayer. No wise man misliketh the prayers that are used in our
Church Assemblies, no not the reading of prayers, no not the reading of many
prayers neither; so that reading of prayers may not thrust out, nor hinder
preaching, no wise man will mislike it. But though prayer be a chief work
that the Minister has to do, yet it is not (I take it) the chief of all that
he has to do, though it be a chief duty to be performed in all our
public assemblies yet it is not the chief duty of all. Preaching was the
chief work of all that Christ the chief Pastor of his sheep was sent to
do in his ministry. He has anointed me (says he, Luke 4.18) to preach
the Gospel; and verse 43. I must preach the kingdom of God (that is, the
Gospel, the Doctrine that will bring men to Gods kingdom) to other cities
also, for therefore am I sent. Neither was there any one work of his calling
that he did so much, and so diligently exercise himself in, as in preaching.
He taught daily in the Temple, when he was at Jerusalem, says the Evangelist,
Luke 19.47. Never would he neglect any opportunity of preaching but he was
ever ready, to neglect all other things for that. See two notable examples of
this. The 1 is Luke 9.10.11. when he had retired himself of purpose, and
sought to be private that he might have speech with his Apostles alone, and
hear them relate what they had done in that embassage he had sent them about,
the people hearing which way he was gone followed him, and found him out, he
perceiving that brake of his speech with his Disciples, and received the people
embraced this opportunity, and spoke unto them of the kingdom of God. The
other example is John 4.31 -- 34. Though he were weary with travel, verse 6.
and hungry also as appears by his sending his Disciples into the town to buy
meat, verse 8. yet knowing that many of the Samaritans were coming to hear
him, he was so taken up with joy for this opportunity of teaching them, that he
quite forgot both his weariness, and his hunger, and says in effect to his
Disciples, that it was meat, and drink to him to preach, yea he says, verse
34. that this was to do the will of him that sent him, and to finish his
work. So preaching was the chief work that the holy Apostles were sent to
do. Christ ordained twelve ( Mar. 3.14.) that they might be with him, and
that he might send them sorth to preach. Christ sent me (says the Apostle, 1
Cor. 1.17.) not to baptize (that is, not so much to baptize) but to preach the
Gospel. For this work chiefly is our maintenance due unto us not by the law
of man only, but by the law of God too. The Lord has ordained (says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.14.) that they that preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel. The Elders that labor in the Word, and Doctrine specially, above all
others, (says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.17.) are worthy of double honor, by
which he means maintenance, as appears, Verse 18. It should be such
maintenance, so free, so liberal as may testify that you honor him, in your
hearts, such as may keep him from contempt; it may not be so base and
niggardly as that the very meannesse of his estate, may make him vile, and
contemptible; yea this double honor this liberal maintenance he is worthy of
it, it is no alms or mere gratuity he is worthy of it, he deserves it
well. And as this is the chief work that we are called of God to exercise our
selves in, and for which our maintenance is due to us from the people; so is
this the chief work we should exercise our selves in gladly taking all
opportunities for doing this work. You heard before Christ did so, and we shall
find, Act. 5.42. that the Apostles did so; daily in the temple and in every
house they ceased not to teach, and preach Jesus Christ. I know well we are not
bound by these examples to preach every day as we have heard Christ, and his
Apostles did; for they could preach without study, and so cannot the best of us
do if we desire to preach well, but if we were as able as they were,
certainly we were bound to do as they did, and certainly we are bound by
their examples to preach as often, and as diligently as the abilities of our
bodies, and of our minds will enable us to do, having always respect to our
people and their necessities. And to conclude my first answer to this first
objection made against the necessity of preaching. I pray you observe that our
Savior, and his holy Apostles ever were wont to take the opportunity of the
Church assemblies on the Sabbath to preach then. Of our Savior this is plain,
Mark 1.21.39, and 6.2. Luke 4.31. and 6.6. and 13.18. And it is as plain that
the Apostles were wont to do so Acts 13, 14, 16, 44: and 17.2, 3, and 18.4,
and 20.7; though the occasion of the Churches meeting at Treas upon the Lords
Day was principally for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper yet (because he knew
that there was no better way either to sanctify the Sabbath or to prepare men's
hearts to the Sacrament then preaching) it is said he spent the whole day in
preaching. And so much shall serve for my first answer to this first objection.

Answ. 2.
Secondly, I answer. That no man can pray aright till he be first by preaching
made able, and fit to pray. This is evident by that of the Apostle Romans 10.14.
How shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed? And how shall they
believe on him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear (savingly
he means) without a Preacher? A people may be accustomed long enough to hear
prayers read unto them, and good prayers too; but they shall be little or
nothing the better for them, till first their hearts be wrought upon by
preaching and made able to pray. All our prayers and what other services soever
we do unto God, will breed us small comfort till we have been hearers, first
and believers till we have profited by our hearing till we have been ready to
hear, till we have heard the word with desire, delight and comfort.

Answ. 3.
Thirdly, and lastly. As preaching is the means to convey into our hearts the
spirit of prayer at the first, so it is also the best means to stir it up,
and quicken it, to set it on work in them that have received it. And that is
the reason why Gods people at their solemn fasts (the chief use whereof is to
make our prayers more fervent, to make us cry mightily unto God, as it is said
Ion. 3.8.) did use preaching so much. Two notable examples we have for this.
The first is Nehe. 9.3. The Levites stood up in their place, and read in the
book of the Law of the Lord, one fourth part of the day. And how did they
read? Their manner of reading you shall find Neh. 8.8. They gave the sense
also, and caused them to understand the reading. Yea they applied it also so
effectually that it wrought marvellously upon the hearts of the people as
appears, Verse 9. The other example is that in Ier. 36.5, 6. Jeremy would
feign have gone into the house of the Lord, to have preached there at the
public fast. And because he was shut up, and could not do it, he sends
Baruch to read his Sermon there as he took it from his mouth. But why did they
use preaching thus at fasts, seeing prayer is (doubtless) the chief duty that
is to be performed at a fast? Surely as a help to prayer, to stir up men's
affections, and make them able to pray more fervently. And this reason Jeremy
gives why he would have preached at that fast, and when he could not would
needs have Baruch go, and read his Sermon unto them Ier. 36.7. It may be
(says he) they will present their supplication before the Lord. As if he
should say, it may be this Sermon will stir them up to pray more fervently.
And this may serve for a full answer to the first objection. Object. 2
But then they object secondly, that though preaching were granted to be never
so necessary for the first planting of a Church, and bringing of men to the
knowledge of the truth, yet in such a Church as ours is, that has so long
enjoyed it, and wherein knowledge does so much abound, it might well be spared;
and instead thereof more time spent in prayer.

Answ.
To which I answer, That plentiful, and profitable preaching is still as
necessary in our Church as ever it was. For first there is no congregation
wherein there are not still many that are ignorant, and unconverted, yea it is
to be feared the greatest part by far in our best congregations are such. And
of them no question can be made but they have still need of preaching. Those
sheep that are not yet of Christ's fould (not yet converted, and of the number
of true believers) Christ must bring, and they must bear his voice as our
Savior himself speaks Ioh. 10.16. or they will never come into Christ's
fould, and be converted. And how shall they bear without a preacher? says the
Apostle Romans 10.14. Secondly, even those that have profited most in grace, and
knowledge have need of preaching still, even of the continual Ministry of the
word. Three evident reasons there are for this. First, the best are much
wanting in knowledge, and grace, and will be while they live, and he has no
truth of grace in him that does not find, and feel it to be so with himself.
Our Savior calls his best Disciples little Children Ioh. 13.33. And so does
the Apostle all the faithful that he writes unto 1 John 5.21. And Preaching
is ordained of God for the perfecting of the Saints Ephesians. 4.12. It is able to
build men up in grace; as the Apostle speaks Acts 20.32. Therefore though he
had opportunity to write to the Thessalonians, and did so twice, yet he prayed
exceedingly as he says 1 These. 3.10. that he might see their face, and might
perfect that that was lacking in their faith. There is no such means to make
men grow in faith, and every other saving grace to perfect that that is lacking
in it, as sound preaching is. Secondly they that have grace in the greatest
measure are apt to decay and cool, and go backward if they have not
continual means to strengthen, and nourish the grace that they have received.
As the most healthful, and strong man will do if he have not daily food; and
the most fertile soil if the rain fall not often upon it, which is the very
comparison whereby the Apostle expresses this point Heb. 6.7. The man that
has fed most liberally yesterday, will find as much need of food again to
day as if he had eaten nothing then. And our souls are apt to decay in
strength as well as our bodies are, and have need of ordinary, and continual
food as they. This the Lord had respect unto in enjoining us to spend one whole
day every week in his service Exodus 20 8 He knew well our souls would be in
danger to decay unless they might have a feasting day once a week. I am like
a green Olive tree (says David Psalm. 52.8.) in the house of God. No man can
hope to continue as the green Olive tree to flourish or keep in himself the
vigor of grace if he grow or dwell any where but in the house of God where he
may enjoy the means of grace ordinarily. They that have had the best means of
grace, and have profited most by them, let them but want those means a while,
and the decay will be sensible even unto men. Israel had enjoyed excellent
means in the days of Joshua, and Eleazar and Phineas, and had profited
greatly by them also; as appears by that protestation, and vow they made
Josh. 24.16 -- 18.24. But when they had wanted those means but a while they
turned quickly out of the way, Judge. 2.17. and fell into gross idolatry. Now
sound preaching is not only the seed whereby we were first begotten unto God,
but it is also the food whereby our souls are nourished, and strengthened,
both milk for babes, and strong meat for such as are of more growth as the
Apostle calls it, Heb. 5.12. They that have more profited by it have great
need of it as well as any other have. I will not be negligent (says the
Apostle 2 Pet. 1.12.) to put you always in remembrance of these things, though
ye know them, and be established in the present truth. Thirdly, and lastly.
The longer that any people have enjoyed a good Ministry and the more they have
profited by it, the more pity it is that they should want it. For as they are
dearest unto God, so their decays will more dishonor God, then the sins of
other men. I have not written unto you (says the Apostle 1 Job. 12.21.)
because ye know not the truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of
the truth. As if he should say, therefore have I had more care of you, then
otherwise I would have had. See this also in the example of other of the
Apostles, and servants of God. Antioch was the place that (of all the Cities of
the Gentiles) had enjoyed the best Ministry, and had profited most by it; and
the Disciples were called Christians first in Antioch, Acts 11.26. And there
was no place in the world, that the Apostles showed so much care of, nor spent
so much time in, as they did there. When Barnabas came, and saw how the Gospel
prospered there, he did not only rejoice in it, and took great pains there
himself, but sought out Paul and brought him thither too; and they both took
pains there a whole year together Act. 11.23 -- 26. And Act. 14.28. they came
thither again, and abode there a long time with the Disciples. And so did they
again, and with them Silas also, Act. 15.34, 35. and spent a good time there.
Two objections more there be that are made against the necessity of preaching,
which I will pass over very briefly.

Object. 3
Admit (say they thirdly) that preaching be the best means to feed the soul;
yet as the stomach (specially of a child) may be overcharged and glutted with
the best food that is, and so take much hurt by it; so it is with the word the
people are in these days even glutted, and cloyed with it, and grow thereby to
a loathing of it, if it were not so common, it would be more precious then it
is, as it is said it was in the days of Samuel 1 Samuel 3.1.

Answ.
To this I answer. First, it has ever been so with some that they have loathed
the word. But much preaching has not been the cause of it. For many that are
not troubled with much preaching, loath it as much as any, and feel no
sweetness in it. The word of the Lord is a reproach unto them, they have no
delight in it, as the Prophet speaks Ier. 6.10. And many that are the most
constant hearers of it, are farthest from being gluttted with it, hear it with
the best appetite, and delight, the more they hear the more they may. The
blessed man that David speaks of Ps. 1.2. though he meditate in Gods law day,
and night, delights in it nevertheless; for that, he finds no satiety in
it he is not glutted nor cloyed with it. The true cause of this loathing of the
word is given by the Apostle Romans 8.5. They that are after the flesh do savor
the things of the flesh, but they that are after the spirit, the things of the
spirit. A carnal man finds no savor in any thing save only in carnal, and
worldly things; no man can find sweetness in the word, till he be a
regenerate, and new man. Secondly much preaching if it be sound, and
substantial, is not food only but Physic to the soul, it is the best means
to cure this Nausea this disease of the soul that makes it so apt for to
loath the word. And therefore the Apostle speaking to Timothy 2 Timothy 4.2, 3. of
such as could not endure ^ound Doctrine (wholesome food) prescribes him this
for the remedy against it, therefore preach the more (says he) and the more
profitably, be instant in season, and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort
with all long suffering, and doctrine.

Object. 4.
The fourth, and last objection is this, that though preaching has been in
time past necessary, and of good use yet it may be well spared now for we see
it does little or no good now a days, look into such places where it is most
used, and see how few are bettered by it.

Answ. 1.
To which I answer, first that this is too true indeed, and in this two
fearful evidences of Gods wrath are to be observed both mentioned in that
speech of our Savior Matthew. 18.7. Woe unto the world because of offenses, for
it must needs be that offenses come, but woe to the man by whom the offense
comes. First, Woe to the world because of offenses. It is a fearful sign
of Gods wrath upon thee, and such as thou art, that thou have such stumbling
blocks laid before thee, to work thy ruin and sink thee deep in hell, that
thou had such occasions given thee to mislike Religion, and this ordinance of
God. Secondly, Woe be to the man by whom the offense comes, woe be to you
all, that by your ignorance, profaneness, drunkenness, filthiness, backsliding
cause this ordinance of God to be derided, and hated. The name of God is
blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, as the Apostle speaks Romans 2.24.
Certainly you will one day wish that you had lived rather among the Indians,
and Canibals then in such a place where you have so long enjoyed such a
ministry and so much dishonored it.

But then secondly I answer that the preaching of the word, Answ. 2.
is not (blessed be God) altogether without fruit at this day in any place that
does enjoy it. It does good daily and the Church is increased by it. God adds
to the Church daily such as shall be saved, as it was said in those first times
Act. 2.47. though not so many nor so eminent persons as he did then. Yet even
those few young folk, and mean persons that are woone to God daily by the
preaching of the word, will rise up in judgment against thee one day, and
confound thee so as thou shall have nothing to say for thy self, that they who
have less help by nature, then thou have profited so much and been drawn on
forward by it, and thou profitest not but growest more backward, and backward
every day. For so says the Apostle 1 Cor. 1.27. God has chosen the weak
things of this world, to con^ound the things that are mighty. So that to
conclude my answer to this last objection I will say to these men as the
Apostle does in a case not much differing from this Romans 11.7. What then?
Israel has not obtained that that he seeks for, the most of our hearers
obtain not that good by our preaching which they seem to seek for, but the
election has obtained it and the rest were hardened. The elect of God are made
the better, and the rest the worse by it, and God will be glorified in them
both.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Index of the principal matters contained in this Book.
A.
Affections.
THe necess^y of good affections. 489
Affliction.
In all distresses, (...) to God by prayer, and seek comfort that way. 59 In
all afflictions we must clear and acquit God of all rigor and injustice. 245
Every child of God must look for affliction. 253 God has a special hand in
all afflictions. 256 God afflicts his people in love. 257, etc. Think of
affliction (...) 260 Willing bearing of affliction is a means to mortifi^
corruption. 322 We may in two respects judge of men's sins ly their
affl^ction. 559 We may therein offend two ways. Ibid and 560 Though the
afflictions men endure be in their own nature punishments yet are they not so
to all men. 664, 665 Afflictions inflicted upon the godly for sin are not
properly punishments, but chastisements. 665 In extreme affliction our case
will be woeful without Christ. 684 Six remarkable things concerning affliction.
Ibid. and 685 He that has Christ may be safe and comfortable in any
affliction. 686
Almsdeeds.
Motives to them. 116, 117, etc. How to be performed. Ibid. How faulty men are
this way. 119, etc.
Anabaptists.
Confutation of their errors touching infants. 281
Application.
Hearers must apply the Word to themselves. 39 Ministers must apply the Word
particularly to the people. 44. etc Every man must labor to have Christ's blood
sprinkled upon his heart, and applied to him 614, etc.
Assurance.
Labor to get assurance that Christ's blood was shed for us. 617, 618 Many
deceive themselves in this, and the danger of this deceit. 620 Signs of false
assurance, 628, 629 Signs of true assurance. 621, etc. Every Christian has
the Word to assure him in particular, that he is in the state of grace. 623
Means to get true assurance. 632, etc.
Attention.
We must diligently attend to what we hear. 36, 37
Beneficence.
Gods children are ready and careful to do good, and to be useful to others.
121 -- 125
Birth.
No cause to be proud of parentage or birth. 28^
Blessinge of God.
The godly have been often confirmed in assurance of Gods love, by the
experience of Gods favor to them in temporal blessings. 645 689 True
believers may take great comfort even in these outward blessings. 688 Such
things as are blessings in themselves, are not so to wicked men 686 They have
no spiritual title to them. 687 To them they are fruits of Gods common love,
not of his special. Ibid.
Catechizing.
A special means to breed sound knowledge. 789
Censoriousnesse.
Men are apt to think them greatest sinners, whom they see most afflicted. 557
The folly and wickedness of it. 560, 561
Charity.
The knowledge of Gods love in pardoning us, should provoke us to forgive those
that have wronged us. 111 Signs whether we have indeed forgiven such as have
wronged us. 114, 115 Charity is a special fruit of the Spirit. 747, 748 Signs
of it. 748, etc. Toward all men. 748, 752 Toward our enemies. 752, 753 To
them that fear God. 754, 755 We love no man unless we love his soul, and
unfeignedly desire his salvation. 803, 804
Children.
To honor and reverence their parents. 284 Parents should do their uttermost
to breed grace in their children. 287 Children owe honor and subjection to
their parents, be they never so poor. 291 Correction necessary for children.
293
Christ.
The riches of Gods grace appears to his people in Christ in five regards.
103, 104 No mercy to be hoped for from God, but in and through Christ. 596
Though salvation were not free to Christ, but he paid dea^^ for it, yet is it
to us free. 600, 601 Every one should labor to know that Christ is his. 607
Motives to that. 608, 609 Signs that Christ is ours. 610, 611 Means to get
this assurance. 611, 613 Esteem of Christ above all, and labor to be found in
him. 683, etc. All men shall not have benefit by Christ, but few in comparison.
744, etc. The reason of that. 745
Church.
We should be affected with the miseries of the Church, and bow. 562, etc. Pray
for the Church. 567 Only the Church has benefit by Christ. 744 Nor all within
that. Ibid.
Church Assemblies.
Being come into them, we must set our selves as in the presence of God. 35
Their sin which behave themselves unreverently in them. 36 That sleep
ordinarily there. 708, 709 That absent themselves from them. 710 Reverence due
in them in three regards. 709 The fullness of them a comfort to Gods children.
800
Civill-honesty.
In it self a good thing, pleasing to God, and such as he uses to reward.
692, 693 The great sin of Professors that are defective in that. 694, 695 Yet
no sound comfort to be found in this alone. 695, 696
Comfort.
Ministers must take care to comfort such as are afflicted in conscience,
though the greatest part of their audience stand not in need of the word of
consolation. 135, 136, 459, 649, 650 Reasons to persuade such as are afflicted
in mind to give way to comfort. 137 God intends good to his children, by
withholding comfort from them for a time. 142 Comfort for those that complain
and mourn for their unprofitablenesse in the use of Gods ordinances. 595 Of
their doubtings and infidelity. 647, 648, 654, 680, 682
Commonwealth.
A great sin to be all for ourselves, and to have no care of the common good.
125 We must seek the good of it. 806 The Gospel brings blessings to it. 806,
807
Communion.
Their sin that forbear it, because they are out of Charity. 113 Because we
come not to it rightly humbled, we depart without comfort. 265, 266 There Is
great force in that to work assurance of Gods favor in Christ. 635 And
constancy in the truth. 797 Concupiscence without consent is sin. 306
Conference.
We should confer of what we hear specially in our own families. 40, 41
Good in trouble of mind to make known our case to some faithful friend or
Minister. 151
Confession.
He that truly repents, will willingly confess and bewail his sin. 158 He
that can rightly and truly confess his sins, may be sure to find mercy in the
pardon of them. 159, 160 The Reasons why Gods people have been so willing to
confess their sins, and why the Lord has so much delighted to see them do
so. 161, 162 How far forth confession of sin in private to a Minister, or
other friend, is not necessary. 163, 164 How far forth it is profitable and
fit. 164, 165 Those whose sins are public and scandalous, must be willing to
make public confession and profession of their repentance. 171, etc. Three
cautions touching this. 171 Confession of our sins to God is of all other
most necessary and useful. 191, 192 Five means whereby we may be enabled to
confess our sins aright. 196, etc. Five properties of sincere confession of
sin. 198, 203
Conscience.
Thy conscience will one day bring thy secretest sins to thy mind. 207 And
smite thee for them. 208 No comparison between the pleasure of sin and that.
209 A good conscience a special means to make us bear affliction comfortably
and patiently. 272 And to get assurance of Gods favor. 409, 410 638, 641 Make
conscience of every truth. 793, 794
Conversion.
The power and goodness of God to us, in it is admirable. 342, etc. God has
set a time for every man's conversion, we must count the present time that. 345
Rejoice in the truth of grace wrought in thee. 346 In it a change and
reformation wrought in the whole man. 414 Three cautions. 415, 416 Conversion
is to be ascribed wholly unto God and the mighty working of his grace. 503,
etc. 519 The work of grace in the conversion of man is most free. 510, 511 God
in denying the means of conversion or grace of conversion to any, does them no
wrong because he is a solute Sovereign. 519, 520 In that he denies effectual
grace, to profit by the means to most, he manifests his free grace and mercy
to his elect 520 God in conversion, not only offers grace, but con^ers and
in^useth that grace into the will, that actually inclines it. 524
Covetousness.
True says will subdue it. 733
Curiosity.
Take heed of affecting the knowledge of curious, intricate, and unprofitable
points. 785 This discerned three ways. 786, 788
D.
Death.
ONe chief thing that should make the faithful willing to die, is that then
they shall sin no more, but be freed from all possibility of falling away. 11,
324, 325 In the best an unwillingnesse to die. 325
Delay.
Presently set upon the practice of what you have learned out of the Word. 43
Seek speedily the pardon of sin. 9^ Without delay make thy best use of the
means of conversion. 346
Desire.
Unfeigned desire to please God a sign of uprightness. 438, 439, 463 Five
differences between the desires of the godly and the wicked. 442, 443 Signs to
know a true desire of grace. 465
Doubting.
All doubting is not a sign of infidelity 242 Yet a dangerous sign not to
be able to believe the Word nor to be troubled with infidelity. Ibid. Or to
dispute against the Word. 243 Comforts for such of Gods children as doubt they
are hypocrites. 461 A man may be in the state of grace though he perceive it
not. 650, 651 He that finds least comfort in himself, yet should rest upon
Christ. 653
E.
Enemies.
WE must love them, and express it in eight duties. 752, 753
Errors.
Corruption in judgment the most dangerous corruption. 779, 780 The faithful
may err in matters of smaller moment. 780, 781 Yea in fundamental points for
a time. 782 We must shun the hearing, and con^erring with seducers. 784
Examination.
Christians should daily examine their ways. 197, 198 A means to get and
increase assurance of Gods favor. 641, 643
Example.
Great force in example. 298
Experience.
It is profitable to call to mind the signs of grace we had in former times.
643 And the special Experiments we have had of Gods love in temporal
blessing* 644 But specially in spiritual things. 645
Exercises of Religion.
Every man is to spend some part of every day in them. 320 Conscionable use of
them is a means to mortify corruption. 321
F.
Faith.
WIthout faith we cannot bear afflictions patiently, but having it, we may.
266 267 How to try it. 268 Diverse effects of it. 627 True faith is operative.
626 Comfort for such as complain of the weakness of it. 269 Till faith come
into the heart, no sin can be mortified, but when it comes, it will mortify
sin. 326, 327 Two reasons of that. 327, 330 We must exercise and make use of
our faith. 330 Faith the root of all true piety and love to God. 397 There may
be true faith where there is no assurance of salvation. 411, 650, 652 Wherein
the nature of true faith consists. 411, 413, 653 It will bring comfortable
assurance in the end 413 The inward instrument to sanctify the heart. 731 All
men by nature unable to believe. 746
Falls of the godly.
The truly regenerate may fall fearfully into odious sins. 8 Why the Lord
suffers his people to fall. 9, 10 The best have therefore great cause to fear.
10, 11 Means to keep us from falling 11 Take heed of declining in the least
matters. 795 When they are fallen, they cannot rise up again of themselves. 13
Comfort against tentations of falling away. 352, 357 Differences between the
falls of the elect and others. 355, 556 Their sin is great that rejoice to
hear and speak of them. 552 And theirs that embolden themselves to sin by
them. 554, 557 Why the falls of the godly are recorded in the Word. 555
Family.
True converts will have a care to reform their families. 288, 630 Such as
have children and families, are charged with the souls of them. 289, 481 Must
answer for their open pro^anenesse and contempt of religion. 711
Fast.
Humiliation necessary in every fast, and for what causes we should be humbled.
311, 313
Feeling.
A man may be in the state of grace, and highly in Gods favor, though be feel
is not, nor have the comfort of it. 140, 141
Fear of God.
That may be well done, that is done cut of fear of Gods judgments. 387 But
it must be such a fear as is mixed with love. 388 A man may be subject to
slavish fears* and yet truly love God. 392 Reasons of it. 393, 394 We must
strive against these fears. 395 6 Means to overcome them. 396, 734, 735 He
that is in the state of grace, must be afraid to sin 569 570 Must fear every
degree of sin, must continue in this fear Ibid Faith the root of it. 741
Freedom of will.
How dead we are by nature. 305, 517, 518 Wicked men have no true desire nor
will t^ have grace, and to be saved 454, 455 Wicked men may forbear many
sins, and do much more good than they do. 457 He that does what lies in
him, is nearer to salvation, than another natural man. 458 The natural man is
able to ^^ve to men, and to himself but not to God. 518
G.
God.
HIs omnipresence and omniscience. 221, 222 His holiness. 222 His Majesty. 223
His goodness and bounty. 224
Gods love.
Wicked men are persuaded God loves them, and he does indeed with a common
love. 398 Faith assures us of Gods special love. 400 Rest not in common
favors, but get assurance of Gods special love. 401, 402, 687, 688 Motives to
seek for assurance of Gods special love. 402, 406 Means to get it. 406, etc
Grace.
We are bound to give God thanks for his restraining grace in others. 337. In
our selves. 339 Saving grace is of a permanent and durable nature. 428
Gospel.
The preaching of the Gospel is the outward instrument whereby the Spirit
works sanctification. 732
H.
Hearers.
TO love and reverence Gods Ministers. 22, 167 What Ministry they should most
prize. 22, 23 Yet must they esteem reverently of the meanest faithful
Minister. 23 Reproo^e of hearers that love not their Ministers person. 24 That
discourage their Ministers. 480 That regard not his Ministry. 24, 169 The
danger of such as neglect to hear. 26 That hear without profit. 27, 528 Many
complain without cause they cannot profit by the Word. 528 What the true
causes are men profit not by the Word. 529 What they must do that have long
enjoyed the Ministry of the Word and cannot profit by it. 530 Hearers must
examine what they hear. 790 How we may hear with profit. 30, etc. 742 1.
What we must do before. 30, 35, 792 2. What in hearing. 35, 39 3. What after.
39, 44 Resort to Ministers for resolution. 43
Heart.
Gross sins harden the heart. 14, 15, 16 Hardness of heart a ^earefull
judgment. 16 Means to deliver and preserve us from it. 16, 17, 735 Make
conscience of the first stir^ings of thy corruption there. 317 When God has a
man's heart it is a sign of uprightness. 438, etc., 463 Signs that the
purpose and desire of the heart is right. 465
Honor.
Whom God accounts truly honorable. 286
Hope.
A sound hope that when we shall die we shall go to heaven, a special
means of patience. 270 Signs of a true hope. 271
Humiliation.
The knowledge of our natural corruption is of great force to humble us. 308
We have cause to be humbled when we have performed our best duties. 309 When
we go before God in prayer. Ibid. Specially at fasts. 311 And at the Sacrament.
574 Seeking assurance of Gods favor with an humbled soul, is a special
means to obtain it. 408, 647 Humiliation for sin a special means to
obtain sanctified knowledge. 498 He that is in the state of grace ^ath more
cause to be humbled for his gross sins, than any other man 573 Four
benefits of ^ound humiliation. 574 The humbled soul most capable of mercy.
647, 648 None fit to receive Christ but the humble, and such as find themselves
utterly void of all grace. 691
Hypocrisy.
The best are apt to suspect themselves to be hypocrites. 460 Comfort for such.
461 Many things in an hypocrite, better than in any mere natural man. 697 An
hypocrite may go far. 698, etc. The good things in them not to be misliked
and scorned. 699 In some respects the hypocrite is worse, and in worse case
than the open profane person. 719 Signs of an hypocrite. 720, etc
I.
Idleness.
A Great sin for any man to live idly and un-profitably. 125
Idolatry.
It is a good thing and pleasing to God to hate Idolatry. 712, 714
Ignorance
Is a sin that much provokes God. 494 It is a sign one is under Satan's
power. 496 Such a one easily seduced. Ibid. Such an one is full of doubts and
fears. 497
Infants.
Every Infant so soon as it is borne or conceived, is guilty of sin in the
sight of God, and deserves to be damned. 277 In what respects called
Innocents. Ibid. And said to be holy. 278 How severe God has been in his
judgments toward some Infants. 279, 280 The original corruption of Infants
consists in three things. Ibid Observe Gods judgments on them. 281 The sin
that is in Infants is derived to them from their parents. 282
Infidelity.
The heinousness of that sin. 146, 147 Notwithstanding Infidelity discerned
and bewailed, a man may trust in Gods mercy. 648, 682
Infirmities.
Four notes to discern a sin of infirmity from a reigning sin. 709
Joy.
The humble-hearted man has great cause of Joy. 138 Gods children have cause
to be comfortable, and to serve God with alacrity. 364, 365 He that truly
believes he is justified by Christ, must needs rejoice in him. 675, etc. Their
great sin that do not. 680
Judgments of God.
The Lord shows his severity more in this life, against the sins of his
own people, than of the wicked. 1. He afflicts all them. 2. Begins with them.
542, 543. 3. He usually makes them examples. 544. 4. His judgments are wont to
be heavier and sharper on them. 545 This be does to keep them from sin and
perdition 546 He gets himself glory from wicked men two ways, by the
Examples of his severity toward his own children. 547, 548
Justification.
By Christ we are fully and perfectly delivered and freed from all our sins.
315, 316 All true believers are perfectly cleansed from their sinne^ and pure
in Gods eyes. 655 The reasons of it 660, 661 Four maine differences between
justification, and sanctification. 656, 659 How perfectly a true believer is
discharged of all his sins, appears in 5 points 659 We cannot be justified
by inherent righteousness. 669, 670 Reasons of it. 670, 671 We are justified
by Christ's righteousness imputed to us. 672 Objections answered. 674 The
knowledge of this, that Christ has purchased for us the pardon of our sins,
a sufficient ground of comfort. 677. and so is the knowledge of this, that
Christ's perfect obedience is imputed to us. Ibid.
K.
Knowledge.
A Good sign to desire to know the whole will of God in all things that
concern us. 423, 786, 794 Saving knowledge is the principal work of Gods
grace in the conversion of man. 472 It is the foundation of other graces. 473
It is the seed of other graces. 475 All Gods people must seek for saving
knowledge. 483 Signs of sanctified knowledge. 485, etc 1 The Word the only
object of it. 2. Specially such parts of it as are most useful and profitable
for our selves 485. 3. It is clear and certain. 4. There Is no fullness nor
satiety in it. 486 It works 1 humility 487. 2. Good affections. 488. 3.
Reformation of hearts and li^e 489, 490. 4. Strengthens against tentations.
491 Motives to seek knowledge. 1. It concerns one as well as another, to have
knowledge in Religion, and in the Scriptures. 492, 493. 2. It is a duty
required of God. Ibid. 494 3 It is a comfortable sign of Election, and
uprightness o^ heart 495 4. It keeps us constant in Religion, and from
danger of seducers 490, 788 5. It makes us walk boldly and comfortably. 497
Means. 1. Be sensible of ignorance. 2. Be truly humbled; or sin 498. 3. Depend
upon an ordinary and sound ministry 499. 4. Read the Word. 5. Meditate. 6.
Confer. 7. Pray, 501. Receive the Word with an honest heart. 792 No man by
natural abilities can attain saving knowledge without supernatural grace.
512 This cure not perfected in this life, nor so perfectly in some as others,
but shall be perfected in heaven. 514 Natural men's knowledge not sufficient to
salvation. 515 The work of grace enlightening the understanding, is
extraordinary and rare 516 This works most free: no reason of it, but only
Gods good pleasure. Ibid. ^abour to understand every thing we do in Gods
service. 583 Danger of them that make light account of knowledge. 598
L.
Labor.
WE cannot perform any spiritual service unto God without labor. 34
Love of God.
The love of God is the root of all true obedience. 386 The true love of God, a
certain sign of an upright heart. 388 389 No wicked man does indeed love God.
390, etc. There may be true love of God in them that are much exercised with
slavish fears. 394 Love that is wrought in men toward God by his common
savours is unsound. 398, 399 Faith the root of it. 742 Every one that has the
Spirit of Christ, loves God above all 798 Gods honor must be dearer unto us
than any thing. 809
M.
Magistrates
HAve great opportunity to honor God in their places. 631
Maliciousness.
True faith will subdue it. 733, 734
Means.
God is the giver of all means, and of the virtue in them to do us good. 72
Meditation.
Meditate on that we hear. 40
Memory.
We should be careful to remember what we hear. 39 And to keep Gods favors
in remembrance. 646
Mercy of God.
The only ground the best can have for hope of pardon is Gods mercy. 102, etc.
Gods mercy most free. 107 In him bowels of mercy. 107, 108 We must not rest in
this, to know that God is merciful, but labor to know that his mercy, yea a
special mercy belongs to us. 126 Five differences between it and common
mercies. 126, 127 Five notes to know whether it belong to us. 127, 128 Five
notable effects, that the assurance of Gods special mercy works in the
conscience 129, 130 The vilest sinner, if he feel his sin, and desire to turn
to God, need not doubt of finding mercy with him. 130, etc. Gods mercy to us in
the things that concern this life 224, 225 In things that concern our souls.
225, etc. Learn to be merciful by example of Gods mercy. 115
Ministers.
Why the faithfullest Ministers are so hated. 46, 47 What properties should be
in the Minister that desires to do good specially in reproving sin. 48, 52
Ministers should not be given to suits and contentions 51 What manner of men
Ministers had need to be. 166.167 Ministers must chiefly labor to bring the
people to knowledge, to ground and stablish them in it. 481 By what means he
may do that. 482 Ministers have great opportunity to honor God. 631 Ministers
teaching by warrant of Gods Word, are to be obyed. 724 A man that has no truth
of grace in himself, may be a means to conver^ others. 805
Ministry of the Word
The means which God has sanctified, and by which he has been wont to work
repentance and grace. 18. and knowledge. 499. and constancy in the truth. 796
What mighty works it has wrought, and the reason it has done so. 18, 21 We
should resolve to live under it, and why. 23, 24, 48 To be accounted a chief
blessing. 25, 478, 800, 804 That the best, that applies the Word particularly,
and reproves sin boldly. 44 A principal work of mercy, to procure or provide
that for a people. 479 It is Gods special and free favor, that any of us
enjoy the sound Ministry of the Word 503 507 That the Ministry of the Word is
effectual to conversion, is to be ascribed only to the Spirit. 507, 509 They
are in a fearful estate that enjoy not the Ministry of the Word. 526, 527 And
also they that enjoy it, and cannot profit by it. 528 A great mercy to enjoy
the Ministry of the Word, but specially, when we profit by it. 531, 532 We
should rejoice in this. 802, 803
Modesty.
The people of God dare not speak boldly nor immodestly of filthy actions. 6
Mortification.
Seven means of it. 317, etc. We may with confidence go to Christ for help
against our spiritual infirmities. 331 Objections against that answered. 335
Faith the only means of mortification. 732
Music.
Three things to be observed concerning the Music they had in the worship of
God under the Law. 3
N.
Neighbors.
HOw we came to make our selves guilty of the sins of others. 179, etc. 219
We are bound to desire and procure (so far as in us lies) that all men may
have the means of knowledge. 477, 478
O.
Oath.
GReat care to be had in taking an oath and keeping it. 183 The common sin,
in taking an oath so carelessly, and making so little conscience in keeping it.
184 Occasions of evil to be shunned. 318
Officers
Bound to present infamous and scandalous persons. 182 They sin that keep men
from public penance. 187, 188
Obedience.
Be willing to yield passive obedience unto God. 245, 249 Conscionable care to
please God a sure note of uprightness. 378 True obedience is universal. 419,
etc. 724, 726 Yet special care to be had of those things God has given us
special charge of. 422 The only rule of true righteousness is the Word. 380,
etc. How the upright man shows equal respect to all the commandments. 423,
etc. Forth the root of it. 737, 741 Five notes of Evangelicall obedience. 754
Obedience must be done in a right manner. 433, etc.
Oppression.
Against such as are undoers of others. 124
Original sin
Is derived from the parents, and why. 282, 283 For this sin (above all
others) God may justly ab^orre us, and we have most cause to be humbled in our
selves. 301, 303 Three motives to persuade us to seek deliverance from it, and
two means. 313, 317 Consider Gods mercy and goodness toward us in that
regard. 336
P.
Papists.
THeir errors touching original sin. 305, etc. Touching justification. 662,
etc.
Parents.
To be humbled for the corruption and sin that appears in their children.
286 Parents should use their utmost endeavor to breed grace in their children.
287, etc. Diverse motives. Ibid. Means Parents must use to save their childrens
souls. 291, etc Parents must maintain their authority over their children,
291 How they come to lose it. 292 Their sin in neglecting to keep them in awe.
293 294 They must instruct their children. 1. Instilling betimes the beginnings
of knowledge. 294. 2. Acquainting them with the practice of Religion. 295. 3.
Bringing them to the public worship. 4. Examining them how they profit. Ibid.
They must be careful to give them good example. 298 They must take heed how
they place them at school, in service, in marriage. 299 They must pray for
them. Ibid. Parents using these means, need not doubt they shall lose their
labor. 300
Patience.
We have need of it. 250 Seven notes of it. 251, etc. Motives to it. 253, etc.
Means. 260, etc.
Perseverance.
Study to persevere unto the end. 12 The mavelous mercy of God to be
acknowledged, in the perseverance of any in the state of grace 347, 352 Take
heed of declining and falling from grace. 431, 432 The regenerate elect child
of God ca^^ot sin so hainously as every unregenerate man may do. 533, etc.
Constancy in the true Religion is a sign a man has the Spirit of Christ. 766,
etc. God has given great testimony to this. 76^ The faithful have found much
comfort in ^t. (...) They whom the Spirit has taught, (...) persevere in the
truth. (...) Motives to constancy in the truth. 7^^* 7^2 Means to it. 782
Though it be ascribed to the Lord alone, yet he works it by means, and will
have us to be agents in this work. 783
Predestination.
Gods decree of Predestination is most righteous. 248, 249
Prayer.
Gods people in all distress must seek for comfort from God by prayer. 59.
etc. Extremity of affliction should not keep us from it 63, 64 Nor sense of
our own vileness. 64, 65 Nor inability to pray. 68, 69, etc Nor a conceit
that it is to no purpose to pray. 69 etc. Prescript and set forms of Prayer may
be used. 68 Why God delays to answer the prayers of his servants 75, 76 What
we must then do. 78, etc. God gives often a gracious answer to the prayers of
his servants, though they perceive it not 76 Five several ways God shows
respect unto, and gives a gracious answer to his peoples prayers. 76, 77 Six
principal faults that use to blemish and weaken our prayers. 81, etc. 637 Five
notable encouragements to prayer, specially in inward afflictions. 153 Prayer a
special means to get grace to bear afflictions comfortably and patiently.
273 Long prayers not unlawful, so it be with four cautions. 310 Prayer a
means to conquer corruptions. 322 And to get assurance of Gods favor in
Christ. 636 A singular good thing to keep a constant course in prayer. 700
Faith e^ableth us to pray well. 743
Practice.
Presently set upon the practice of what we have learned. 43 Making conscience
to practice what we have learned, means to establish us in the truth. 792
Preaching of the Word.
Is a means to bring men to Christ. 19 The godly man will rejoice in the
plentifulnesse of it. 801 for three reasons. 803, 809 Preaching necessary now.
813 Objections against it answered. 810, etc.
Preparation
To the hearing of the Word, wherein it consists. 30, etc.
Presumption.
Take heed we sin not, presuming that we shall repent before we die. 15 The
vanity of those conceits which keep many from being troubled with their (...).
89, 93 Hypocrites use to be confident. 377 Presume not to sin, because of the falls of Gods people. 554, etc. The danger of Presumption. 620, 625, 744 Signs
of it. 628, 629
Private duties.
Secret confession of sin, most necessary, convenient, and beneficial. 193,
195
Psalms.
The titles of them not to be omitted as superfluous and impertinent. 1 Why
committed to the chief Musician. 4 Singing of Psalms an ancient and excellent
ordinance of God. 4 How Psalms should be sung. 6
Punishment.
The consideration of punishment may cause a faithful man to mourn and grieve
for sin, and to be afraid of it. 218 Christ has satisfied as well for the
temporal as eternal punishment due to our sins. 662, 663 Though the
afflictions men induce be in their own nature punishments, yet are they not so
to all men. 664, 665
Profaneness.
In some respects the open profane persons case is worse than the hypocrites.
718
Profession.
Live so as men may be witnesses of thy goodness. 418 He that has assurance
that Christ is his, will pro^esse and declare himself openly to be Gods
servant. 627 We may hate the sins of professors, but not hate them for any
goodness they profess. Three notes whereby we may see many hate professors
for their goodness. 716, 717
Prosperity.
He that has not Christ, can have no comfort in his prosperity. 686 Great is
their folly that prefer worldly things before Christ. 690
R.
Regenerate.
THe sins the regenerate fall into, are in sundry respects greater than the
sins of others. 539, 542, and 548, 552 God will plague sin as much in them
as in any other in the world. 540, 541 In this life he shows more hatred to
the sins of such, than to the sins of other men. 542, etc. The goodness in
the regenerate man, in three respects surpasses the goodness in the moral
man or hypocrite. 729, 730
Religion.
That Is the true Religion that gives the whole glory of man's salvation to the
free grace and mercy of God. 110, 523 The truth we have received by warrant of
the Word, and teaching of the Spirit, we should be constant in. 525, etc. 766,
767 A grievous sin to insult against Religion for the faults of the
professors of it. 553, 554 True Religion grounded on the Word 767 No certainty
in Religion, but by the teaching of the Spirit. 773, 774 True Religion brings
great blessings to the Church and State. 806, 807
Repentance.
A great comfort that thou have repented. 17 The sin of such as keep men from
public penance. 187, 188 The sin of such as sin, and refuse public
profession of their repentance. 189, 191 They that have truly repented them of
their sins, cannot easily forget them, but are apt to think of them. 203,
etc. The chief thing that should make us hate sin, and mourn for it, is the
offense and dishonor done to God. 219* 220 The sinning against so good a God
should humble us. 227 Notes of sincere repentance. 232 Five things required in
true repentance. 605 Faith the root of repentance. 740
Reproof.
The Minister must plainly and particularly reprove sin. 44, etc. 707 The
reasons for the necessity of reproof. 46 In four things the Ministers wisdom
in reproving sin, must appear. 49, 50 And his love in three. 51 Reasons why
men cannot endure reproof. 52 Their folly appears in ^oure things. 53 Five
Objections answered against such Ministers. 54, 57 Dangerous not to endure the
Word of reproof. 244
Righteousness.
Five things to be granted touching inherent righteousness. 667, 668 Yet
cannot a man be justified by that. 669 Inherent righteousness a great ground
of comfort. 677, 678
S.
Sabbath.
THough the outward observation of the Sabbath be the least, yet God is highly
pleased with it, and promises to reward it. 701, 705 The things required for
the right observation of it. 708, 710
Sacrilege
Is a great sin. 724
Sadness.
Christians should beware of sadness and fear. 137
Salvation.
The whole glory of man's salvation is due to the Lord alone, and his free
grace. 521, 522 Though it be free to us, Christ paid dear for it. 600, 601
Sanctification.
Whom the Lord iustifies, he sanctifies, though this be not so perfect as the
former, yet is it more sensible to us because we are agents in it our selves.
316 Four maine differences between sanctification and justification. 656, 659
Sanctification is not in the same measure in all true believers. 657 Nor
perfected in this life. 658 None can be sanctified till he be justified. 730
Faith the inward instrument whereby God sanctifies the heart. 731 Reasons of
it. 738, 739
Scandalous sinners.
We should do our best endeavor to bring scandalous sinners to open shame and
punishment. 182, etc. Officers chiefly. Ibid. How ^arre private Christians may
go in this. 185, etc.
Scripture.
We must esteem reverently of every part of Scripture, though we cannot at
first reading or hearing profit by it. 2 The duty we owe to those parts of the
Word we cannot understand, stands in six points. 2, 3 The holy Scripture of
the Old Testament was kept in the Sanctuary and Temple. 4 It is the only rule
of true righteousness. 380, etc. The absolute perfection of the Scriptures
appears in six particulars. 381, 384 All Gods people have equal interest in
the holy Scriptures. 493 All truths necessary to salvation are plainly and
clearly set ^^wne in the Scriptures. 512, 513, 768
Security.
Against secure sinners. 209, 214
Selfe-denyall.
To renounce our selves, and with humbled souls to cast our selves upon the
^ree mercy of God in Christ, is the way to obtain comfort. 647
Service of God.
Their solly which re^use Gods service because it is an heavy bondage. 444,
etc. Reasons why men re^use Gods service. 445, etc. Gods service the most
comfortable life. 448 Four things to be considered in the gracious disposition
of our Master that makes us cheerful in his service. 451
Sight of sin
How far forth the discovering of sin to us is a blessing. 340 How far forth a
judgment. 341
Sincerity.
The Lord desires and highly esteems truth and sincerity of ^eart, and ^oure
reasons for that. 368, 371 It stands us all upon to (...) diligently whether
our hearts (...) up^ight, and th^ee motives to that. 372, 376, 466 He that has
any one s^ving and sanctifying grace, has certainly an upright heart. 376 Even
the aptness that is in us to suspect our selves least our hearts should be
unsound, is a good sign of uprightness. 376, 719 So is the conscience we make
of Gods commandments, and to lead a godly life. 378 Means to attain
sincerity and uprightness of heart. 469, 470 Care to keep our selves un^potted
of every sin, is a sign of sincerity. 726 So is this, when our maine intent
and aim is to please God. 728
Sin.
One sin draws on another. 14 Pardon of sin is more to be desired, than
deliverance from any outward misery. 84, etc. Sin the greatest evil. 85 Sins
are debts. 86 Sin is filthenesse. 87 Motives to seek pardon of sin. 94, 95 Pray
daily for it, though we be justified. 666 Comfort from the pardon of sin. 677
Means to obtain it. 96, 97, 98 Notes whereby to know sin is pardoned. 100,
101 How the assurance of pardon is lost. 99 The godly man remembers his sin
with grief. 203, etc. Three great mischiefs of scandalous sins that abound
where the Gospel is preached* 175, 178 Learn to be afraid of sin. 207, 569
Every sin is a transgression of Gods Law. 220 A contempt done unto God. 221
Four attributes of God by which it appears that we are chiefly to mourn for
our sins, because God i^ offended. 22, etc. No sin venial., or lightly to be
accounted of. 228, 229, 233, 234 Yet are some greater than others. 230, etc.
549, 552 Three causes of actual sins. 282 The godly man has most cause to
be afraid of sin. 571 Four things to be observed in the passion of Christ that
do notably set forth the odiousness of sin. 601, 604 Five means to make us
esteem sin as it ought to be esteemed of. 605, 606
Speech.
Filthy speech becomes not Christians. 6, 7
Spirit of God.
Five notes of the holy Spirit dwelling in us. 150, 151 The Spirit is the mark
on Christ's sheep, whereby they may know they are his. 747 By the fruits of the
Spirit, they may know they have the Spirit. Ibid. Where the Spirit dwells, it
persuades them in the truth of religion. 771 This no private Spirit. 775
Strictness
Makes not Christ's yoke intolerable. 235 All preciseness and strictness in
small matters is not hypocrisy. 236, 581, 714 Answer to them that blame
professors for their scrupulousness. 715
T.
Trouble of mind.
Diverse objections of men in that case answered. 139, etc. Take heed of
seeking help in this case by false ways. 144* 145 Tentations to despair to
be resisted, and how. 145, 146 How to recover our selves, and to overcome such
tentations. 148* etc.
Truth.
When a thing is said to be done or spoken in truth. 368
W.
Watchfulness.
A Means to get assurance of Gods favor. 641, etc.
Wicked men.
L^wd persons are a curse to the place they live in. 124 Have no cause to
stumble at this, that God is so apt to pass by the s^ips of his children. 361,
363 Wicked men must pray, and do other good duties, and they may receive good
the^ by three ways. 363, 364 We must love their persons, and yet show
detestation to their vices. 749
Works.
Good works the fruits of Gods sanctifying Spirit in us, good grounds of hope
and comfort. 104, 105 The maine foundation of any comfort in them, is wholly in
Gods mercy 106 Why no man can make them the maine ground of his comfort. Ibid.
God does greatly respect the poor and imperfect services of his people, and
three reasons for that. 357, 361 Good works must be performed in a right
manner. 433, 438
Word of God.
The Lord must be justified in whatsoever he has spoken. 238 We must believe
it. 239 Allow and approve of it as just. 240 Take it to heart. Ibid. The Word a
special means to enable us to bear afflictions christianly. 263 To mortify
our corruptions. 321, 322 Why so much is ascribed in Scripture to the Word it
self, and to the Ministry thereof. 507, 509 The least thing God has appointed
in his Word may not be neglected. 577, 579 Try our estate by the Word of God.
624, 625 The Word a special means to get comfortable assurance that Christ is
ours, an (...). 633, 634 A singular good thing to love the Word. 700
Worship of God.
We must depend upon the direction of the Word for (...). 581 Conscience to be
made of the outward parts of Gods Worship and exercises of Religion. 581, 582
We must labor to understand every thing we do in the service of God. 583, 589
Else we shall receive no good by it. 584, 585 In every part of Gods Worship
labor to find God with us in it. 587, 588, 591 Four motives to stir up this
^are. 591 Four means to make Gods Ordinances effectual. 592, 593 We must not
neglect Gods Ordinances though we find no fruit. 594 Gods solemn Worship, and
conscionable use of his Ordinances, a means to work, (...), and recover
assurance that Christ is ours. 632 True love of God will appear toward his
Worship. 799
Z.
Zeal*
EVery one that (...) the Spirit of Christ, must needs be zealous for God and
his worship. 799
FINIS.

