

The Gardeners Labyrinth: Containing a discourse of the Gardeners life, in the
yearly travels to be bestovved on his plot of earth, for the use of a Garden:
with instructions for the choice of Seeds, apt times for sowing, setting,
planting, and watering, and the vessels and instruments serving to that use and
purpose: Wherein are set forth diverse Herbers, Knottes and Mazes, cunningly
handled for the beautifying of Gardens. Also the Physike benefit of each Herb,
Plant, and Flower, with the virtues of the distilled Waters of every of them,
as by the sequel may further appear. GATHERED OVT OF THE BEST APPROVED
WRITERS of Gardening, Husbandry, and Physic: by Dydymus Mountain.



PRINTED AT LONDON by Henry Bynneman. ANNO. 1577.

Henrici Dethicki ad lectorem
Carmen.
COelum, aequor, tellus, nunc, lumina, flumina, fructus,
Praestat, fundit, habet, sole, vapore, fimo.
Hortus praestat olus, praestant Pomaria poma:
Cuncta vigent, magno parta labor viri.
Vrbis honos hortus, florum speculatio grata,
Et sunt herbarum pharmaca graeta viris.
Falce, ligone, filo, qui, dissecat, effodit, ornat,
Plantam, terram, hortos, haec documenta tenet.
Sano, aegro, caeco, vis? victum, pharmaca, visum,
Lingua, mente, manu, haec, perlege, disce, tene.


To the right honorable and his singular good Lord, Sir William Cecill,
knighte of the most noble Order of the Garter, Baron of Burghlev, Lord high
Tresurer of England etc. Henry Dethicke wysheth long health, with increase of
honor.
COnsyderyng (right honorable) my promise plighted (unto my friend, lately
enterred) I was enforced to perform the perfecting of this English Treatise:
otherwise I had not so willingly attempted to solicit your honor with this
vulgar style. And since that reason requires, and duty demau^deth, the
satisfying of the trust in me reposed, I doubt not but that mine enterprise
will be allowed. Unreasonable were I, and destitute of all humanity, if that I
should obstinately neglect, the earnest desire of the deseased: likewise,
worthy were I to be deemed vndutyfull, and altogether ungrateful, if that I
should omit any opportunity, whereby I might increase so rare a commoditye to
my country. I therefore respecting the request of my friend, and te^dering the
profit of my country, have craved herein (as heretofore in all other mine
affairs) your honors protection, and the rather, for that I find none (your
honor excepted) neither in ancient aucthoritye, neither by common consent,
neither by present proof, that has more warely, and wisely, warded the weal
of this country. In fine, to avoid tediousness, I have omitted all
circumstaunces, whereby I might display the sundry commodities and rare
rudiments, contained in this painful, and gainful discourse: but surceasing to
trauise farther in this terrestrial Gardeners Labyrinth, I wish unto your
honor by daily Prayer, the fruition of the Heavenly Paradise, crauyng of the
Omnipotent and provident God, the guider of that gorgeous Garden, that he
would vouchsafe to grant unto you, the sweet savor of his chief fragrante
flowers, that is, his comfort to cleave fast unto you, his mercy to keep you,
and his grace to guide you, now and evermore.

Your honors most humble HENRY DETHICKE.

A Table expressing the Contents of every Chapter contained in this Labyrinth.
THe first devising of Garden plottes with their commodities in time past.
Chap. 1. The diligence required of a Gardener, and what increase a well
labored earth yields. Chap. 2. The choosing of a Garden plotte, with the
goodness of the earth. Chap. 3. Of playner instructions for the choosing of a
battle ground, with other matter necessary. Chap. 4. Of the placing of a
Garden plotte, with the Commodyties thereunto belongyng. Chap. 5. What air
is noyous to me^, and to plants, and why a Garden should be placed nigh to
the owners house. Chap. 6. The form of Enclosures invented by the Romans.
Chap. 7. The inventions of erecting a strong hedge for the defense of a Garden.
Chap. 8. The cause why dunging of Gardens was misliked in ancient time near
to houses, and what dung is best allowed for pothearbes. Chap. 9. Of the
kinds of dung, and which is commended for a Garden. Chap. 10. What is to be
considered before the Ieuelling of Beds. Chap. 11. Of the framing of Herbers,
Walks, and Alleys, in a Garden. Chap. 12. The form of disposing quarters,
beds, and Borders, with the sovving, choice and defense of the Seeds, with
the vveding of the beds. Chap. 13. The artely disposing of Beds for the
increase of Kitchen Herbs, with the vvittye defenses to be used after the
Seeds are bestovved. Chap. 14. The vvorkmanly deuidyng of Beds, for roots and
herbs. Chap. 15. The rare inuentio^s for the defense of Seeds committed to
the earth, that they may not be endamaged by birds, nor creepyng things. Chap.
16. The witty helps for the Garden Seeds to be employed before and after
the sovving of them, least that they should be harmed by outvvarde or inward
injuries. Chap. 17. Of the nature and election of sundry Seeds, with the apt
times commended for the sovving of most Kitchen herbs. Chapter. 18. Certain
precepts for the sovving of delectable flowers and tender herbs, with the
observations of the Moon. Cha. 19. The commended times to be observed in the
bestovving of Seeds and plants in the earth with the discommodities. Chap.
^. Of certain curious instructions, for the bestovving of Seeds and daintye
Herbs. Chap. 21. In what space of time Seeds committed to the earth in the
encrese of the Moon, commonly shoot up. Chap. 22. What diligence is to be had
in vveeding of a Garden. Chap 23. Of the times of vvate^yng beds, and what
manner of water ought to be used for Plants, with the inventions of
Vessels. Chap. 24. Of the removing of plants, with the breaking and s^ipping
of sundry sets. Chapter 25. Certain instructions for the gatheryng and preserving
of kitchen Herbs and roots, with flowers, dainty Herbs and roots to the
use of phisik. Cha. 26. The remedies which prevail against Snailes,
Cankervvormes, Garden fleas, and Barthvvormes. Chap. 27. The helps against
Garden Moles, Ants, Gnats, Fleas, and Frogs, vvasting herbs, trees and fruits.
Chap. 28. Of rare practices against serpents of the Gardeyn, and other
venomous things, hurting as well men, as kitchen herbs, trees, and fruits.
Chap. 29. Of the helps against Scorpions, Todes, Garden myce, VVeasels, and
all other beasts, vvasting herbs and fruits. Cha. 30 Of remedies against hail,
lightnings, tempests and beatings down of Kitchen herbs, trees, and fruits.
Chap. 31. Of the healpes against frostes, blasting of trees, mistes, and rust.
Chap. 32. Certain proper knots devised for Gardeyns, to be placed at the
owners discretion.
The Chapiters contained in the second part.
THe secrets in sovving and removing the garden Colevvort, with the physic
healpes of the Colevvorte, and distilled water thereof. Chap* 1. The order of
sovving the Beete, with the physic healpe of the Beete, and water distilled
thereof. Chap. 2. The order in sovvyng or setting of the Blete, with the
commodities thereof. Chapter 3. The order in sovving or setting of Arage with the
phisike helps thereof. Chap. 4. The sovvyng and removing of Sperage, with the
phisike helps thereof. Chap. 5. The ordring and sovving of Spinach, with the
physic helps thereof. Chap. 6. The ordering and sovving of the Garden
Sorrel, with the phisike helps of the Sorrel and Pympernell, and the v^ater
distilled thereof. Chap 7. The ordering and sovving of Louage, and Buglosse,
with the phisik helps of them both, and the water thereof. Chap. 8. The figure
of the Furnace named ^alneum Mariae. fo. 26. The order of sovving removing and
setting the Marigold, with the phisike helps of Marigolds, and water thereof.
Chap. 9. The ordering and sovving Parsely, with the physic healpes of
Parseley, and the water distilled thereof. Chap. 10. The ordering and sovving
of Garden and vvilde running Time, with the physic healpes of Time, and
water thereof. Chap. 11. The ordering and sovving of Mintes and Holihoke, with
the physic healpes of the Mintes, and Mallovves, and water thereof. Chap.
12. The ordering and sovving of the Artochoke, with the physic healpes
thereof. Chap 13. The ordering and sovving of Endive and Succory, with the
physic helps both of them and the water thereof. Chap. 14. The ordering and
sovving of Lettuce with the physic healpes of Lettuce and the water thereof
distilled. Chap. 15. The ordering and sovving of Purselane, and Rocket, with
the physic healpes of them both, and of the water of Purslaine. Chap. 16 The
ordering and sovving of Cheruill, Smallage, Taragon, and Cresses, with the
physic helps of Cheruill and Garden Cresses, and the distilled waters
thereof. Chap. 17. The ordring and sovving of Bucks horn, Stravvbery, and
Mustard seed, with the physic helps of them all and water distilled from
them. Chap. 18. The ordering and sovving of Leekes and C^ues, with the
physic healpes of the Garden Leeke, and water thereof. Chap. 19. The
ordering and sovving of the Onion, with the physic commodities of the Onion
and water thereof. Chap. 20. The ordering and sovving of Garlike, with the
physic healpes of Garlike, and the water thereof. Chap: 21 The
inconveniences of Garlike out of Pliny. fo. 103 The ordering and sovving of
the Scalion and Squill Onion, with the physic healpes thereof. Chap. 22. The
ordering of Garden Saffron, with the physic healpes thereof. Chap. 23. The
ordering and sovving of Nauevves, with the physic benefits thereof. Chap.
24. The ordering and sovving of the Rape and Turnupe, with the physic helps
of the Rape, and water thereof. Chapter 25. The ordering and sovvyng of Radyshe,
with the physic benefits of Radishe, and the water thereof. Chap. 26. The
ordering and sovving of Parsneps and Carots, with the physic he^lpes of them
and the water of Parsnep. Chapter 27 The ordering and sovving of the Garden Poppy,
with the physic helps of Poppye, and the water thereof. Chap. 28. The
ordering and sovving of Cucumber, with the physic commodities thereof. Chap.
29. The ordering and sovving of the Gourde, with the physic helps of the
same, and the water thereof. Chap. 30. The healpes and secrets of the
Pompons, Mellons, and musk Mellons, with the physic commodities of the
Pompones and Mellons, and the distilled water of Mellons. Chap. 31. Worthy
instructions about the setting and sovving of sundry physic herbs,
fragrant herbs and flowers, and of the Blessed Thistle, with the physic
helps of the Thistle and the water thereof. Chap. 32. The setting and sovving
of the herb Angelica, with the physic healpes thereof. Chap. 33. The sovving
of the herb Valerian, with the physic helps of the same, and the water of
the herb and root thereof. Chap. 34. The bestovving of Bitto^^^, with the
physic commodities of the same, an^ the virtues of the Water thereof.
Chaptrer 35. The bestovving of Lo^age, with the physic helps, and virtues
of the water thereof. Chap. 36. The bestovving of Elecampane, with the
Physic healpes of the same, and the water distilled of the herb and root
thereof. Chap. 37.
Finis Tabulae,
Authors from whom this work is selected.
Pliny Cicero Columella M. Cato Varronianus Tremelius Varro Florentinus
Palladius Rutilius Vergile Didymus Auicen Democritus Dyophanes Hesiodus
Affricanus Apuleius D. Niger Theophrastus Anatolius Pamphilus Ruellius Paxanius
Beritius Marcus Gatinaria Albertus Philostratus Archibius Galene.
The Gardeners Labyrinth. Containing the manifold trauayles, great cares, and
diligence, to be yearly bestowed in every earth, for the use of a Garden: with
the later inventions, and rare secrets thereunto added (as the like) not
heretofore published.


The invention of G^rden plottes, by whom first devised, and what commodity
found by them, in time past. Chap. 1.
THe worthy Pliny (in his xix. book) reports, that a Garden plotte in the
Ancient time at Rome, was none other, than a small and simple enclosure of
ground, which through the labor and diligence of the husbandma^, yielded a
commodity and yearly reuenew unto him. But after years (that man more
esteemed of himself, and sought an easier life) devised and framed this ground
plotte, for the mind, as for pleasure and delight: as may well appear by that
Epicure, of whom Cicero makes mention, in his book entitled De natura
Deorum, who living at ease, and conceyuing a felicity in the Garden,
endeavored first to place and frame the same within the walls of Athens,
which before (as it should seem) lay open, and undefended in the wide field,
and the culture of it not had in so much estimation, as to place them nighe to
their towns or houses: For which cause, does Pliny (by good reason) rightly
attribute, the invention of the delectable Garden to him. The Garden plottes,
which the Ancient Romans possessed (as Pliny reports) were only set
about with trees, having a dead enclosure, made only of busshes^, that needed
repayring every year: in which especially were sown the red Onyons,
Colewortes, great Leekes, Cresses, great Mallows or holy Oaks, Endive, Rocket,
and sundry sallate Herbs: In these they found such a commodity, as
maruelously pleased them* seeing they by enjoying the herbs, needed no fire
about the dressing and preparing of them, and spared a charge of flesh,
besides a daily profit that they got, by the herbs and woodde brought to
the City to be sold. The meaner sort of that time so little cared and
esteemed the eating of flesh, (who in general accounted it a kind of
reproach, to be known to have eaten flesh) that they refusing this taunt, did
(as to a shambles or flesh market) haunt daily to the Garden.

Columella reports lib. 10. that the Ancient husbandme^ so slenderly looked
unto (or rather forced of) Gardens, that they in furthering the grows and
yield of their fruytes and herbs, bestowed a small travail and diligence.
And as they appeared negligent in their labors of the Garden, so were they
well pleased with a mean living, in so much that the common sort fed and
lived willingly on gross and simple herbs. But after the age and people were
reformed, and brought by the instruction of the Epicure, to a more delight of
themselves, in coveting to feed on dainty herbs and Sallates, with meats
delectable, and taking an earnester care for the pleasing of their mouths,
they labored then to become skillful, and to use a greater care about the
ordering and apt dressing of Garden plottes, by well fensing and comely
furnishyng of their ground, with sundry needful and delectable trees,
plants, and herbs: in which trauayles and diligence of the husbandmen, so
good success and commodity ensuing, procured not only the willing carriage
of herbs, fruytes, and other commodities far off to be exercised unto Cities
and market Towns, by which these through the sale obtained a daily gain and
yearly reuenew, for the aid of their household charges, but allured them also
to place and frame gardens, as well within Cities and Towns as fast by, that
a cost bestowed, might after possess the recreation and delight of minds,
besides the proper gain made by the fruytes, flowers, and herbs, gathered in
them. The Garden plottes at length, grew so common among the meaner sort, that
the charge and the chiefest care of the same, was committed unto the wife, in
so much that these accounted not the wife of the house, to be a husewife in
deed, if she bestowed not a pain and diligence as Cato reports in the
weeding, trimming, and dressing of the Garden. But to be brief, and leaving
further to report of antiquity, I think it high time to declare the effects
and commodity of this work taken in hand, and first to entreat of the care,
helps, and secrets, to be learned and followed in the Garden ground: All
which in a pleasant manner, shall after be uttered in destinct Chapiters, to
the furtherance and commodity of many Gardeners, and all such having pleasure
therein.

What care and diligence is required of every Gardener: to these, what increase
and commodity a well labored earth yields. Chap. 2.
THe husbandman or Gardener, shall enjoy a most co^modiouse and delectable
garden, which both knows, can, and will orderly dress the same: yet not
sufficient is it to a Gardener, that he knows, or would the furtherance of
the garden, without a cost bestowed, which the works and labors of the same
require: nor the will again^ of the workman, in doing and bestowing of
charges, shall smally avail, without he have both art and skill in the same.
For that cause, it is the chiefest point in every faculty and business, to
understand and know what to begin and follow: as the learned Columella out of
Varronianus Tremellius aptly utters. The person which shall enjoy or have in
a readiness these three, and will purposedly or with diligence frame to him a
well dressed Garden, shall after obtain these two commodities, as utility and
delight: the utility, yields the plenty of Herbs, flowers, and fruytes
right delectable: but the pleasure of the same procures a delight, and (as
Varro writes) a iucunditie of mind. For that cause a Garden, shall workemanly
be handled and dressed unto the necessary use and commodity of man's life,
next for health, and the recovery of strength by sickness feebled: as the
singular Palladius^ Rutilius has learnedly uttered, and the skilful
Florentinus, that wrote cunningly, of husbandry in the Greek tunge, certain
years before him: Lastly by sight unto delectation, and iucunditie through the
fragrancie of smell: but most of all, that the same may furnishe the owners,
and husband man's table, with sundry seemly and dayntie dishes, to him of
small cost. The Garden ground (if the same may be) ought rather to be placed
near hand, whereby the owner or Gardener may with more ease be partaker of
such commodities growing in the garden, and both oftener resort, and use his
diligence in the same: So that this is the whole care and duty required of
every owner and Gardener, in their plot of ground. Yet may I not be
unmindful, that the garden does also require a dunging, at the apt times: of
which in the proper place we shall after entreat.

What consideration and chosing to be used, in any Garden plot: with the
goodness and worthiness of every earth. Chap. 3.
AS to the nature and goodness of a garden ground, the especialler that ought
to be eschewed, are a bitter, and salt earth of taste, if so be we mean to
make a fertile, commodiouse, and well yeeldyng ground: for these two natures of
earth, were very much mislyked in Ancient time, as may appear by the skillful
Poet Virgill, who says that every earth is not allowed or commended, for the
yield of garden herbs. For which cause, the mind of the ancient husebande
men is, that the Gardener by taking up a clodde of Earth, should artly try the
goodness of it after this manner: in considering whether the earth be nether
whote and bare, nor lean by sand, lacking a mixture of perfect earth: nor the
same found to be wholly Chalk, nor naughty sand: nor barrayne gravel, nor
of the glittering powder or duste of a lean stony ground, nor the earth
continual moist, for all these be the special defaults of a good and perfect
earth. The best ground for a Garden, is the same judged to be, which in the
Summer time, is neither very dry, nor cleyie, nor sandy and roughe, nor
endamaged with gapings, procured by heat of the Summer, as the worthy
Didymus, in his Greek instructions of husbandry writes. Wherefore the earth
which in the Summer time is wont to be dry, either perishes or loses all the
seeds sown, and plants set in it, or yields those thin, and weak
proving on the ground. For the Cl^yie ground of it self, ouerfast holds: but
the sandy and rough, in a contrary manner: so that neither is wont to nourish
plants, nor retain water. Therefore an apt earth for a Garden, shall you
readily try and find out, if the same through wet and dissolved with water,
you shall see to have a much clamminesse and fastness. In which ground, if
a waterinesse shall exceed, then shall you judge the same disagreable and
unfruitful: if dissoluing the earth with water, you shall find the same very
clammie or much cleaving to the hand and fingers, as it were wax, this earth
shall you account, as wholly unprofitable. Pliny wills, that a garden
plotte before all other matters done to it, be very well cleansed of stones, and
to these, that the earth prove not full of chappes, or but few to be seen,
least the Sun beams entering between, may so scortch and burn the roots
of the plants. For which cause, the best and gentle or worthiest earth shall be
chosen, in which you mind to commit your seeds: or for the same, that the
Nource as a mother, may often agree to the fruit, or yield to be an ayder and
furtherer to it.

Certain playner instructions, much furthering the Gardener, in the knowledge
and choice of a good and battle ground, with other matter necessary. Chap. 4.
THe Gardener minding to try and know a fat earth, for the use of a garden,
shall work after this manner: in taking a little clodde of earth, and the same
to sprinckle with fair water, kneading it well in the hand: which after
appearing clammie, and cleaving or sticking to the fingers, does undoubtedly
witness that earth to have a fatness in it. An other trial of a battle
earth, may thus be purchased, if you dig up a rotten clodde in a manner
black, and the same able enough to cover it self with the grows of the own
grass, and appearing also of a mixte color, which earth, if it be found
thin and loose, may well be fastened and made clammie, through the adjoining
and mixing of a fat earth to it. The garden ground does also require a
sweetness to consist in it, which the Gardener shall easily find and know,
by taste of it: if so be he take up a clodde of earth in any part of the
ground which most misliketh him, and moystening the clodde with fair water in
an earthen potsharde, does after the dipping of the finger in this moist earth
and water, let a drop softely fall on the tunge, he shall incontinent feel
and perceive (by reason of the taste) of what condition the same is. Further,
every fat earth being reasonably loose, is evermore commended and chosen,
which of it self requires small labor, and yields the most increase. But
worste of all others is that ground, which shall be both dry and gross, lean
and cold. In the kinds of ground, the chalkie is to be refused: which
properly the ancients name, the cleyishe, and reddish earth. The worthy Varro
commends the same ground, which of it self being gentle and pliable,
yields properly walwurtes. The same earth does Columella greatly allow,
which of the own accord yields or brings forth wilding or Crabbe trees,
young Springs, the Slow or Bullesse trees, Elm trees, and such like. So that a
battle ground, is on such wise found and known: the rather of the crescent
things, seen in it of the own accord: yet of necessity may every ground
well agree, to be mixed and turned in with dunge. Florentinus utters an other
trial of a fruitful ground: if so be the Gardener diggeth up a furrow, of a
foot and a half deep, and fills the same again with the own earth, which
in short time after gapeth or choppeth, this no doubt, is a weak and lean
earth: But if the earth thus ordered, swells or retcheth out, then is it a
sure note, that the same is a battle and fat ground. And this is noted to
be a mean earth, which after the digging and raking even, gapeth but a
little. This I thought not good to be covered, nor willingly over passed: that
a garden plotte situated or standing near to a mote, or compassed by a mote,
is not always lawdable, in that the seeds bestowed in the same, and diverse
plants set in it, do lightly and soon through the water vaporating forth
wax old: yea the fruytes (whether those shall be of the herbs or trees) are
for the more part caused unpleasant, and ouermoyst. Further conceive, that a
garden ground, ought to be of a moderate increase, and easy dressing: which
neither is very moist, nor over dry of it self. To these such a earth is
greatly commended as being new dug, birds covet to it: and that Crows
especially follow the new casting of the digger. If the earth shall be found
naughty or unfruitful, as the Cleyie, Sandy, and Chalkie, then ought the
same to be amended, after the mind of the skillful, with mearle and dunge
laid three foot deep, and well turned in with the earth, if this be
perceived over thin and lean, then to be mixed and helped by a fat earth: or
to a barreyne and over dry ground, may be mixed a moist and very fat earth. A
waterie ground is made the better, if the same be mixed with a sandy or small
gravely earth, and deep Alleys made, for the conueighyng and shifting of the
water falling in the night. But to use such a tediouse pains in these, Pliny
accompteth it a madness: for what fruit or gain may be hoped after, in
bestowyng such a travail and diligence in the like ground plotte? To
conclude, every reasonable earth, may very much be helped thorough the well
dunging, and laboring of the Gardener, of which matter (in the proper place)
we mean fully to entreat.

Of the placing and standing of a Garden plotte, with the necessary benefit
of water to a Garden, and other matters profitable. Chap. 5.
IT is right necessary (says Varro) to place gardens near to the City,
as well for the benefit of pothearbes and roots, as all manner of sweet
smelling flowers, that the City greatly needs. Where these placed in a soil
far off that they can not so conveniently and in due time be brought to the
market to be sold, in such places are altogether disalowed, and thought
frivolous for the turn. Cato does very much commend the garden plot placed
near to the City, in which both young trees to bear up Uines, and Willow or
Osier trees be planted nigh to water sides and in places waterie: and that
through the garden ground, water or springs be seen running. To these, the
seeds of most herbs committed into a very well dunged, dressed, and fair or
large open plot, in which besides all kinds of fruytes, for the use of man,
workemanly planted and set in apt times of the year. This skillful Cato also
wills, that all kinds of garden grounds be placed and framed near to the
City, as well for the Garlande or Posie flowers, as all manner round and
delectable roots, with the sweet and pleasant smelling trees: as all the
kinds of the Roses, the sweet Jacemine, the Eglantine bryar, the Myrtill
tree, and all others of like sort, sowed and planted in due seasons of the
year. But a Garden plot, only serving for the use of potherbes and the
kitchen, ought especially to be a battle ground, sufficient moist of it self,
and well turned in or workemanly labored with dung. Garden plottes ought to be
placed, far from Barnes, Hay loftes, and Stables, if the same possibly may be
refused, or otherwise chosen for the turn: in that the chafe or duste of
strawes (as enemy to them) the plants hardly brook and suffer: in so much
that the very strawes blowe^ abroad with the wind, and falling on herbs, do
greatly annoy and harm them: as the singular Florentinus in his Greek
instructions of Husbandry skilfully utters. For these, says he, by cleaving
to the plants, in the falling, pearse the leaves, which once pierced, are
incontinent burned by them. All Gardens as well prosper by the dunging with
roots, as with the proper dunge allowable: yet dungyng the Garden earth, with
the branches and leaves of trees, is of the skillful Gardeners very much
disalowed, as unprofitable and noyouse to herbs.

As to the well standing of a Garden behooves: the aptest and most laudable
placing of a Garden plot shall be, if the plain ground lying somewhat a slope,
shall have a course of spring water running through by several parts. But this
course of water, running through the Garden plot, may in no wise be big. And
the smalnesse of the laboring and dressing of a Garden ground, is more of
yield, than the largeness of it, not labored in a manner at all.

It behooves to have a well in a Garden, unless some running water as either
ditche or small river be near adjoining: for that a sweet water sprinkled on
young Plants, and Herbs, gives a special nourishment. If a well be lacking
in the Garden, then dig a deep pit, in some convenient place of the
Garden: although it may be a painful labor for the Gardener, to draw water
out of the same. For a Garden ground needs often to be watered, through
which all Seeds committed to the earth, as Pliny reports, both sooner
break forth, and speedier spread abroad. That a pit with water of long
continuance, may be purchased, the same at that time Columella wills to be
dug, when as the Sun shall obtain or occupy the last degrees of virgo:
which is in the month of September, before the Equinoctial harvest. For the
virtue then of Well springes, are thoroughly tried and found out: at which
time through the long drought of Summer, the earth lacks the due moisture of
rain. If a well or pit to purpose cannot be made in the Garden: then frame
up a squarepitte or Cesterne leaueled in the bottom with brycke and ^ime to
receive the rain water falling: with which in the hottest Summer days, you
may water the beds of the Garden. But if all these manner of healpes and
ways, shall fail the Gardener, or can not well be compassed in the Garden
ground, then shall he dig the ground after the mind of Palladius Rutilius,
three or four foot the deeper or lower. For the beds on such wise ordered,
being workema^ly labored and sown, may the better endure, through the low
standing, the whole drought of the Summer days. In the Garden ground besides,
this shall you observe, that when the Alleys or paths of the beds be over
cloyed with water, to dig deep gutters here and there after your discretion,
in such order, that the water falling and runnyng along, may be guyded into a
convenient pit, made at the lower side or end of the Garden, for that only
purpose. Here further learn, that what Garden plot the nature of the moisture
helps not, the same may you aptly divide into parts, in converting the
spaces, dug and dressed for the winter time to lie open to the South, and
those prepared for the Summer time like, unto the North quarter.

What air commended for the benefit of a Garden, and which be no^ous as well
to Man as the Plants: and the reason why Garden plottes ought to be placed
nigh to the owners house. Chap. 6.
Every ground pl^^^ying near to the City, as well the Garden as Orcharde,
ought to be placed near to the house, for the oftener recourse and diligence to
be bestowed of the owner: and the Garden especially to be labored and well
turned in with dung: through whose juice and fatning, the earth may yield
herbs of the own accord. As touching the air commended for a Garden, the
same being clear and temperate is best allowed, in that this not only
cherishes and prospers the herbs growing in it, but procures a delight
and comfort to the walkers therein. An evil ay^^ in the contrary m^^^et,
troubled with the vapors of standing pitt^s, ditches, and such like mixed to
it, does not only annoy and corrupt the Plants and Herbs growing in that
Garden fast by, but ^ist choke and dull the S^yrites of men by walkyng in the
(...). Besides* the winds biting, and frostes mortifying, do both harm and
destroy Plants. Auicen writing of the air, does in skillful manner ^tter, that
the same air, which after the Sun setting is soon cold, and after the
Sun rising speedily hot, is both subtle and healthful to man. So that a
contrary air to this, works the contrary to man and Plants. Yet that air
is accounted worser, which seems as it were to wring or bind h^rde together
the Heart: yea making straight or letting the attraction of air. The learned
Neapolitane Rutilius besides these reports, that ye subtilnesse or
healthfulnes of air, do declare those places free from low valleys, and
stinking mistes or fogges in the night, that might annoy both men and the
Plants. Here is does not much disagree from the matter, to write in general,
general of the qualities of the winds: and of these, in the briefest manner.
First, the Easterly and Westerly winds, be in a manner temperate of quality,
as between a hotenesse and coldness: yet of the two, the Easterly winds be
known dryer. Further the Easterly winds, are for the more part hoter, than
the Westerly, and the Westerly by report of the Ancient somewhat more moist,
than the Easterly. Of all the winds, for the benefit of the Garden, is the
Southwest wind especially commended: as the worthy Florentinus in his Greek
rules, and others of experience affirm.

Besides these, as unto the clemency or temperatenesse of air, and
healthfulnesse of the place belongs, a Garden plot in cold countries, ought
in a contrary manner to be placed, as either to the East or South quarter: if
the same be such a plot of ground, which both contains trees, and Plants or
Herbs coming up in it, least the Garden plot excluded from these two parts,
by the object or standing against of some most great and high hill, be so
nipped, frosen, and withered, with the extreme cold long continuyng, or the
Garden plotte otherwise far distant form the comfort of the Sun on the
North part, or else the Sun only shining low and weak, at the West quarter
of the same. The singular Cato wills, that the Garden, if a man can, be
placed at the foot of an Hill: and the same beholding or lying open to the
South, especially in a healthful place. For a Garden plotte thus defended by
an high hill, on the North part, and all the day comforted, by the open face
of the South quarter: is procured to yield the sweeter and tymelier Fruytes,
in the seasons of the year. But in hot Regions or Countries, let the open
place of a Garden ground, be rather situated toward the North quarter:
which may through the like standing avail, as well to health of body and
quicknyng of the Spyrites, as to profit and pleasure.

This besides conceive, that the placing of a Garden ground near to a Fenne
or Marrishe, is every where to be misliked and refused: if the same lie open
toward the South or Weste, and yearly in the Summer time is accustomed to be
dry: for on such wise happening, the air thereabout gathered up, does in the
falling again, engender either the Pestilence, or wicked vermin, much harming
the Garden plot lying nigh to it. There is also a great regard to be had to
the water, mote or ditche, standing nighe or round about the Garden ground:
whether this for the more part be wont to vaporate or breath forth any
noisome air, that may both to men and the Plants be harmefull. For peculiar
or proper is the same (or rather such is the property) of very many still
waters and Motes. So that it is the counsel of the skillful (if any like be
known) to refrain from placing any Garden plotte or Orcharde, if the owner
may choose, near to the same.

The form of the enclosures, which the Husbandmen, and Romans in time past
inuc^ted. Chap. 7.
FOr as much as the same may be thought a mere madness, to have chosen out a
fit plotte of ground, and to cast, dig, and dress it seemly in all
points: yet lying open day and night, as well to the incursious and common
haunte, as to the injuries to be wrought and done by robbers or thieves, fowls
and beasts: for that cause, I here mind to entreat of the sundry manners of
fensing, and co^passing in of the Garden grounds in ancient time. First, the
skillful and wary husband men in time paste, being those of good ability,
buylte them walls about of F^r^stone artly laid and mortered together, and
some did, with baked brick like handled. Others of lesser ability, and of the
meaner sort, framed them enclosures, with stones handsomely laid one upon an
other without mortar or Cley: and some of them couched the broad Slate stones,
with other big and large stones (in like order about) where such dwelt by
quarries of stone. But very many of the baser and poorer sort, made them
fen^es and walls about, with mudde of the ditche, dung, chafe, and strawes
cut short, and well mixed together. Others there were, which with big Canes
set upright, by small poles bound together, so fensed their Garden plot, in
handsome manner round about. Some also with young Willow trees, set by certain
distances, and the dry black thorn (purchased from the woodde) being bound
in (between the spaces) so framed their enclosure: but this manner of enclosing
wrought or buylte by Art (the skilfuller named) a dead and rough enclosure,
made especially for the keepyng and defending of Cattle out of the Garden
ground. Yet the hedge or enclosure erected after this manner, required every
year to be new repaired and bound up in the places needful, to the
tediousness and great pains of the husband man.

The learned Columella in his husbandry reports, that the Romans in time
paste, fenced and enclosed their Garden grounds, with big quarters set
upright, and Poles with lathes, very thick fastened to them, by small rods of
the Osier tree walling them in. Some boared large holes through big bodies or
stocks of trees, that quarters or great poles made for the purpose might pass
thorough them, either by two or three together, in reasonable distaunce, with
payle board raised and fastened along to them. Some also through the timber of
trees (set into the earth) fastened big poles or long quarters round about,
much like to the usual Cattle pounds in our age. But some attayning a more
skill, erected as Varro reports, a natural enclosure, set about with the
black or White thorn trees, and young willowes: which had besides the roots
of a quick set hedge, that in time growing up, withstoode tempests, winds,
landfloudes, yea fire the consumer of all things put to it. The Ancient
husband men did besides these invent the ca^ting up of banckes and counterm^res
of earth, round about the Garden plotte, much like to the trenches in time of
war about Bulwarks and Tents: and these they especially made near to high
ways, or by Rivers, and in Marrishes or Fennes lying open, or other Fields,
that the Garden plot might on such wise be defended, from the damages and
harms, both of Thieves, Cattle, and Landfloudes.

For a playner conceyuing of the abouesayde, learn these following: that the
Ancient husbandmen did cast up and made a deep ditche, about their Garden
ground (standing in the open field) which might receive all the rain water
falling: and this they so dug with a slope passage, whereby the water might
run the easier and freelier from the bottom. The earth and Clay cast up on
the inside (fast by the brincke) they so wrought up together, that hardly any
person (after the drying of the cou^termure) could clyme over the same. Some
also made high banckes or countermures, without a ditche dug about, and the
same so served in the open fields in stead of a wall.

To be brief, the enclosure which longest endured, surest, and of the least
cost, was the same that the Romans in ancient time made with Brambles, and
the white Thorn laid orderly in banks, for the better growing up. For this
enclosure or hedge (after years sprung up) endured by report of the learned
Cato an infinite time: yea experience in our age, does likewise confirm the
same. For which cause, this enclosure was very much commended of the Ancient
Romans, who well conceived and knew, that the Bramble decayed or died not at
any season, except it were dug and plucked quite up by the roots. Yea they
learned by practice, that the Bramble swinged or scorched with straw flaming,
recovered and grew every year after, both stiffer, rougher and thicker
together.

The later inventions of erecting a natural and strong Hedge* which in time
growing, may prove a most sure defense and sauegarde of the Garden. Chap. 8.
THe most commendable enclosure for every Garden plot, is a quick set Hedge,
made with the Brambles and white Thorn: but the stronger and more defensive
Hedge is the same, which the singular Democritus in his Greek instructions of
husbandry (that wrote long before Columella, and Palladius Rutilius) cunningly
utters, and the same with ease and small cost, after this manner. Gather,
says he, in a due season of the year, the ^eedes found in the red berries
of the biggest and highest Briars (which by a more common name with us, are
called the wild Eglantine Briars) the through ripe seeds of the Brambles
(runnyng low by the ground) the ripe seeds of the white Thorn, and to these
both the ripe Berries, of the Gooseberrie and Barberrie trees: this done, mix
and sti^pe for a time, all the Berries and Seeds, in the blended meal of
Tarts, unto the the thickenesse of Honey: the same mixture lay diligently into
old and untwisted Ship or Well roapes, or other long worn roapes, and
fittered or broken into short pieces, being in a manner stark rotten, in such
order, that the Seeds bestowed or couched within the soft hears of them, may
be preserved and defended from the cold, unto the beginning of Spring. At
which time, where you be minded, that the enclosure or Hedge shall run and
spring up: there dig in handsome manner, two small furrows, and these either
two or three foot asunder, and a man's foot and a half deep: into which lay
your roapes with the Seeds, covering them workemanly with light carth: and (if
need shall require) water by sprinckling, or moysten the Seeds, in the same
wise again.

The worthy Columella (in his husbandry) and the Neapolitane Palladius
Rutilius, writing the like instruction, in a manner, will that the ground
plotte, in which a Hedge shall be erected, be compassed with two narrow furrows,
dug three foot distant one from the other, and a man's foot and a half
deep: but these to be made in the Equinoctial Harvest, at what time the ground
shall be well moystned with shoures. The Furrows thus prepared, they appointed
to lie open all the winter thorough: after in the month of February, the
roapes with the seeds, laid into each furrows, to be covered not thick
over with light earth, for hindering the growth of the seeds, especially of
the white Thorn: and that this action be rather wrought, when as the wind
blows from the South or Southwest: the seeds thus covered with diligence,
shall appear within a month either more or less, and the tender young
Thorns sprung up to some height, must be helped and stayed with Willow
twigges, or other small proppes, set between the empty spaces, until the
Thorns, by their further growth, joined together, may stay one the other:
which within few years, will grow to be a most strong defense of the Garden or
field, and a sure safeguide against outward injuries. Columella* besides
wills, that a Willow or Osier hedge, be set on either side, and in the middle
room or space, between the two furrows, covered and even raked: that these
might so stay the tender Thorns, springing up in either furrowe, unto the time
they joined, and were grown above this Willow hedge, or at the least unto such
strength, that they well stayed one of the other. Others there are, as the
famous Diophanes (among the Greek writers of Husbandry) and with him many the
like, which will a quick set Hedge to be erected, and made after this manner.
The bigger arms or rods of the Bramble, they willed to be cut into short
portions or parts, and these laid aslope, into open Furrows of a span deep,
to be diligently covered with earth: after to use about the Plants, a daily
digging or rearyng up of the earth, and watering of them if need so requires
until the Plants budde forth, and the leaves of the stemmes open, which by
this manner of comforting and cherishing, shall grow in few years to a strong,
sure, and continual hedge.

The Neapolitane Palladius Rutilius instructs, the way and manner of erecting
an other quick set Hedge, on this wise: Plant, says he, young Elder trees,
near three foot asunder, then the seeds of the Brambles, lapped diligently
in long lumpes of softened and moist Cley or tough earth, lay the same orderly
in a shallow furrow, between the Elder trees, which artly covered with light
Earth, and watering the places if need so requires, will within three years
following, grow to such a strength and surenesse, that the same will be able
enough, to defend the injuries both of the thief, and beast. Palladius
Rutilius reports, that this hedge of the Brambles after three years growth,
ought to be swinged with flaming straw: for on such wise handled, it
prospers afterward the better. In that the Bramble, as he says, through
the every years swinging or burning with straw, ioyeth and increases the
better: yea through the yearly burning, as the skillful Husband men affirm,
they shoot out harder and rougher of prickles.

And this manner, to be brief, is a general way of enclosing Garden grounds,
with small cost, and easily performed. Although the comlier enclosure or Hedge
for a Garden be the same, which is made of the white Thorn artly laid: that
in few years with diligence cut, waxes so thick and strong, that hardly any
person can enter into the ground, saving by the Garden door. Yet in sundry
Garden grounds be hedges framed with the Pryuet tree, although far weaker in
resistance: which at this day are made ye stronger, through the yearly
cutting, both above, and by the sides: yea the same also caused through the
like doing to grow the euener and thicker, to the beautifiyng of the Garden
ground, and for other necessary purposes. To conclude, I have here uttered
the making of certain natural enclosures for a Garden, which may with the
meanest cost be erected in any ground.

The cause why certain skillful husbandmen in Ancient time, misliked the
dunging of Gardens near to the house: and what dung best allowed for kitchen
or pothearbes. Chap. 9.
THere were in Ancient time, as Pliny reports, certain witti^ husband men,
that wholly refused and forbadde the dunging of Gardens placed nighe to the
dwelling houses: in that this dungyng might not only infect the air
thereabout, but cause also the crescente things to prove both vnsauerier and
more corrupt. And in this matter the worthy writers of Husbandry commended
highly the Greek Poet Hesiodus, which writing very cunningly of husbandry,
omitted the dunging of the fields, and Garden plottes: contented rather to
council unto healthfulnesse, tha^ willed ye same to fertility. In so much as
it was supposed enough at that time, to have fatned the fields and Garden
plottes, with the leaves and empty coddes of the Beans, Peason, Tares, and
such like, turned workemanly in with the earth, in due season of the year, and
not to have employed or dunged the ground, with a rotten and pestilent matter,
incommodiouse to Man and the Plants. Which wise men have well found out, in
that the sown Plants sprung up in such an earth, yield for the more part a
harmefull quality to the daily feeders on them, hardly to be amended.

Yet for that neither the Ancient, nor later husband men seem to follow the
instruction of this precept, nor approve or allow any proper dunging, in
prescribing and commending the same in general: for that cause, I here purpose
to entreat in a brief manner, of the nature and use of the same. But first of
all to warn you, that a good and battle ground needs small dunging, where a
dry and thin or lean earth, in contrary manner requires plenty of dung. A
earth only dry (as Maro reports) well ioyeth to be often fed, and
diligently labored with fat dung: But the ground that has a mean substance
in it, requires in like manner a mean dunging to be used. Further conceive,
that good dung does (for the more part) procure, a good and battle earth the
better, yea this helps and amendeth the evil and naughty earth: But the
evil dung in a contrary manner, does evermore cause al earthes the worser: And
this behooves the Gardener and husband man ^o know, that as the earth not
dunged, is both cold and stiff, even so the ground by the overmuch dunging,
may be burned altogether. For which cause ( Columella reports) that more
auaylable and better it is, often to dung the earth, than overmuch at one time,
to bestow in the ground. The earth dug up to serve for the spring, ought to
be dunged in the waine or decrease of the Moon about S. Martyns day: that the
same lying all the Winter through, may so be desolued, against the time of
committing seeds to the earth: and in the Month of March to be dunged
again, that the earth well moystned with showers (in the month of April) may
be procured the apter, for the bestowing of your finer and daintier seeds in
the same. Herein consider the leanenesse or fatness of your earth, in the
often dunging of it, and the worthiness of your seeds, which may require a
like pains to be bestowed on the ground. The plot of earth prepared for the
Winter seeds, ought to be well turned in with dung about the end of September,
and the seeds committed to the earth, after the ground be well moystned with
showers. The dung in a Garden plot, for the planting of young settes ought not
to be cowched or laid next to the roots of the plants: but in such order the
dung used, that a thin bed of earth be first made, for the setting of the
young herbs: next laid to this, a handsome bed of dung, as neither to thick
nor thin spread on that earth, above that let an other course of earth be
raked over, of a reasonable thickness: which workemanly handled and done, see
that your plants be set (in handsome manner) into the ground, and in a
chosen time. For the earth and beds (on such wise prepared) help that the
plants bestowed shall not at all be burned: neither the heat of the dung,
hastily breath forth to them.

Of the kinds of dung, and which well commended for the dunging of Gardens.
Chap. 10.
AS touching the worthiness and excellency of dung, the Greek writers of
husbandry (to whom many of the latin Authors consent) affirm that the Doves
dung is the best, because the same possesses a mighty hotenesse, for which
they willed this dung to be strawed the thinner, and in a manner (as thin to
be scattered abroad) as seeds on the earth, whereby the same may so season the
earth measurably, and not on a heap or thick bestowed (as M. Varro reports)
much like to the dung of cattle thrown abroad on the ground. The dung also of
the hen and other fowls greatly commended for the fournesse, except the dung
of geese, ducks, and other waterfoules, for their much and thin dunging. And
although this dung last, be weaker than the others, yet may the same be
profitable, as the selfsame Varro witnesses out of the Gre^ke instructions of
husbandry. A commendation next is attributed to the Asses dung, in that the
same beast for his leysurely eating, digesteth easier, and causes the bitter
dung, which bestowed in the earth, for that the same is most fertile by nature,
brings or yields forth least store of weeds, and profits very much all
plants and herbs: yea this causes the most sweet and pleasantest herbs
and roots. The third in place is the Goats dung, bing most sour, which
ensues the sheep dung yet fatter. After this, both the Ox and Cow dung:
next the swines dung, worthier than the Oxen or Kien, but greatly disallowed of
Columella, for the mighty hotenesse, in that the same burns the seeds
immediately, bestowed in the earth. The vilest and worst of all dungs after the
opinion of the Greek writers of husbandry, is the horses and moiles: if
either of these be bestowed alone in ye earth, yet with the sower dungs mixed,
either will profitably be abated or qualified. But the same especially is to be
learned and observed of every Gardener and husbandman, that they fatten not the
earth, if it be possible, with dung of one years, for the same, besides y^ it
is of no utility, it ingendreth also many noisome worms, and kinds of
vermin. But of the contrary mind is Columella, who wills the earth to be
fatned with dung which has lain a^yere, and not above, in that the same, as he
reports, brings forth least weeds, and possesses as yet a sufficient
strength for the turn. But how elder the same be, so much the less
profitable, in that it lesser avails: yet the newest dung (says he) will
well agree for Meadows or the fields, in that the same procures the more
yield of grass, being bestowed in the Month of February, or March, in
colder countries, and the Moon increasing of light. The mud also of a running
water, as the ditch or river, may be employed in the stead of dung. The dung
besides of three years is esteemed very good, for that in the longer time
lying, whatsoever this shall have of the evil quality, and stinking savor,
the same by that time vapored forth: and if any hard matter consisted in the
same, the age thoroughly resolved it. Howsoever it shall happen, that the earth
be, the worthiest dung of all, for flowers and Kitchen herbs is the very
thin Ashes reported to be, which in nature is hot. For this kind of dung
either kills or drives away the Garden Fleas, the worms, the canker worms,
found commonly on Colewortes, Snailes and all other creeping things wasting
the stemmes of plants, and herbs. The dung which men make (if the same be not
mixed with the rubbish or dust swept out of the house) is greatly mislyked, for
that by nature it is hoter, and burns the seeds sown in that earth: so that
this is not to be used, unless the ground be a barren, grauelly or very
louse sand, lacking strength in it, which being on such wise, requires the
more help of nourishment and fatning, through this kind of dung: yet for
lack of the foresaid dungs, the others may be put in use: so that these with
the Spade be often changed and dispersed in the ground. Here you may not
forget, that a watrie Garden plot requires the more plenty of dung, but a
dry earth needs the lesser dunging: the one for the daily moisture running
in it, being ouercolde and stiff, is through the often applying of the hot
dung, resolved and made temperate: And the other dry of it self through the
heat consisting in it, by much applying of this hot dung, is of the same
burned: for that cause the moisture ground ought to have store of dung, but
the dryer small dunging. That if no kind of dung can be purchased, t^en in
grauelly grounds, it shall be best to dung the same with Chalk: ^ut in
Chalkie places, and over thick, those dung with grauelly earth: for on such
wise Garden plottes, shall not only be caused to be battle and fruitful, but
shall also become fair and delectable, as Columella the most diligent and
skillful instructor (of the Roman Gardens) witnesses: let this last
instruction of Pliny be remembered, that at what time soever you mind to dung
a Garden for yielding of few weeds, see that the wind blow then from the
west quarter, and the Moon decreasing of light, and the earth also dry: But
for the dunging of a Meadow (as before uttered) let the same be done in the
increase of the Moon. etc. For by such an observation followed, the
plentifulnesse of yield is marvelous much increased: as after the worthy
Greeks, the Latin writers of husbandry, have noted.

What to be considered of every gardener, before the casting forth and
leue^ling of the beds, with the disposing of the earth. Chap. 11.
BEfore I entreat of the sowing of Gardens, it behooves to admonish you, that
it much avails in a Garden, to frame seemelye walks and Alleis, for the
delight of the owner, by which he may the freelier walk hither and thither
in them, and consider thoroughly all the matters wrought and done in the Garden,
if the disquietnesse of mind hinder not the benefit of the same. The walks
and Alleys shall to that end be disposed, that they may serve in the stead of
a dunging in those places, as the worthy interpreter M. Cato (that cunningly
wrote of the ancient husbandry) witnesses. These before considered, let us
come unto the matter: Certain skillful practicioners admonish, that a Garden
plot or field, be not sown over all, until the earth before shall be well
moystned with showers. That if these fall in due season and time (then the
skillful Gardiners agree) to be well liked. If any be otherwise occasioned to
sow, as often it so happens, then the seeds slowly break forth, how
workmanly soever the seeds may be bestowed in a dry Garden ground, or plow
land, as that worthy Columella witnesses: which like matter in certain
countries is wont to be exercised, where the condition of the air is on such
wise. For what the same is which shall be bestowed in a dry earth, is even the
like, as If the same were laid in a house, which corrupts not. But when
showers fall on the seeds (committed to the earth certain days before) they
after shoot up in one day: yet are these seeds in danger (sown in the
mean time) of Birds, and Antes or Pismires, except the seeds be (before the
sowing) preserved and defended with those helps which shall after be uttered,
in the proper place following. How soever the occasion and weather serve, the
Gardener shall employ his diligence, that the Garden ground or field, which
ought to be leuelled, and sown in the spring time (that the same may yield the
proper fruits in the Summer time) be dug and dunged (if need so require to
the earth) about the end of Harvest, when as yet the cold season and frosts
be not approached, nor bitter weather begun. And the same garden plot or
quarters of the Garden, which the Gardener would in the Harvest time, have
covered with the Sallet, Pot herbs, and roots, ought to be turned up in the
beginning of Summer, or in the Month of May, that the Cloddes of earth may
(through all the cold Winter, and hot Summer weather) speaking or rather
(here meaning of the greater Gardens) be so dissolved, as the worthy Maro
skilfullye instructs.

And to these that the roots of the unprofitable Herbs or Weeds may likewise
be killed: After the Winter or Summer time ended, dung then must be orderly
turned in with the earth: as in the Month of March (the Moon decreasing) for
the Spring time, and in the end of Harvest, for the Winter time. And when the
sowing time approaches or draws near, then shall the Garden ground (as the
proper order and manner of every Country is) be diligently raked, weeded and
purged, both of the stones and unprofitable roots, after the same, let the
earth be dunged, and orderlye dug, as in the manner before taught, which
through the diligent digging so often repeated, that the dung with the earth by
the twice laboring over be well dissolved and mixed together. After this
digging and dunging again the second time (if the ground needs such
fatning) and the earth leuelled, may the Garden (about the mids of February,
but I rather suppose in the Month of March to be more agreeable, and the Moon
especially in her first quarter) be beautified in apt places of the same, with
seemly Herbers, before the quarters and beds be workmanly trodden out by the
Gardener: the instruction of which Herbers, shall fully be uttered in this next
Chapter.

The framing of sundry Herbers delectable in a Garden, with the walks and
alleys artely devised in the same. Chap. 12.


THe Herber in a Garden may be framed with Juniper poles, or the Willowe,
either to stretch, or be bound together with Osyers, after a square form, or
in arche manner winded, that the branches of the Uine, Melone, or Cucumbre,
running and spreading all over, might so shadow and keep both the heat and
Sun from the walkers and sitters there under. The Herbers erected and framed
in most Gardens, are to their much refreshing, comfort, and delight. These two,
as the upright, directed by quarters set in the Earth, and leaning to the
wall, near to which fair Rosemarie, or the red Rose set, to run straight
up, and the winding in arch manner, framed (as I uttered before) with the
Juniper, or Withie poles, to shadow the walkers there under. To this fastening
the Uine, and sundry herbs, which in the growing up, run and spredde over
the same, as the Bryonne, Cucumbre, Gourd, and diverse others, of which here
under we shall more fully entreat. But first I mean to speak of those
Herbs, which the Gardener planteth and orders to run for beauties sake in
an vprighte Herber: after to entreat of those, which he either sows or
planteth, to run over the winding or arch Herber. The plants to run up,
and serve comeliest for the straight Herber, ought to be those of a fragrant
sauoure, and that grow or shoot up high, and are spredde abroad, which
especially framed in the Garden for delight and pleasure, and these properly
named wall Herbers, in that they are set in a manner leaning to the wall, with
the quarters set vprighte, and poles fastened overthwart, along the which,
the Rosemarie, the Jasmine, and red Rose in many Gardens, set for grow
upright, which in time growing, beautifye an vprighte Herber, although these
cover not the same, through their shorter and lower growing than the Herber:
yet this commodity ensues by the Herber, that the owners friends sitting in
the same, may the fre^lier see and behold the beauty of the Garden, to their
great delyght. The erection and garnishing of the winding Herber, may best
be wroughte with Juniper poles, in that these may well endure without
repairing for ten years: but those framed with the Willowe poles, require
every three years to be repaired.

The owner or Gardener that would set Rosetrees to run up by the poles of
this Herber, ought workemanlike to begin and do the same about the mids
of February, and in the first quarter of the Moon, the beds before well
reared with a stony and dry Earth, and not with Dung. The Rosetrees with
their roots, are also to be planted in short and narrow beds, diligently
raised with a dry Earth, but if the Gardener or owner will, slyppes may be
broken off from the roots, cut in a slope manner at the heads, about a man's
foot and a half long, writhed at the ends, and so set in a slope manner, a
foot deep into beds, well reared with a dry Earth, and in the increase of
the Moon. The old trees new set every fifth year in the wayne of the
Moon, take root the sooner, and yield the more Roses, being proyned and
refreshed every year with new and dry Earth about the roots, for neither
the slippes nor old roots joy in a fat Cley, or moist ground, but in the
dry and stonye Earth, and to be set in ranckes well a foot distaunte one
from an other, in dry beds, well reared up: for bestowed in ranckes of
such distance between, they prosper the better, and yield more Roses. The
Seeds of the Rose committed to the Earth, do slowlye come up, yet so often
as you mind to sow the Seeds, bestow them a foot deep in light and dry
Earth, about the mids of March with us, and in February, in hotter places,
the Moon then increasing. Here may any truly learn by the instruction o^ the
worthy Neapolitane Palladius Rutilius, which are the seeds of the Rose: For
a man (says he) may not think the yellow graynes within the Rose flower
(being of a golden color) to be them, but the knobbes which grow after the
manner of a most short and small pear, the seeds of which are then full ripe,
when they be perceived brownish and soft, which will be in the Month of
September. The owner also may set the Jasmine tree bearing a flagrant flower,
the musk Rose, Damask Rose, and Priuet tree, in beds of dry earth, to
shoot up and spread over this Herber, which in time growing not only
defends the heat of the Sun, but yields a delectable smell, much
refreshing the fitters under it. But this Arche Herber for any kind of the
Roses, may not be built much above a man's height, for the short growth of
them. And as this Herber is delectable to the eye, even so laborsome, and with
diligence to be tended: for which cause the more number in England, plant Uines
(for the lesser travail) to run and spread over the upright and square
Herbers, framed with quarters and Polles reaching a breadth. After the Herbers
seemly performed, in convenient places and walks of the Garden ground (here
meaning and speaking of the large plottes) the Alleis even trodden out, and
leauelled by a line, as either three or four foot broad, may cleanly be
sifted over with river or sea sand, to the end that showers of rain falling,
may not offend the walkers (at that instant) in them, by the earth cleaving or
clagging to their feet. The commodities of these Alleis and walks, serve to
good purposes, the one is, that the owner may diligently view the prosperity
of his herbs and flowers, the other for the delight and comfort of his wearied
mind, which he may by himself, or fellowship of his friends conceive, in the
delectable sightes, and fragrant smelles of the flowers, by walking up and
down, and about the Garden in them, which for the pleasant sightes and
refreshing of the dull spirits, with the sharpning of memory, many shadowed
over with vawting or Archherbers, having windows properly made toward the
Garden, whereby they might the more fully view, and have delight of the whole
beauty of the Garden. But the strait walks, the wealthy made like Galleries,
being all open toward the Garden, and covered with the vine spreading all
over, or some other trees which more pleased the^. Thus briefly have I touched
the benefits of walks and Alleyes in any Garden ground: which the Gardener
of his own experience may artly tread out by a line, and sift over with sand,
if the owner will, for the causes before uttered.

The form of the disposing the quarters into beds and apt borders about,
with the sowing, choi^e and defense of the seeds, and weeding of the beds.
Chap. 13.


THe quarters well turned in, and fatned with good dung a time before, and the
earth raised through the dunging, shall in handsome manner by a line set down
in the earth, be trodden out into beds and seemly borders, which beds (as
Columella witnesses) raised newly before with dung, and finely raked over, with
the cloddes dissolved, and stones purged forth, shall be artely trodden out,
into three foot of breadth, and into what length the owner or Gardener will:
but to such a breadth especially trodden forth, that the weeders hands may well
reach unto the midst of the same, least they thus going by the beds, and
weeding forth the unprofitable herbs and grass, may in the mean time
tread down both the seeds shooting up, and plants above the earth. To the
help of which, let the paths between the beds be of such a reasonable
breadth (as a man's foot) that they passing along by, may freely weed the one
half first, and next the other half left to weed.

The beds also ought (after the mind of the worthy Neapolitane Palladius
Rutilius) to be trodden out narrow, and of a length, as twelve foot long, if
the plot be large, and six foot broad, and the paths to these of a seemly
breadth, for the easier retching into the middle of the beds, or at the least
freelier, to the furtherance and speed of the weeders. In a moist and watrie
Garden plot, this skillful Neapolitane wills, that the beds in the same
ground be reared two foot high, for the better prospering of the seeds
committed to that earth, and the plants come up. But in a dry ground, the
edges of the beds raised a foot high, shall well suffice. The paths trodden
out between the beds, ought to be of a good depth and even, whereby the
water sprinkled gently forth by a water pot, on the upper face of the beds,
and falling into the paths, may the easier enter into the beds, to the
better moystning and feeding of the roots of the plants, and the rest
superfluous to run the easier into other Alleys or paths needing this
moisture, which by this easy running along in the paths, shall proceed a
speedier moystning, and far better watring of all the beds, yea the
superfluous water in the end, lying still in the paths, may through a slope
gutter made in the mids of them, be directed forth into a convenient place
made for the purpose, of some distance from the beds. And this instruction
much avails to beds in the night time, when as mighty showers happen to
fall, which might ouercloy the beds, were it not for the Gutters speedily
conueying the water away.

All these instructions conceived, the Gardener or Owner may then prepare
himself to the committing of Seeds to the earth: in which he ought to be
careful, that after the bestowing of the seeds in the earth, a clearness or
mildness of the air may for certain days succeed: for through the air and
weather favoring, and the seeds sown in warm places, where the sun long
shines, do they most speedily break, and shoot above the earth, so that the
seeds be new and good, the age of which in this doing, much avails to be
examined and known. Therefore every Gardener and owner ought to be careful and
diligently to foresee, that the seeds committed to the earth (as M. Cato
wills) be neither too old, dry, thin, withered, nor counterfeyted, but
rather full, new, and having juice. These notes of the seeds remebred, and the
Gardener minded to commit them to the earth, ought before to regard, that the
wind at that instant blows not from the north but rather from the south, or
southwest, nor the day very cold: for in such seasons and days (as all the
skillful report) the earth as then timorous and fast shut, hardly receives and
nourishes the seeds committed to it, where the ground in a contrary manner,
does willingly apply and retain the seeds, bestowed or sown in fair days,
and temperate hot.

The artely disposing of sundry beds, for the sowing and increase of diverse
fruits and kitchen herbs, with the witty defenses to be used after the
seeds are bestowed. Chap. 24.
THe Gardener minding to commit chosen seeds into sundry beds, ought to
learn, that the beds lying open to the south, be high raised, through the
well mixing of horse dung with the earth, and after the even raking and
leuelling, to remain a certain time unsown: then one or two of the beds in
the month of March, and in the increase of the Moon, may he sow with Lettuce
and Purselane seeds, for these sooner spring up in the month of March, than
February, to be removed in the beds, after the plants be shot up half
a finger height. In those beds may he also sow the Parsely, Rocket, Sorrel,
Endive, and diverse other Sallat herbs: which after they be somewhat come up,
may be thinner set in other beds. Have beside a special regard to your
Seeds, that they be neither to old, wythered, thin, and emptye, and the
borders of those Beds may you bestow with the Seeds of the Artichoke, well
two hand breadth asunder. In an other bed may you sow fine seeds to have
pleasant herbs that may be kept dry, for the pot or kitchen in the Winter
time, and those which yield delectable flowers, to beautify and refresh the
house, as the Maiorani, French balm, Time, Hysope, Ba^il, Sauerie, Sage,
Marigolde, Buglas, Borage, and sundry others. The Gardener may try these
seeds in beds, lying all open to the warm Sun, as the Orange, Lemmon,
Pomecitrone, Pomegranate, the Myrtle and Date, but these ought so to be fensed
by a succor on the North side, that the cold Air hinder or let not the
coming up of them. When the Cytrone or any of these be well sprung up, the
Gardener ought to remove and set them into proper chestes filled with light
earth, which at will and pleasure, may be rolled hither and thither, for the
better avoiding of the Suns great heat, and bitter cold air, by standing
under a cover or Penthouse, made for the only purpose. In an other bed being
of good length, and placed toward the quickset hedge, and to run over the
Arche Herber, may the Gardener bestow seeds of the Cucumber, Cytrone, round
Gourd, and long: In an other bed also, bring long and narrow, and deep
furrows at each side made, to set vessels lower than the beds, may the
Gardener sow seeds, of the sundry kinds of Melons. That the Birds and other
fowls may be defended from coming to the seeds committed to the earth, the
skillful will, that the white thorn be laid on the beds: but to bestow your
seeds in beds rather in the Month of March, than February, and the moon
increasing do spedier appear above the earth. But if the Gardener fears
least the seeds committed to the earth should be in danger through the ^itter
cold air and Suns heat following (as yearly the like so happens) the
beds may then be covered with thick Mattresses of straw, in such manner, that
they hinder not through their weight, the crescent things coming up, which may
thus be ordered, in setting first up sundry forked sticks at each corner, and
in the sides of the beds, on which long rods laid, reaching to each
corner, and at the ends, as Columella wills: these done, let him wittily lay
on the Mattresses, in covering and defending the young plants from the cold or
heat, at that time. But at such times as the air being clear in the cold
season, the Mattresses (when the Sun shines warm) may be taken of, for the
speedier increasing of the plants spinging up. All herbs and roots for the
Kitchen, prosper far better by their removing, and thinner setting, through
which (by report of the skillful) they yield a pleasanter savor* There are of
the Greek writers of husbandry, which will the sowing of seeds to be done in
the increase of the moon, as from the first quarter, unto the full light of
the Moon, and ^he knowing at that time to be under the earth in the day time*
Others having devised a perfiter way, do not allow a timely or early sowing of
seeds, for which cause they disposed and divided the same sowing of seeds,
into two, yea into three or four several times of the day, contenting by this
means to avoid the uncertainty of the time to come: herein calling to mind
the husbandly proverb, of the worthy Columella, which says, Have no mistrust
in the committing of seeds to the earth.

It therefore behooves the gardener, which has an earnest care for the
purchasing of Kitchen or pot herbs, to regard and see that the seeds
committed to the earth be full and new, the earth artely prepared, ye dung in the
same laudable, and water at hand for the use of the seeds. For the seeds
found and good, do yield after the sowing plants of the like goodness and
virtue: the earth labored and made apt, will very well keep and prosper the
seeds committed to it: the dung being good, and well myxed with the earth,
will cause the earth batteller, and to these the louser, whereby water
diligently sprinkled on the same, may the freelier and easier enter in, to
feed and cherish the roots, and the water serving to the same end, that it
may as by a feeding pappe, nourishe and bring up all crescent things.

The workemanly casting forth, dividing, and preparing of beds for the most
herbs and roots of the Kitchen. Chap. ^5.
THe owner or Gardener ought to remember (that before he commits seeds to
the earth, the beds be disposed and trodden out, into such a breadth and
length, as best answers to every plant and root, in that the beds to be
sown for Nauew roots, ought to be trodden out large and long, next to which
may the beds for Colworts and Cabbages be joined of a sufficient breadth: to
these next may you place beds of a reasonable breadth, for the Rapes and
Tureu roots: then for a seemly division in the Garden, may he tread out by
these an Alley of three foot broad: next to which, if the Gardener will, may
he dispose sundry beds together, for diverse kinds of Herbs, as the
Arrache, Spinedge, Rocket, Parselie, Sorrel, Beetes, Speradge, Cheruill,
Borage, Fenell, Dill, Myntes, white Poppie, and sundry others. Next joining to
these, may the owner or Gardener place an other alley of three foot broad, by
which, frame beds for the Leekes and Cyues, and to these next, may the
Gardener join beds for the Onyons and Chiboules, by these next, the
Scalions and Garlike in two beds disposed. Then level out by these an Alley
of three foot and a half broad, to which the Gardener may adioyne many
beds about for bordures, serving as well for the keeping in of ye sauoures, as
for hedges and pot herbs for the Winter. After these, it shall be right
profitable to level a bed only for Sage, another for Isope, the like for
Time, another for Maioram, a bed for Lauender, another for Rosemarie and
Southernwood, a bed for Sauerie and Isope, beds for Costemarie, Basil,
Baulme, and running Time: yea a bed of Camomile, for the use of Benches to
sytte on, and a delectable Labyrinth to be made in the Garden (if room will so
serve) with Isope and Time, or the Winter Sauerie only. In the Garden besides,
to sow and plant diverse Physic herbs, and pleasant flowers, shall be to
great use and commodity, in that these, besides their delectable sight, yeel a
commodity to our bodies, in curing sundry griefs as well in women, as men, for
which cause, it shall be necessary to sow Beds of Physic Herbs next to
these, as the blessed Thistill, the Roman Wormwood, the Sperage, Herb
Mercury, Gentiane, Dittany, Herb Fluelline, Hearts tung, Buglosse,
Selfeheale, Liuerwort, Lungwort, Stecados, Ualeriane, Spykenard, Lions foot,
Mugwort, Herb Patience, Angelica, Byttonie, and many others, of which in the
second part shall particularly be uttered, and their Physic benefits to be
employed many ways.

The rare inventions and defenses for most seeds to be committed to the Earth
that these be neither endamaged of Birds, nor creeping things. Chap. 16.
AL worthy Writers agree, that in vain the Husbandly Gardener shall travel,
yea and all others, if the Seeds bestowed in the earth, happen after to be
endamaged either of Worms, and other creepyng things, or otherwise scraped up
and wasted by Birds, or else harmed by any other injury, whether the same be
wrought within, or without the Earth, for which cause, that the owner or
Gardener may avoid these injuries, it is high time that he employ a care and
diligence in the conceyuing of these remedies and secrets following. If Seeds
to be committed to the Earth, are a little time before the bestowing, stieped
in ye juice of Housele^ke or Syngrene, they shall not only be without harm
preserved, from Birds, Antes, Field Mice, and other spoylers of the Garden
Herbs, but what plants shoot up of these, shall after prove the better and
worthier, as I observed the like, found noted both in the Greek commentaries
(of matters of the field) and Latin authors of husbandry, which to be most
true, although experience instructs and approves the same, yet this many
times happens in sundry Countries, that small store of the Herb can be
found to supply the turn, by reason whereof, the Gardener must be forced to
exercise a sparer way, after this manner, in steeping of the Herb for a night
in a good quantity of water, and the same to sprinckle sufficientlye on the
seeds, whereby they may all the night draw and drink in the substance of
the Herb, as the worthy Columella instructs.

And for lack of this Herb altogether, (the said Authoure reports) that
the Gardener may use in stead of it, the Soote cleaving on the chymney,
which gathered a day before the bestowing of the seeds in the earth, and
myxed for a night with them, does the like defend the seeds in safety.

The Greek writers of husbandry (and after them, Pliny, and the worthy
Neapolitan Palladius Rutilius) report, that those seeds may be preserved in
safety, from all evil and Garden monsters, if the bare head, without flesh,
of either Mare or she Ass (having bin covered of the Male) be buried in the
Garden, or that the mids of the same fyxed on a stake set into the earth, be
erected.

The worthy Pliny further reports, yt there is a Garlike growing in ye
falowe field (named Alum) which on such wise boiled, yt the same will not grow
again, and strawed on the Beds sown, does in such manner avail, yt Birds
after will not scrape up the earth, nor spoil the seeds bestowed in them. And
such which have eaten of this, are taken (as being astonished) with the hand.
The well practiced Affricanus unto the same matter instructs, that if a
quantity of Wheat or Barley be boiled or infused in wine, and mixed with
Neeswort, as either the black or white, and the same sprinkled abroad by the
paths of the beds round about, does on such wise defend the seeds sown
from the injury of Birds. But those being in a manner dead by eating of this,
or at the least stark drunk, he wills then to ^ang up by the legs, on a
long rod sticked in the earth, to the terror and fearing away of all other
Birds coming to the place. Nor this worthy Author omitteth the rare
practice of the decoction of river Creauises: with which if the Gardener shall
sprinckle his seeds before the sowing, Birds will never after (a matter to
be marvelled at) approach to the Garden Beds: yea the plants beside, which
are sprung or shot out of these, shall endure and continue safe and free
from all the injuries of creeping things. There are certain skillful
practisioners, which affirm to have auayled mightily in dryuing away Birds,
by the only sprinckling of this decoction above taught on the plants come
up, which matter has of many been experienced above a hundred times, so
that the same were wrought at a certain period and time of the Moon. Sundry
practicioners myxed the bruised leaves of the Cypress tree, with the seeds
for a night, and the same myxture on the morrow they bestowed in ye earth, being
before well wrought, and turned in with dung. For on such wise the plants sprung
out of these were delivered from all manner of gnawings of creeping things.
Others skilfully practiced, used the dry shauings or filings, either of the
hearts horn, or Elephants tooth, which they myxed with the seeds for a day,
and committed them after to the earth, or they otherwise sprincled the seeds
to be sown with the water of the infusion and mixtion of these for a night.

The witty helps commended of the ancient, for the Garden seeds, to be
employed as well before as after the sowing, that these be not harmed by
outward nor inward injuries. Chap. 17.
THe singular Port Virgill counsayleth that the seeds to be committed the
earth to be before sprinkled and moisted with the water of Nytre infused, or
the Bryne made of the same.

The Greek Apuleius wills, that Seeds (before the sowing) be sprinkled
and moistened with Wine, for on such wise handled, the plants springing and
shooting up, weaken the less, yea being feeble, they shall mightly be helped
^with water and Bryne mixed and sprinkled on them.

There are c^rtaine Greek instructers of Husbandry (both of Pliny,
Columella, and the Neapolitane Paladius Rutilius) allowed and commended, which
will, that the roots of the wild Cucumbre be infused for one whole day and a
night in fair water, and with the same, through the often sprinckling, so to
moisten well the Seeds, the next day those Seeds covered over with a
Blancket, they will the next morrow to be committed to the earth, affirming
the Seeds thereby to prosper the b^tter, and these for a certainty to be
preserved from all evil annoyances. The self same does the skilful Apuleius
will, that a few Lentels be also myxed with the seeds ^, in the sowing of
them, for as much as the ^ame pulse by property, avails against the harms
of wyndes: This author further wills, that for a safety of the seeds
bestowed, a speckled Tode, named of the Greeks Phrynon, be drawn by a line
in the night time, round about the Garden or field, before the earth be
labored, or diligently dug and dressed of the Gardener: and the same after
enclosed in an earthen pot to be buried in ye mids of the Garden or Falowe
field, which, at the present sowing time approached, shall then be dug
forth, and thrown or carried from that place, a great distaunce off, least
the plants (after the seeds sown) growing up in that place, may prove or
become bitter and unpleasant of smell.

The Egiptian and Greek instructors of husbandry report, that the seeds,
after the bestowing, will remain vngnawen or bitten, and free of harm by
creeping things in the Garden, if the seeds shall be committed to the earth
when the Moon possesses hic half light, or is quarter old. It might be
thought an obliuiousnesse, to have ouerpassed ye physic experiment of ye
singular Democritus, both for the seeds and plants, noted diligently (of the
skillful Neapolitane Palladius Rutilius) after this manner: Bestow and close
cover (says Democritus) of the Sea or river Ereuises, no fewer than ten in
number, into a glass body filled up with water, the same set abroad in the
air, let so stand to be sunned for ten days together, the Seeds that you
would after have to remain in the earth unharmed, sprinckle and moisten with
the same water for eight days together, after these eight days ended (as
Rutilius instructs) do in like manner with that water, until the plants
after your desired mind be well sprung up, at which experiment thus handled,
you will greatly marvel: for out of these Seeds, what plants shall be sprung
and shot up, will not only drive Beasts and Cattle from the eating of them,
but all other creeping things of what condition they be, from the gnawing and
biting of them, of which matters shall further be entreated, in the proper
Chapiters a little after, and for other defenses and helps of Seeds as
occasion offers in the places shall be uttered.

The laudable instructions of the ancient, in the nature and election of
sundry Seeds, with the apt times commended for the sowing of most Kitchen
Herbs. Chapter. 18.
THe singular Columella instructs, that all Seeds bestowed in the Garden,
for the use and benefit of the Kitchen or pot, ought rather be done in the
increase of the Moon, as from the first, unto the sixte day. For as much as all
Seeds committed to the Earth, in the decrease or waine of the Moon, either
slowly break and shoot up, or else so weakly increase, that these after
serve to small purpose. It many times also happens (as the worthy Varro
reports) that although the Seeds bestowed in the Earth, be done in the
increase of the Moon, the Seeds besides having a juice, weighty, full, white
meal in them, and in no manner corrupted or too old, yet these notwithstanding
are hindered through some evil constellation, which of the skilful is named an
influence of Heaven, were the Gardeners diligence never so much, so that it is
not impertinent to the matter here to recite what the worthy Neapolitane
Palladius Rutilius reports of the Garden ground, which says, that a garden
plot, placed and lying under a fresh and sweet air, and moistened gently by
some Spring or sweet water runnyng by, is in a manner battle and ready
enough, whereby the same requires but a small instruction and diligence, to be
bestowed in the sowing of it. The bestowing of Seeds in a moist earth, the
beds before short cast, ought to be done in the warm season of the Spring, as
in May, and the Moon increasing, for seeds on such wise handled, prosper the
better, through the warm and dry time following. But if occasion moves you
to commit Seeds into a dry ground, and that water be far distant, then
dig the alleis of the beds deep, and in a slope manner, for the better
leading of the water from beds sufficiently moistened, to others lacking
moisture: and to these such a dry Earth better agrees to be sown in the
Harvest time, the ground before well moystned with shoures, herein not
forgetting the choice of seeds, nearest agreeing to the natures of these two
Earthes, with the furtherance of the Moon at time of the sowing. If the
Gardener minds to commit seeds to the Earth in the Summer time, let the
same be done in the increase of the Moon, in the months of July and August.
In the Harvest time about the middle of September, and in October, ye Moan in
those months in her first quarter: for the time again of committing Seeds
to the Earth, let the same be done in the Months of February and March, the Moon at those times increasing of light.

The Seeds which ought especially to be sown in the Earth, about the end of
Harvest as about the middle of September, and in October the Moon at those
times increasing, that these may all the Winter endure, and be strengthened in
the ground, are the Endive, Onions, Garlike, Scalions, the great Garlike, young
Leekeheads, Colewortes, Mustard seed, and such like.

The Garden ground naturally cold, or all the day receives but a weak
comfort of the Sun, through his short presence or tarying there, or else in
cold Countries, as at York, and farther North. In such places I say, the
bestowing of many seeds better agree to be done about the middle of the
Spring, or in the month of May, in warm and caulme days, the Moon then
increasing of light.

But the seeds to be committed to the earth in those Countries and places in
the Harvest time, ought rather to be done sooner or before the time with us,
where the Seeds otherwise to be bestowed in hot Countries and places in the
Spring time, require far timelyer to be done, as in the beginning of the
month of March, and the Seeds to be sown in those places in the Harvest
time, to be bestowed much later.

The Seeds that at will of the Gardener may be committed to the Earth, either
in Harvest or Spring time, chiefly for the Kitchen or pot, under a gentle air,
and in a Battle ground, are these, the Coleworts, N^uew, A^ti^hocke, Endive,
Lettuce, Dyll, Rocket, Coliander, Parselie, Fennoll, Radishe, Parsnip, Carret,
and sundry others. Yet these by report of the skillful, come better forward,
being sowe^ in the month of July, the country there hot, but in the country
temperate, the seeds ought rather, in ye month of August: and in the Country
being cold, in the month of September. Those seed committed to the earth in
warm and caulme days, prosper far better than those being sown in hot and
nipping cold days: for that the warm, comfortablie draw up the plants,
where as the hot days (in a contrary manner) do dry, and the bitter cold
shut the earth.

The seeds which the Gardener minds to bestow in the earth, ought not to
be above a year old, and that bruised have a white meal within, and full: for
otherwise being over old, or withered, they will neither grow, nor profit at
all. The fresher and newer that the seeds be, at time of the bestowing in the
Earth, as the Leeke, the Coucumber, and the Gourde, so much the sooner these
break, and appear above the Earth: contrariwise, how much the older the
seeds shall be, as the Parsely, Betes, Organy, Cresses, Peneroyall, and
Coliander, so much the speedier do these shoot up, and appear above the
Earth, so that the seeds before the sowing be not corrupt.

Certain precepts of the skilful in our time, for the sowing of many
delectable flowers, and tender Herbs, with the observations of the Moon in
these, and in other matters necessary. Chap. 19.
THe latter writers of husbandry report, that these tender Herbs, and
pleasant flowers, as the Maioram, Sauerie, Herb Fluell^ne, Buglosse, the
blessed Thistil, the Herb Angelica, Ualeriane, Bauline, Ar^^s, Dil, Fennel,
Organy, Myntes, Rue or herb Grace, Sp^rag^, ^^ache, Spynache, Beetes, Endyue,
Borage, Rocket, Taragone, Parselie, Sorrel, Endive, Strawberrye, Lettuce,
Artichocke, and sundry others, the Marrigolde of all kinds, Rosecampion the red and white, the flower Amoure, ye Flower Petilius, the Columbine white and
blew, sweet John's, the Pincke, Hearts ease, the Pionie, red Lilly, herb
Sticas or Lauander gentle, Batchlers button, the Gillifloure of al kinds, the
Carnation, and many others, ought rather to be committed to the earth in the
spring time and sown in the Months of March and April, for so they speedier
come forward, than bestowed in the Month of February, herein considering the
state and diversity of the time. The seeds also of the tender herbs,
committed to the earth in an apt time, and the Moon in her first quarter, do
the speedier shoot up, being especially sown after showers of rain, on sunny
and warm places, as lying open all the day to the Sun) which on such wise do
the soonest and spediest break, yea and appear above the earth. For which
cause, a diligent care must be had in the bestowing of tender Seeds, that the
wind then blows not from the North, nor done in cold and close days: for
these both include the seeds in the earth, and hinder their growing and
shooting up.

Seeds bestowed in hot places, do sooner yield their stemmes and leaves, yea
these speediest give their seeds. Such time use in the sowing of your seeds,
as may be both mild and warm, in that warm days following speed more
forward the seeds bestowed.

As touching the most seeds committed to the earth, they ought rather (as
before uttered) to be new, not riueled but full, big, weighty, fair of
color, fattie or having a juice, which broken give a white meal and no dry
powder, for the seeds that after the breaking yield a dry powder, do well
declare them to be corrupt, and serving to no purpose.

The seeds thus tried before, and bestowed at that time in the earth, when
flowers fell a day or two before, and a temperate day at the sowing of the
seeds, do very well prosper the growing, and procure these to shoot up
far speedier. In that a cold air at the sowing, and a day or two after, is
known to be harmefull to seeds, through the including of them in the earth,
and hindering in their growth and shooting up.

If necessity forces the Gardener to bestow any seeds or plants, in a salt
earth* let these be either set or sown about the end of Harvest, whereby the
malice and evil quality of the ground may be so purged, through the shoures
falling all the Winter.

If the owner or Gardener minds to bestow young Trees in th^s ground, let
sweet Earth or River sand, be turned in with the same.

The Greek writers of husbandry (after whom Columella and Rutilius) will,
that all the kinds of pulses, as Peasone, the Hastings, Uetches, Tares, and
such like, to be sown in a dry Earth, saving the Beans, which rather joy to
be bestowed, in a moist ground.

What seeds the Gardener minds to commit, in a well dressed earth let these be
bestowed from the first day until the full light of the Moon (well nigh) for
that seeds sown in the Moon, come up thin, and the plants insew weak of
grows. Such trees as the husbandman, minds to build with all, let those
rather be cut down after the consent of the skillful in the last quarter of
the moon, she being (at that time) of small light, yea near to her change,
and under the Earth.

In the cutting down and gathering of corn (as Macrobius wylleth) for the
longer preserving of it and the straw dry (so that the same be done in a dry
season) does better agree, being in the wayne of the Moon.

Such crescent things as the Gardener (or Husbandman) minds otherwise to sell,
ought to be cut, and gathered in the full Moon, whereby the greatness thereof
such things may yield a better sale, and be delectabler to the eye.

Such things as the Husbandman myndeth to preserve a long time moist, as Aples,
Pears, Wardens, and such like, let these (after the mind of the skillful) be
rather gathered near the full light of the Moon.

For the committing of seeds to the Earth, although the ancient Husbandmen
prescribe proper months and days, yet may every person herein keep the
precepte, according to the nature of the place and air, so that these
diligently be considered, how certain seeds there are, which speedier
spring up, and certain which slower appear above the Earth.

The commended times to be observed, with the anoyannce and incommoditie to be
eschewed, in the bestowing of seed^s and plants in the Earth. Chap. 20.
The singular D. Niger learnedly utters, that the more of estimation the
seeds and plants are, with the travails there about bestowed, so much the
circumspecter ought every Gardener and husba^dman to be, and the more
instructions and helps the Gardener may attain, or the greater danger he may
therein avoid, the more careful ought he and all others to be.

The daily experience is to the Gardener, as a Scholemaister, to instruct him,
how much it avails and hinders, that seeds to be sowe^, plants to be set,
yea Sions to to be grafted (in this, or that time) having herein regard, not
to the time especially of the year, as the Sun alters the same, but also to
the Moons increase and wayne, yea to the sign she occupyeth, and places both
above and under the Earth.

To the aspectes also of the other planets, whose beams and influe^ce both
quicken, comfort preserve, and maintain, or else nippe, wyther, dry, consume,
and destroy by sundry means, the tender seeds, plants, yea and Graftes, and
these after their property, and virtue natural or accidental.

Herein not to be forgotten, the apt choice and circumspection of the Earth,
with other matters generally required in the same, for which cause (after the
mind of the skilful Astronomers) and prudent experimenters, in either
committing seeds to the Earth, and planting, or other like practice to be used
about the seeds, plants and young trees, these rules following are to be
understood and kept (which they have left to us for our commodity) in cases
of importance, and where the occasion may be employed.

When the Moon and Saturn, are either three score degrees of ye Zodiac
asunder (which distance in heaven) is named of the skillful, a Sextyle aspect,
it is then commended to labor the Earth, sow, and plant, marked after this
manner.

But when these are 126. degrees asunder, which properly is named a Trigon, or
trine aspect thus noted for ye more part, then is that time better commended
for laboring the Earth, whether it be for tilling Gardening, sowing, planting
and setting, or cutting of vynes.

When the Moon and Saturn, are well a quarter of the Zodia^e distant, which
is.90. degrees (named of the skillful a quadrate aspect) thus commonly marked,
then is denied utterly to deal in such matters.

The Moon being six signs distant from Saturn, so that she occupy^th the
like degree in Taurus, as Saturn in Scorpio, or ye Moon other wise in like
degrees of Gemini to Saturn, (right against) in Sagitarie, this aspect
together is disalowed of the expert Astronomers: and noted after this manner.

The Moon possessing her full light at those times, is like denied of the
skillful: yea the Moon being near to that section, named of most Astronomers
ye Dragons tail, is in like manner disallowed for sowing of fine seeds, and
setting of dainty plants. Here uttering precepts general, as we now do.

But the Moon approached nere to that section named the Dragons head: the same
time for doing the like is very well commended: al things before supposed
agreeable. But to be brief, and to knit up other observations, answering to
the Moons place especially, learn these ensuing.

The Moon increasing, and running between the.28. degree of Taurus, and
the.xj. degree of the sign Gemini, sow fine seeds, and plant dainty herbs,
your earth before prepared, and air answerable.

But the Moon found between the.28. degree of Gemini, and the sixth of Cancer,
(although she increase) yet bestow no dainty seeds in your earth prepared
for the purpose.

From the sixth degree of Cancer, unto the.xix. degree of the same sign (so
that the Moon increase) both labor the earth, sow fine seeds, and plant
dainty herbs, herein regarding the condition of the air.

From the.28. degree of the sign Leo, unto the.xj. degree of Virgo, your
seeds and plants of valor, sow and set, the warm air and Moon ayding
thereto.

From the.xj. degree of Virgo, unto the.xxiiij. degree of the same sign,
commit seeds to the earth, and set your dainty plants, so that the wind
then blows not from the north, nor the air cold.

From the.xxiiij. degree of Virgo, unto the seventh degree of the sign Libra,
labor the Garden ground, and sow your fine seeds, so that the Moon
increase.

From the seventh degree of Libra, unto the.xix. degree of the same sign (the
Moon answering thereto) sow and plant.

From the sixth of Capricornus, unto the.xix. degree of the same sign (both
the Moon and Air ayding thereto) sow your fine seeds and dainty plants
set.

From the.xxiiij. degree of Pisces, unto the seventh degree of Aries, the Moon
increasing of light, and air calm, bestow your seeds and plants in the
well dressed earth, prepared for the only purpose.

These precepts of the prudent experimenters, well borne away of every careful
Gardener, the seeds and plants no doubt, shall prosper and increase the
better.

Certain instructions more curious to be learned of every skillful Gardener,
in the bestowing of seeds and dainty herbs in a well dressed carth. Chap.
21.


THe learned Pliny worthy of memory, utters a special note and rule of the
ancient obseruers, to be learned of every careful Gardener, in the bestowing
of seeds: that if he be occasioned to commit seeds into a moist earth, or
the seeds to be bestowed are of a great moisture, then shall the Gardener
commodiously choose the end of the Moons decrease or waine, and near to her
change.

In a contrarit manner, the Garden ground of the dryest, or the ^eedes very dry,
then in committing such seeds to the Earth, let the Moon bee^ increasing, and
drawing near to her full.

To the better furthering of the Gardeners trauelles, he ought before to
consider, that the Garden earth be apt and good, well turned in with dung, at a
due time of the year, in the increase of the moon, she occupying an apt
place in the Zodiac, in agreeable aspect of Saturn, and well placed in the
site of heaven. All these thus before hand learned, and with dilygence
bestowed, procure the plants the speadier to grow, and wax the bigger, if
before weighty, full, etc. as before vtt^red in the ninteene Chapter, for
otherwise this care and pains bestowed about the seeds and plants, nothing
avails the Gardener.

The yearly Almanackes do maruellouslie help the Gardners in the election of
times, or sowing, planting, and graffing, but especially in observing the
Moon, about the bestowing of plants, as when the Moon increasing, occupies
Taurus and Aquarius. But if it be for the setting of young Trees, let the same
be done in the last quarter of the Moon, she then being in Tauro, and in a
conjunction with Venus, for so these speedier take root in the Earth. And the
Gardener planting in either Taurus and Aquarius, or Virgo and Pisces, must as
carefullye take heed always, that the Moon be not evil aspected of Saturn
and Mars.

In the planting also of young trees, let the same be done from the middle of
October, unto the myddle of March. In the sowing of seeds, in a well dressed
earth, let the Moon run at those times in Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Libra and
Capricornus.

But this dilygently learn, that the seeds and Plants increase the better,
if any of these signs shall be ascending in the Eastangle, and that Marse
neither beholds the Ascendent, nor the Moon by any aspect, but shall be
weakly standing in a weak place of the figure at that time.

Here might many other rules, as touching the particular favor and
hyndraunce of the Stars be uttered, but that it is not my intent in this
Chapter to be tedious in words, or dark in sense. For which cause, let these
few rules content the Gardener, who by exercysing of them, and through an
instructor, may invent other rules more particular.

Yet I fear me, that the common sort of men will suppose these rules to
extend somewhat above their capacity, which for zeal I bear unto my
country, moved me notwythstandyng to utter and put such matter into their
heads, procuryng them thereby (that where the dayntinesse and value of the
seeds, and plants so require) to request the counsel of some skillful, that
both may make plain these precepts, and instruct them in other rules alike,
if need so requires.

To conclude, the Gardener must here suppose all matters on his part to be
fully and duly first prepared, and well appointed, and then to attend, or
diligently take heed to those times, before uttered, for the workyng of the
Planets and Stars, in the bestowing of seeds and tender plants in the earth.

In what space of time seeds committed to the Earth, in the increase of the
Moon, commonly shoot up and appear above ground. Chap. 22.
FLorentinus (a Greek writer of husbandrye) cunninglye utters, that the
naturalnesse of the ground, the clemency of heaven, the favor of the
weather, and age of the seeds, procures that the seeds being bestowed in the
ground, do either speedyer, or later shoot up into plants. For which
cause, the dayntie seeds committed to the Earth in a fair and warm day, the
place hot or lying open to the Sun, and the seeds new, do far speedier
shoot up, than those that being sown in a contrary season, place, and
ground.

All Seeds sown, do evermore appear above the Earth, at one certain time
in a manner, for which cause, the Gardener ought to have regard unto the
proper times aunswering to the bestowyng of Seeds, and gathering the fruits
or yield of each Seeds.

The Spinach, Rocket, Basi^, and the nauew seeds, break and appear above the
earth, after the third day sowing, if a warm air succeed.

The Lettuce seeds bestowed in a well dressed Earth, do break and appear
above ground, by the fourth day following, if the clemency of air, aid
thereto, the Coucu^ber and Cytrone seeds, bestowed in ye increase of the Moon,
and showers of rayn falling the same or ye next day following, procure them to
appear the fifte day after.

The seeds of that slghtly Herb, named the flower Amoure, being sown in the
increase of the Moon, and the air sauouring: do break and appear above the
Earth by the seventh or eyghte day following.

The seeds of the Herb Dyll, bestowed in the Earth, in the increase of the
Moon, do (for the more part) apeare by the fourth day following.

The seeds of the Garden Cresses, and Mustarde, committed to the Earth in the
increase of the Moon, do commonly appear above the ground, by the fyfte day
after.

The Leeke seeds (bestowed in the ground) in the Summer time, are seen above
the Earth by the sixth day following, but in the winter time, in well dunged Beds,
by the tenth day after.

The seeds of the herb Rocket, committed to the ground in the increase of
the Moon, appear by the eight day following.

The seeds of all the kinds of Colewortes, bestowed in well dressed Beds, are
evermore seen by the tenth day following, if the cold air hyndereth not.

The seeds of the great Leekes, bestowed in well dunged Beds, appear many
times by the ninteenth, but oftener by the twentyth day following.

The Colyander seeds, bestowed in well trimmed Beds, and in the increase of
the Moon, are commonly seen above the earth by the, xxv. day: but the young
plants later appear, if the seeds bestowed are new.

The seeds of the Organie and Sauerie, bestowed in light Earth, and the Moon
increasing, do appear above the ground by the thirty day following.

The Parsely seeds, committed to the Earth, and in the increase of the Moon,
do commonly break and appear above ground, by the xl. day following, although
they are not many times seen before the fifty day.

Thus have I briefly uttered, a true and pleasant instruction, both for the age
of seeds, and skill of the Gardener in the sowing of them. For as I have above
said, the Lecke, the Coucumber, and Cytrone seeds, do speedye came up, being
new seeds: in a contrary manner, the seeds of the Parsely, Beetes, Spynage,
Cresses, Sauerie, Organy, Penneroyal, and Colyander, the elder that these are
(before the bestowing in the Earth) the speedier the seeds break, and appear
above ground.

The seeds in like manner of the Coucumber, steeped in milk or luke warm
water for a night, and committed to the Earth, under a warm air, do far
speedier break, and appear above ground. The like may the Gardener conceive,
to be done with the seeds of the Artichock, and many other herbs, of which,
shall particularly be uttered, in the proper places hereafter.

The third months sowing, or rather in May, to such dwelling far North, and
where snow lies long, there (this bestowing of seeds) better agrees,
especially, where the quality of Summer is known to be moist.

But in other Countries (this like) by a seldom hap answers, seeds three
months old, committed to the earth, in the Harvest time, will better agree,
being done in hot Countries, the Moon herein considered.

The Gardener in his well trymmed Earth (the time ayding) may commit to the
ground all worthy and excellent kind of seeds, plants, flippes, kernels and
such like: but these for a trial, bestow in the Beds of your Garden.

So that in any new kinds of seeds, not assayed or proved before, the
Gardener may not thoroughly hope, that these will prosper in his ground.

The seeds committed to the Earth, in moist places, do speedier shoot up
(the Moon helping) tha^ bestowed in dry ground. For which cause, election
used in the sowing of good and full seeds (^n either ^round) much avails.

The Seeds or settes bestowed in shadowie places, although the Earth be well
labored before, do rarely or very seldom prosper, and yield their flower.

The plants grown to their flower, may at that time (after the mind of the
Neapolitane Palladius Rutilius) be little or nothing handled, for doubt of
corrupting their flower, or the sooner sheading of them.

What care and diligence is required of every Gardener, in the plucking up, and
clear weeding away of all unprofitable Herbs, growing among the garden
plants. Chap. 23.
AFter the Seeds being workemanly bestowed in the Beds, the Gardeners next
care must be, that he diligently pull up, and weed away all hurtful and
unprofitable Herbs, annoying the Garden plants coming up.

But about this exercise in weeding of the beds, there is a disagreement
among the Writers of Husbandry. For certain deny that the raking does profit
ye plants any thing at all, in yt by ye Rake the roots of the Garden plants
are so uncovered, and the plants with the same felled, and caused to lie
flat on the ground, which, if cold weather ensue, are utterly killed with the
nipping air, for which cause, they better thought of that weeding and clensing
exercise, by pulling up with the hand, so that the same were done in due order
and time.

Yet it pleased many Husbandmen in time past to rake up the weeds in
beds, yet not after one manner, nor at al times alike, but according to the
usage of the Country, the good skill and condition of the weather: for which
cause, in what manner soever this exercise shall be taken in hand, that
weedyng shall need or be required in these places, the Gardener shall not
attempt or begin the weeding of beds with the hand, before the plants
well spring up, shall seem to cover their proper Beds, and that in this high
growth, the plants shall be mixed and joined one to the other, according to
the nature and form in their growth.

In this pluckyng up, and purging of the Garden beds of weeds and stones,
the same about the plants ought rather to be exercised with the hand, than with
any Iron instrument, for fear of feebling the young plants, yet small and
tender of growth.

And in the weeding with the hand, the Gardener must diligently take heed
that he do not too boysterously loose the Earth, nor handle much the plants
in the plucking away of the weeds, but the same purge so tenderly, that the
roots of the young plants be not loosed and feebled in the soft earth: For
occasion will move the careful Gardener to weed dainty Herbs, being yet
young and tender, least gross weeds in the growing up with them, may annoy and
hinder their increasing, Therefore the young plants in some readiness to be
taken in hand, ought not to be stayed until their strong and biggge growth,
but weeded in the mean time, for doubt of the inconveniences above uttered.
But the common Herbs for the Kitchen the Gardener shall not begin to weed,
before they be grown strong in root, and big shot up. And this learn,
that if the Earth be lose and soft at the time of weeding the dayntie plants,
you may not then lose and pull up weeds, but in a soft and tender manner:
and yet fine Herbs require at all times to be weeded, so that shoures of
rain have well softened the earth a day before.

The walking or treding often about the beds of the little and tender plants
shooting up, loses much the soft Earth about them, yea this so settleth down
the ground by the help of shoures of rain falling, that the weeds growing up
in those beds, are caused the harder to be plucked up. And sometimes the
roots of the weeds in the plucking up with the hand are left behind,
through this fastness caused of the Earth.

Here remember, that you never take in hand or begin the weeding of your
beds, before the Earth be made soft, through the store of Rain falling a
day or two before.

Here conceive, that the clipping, plucking away, and pressing down of
sundry Herbs with Tyles or other weighty things, after they be grown to
some greatness, is to great purpose, for so much as this causes them to keep
the longer green, and to yield the thicker, fairer, and bigger Touffes,
besides the letting of the Herbs, that they grow not up into Seed, and to
give with these a plesanter savor, than the same that before they possessed in
their growth simplye,

As by a like means and ordering, both the Lettuce, Cabbedge and Coleworte,
may be caused better, and more pleasant of taste, than the leaves simply
growing, without any such manner of ordering:

In the like condition, do the Radishe and Nauew roots grow the fayrer, and
bigger, if diverse of the green leaves (after some growth) be handsomely
clipped or broken off.

But of the apt ordering of these two last, in causing their roots to be
far bigger than customable, and pleasaunter in taste, shall more fully be
uttered in their proper Chapters hereafter, in the second perte of this
treatise.

The commended times for watring of the Garden Beds, and what manner of water
ought necessarilye be used to plants, with the later inventions of sundry
vessels, aptest for this purpose. Chap. 24.
THe Beds being furnished with seeds in due age of the Moon, requires
diligence (if the air sufficiently moysteneth not) in the watring of them,
least the ground being very dry of the proper nature, may through the dries
for the lack of rayn, cause both the seeds and tender plants shot up, to
perish and dry.

For which cause, every Gardener ought carefully to consider the condition and
property of the earth of his Garden, whether of it self, the same be very
moist, or over dry, which two extremes learned, he may with the more
diligence, bestow pains about the watering of the Garden beds, so often as
need shall require.

And for that the seasons in a manner, sufficiently instruct every owner and
Gardener, when to water the plants come up, it shall not be (of my part) a
new instruction, to utter unto them, the days and times necessary to water
the plants, seeing the youngest of any discretion, know* that the Beds chiefly
require watering after a drought, or when many hot days have chanced
together, as the like especially comes to pass in the So^mer time, about the
Cof^icke rising of the Canicular or dog Star (which with us commonly
happens about the seuententh day of July. And this watring of the Beds
ought rather be done (as Pliny witnesses) in the morning, soon after the
Sun rising) and at the evening when the sun possesses a weak force above
the Earth. The reason this Authoure alleges of the same, is that by watering
at the hot time of the day as at noone, the water then made hot by heat of
the Sun, would so burn the young and tender roots of the plants. And in
this watering of the beds, the Gardener must have a special care and regard,
that he moisten not the plants too much, least cloying them too much with
water, they after wax feeble and pe^i^h. The water best commended for watering
of the plants, is the same drawn or gotten out of the River, or other narrow
Stream ebbing and flowing, or else sweetly running one way, through the help
of Springs falling into it. But if the Gardener b^e forced to use Well water,
drawn especially out of a deep Well, or the water out of some deep pit, he
ought then to let the same drawn up stand for two or three days together,
or at the least for certain hours in the open air, to be warmed of the
Sun, least the same being new drawn up, and so watered or sprinkled forth
on the beds both raw and cold, may feeble and kill the tender young plants
coming up.

The age also of the plants, shall greatly direct the Gardener to know how
much and how smallye he ought to moysten them at each time needful, for the
tender young plants new come up, require a lesser watering, and the same
gently, where the Herbs more grown, well joy to be plentifully moystned with
the water temperate warm. And this water ought gently to be sprinkled forth on
the beds, with a watering pot, and by other means, which after shall be
demonstrated, that the roots of the young Herbs may alyke drink in of the
water, and not to be cloyed, through the over fast, or too much moisture
sprinkled on them, by which doing, these the rather retain the spirit
vanquishing, procured to pass through the exhalation of the Earth. For which
cause, the beds at one instant shall not fully be watered, but as the Earth
and plants drink in, so gently sprinckle forth the water, in feeding the
plants with this moisture, as by a breast or nourishing pappe, which like
handled, shall greatly prosper the tender plants coming up, where they
otherwise, by the hasty drownyng with water, are much annoyed, and put in a
hazard of perishing.

To the water standing in the Sun, if the owner or Gardener mixed a reasonable
quantity of dung, after his discretion, this mixture no doubt will be to great
purpose, for as much as the same gently watered or sprinkled abroad, procures
a proper nourishmente to the tender plants and young Herbs coming up.

The cold as well as the salt water, is known to be enemy unto all kinds of
plants, yet Theophrastus reports, that the salt water is more proper for the
watering of certain plants, than any other.

The common watering pot for the Garden beds with us, has a narrow neck,
big belly, somewhat large bottom, and full of little holes, with a proper
hole formed on the head, to take in the water, which filled full, and the
thombe laid on the hole to keep in the air, may on such wise be carried in
handsome manner to those places by a better help ayding, in the turning and
bearing vprighte of the bottom of this pot, which needefully require
watering.

The watering pot best to be liked, and handsomest for this turn, both for
the finely sprinckling forth, and easy carriage of water in the same from
place to place in the Garden, is that much used in the chiefest Gardens about
London, and in diners parts of England now known, whose form is after this
manner, the body wholly of Copper, having a big belly and narow neck, a
strong handle of the same metal workemanly fastened to the belly and head, to
carry the pot if need be to places in the Garden: but for a more easiness
and quickness in carriage of the pot vprighte and full, is an other strong
ring or handle, fastened artelie to the lips of the pot, much like to the
Barbers waterpot carried abroad, that serves to none other turn, saving for
the easy carriage of the pot full of water to needful places: but this
other handle especially serves to sprinckle forth the water by the long pipe
full of little holes on the head, that some name a Pumpe, which reaches from
the bottom, unto the head of the pot, for the handsomer delivering forth of
the water, the handle in the mean time guiding this long pipe of the pot,
until all the water be spent.

The Gardener possessing a Pump in his ground, or fast by, may with long and
narrow troughes well direct the water unto all beds of the Garden, by the
paths between, in watering sufficientlye the roots of all such Herbs, which
require much moisture. But for a playner understanding of this, I have here in
the Page following demonstrated the form to the eye.

The manner of watering with a Pumpe by troughes in a Garden.


There be some which use to water their beds with great Squirtes, made of
Tin, in drawing up the water, and setting the Squirt to the breast, that by
force squirted upward, the water in the breaking may fall as drops of rain
on the plants, which sundry times like squirted on the beds, does
sufficiently feed the plants with moisture.

An other way better commended, and the same with more ease, in watering of
plants and Herbs, is done by a great vessel of Tynne, formed somewhat like
to a Squirte, yet in the divided parts the same differs, for that this has
a pipe of the same metal raised from the bottom, and reaching in a manner so
high, as the great pipe, having many little holes at the imbossed top or
end, this bigger Pipe formed after the manner of a small Pumpe, at whose
nether end, a thick square plate of Tin stricken full of little holes,
workemanlie fastened, into which a Pumpe staff put, for the drawing up, and
forcible sending forth of the water, by thrusting down with both hands a good
distance off.

The vessel thus prepared in a readiness, must be set into a deep vessel
or tubbe of water, in what place of the Garden the owner or Gardener minds to
begin in drawing first the Pumpe up, and with mightier strength thrusting
it down again, which so handled, causes the water to ascend and flee
forth of the pipe holes on such height, that in the falling, the drops come
down through the air, breaking it in form of rain, that one place being
sufficiently watered, the Gardener may then remove the tubbe and vessel into
another place, which needs the like watering, and on such wise doing in three
or four places, he shall sufficiently moisten all the beds and bordures of
the Garden. That the form of this vessel with the tubbe may the readier be
conceived, behold this figure following here faithfully demonstrated.

The manner of watring with a pumpe in a tubbe.


The owner or Gardener, enjoying a Ponde with water, in his Garden ground, or
a ditch of water running fast by, so that the same be sweet, may with an
instrument of wood (named of most men a skiffe) sufficiently water all the
Beds of the Garden, with great ease and expedition.

Such Plants which come spediest forward, through much moisture bestowed on
them, as the Cucumber, Mellone, Gourde, and sundry others, the Gardener may
with far greater ease and travail, water after this manner, in taking
woollen clothes or Lystes, and these like tongs cut sharp at the one end,
which lay to the botome of the pot, filled with water, the sharp end
hanging forth, well four fingers deep, and the Pot leaning somewhat
forward, that these may through the continual dropping, hastily speed the
increase of the above said plants, so that to each plant a like pot
prepared be set, which manner of doing, is termed filtring.

At what time diverse plants sprung up, ought to be removed and set again,
as out of one bed or bordure, into another, with the breaking or s^ipping of
sundry settes from old bodies, which with skill require to be bestowed in the
Earth. Chap. 25.


The Husbandman or Gardener, which would have plants grow unto a greater
bigness than customable, ought to remove after four or five leaves be well
come up, and set them again, as out of one bed bestowed into another, and
like from one Bordure into an other. Although the owner may (at all seasons)
dispose plants, at his will and pleasure, yet is it better commended, that all
plants be changed into other Earth prepared when showers of rain have well
moystned and softened the same.

The plants also removed, and set again into a fat Earth well labored and
dressed, needs besides, as Columella witnesses, no other amendment by dung.

The skilful Neapolitane ( Palladius Rutilius) in his worthy work of Husbandry
reports, that when the Gardener has bestowed sundry kinds of seeds in one
bed together, which after the dyligente watering be so risen, that four or
five leaves of diverse plants are sprung above the Earth, such then after
this Authors consent, may well be removed and set again (into beds
workmanly prepared) a certain distance asunder, being such plants that
(before the setting) require to hane the tops of the leaves, and ends of the
roots cut off, whereby they may the freelyer grow up broad in Touffe or
big in root.

Those kinds of seeds, which after their committing to the Earth, and
dyligente wateryng, need not, after certain leaves sprung up, to be removed,
may the owner or Gardener bestow (as Rutilius witnesses) in the Beds the
thynner, the Moon herein remembered.

The worthy Columella (in instructions of the Garden) wylleth the owner or
Gardener, having an occasion to pull up plants, and set them again in
Beds, and that the ground the same time (for the lack of rain, be over
dry and hard) to moysten and soften well the Earth a day before, with water
sprinkled forth, by a wateryng pot, serving only to that use.

And certain of these, which require to be set a good distance asunder,
the worthy Rutilius wylleth to clippe off the tops of the young leaves, and
the ends of the roots to cut away, before the bestowing again in Beds
workmanly prepared, as like the Coleworte, Cabedge, Lettuce, great Leeke,
Nauewe, and Rape.

again, a good distaunce asunder, are the Cucumber, Gourde, Melone,
Artichocke, Nigella Romana, and sundry other^: which thus placed in Beds
artly prepared, may the readyer and handsomer be weeded, and cherished by earth
dug about, so often as need shall require, whereby the plants, through
help of diligent watering, and furtheraunce of the Moon in the setting, are
after procured to increase the better, and delectabler to the eye.

The young settes for the Garden (of pleasant delight and smell) may the owner
or Gardener also bestow in Bordurs at al seasons (although better commended, to
be done in the Spring time) in breaking of the slyps or Branches of one
years grows, from the bodies of old stocks, and in wrything the ends
about, so to set them a good deapth into the Earth, the Moon at that time
drawing near to her change, and known to be under the Earth, which much
furthereth the settes in the sooner taking of root.

But the skillful Columella rather wills to cleave the end of the Branch
or slyppe beneath, into which clefte an Ote grain to be thrusted or pu^, and
in ye setting deep into the ground, to bestowt Ote graynes round about the
same, (the Moon then near to her change) rather than any dung.

And those young Herbs, which the Gardener myndeth to remove, need not
(says this Columella) to be stryked about the roots with any Dung, but
rather that the ends of their roots (before the setting again) be cut off,
as I above uttered.

The Marigolde, Daysie, Collumbine, Primrose, Conslippe, sweet John,
Gilyfloures, Carnations, Pinckes, and sundry other delectable flowers, are
procured to increase the bigger, fayrer, and doubler, if the owner or Gardener
do often change these into Beds workmanlye prepared, the Moon at those
times considered, to be increasyng of light, and that a diligence bestowed in
the often watering.

As touching the pulling up of sundry dayntie Herbs of pleasant savor,
and that these ^o be set again in Beds (orderly prepared) after the course
of the Moon, with a care and dilygence to be bestowed particularly on most
plants of the Garden, shall at large be uttered in the second part of this
treatise, where we purpose ^o i^treate of many laudable and weighty matters
besides.

The plants (which after certain leaves spring up) need not to be removed
into other Beds, are the Spynage, Arache, Dyll, Sperage, Sorrel, Cheruile,
Parsely, and diverse other of like sort.

The laudable instructions of the wise, in the gathering and preserving of the
greater number of Kitchyn Herbs and roots, with the times aptest, for the
like doing by a^ flowers, dainty Herbs, and roots, to the use of physic.
Chap. 26.
THe best and worthyest roots of Herbs, are for the more part, to be
gathered in apt places when the leaves are beginning to fall off, and the
fruits or seeds already shed, so that the season be fair, for done in a
raynie time, the roots be caused the weaker, and filled with rude moisture.

The flowers in like manner are to be gathered, as the Borage, Buglosse, and al
others of like sort, when they be wholly opened, and before they feeble, except
the flowers of the Rose, and Jacemyne, which ought to be gathered for the
better and longer keeping, before they be much or rather but little opened.

The leaves and whole Herbs are to be gathered, when these be come to their
full growth and perfection.

The fruits, as the Melone, Cucumber, Cytrone, and Gourde, when these appear
yealowe, and be come to their perfitte growth and perfection.

The seeds in like condition are to be gathered, when they be well ripened,
and before ye seeds shed on ye earth, but those which remayn after the Herbs
through dried, ought to be rubbed forth with the hands, and kept, unto the time
of sowing.

Here remembering that the seeds ought to be gathered in a clear season, and
in the wayne of the Moon.

And this for a general rule observe, that al those to be gathered, as the
Herbs, flowers, roots, fruits, and seeds, are to be done in a fair and
dry season, and in the decrease of the Moon.

The Herbs which the owner minds to preserve, are before to be clean
picked and cleansed, and dried in the shadow, being a place open toward the
South, not moist and free from smoke and dust.

These after are to be put in leather Bags, rather than into Canuase, the
mouths at the hanging up fast tied, and into wooden Boxes of the Box tree,
to the end the Herbs may not lose their proper virtue, as we see those
persons to do, which preserve dainty Herbs for the winter time. So that
the Potecaries in my opinion are very negligente, which hang up the Physic
Herbs in their open shoppes and warehouses, through which, the virtue of
these not only breath away, but the bags charged and clagged with duste,
Copwebs, dung of flies, and much other filth.

The flowers ought not to be dried in the sun, nor in that shadow caused
by the Sun at Noone, nor in no Chamber or high place above, for as much as
these, through their softness and tenderness do lightly of like occasion,
breath away their proper virtue, but especially through the sharp heat of the
sun, and heat of the air, unless it be our Rose of ye Garden, which to be
preserved for a long time, requires to be dried in a high place standing open
to the Sun at Noone, or that the Sun beams enter unto, and yet touch not
the Rose leaves.

The better way for drying flowers, is to lay them in a temperate and dark
place, free from moisture, smoke and dust, and to stir them too and fro, that
these in the drying corrupt not, and to be either close kept in bags, or
continually covered over well, that these in the mean time lose not their
color, nor natural savor.

After being well dried, these ought to be close stopped in a glazed earthen
vessel.

The fyner Seeds are to be preserved in leather bags, or in carthen
vessels, having very narrow mouths, or else in Glass bottels, or gallie
glasses very well s^opped.

But the Seeds of the Onyons, Chybolles, and Leekes, as also of the Poppie,
are to be preserved in their Hu^kes and heads.

For the preserving of roots, the owner ought to learn and exercise two
means, the one for keeping the fresh, and the other for the round roots, as
the Nauew, Radysh, Carrotte, and others of like sort, and for to preserve them
dry.

The way and means to keep or preserve roots fresh, is to bury them in a
Sellar, in either Gravel or Sand, well turned upon, them, or in a Garden
ground reasonably deep dug, even so d^epe as the Gardener does for the
Radishe and Nauewe in the Earth, to enjoy the commodity of them for the
greater part of the winter: To preserve roots dry, the owner or Gardener,
after the plucking of roots out of the Earth) ought to wash them very
clean, with Cunduite or spring water, after to cut away all the small and
hearie roots, which done, to dry them in a shadowie place free from the
beams of the Sun, as being somewhat dark, if so be these are s^ender and
thynne of rynde, as be the roots of the Fennel, Succorie, Parselye, Endyue,
Borage, Buglosse, Sperage, and sundry others like, but if the roots be thick
of rynde, of a gross essence and big, then may the owner lay them to dry in
the Sun at Noone day, as the root of Gentiane, the Earth Apple, Brionie,
Raponticke, Aristolochia, or any others like.

After that these be well dried, and like prepared, ought the owner to hang
them up in some Garrette or open room a high, being sweet and dry (through
the suns daily shyning on the place at noone, or open to the North, where
nothing damaged by smoke, nor duste, nor that the Sun beams may harm in any
manner, even as that ancient and singular Physician Hypocrates instructs, who
wylleth the Herbs, flowers, and roots, so well fresh as dry, not to be
bestowed, in any manner, in an open place, to be dried of the wind, but
rather close stopped, in Glasses, Earthen pottes, and square Boxes of wood, to
the end, that these lose not their virtue, which otherwise they might soon
do, by lying open to the wind.

All the field plants, flowers and roots, are stronger in nature, but in
substance inferioure to the Garden plants. etc.

Among the wild plants, those growing on the mountains or high Hills, do
excel the other in property.

Among all Plants, those also are of a stronger nature which shall be of a
liuelier color better taste and savor.

The force besides of plants, do endure (for the more part) unto two or three
years.

The Herbs which a man would use for the Kitchen, ought rather be gathered
with a knife, somewhat above the Earth, when these are shot up unto their
perfect growth, as the Beetes, Succorie, Arache, Borage, Marigold, Coleworte,
Endyue, Clarie, Rocket, Basil, Maioram, Lettuce, Parsely, Mercury, and many
others.

When the owner minds to use certain Herbs, hot of qualitye, he ought to
gather them for the more part, rather fresh, than dry, but if his intent
be, rather to heat lesser, than seeing the moisture of the green, does much
mytigate the heat consisting in it, for that cause is he willed rather to
gather the herbs for Physic, before they begin to alter their color.

This for a general rule note, that all flowers, herbs, and roots, ought
carefully be gathered in a dry fair season, and not in cloudye, mysty, nor
rayny weather. The roots besides are not to be gathered, but after the fall of
the leaves, and these especially from the middle of September, unto the
beginning of the month of November. But flowers are chiefly to be gathered
from the middle of the month of May unto the beginning of July, and after.

And for the fruits of sundry Herbs, these properly are to be gathered,
according to the diversity of the Herbs.

The worth^e remedies and secrets auayling against Snayles, canker worms, the
long bodied Mothes, Garden fleas and earth worms, vitiate and gnaw, as well the
pot Herbs, as trees and fruits. Chap. 27.
THere is none so dull of eyesight (as I believe) which not thoroughly
perceives and sees, how that the Garden riches be diversely annoyed and
harmed by diverse creeping worms and beasts, as well above, as under the Earth,
and that through the same occasion, often procured to feeble and waste, and
unless speedy remedies shall be exercised, that these in the end do fall
down and perish.

For the Pestilent company of these increase and are seen many times to be
so many or great in number, that by no devised means, neither by fire, nor
Iron ingine (from the Garden grounds or field^s) in which these once shall be
lodged or abiding, can either be driven away or destroyed: therefore I shall
do herein a most grateful matter (as I suppose) both to Husbandmen and
Gardeners, if against this pestiferous annoyance and destruction, I shall utter
and teach those worthy remedies, that both the aunciente and later men by great
skill invented and noted in their learned works.

From words to come unto the matter I think it time to entreat, and first
that singular, Africanus among the Greek writers of Husbandry reports, that
Garden plants and roots may well be purged and rid of the harmefull worms,
if their dens or deep holes be smoked, the wind ayding with the dung of
the Cow or Ox burned.

That worthy Pliny in his Book of histories writes, that if the owner or
Gardener sprinckleth ye pure mother of the Oil Olive without any salt in it,
does also drive the worms away, and defend ye plants and Herbs from being
after gnawen of them. And if they shall cleave to the roots of the plants,
through malice or breeding of the dung, yet this w^^deth them clean away. The
Plants or Herbs will not after be gnawen or harmed by Garden fleas, if with
the natural remedy, as with the Herb Rocket, the Gardener shall bestow his
beds in many places.

The ^^^^wortes and all pot Herbs are greatly defended from the gnawing of the
Garden fleas, by the Radishe growing among them. And the worthy Anatolius in
hi^ Greek instructions of Husba^drie affirms the like, so that some bitter
fitches be also bestowed with the Radish in beds. And this Seed committed
in beds with the Radish and Rape, does greatly avail, as the ancient
witness of experience. The eag^e or sharp vinegre does also prevail, tempered
with the Juice of H^^ban^, and sprinkled on those Garden fleas. To these, the
water in which the Herb Nigella Romana shall be stieped for a night, and
sprinkled on the plants, as the Greek Pamphilus reports, does like
prevail against the Garden fleas.

If from other creeping things the Gardener would defend ye Seeds committed to
the E^^th from being gnawen or harmed, let him stiepe those Seeds for a night
(as I before uttered) before the sowing in the Juice of the Seng^ene or
Houselecke, which Seeds also the Gardener shall preserve vngnawen, if he
bestow of them in the shell of that Snayle, which I suppose to be the same,
named the Tortuise, as the former Author Anatolius writes, in which place I
may not omi^te the same practice of the skillful Paladius Rutilius, who
reports, that the noisome vermin or creeping things will not breed of the
Pot-Hearbes, if the Gardener shall before the committing to the Earth, dry
all the Seeds in the skin of the Tortuese, or sow the Herb Minte in many
places of the Garden, especially among Colewortes. The bitter Fitche and Rocket
(as I before uttered) bestowed among the Pot Herbs, so that the Seeds be
sown in the first quarter of the Moon, do greatly avail: As unto the
Canker and Palmer worms belongs, which in many places work great injury
both to Gardens and Uines, may the owner or Gardener drive away with the Fig
tree ashes sprinkled on them and the Herbs.

There be^some which sprinckle the plants and Herbs with the ^^e made of
the F^gge. Tree ashes, but to destroy these Worms, to strowe (as experience
reports) the ashes alone on them.

There be others which rather will to plant or sow that big Onyon, named in
Latin, Scilla or Squilla here and there in beds, or hang them in sundry
places of the Garden.

Others also will, to fix river Creuisses with nails in many places of the
Garden, which if they shall y^^ withstand or contend with all these remedies,
then may the gardener apply or exercise this device, in taking the Ox or Cow
Urine, and the mother of Oil Olive, which after the well mixing together, and
heating over the fire, the same be stirred about until it be hot, and when
through cold this mixture shall be sprinckle^ on the Pot Herbs and Trees,
does maruellously prevail, as the skillful Anatolius of experience deporteth.

The singular Pliny in his practices utters, that those harmefull Worms,
touched with bloody r^ddes, are likewise driven away.

The worthy Paladius Rutilius reports, that if the owne^ o^ Gardener burn
great bundels of the Garlike blades without heads dried through all the Alleys
of the Garden, and unto these the dung of Backs added, that the sauoure of the
^^^^ke (by the help of the w^^de) may be driven to many places, especially to
those where they most abound and swarm, and the Gardener shall see so speedy
a destruction, as is to be wondered at.

That worthy Pliny of great knowledge reports, that these may be driven
from the Pot Herbs, if the bitter Fitche Seeds be mixed and sown together
with them, or to the branches of Trees. Creu^sses hanged up by the horns in
many places, does like prevail. These also are let from increasing, yea
they in heaps presently gathered, are destroyed, as the Greeks report of
observation. If the Gardener by taking certain Palmer or Canker Worms out of
the Garden next joining, shall sees them in water with Dill, and the same
being thorough cold, shall sprinckle on the Herbs or trees, that the mixture
may wet and soke through the Neastes, even unto the young ones, cleaving
together, that they may taste thereof will speedily dispatche them. But in this
doing, the Gardener must be very wary, and have an attentive eye, that none of
the mixture fall on his face nor hands. Besides these, the owner or Gardener
may use this remedy certain, and easily prepared, if about the big arms
of Trees, or stemmes of the Herbs, he kindle and burn the stronger Lime and
Brimstone together. Or if the owner make a smoke with the Musheromes growing
under the Nutte tree, or burn the houses of Gotes, or the gum Galbanum, or
else make a smoke with the Hearts horn, the wind aiding, by blowing toward
them.

There be also some, which infuse the Uine ashes in water for three days,
with which they after sprinckle abundantly, both the Herbs and Trees. Many
beds make soft the Seeds, sti^ped before their committing to the Earth, in
the Lie made of the fygge ashes.

The Husbandmen and Gardeners in our time, have found out this easy practice,
being now common every where, which is on his wi^e, that when these, after
shoures of Rain are cropen into the warm Sun, or into places standing
against the Sun, may early in the morning shake either the fruits and
leaves of the Pot Herbs, or the ^^ughes of the trees, for these as yet (...)
through the cold of the night, are procured of the same the ^^ghtlyer and
soone^ to fall, nor able after to recover up again, so that the Palmer Worms
thus lying on the ground, are then in a readiness to the killing of the
Gardener.

If the owner mind to destroy any other creeping things noyous to Herbs and
Trees (which Palladius and Ruellius name, both Herb and Leeke wasters, then
let him harken to this invention and devise of ye Greek Dyophanes, who
wills to purchase ye Mawe of a Wether Sheep new killed, and the same as yet
full of his excrementall filth, which lightly cover with earth in the same
place, where these most haunt in the Garden: for after two days, shall the
Gardener find there, that ye Mothes with long bodies, and other creeping
things will be gathered in di^ers companies to the place right over it, which
the owner shall either remove and carry further, or dig and bury very
deep in the same place, that they may not after arise or come forth, which
when the Gardener shall have exercised the same but twice or thrice, he shall
utterly extinguishes, and quite destroy all the kinds of creeping things that
annoy and spoil the Garden plants. The Husbandme^ in Flanders, arm the
stocks, and compass the bigger arms of their trees with wispes of Straw
handsomely made and fastened or bound about by which the Palmer worms are
constreyned to creep up to the tops of the trees, and there stayed, so that
as it were by snares and engines laid, these in the end are either driven
away, or thus in their way begun, are speedily or soon after procured to
turn back again. As unto the remedies of the Snayles particularly belongs,
these may the Gardener likewise chase from the Kitchen Herbs, if h^e either
sprinckle the new mother of the Oil, Olive, or Soote of the Chimney on the
Herbs, as if he bestowed the bitter fitche in beds among them, which also
avails against other noisome worms and creeping things, as I before uttered.
That if the Gardener would possess a green and delectable Garden, let him
then sprinckle diligently all the quarters, beds, and bordures of the
Garden, with the mixture of water, and powder of Fenny Greek tempered together,
or set upright in the middle of the Garden, the whole bare head without flesh
of the unchaste Ass, as I before wrote.

That worthy man Julius Fronto reports, that all Kitchen Herbs may greatly
be helped, if among them the herb Rocket shall either be sown or planted. But
an intolerable injury shall be wrought to the Husbandly Gardener, if the
G^^se dung dissolved in brine, be sprinkled on the Kitchen Herbs, as these
worthy writers, Democritus, Fronto, and Damageron in their chosen precepts of
the Greek Husbandry, have left noted to our age.

The skillful inventions and helps against the Garden Moles, antes, Gnattes,
Flies, and Frogs, euerting, harming and wasting as well Kitchen Herbs, as
Trees and fruits. Chap. 28.
FOr as much as the Moles in many places of Garden grounds, through their
casting up and hollowing of the same, the Seeds before bestowed in beds they
on such wise uncover, and the plants in like manner turn up, and vnbare of
earth, to the great grief and pain of the careful Gardeners, in daily
renewing and repairing of their former labors, for that cause has he just
occasion to travel and busy himself, in searching out, and devising by all
skillful means, in what manner he may surest and best prevail against this
harmefull blind best. And that I may do a most grateful matter to all
Gardeners in the same, I will here utter all* such singular practices, that
either the worthy Greeks or Latins have uttered and noted to be auaylable
against them.

First the skillful Paxanus has left in writing, that if the Gardener shall
make hollow a big Nutte, or bore a hollow hole into some sound piece of wodde
being narrow, in filling the one or the other with Rosine, Pitch, Chafe, and
Brimston, of each so much as shall suffice to the filling of the Nutte, or
hollow hole in the wodde, which thus prepared in a readynesse, stop every
where with diligence, all the goings forth, and breathing holes of the Mole,
that by those the fume or smoke in no manner may issue out, yet so handle the
matter, that one mouth and hole be only left open, and the same so large, that
well the Nutte or vessel kindled within, may be laid within the mouth of it,
whereby it may take the wind of the one side, which may so send in the
sauoure both of the Rosin and Brimston into the hollow tomb, or restyng place
of the Mole: by the same practice so workemanly handled, in filling the holes
with the smoke, shall the owner or Gardener either drive quite away all ye
Moles in that ground, or find them in short time dead.

There be some which take the white Nesewort, or the rind of Cynocrambes
beaten and sarced, and with the Barlie Meal and Eggs finely tempered
together, they make both Cakes and Pasties wroughte with Wine and Milk, and
those they lay within the Moles den or hole, Albertus of worthy memory
reports, that if the owner or Gardener closes or diligently stops the
mouths of the Mole holes with the Garlike, Onyon, or Leeke, shall either drive
the Moles away, or kill them, through the strong savor, striking or breathing
into them. Many there be, which to drive away these harmefull Moles, do bring
up young Cattes in their Garden ground, and make tame Weafris, to the end that
either of these, through the hunting after them, may so drive away this
pestiferous annoyance, being taught to watch at their straight passages and
mouths of the holes coming forth. Others there be also, which diligently
fill and stop up their holes with the red Okare or Ruddell, and juice of the
wild Cucumber, or sow the Seeds of Palma Christi, being a kind of Satyrion
in beds, thorough which they will not after cast up, nor tarry thereabout.
But some exercise this easy practice, in taking a live Mole, and burning ye
powder of Brimston about him, being in a deep Earthen pot, through which he
is procured to cry, all others in the mean time as they report, are moved to
resort thither. There are some besides, which lay silk snares at the mouth of
their holes. To the simple Husbandmen may this easy practice of no cost
suffice, in setting down into the Earth a stiff rod or green branch of
the Elder tree. The worthy Pliny which has left to memory skilful
practices. reports, that the mother of the Oil Olive alone, sprinkled on
the heap of Pismires or Antes, kills them. This Authoure also writes, that
the Pismires are wicked annoyers to trees, which the Gardener or Husbandman
says he, may force to forsake and leave, if he bestrike the nether parts
of the Trees round about with the powder of the Ruddell, and Liquide pitche or
Tar, mixed together, and hang also by the place the fyshe named of the worthy
Rutilius after the Greek Writers Husbandry Coracinum, and of Ruellius
Graculum, for on such wise handled, they will resort and gather all into one
place, whereby the Husbandly Gardener may the speedelyer destroy them. Others
there be, which with the powder of the Lupynes and Oil Olive tempered
together, do bestrike the lower parts of Trees and plants, for the letting
of them in creeping up. Many kill them as I before uttered, with the only mother
of the Oil Olive. The skillful Neapolitane Rutilius reports, that if the
great company of Pismires or Antes have deep holes in the Garden ground,
those may the owner chase away, or kill in the ground, by stopping the mouths
of the holes, with the heart of ye Owl. If they creep abroad, then sift all
the Alleys where these run with bright Ashes or else score the ground thick
together with the red Okare or white Chalk, or make long strikes with Oil
on the Earth. Further he writes, that the Husba^dly Gardener may drive away
Pismires, if on the mouths of their holes he sprinckle the powder of Organy
and Brimston beaten together, or burn the empty shelles of Snayles, and with
the ashes of the same, stop abundantly the mouths of their dens and holes.
In which devise, this Rutilius omitted the Storax that of Paxanius the Greek,
out of whom he borrowed this conclusion added. The words of Paxanius be on
this wise: If the owner says he, shall burn certain Antes or Emots in the
middle of the Garden, the othe^s of the savor will creep away. To these, if
about the mouths of the Emots holes the careful Gardener shall smeare the
grosser Turpentine, the Emots or Antes will not after come forth, and these he
may expel or drive away from their proper resting place, or dwelling together,
if the shellie couerings of Snayles, burned with Storax Calamita, and beaten to
powder, or the ashes sifted, he shall after sprinckle on the heap of the
Pismires. And the owner shall thoroughly destroy the Antes, if he sprinckle on
them the iuce of Cyrenaicum dissolved and well mixed in Oil. This Authoure
further reports, that the Emotes will not creep on the plants nor trees, if
the Husbandly Gardener shall diligently sprinckle the bodies and stemmes of
them, with the powder of the bitter Lupines and mother of Oil, well mixed or
boiled together. The self same matter shall the Gardener perform, if he
compass their holes with white and clear Wolle or Bombaste, or that he mark on
the ground long strikes, or form round circles, with white Chalk, or red
Okare, all those ways especially that these most often haunt, or compass their
holes with Organy as I before uttered: for by ye like doing as he affirms, the
Emots after will not only leave ye creeping up on ye plants, but refuse also to
ascend over ye rings made with white Chalk about ye bodies of Trees. There be
others which report, that the Emotes will not creep to that honey pot set on
the ground, about which the like circles with Chalk or red Okare shall be
fourmed, yea though the same were left uncovered, yet is it known to many, yt
the Antes are marvelous desirous of Honey, and other sweet things.

The skillful Neapolitane Rutilius wills, that the diligent Husbandman
anoint or best rike the stemmes of plants, and the bodies of Trees, with the red Okare, Butter, and liquid Pitche mixed well together. There be certain
of the Greek Writers of Husbandry, which will the thick Yuie Garlandes to
be bound about the bodies of Trees and Uines, that by the same skillful
devise, the Antes lodging under the shadow of these, as then pledges they slay
and kill.

There be many which report, that the like may be wroughte and done with the
Bulls gaul, mother of Oil, and Liquide Pitche, smeared about the bodies of
Trees. The singular Pliny reports, that the Sea mudde or Ashes, stopped
dilige^tlye into their holes, is a most sure remedy against the Emotes, so that
the places be not moist or waterie. But with the surest practice and remedy of
all, are the Pisemires killed with the Herb Heliotropium. Some suppose, that
the water in which the crude Tile shall be infused for a time, to be enemy to
them. The Gardener may drive away Gnattes, if he sprinckle on the beds and
plants, the decoction of Organie in vinegar, as that skilful Democritus in his
Husbandry has noted. To these the owner may sprinkle on the Plants, the
infusion of Rue in water, or use the decoction of the herb Fleabane, or else
make a smoke either with Brimstone, or Cummyne, or the dry Ox dung, or the
gum Bdellium. The learned Pliny utters, that the Gardner may drive these
away with the smoke of Galbanum burned, and that worthy Neapolitane Rutilius,
of experience affirms, that if the owner either sprinckle the new mother of
oil, or soote of the chimney on the plants, it likewise drives the^ away.
That skillful Greek Berytius has left in writing, how that the Gardener may
drive the Flies far off with this fearful device* if mixing the pouders of
the Hellebor or Neeswort, and Orpiment with milk, the same be sprinkled on the
plants and place where the Flies most hau^t, it either hastily drives them
away, or kills them soon after. The self same will the common Alume, beaten
with Organye, and tempered with Milk prevail against the Flies: For what
plants and herbs shall be sprinkled with this mixture will not after be
resorted unto nor touched of Flies. The Bayberries with the black Neeseworte
beaten together, and infusing it in milk or water and Honey myxed, does like
profit: for this mixture sprinkled on the Plants, and places where the flies
most haunt, does after as it were by a poison, hastily kill the flies, or
otherwise force them to fly speedilye away never to return.

As touching remedies against the Frogs, which in the summer nights are
wont to be disquieters to the weried husbandmen (through their daily labor,
by chyrping and loud noise making, let the Husbandman exercise this help and
secret, borrowed of the skilful Greek Africanus, which is on this wise: Set
on some bancke (says he) a Lantern lighted, or other bright light before
them, or on some tree (fast by) so hang a light, that by the brightness of the
same light* it may so shine upon them, as if it were the Sun, which handled
on this wise, will after cause the^ to leave their chirping and loud noise
making: A practice tried by many of later years.

The skilful Greek Beritius reports, that if the Husbandman bury in some
Banckee fast by, the gaul of a Goat, the Frogs will not afterward gather to
that place.

The rare practices and secrets, both of the ancient, and later writers of
Husbandry, against Serpents of the Garden, and any others veneming as well men
as the Kitchen Herbs, trees, and fruits. Chap. 29.
FLorentius (a singular and diligent interpreter of the matters of the field)
wrote, that serpents in the Garden ground or elsewhere, will not lodge or
abide, if the owner sow or plant in bordures about, or in apt corners of the
Garden, either the wormwoode, Mugworte, or Southernwood, which if these shall
some where happen to haunte, then may the Gardener (as he writes) drive them
incontinent forth of the ground, if he make a smoke either with the Lyllie
roots, Hearts horn, or Goats houes.

The skilful Rutilius utters, that all Serpents be forced out of ye ground,
by every sour savor, and stinking smoke, flying abroad with the wind.

The learned Democritus affirms, that the serpents assuredlye do dye, if the
Gardener straw or throw Oken leaves on the^, or if any spitteth fasting into
their mouth gaping or wide open.

The well practiced Apuleius writes, that these stricken but once with a tough
reed or willowe rod, are mightily astonished, but giving them many strokes, do
recover and wax strong again. Tarentinus (a skilful writer of ye Greek
Husbandry) denies, yt any can be harmed of a serpent, if the person before be
anointed with the juice of the Radish, or that he has eaten of the Radish,
which matter ( Athenaeus and Galen, with many other worthy Authors) ascribe to
the Orange or Lemon, and they confirm the same, with a pleasant History.

The former Florentinus utters, an other singular practice against serpents
of the Garden, to be wrought after this manner: Lay (says he) the fat of the
Heart in the Garden Earth, or else bury the Centorie root, or the Geate
stone, or else the Eagle, or Kytes dung, and the serpents will refuse the
ground (or at least) not come near the place, and every venomous worm will be
driven away, if the Gardener by taking ( Nigella, Pelitorie, Galbanum, of the
Hearts horn, Hysope, Brimstone, Peucedanum, and the Goats houfes, shall
diligently bring these to ponder, and infuing the whole for a time in the
strongest vinegar, shall after make little balls of the myxture, with which
through dried cause a sauoure and a smoke. For through the savor of these
matters sparsed in the Air, all creeping vermin will either hastily (for the
great fear) forsake the ground, or dye there incontinent. The same Authoure
Florentinus, reports, that the serpents may like be gathered on an heap,
into an old deep poudering Tubbe, as fish into a well or bownette, if the
same be deep set about that place of the Garden or field, where these most
lurk and haunte: for after the speedy resorting of these to the brincke of
it, they fall willingly in, not able after to recover themselves out, Pliny
writing of the withye named Siler, reports this, that the serpents refuse,
both the tree and fruit, for which cause, the husband men made them staves of
the wood to carry about with them. But this by a most certain experience or
trial, proved and confirmed, that by making a smoke with old shoes burned, the
serpents incontinent speed away, nor these only fly out of the Garden ground,
field, or house, but such as are enterd into men, by dead sleep in the
summer, in sleeping open mouthed, or with open mouth, in the field, do like
come forth with the said smoke. Which matter ( Marcus Gatinaria a famous
Phisitio^) confirms, who reports that the like happened to a certain man in
his time, to whom after infinite medicynes and most effectuous remedies were
ministered, and none of them prevailed, at the last this employed, fell out most
luckylie and wonderful of all the others, in burning the leather of old shoes,
and receiving both smoke and savor by a Tunnel into ye body. For as soon as
this hidious beast (which was a mighty Adder) felt the savor of this smoke, he
was seen (to the standers about) to come forth by the fundament, to ye mighty
astonishment and wonder of all the beholders. And this worthy secret, easy to
be prepared, I thought here good to place, that the same, a like case
happening, might be profitable, to every person. But in this place is not to
be omitted, yt serpents greatly hate the fire, not for the same cause, that
this dulleth their sight, but because the natrue of fire is to resist poison.
These also hate the strong sauoure far flying, which the Garlik and read
Onyons procure. They love the Sauine tree, the Juie, and Fennel, as Todes do
the Sauge, and Snakes the Herb Rocket. But they are mightily displeased, and
sorest hate the Ash tree, insomuche that the serpents, neither to the morning
nor longest evening shadows of it, will draw near, but rather shun the same,
and fly far off. As a like matter Plynie reports, was on a time proved, by
enclosing a serpent, within the large cyrcle made of green Ashetree leaves, in
the middle of which a quick fire made, to the terroure of the serpent, for
that end to prove, whether she had rather run over the Cyrcle, than draw
near to the fire, which nevertheless (the fire kindling more dna more) at the
last, rather crepte to the fire, where he peryshed, tnha by any means would
draw near to the Cyrcle of the Ashetree leaves. Yet here learn, the
marvelous benignity of nature, which permits not the serpents to come forth
of the Earth, before the Ash tree buddeth forth, nor to hide them again,
before the leaves fall off. The singular Poet Virgil says, that the smoke made
of Rosen or Galbanum, does hastilye chaste and drive the serpents away.

These hitherto uttered, for the driving away and killing of serpents. But
here was almost forgotten, that ye leaves of Fern, do chase away the serpent:
for which cause, many skilful think it profitable, either to sow, or straw
the Fern, in such places where the serpents haunte. The Neapolitane Rutilius
adds, that if the leaves of the same be burned, they (with the sauoure
only) will flee or creep hastylye away, yea and force them to change their
lodgings, far from the Garden ground or field.

Here a doubt may be made, whether the same be to purpose here to recite, that
the worthy Albertus reports of the round Aristolochia with the field Frog,
and a certain proportion of writing Incke diligently labored, and mixed with
these, to make the Serpents immediately to quayle as dead, if any of the
myxture be written wythall, and thrown before them.

But I think it high time to come unto the remedies, which are both ready
and easy to be prepared.

If that any shall be bitten of a serpent, unless he have a Fever, and
dryncketh a certain quantity of the juice of the Ash leaves, with pleasant
white wine, and applies also of the fresh leaves on the place bitten, shall
in short time see a worthy secret, greatly to be marvelled at, and by happy
success, proved of many.

Here briefly to conclude, if the Gardener bestows the fresh elder flowers
where the Serpents daily haunte, they will hastily depart the place, yea these
by report (artely bestowed in the Garden ground) do in short time destroy the
Mothes, the Ca^kerwormes, and Palmers breading in trees.

The other helps and remedies necessary to be uttered in this Chapter, shall
in apt places be declared in the second part, where we purpose to entreat
particularly of most Herbs growing in the Garden.

The laudable devises and cunning helps against the Scorpions, Todes,
Gardenmyse, Weasels, and al other greater beasts wasting and corrupting, as well
the kitchen Herbs, as fruits. Chap. 30.
Pliny reports, that if slippes of the green Heliotropium, be set round
about the place where the Scorpions frequente, that they will not after creep
thence. But if the owner either lay on or strew upon the Scorpions, the whole
Herb, they incontinent (as he affirms) die.

That skillful writer Diophanes (in his Greek commentaries of Husbandry)
utters, and the like many other, that the fresh Radish, either laid or
strewed on the Scorpions, kills them incontinent.

To these, if any annoynteth the hands circumspectly with the juice of the
Radish, he may after handle Scorpions or any other venemouse thing, without
danger.

This Author further adds, that a smoke made with Saudaracha and better, or
the fat of a Goat, will drive away both them, and other venemouse things, and
by burning one Scorpion, all the others fly forth of the ground.

If any boyleth the Scorpion that stung him, or any other in Oil, and
annoynteth the sore place with the same, it shall greatly avail.

The like comes to pass, if he may kill and bruise the same on the stinging,
but perilous will the same stinging be, if he refrain not the eating of Basil
all that day of the stinging. Florentius reports, that the juice of the fig
tree leaves, dropped on the stinging, mightily avails.

The learned Pliny affirms, that the Ashes of the Scorpion drunk in wine
(if the fit of the Fever be not upon the person) to be a singular remedy,
as the powder of worms burned, to persons having worms, or to beasts the
like ministered, and any bytten of a mad dog, if the hears of the same be
burned and druncke, do greatly avail.

The Todes, (as the Greek and Latin professors of husbandry write,) may be
driven forth of the Garden ground, with those remedies, that the serpents: for
which cause, the remedies and healpes against them to repeat I think here
superfluous.

The wise (as the learned Apuleius writes) will in no manner harm or wast those
seed^s committed to the Earth, which before the sowing are steeped a time in
the Gaul of an Ox.

They will be killed in the ground, if the Gardener shall stop their
commings forth, with the fresh leaves of Rhododaphnes.

There be (of the Greek writers of husbandry) which will that like portions of
the wild Cucu^ber, or Henbane, or of the bitter Almondes and black Noseworte,
be orderly bruised, and tempered with Meal, the same after wrought into Balls
with Oil, to be laid at the holes of the field, and house Myse. Pliny
writes, that the seeds (before the bestowing in the Earth,) infused either in
the Gaul of a Weasell, or the ashes of him committed to the Earth with the
seeds, does like them from being harmed of Myse, yet the plants springing out
of these are greatly misliked* for that they then give the savor of such a
rank beast, so that the seeds are far better commended, to be ste^ped
before in the gaul of an Ox.

The skil^ull Africanus utters, that the Gardener may either kill or drive
away Weasels if he mix salt ^rmoniack with wheat paste, and lay of the same
in such place, where these often haunte. Others there be, which will the
careful Garden^r to get one alive, and cutting of both tail and testicles, to
let him so pass again, for by that means (others perceiving the like sight)
will depart the place, the easy experience of which matter, will after bring a
credit to thee in the same. For the dryuing away of the greater beasts,
conceive these remedies following, that if the Gardener shall water the seeds
bestowed, with the old urine in which the ordure of a dog shall be infused for
a time, they shall after ^e defended in ye growyng up, from the spoil of
greater beasts.

The self same does the worthy Democritus affirm to come to pass (as I before
uttered) if that the owner take to the number of ten River or Sea Creauises,
and in putting them into an earthen pot full of water he set the same in the
sun for ten days, to be well heated and vapored through the hot beams,
which thus handled let him sprinckle on the beds and plants, that he would
have defended from the air, and great beasts: yet may he not water the younger
plants, but every third day, until these be grown up stronger. The skilful
Africanus, and other worthy writers of Husbandry, report, that if either the
Pyonie or Herb Personata be buried, or otherwise sown about banckes or
bordures, in the Garden or field, are after (as by a secret protection)
preserved, that neither the great nor smaller beasts, will after spoil the
plants there growing. But if the Husbandman would have his trees preserved,
from being sore eaten and wasted of the greater beasts, then let him exercise
(after the mind of Pliny) this easy practice, in ^asting or sprinckling on
the leaves, the water in which Ox dung has bin disolued, so that he be sure
those times, that rain will fall within a day after, to the clean purging
again of the branches and leaves of that sauoure, a matter in very deed
wittily devised for the purpose.

The skilful practices and remedies, against Hayle, lightnings and tempests,
beating down, and spoiling the Kitchen Herbs, trees, and fruits. Chap. 51.
FOr the Hayle, which for the more part destroys both the labors of the
Oxen and men, conceive these few remedies following. That if the Husbandman,
would avoid the same danger at hand or ready to fall, then let him draw about
the ground (whether it be field, Orchard or Garden) the skin of a Seal, or
Crocodil, or Hyena, and hang it after at the entry or coming in of the place,
as the worthy Philostratus, in his Greek commentaries of husba^dry, has noted.
Others there be, which seeing the Hayle at hand, by holding up a mighty Glass,
do so take ye Image of the darck cloud, directly over the place, to ye end, the
abject by the same remedy (as Rutilius reports) may offend, whereby as
doubled, it may give place to the other, and on such wise be speedily auerted
and moved away.

There were some (as Philostratus writes) which with the right hand drawing
the Marrish Tortoise on her back, labored so about the Garden ground or
field, and returned to the place where they began, they so laid her upright
in the furrow made with her back, and shored cloddes of either side, that she
might not fall, neither to one nor other side, but abide steadie upright, to the
end she might so behold the big and thick clouds, directly over the place.
And the same, at such times they exercysed in the syxt hour of the day, or
night. Certain others (seming to be of greater skill) when the Hayle approached,
did spread ou^t every space of the Garden or field, white Uine, or fastened in
some place right against the Tempest immenent, a live Owl, with the wings
spredde abroad, which two remedies also much avail against the lightnings
and hayle, as says the singular writer of Husbandry ( Junius Columella) in
his little treatise of the Garden.

To utter here the populare help against Thunder, lightnings, and the
dangerous hayle, when the tempest approaches through the cloud arysing, as by
the loud noise of Gunnes shot here and there, with the loud sound of
Belles, and such like uoy^es which may happen:

I think the same not necessary, nor properly auailable to the benefit of
the Garden.

The famous learned man Archibius which wrote unto Antiochus king of Syria,
affirms, that tempests shall not be harmefull to pla^tes nor fruits, if the
speckled Tode enclosed in a new Earthen pot, be buried in the middle of the
Garden or field. Others there are, which hang the feathers of the Eagle, or
Seals skin, in the middle of the Garden or at the four corners of the same.

For these three, as by a certain secret property (and for truth) by a
marvelous repugnancie to resist the lightnings, and that of these (the above
said) in no manner to be harmed or blasted, is to memory of the posterity
committed, and by the experiences or trials of many skilful men confirmed.
Wherefore Tiberius Caesar (as reports Suetonius) was wont to wear a Garlande
of Bays, and to cover his proper tente all over with Seal skins, at such
times as thunder and lightning happened, supposing himself to be defended from
these, which he maruellously feared. Pliny reports that Bulbus (not for ye
smalnes only of his body) escapes the force of lightning, but through a
secret and natural repugnaunce does this avail against the stroke of
lightning.

The laudable devises and helps against Frost, blasting of trces, Mystes, and
ruste, which be enemies as well to Garden Herbs as fruits. Chap. 32.
TO most men it is manifest, that there are two kinds of celestial injuries,
the one, that men name tempests, in which the hayle, storm, and such like as
are meant.

These (when any happen) are named a mightier violence and working of heaven
moved forward, as Pliny reports, by the fearful stars, which be
Virgiliae, Hyades, Canicula, Arcturus, Fidicula, Haedi, Orion, Aquila, and
sundry others, carefully observed of the writers of Husbandry and Physic,
and of them most diligently noted.

The other kind is wont to happen, the air being caulme and quiet, and in
fair nights, no feelyng to be decerned, but when the same is come to pass
and wrought, which bewailed calamity is one while wont to be named rustie, an
other whiles burning, and an other whiles blasting, that to all crescente
things, is a strerilit^e, and at one word a destruction, so that al is caused
by Heaven, and wont especially to happen in the Spring time. The blasting and
burning of the blossoms of Aple trees, the flowers of Uines and Corn, are
caused through the injury of the Frostes happening in the night, and not as
many report, to be wrought by the Suns sharp heat, burning hastily up the
deawe, or the moisture entering in, and corrupting the heads of Corn. The same
also wasting the tender buddes, plants, and branches, is commonly named
burning, for that it burns and consumes in places so black as any Cole. The
blasting besides of the tender blossoms of Trees and Uines, is named
sideratio^, for that this especially is caused through the blast and stricking
of some Constellatio^. To these we add the rust, as a mighty enemy to
fruits. The worthy Pliny reports, that the rust and burning, be caused
only of cold, which happens in the night time, and before the Sun
rising, so that the Sun is not worker of these. And the time when the like
succeeds, is known to be after the mind of sundry skilful Writers of
Husbandry, at the change or full Moon, some Stars then of the fist bigness
ayding, in the rising, or setting. The suspected times and days of the rust for
iudgyng of the good or evil success of fruits, is known in April,
according to the falling out of George and Saint Marks day, and the ninth day
of May, for the caulmenesse and cleerenesse of the air. This celestial
sterilitie, does neither happen, nor cannot every year, for the proper
courses of the Stars, both in the descending and ascending in Heaven, with
the radiations or aspectes one to another. In the which working, who can not
but wonder, and for the same honor and reverence, the marvelous benignity
and goodness of Almighty God toward mankind, yet of the constellations
before mentioned, and of the others which are infinite in number, the diligent
antiquity only feared three of these greatly, and observed them for that
cause, as the diligent Pliny noted, and to memory committed. First, the
constellation Virgiliae for the fruits, the constellation Aquila for the
Corn, and the constellation Canicula for the gathering of fruits, so that
these for ye same cause were named the Judicial Stars, to foreknowe the
seasons by. In whose days of the first appearance, if the air clear and
caulme sent down a kindly and feeding juice to the Earth, then was it a sure
note to the^, that such things sown, would grow and increase prosperously.
Contrariwise, if the Moon at those times sprinkled a dewie cold on the
plants and crescent things, then as a bitterness mixed contrary to the
sweet and nourishing juice, the same so slew or killed the tender things,
shot forth appearing above the earth. But to come to the matter: there is
neither frost, hayle, storm, nor tempest, so harmefull to certain fields or
Garden grounds, through which they at any time cause the sterilitie and
penury of victuals, as the rust and burning heat do, for these falling and
working in open Countries, procure for the more part through their harms a
public calamity and present dearthe, to the avoiding of which, shall here
be uttered those skillful remedies, invented of the ancient Writers of
Husbandry. If the careful Gardener would withstand the force of Frost and
rust approaching, then let him burn store of Chafe, if such plenty be there,
or near hand, but for lack of the same, may he use the dry weeds plucked
up of the Garden or field, and the big Thistles, or other wast fruits, in
many places of the same, especially toward that way which the wind then
blows, for on such wise handled, Diophanes in his precepts of Husbandry
writes, that the evil nighe or at hand is auerted. The self same practice
may be used against thick and dark mistes. Beritius in his Greek precepts of
Husbandry gives warning, that the Husbandman or Gardener diligently mark,
whether the same be gathered in the air, which ready to fall, let him then
burn incontinente the left horn of an Ox, with either Cow or Ox dung,
making with these a mighty smoke round about the Garden ground or field, but
the smoke especially directed by the wind, in fleeing against it. The worthy
Apuleius wrote, that the smoke of three river Creauisses, burned with Ox or
Gotes dung, or with Chafe, to be a most sure healpe and remedy against the
like, that if the same be already fallen, I mean the rust, the Gardener may
recover the harm after this manner, as the skillful Beritius reports, in
taking the roots or leaves of the wild Cucumber or Colocynthis, which after
the brusing and infusing in water for a night, sprinckle and wet the places
well taken with rust before the Sun rising. The like may the Gardener work
and do, with the Fig or Oak tree ashes, sprinkled in the places endamaged
with rust.

All Seeds of the Garden or field are defended, as reports Anatolius, from
al injuries and Monsters, if the Husbandman or Gardener before the committing
of Seeds to the Earth, does infuse them for a time in the juice of the roots
of the wild Cucumber.

If the Gardener or Husbandman as Apuleius witnesses, shall stick and plant
round about the Garden ground or field, many slippes, stocks, and branches
of the Bay tree, these will after avail against the rust, for into them all
the harm of the rust passes and enters, as the like many times has bin
observed of the skillful, which very often is wont to happen in the dewie
Country, valleys, and in places where big wind of a suddayne does many
times blow. Thus much for the rust, being enemy to fruits. Against the
burning heat, which peculiarly is wont to hap to Uines, the learned Pliny
wills the Husbandman to burn three live Creuisses, or to hang them alive on
the Tree or Uine.

The Greeks (as certain Latin Writers have noted) did sow Beans as well
within, as without the Garden ground or field, to avoid by that means the
Frost falling, or at least, to avail against the Frost.

These instructions for the workemanly handling and ordering of a Garden
plotte, shall at this present suffice, and like the remedies, against the
harms and injuries that commonly annoy, whereby all Seeds and plants
bestowed in the same, may with gladsome cheer to the Gardener prosper and
increase, which the gentle Reader shall conceive to be borrowed out of the
works both of the old and new Writers of Husbandry, as well Greeks, as
Latins, that by great study, and painful labor searched and observed the
most of these, or else not attempted of my part, to be published and made
common to all men. Besides these, you shall well conceive, that the better
part were confirmed in our time, by the experiences of sundry skillful men in
the matters of Husbandry, and by earnest suit purchased, which to be brief
being thankefully accepted, the Authoure has his due reward, and so an end
of this first part of the Gardeners Lab^^inth.

Vale.

A proper knotte to be cast in the quarter of a Garden, or otherwise, as there
is sufficient roomth.


The second part of the Gardeners Labyrinth, uttering such skillful
experiences and worthy secrets, about the particular sowing and remouyng of
the most Kitchen Herbs, with the witty ordering of other dayntie Herbs,
delectable flowers, pleasant fruits, and fine roots, as the like has not
heretofore bin uttered of any. Besides the Physic benefits of each Herb
annexed, with the commodity of waters distilled out of them, right necessary
to be known.


WHere in my first part I have fully satisfied (as I trust) the exspectation
of the Husbandly Gardener and owner in all such matters, which may appear
needful or requisite to be learned and known, for the better aid, in
poss^ss^ng of a commodious and delectable Garden: in like manner I purpose to
aid the careful Husbandman or Gardener, after the possibility of my skill in
this second part with such skillful healpes and secrets, as are required
about the artely sowing, and particular bestowing as well of the Kitchen, as
other dayntie Herbs* pleasant fruits, delectable flowers, and fine roots,
which at large I purpose to utter in the same, and likewise the Physic
benefits to each Herb I add, with other matters profitable, to the end
the owner or Gardener may with better good will be moved to bestow an earnest
care and diligence about the often removing, as well of dainty flowers as
Herbs, with the clipping, pressing down, breaking away, and cutting off the
ends of roots, that these may grow the thicker and bigger both in Herb and
root. All which instructions and rare secrets, are part borrowed out of the
worthy works and treasures of the Greek and Latin professors of Husbandry,
and part purchased by friendship and ea^nest suite, of the skillful
obseruers and witty searchers in our time of laudable secrets in Garden
matters, serving as well for the use and singular comfort of man's life, as
to a proper gain and delight of the mind.

The like of which already uttered, may the owner both see and know by that
plant, which in Gardens every where, as well those in the Country, as in
the City, is placed none so common, none more plentiful, nor oftener used
among Kitchen Herbs, than this familiar Pot Herb, named the Colewort,
which by a diligence of the Husbandly Gardener, may well serve in the coldest
of Winter, in the stead of other Pot Herbs, so that this Herb by good
reason, known to be not only profitable for the Pot, but to the uses of
Physic right necessary, has moved me the rather to begin first with
the Coleworte, in uttering what care and diligence is required about the
sowyng, often remouyng, clippyng and dressing of the same, being before
bestowed in Beds workemanly prepared.

What healpes and secrets to be learned in the sowing and often removing of
the Coleworte. Chapter. 1.
THe worthy Marcus Cato in his husbandry preferred the Colewort before all
other Pot Herbs, and the learned Pliny in like manner ascribed a
principality to the same of all Garden Herbs, for which cause, I purpose
here to entreat first of this Herb, that many of the Latins also for the
mighty stem and arms like branches named the Colewort. Such is the nature
of this plant, that the same refuses no condition of air, for which cause it
may be committed to the Earth in any time of the year. This plant desires a
fat Earth, and well turned in with dung, but the Cleyie, grauellie, or Sandy
this refuses, except a flood of rain water shall now and then healpe.

The Coleworte prospers the better, being placed toward the South, but this
standing open to the North, not so well increases, although both in taste and
strength it overcomes in the same place, for through the cold air and
frostes, the Herb is caused the tenderer and pleasanter.

The Colewort ioyeth on a hill side, or the ground stieping down, it
delights in dung, and increases by the often weeding, as the worthy Rutilius
has noted: when six leaves shall be sprung up, or ^ut five, the same then must
be removed, but in such manner handle, that the root before the setting
again, be anointed with soft Cow dung, which ought so to be ordered in a
warm day, if it be Winter, but if in the Summer time, then at such time as
the Sun shall be going down in the West.

The most ancient of the Greeks divided the Colewort into three kinds only,
as the crisped, which they named Selinoidea, for the similitude of ye leaves of
Parselie, the same of them Lean, for the broad leaves issuing or growing forth
of the stem, for which cause, some named it Cauloden. And the same which
properly is named Crabe, growyng up with thinner leaves, both single, and
very thick. The Colewort becomes the bigger, through the Earth daily turned
light up about the body. And particularly to write, the common Colewortes,
which they name the long or green, ought to be sown from the middle of
August, or from the beginning of September, that these may be grown up
into big leaves to serve in Winter and in the lent time. The husbandly
Gardener or owner may plant young Colewortes in October, and set them again in
December, to possess the leaves in the sharp winter, and ye seeds in June and
July, and to make them also grow as big touft, as in the other seasons of the
year and as tender or rather tenderer, although not so delectable: and have
good regard, that the seeds be not to old, for these then bring forth pla^ts
out of kind, of which the report goes, that seeds sown become Rapes, or
Nauews. Such seeds as you would to endure for six years, ought to be
carefully preserved. Marcus Varro wills the Coleworte to be sown in saltie
places, and when three leaves be come up, to sifte Nyter or salt Earth on
them, so fine as the froste falling, for on such wise handled, these are
caused the tenderer and delectabler the virtue notwithstanding preserved, which
like practice is confirmed, in ye Greek Husbandry of Praxamus. There be some
which use Ashes in stead of Nyter, or for the same cause, yt either may kill
and destroy the Canker worms, which greatly offend and waste ye Coleworts in
some Gardens.

The singular Columella reports that the Colewort does come sooner soft and
tender in the seething, and does keep the green color without Nyter, if the
root lapped about with three small blades of the sea weed, be again set in
the Earth.

The worthy Pliny wills the Reyte or sea weed, to be put under the stalk,
in setting again, and unto the same end, the delicate and tender seething
used, so that the Colewort before ye seething, be steeped a time in Oil and
salt, but in the seething, put in a little salt, for the Nitrous and salty
substance consisting in it.

The Coleworte may be caused both big and pleasant, if thrust into a whole,
you set it unto the leaves in Earth, that no part of the stem be left
bare, for doubt of perishing: and as the same grows up in height, and the
earth shrinking from it, so continually raise the Earth high up to the body,
and cut away the outward leaves, so that no more than the top of the leaves
may appear above the Earth. The Coleworte often weeded about, and workemanly
dunged waxes the stronger, and causes the Coleworte to be of a greater
increase, and tender of lea^e. All the year through, may the Coleworte be
cut, seeing at the year (as aforesaid) the same may be sown, yet grown to
feed, it ought not to be cut. The tender tops of ye young Colewort, is
greatly commended for Sallets, so yt somewhat hot, both oil and Salt be
bestowed upon. When rain after a drought in summer time falls, ye owner may
renew those Coleworts decaying, by plucking away from the^ the decayed leaves,
which either shall b^e dry or eaten in many places through. The Cabedge Cole
or white Cabedge, may be sown thick in beds, but after certain leaves come
up, removed into well dressed beds, half a yard asunder, grown especially to
a big stem or stock, and these well joy under a cold air in that they are
caused the te^derer and delectabler through sharp fros^es, and the heads
covered with straw, are caused both rounder and whiter.

The wrinckled, crysped, and Romayne Cabedges, which of nature are more tender
and delicate, ought to be sowe^ in the month of March, and removed at certain
times of the year, being always watered, when need requires.

When the Gardener or owner at any time sees that the leaves of the Coleworte
either wythereth or waxes yealowe, the same then is a note of the default of
water, which like happening, causes the leaves to be yealowe and full of holes
or lythie and feeble, or else dry, through which of necessity they must feeble
and die.

If the Husbandman or owner would have Colewortes tender and pleasant (as before
uttered) let him break off in the s^tting again the outward leaves, for the
inward leaves in the growing, will after become better of taste, and
pleasanter in sauoure, than the outward leaves were.

The red Colewortes naturally grow through the abounda^ce of hot dung, or
through the watering or well moystenyng of them with ye Lies of wine, or else
by the planting of the^ in hot places, where the sun daily shyneth a long
time together.

Never take the tops of the Romayne, crysped, nor the other, for your turn
and use, but always the thick leaves downewarde, from the head or tops.

All the sorts or kinds of Coleworts, may be planted at al seasons, so that
the times and Earth, be neither to cold nor to hot. When you mind to set them
again in holes made with a Dybbel, cut away the ends of the roots least in
the setting into the earth, they fold or bend to the ground, which harm them
greatly, and only those of a big growth are to be set again, which although
they slowly take root, yet are they caused the stronger. And ye roots of
these neither des^^e any soft dung, nor River mud to be anointed or laid
about them, nor to be set in a soft earth, in that they joy and prosper in a
ground meanly dry, although the outward leaves wyther, until the time a sweet
rain falling, recover their strength. Some water the younger Colewortes with
salt water, to cause them grow tender, etc. as before uttered.

Pliny (that incomparable searcher of the matter of nature) reports, that
pottes or other vessels, in which by water daily seethyng, ^ crust or parget,
so fast cleaves or is baked to the sides within, that the same with no
scouring can be gotten off, yet by seething the Colewort in this pot the
cruste immediately and with ease falls off.

Athenaeus writes, that the Coleworte ought not in any case to be planted or
sown near to the vine, nor the vine in like manner nigh to it, for such is the
great enmity between these two plants (as Theophrastus witnesses) that being
both in one plotte together, these so hinder one another, that the vine in
branches growing further, rather turns or bends back again, from the
Coleworte, than stretching toward it, and it yeldeth less fruit there
through. And the same to be true ( Pliny affirms) the wine in the Butte or
Hogg^sheade to be corrupted, both in sauoure and taste, through the Coleworte
put into it, but the wine again to be restored, through the leaves of the
Beete steped in it. By which argument or proof. Androcides singular in
knowledge (as the like Pliny writes) reported, that the Coleworte grealye
avails against drunkenness. Of which, it is now a common exercise among
the Egiptians, that greatly love wine, to boil ye Coleworte with their meats,
yt in eating of the^ like prepared, they may so anoyde ye annoyance of wine
after drunk. Paxamus (a Greek writer of Husbandry) reports, yt if any
pours a little quantity of wine by drops, into ye licour of ye Coleworte
boiling, ye same after seetheth no more, but quailed in strength is corrupted
and changed in licor. By a like man may contrary gather, yt the person which
would drink plenty of wine, without being overcome with the same, ought to
eat before a quantity of the raw Coleworte with meat. But for this matter,
hear the sentence of the singular man ( M. Cato) who wills the person
purposed to drink much wine at a feast, and to dine or suppe freely, to eat
before supper, as great a quantity of the raw Coleworte as he will, with good
vinegar, and being also set down to supper, to eat five leaves raw, these
then will cause him to be, as one that had neither eaten nor drunk, whereby he
may drink as much as he will, through the marvelous repugnancie of this Herb
with wine, as before uttered, and like noted by Agrius, in the worthy work of
M. Varro.

The Coleworte in like manner, ought not to be planted nighe to the Organye,
Ru^, nor Sowes bread, for the drying quality consisting in the^, so that
these either sown or planted nighe to the Coleworte, and other very moist
Herbs, do greatly hinder, and cause them to wyther. A like matter works the
Lauander, set in beds near to moist Herbs, through the heal consisting in
it, as the Radish does, which through ye proper tartness or sharpness being
in it, burns any moist and tender plant growing near to the same.

This also is worthy memory, which Athenaeus reports, that in Athens (in
time past) the Coleworte was wont to be prepared with meat for women with
child, in the steed of a certain defensitiue against annoyances.

There is also made of the Ashes of the Coleworte, infused in water, a salt,
in that the same possesses a Nytrous substance (as before uttered) through
whose benefit, if this be meanly boiled, and taken in broth (as we shall here
after write) does loose the belly.

The Physic helps and worthy secrets of the Coleworte.
THe Coleworte in the use of Physike, has so many properties, that peculiar
Pamphiletes the ancient, as Pythagoras, M. Cato, Chrisippus, Dieuches, and
sundry others, wrote of the virtues of the same. But of the monuments of these
men (none are extant) saving the same, which M. Cato, and Pliny, have left
to memory written. Therefore a few virtues of this Herb (and of the
worthiest) shall after be uttered.

First M. Cato writes, that this Herb cools and moystneth in the second
degree, and for the hardness of making water, which co^^th for the by drops
or very straightly, he wills to prepare the Herb after this manner, in
taking the Coleworte leaves clean picked, and after the bestowing of them in
scalding water, to let them sees a while, which as yet half raw, pour the
lycoure almost from them to these, then add a reasonable quantity, both of
Oil and Salt, but of cummyne a little, which done, let the whole sees a
while, then taking it from ye fire, and cooled, to sup a mease or draught of
the broth* and the Colewort leaves to eat, as soon as they be thus sodden
tenderer, which in like manner daily use, unto the time the patient be ^ased.

For all manner of ulcers, and swellings, use and apply the Coleworte
workmanly bruised, especially the small stalks and tender leaves of the same,
that the Greeks name Crambe, and with us, the common Coleworte, which like
ordered, purges the Canker sores, and in short time heals them, ye like of
which, no other medycine properly can do. But before the patiente lay them on,
he must diligently with much warm water, souple and wash the sores, after
apply or lay on twice a day the said Crambe or common Coleworte bruised: with
which remedy also, both loose joints and bruses, yea Canker sores and ulcers
in the Pappes of women, may meruailously be cured.

If the ulcer be so tender, that it can not suffer the sharp working of the
Coleworte, then mixing the Barlie meal with it, apply on such wise and the
report goes, that there is one simple, which like prevails against the
joint sickness or Ach of joints, as the raw Colewort diligently applied,
does, if the same finely shredde, be eat with Rue and the Coriander, or else
with a Corn or two of salt and Barlie meal. a^tly mixed with Oximel, the
same be noynted morning and evening.

That if a person hardly heateth or but little bruise says M. Cato) the
Colewort with wine, which after the hard wringing forth, and warmed in a
saucer, drop gentlye into the Ear, and in short time the patient shall feel
ye benefit of the same. These hitherto M. Cato, which accustomed to prove the
crypsed Coleworte especially, next the thynne with great leaves and big stalk.

Leaving further to w^^te of the virtues, which Cato in h^s Husbandry, and the
singular Pliny utter, I here mind to declare certain worthy practices of the
Greeks as (...) the Coleworte, and first they report, that the decoction of
the Coleworte drunk with pleasant wine, to procure the monthly course in
women, to these, the juice of the same mixed diligently with fine Honey, to cure
the eyes, it (...) wittily be dropped into the ^orn^^s of them.

That if any has eaten venomous Mushromes, he shall maruellously be helped, by
drincking the juice of the Coleworte.

Nor they omyt that the same does yield a mighty nourishment to the body in
such manner, that children eating of the Coleworte for a time, do the
speedilyer go alone.

The juice (as they report) drunk with white wine, for ^l days together,
cures both the disease of the Spleen and Jaundise, as the worthy Paxamus (in
his husbandly instructions) confirms. In which he reports, that three
parts of the Coleworte, with two parts of the round Alume steeped in
vinegar, cleanses the foul four^^ and leaprie, the same boiled and drunk
amendeth the voice and grief of the Arteries. For which cause many
students, use desirouslye this Herb.

To use also the seed and leaves, with Sylphium and vinegar bruised, and
applied on the grieved place, does perfitlie cure the byt, both of a dog mad
and not mad.

And if it shall happen through a distillation or Reume from the head, that the
Vuula or roufe to be fallen into the throat, the juice then of the raw
Coleworte applied to the head, will in short time recover, and stay the same
in the proper place, a secret in very deed, worthy to be noted.

The raw juice of the Coleworte drunk with wine, helps the bit of a serpent
or adder, the juice with ye meal of Fenigreke and vyneger artely mixed, and
either anointed or applied in plaster form, does effectuously cure the
Gout, Joynte sicknesses, yea filthy and old ulcers, as the worthy Dioscorides
writes. The juice also snuffed or drawn up into the nosethrils, purges very
well the head, and conveyed into the secret place with the meal of darnell,
draws the reddes or terms down.

The juice of the leaves anointed alone, or with barley meal beaten and myxed,
does in short time qualifye inflammations, and assuage great swellings, and
with salt both breaks Botches, and stays the sheading of hear.

The diseased of the Spleen, this raw eaten with vinegar does profit, after
the boiling mixed with Honey the same greatly preuayleth against eating ulcers,
and Canker sores.

The green stalks with the roots burned (or rather roasted under hot
imbers) which after the Artly mixing with old Barrowes grease, be in plaster
form applied, to the daily griefs of the flanckes or sides, does in short
time prevail.

The juice of the Coleworte myxed with the oil of Roses, and applied to the
foreheade, does remove the headache, procured by heat of the Sun. To this
Coleworte boiled, if you mix the oil of Almonds, and Juice of the sweet Pome
Granate, the same used, does in short time deliver a dry coughe.

The Colewort (after the opinion of certain skilful Physicians) is found to
be hard in digestion, swells the Belly, harmeth the flewmaticke (in that
the same increases humors) and harmeth women, having the red course on them,
for so much as the same increases such a flux.

If you would dry a moist belly, then after the Colewortes be half sodden
(by pouring forth all the first in a manner) pour in other warm water
speedily, which like boil again, until the Coleworte in this seething, shall
be tender and soft, and in eating, season it with a little pepper and salt:
but this may not be handled on such wise, if you would use it for loosing of the
belly, for then after the shifting of it out of the first hot licour, into a
pan standing fast by with oil and a little salt prepared, you must boil
again unto the time the same be ready.

The commended benefits of the distilled water of Colewortes.


THe leaves of the green and common Coleworte, are to be distilled in a fair
and apt time, about the beginning of June.

This water ministered or received unto the quantity of three ounces at a time,
morning and evening, stays wome^s reddes. The distilled water of the
Coleworte, profits the birth of child, when the time of delivery is at
hand, if a Napkin wete in it be applied often to the nose, to smell unto, for
by that means may she happily be delivered. The like quantity druncke,
healpeth the dropping of the vryne: And druncke unto the quantity of three
ounces, at a time, morning and evening, stays a loose Belly.

The Physic helps of the water of the red Coleworte.
THe leaves of the red Coleworte gathered, are to be distilled in the end
of May.

This water drunk in the morning fasting, unto the quantity of six or seven
ounces at a time, softneth a hard belly, and three ounces at a time used (for
a month together) puts away the gyddynesse of the head: this water
profits against the Apoplexy, and convulsion or Cramp in the members,
either drunck or anointed on the grieved places. This water helps the
trembling and quiueryng of members, if those be often rubbed and suppled with
it, and the water suffered to dry these into parts by it self.

The linen clothes wet in it applied on inflame (...), puts away the heat,
and ceasseth or ^^ageth the sw^lling^ and orderly drunk, heals ulcers, both
within and without the body, so that the ulcers without, be applied with linen
clo^^^s, both morning and evening.

What worthy instructions to be concey^ed in the sowing and ordering of the
Beete for the Po^te. Chapter. 2.
THe Beete more often eaten at poor men's tables, ought to be bestowed in a
most fat Earth, and sown at any season, but rather the Seeds to be
committed to the Earth about the middle of December, and unto March, and like
in August, to possess Seeds, which may endure for three years. The Seeds
ought rather to be thick than thin sown in be^dde, and shot up to some
growth, as that four or five leaves be sprung above the Earth, then in the
Summer time, the plants are to be removed, if the beds before were moystned
or wet with flowers, as the singular Columella writes: but if the ground be
dry in the Harvest time, then to remove them where shoures lately fell and
softened the Earth.

The Beete loves or ioyeth to be often dug about, and to be fed with much
dung, for which cause, the young plants to be set again, ought after the
ends of the roots cut off, and the tops of the leaves clipped, to be
striked or anointed about with new Cow Dung, and then bestowed in beds a
good distance asunder, which after the plants be more grown up, to be
diligently weeded about, and the unprofitable weeds thrown away, for by that
means they grow the fayrer and bigger, being as I said bestowed in fat
Earth and well dunged.

The Beete may be caused to grow big and broad as ^ostion in his Greek
instructions of Husbandr^e affirms: if before the Beete shall be grown up
into a stem, and shot forth in stalks, the owner lay upon ye head a broad
Tile, Posthard, or some other thing of weight, to press the top gently
down, for by that practice or means in the weighty bearing down, the Beete
is caused to spread into a breadth with the leaves.

The Beete becomes the whiter and far greater, if the Husbandly Gardener
annoynte or cover the root with new Ox or Cow dung, and that he cut the
root and top of the young Beat* as the Leeke handled before the setting, and
after a bigger growth to p^asse it down as before uttered. To have the Beete
grow read, water the plant with red Wine Lies or set the same in a hot
place, where the Sun daily shines long. The Beete roasted in Imbers, takes
away the stinking smell and sauoure of Garlike eaten, if the same be eaten
upon or after the Garlike, as the Greek Menander has noted. This is
marvelous to hear by the Seed of the Beete, that it yields not the whole
perfection or perfect Seeds in the first year, but an increase in Seeds
somewhat more the second year, and in the third year a full perfection, from
the first sowing. And Pliny reports, that the Beete speedie^ comm^th
forward with the old Seed, than with new for which cause the matter
demanded of a skillful Gardener reported of experience, that the Seeds of the
Beete to sow, ought not to be gathered, before the Beete had borne a third
year, after the first sowing of which Seeds sown in due time of the Moon,
the best Beetes come, and this not to be forgotten, that when the taste of Wine,
through the Colewort (as before uttered) is corrupted in the vessel, the same
again by the sauoure of the Beete, as through the leaves put into it, is
recovered. These hitherto of the Beete.

The Physic benefytes of the Beete.
FIrst all the kinds of the Beete, have a cold and moist quality, and the
white Beete as Diphilus the Husbandly Physician reports, loses the belly,
and the red Beete, moves or provoke vryne, Galen affirms this Beete to
be endued with a nytrous quality, through which it both purges and cleanses
filth, which virtue is more effectuous in the white, in so much that it
causes the belly laxatiue, and purges the body of evil humors, yet the fame
passed to the stomach, byteth and plucketh it. The juice of the common Beete
drunk, louseth the belly, but the same harmeth the stomach, in pinching or
biting it, especially those persons which have a tender and delicate stomach,
so that the Herb is better commended sodden, than the raw juice used.

The juice of the Beete mixed with the oil of bitter Almonds, after the
heating in a sawcer, supped or drawn up into the nosethrills, does greatly
healp the stopping of ye nose, and recover smelling thorough the purging or
clensing of the head. The root of the Beete boiled in water, and three or
four drops of the licoure dropped into the ears, does remove the rage and
pain of the. And the juice of the Beete rubbed in the gummes, does aswage the
raging of them. The juice of the raw Beete, anointed on any bald place of the
head procures ye hear to grow, and kills Lyse. The decoction of the leaves
and roots, do also cleanse the head of Nules and Dandrie. The Beete after the
tender boiling* applied on Whel^es, and blisters of skalding or burning, does
in short time heal them. The juice of the Beete, drunk with Cumin or Dyll
Seeds, remoueth the gripings of the Belly. The black or read Beete boiled
with the pulse Lentiles, and the same received, stays a loose Belly, which
(as I above said) the white Beete loses. This white Beete also ^^dden and
eaten with raw Garlike, does drive away the Worms of the Belly. The Beete
boiled, healpeth the obstructions or stoppings of the Liver, more than the
great Mallows or hollie Oak does, especially when the same is eaten with
Mustard or Uinegre, and eaten in like manner as with Mustard or Uinegre, does
maruellously aswage and healp the corrupted Spleen. The juice avails against
the holy (...) S^ingles. This Herb is rather eaten after this manner, for
Physic causes, than for nourishment, in that there is but a small nourishment
of this, as of all other Pot Herbs, which to the full eaten of at a time, or
often eaten, does not only grype and bite the stomach, but increases evil
humors as well in the healthful, as sick persons.

The special effects of the distilled water of the white Beetes.
THe time of the destilling of this Herb, is in the end of June, and that
both the leaves and stalks together. The new water of the white Beete, drunk
morning and evening, unto the quantity of four ounces at a time, does
maruellously prevail against the Sun, in that the same consumes it. This
quantity like drunk, preuayleth against the grief of the Stone, in that it
purges the Loins and Kidneis. Th^^ ceasseth, the ^^xing pain of joy (...)
aches, by applying wette clothes on the ^late^ (...) it.

What fate drawn and (...) to be learned, in the sowing and setting of the
Blete. Chapter. 3.
THere are two kinds of this Blete, as the white, and the red, or black,
both at this day very well known through their growing as common in the field
as Garden. The stalks and leaves of the red wax so read in the growing,
that they appear as dyed with a scarlet color, but after a further growth,
in time, these from that color are changed into a purple, and at length wax
black of ye eye, of which the same also is named o^ (...) the black Bleete.
The root besides of this Herb in the breaking, appears so red as any
blood.

The white Blete possesses or rather ^^^deth forth branches and leaves like
to the Beete, and the same without any sharpnes or biting, being unsavory, and
each is of the same condition, that it spedely springs in the Garden, as
Pliny reports.

And the white or read Blete may be sown in any earth, but rather in a well
dressed ground, in the month of March, as the skillful Neapolitane Ruellius
wills, which strongly grown in the Earth, or fully come up, continues and
yearly renews of it self, without any proper sowing, so that in time this
so takes root by the seeds yearly falling, that the Gardener after can
hardely weed the same out of his ground, if he would wherefore this once sown
in a fertile Earth, prospers many years by the yearly yeride and falling of
the Seeds, and requires neither raking nor weeding about it, as the worthy
Palladius reports.

The Physic healpes and commodities of the Blete.
THe worthy Galen in his Book ^span writes that the Blete is a Pot Herb
much and often eaten of the s^^pler ^^te, and in quality cold and moist.

This as Pliny writes is thought to be unprofitable to ye stomach, and so
much molesting the belly, that in some ^h^s moves and causes the Choler to
increase, (...) the (...) of the (...). Y^^ this moves also vomitings, with
gripings of the Belly, (...) and stirred up, which by the daily or too much
eating of it at a time proceeds, yet the Blete of practice known, does
less harm the stomach and belly, if the first water powered forth, and the
soft Herb put into a Pan, be fried with Oil or Butter, and a little Salt
added, or Uinegre, and so eaten. But this notwithstanding may not be often
eaten, nor to the full at a time, for so much as this (of experience known)
procures vomiting, and engenders pain in the stomach, griping in the
bowels, and to be laxatiue, through the moving of Choler. And in the eating
also this is to be remembered, that the Herb be not eaten with Oil alone,
and a little Salt, but rather with Uinegre added for the more part, in yt the
same otherwise is known to be enemy to the stomach. This Herb (as above
uttered) has a property in softning the Belly, especially when the force of
it is increased, by some other slipperie and clammie matter. These hitherto
Galen. This notwithstanding drunk in Wine (as Pliny reports) preuayleth
against the bitte of a Scorpion, and laid in plaster form, on the thick
skin of the feet, and in like manner, for the beating pain of the Temples,
and with Oil on the Milte, does greatly profit. And the worthy Hipocrates
writes, that the same eaten in the manner (as before taught) does restrain or
stay the Terms. These hitherto Pliny.

What diligence and skill is required in the sowing and setting of the Garden
Arage. Chapter. 4.
THe Garden Orage for the Pot, ought by the agreement of the skillful, to be
sown in the Month of March and April, and in ye other Months following,
unto Harvest, the apt seasons and times herein considered. But in some places
are the Seeds bestowed in the Month of December, in a well dressed and dunged
Earth, and the plants better prosper, being thin sown. These also may be
sown by themselves in beds, and together with other Herbs, and they always
desire to be cut or broken off with an iron instrumente, that they cease not
yielding forth of young. The Orache ioyeth in the often watering, if the season
and ground be very dry. The Seeds of the Arage ought diligently to be
covered, incontinent after they are bestowed in the Earth, and the roots of
the Herbs to be often dug under, and left hollow of Earth, that the
roots may grow within the stronger.

This Herb is supposed to grow^ the greater, being not removed at all, and
for that cause the plants thin bestowed in beds, do evermore joy and
increase the better. The plant in like manner increases and becomes the
sooner great, through the often and diligent weeding exercised about the same.
To be brief, this plant after the mind of Rutilius requires to be watered all
the hot and dry seasons, unto the time of Harvest, in that the same
delights and increases the faster, through the daily moisture bestowed on it.

The Physic benefytes of the Orache.
THe Seeds of this Herb may be kept to use for four years, and these
through their clensing quality, healpe greatly the stopping of the Liver,
causing the sheading of the Gaul, or yellowe Jandise. Two drammes of the
Seeds bruised, ministered with two ounces of Honey, and a draught of warm water,
and drunk fasting, does on such, wise by vomiting, cast up Choler. The
Herb in quality is known to be cold in the first degree, and moist in the
second, through which reason it softneth the belly. The Herb smallie
nourishes, in that the licour or juice of it is waterie and slipperie, through
which it lightly loses the belly, and the leaves after the brusing laid in
plaster form on hot impostumes and swellings, and like on the Shingles, do
both speedily cool and heal them. The Seeds after the brusing, taken with a
quantity of Honey, and the same sundry times, healpeth such as fetch the wind
hardly. The Seeds like used, do expel the Worms in the Belly, and provoke
vomiting. Pythagoras greatly misliked the Orach, in that the same (as he
affirmed) caused by the often eating both a palenesse of face, and the kings
evil. But the worthy Dioseorides far^e otherwise judged, in that he affirmed
the Arache Seeds to healp the Jandise. The Arache also helps such, as have
a hot Liver. If the Herb Mercury with the Orach be diligently boiled, and
the broth sundry times used, it does both loose the Belly, and delivers the
pain of the Bladder. The person daily using the decoction or broth of the
Orach, with the Herb Mercury and Beetes, for a time together, does speedely
deliver and rid the Agew, The Orach eaten, is thought profitable for the
person spitting blood. The Herb bruised and applied to the belly, not only
cleanses the defaultes or corrupt matter within the privy place, but ceasseth
in short time the paynefull grief of the Matrice. The Orache bruised and laid
in plaster form on any member hurt either with Thorn or Nail, does with
expedition draw the same forth, and heals it. The Herb boiled with honey,
and applied on rough nails of the fingers, does within short time loose them
off. The Orache bruised, and after the mixing with honey, applied in plaster
form, does in short time remove the aching pain of the hot Gout in the
feet. The Herb so tender and soft boiled, as any other Pot Herb, and
eaten of the patient, does not only soften the belly, hardened or costiue by
heat, but remoueth diverse swellings.

What singular skill and secrets to be known in the sowing, removing, and
setting again of the worthy Herb named Sperage. Chapter. 5.
THe field and garden Sperage, ioyeth in a fat, moist, and well dr^ssed Earth,
and the Herb grown up to height, has by every leaf growing forth, a red
Bearie hanging down, in which a Seed is, that the Herb in the sowing
comes of.

The Seeds to be committed to the Earth as the worthy Didymus in his Greek
instructions of Husbandry reports, ought to be bestowed in the Spring time,
into little holes of three fingers deep, in which the owner or Gardener may
put two or three Seeds together, well half a foot distante one from the
other, which thus bestowed, require after no more travel nor care for the
first year, saving the digging about, and plucking up of weeds growing among
them.

But for the sowing and increase of the Sperages, it shall be to great purpose
and commodity, to hear the witty precepts and instructions of Marcus Cato,
Columella, Pliny, and Palladius like agreeing.

The Seeds (say they) as much as three fyngers can take up to one time,
may the owner or Gardener workemanly put, and lyghtely cover, in Earth
both fat and dunged, and in very little furrows, so straight made as a
line, which on this wise handled, will by the fortith day after grow so
inward in the Earth, that the roots shot forth, will clasp and fold one in
another, as if they joined together in one, and for the same named of the
auntiente Gardeners Earth Spunges. If the places in which you purpose to
commit the Seeds shall be dry, then these laid in soft dung, lying allow
in the furrows, shall on such wise be ordered and covered, as if they lay or
were bestowed in little Hyues. But in a contrary manner shall the owner or
Gardener work and do, in continual moist places, for the Seeds in like
places shall be bestowed on high ridges, workemanly raised with dung, that the
moisture may lesser annoy the plants in the growing, which only ought to be
fed or watered with the moisture passing by, and not still to abide in that
moisture, to be cloyed with it. The Seeds on such wise bestowed, will yield a
Sperage in the first year, which the owner or Gardener shall then break, or
cut off beneath. But if the owner assay to pull at it near the ground, the
small roots (as yet tender) and weak in the Earth, may happen to rise and
follow with the whole Sponge, which therefore workemanly broken off, ought
thus to be fed and nourished in one proper place, growyng still for two years
with dung, and diligent weeding. In the other years following, the Sperage shall
not be broken off by the stalk, but plucked up by yt root, that the same may
so open the eyes of his branching, for except the plant be handled on such
wise, the stemmes broken off, will not increase the eyes of the Spunges, but
rather grow as blind, so yt these will not after suffer the Sperage to yield
or send forth the proper increase. The same shall ye Gardener preserve, of
which he gathered the seed, and burn after the croppes and knobbed ends or
iointes of the same Herb. After this, about the Winter time, shall the owner
lay or bestow on the Spunges, both ashes and dung, which the learned M. Cato
rather wills to be Sheep dung. There is another manner and way of sowing,
by Spunges only, which after two years, ought to be removed into a Sunny and
well du^ged place. The like furrows ought to be made well a foot distante one
from the other, and not above twelve fyngers deep, in which the tender and
young Spunges are so to be set, that lightly covered with Earth, they may
easily spring and shoot up. But in the Spring time, before they shall come up
or appear above the ground, the Gardener or owner with a forked Iron, commonly
named a debbill shall so loose the earth, yt the end of it may appear out, and
the root of the Herb loosed from the ground, may by that means increase of a
more bigness.

The same M. Cato wills the plant to be raked and diligently weeded about,
but so handled in the digging about or weeding, that the roots of the plant
be not loosed, or in the weeding by it be otherwise febled in the treading
down.

In the winter time, the little grove of Sperages shall be covered over with
thin and light Matteresses of straw, least it should be bitten and greatly
endamaged, with the frostes and cold air, which in the Spring time shall be
opened and uncovered again, and fed with dung about the roots, that the
plants may the speedier come forward and increase, through the comfortable
feeding of the dung and moisture, orderly done.

The worthy Didimus (in his Greek instructions of Husbandrye) reports, and
after him the learned Pliny that many Sperages do spring up through the
horns of wild Rams broken into gross powder, and these strewed along in
little furrows, and after the light covering with Earth, often watered, which
although it seemed not credible to the worthy Dioscorides, and that he much
mislyked the reason of the same, yet if ye Gardener or owner shall make a proof
or trial, he will after confess (I dare affirm) this experimente to be most
true.

There be which far maruellousser report, even that the whole horns of
Rams, not broken a sunder, nor cut into small pieces, but only boared through
in many places, and then bestowed in the Earth, to bring forth or yield in
short time the Sperages, which if the owner would possess of them for all
the year to feed on, when he gathers the fruit, must then in the digging
about (as the said Dydimus writes) open those roots, which scatter and
spread in the top of the Tyrfe, for the young plant thus ordered, will
speedily send forth new tender stemmes, and yield Sperages, which lightly
boiled in water and fat broth, and to the same both salt and oil or sweet
butter orderly mixed, and a little quantity of vinegar poured upon, will after
yield a singular delight to the eaters thereof.

But in this place I think it necessary to be remembered, that the Sperages
require a small boiling, for to much or long boiled, they become corrupt or
without delight in the eating.

Of which the worthy Emperor Drufus, wylling to demonstrate the speedye
success of a matter, was wont to say, the same should be sooner done, than
the Sperages boiled.

As touching the making of the sauce or pickle, the tender stalks sprinkled
with salt, and wrought up in round heaps, ought so to be let alone to
sweat in the shadow, after to be diligently washed with the own licoure,
until they be sufficientlye abated and cleared of the moisture in them, at
the least, cleansed from the pickell, and in the laying on of a weight (after
such manner) pressed forth. Then pour ^^to an apt vessel two parts of vinegar,
and one of the pickel, which workma^ly thicken with dry Fennel seeds, in such
manner as the tender stalks and leaves, may well be pressed down and covered in
the same; and that ye lycor retch up unto the top or brimme of the Earthen
pot.

The Physic commodities and helps of the Sperage.
THe fruit and seed are used in medicine, and endure for a year in perfect
virtue, the Herb by nature heateth and moystneth, and so the same refourmeth
and helps the Palsy, the Kings evil, and Stragurie. The Garden Sperage
prepared with meat and eaten, both not only help a hard mylte, but stopping
of the Liver. The root of the Sperage boiled in wine, and ministered in apt
time of the Moon, recouereth ye shedding of ye Gaul, and is the same by
experience known. The meat of the Sperage, is reported to be most profitable
for ye stomach, which with Cummyne myxed, both tem^^eth the swelling of the
belly, and chollicke.

The meat of the Sperage orderly prepared, and eaten, does not only procure
urine (easilye to pass) but dissolueth, and sends forth the small stones in
the Bladder, through the juice of the Lemmon added to, which experience will
well confirm. There be some which minister the root (artly boiled with sweet
or white wine) for griefs of the woman's privy place. There be which affirm,
that the person shall not be stinged with Bees, if he annoynte the naked parts
with Sperage and oil bruised together. The decoction of the root, not only
profits the persons hardly making water, but aswageth all manner of grief and
pain of the gummes, teeth, and mouth, by holdyng the same for a time, and
washing the mouth therewith.

The worthy Pliny writes, that the Sperages (workmanly boiled) do maruelously
profit and help the griefs both of the breast and Chyne of the back. To
these, the Sperage to procure and move forewarde the veneriall act, and to
loose gently the belly.

Dioscorides reports, that the Sperages either roasted or sodden, do mytigate
the dropping pain of the wine, the difficultnesse of the same, and the
perilous flixe Disenteria. Galen affirms, the Sperage to clear the kidneys
and stopping of the Liver, especially with the root and seeds.

What skill and observation to be followed, in the sowing, and ordering of the
Spynage. Chap. 6.
THis plant aptest for ye Lent time (or for yt the same oftener or more common
used in that season) may in any ground be bestowed, for it comes up very well
in every place. And the seeds are to be committed to the earth in the months
of September and October, to serve for the Lent insewing for yt it is the first
pot Herb, which is found in Gardens about the lent time. But in the months
of December, Januarie, February, and March, for all the summer following. And
this plant very well indureth the extremity of times and seasons, as the cold,
frostes, and Snow. And although Spynage comes well up in any ground, yet ye
earth ought to be diligently labored before, and the same to be somewhat moiste.
The plants after the coming up, which appear by the seventh day after the
sowing, need no weeding to be done about them, but only to clip off the tops of
the tender leaves, whereby they may^ grow up the comlier and fairer to ye eye.
If the Gardener would have the bed of Spinach endure a long time, and to
profit he ought to cut half the bed along at one time, and the other half,
at an other time. This pot Herb (after the tops cut and thrown away) ought to
be sodden without water, in that the same (in the seething) yeldeth much
moisture, for contented with the proper licoure, it refuses any other broth
added, so that this otherwise sodden, loses the kindly and natural juice of
the same, and besides to hastily drowned or overcome with the same. This being
very tender after the seething ought to be finely chopped with a wodden knife, or
otherwise stamped and turned often in the beating of it, which wrought up into
round heaps, and fried in the sweetest oil or butter, must so be prepared
with a quantity of Ueriuy^e and Pepper ^^used, that it may the more delight
the taste.

The Physic benefits and helps of the Spynedge.
This Herb for the pot, named Spynedge, moysteneth and cools (after the
mind of the skillful) in the end of the first degree. The Spynedge both
softneth the belly, and moystneth the body, and remoueth the grie^es of the
Breast and Lungs. This gathers wind in the body unless the excrementall
humor be sent forth by purge: but applied in hot causes this greatly
profits.

And if we may credit the Physician Serapion, this more nourishes than^ ye
Arage, loses the belly, and leaves after it a better nourishmente, yea
cleanses, mundifyeth, aswageth Choler, and profits both the breast and
lunges. The Herb boiled and applied, helps the soreness and grief of the
throat, proceeding of blood, and the red Choler. The daily eating of this
Herb, does maruellously profit such having a hoarse voice, and that hardly
fetch breath, and much molested with the coughe, if the Herb after the proper
seethyng and ordering (as above taught) be either fried with sweet Butter, or
the oil of sweet Almondes, and that to it Ueriuyce and Pepper bruised, be
wittilye added. For on such wise handled, the same (daily eaten) does expel
evil humors, where in a contrary manner, the decoction and Herb simply being
daily eaten, does (by agreement of the skillful) engender in like condition
Melancholy, as the daily eating of Lettuce does. The Herb prepared (as before
taught) and eaten with the decoction of the same drunk, does not help without
doubt the grievous pains, and ache of the back, but loses a costiue belly.

What skill and diligence is required, in the sowing and ordering of the Garden
Sorrel. Chap. 7.
THe Sorrel of the Garden, although it will well enough come up in ground not
dressed, yet the seeds are evermore bestowed in labored Earth, not dunged at
all, in the month of April, and to be much and often watered, until they
be well come up, in that the same especially ioyeth being placed near to water.

And the Gardener mynding to possess the seeds of the Sorrel, ought, after
certain leaves come up, to remove the plants, in letting them grow, unto the
full rypenes of the seeds, which after the through drying, to be kept unto the
sowing time. The Sorrel come up, neither well abides frostes, cold, nor
ouermuche moisture, and to have the beds of Sorrel continue seemly to the
eye, all the summer through, let the owner or Gardener cut the tops of the
Sorrel, three or four times in the year.

The like diligence may be employed, in the sowing and ordering of the Garden
Pimpernel.

The Physic commodities and helps of the Sorrel and Pympernel.
THe Herb Sorrel cools and dries in the third degree, and the Herb
eaten, remoueth lothsomnesse, and procures an apetite to meat. The Sorrel
sauced with vinegar, and eaten fasting in the morning, is a preservative for
the Plague. The leaves wrapped in paper, and roasted under hot imbers, which
after the brusing and mixing with a little oil of Roses, applied on swellings,
does bring them in short time to mattering.

The seeds of the Sorrel bruised, and druncke either with water or wine,
aswageth the dangerous flyxe Dissenteria, and the pain of the belly of a
continual flyxe, and the abortement of the stomach. The roots of the Sorrel
boiled with vinegar, or raw employed and anointed, do heal the Leprye and
Ringwormes, and rough nails, but it behooves to rub over the places before,
with salt Nyter and vinegar in the hot Summer. A decoction of the roots
ceasseth the ych of the body, if with the same the body in a Bath be gently
rubbed and suppled, the root besides boiled in wine aswageth both the grief
or pain of the ears and teeth. Many in removing of the kings evil, wear
the root about their neck. The juice of ye Sorrel, tempered with oil Olyue,
and rubbed on the head, remoueth the grievous pain of the head proceeding of
an intemperate hotnesse. The roots boiled with wine and drunk or eaten, remove
any sickness coming of heat, as the Jaundise, proceeding of the liver or
Mylte, in the like manner druncke, and the roots after the brusing applied in
plaster form to the privy place, do stay the reddes of women long
continuing. The seeds boiled in wine, do stay all manner fluxes of the belly,
and remove the swelling of the mylte. The leaves of Sorrel well bruised, and
applied on the wreast, do aswage the burning of the Fever.

The Pympernell of the Garden, heateth and dries in the second degree. The
Herb is especially applied for poison, in that the same cle^seth all the
outward fylth of the body. The root boiled in wine, and drunk, remoueth the
evil and venomous blood from the heart, of which the plague is easily caused to
proceed, and ceasseth the headache. If a man be wounded unto the skul, the
juice of this Herb dropped into the wound, and applied upon, does in short
time recover and heal yt same without grief. This dropped into ulcers and
other wounds, cures them. As for proof take a cock, and ^trike him into the
skull with a knife, but not pearcing it, after take the juice of this Herb,
and instyll two or three drops into the wound, and it will immediately bring
the same unto a skar. The Herb mixed with Rockette seed and vinegar, and
drunk, moves sweat, expels poison and evil humors, boiled with wine and
drunk, remoueth the disease of the Hyppes, and especially helps an evil
cough, and purge^h the breast. The Herb boiled in wine and received, breaks
ye stone of the Kidneys and Bladder, and remoueth ye strangurie. In the same
manner employed, profits against ye gripings of the bowels. But this
especially avails against the stopping of the Liver and Mylte. The Pympernel,
to be brief, helps the stone, moves urine, aswageth the strangurie, purges
the breast, and expels the poison of the plague from the heart. The juice
of it boiled, and drunk before the fit of the Ague, puts away any Fever. The
root may also be canded, as ye Ginger, with Sugar or honey, and to prevail the
like against the above said diseases.

The Herb boiled, remoueth a continual Ague: the juice of the herb, a
tertiane Ague, so that the same be drunk before the fit.

A worthy experiment against the Phtysicke of the Lungs Take of y^ Pympernel
brought into very fine powder two ounces, of new Pympernel water, and of Sugar,
as much as shall fuffise, making thereof an Electuarie, of which take daily two
drammes.

The commended helps of the distilled waters, both of the Sorrel, and
Pympernel.
THe Sorrel is to be distilled, with the whole substance, in the spring time.
The water tempered with T^iacle, prevails against the plague. The water
drunk, remoueth al manner of inward heates, ceasseth thirst, helps the Liver
and Mylte, by the drincking and employing of the same, with linen clothes wet
in it. It remoueth the shingles being applied and drunk, it helps scalding or
burning, and puts away the kings evil. It anayleth in Agues, to cool the
burning heat. etc.

The root and Herb with the whole substance, shred and bruised together, ought
to be distilled in the end of May. The water of the Pimpernel drunk morning
and evening, unto the quantity of three or four ounces at a time, does help
the stone of the kydneys and Bladder, and purges the Reins. This helps the
plague, drunk within six days once. It profits women, whose Matrice is
ever cold, and sends down ye reddes, This drunk, with a little quantity of
Castorie in fine powder, puts away the shaking of the members. This drunk
unto the quantity of four ounces fasting, preserves the person that day from
any natural sickness, in that it remoueth all manner of grief from the
heart, expels evil humors, and procures urine. This drunk, like profits
against poison, it causes also a clear skin and fair both in face and
hands, if the party for a time washes daily those parts with it.

What skill and diligence required, in the workmanly sowing and ordering of the
Borrage and Buglosse. Chap. 8.
THe Borage, and Buglosse or Longdebeefe serving for the Pot, when the leaves
are yet tender, and their flowers for Sallettes, require to be sown in the
month of Auguste, and in September, to serve the winter time, and in the
month of April (the Moon increasing) for the Summer time, in that the seeds
(especially of the Buglosse) prosper not so well, to be sown at any other
time, for so much as it ioyeth to be placed in a warm and Su^ny place, the
Earth before diligently labored and dressed. These may the owner or Gardner
remove (after certain leaves sprung up) at any time of the year, and to be
placed in Beds, either alone, or in Bordures, round about the new Beds
of other Herbs. The seeds both of the Borage and Buglosse require to be
gathered in a manner half ripe, to the end they fall not out of their Husk.
And the whole Herb with the seeds of either ought to be laid in some high
place, open to the warm Sun, that they may rypen the speedier, which full
ripe, rub tenderly between the hands the seeds forth on a linen cloth or
sheet, and these may you keep for two years.

The Physic benefits and singular helps both of the Borage and Buglosse or
Longdebeefe.
THe Borage, which otherwise of Galen and Dioscorides, is named the Buglosse
or Longedbeefe, is (by the agreement of the skillful) affirmed to be moist and
hot in the first degree, which the self same Galen witnesses, saying, that
the Buglosse is of a moist and temperate hotnes, for which cause, steeped in
wine, it is thought to procure a gladsomnesse and joy to the drincker of it.

The Borage boiled in wine, and the same drunk, procures good blood in the
creature. The juice of this Herb mixed artely with Sugar, and drunk fasting,
maruellously helps the gyddinesse or swimming of the head. The Sirupe made
of the juice of Borage, to which a like weight of Sugar, and a little quantity
of the powder of the bones of the Heart, these after the workmanlye boiling,
drunk fasting for a time together, maruellously recouereth the trembling and
beating of the heart. If the juice with the simple Sirupe of Borage and Senee
equally myxed, shall be drunk morning and evening, does not only increase
memory, but remove Melancholy. The flowers raw eaten with distilled vinegar
and Sugar, do not only procure good blood, but stay the tremblyng of the
heart, which like they in wine, and drunk, prevail. The flowers dried and
preserved for a year, do like profit in all the abouesayd griefs, as the
Herb does. The Syrup of Borage used for a time, prevails against the
Kings evil.

The flowers steeped for a time in the oil of sweet Almondes, and after the
wringing forth of this tenderly applied to the stomach, and region of the
heart, do maruellously comfort the weak patient. The Syrupes both of the
Borage and Buglosse, are applied in Physic, for the only purpose of
comforting.

To such having weak Lungs, and a dry cough, the Buglosse stieped in Wine and
drunk, greatly preuayleth: for the roughness of the throat and cough only
apply or drink (as Galen instructs) the Buglosse boiled in Mulse, or water
and Honey. The Buglosse stieped in Wine, and tempered with Mellicrate, procures
after the drinking gladsomnes to the creature. It purges the red Choler,
proceeding of overmuch heat, being often drunk with sweet Wine. This drunk
in the like manner, recouereth the Cardiacke passion, yea it expels the
noisome humors of the Lungs.

The juice of the Buglosse, remoueth the swelling of the feet, being drunk
with warm water.

The Wine for a time drunk, in which the Buglosse shall be stieped, does
preserve a good memory.

The same wine of the flowers stieped and drunk for a time, not only
comfort greatly the heart, but engenders good blood in the creature.

The figure of the furnace named Balneum Mariae.


The singular healpes and Physic benefytes of the distilled waters, both of
the Borage and Buglosse.
THe commended time for distilling of the Borage, is for the more part, about
the end of the Month of May, when as it bears flower, which wholly with
the root, shredde and bruised, ought then to be distilled in such a like
furnace and vessel, as here before is placed, named of the worthy Physicians
Balneo Mariae, for that the same more naturally distilleth all manner of
delectable flowers, and comfortable Herbs, than any other dry Furnace by
Ashes does.

The water destilled in this Furnace, drunk unto the quantity of two or three
ounces at a time, both morning and evening, does maruellously remove and
assuage, both the gripings and swellings of the belly, yea this cures
Dissenteria, and the hardness of fetching breath.

This water drunk fasting, unto the quantity of two ounces, does not only
comfort the heart and brain, but renders a healp to memory and wit, yea
purges the evil blood, and remoueth phrensinesse.

This water eases the grief and pain, caused by the sting and venoming of a
Spider or Be, by laying linen clothes wet in it on the place. This with the red Sarcenet laid on the eyes, does not only aswage the pain of them, but
procures a cleerenes of sight, yea the water applied on the ears and neck,
does remove the ringing and pain of the ears. The water of the Borage
flowers drunk, preuayleth by a like manner in all those griefs, as the water
of the proper Herb does, yet the water of the flowers accounted the
worthier, for that the same purges the blood, expels Melancholy, and
maruellously comfort the heart. This also amendeth every manner of
distillation of the head, by drinking two ounces every evening, before the
going to bed. This drink profits against burning Fevers, and the Jaundise,
and drunk or applied with linen clothes wette in it, does speedely cool and
amend the heat of the Liver. The Buglosse ought rather to be destilled in
the beginning of June, in the like furnace before placed, named Balneum Mariae.
This distilled water drunk, profits all such, which are molested with the
Flixe, Disenteria, the paineful fetching of breath, and decay of mind, besides
the penslue and troubled, and those which are weak of brain, if this be
drunk morning and evening with Sugar, unto the quantity of two or three
ounces at a time. This drink preuayleth against all hot sicknesses, agewes,
defaultes of the Lungs, the Liver, and Milt: it purges also the blood, and
remoueth the pricking about the heart and breast.

The water of the Herb drunk, amendeth the Jandise, cleanses the Leprie and
Scabbes, and stays the stilling of the head. This ceasseth the pain of the
head, and burning of the eyes, applied with linen clothes on the head or eyes,
this in like manner handled, remoueth the ringing or sound of the Ears. The
Buglosse flowers, and Herb, of each two great handfuls, to which added of
Sinamon four ounces, a little bruised before, these together destilled in
Balneo Mariae, do yield a most precious water, for the comforting of the heart
and brain, if the same in the daily taking, be drunk with the confection of
Manus Christi, made in tables with pearls.

What skill and secre^es to be learned, in the sowing, removing and setting of
the Marigold. Chapter. 9.
THe Marigolde named of the Herbarians Calendula, is so properly termed, for
that in every Calends, and in each month this renueth of the own accord, and
is found to bear flower, as well in the Winter as Summer, for which cause, the
Italians name the same the flower of every month* but some term it ye Suns
flower, or the follower of the Sun, and is of some named the Husband man's
Dyall, in that the same shows to them, both the morning and evening tide.
Other name it the Suns Bride, and Suns Herb, in that the flowers of the
same follow the Sun, as from the rising by the South, unto the West, and by a
notable turning obeying to the Sun, in such manner, that what part of Heaven
he possesses, they into the same turned behold, and that in a cloudie and
thick air like directed, as if they should be revived, quickened, and moved,
with the Spirit of him. Such is ye love of it known to be, toward that royal
Star, being in the night time, for the desire of him, as pensive and sad,
they be shut or closed together, but at the noone time of the day fully
spread abroad, as if they with spread arms lo^ged, or diligently attended, to
embrace their Bridegroom. This Marigold is a singular kind of Herb, sown in
Gardens, as well for the pot, as for the decking of Garlandes, bewtifying of
Nosegayes, and to be worn in the bosom.

The Seeds of this flower, are commonly bestowed in a Husbandly and well
dressed Earth, but this rather done by the counsel of the skillful in the
increase of the Moon, whereby the flowers may grow the bigger and broader.
But to procure the flowers to grow the doubler, bigger, and broader, the owner
ought to remove the plants often, and to set them in new beds, lying in
Sunny places, herein considering at those times of removing, that the Moon
be increasing so nigh as you can.

Besides some will, that many Seeds be put together into one hole, in the
first quarter of the Moon, and to be sundry times watered, in the first coming
up of them, unless the moisture of the air otherwise healpe.

These after certain leaves spru^g up, if they be often removed and clipped by
due course of the Moon, yield a bigger, broader, and fayrer flower, and they
yield always more flowers in the Harvest, than in the Spring time.

The Physic benefytes and healpes of the Marigolde.
THe juice of the Herb and root, applied up in glister form, recouereth in
short time the Palsy members. The flowers and leaves dried, keep unto use,
for if a woman delivered of child, the after burden come not, kindle or burn
this Herb and flowers dried with wax, and with the same make a smoke below,
for this is a sure and laudable experiment, to bring them down (the child
before delivered) as the learned Brumfelsius reports. For the pappes of women
swelled, through the stopping and stay of the reddes, minister the flowers with
Spikenard and Wine, in that the same ceasseth or aswageth, and provoke the
monethlie course.

The flowers of the Marigolde boiled and drunk, stays the flux of pissing
blood.

The juice of the leaves wringed forth, and dropped into the ears, kills
the worms.

The rindes of the roots dried, brought into powder, and applied on foul
pushes, do heal them in short time.

The rind of the Marigolde pierces and digesteth evil humors, which boiled
in Wine and drunk, helps the stopping and other griefs of the Liver.

The flowers of the Marigolde stieped in Uinegre and Salt, and reserved,
reteyne their proper virtue for two years.

These comfort the stomach and procure an appetite to meat, yea they consume
the humors of the stomach, and heat a cold breast.

The said juice of the flowers mixed with a little pure vinegre warmed, and
rubbed well on the Teeth and gummes, is a sovereign remedy for the aswaging of
the grievous pain of the Teeth.

The juice of the flowers drunk unto the quantity of two ounces at a time, in
the fit of the Plague, shall speedely be helped, if the patiente (after the
drinking of the juice) lying on bed, be well covered with clothes, to sweat
thoroughly. The conserve of the flowers is a preparatiue against the plague. If
seven graynes weight of the juice of the flowers be drunk with three ounces
of white Wine, and repeated sundry mornings, it helps the quartaine.

The powder of the rindes of the roots of the Marigolde, mixed with the juice
of Fennel, Wine, and a little Oil, and boiled unto a thickness, to which a
little wax added for the apter making of it an ointment, and so applied on the
Milte or cold stomach, does greatly profit.

The commended healpes of the distilled water.
THe worthy Hieronymus a most expert Herbarian reports, that the distilled
water of the Marigolde flowers, drawn in Balneo Mariae, do recover al
defaultes of the eyes, whether these proceed of heat, or through cold
caused, and to procure clear eyes, besides the putting away of all griefs of
the head.

What skill industry and secrets to be learned, in the sowing and ordering of
the Parselie. Chapter. 10.
THe Parsely in the bestowing in the Earth, requires small labor and
diligence, and loves a stony and Sandy Earth, so that the same needs small
fatning, whereby it may well agree to be sown in shadowie places, near to
the Hedge or Herber in the Garden, and this especially requires much
watering, for the speedier shooting up. The old Seeds, if we may credit
Theophrastus, do sooner come up, yea and the elder Seeds are better for the
turn: the plants shot up, do endure a long time without sowing any more, in
such condition, that the owner or Gardener shall not need to sow or set of
the plants again, for five years after. The Parsely when it has growe^ a
year, it sends up or bears stalks and Seeds, and a yealowishe flower.
The new Seeds of the Parsely committed to the Earth, do most slowly come up
in beds, in that these not before the fortith, yea fiftith and sixtith day
after the sowing, do for the more part appear, as the learned Pliny
reports, yet this ease and commodity ensues, that once sown and come up
(as above uttered) it yearly increases of the own accord, without renewing
for many years. The Seeds as the worthy Neopolitane Rutilius witnesses; joy
in any earth, and as well in the cold, as warm places, saving the Seeds in
the first coming up require much moisture, through which watering, they come
so speedely strong, that after no air nor ground hinders them. Both the
Seeds and plants (as Columella instructs may prosperously be bestowed, to
increase the speedier, near to Springs, and little running waters. If the
owner or Gardener would have the leaves grow very broad then let him attend
to the words of the worthy Greek Florentinus, who wills to take up of
Parselie Seeds at one time, as much as can handsomely be holden between three
of the fingers, and these after the tying up in a thin or well worn linen
cloth, to be set into a shallowe hole with dung, handsomely mixed in the Earth,
which on such wise handled, will after come up and grow, with so large a
lease, for the increase of all the Seeds will then be joined, and shote up
together in one blade, as the worthy Rutilius has noted, and before him the
singular Columella. But ye Parsely shall grow biggest, (as the worthy
Florentinus reports) if ye owner by digging about ye roots, bestow chafe
about them, and after ye covering with lightearth, to water the^ well and often.
The Parsely may ye Gardener cause to grow crisped in leaf, if he thrust and
bestow the Seeds a little before the sowing in a ball stuffed with them,
which broken somewhat with a staff, and as they were spoiled, commit them
(as Columella wills) to the Earth.

Or the Gardener otherwise with lesser pain may procure them to grow crisped,
in what manner soever they be sown, if he turn on the bed and plants a
round stone, or big roller, as soon as the plants be somewhat grown up
above the Earth: and the like may the owner do with the plants come up, if he
tread them often down.

The best commended time, for committing of the Seeds to the Earth, is from
the mids of May, unto the Summer solstice in June, in beds thick together,
and to be often watered, for that these speedyer increase and come forward,
through the heat in the same season. If the owner or Gardener would have the
Seeds sooner break and shote up, let him infuse the Seeds for a certain
time in Uinegre, which bestowing in a well labored Earth, fill half the
beds with ashes of the Bean coddes. After the Seeds are thus sown, water
them often and lightely with a small quantity of the best Aqua vitae, and
soon after the sprinckling and moistning of the Beds, cover the beds over
with some piece of woollen cloth, to the end the proper heat ministered, breath
not away, for by that means, the plants within one hour will begin to
appear, so that the owner must then take off the cloth, and sprinckle or
moisten the plants appeared oftentimes, whereby they may the sooner shoot up
into a high stem or Blade, to the wonder of the beholders. To Florentinus,
do ^unius Columella, Pliny, and Rutilius agree, that there are two kinds of
the Parsely, as the Male and Female, the Male (as they describe it) has
blacker leaves, and shorter root: but the Female possesses crispeder leaves,
and hard, a big stem, in taste sour and hot: but neither of these two does
Dionisius and Chrisippus ye Physician, allow to be eaten with meat, as Pliny
writes: Although the same much used in Plinies time, as at this day, both in
brothes and sawces, for a better delight and appetit. They report, yt by the
often eating of the Female blades, worms engender in the body, and yt the
female eaten, does procure the woman barein, as ye Male the man. And further,
ye Parsely eaten of women with child, does cause ye birthes to have the falling
sickness, yet they affirm the Male to harm lesser, so yt for the same it was
not altogether misliked nor condemned of the ancient, among the wicked fruits.
Therefore it is not to be marvelled at, if ye late Phisitio^s do advise and
warn persons, having ye falling sickness, and women with child, not to eat ye
Parselie: To these, if the Greeks forbad Nourses, and women with child the
eating of Parselie with meat, although an other occasion may also ensewe of
the same, that it may hinder women's Milk Springs, and extinguish the coming
of milk: besid^s that, this procures the eaters of it, unto the venerial act.

Certain report, that the sick fishes in Pondes, are mightily recovered and
made lusty, through the Parsely laid in them.

There is nothing that does like sweeten the mouth, as the fresh and green
Parselie eaten, so that the Herb often eaten of them which have an unsavory
or stinking breath, and sends forth an odious smell to be abhorred, does in
short time maruellously recover and amend the same: A matter very commendable
and necessary, both for Maidens and widows, to deceive their wowers, by the
chawing and bearing about of the Grene and fresh blades, whereby they may so
remove for the present the strong smell of the breath, yawning or otherwise
issuing forth, and by the customably eating, send forth a sweeter breath.

Sundry in times past, preserved the blades of Parselie in a pickell, unto use,
which received or contained two parts of Uinegre, and a third part of Brine.

The Physic benefits and healpes of the Parselie.
THe Garden Parselie is hot in the beginning of the third degree, and dry in
the second, or it heateth and dries by nature in the second and third degree.
The juice of Parselie, Turpentine, Wheaten Meal, and the Oil of Roses, artely
mixed and boiled together with a little quantity of Sarcocolla, of which by
art, an abstersive or clenser made, does most perfectly cleanse and incarnate
ye ulcers of Carbuncles, and other impostumes. The Parselie boiled with leaves
of the Coleworte and Melilote, of which a plaster made with Otemeale, Oil of
Camomille, Dill, and Oil of Roses, and applied, does maruellousely resolve the
impostumes of the pappes, caused through the ranckling of Milk stayed back,
by part drying up the Milk, and part by purging the same.

The Parselie eaten either raw or sodden, does amend the stopping of the
Liver, provoke Urine, stays loosenes of the Belly, and has a property in
strengthening of loose parts.

The Parselie also has the nature of pearcing, for which cause it moves
vryne, and very much prevails against the stone, as well the seed, as root.

The Greek Florentinus writes in his husbandry, that the Parsely with
crummes of bread, applied in the steed of a plaster, does heal the Shingles,
but the decoction of the same drunk, to break the stone, and the like to
perform by applying outwardly.

To these, for such hardly making water and diseased in the kidneys to help
as well by the leaf, as by the root.

The black spots to restore to the proper color, if the decoction of the
seeds be applied upon, and to soften the hardness of the pappes, by applying
the leaves bruised on them.

Pliny writes, that the bruised seeds anointed with the white of an Egg, or
the seed boiled in water and drunk, to amend and help the kidneys, and
bruised in cold water, to profit and remove the ulcers of the mouth, this also
with old wine ministered, to break the stone in the bladder, which like does
the root perform.

This profits given for the Jaundise in white wine, and to such women whose
monthly courses do not orderlye proceed, or be stayed.

This is worthy to be noted, that the raw Parsely yields sweeter waters in
the drinking, as the worthy Pliny has noted, and to the mouth (as Galen
writes) the same pleasant and very delectable to the stomach.

The seed taken in meat, does expel wind in the body, the same bruised and
applied on a foul Scabbe, does very well cleanse, and procures a fair skin.

The seeds eaten, does remove the swelling of the stomach, and profits the
dropsy men, in that the seeds dry and pearce the evil humors, and consume
them.

The Parsely profits those persons, which have gotten the Leprie of
Fleumaticke humors. It cleanses the Liver, and remoueth the pain of the Loins
and Bladder.

A sauce prepared of the Parselye, with Sorrel and vyneger myxed together, and
eaten, preuayleth against the burning of a Fever.

If after the drying of the Parselye roots, and beaten fynelye to powder the
same, be mixed and drunk with the purest wine, does not only procure a sound
brain, and perfect memory, but purges the blood.

The Seeds (after the agreement of the best writers) are principal in the
causes of Physic, the roots next to them, and the leaves as third in working.

The roots, Herb and seeds of the Parsely, applied in meat and drink, do
procure urine, remove the stone of the Loins draw down the reddes, dissolve
wind in the body, take away the gripings of the belly, aswage the
strangurie, pain of the back, grief of the Kidneys and bladder, and swellyng
of the stomach.

The person bitten of a mad dog, by boiling and drinking the decoction of
Parsely, and applying a plaster made of the seeds and Herb shall be speedily
helped.

The Physic helps of the distilled water of Parsely.
THe commended time for the distilling of Parsely is in the beginning of
September, and that the fresh roots and Herb, with the whole substance be
distilled together in Balneo Mariae.

The water of the Parselye drunk unto the quantity of three or four ounces
at a time, morning and evening, for thirty or forty days together,
profits against the stone of the kydneys and Loins, purges the kydneys and
bladder, and greatly moves forward the urine.

The water drunk in the same manner, helps digestion, procures an appetite
to meat, purges the Liver, eases the strangurie, and where so ever this
water is anointed on the head or body, hears do soon after shed.

What skill and diligence required, in the sowing and ordering both of the
Garden and wild or running Time. Chap. 11.
THe Garden Time, although it seem better to agree, to be placed nigh to
Beehiues (for the commodity of Honye) than in Gardens, yet our purpose is
here, somewhat to write of the same, in that this is so carefully bestowed in
Gardens, as well for the commodity of meats, as for the deeking of Garlandes.
There are found to be two kinds of it, the one white with a woody or hard
root, growing on little Hills, which is accounted the worthiest.

The other as well in kind, as flower* black, which Actius (in meats)
disaloweth, for the same inwardly received lightly putrifieth, and increases
Choleric humors.

The Time of the Garden growing bushie, and full of slyppes, is seen to shoot
up* two handfuls high, bring most sweet and delectable of sauoure, and decked
with a number of small leaves, bearing also purple flowers, tending to a
whiteness, and the tops after the form of Antes bending in body. The
Garden Time better comes forward, being bestowed in a lean and stony
ground, for which cause, it neither desires a fat nor dunged Earth, but
ioyeth to be placed in a Sunny and open place. This well enough prospers,
being bestowed in beds, either in the seed or plant, but this speedier comes
forward being only set, yea this increases, being set again with the flowers
bearing, as the singular Theophrastus witnesses. The owners of Hiues, have a
perfitte forsight and knowledge, what the increase or yield of Honye will be
every year, by the plentiful or small number of flowers growing and appearing
on the Time about the Summer solstice. For this increases and yields most
friendly flowers for the Bees, which render a color and sauoure to the Honey.

The said Theophrastus writes, that the flower of Time (spread abroad is
destroyed and dies, if a big shoure of rain happen to fall.

The worthy Neapolitane Rutilius in his husbandry instructs, yt the whole
plant is to be rather set than sown, about the middle of April in a well
labored Earth, lying open to the Sun, and that the same may prosper and come
the speedier forward.

He wills the owner to water the Plants of time, or to moysten them al a
day with water finely sprinkled on the beds, in that the time so fast
drincketh in. If the owner or Gardener would possess ye seeds, he must
diligently gather the flowers (in which the seeds are contained) and not
labor to separate the one from the other.

The running Time ioyeth to be set or sown near to springs of water, as by a
Well, or Ponde, for on such wise bestowed in the Earth, the same yields the
fayrer leaves. This neither requires, a fat nor dunged Earth, but only to be
bestowed in a Sunny place, and ioyeth, in the often removing. The running time
does many times proceed or come of the Basil, rudely or without care bestowed
in the Earth.

The Physic helps both of the Garden and running Time.
THe Garden Time heateth and dries in the third degree.

The Time after the well drying, brought to fine powder, and given unto the
quantity of four drammes at a time, with a draughte of Oximel (or vinegar and
Honey boiled together) not only remoueth the ioynte sickness and ache of
parts, but purges Choler, and all other Humors. The like quantity given,
helps the passions of the Bladder.

The fine powder of Time, ministered unto ye quantity of one dra^me at a time,
with a sponefull of water and Honey well mixed together, prevails in short
time, against the swelling of the Belly.

The powder taken, unto the quantity of three drammes at a time, with a
draught of Mellicrate, remoueth the grief of yt Hyps, aswageth the pain of
the Loins and sides, amendeth the breast, and the inflations of Hypochandria
or the flanckes.

The powder given, unto the quantity of three drammes at a time, with a
draught of Oximel fasting, does maruellously help the Melancholicke, the
troubled in mind, and fearful.

The powder ministered unto the quantity of three drammes at a time, with the
best white wine, both morning and evening, does maruellouslye cure the
blearednesse of the eyes, and the vehemente pain of them.

This powder in like quantity used with good wine, aswageth ye grief of the
cold Gout and the deadness of moving, and helps the stiffenesse of Limbs,
drunk morning and evening.

The powder drunk morning and evening, unto the quantity of three drammes at
a time, with a draught of Oximel, does in short time aswage the swelling of the
Testicles: these hitherto Aetius.

The powder drunk with white wine, morning and evening, unto the quantity of
half an ounce at a time, not only moves urine, and purges the Bowelles, but
sends down the after burden, and Terms in women.

The form of a Sirupe made of the Time with Pure Honey, a^tly boiled, and
drunk fasting, does in short time amend the hard fetching of breath, and
remoueth all other griefs of the breast, through the spilling forth of the
corrupt matter.

The powder is thought to help greatly the clearnes of sight, being sundry
times taken with meat: but ye Time ought moderately be used, in that (through
the often eating) it mightly heateth.

The time given to such having the falling sickness, greatly avails in that
through the smelling to it (in the time of the fit) they are much revived, but
such ought to sleep for a while on the soft Beds of Time.

The leaves fynely beaten and strewed on wolle, and with oil applied on loose
parts of the body, myghtilye preuayleth, and on burnte or scalded places, to
great purpose anointed with Barrowes grease.

Here conceive, that the Time which is black (as before uttered) is altogether
to be refused, and only to use the same bearing a purple flower, and tending
to a whiteness, is best commended for all purposes.

The running Time sown in Gardens, is by nature hot and dry, and this
somuche heateth, that it both moves urine and the reddes, yet the same is
sower in taste, as the worthy Physician Galen witnesses.

If any drink the fine powder of the running Time with pleasant wine, morning
and evening, for a certain time together, does break the stone of the kidneys
and Bladder. The Herb laid on the sting of a Be, speedily helps it.

The Herb boiled in pleasant wine and drunk, heals the bit of an Adder or
Snake, the smoke of the same, drives away venemouse worms. This Herb boiled
with vinegar and Honey, and drunk unto the quantity of a draught at a time,
profits the spitting of blood: the juice of the Herb drunk, perfourmeth the
same, being myxed with vinegar, and drunk unto the quantity of four ounces
at a time.

The Herb stays the Reume and stillings of the head, coming of a cold
cause, it likewise amendeth the cough and cold stomach, if the same be taken
morning and evening, with good white wine.

The Herb steeped in Rose vinegar and bruised* being with the oil of Roses
diligently fried and anointed, does speedilye remove the headeache. The same
oyntemente applied on the head, amendeth Frensinesse and the Litharge or often
slumbering.

The Herb boiled in wine and drunk, opens the stoppyngs of the Liver and
Mylte, and moves vryne: this drunk in wine sends down the terms, and
causes urine, and recouereth the bytte, of venomous beasts. The same boiled
in wine and oil, aswageth the swellyng in the throat, if the throat be daily
applied with it.

The Herb boiled in wine, with the juice of Licoras, recouereth the cough, and
purges the breast: the juice of ye same drunk with vinegar, unto the quantity
of two drammes at a time, staieth the bloody vomitings.

The Herb boiled with Annys seeds in wine, not only heateth the stomach, but
remoueth wind in the Bowels, and eases the Strangurie. The Seed in wine,
does greatly move urine, and expels mightily the stone.

The worthy helps of the distilled water of the running Time.
THe Herb, stalk and root, with the whole substance shredde, ought to be
distilled in Balneo Mariae, about the end of the month of June.

The water of the running Time, drunk morning and evening unto the quantity
of three ounces at a time, does not only strengthen and amend the head,
brain and stomach, but procures an appetyte to meat, remoueth the noise or
rumblyng of the belly, softneth the hardness of the stomach, and moves
forward the vryne.

In the like manner it drunk not only comfort the sight, and consumes
humors and the destillations of the head, but myxed with the water of
wormewoode, and drunk, helps a Quotidian Ague. The same drunk to the
quantity of three ounces at a time, amendeth a cooled Liver and Mylte, and
recouereth or heals the bowelles exulcerated.

This in like order drunk, opens the stopping of the Nosethrils and ears,
restores hearing, helps gyddinesse, stays the desire to vomit, and
expels the grypings of the belly and bowels.

This drunk sundry times, both morning and evening, breaks the stone, and
moves vryne. This water applied with a lynnen cloth on bruised members, does in
short time cure them.

What skill and diligence is required in the sowing and ordering both of the
Myntes and Holyhocke. Chap. 12.
THe Garden Mynte desires to be bestowed, neither in a dunged, nor fat earth,
but rather in an open, and Sunny place: yet this best ioyeth in a moist place,
or by some well. And where the like is not, the Minte in yt ground ought to be
often watered in the first bestowing in the earth, or this otherwise in short
time withers and dies.

The Minte ought to be set in the root or whole stem, in Harvest or in the
spring time. The owner or Gardener lacking or not having the Minte seeds to
sow, may in the steed of them, use or bestow in his ground, the seeds of
the field or wild Myntes, in setting the sharper ends downewarde of the
seeds, whereby to tame and put away the wildness of them. This plant well
grown up, needs not after to be renewed or sown every year, in that once
sown or planted, it after comes up yearly of the own accord. And for the
delectable sauoure which it enjoys, much desired and used, both in Brothes
and Sallets.

But this plant after the coming up, may in no case be touched with any Iron
instrument, in that the same soon after dies. This plant flourishing in the
Summer, becomes yelowish in the winter time.

The Holyhocke or greater Mallows of the Garden, as Ruellius out of the
learned Theophrastus affirms, does often shoot up into the form of a
tree, and waxes so great, that the stem or body of it may serve to the use
of a staff, which sends forth big stalks, and leaves both large and
round.

The flower of this plant for the proper time flourishing, is named ye winter
Rose, in that this plant yields flowers like to the Rose, from the beginning
of Harvest, unto the winter time, which flowers both of ye red and white,
lesser than the fading or vanishing Rose, longer endure and enjoy force.

This Rose of the ancient Greeks, was named (...), in that the leaves (as
Columella reports) turn about with the Sun, which at Noone time of the day
are fully opened. The ancient Romans did also name it the sown or Garden
Mallows. The common people in time past greatly pleased with the beauty of ye
same, named it ye beyond sea Rose. For in comelines, nether of the^ gives
place to ye Rose, which if the same inioyed a savor, it were not inferoiure to
the Rose, seeing in color they be equal in bering of the red carnation and
white, so yt in sauoure the Rose only excels.

This for the worthy comeliness and beautye, to be set in windows, is at
this day diligently sown and set in Gardens.

The worthy Rutilius (in his treatise of the Garden instructs, that the
Seeds to be committed to the Earth, ought rather to be bestowed about the
middle of April, in a well dunged and fat ground, and to be often watered,
until the plants be well sprung up.

The skillful Columella in his Husbandry utters, that this rather ioyeth to
be bestowed in a fat Earth, well turned in with dung, and that moist dung be
laid about the roots of the young plants, in the setting again, which the
said Authoure wills to remove, after four leaves are well shot up above
the Earth.

This learned Columella writing of the holyhoke, reports, that the flower (as
the Marigolde) opens at the rising of the Sun, full spread at the Noone
time, and closes again in the going down of the Sun.

The Physic benefits and healpes, both of the Mint, and Garden Malowes or
holyhoke.
THe Garden Mint is reported to be hot and dry in the second degree, and
this in medicine oftener used dry than green.

The worthy Florentinus a singular professor of the Greek instructions of
Husbandry, writes, that the Mint for the same, might well be accounted an
unprofitable Herb, seeing the Herb applied on a wound, defends the same
from waxing whole, and to come to a skarre.

If the Minte be put into Milk, it neither suffers the same to courd, nor
to become thick, in so much, that laid into courded Milk, this would bring
the same thin again, so that by the same virtue and property, he says to
resist and abate the generation, as well in Man as woman: But others of a
contrary mind defending the Herb, accounted in very wholesome, and beneficial
to man.

If the Herb boiled in Wine and Oil, be applied on the Pappes of the new
milch Woman, does not after suffer the Milk to courde, nor to be thick, and
the Milk courded, to become thin again, whereby it amendeth the hard and
ranckled breasts, in danger to break, thorough the Milk courded. For which
cause, this Herb is wittily added in the potions of Milk, that in the
courding of the Milk within the stomach, no peril of strangling through the
benefit of this Herb might ensew.

The Juice or water of the Herb, drunk with the juice of the Pomegranat,
stays the resting or belching of the stomach and vomiting, as the worthy
Democritus in his Husbandry has noted.

The Mint brought to fine powder, and ministered in Milk, profits against
the long worms in the body.

If the swollen priuities, be often soupled with the decoction of the same, it
does in short time remove the swelling of them.

This drunk in water with Amylum, aswageth the force of the painful Flux of
the belly, and scouring with blood: besides, it stays the over great course
and show of the reddes in women, and the same heals ulcers on the Infants
heads.

The sauoure of this quickneth the spirits and mind, and the taste works an
appetite, and earnest desire to meat.

The juice of the fresh Herb drawn up, amendeth the defaulte in the
Nosethrilles, which also in the pain of the head, and beating of the Temples,
is profitably anointed.

The juice of the Herb applied with Uineger, retains and stays the inward
courses or Fluxes of blood.

The Minte after the brusing with the Oil of Roses, applied in plaster form
on hard pappes, which be swollen through the Milk, does not only soften,
but defends them from mattering.

The Herb eaten with Uineger, loses the belly, but daily eaten for a time
together, does maruellously procure a seemly color to that creature, and
this Herb at any time used, is very profitable and wholesome.

The juice drunk with vinegar, profits the spitting forth of blood: the same
anointed on the forehead, does aswage the griefs of the head: the juice with
Honey and water applied, remoueth the pain and noise or ringing of the ears.
The juice tempered with Honey, and anointed on the eyes, remoueth the moystnes
and dimnesse of sight.

The Mint after the boiling in Wine received, amendeth a stinking or strong
savor of the mouth: the mouth after the adding of Uineger to it washed
diligently, not only helps the teeth, but purges the mattered Gummes: If the
teeth in like manner be washed fasting, with the decoction of Mintes, it
lets the mattering of the Gummes. The decoction in Wine, with a little
Uineger added, remoueth (through the sundry times taking) ye blistering of ye
tung, proceeding of heat. The Herb also tempered with Uineger, and anointed
near and about the eyes, does in short time remove the spots in them.

The Mint in cold sicknesses, yields a mighty comforting rejoices the
mind, and stays the will to vomit. The juice after the mixing with Uineger
and Brimstone, anointed with a feather on the Shingles, does with expedition
cease the pain.

The Herb boiled in Wine, aswageth the pain of the bowels and Kidneys, and
boiled in Wine with Oil, being applied in plaster form, does both dissolve
and cure impostumes.

The Physic benefits of the Holyhoke, do here ensewe.
THe Malowes of the Garden or Holyhoke, is the like moist by nature, as the
other kinds of Malowes, and serves as well to outward, as inward griefs.

The Herb, root, or Seeds, boiled in either Milk or Wine, and orderly
drunk, do remove a hot cough, recover the Lungs blistered, and is a singular
remedy against the consumption of the Lungs.

The Holyhoke boiled in either water or Wine, and tempered with Honey and Alume,
if the same decoction be gargalled and holden for a time in the mouth, does
speedely cure the blisters and putrified sores of the mouth and throat.

The leaves of the Holyhoke, after the boiling with meat, eaten with Sallet
Oil and a little Salt, loses the belly, and amendeth the hoarsenesse of
voice: The root and Herb boiled unto the consumptio^ in a manner of the
water, will leave a clamminesse above, which applied on any impostume, ripeneth
and softneth the hardness of the same.

The commended healpes of the distilled water of the Holyhoke.
THe distilled water of the Holyhoke Roses (in Balneo Mariae) gargelled, or
applied without with linen clothes, is greatly commended for the breakings
out of the mouth, and profits as well against the outward as inward heates:
besides, cures the Shingles and ulcers of (...) ^^ote, and all other swellings.

The said water often drunk, is a precious water unto all inward heates of
Fevers, in yt the same cools and softneth all impostumes of the Lungs and
sides. It heals and mitigateth the perilous flixe Disenteria, the hot
swellings of women's places, the Kidneys and Bladder.

This asswageth the pain of the Bladder, expels the stone, purges the
Kidneys and Bladder, being drunk for a time morning and evening.

The water applied on ye Temples in a hot Fever, procures sleep, if the
feet of the patiente in a hot Fever be bathed with it, procures rest, and
ceasseth thirst.

The commended benefytes of the distilled water of Mintes.
THe Herb with the stalks finely shredde, ought diligently be distilled in
Balneo Mariae, about the middle of May.

The water drunk morning and evening unto the quantity of three ounces at a
time, strengthens the stomach, and digesteth the meat received. The water
drunk in the same manner, profits against the stopping of the Liver and
Milt. It opens also the ways of Urine, as of the Kidneys and Bladder.

The water in like manner drunk, procures an appetite to meat, stays
belching and vomiting, the like does this applied without on the stomach. The
mouth often washed with the same, recouereth a stinking breath, and putride
gummes.

The water drunk stays sounding, and giddines of the head. If any taking a
slice of Barlie bread, and stieping it in this water, tempered with Wine or
Uinegre, shall apply the same warm to the Nosethrils, the sauoure incontinent
yeldeth a marvelous refreshing and strengthening of the feeble person.

The water in like quantity drunk, purges the Matrice, and a linen cloth
wet in it warm, and applied to the privy place, like preuayleth. The water
applied on hard pappes, dissolueth the milk courded in the^, the same for a
time drunk, heals the ruptures within, both of old and young persons. The
water after the mixing with Rue and the Coliander, gargelled in the mouth,
restores the Vuula fallen (...) of the Herb stieped in Lie, be washed on the
Scabbes of Children, heals them speedily.

This like drunk, profits against worms, drunk with Wine, comfort and
heateth a cold stomach.

What care and skill is required in the sowing and workemanly ordering of the
artochoke. Chapter. 13.
THe Herbarians write the Artochoke to be a kind of Thistill, of them named,
the Thistill of the Garden.

The Artochoke which before grew wild in the fields, came by diligence (for
the benefit of sale) to be carefully bestowed in the Garden, where through
travel, brought from his wildenesse, to serve unto the use of the mouth and
belly. The Artochoke growing with thick scaly ^ares, in form to the
pinaple, and sufficiently known to most persons, ioyeth in a loose and dunged
earth, yet the same better comes forward, being bestowed in a fat ground,
and by that means defended from Moles, as the worthy Rutilius reports, but
sown in a fast Earth after their growth, be not so lightely dug up of an
enemy. The said Rutilius wills the Seeds of the Artochoke, to be committed
to the Earth in the month of March, the Moon then increasing of light, and
that in beds well dunged, and workemanly prepared, which bestow in the Earth
half a foot asunder, yet these not deep put, and in such manner deal with
the seeds, that taking so many up, as you may handsomely with three fingers
thrust or set those unto the middle joints in the Earth, covering them
lightely with loose Earth, which if hot weather happen to ensewe, the Gardener
with diligence must water the plants for a time, for the plants on such wise
handled, will yield a tenderer fruit and fuller head, as the worthy Varro
reports, yet may not the owner hope or look for fruits or heads to come to
their full growth and perfeitnesse for the eating in the first year. If the
Gardener would bestow seeds to profit, he ought to make little furrows on
the bed, w^ll a foot distante one from the other, being in breadth and
deepenes of half a foot, which after fill with old dung finely broken, and
black Earth in like manner small, in which so handled, bestow the Seeds to
the depth of the middle joints, and after cover them lightely with fine Earth,
not pressing or t^^ading it down. And as soon as the plants have yielded
foo^th leaves suffic^^^^ great, the owner ought to water them often, and to
continue the ly^e watering in a ground very dry until the herbs yield or send
forth heads both tender and sufficient big, when the plants shall be well grown
up, the Gardener must cleanse and purge daily the beds of weeds, and dung about
the roots of the plants (if he will credit Columella) store of ashes, for ye
kind of dung the said author reports to be most apt and agreeable to that
potherb, of which by the kind of the dung, this herb takes the Latin name.

The owner or Gardener must have a special care, that he bestow not the seeds
in the earth with the contrary ends downward, for these will bring forth
Attochokes crooked, weak and very small, if we may credit the Neapolitan
Rutilius. If the owner would have the herb yield beds or Artochockes without
prickles, he must after the instructions of the Greek writers of husbandry)
either break the sharp ends of the seeds, or make blunte the pricks (before
the bestowing in the earth) on some stone rubbed, which also many affirm to
come to pass, if the Gardener paring off the rind of the Lettuce root, and
shreading or cutting the same into many small pieces, does after the bestowing
of the seeds into ^che piece, diligently set these a foot distance asunder,
will after yield heads the like.

The Gardener shall possess Artochokes of pleasant sauoure, if he lay the
seeds to sti^pe for three days before the sowyng, in the juice of the Rose or
Lilly, or oil of bays, made with the sweet Almonds, or in any other pleasant
juice or lycour, which after the drying in the air from the Sun beams, he
commits them to the earth, for on such wise handled, the fruits yield the
same savor as the licour in which the seeds were soked and received. For by
a like example, the heads shall savor of the bay, if the owner sti^pe them
with the leaves of the Bay tree, or he otherwise making holes, bestow the
seeds within the bay berries, before the committing to the earth: And a like
practice may he exercise in all seeds that be great.

The fruits of the herb named the Artochoke (will become sweet and delectable
in the eating (if ye owner before the committing of the seeds to the earth) do
sti^pe them for two or three days, either in new milk, honey, sugared water or
wine aromatized, and after the drying in the air, does then bestow them in
beds a foot distance one from the other. The Artochocks be set in Harvest,
which is about the month of October, that these may yield plenty of fruits or
heads, ought to be those bearing big leaves and stalks, with big stems grown
or shot up in the mids: which big leaves after serve to none other purpose
but to be broken from the bodies, and the plants to be bestowed again in beds,
with ye stems in like manner cut off and cast away, as serving to no use, well
turned in with dung: these set in such manner that the tendrer leaves grow
vptight, and the stemmed in ye middle being low broken off, to be diligently
covered with light earth. And herin the Gardener must have a care to ye
watering of them, at times nedeful, if the seasons sufficiently moist not,
either in the winter or in any other time of the year, to set forward or
procure spedily the Artochockes to come: and set again the tender plants in
well dunged beds, covering them well about with Ashes and black earth, the
better to bear and suffer the cold Winter time, which in the year followyng,
will yield new fruits.

Many skillful Authors write, that if the leaves of the Artochoke be well
covered in the ground, about the beginning of Winter, they will after become
not only white, but pleas^unter in the eating, whereby to serve among the
Winter meats.

Here I think it profitable to the owner to know, that the big leaves or
branches ought yearly to be broken off, from the old stemmes or bodies,
least the elder in their yield might be hindered, and the younger plants in
farther distances set, that these may prosper and send forth their fruits
the better, for such is the fruitful and plentyfull yield of this Plant,
that the branches or great leaves broken off from the tender stemmes, and set
again in the earth, will after cleave and join together, as certain report,
and oftentimes to yield in the same year, both the stem and outward roughnes
with pricks on it. The skillful writers of the Greek Husbandry will, that
the owner or Gardner in the opening and digging away of the Earth, to cut them
up with a sharp hook, leaving some part of the root in the earth, which so
pulled up, and anointing the root with soft dung, set again in a well
labored ground, turned in with old dung well three foot a sunder, and often
water them, when the dry season comes, until the plants shall be
sufficientlye strengthened in the Earth.

Those which the Gardner minds to let run or grow unto Seed, such shall he
separate from all the young plants, as Palladius wills, and cover the heads
either with a thin Potshard, or Bark of a tree, in that the Seeds ^^e
commonly wo^te to be corrupted through the Sun or shoures of Rain, and by
that means these to perish and come to no use, which if the Seeds be either
burnt with the Sun, or putrifyed with the moisture of shoures, will after
yield to the Gardener no commodity in the bestowing in the Earth.

The owner or Gardener may not gather the fruits of the Artochokes all at one
time, for as much as the heads ripen not together, but one after the other, so
that the owner ought then to gather the fruits, when as these only have
flowers below in form of a Garlande, and not before that time, wherefore if
the Gardener do stay until all the flowers be shed, the fruits will be the
worser, and lesser delectable in the eating.

The Gardener must carefully look unto, that the Mice haunt not to the roots
of the Artochokes, for once allured through the pleasant taste of them, they
after resort in great number from far places, to the marvelous spoil of the
roots, as the Greek Varro in his worthy instructions of Husbandry has
diligently noted, yet not leaving the same without a healpe and remedy: for he
reports, that the sharp assault and enterprise of them is withstanded and
driven away, if the Gardener either lap Woolle about the roots, or Swynes
dung, or bestow the Figgetree ashes in like manner about them.

The Moles in like manner do maruellously harm, and be injurious to the
roots, in so much that through their often casting, and hollowing of the
ground, the whole plants are procured to fall or lean, through feebleness in
the Earth, for remedy of which annoyance, the Gardener may either bring up
and learn a young Catte, or tame a Weesill, to hunt daily in those places.

There be which (...) plants of the Artochoke, in a fall and dry ground, to
the end the Moles should not so lightly in their working, overthrow them.

The owner which would understand and know other healpes, let him resort
unto those experiments, which we have uttered in the first part.

The Physic benefits and helps of the Artochoke.
THe Artochocke eaten green or raw with vinegar reformeth the sauoure of the
mouth. The Eared and scaly kernels cleaving or sticking round about the head,
being tenderly boiled (after the manner of the Sperage) from which after the
licoure poudered, the Ears again boiled with Butter, and seasoned with
vinegar, and Salt, do yield a delectable sauce with meat right profitable.

There be some, which rather eat the Ears (...) than sodden, being before
prepared with Salt and the fine powder of Pepper or Coliander seeds strawed
upon, for by that means (as they affirm) is the natural sweetness of them
more kindly and delectably represented and felt.

Certain report, that the Ears only steeped in wine, to cause urine and move
the venerial act, as the worthy Hesiodus reports, which (as Ruellius has
noted) at the bearing of the flower, the Grasshoppers then do lowdest sing, and
women greediest to the venerial act, but men at the same time flowst.

The root (after clean scraping and keeping forth of the Pyth) boiled in wine,
and drunk, not only amendeth the hardness of making water, but the rank
sauoure and stinking smell of the Armeholes, which Xenocrates affirms, of
experience, to send forth on such wise ye stincke in the urine, caused by the
heat of the small pockes, or of any other occasion.

The Artochocke tenderly boiled and eaten, is said to strengthen ye stomach,
and help somewhat the privy places, that men children may be conceived, as
the Athenian Cherias and Glaucias affirm,

The worthy Galen reports, the meat of the Artochocke to be of an evil
nourishment, and incommodious to the stomach, especially when the same shall
be hard at the first yielding of the flower, for then the Ears possess a
great quantity of Choleric juice in the^* which for the same, ought rather
to be eaten boiled, than raw yet some be of this mind, that the younger
heads, tender and full of juice, being prepared (as before taught) may with the
more delight, and lesser harm be eaten.

What skill and diligence to be learned in sowing, and workmanly ordering, both
of the Endyue and Succorie. Chap. 14.
THe Endyue, otherwise named the Sycorie or sour Lettuce, serves rather for
the use of Medicine, than for other purposes, so that by a travel caused to
grow acceptable in the Garden, for as much as this of it self, by nature, is
evermore sour, although it be a kind of the Lettuce, which ought often to be
removed and changed into sundry places, that the nature of it may on such wise
be altered, with lesser travail to the Gardener.

The Endyue thus bestowed in Beds, may well abide the cold season of winter,
wherefore in cold Countries, this better agrees to be sown near the end of
Harvest, and well grown up, to be removed and laid again in the earth, that
these, in the lying, may on such wise become white, if so be (before the
covering) the Herbs be strewed over with river sand, and often watered (if
not helped by shoures of rain) which then cover with light earth, letting
these so rest, until by a diligence in the watering, they become sufficientlye
white for Salettes or other purposes. The young plants of the Endive are not to
be removed, before that sour leaves be sufficiently sprung up, and these cut
at the ends of the roots, as well as the tops of the leaves, with soft Cow
dung anointed about the roots, before ye bestowing in the earth, which
lightly covered, water so long, until the plants, be sufficient strong in the
Earth.

The Sycorie is of the nature of the Endyue, which in like manner retayneth the
proper bitterness, being not like removed and ordered as the Endyue. This
desires a moist ground and the Earth to be well labored, when sour leaves
be come up: the plants after the removing, ought again to be set in a well
dunged earth, and that these may yield fair, large and long leaves, let the
owner, after the leaves be somewhat more shot up, or on the myddle of them lay
a piece of a Tylestone, for by the weight of the same, will the leaves spread
out, and inioye more Touffrs or grow thicker. By this workmanly ordering, will
the bitterness of the leaves be removed, and they aptly serve in the winter
time, for the use of the Sallets, if so be the plants be set again, in the
end of August, or rather in the beginning of September, when the leaves are
shot up big, and in the pulling up, the Earth not knocked of the roots, but
with soft Cow dung the roots gentlye anointed about, and bestowed after in
beds well turned in with dung.

The leaves laid along in well dunged Beds (to be white) cover so over with
lose Earth, that the roots may lie upward, and over them lying a long in the
Earth, make some couerture in the form of a herboring place, or rather strewe
upon them the chafe or corn, for the better defense of the cold, and bitter
winds.

Certain report, that the like may be purchased, if the owner, after certain
leaves of the Sycorie shot up, byndeth altogether, with a brown threede,
and covers them after with a pot of Earth, to the end that those may daily
draw by the roots, a nourishment from ye earth, which by the same means,
shall purchase both a whiteness and tenderness, and loose a great part of
the proper soreness.

The Physic helps, both of the Endyue and Sychorie.
The Endive, which by another name, is termed the wild Lettuce, is reported to
be cold and dry in the second degree, and of this, only the leaves and
seeds serve to the use of Physic, yet are the leaves brought apt to be eaten
in Sallets.

The root, by the consent of al writers, is to little use, therefore in our
time, seldom applied in Medicine.

The green leaves exercised in Medicine, are to great purpose, but ye dry,
prevail little or nothing at al.

The green serve to comfort, for which cause they prevail against the
stopping of the Liver and Mylte, through the occasion of Choler, and these like
prevail against a simple and double Tertian, and against the heat of the
Liver, and against hot or burning impostumes eaten either sodden, or raw with
vinegar. The Syrup made of the decoction of the Herb with Sugar, avails in all the abouesayde.

The juice or Syrup given with Ruberbe, about the fourth or sixth day after
digestion of the matter, greatly prevails for the heat of the Liver, and a
burning impostume, the said Herb or juice applied in plaster form, greatly
avails. If the leaves can not be had, then use the seeds bruised and boiled,
it to applying the same hot places, which greatly profits.

The juice of leaves applied on hot pushes, qualifieth and draws forth the
heat in them, the Herb bruised and laid on hot impostumes greatly helps. The
herb aplyed on the left pap with vinegar, mightily profits the Cardiacke
passion, the same on the belly, stays the flyxe.

The Sirupe made or the Endive and Hearts tongue, preuayleth against the kings
evil, the Herb applied in plaster form, with Ceruse and vinegar, heals
the Shingles, hot impostumes, and swellings: the juice applied with vinegar and
Rosewater on the temples, aswageth the headache. The drinking of the juice,
every second day, recouereth the spitting of blood, and aswageth the excess
of Sperme. The juice is effectuously anointed with Ceruse and vinegar, on all
parts, which are healed by cooling.

The Sicorie is of a dry and cold quality, yet somewhat more than ye Endyue,
this Herb (as Aegineta reports) is both of cooling and drying in the first
degree, and has also the virtue of bynding.

The Herb bruised with the root, and round Trochyses or flat Bals made of
the same, which after dissolved in Rosewater, and anointed on scabbed places,
does both cure them, and causes a fayrer skin. If any use this potion, made
with the juice of Cychorie, Endyue, and Hearts tongue, to which a quantity of
Sugar added, in the boiling with water and a little vinegar, does in short time
recover the stopping of ye Liver and Mylt.

So that pills of Ruberbe be after ministr^d, and the comforting Electuarie of
the three Saunders taken.

If any prepares this plaster made of Serapium, and Myrre, of each a like
weight, to which the oil of Camomil and Honey in like proportion added, and the
same applied warm to the woman's privy place, does on such wise purge the
Matrice, yt she may after conceive with child. And in the proper purgings of
the women (as Pliny reports) the decoction of the Herb in water somuche
preuayleth, that it draws forth the dead yongling.

The juice of the Herb boiled, and ministered, loses the bellye, helps the
Liver, kydneys, and stomach, boiled in vinegar remoueth the vexing pain of
the vryne, yea the kings evil, applied with Milk or water and Honey, if it be
without a Fever.

The Cychorie taken with vinegar (as Discorides reports) is profitable to the
stomach, for that the same in meat aswageth ye heat and infirmities of the
same. And by it self applied, and with barlye meal laid plaster wise on the
regyon of the heart, greatly helps, in the plague, and burning Agues the same
is to be used to great purpose. It also qualifieth Pestilent pushes, if the
water of ye decoction of ye same be applied on the places, with linen clothes.
The flower thrown into a pismyers hyl, soon after becomes as red as blood.

This Herb boiled in wine, and taken with meat, is very profitable to the
stomach, in that the same helps digestio^, the flowers bruised with the
roots, and applied in plaster form on the Gout, do inco^tynente aswage
the pain of the same proceeding of heat. This plaster applied on the
Shingles, does maruellously*remoue the mighty heat.

The commended virtues of the distilled water, both of the Endyue and Cychorie.
THe time aptest for the distilling of Endive, is in the end of May, the leaves
(before the distilling) plucked from the stemmes, and finely shredde.

The Endive water drunk unto ye quantite of two ounces at a time both morning
and evening, profits the straightnes and stopping of the breast, in the same
manner drunk, is auailable to women with child in that this both strengthens
them, and amendeth senses.

The Endyue water mixed with the water of Plantein, Rose water, and the white
Sief without Opium, of which an oyntement made after art, does in short time
recover ulcers distempered of a hot matter, and especially those happening on the
priuities.

The said water with the juice of the March Mallowe roots, oil of Roses and
Camomil, Saffron, barlie meal, and the yolks of Eggs mixed altogether over
the fire, and applied in plaster form, is a present remedy, both for the
Gout of the hands and feet.

The Endive water drunk unto the quantity of four or five ounces at a time,
both morning and evening, recouereth the plague, repelleth or puts away the
kings evil, ceasseth thirst, and in good quantity drunk aswageth the heat of
the Liver.

This helps the stitch in the side, and pricking felt about the heart,
drunk unto the quantity of three or four ounces at a time, both morning and
evening, a lynne^ cloth or bolster of hemp applied on a hot Liver, qualifieth
the heat, or in what part of ye body the like happens, but as the linen
clothes wax dry, evermore to wet them in this water.

The best time for distilling the Cichorie, is in the middle of May, the herb
and root to be finely shred, before the distilling in a tin Limber^^.

The water of Cychory drunk unto the quantity of two ounces at a time, both
morning and evening, and at Noone, or taken with drinck in this manner,
remoueth the heat of the stomach. This drunk in the like manner or applied
with linen clothes on the region of the Heart, both comfort and
strengthens the heart and stomach.

And as this applied with linne^ clothes on the Liver, aswageth the heat of it,
so it opens the stopping of the same. This drunk in the said manner,
preserves the creature from the plague This like avails for carbuncles,
either drunk, or applied with linen clothes on the places: this also often
drunk, stays the rising of the lungs unto the throat, and stops the
perilous flixe Disenteria.

The water in like quantity drunk, opens the stopping of the Liver and
Mylte, this gargelled in the mouth and drunk, helps the swelling of the
Vuula and throat, it helps also wasted members, if those be often bathed with
the same and drunk in like condition or applied with linen clothes, helps
the bit of a venomous beast.

The flowers after ye gathering in ye morning, distilled in Balneo Mariae and
orderly applied, serves unto diverse impediments of the eyes, as unto the
ulcers of them, the mistynes or dymnesse of sight, the Pynne, web, and spots
in the eyes, and unto many other like griefs.

What care, skill, and secrets to be learned in the sowing, and workmanly
ordering of the Lettuce. Chap. 15.
THe Garden Lettuce, desires a well labored ground, fat, moist, and dunged,
appearing for the more part by the fourth day above the Earth, so that the
Seed in the Earth be not burned of the sun, or the ground unfruitful. The
seed may be committed to the earth, all the year through if the place for the
growing, shall be battle dunged, and moist. The seeds may be sown in beds
thick together, and in the month of March or beginning of April, in that the
tender plants can not endure the nipping frostes, nor cold air. Those seeds
which the owner bestows in beds in the month of September, will so be
hardened for the winter time, that the plants may well endure to be removed
and set at any time, and watered for two or three days together, unless these
be otherwise moystned with the daily and sweet shoures of the air. And in
committing of the seeds to the Earth, the owner ought to have a care, for
watering of the beds, least the heat consisting in the dung, breaths or
casts the seeds forth of the earth.

The plants r^sen or sprung up, well four or five leaves above the Earth,
ought then to be removed and set again into a fat ground, a good
distaunce one from the other, and to water them well at the roots, so that it
freese not, nor the season be very^ hot.

The owner or Gardener may not remove (to set again) the small or common
Lettuces, but the great, which will become crisped and thick (named of
diverse, the Romayne Lettuce) that yields white and far bigger seeds:
these if the Gardener bestows again in Beds, will shoot up far fayrer
and greater in Touff^, and in taste pleasaunter, if he especially break away
the first leaves before the setting of them in Beds, for as much as the first
or outward stalks have much milk in the^, which will lightly become bitter
through the heat of the Sun.

If the owner would possess fair and whit Leettuces, he ought to bind the
leaves up together with a threede, well two days before the plucking up* and
setting again in other Beds, which so done, he must straw thick over, with
river or sea sa^d, which the worthy Pliny seems only to ascrybe to those
which yield the white Seeds, whose nature is such, yt they best endure the
cold winter. But if these through ye defaulte of the place, season, or seeds,
wax hard, the Gardener may procure the plants to grow tender, by plucking
them up, and setting the^ in well wrought beds.

The Lettuce spreads into a breadth, if so be the owner either sets it
asunder, or when it is grown into big leaves, the tops gently cut off, it be
pressed down with a Turffe of Earth, Tile or Potshard, whereby it may the less
shoot up into a ste^me. For through the weight thus laid upon (the plant
kept under) is forced to crepe, and shed forth into a breadth, as the singular
Florentinus in his Greek husbandry, and after him Columella, to these, Pliny
and the worthy Neapolitan Rutilius utter.

The Lettuces are caused to grow broad, round, thick of leaves, crysped, and
low by the earth, if the plants removed when they be shot up a hand breadth,
be after the cutting away of the hearie roots, anointed well about with new
Cow dung, and in heaping the Earth well about them, be often watered, and
as soon as these are grown to a more strength, to clip the tops of the leaves
off with a sharp pair of sheares, and to cover them with pottes of earth new
filled, in such manner that the tops beaten or pressed down, may grow touffed
round up, and white, as the said Florentinus (in his Greek instructions of
husbandry) reports that he did.

If the owner myndeth to inioye Lettuces sweet in taste and smell, let him
(two days before the pulling up) bind up the tops of the leaves hard
together, for by that means in the farther growing, will the plants be the
fayrer, sweter, and whyter. Herein remembering, that at the tying (on such wise)
of the plants, and they stronger grown to be then pressed down, as before
taught, with either Tile or potshard or Turfe of Earth.

The skillful Florentinus (does also affirm) that the plants may be caused to
grow sweet and pleasant of smell, if the owner bestows of ye lettice seeds,
into the citron seeds, before the committyng to the earth which likewise the
Gardner may perform, by infusing the seeds in either damask or musk water,
for certain days.

Here I think (...) not impertinent to the matter, to recite in this place the
meruaylous devise of Aristoxenus Cyreneus: This man as Pliny writes, leaving
his proper country, for the earnest desire he had to Philosophy, and setting
a felicity in banketting dishes, watered at evening diverse Lettuses (as they
grew on the earth) with wine and honey mixed together, and with the same
lycour so long filled the^, until the herbs had sufficiently drunk: which
after he had left them unto the next morrow, boasted that he had purchased
dilicates from the earth. This no doubt a worthy invention for a proper
banquet, but no philosophy consisting in it: therefore leaving further to
report of this, we will return to our former matter.

The Lettuce obtains a tenderer leaf, or the leaves become the tenderer, if
the root (as aforesaid) be diligently anointed about with the best Cowdung,
and watered at needful times with river or running water, or the tops of the
leaves, as I before wrote, tied close together with a threade, well two days
before the pulling up and setting again.

If the Gardener desire to have a pla^t to grow of a marvelous form, and diverse
in taste, he shall with an easy cost and light travail (as the skillful Greek
Didymus reports) perform the same, if he will properly make a hole into a
round pellet made of Goats dung, and into the same put of the Lettuce,
Cresses, Basil, Rocket, and Radish seeds (as the like Rutilius writes) and
that ball wrapped in dung, be bestowed in a well labored earth, the furrow not
being deep, and soft dung laid over, with the light earth: and this often and
gently (or by little and little) sprinkled with water: For the radishe
shooting down performs the root, but the other seeds shoot into a
height, the Lettuce rising withal, and each yelding the plant in their proper
taste.

There be some which in two or three terdyles of the Goat or sheep bruised, and
made up into a ball, bestow the foresaid seeds, and tying this in a linen
cloth, do set it into the earth, with the like care and diligence, as above
is uttered.

Many of the Latin writers of husbandry taught the same in an other manner, by
gathering whole leaves of the Lettuce, growing next to the root, in the
holowe pittes and places of which leaves, the owner to bestow, except the
Radish (as Rutilius writes) or the Parseley (as Ruellius instructs) all the
before named Seeds, which leaves anointed about with soft dung to be set
into a well dunged ground, and the Seeds diligently covered over with Earth.

If any would possess Lettuces for the winter turn, ought to conserve
them (as Columella instructs) after this manner, in plucking first away the
outward leaves round about, that the tender leaves left apparante and
uncovered, might well be salted in an earthen pot or other vessel, and left
covered for a day and a night, after such manner, until these with the
help of the Salt, yielded forth a Brine.

The Brine throughlye pourged away with fresh water, and the licoure pressed
forth of the leaves, to let them lie abroad on a Lattesse, until the leaves
be sufficient dry, then to straw the dry Dill, and Fennel on them, after
this to lay the heaps or handfulls of the Lettuces into the vessel again,
on which to power the licoure made of two parts of Uineger and one of the
Brine: after this, so to thruste down the whole substance with a dry
thickening, that the licour may flote and appear well above all, which on
such wise ordered, must diligently be tended upon, that as often as the
substance above, seems to lie bare and uncovered, to fill always up with
the said licoure, but with a Sponge keep clean the lyppes and outside of the
pot, washed diligently about with fresh Conduite water, and this so often
use, as need shall require.

The physic benefits and helps of the Lettuce.
THe Lettuce colleth and moistneth in the second degree, Aegineta affyrmeth
that the Lettuce both manifestly cools and moistneth, through which, it
procures sleep, and as the same among other potherbs greatly norisheth, even
so is it a worker and causer of good blood.

Certain report, that Augustus Caesar by using of the Lettuce in the time of
his sickness recovered to health: And no marvel, in that the same helps
digestion, and ingendreth better blood, than any of the potherbes. The Lettuce
found of experience to be commodious to the stomach, procures also sleep,
loses the belly, and causes plentifulnesse of milk in the breasts. The
Lettuce seed gives to Noursses the plentifulnesse of ^^lk, and sharpneth the
sight, being taken in drink. The same drunk in wine procures sleep: a
plaster only made of the lettuce, and applied on hot impostumes and the
Shingles* does mightily cool: The lettuce sodden and mixed with the oil
Olive, received inward by potion, does help in short time the dropsy.

The juice of the Lettuce anointed on the forhead of him that has the fever,
and can not sleep, procures rest and sleep to the pacient (as ye skilful
Florentinus writes) which also affirms, that a man shall not be overcome with
drink, if he before eat with a fasting stomach, grene lettuce.

To these he adds, that seeds of the Lettuce bruised and drunk* to stay the
sheding of Sperm, for which cause this is profitably taken or drunk against the
night pollutio^s, happening to many young persons.

This author besides utters, that the Lettuce laid under the couerlet, the
sick person not knowing thereof, and gathered after this manner, as with the left
hand pulled up by the root before the Sun rising, does soon after cause
sleep. A like to this he reports, if five, three, or one leaf be laid
privily under the bolster of the sick, but in such manner, that the bigger end
of the stalk and leaf lie to the feeteward, and the top or smaller end to
the head.

Here learn, that the plentiful and daily eating of the Lettuce of married
persons, is very incommodious and noisome to them, as the Greek writers of
Husbandrye have noted, in that the same (as they write) not only does diminish
the fruitfulness of children, but the children after borne, to become idle,
foolish, and peuish persons. But the physicians in our time write contrary: for
they say, that Lettuce neither does increase evil blood, nor the same thoroughly
perfect, yet is the Lettuce (by their agreement) worthier than the other
potherbs: For the Lettuce is preferred (as Galen writes) and not without good
reason to other her^es, in yt there is none known or found to be of better
norishment.

This also in the Summer time (as the said Author writes) is a grateful and
profitable meat, forasmuch as by nature it cools. This ministered too hot
and Choleric stomachs, is maruelously auailable: yet the often use dulleth
the sight of the eyes, and procures a moistnes, yea and abateth the desire of
the venereall act. This also through the often eating greatly harmeth such
fetching the wind short, spitting up, of blood, and the fleumatike. This herb
besides too often and much used as well sodden as raw) is no less perilous
than the eating of the Hemlock. The Lettuce in the summer time is used rather
for Physik sake, than for the proper nourishment which it yeldeth, as unto the
moystening and cooling: yet this seeing it may be discerned cold, who needs
to doubt, that it can engender in any manner sound and pure blood in us: for
the substance of it common to us, which is both mylkie and sweet, and to
these meanly digested, is for the same readily and lightly changed into blood.
The Lettuce therefore eaten moderately, does procure in us good blood, and
helps many times the tertian agewe, and the herb is said to loose the belly,
in that this thorough the proper moisture and coldness, both colleth and
tempreth the immoderate heat of the liver, which notwithstanding for the
speedy and vehement distribution and carrying away of the meat and drink, is
many times wont to bind the belly. The herb eaten either raw, or boiled with
vinegar and Sugar, does dissolve the stopping of the milte and liver, yet eaten
raw in much quantity, is said to trouble the sight, and both harm the eyes,
and cause a mistiness that thickneth and dulleth the visiue spirits, and
causes the christalline humor troubled, and offends the animal spirit
through the proper coldness consisting in it.

Many use the Lettuce before it be risen into a stalk, boiling it in water or
broth, which likewise (the worthy Galen reports) that he did in his old
age, yet not eating the ^ame before the boiling, for the hardness which he
found to ensue by the eating of it raw: notwithstanding the said Galene in
young age used the raw Lettuce, to repress the heat of choler in the
stomach: but when he came to old age, he used to eat the lettuce boiled at
supper, to procure the sweeter and longer sleep in the night: so that the
lettuce boiled and eaten at supper, or at the hour of going to bed, was to him
a singular remedy to cause a quiet sleep.

The ancient used not to eat the Lettuce at the beginning of supper, but at
the latter end, the reason of which was, that seeing the Lettuce (as we have
aforesaid) is of a cold and moist nature, therefore the eating of the same at
the end of supper, and mixed with the other dainties in the stomach, it
causes the sooner and sounder sleep in the night, and this the readyer
represseth the vaporous fumes of heady wine and drunkenness: also it is the
sooner maistre and stayed thorough the mighty moistening of the brain. The
Lettuce seeds bruised, and mixed with the white of an egg and woman's ^^lke,
applied in plaster form on the temples of foreheade warm, at the going to
rest, does maruellouslie procure sleep: A like to this, does the juice of
the Lettuce, and woman's milk, of each a like quantity, to which half an
ounce of white Popie seed bruised, and applied warm on the forehead.

The Seed bruised and druncke, ceasseth the often imaginations of the venereall
act in sleep, and represseth the desire of the natural act.

The worthy Physicians in our time, have devised a more healthful way for the
eating of raw Lettuce, at Dynners and Suppers in the Summer time, by mixing
with it vinegar, oil Olyue and salt, (which so prepared) joining with other
meats on the table, that the same may stir up the feeble appetite, caused by
great heat, and both temper the burning of blood, and mitigate the heat of
the liver and heart, notwithstanding the herb in this manner prepared, ought
waryly to be used, se^ng the immoderate use of the herb (as before uttered)
does extinguishe the earneste will to the venereall act.

The married persons (desiring the procreation of children) ought soberly and
measurably feed on the Lettuce, but to the Choleric persons this herb is
not denied, so that the coldness of it with Rocket, Cresses* Mintes, Maioram,
and such like be before tempered, to the apter cooling of their stomachs.

The commended virtues of the distilled water of Lettuce.
THe Garden Lettuce gathered about the middle of May, ought after the finely
shredding, to be distilled with a soft fire in either Balneo Mariae or Tynne
Lymbecke. This water of the crisped or Garden Lettuce druncke to the quantity
of two ounces at a time, both morning and evening profits the Liver, in
that by nature it cools and comfort the same, and cools the blood
inflamed The water in like manner drunk, stays the perilous Flixe
Disenteria, and other vehemente Flixes of the belly: this amendeth the
trembling of m^mbers, and healpeth those which cannot quietly sleep: this
anointed on the Temples of the head, and p^^^ses of the hands procures
sleep.

The water druncke, (...) women lacking milk, if they either take it alone or
in drink, (...) such wise this procures store of milk in the Breasts. The
water ceasseth and amendeth a hot and dry coughe taken in drink, mollifyeth
the throat, cleanses the breaste and tungs, ceasseth thirste* tempeteth the
heat of the stomach, liver, and kidneys, this besides in good quantity taken
loses the belly.

What care and skill required in the sowing and ordering of the purselane and
Rocket. Chap. 16.
THe Garden Purselan, how diligently the same is bestowed, so much the larger
it spreads on the earth, and yields the thicker leaf. This desires to be
sown in Februarye, March, April, May and June, and in no other times, for
this herb cannot well endure the cold season. This plentifullye yields and
spreads, ^eing bestowed in beds well turned in with old dung, or in ground
very fat of it self, or otherwise sown amongst Colewortes, Onions, and
Leekes. And after these have ioyed a year in the Garden, they will yearly come
up without pains to the Gardner, of the own accord, yet the herbs desire
every year, to be often watered, to the end that these may yield the bygger
Tuf^^, and thicker leaf.

The Seeds ought to be ^owen under the shadow of Trees, and in an Harbor
where trees grow not too thick, for these otherwise bestowed under a thick
shadow, grow thin and small of leaf. The Purselane is one of the Garden
herbs, served first in Sallets with Oil, Uineger and a little Salt, as well
at the mean, as rich men's tables, yea this for a dainty dish with many served
first at the table in the winter time, preserved after this manner.

The greatest stemmes and leaves of the Purselane without roots were gathered
in that the smaller sti^ped (lightly decayed and withered) and these with water
clearly and throughlye cleansed from the fine Sand, hanging on, and the f^lthe
or corrupt leaves if any such were clean purged away, and these so long they
dried in the shadow, until they were somewhat withered, for otherwise
(through the plenty of moisture) they either molded or rotted in the lying.
After these were they infused in ueriuice made of so^^e grapes, strewed thick
over with green Fennel, bestowed in an earthen pot glased within, or for the
lack of it, in a sweet vessel of wood: after this, the who^e sprinkled well
over with salt, laying green Fennel again over the Salt, and sundry
courses of Purselane, with Salt and Fennel bestowed to the filling up of the
pot, and over the upper bed of Purselane again, a thick course of green
fennel strowed, which settled the whole mixture down into the pot.

These being done, the licours which was tempered or mixed with two parts of
vinegar, and one of veriuyce made of grapes was poured upon, in such order and
so full that the same reached up to the brimm^ or lip of the vessel. The
same prickle or sauce at the end, close covered with a lid, was set up in a
dry place to be preserved for (...) the beams of the Sun coming, least the
substance through the standing of the place might gather a vinew or mouldines
over the same which also as they affirm may be avoided, if the Purselane be
not suffered to lie f^oting above, but always covered well one^ with the licoure
when they used and served it at the table, they before cleansed it with warm
water or wine, and pouring (...) oil on the Purselane, they set it as a fi^^^
dish^ on the table, to procure an appetite to the guests satte down to meat.
The Rocket is added to the Lettuce in Sallets, to the end it may tempe^ the
con^tarye virtue of the same, so that the Lettuce is seldom eaten with meat
without the Rocket, and the Sallet on such wise prepared is caused the
delectabler and yields the more health to man. And the worthy Galen in his
book de aliment. (...) wills no man to eat the Lettuce or Purselane without
the Rocket, nor the Rocket contrariwise in any sallet, without Lettuce or
purselane, that in as much as the one cools and harmeth the venereall act,
the other through the heating in the either ma^ter profits man* The seeds
may be committed to the earth and the Herb planted, as well in the winter
time, as in summer, for it neither f^^^eth the cold, nor any other
distempe^aneye of the air, nor this requires great labor about the
bestowing of the seeds in the earth, and after the coming up, it especially
ioyeth to be often weeded, but the seeds to be sown in a sandy or ^rauelly
ground, ought before to be well (...).

The physic helps and remedies both of the Purselane and Rocket.
THe Purselane cools in the third degree, and moistneth in the second, the
Herb used fresh and green, is better allowed: (for this dried has small use
and virtue) in that it mitigateth and moisteneth.

The Purselane through the proper coldenesse, asswageth hot and Choleric
flures, through the often applying and cooling, and helps the persons
afflicted with a burning Fever, and the teeth astonished or on edge, by eating
of sour things, is amended by the only eating of the fresh herb. The Juice
of this applied, healpeth the Shingles, and both bridleth the venereall act,
and abateth sleep. The herb expels the worms of the belly, and drunk
with wine, stays the perilous Flux Disenteria. The decoction of the
Purselane, holden for a whiles in the mouth, ceasseth the tothache, if the
Juice be anointed, healpeth outward inflammations. The person which has a hot
stomach, or the mouth of the stomach swollen, shall thoroughly be helped by
eating of the fresh Purselane. The Juice drunk, mightily cools inward heats,
the herb eaten, amendeth the ulcers of the priuities, yet hurtful to the
eyes, and somewhat cools the body. A plaster made of the Purselane, and
applied with barley meal on hot ulcers (where a fear is that the matter in
them putrifyeth) much profits, or if it shall be a hot impostume, which
f^eeth within from one member to another, this greatly amendeth. The Purselane
also remoueth the ulcers of the head, if bruised it be tempered with wine, and
the head washed with the same.

This applied, healpeth swollen eyes, and preuayleth against the spitting of
blood, yet eaten raw, fills the stomach with a clammye humor, the daily
eating of it, abateth the desire to the venereall act, yet eaten with Uineger,
it remoueth the burning Fever: the Herb bruised with Barley meal, and heated
on the fire, and then applied to the stomach, qualifieth the heat of the same
the Purselane used of women molested with the monthely course, stays it
without grief in short time.

The Purselane ^hawed in the mouth profits against the bleeding of the Nose,
the same does the Juice perform anointed on the Foreheade. The Purselane
mixed with harly meal, and applied in plaster form, cease the headache,
extinguisheth the heat of the eyes, stays the perilous flixe Disenteria,
and strengthens both the kidneyes and Bladder. The juice given in drink,
helps burning Fevers, kylleth the worms in the Belly, and stays the
spitting forth of blood.

The juice bestowed in glister wise, helps the excoriations in the bowels of
women, and the rawnesse of the privy places within, procured by distillations
from the head.

The juice of the Herb is profitably anointed on the head, with the oil of
Roses, or oil Olyue, against the headache caused by the heat of the sun and
wounds dangered by blasting, or in a furious heat this mightily mytigateth,
with barley meal anointed.

The Herb (to great purpose) is applied on the Nauyll of infantes falling
forth by crying, and the Herb chewed or rather the juice boiled, stays the
grief and loose teeth of the head, yea the juice eaten raw, aswageth the
kernels and ulcers in the monthe and swelling of the gummes.

Leontinus a Greek writer of husbandrye writes, that the leaf of the
Purselane holden under the tongue of the person molested with thirst to mitygate
the desire of often drinking, and Pliny writes, that the juice to remove
wartes, by annoynting the places many days together, and he also writes,
that the inflammations of the pappes and Gout may be aswaged and healed by
the juice of Purselane with Honey.

The said Pliny reports, that the root of the Herb hanged with a threede
(about the neck) remoueth the grief of fall of ye Vuula, which like happened to
a Judge in Italy, as he writes.

The Herb Rocket heateth and moysteneth in the second degree, the seeds and
leaves are only used in Medicine.

The Herb boiled and eaten, increases the Sperme in the man, which Aegineta
(lib. ^.) like witnesses, saying, that the Rocket obtayneth a great virtue in
heating, and supposed to increase Sperme, and for the same, to stir up a
desire to the Uenereall act, besides to cause (through the often eating alone)
a gyddinesse and pain of the head.

The Rocket ^^creaseth a strong heat, for which cause the same is hurtful to
the head, but the Garden Rocket boiled with the Lettuce and Beetes, works or
causes no harm, and in such manner (...), the same increases the milk in
women giving s^cke, and Nurses.

The Rocket eaten, and applied in plaster wise on the pe^ten, causes urine,
softneth the belly, comforts the stomach, and helps digestion, the iuce
of Rocket myxed with an Ox gau^e, recouereth black scarres unto a whit^^sse,
the pymples or pushes on the face, the juice with Honey anointed amendeth in
short time.

The juice or seed myxed with Honey, and anointed on the head, and often used
with meat, does kill the Nyttes and worms of the head, but the often use of
Rocket, procures gripings of the belly. The root after the tender boiling
bruised, and applied in plaster form on broken and bruised bones, does put
away the pain, the Seed bruised and drunk in wine recouereth the bytte of
venomous beasts. A skilful practicioner reports, that if three leaves of the
Rocket, be gathered with the left hand, and after the boiling in water and
Honey mixed together, taken in drink, the same (says he) maruelously avails
against the Jaundise and hard swelling of the mylte.

The commended Virtues of the distilled waters of Purselane.
THe Herb, ste^me, and leaves of the Purselane shred together ought to be
distilled in Balneo Mariae, about the end of May,

The water of Purselane drunk unto the qua^tine of three ounces at a time,
both morning and evening, for three or four days together amendeth the
spitting up of blood, and the perilous flyxe Dysenteria.

The water drunk in like quantity at a time stays any flux of the belly,
yea puts away a hot and dry cough^* this like profits against the heat
of Liver, ceasseth thyrst, helps the plague and remoueth the shortness of
fetching breath.

This water also profitable to infants against heat and the worms, given in
drink both morning and evening, unto the quantity of two ounces at a time.

If in two ounces of water of Purselane, (...) of the Seed of Psilium or
fleaworte be steeped for a night, and after a Sp^nge deeped in this ye tongue
be washed three or four times a day, which through great heat in a Fever
or other sickness is adusted, and draws to a blackenesse, this in short
time recouereth.

It helps unto a cooling of the inflamed blood, either drunk alone or taken
in drink and repelleth the griefs of the Bladder.

What skill and diligence required, in the sowing and ordering of the Cheruil
Smallage, Taragon, and Cresses. Chap. 7.
THe Herb Cheruell ioyeth to be sown in a well dunged Earth, in the
months of February, March and April, sometimes in August and September, to
possess the Herb in the winter time, and this the better prospers, thorough
the often watering, until it be well come up.

The Smalledge seeds ought to be sown in a well labored Earth, and near to a
stone wall or thick Hedge, this Herb well ioyeth in the shadow, and comes
well up in any ground. And after this Herb be once bestowed in the Garden, a
man shall hardely weed it forth quyte, and the Gardener may leave a stem or
two, to shoot up into Seed, from year to year, for this Herb will endure
for ever, without any weeding at al. The owner may commit the seeds to the
Earth, after the myddle or end of February, unto the beginning of September.
This Herb has the like virtue and properties, which the Parsely possesses.

The Taragon of the Garden, bearing Seed like to the Flax, ought to be
bestowed in a well dunged Earth, and after the plants be shot up near a
foot high, the Gardener ought then to take up the hole bodies, and set them
again in the self same Earth, which often water, until they have taken
strong root in the Earth. The Taragon enjoys the like properties, as the
Rocket, and may not be eaten a part or alone, but rather with the Lettuce,
Purselane, and such like Herbs.

The Garden Cresses is a sour Herb in taste like to the Onyon, which the
Germaynes (in many places) do often use in Sallets, but it seems that the
Herb is not eaten, without other cooling Herbs matched with it, as the
Lettuce, Sorrel, Purselane and such like, which temper the fire or burning
force of the Herb, even as the worthy Physician Galen has willed it, who
forbad the rocket to be eaten without the Lettuce, that the contrary virtue
might be tempered. This Herb ioyeth to be sown in moist places, as by small
ryuers or running courses of water, Wels, and springs: for no other labor
(after the Seeds bestowed) do they require, saving a daily watering, for the
plants in the coming up, desire oftentimes a day to be watered by little
and little.

The Seeds of the Cresses (after the mind of Rutilius) bestowed in Beds
with the Lettuce, increases very well, for they joy in moisture, and hate
the dung: And sown in a shadowie place, in February and March, the Plants
reasonablye prosper and come forward.

The Physic remedies and helps both of the Cheruil, and Garden Cresses.
THe Cheruel heateth in the third degree, and dries in the second, this Herb
of al persons is eaten raw with vinegar, and in brothes boiled.

This Herb taken in drink, procures vryne, and sends down the Terms in
women, bruised with wine and drunk, mytigateth the griefs and stitches in the
side.

This drunk with water and Honye, resolves or loses flewme, it puts away
grypings of the belly, and ingendereth wind.

The juice of Cheruel taken with vyneger, kylleth worms in the belly, the
Cheruell brought into powder, and mixed with Honye, heals a Canker, being
anointed upon. The Herb boiled in wine, and drunk, cease the ache and
grief of the Hyppes.

The Herb with the whole substance boiled, if the same be after mixed with
vinegar, and the head washed with the same, does remove the dandrye of the
head. In the like manner ordered and applied, heals running sores and
Cankers.

It heals the bytte of a mad dog, if the person shall drink of the Seed
bruised, and shall wash the wound with the same. The root of Cheruill boiled
with the Herb Saxifrage, and drunk, breaks the stone of the Bladder, and
provoke urine. The Cheruell boiled in wine, and drunk, dissolueth the
gathered blood into knobbes, or otherwise clotted in the body.

The Herb after the brusyng, and tempering with wax and Barrowes grease,
applied on impostumes behind the Ears, does in short time dissolve and heal
them.

The Garden Cresses heateth and dries in the third degree, but the learned
Platearius affirms, that the Cresses to be hot and dry, in the fourth
degree.

The seed especially serves to the use of Medicine, and is preserved in great
efficacy, for five years. The Herb green, is of great efficacy, being
somewhat dried.

The seed possesses ye virtue of heating and drying of superfluous humors*
and in a manner inioyeth the like virtue of Mustarde seed, the seed after the
brusing drunk in wine, expels the dead yonglyng, drunk with wine,
remoueth the swelling of the Milte, eaten with Honye, is a remedy for the
cough, and loses the breast, it avails against the Palsy of the tongue, if
the seed chawed be retained a time in the mouth.

It profits not if the Cresses be eaten alone, for that the same dyminisheth
man's strength, and engenders evil humors, for this Herb ioyeth to be
bestowed in a moist Earth, and under a shadow from the Sun.

The seed hole taken, restrayneth the distillings of the head, without
danger or harm, the seed brought to powder, and drawn up by the
Nosethrilles, cleanses the brain and helps the pains of the head.

The seed of the Cresses helps against the paulsie, being boiled in wine,
and applied hot in a bag to the Paulsye member, the powder of the seed
blown up does cause the patiente sneese, amendeth the Lethargy or sleeping
out of measure.

The Seed boiled with dry figs, and a Gargyll made of the same, does send
up and dry the Vuula loose hanging.

Against infections of the head, knobbes and dandrie, mix the seeds of the
Cresses with Goose grease, and diligently bruised, annointe all about sundry
times, the powder of the seed annoyted with oil of Roses, does stay the going
forth of the fundament.

The seed drunk in wine, does expel the noisome creeping things, as the
round and flat worms in the body, but forcibler by mynts added thereto,
this profits against the hardness of fetching wind, and the coughe, with
Organye myxed and sweet wine, and the same diverse times drunk: the decoction
of the Herb in Goats Milk helps the griefs of the breaste: this amendeth
the ach of the Hyps, and grief of the Loins, by anointing with Barlie meal
and vinegar mixed with it, on the grieved places.

Certain report, that the daily eating of the Cresses for a time, purchases
a readier understanding and quicker wit. The seeds after the bestowing into a
bag, boiled in wine, and applied on the flancke, does remove the pain
greeuouslye vexyng, and likewise the Cholicke, applied on the bellye,
proceedyng of a cold cause.

For the self same, and for the strangury, does the simple Herb boiled in
wine and Oil prevail, being applied upon. For weakness of the kydneys,
proceeding of a fleumaticke matter discending from the head, the raines of the
back anointed with Honey, strew the fine powder of the seeds, with cummyne,
and Colofonie.

A certain practicioner reports, that the juice of Cresses distilled or
dropped into the Ear, does remove and deliver the grievous pain of the teeth.
The seed boiled in wine and drunk, and a plaster with Fygges applied
without, does in short time aswage the swelling and grief of the Mylt.

The commended virtues of the distilled waters, both of the Cheruel and Garden
Cresses.
THe chosen time for the distilling of Cheruel, is when the Herb and root,
with the whole substance may be finely shred and distilled, which time best
answers in the middle of May.

The water of Cheruell drunk, unto the quantity of four ounces at a time,
both morning and evening, helps men bursten, and harmed by a grievous fall,
and resolves the blood clotted in lumpes. The same drunk, profits against
the stone of the kidneys, a great quantity of this drunk, at one time
loses the belly.

The water drunk (as above said) procures a good stomach, confirms and
comfort the heart, puts away the shaking of the Fever, the same
healthful or profitable to the head, and comfort the senses.

This like drunk, remoueth grievous pains and prickings, helps the Lungs,
and the diseases of the same.

The convenient time for the distilling of the Garden Cresses, is in the end
of May, in a Tin Lymbecke.

The water of Cresses avails against the Measels, and impostumes behind the
ears, if the same mixed, with Honey, be applied on the places, with linen
clothes dipped in it, which being dried, again moysten them, for this remoueth
the red spots.

If the Measels be on the legs, then let blood on the Anckle of the foot,
and drink the same morning and euenyng mixed with strawbery water, and refrain
after from al hot meats.

The water of Cresses drunk morning and evening, unto the quantity of four
ounces at a time, aswageth a swelling, and expels worms of the belly, this
mitigateth ulcers, and swellings of the gummes if they be often rubbed with it.

What care and skill required in the sowing and ordering of the Buckes horn,
strawberie, and Mustardseed. Chap. 18.
THe Buckes or Hearts horn, whose leaves be sweet in taste, and somewhat
saltie, is at this day sowe^ in Gardens, and yearly used in Sallets, and
requires a small labor, before the bestowing in the Earth, for as much as this
Herb, so well ioyeth in the earth not labored and dressed, as before prepared.

But if the owner mind to have the Herb thick toufte, and fair to the eye,
he must often clyppe the tops of the leaves, and press the head down by
some wayghte, or properly tread with the Foot on it: for on such wise
handeled will the Herb be procured to grow downward and into a breadth.

This especially in Sallets in the summer time, although the same have no apt
sauoure nor taste.

The Strawberies require small labor and diligence in the bestowing in the
Earth, saving that these joy to be set in some shadowie place of the garden,
in that these rather desire to grow under the shadow of other Herbs, than to
be planted in Beds alone, and planted under the shadow of high trees, these
prosper without any trimming of the Earth.

Here note a marvelous innocence in the strawberies, that although these
creep law by the Earth, and that diverse venomous things creep over the
Herbs, yet are these in no manner infected with any venomous contagion, which
is a note, that the Herb (of property) has no aff^nitie with poison. This
Herb by diligence of the Gardener, becomes so great, that the same yields
fair and big Beries, as the beries of the Bremble in the Hedge, and hereof it
seems, that Virgilianus Seruius named the strawbury, the Mulbery of the
Earth. Certain skilful men, by a diligence and care, procure the beries to
alter from the proper red color, into fair white delectable to the eye.

The Mustarde seeds desire to be sown in a fat ground, and to be
committed to the Earth with fine powder dust, both before and after ye winter,
these after the coming up require to be often weeded and watered. But the
Seeds may not be sown too thick, in that the plants multiply and spread
into breadthe. After the plants have enjoyed strong root in the Earth, they
are hardely plucked up by the roots, and the Seeds may well be kept for
five years, which the newer they be, so much the better to sow, and to be
eaten. The goodness of the seed is known in the breaking or cracking of it
between the teeth, whether the same be found green, or white within: for if
this be white the Seed is old and nothing worth, neither to sow, nor to
eat. The seeds which the owner would keep for to eat, those plants must he
remove, after certain leaves sprung up, and set them a good distance a sunder,
whereby the tops may bushe and spread the broader, but such plants which
the owner would have run up to seed, those may he not change, nor remove
out of the proper places.

The physic remedies and helps of the Buckes horn* Strawberie, and Mustard
seed.
THe Hearts horn has the property of heating and drying, for which cause
taken in drink, it ceasseth the grypings of the belly, yea this used, healpeth
the griefs of the joints, strengthens and expels the evil matter in them.

This herb after the mind of Dioscorides, has the property of binding, so
that the same be profitably given in red wine, for the perilous Flixes.

Certain report that if four roots of the Buckes or Hearts horn, be either
diligently hanged about the neck, or bound to the pulses of both the hands,
that these in short time, do put away the Fever, or at the least, moisture the
heat or burning of the feet.

The Berries as well as the Herb of the Strawbery have the virtue of cooling
and moystning in the third degree, and the Herb it self endures not above a
year.

Vigonius writing of the Strawberie leaf affirms the same to be of a cold
quality especially, the Juice of which Herb mixed with the wine of
Pomegranates, and a little quantity of Rose water, applied on hot impostumes
(both in the beginning and increase of them) does marvelously healpe. The
Berries eaten with white wine, and a little sugar, does maruellously amend the
hardenesse and swellyng of the spleen, the self same does the juice of the
berrie, taken with honye, the leaves, sundry times used in a bath, is said to
be most profitable against the stone. The leaves and root orderly applied, do
heal as well wounds as ulcers: these also procure the terms, stay the bloody
flixe Dysenteria, and cause urine: the decoction of the herb and root drunk,
helps inflammations of the liver, and cleanses both the kydneys and bladder.

If any shall be mightily molested with grievous ache and pains of the hyppes,
let him take three or four handfulles of the Strawbery leaves, and boylyng
them tender, sit in the bath, and rub the legs well (with the licour and
leaves) from the nether part upward: Which done, and thoroughly dried with a
warm cloathe, apply this Oyntmente following, prepared after this manner:
Take of the oyntmente of March Mallows one ounce, unto which myxe half an
ounce of stone honey, and a dram weight of Wax, making thereof an ointment
by a soft fire: this on such wise handeled, not only amendeth the griefs of
the hippes, and softneth the matter hardened in them, but provoke urine,
applied on the proper place.

The decoction of the Herb and root, holden in the mouth, and washing or
rubbing the teethe and gummes with it, does not only strengthen the gummes
and fasten the teeth, but stays the distillings from the head.

The Berries in the Summer time, eaten with Cream and Sugar, is accounted a
great refreshing to men, but more commended, being eaten with Wine and Sugar,
for on such wise, these maruellouslye cool and moisten Chollericke stomachs
or such being of a Choleric complexion.

The Juice of the Berryes pressed forth, and the water of Plantaine added of
each eight ounces, to these mix two ounces of Rosed honye, one ounce of the
Juice of the Mulberries, of white Greek pitche and the flowers of the
Pomegranat, of each a dram wayghte, these after the diligent beating and
mixing together, wash and gargell the same in the mouth sundry times, for this
in short time remoueth and puts away the impostumes of the throat. Among
other commodities which the Berries yield, the Juice or wine pressed forth of
them, is a sovereign remedy for the removing of the great rednes, spots and
red pimples, which happen on the face, through the heat of the Liver, the
self same asswageth and puts away the redness of the eyes, the spots, and
hot distillings from the head, by dropping of it sundry times into ye eyes. The
decoction of ye roots and leaves of the strawbery in wine is marvelous
profitable for the Jandise, being taken diverse mornings fasting. The decoction
only of the root taken, does mi^igate the heat of the liver, so that the same
be drunk in the morning, and at noone, the herb eaten with vinegar and a
little white pepper, does greatly help such fetching the wind short: the
Beries also eaten, do cease and cool thirste, for which cause profitable to
the stomach, but these especially commodious to the Choleric. The Mustard
seed heateth and dries in the fourth degree and it is like to the Rape seed,
saving that the rape seed is bitter, and the Mustard seed sour. The goodness
of the mustard seed is known in the breaking of it, which if the same be
white and moiste within (although new gathered) yet profitable to uses. This
has the virtue of heating and ripening. The force and nature of the mustard
seed, is to heat extenuate, and draw forth, as the worthy Dioscorides
reports. The mustard seeds bruised with the fresh root of Enula Campana,
and applied on impostumes breaks them without pain, the seeds bruised and
te^pered with vinegar applied on the bit of a venemouse beast, does spedilye
cure the same. The seeds chawed and retained under the tongue, prevail
against the palsy of the tongue, the seeds do like profit against all the
kinds of palseys, happening in any part of the body, if a linen bag filled
with the seeds, and boiled in wine, be applied on the grieved place, being
especially used in the beginning of the infirmity. The seeds after the brusing
with cummin and figs eaten sundry mornings, does deliver and help ye dropsy:
the seeds after the mixing with water and honey sundry times gargelled,
amendeth ye blistering or sores of ye mouth, and aswageth the swelling of the
throat. The Juice of ye mustard seed, taken diverse mornings fasting, does
procure a good memory, the oil drawn out of the seeds, is a sovereign
ointment for the cold Gowte, sciaticke, and feeblenes of sinews. The Juice of
the mustard seed dropped into the eyes, does remove the dimnesse of sight,
and put away the spots and web in them, yea this in the eating causes thirste,
and procures the venereall act.

The person which every morning fasting, shall swallowe down two Seeds at a
time, shall be free that day from the falling sickness, the seeds boiled in
wine, and drunk, amendeth the hardness of fetching breathe: the powder of the
Seeds drawn up by the nosethrills, not only procures the creature to sneese,
but maruelously purges and amendeth the Brain.

If a like waighte of the Mustarde seed, Pellitorie and Ginger be bruised, and
after the well mixing with rosed Honye, the mouth be washed with the same,
and this for a good whiles holden in the mouth, does marvelously cleanse the
Brain of evil humors, of which the grievous pain of the head most
commonly succeeds. The same also amendeth the falling of the Vuula, and
ulcers of the throat.

The Mustard seed, (as Dioscorides writes) eaten, draws down and purges
by the mouth, the fleume gathered in the head: the Juice of the herb mixed
with water and honey, gargelled and holden a whiles in the mouth, does remove
the hard knobbes and swellings of long continuance of the Jaws, the powder
blown or drawn up by the nose, to procure the creature sundry times to
sneese, not only profits such a one having the falling sickness, but
amendeth the suffocation of the matrice, and falling out of place. And against
the dullness of the head, and often sleeping, (the head before shaven) is the
ointment or plaster of the seeds profitablie applied: the decoction of the
Mustard seed in wine, holden in the mouth for a whiles, does cease the ache
and pain of the teeth coming of cold, and drunk, breaks the stone in the
Bladder, and procures the Terms.

The person which coueteth to prepare a clear voice to sing, ought to take
the meal of Mustarde seed (and after the working of it with honey) to make
little balls of the same, and of these to take one every day, which on
such wise used, will procure in short time a clear voice.

The commended virtues of the distilled waters both of the Strawberie, and
plant of the Mustarde seed.
THe best time for destilling of the Berrie is, when they are near ripe, yet
that they be not over ripe and soft, which after the gathering and sprinkled
over with Sugar, ought so to stand close covered in a glass, until they
appear mouldye, before the distilling in Balneo Mariae. The Beries which grow
in woods standing on hills, are better commended to use.

The water of the Berries drunk, and mixed with the same, amendeth an evil or
an unnatural heat, and ceasseth thirste, proceedyng of the liver, or of
Choler. The water drunk unto the quantity of four ounces at a time, both
morning and evening, not only cools the liver, loses the Breaste,
refreshes the heart, purges the blood, and helps the kings evil, but
preuayleth against the stone, of the Loins, Kidneys, and Bladder.

The like quantity drunk, profits against blysters, and sores in the
mouth, the ulcers and swellings in the throat, and strong savor of the mouth,
proceeding of the gummes and teeth, if this water also be gargelled in the
mouth and throat.

The water in like order druncke of women, purges them, and procures the
Terms. The water druncke unto the quantity of four ounces at a time, both
morning and evening, (or at the least in the morning) and linen clothes
dipped in it, being applied twice a day to the leg broken, does in short time
recover and help the same.

The water heals all foul legs, if after the daily washyng both Morning
and Euenyng, linen clothes wette in it, be applied upon: This in like manner
cures filthye wounds, if they shall be washed with the same, or if any shall
use of the water in his drink, this water also aswageth the swelling of the
face, by the often washing with it.

The water drunk Morning and Evening, unto the quantity of four ounces at a
time, with an ounce of pure Aqua vitae, healpeth (no doubt) the Leaprie, in
that this drink pourgeth blood, by the sundry times using, or otherwise a
white toste of bread, after the wetting with this be eaten fasting, which on
such wise used does remove the foul scurffe and scabbes on the body.

The water after the well tempering with Sugar, distilled over again in Balneo
Mariae, is very sovereign for diverse purposes, in that the same not only
cools, clears, and remoueth spots of the eyes, but comfort nature,
expels poisons, provoke the Terms, asswageth burning humors, and
comfort conception: yea this is a most effectuous ointment for the eyes, in
that the same stays tears or watering of the eyes, cools the great heat
in them, and restores a dim sight.

This water also applied sundry times with a linen cloth wet in it does
maruellously cool and put away the red pimples and rednes of the face, yea and
clears the same, contrary to hope.

The virtues commendable of the distilled water of the Strawbery leaves.
THe apt time for the distilling of the herb in either Balneo Mariae or a
Tin Limbeck is inethe middle of May. This water drunk unto the quantity of
four ounces at a time, both morning and evening does remove and help the
kings evil.

The water in like order drunk loses the breast, purges the Lungs helps
the coughe, and cleanses the Lepry. The water dropped into the eyes both
morning and evening, does remove the redness of the eyes, and mitigateth the
heat in them.

The water like drunk ceasseth the ouermuche sweating, and for the heat and
stopping of the Liver, there is nothing more healthful and profitablee.

The whole herb bearing flower of the Mustard seed, after the finely
shredding, ought to be distilled in a Tin Limbecke, in the beginning of
June. The water amendeth the ulcers of the gummes, if the same be holden a
while in the mouth, and the gummes often washed therewith. This water helps
unto the consumption of members, if they be bathed and rubbed with the same:
for the members thoroughe the same, do recover in short time strength and
flesh. This water heateth the marow in the bones, if they be often rubbed with
the same, and the water to dry in alone. This water profits against a cold
disease and ache of the joints, if they be often rubbed with the same, and the
water suffered to dry in by it self.

What skill and care is required in the sowing and workmanly ordring of the
Lekes and Lives. Chap. 19.
THe Leeke for that it is a root of the Garden to be eaten and often used in
the pot, therefore I will first entreat of the same, which (as the most
skillful report) desires to be sown in a fruitful and battle place, and
lying especially open, whether the same be in a low place, as the worthy
Rutilius writes, and to these, that the beds be leuelled, deep dug,
diligently turned, and very well dunged. The husbandme^ in time past, noted two
kinds of this herb, as ye one which grew into a head, like the Onion, and the
other into many divided blades, both long and straight, whose bush sprung up,
is wont to be cut near to the ground, and this with us named the unset Leeke.
The owner or Gardner which would possess unset Leekes, ought to cut the
green blades come up in the beds, after two months of the sowing. For
these (after the mind of the learned Columella) will endure the longer, and
increase far bigger, if after this cutting they be removed and set again,
and how often the green blades shall be cut, so often the herb is helped with
water and new Cow dung. And use instructs every careful owner as the said
Authoure reports, that in the removing, such skill must be used for the
new setting, as when they be grown into a bigness in the head, to be
removed certain distances asunder, as four fingers breadth between either
set, and when they shall be grown to a farther strength and bigness, to be
again cut. The Leekes ought so often to be watered, dunged, and weeded, as
need requires the same, and the place is to be often raked over, whereby the
plants may increase the better, through the help of the often killing and
casting forth of the unprofitable herbs or weeds. As touching the Ciues and
unset Leekes, they may like be bestowed in the earth, as the Leeke bearing the
head: And the seeds of these may be committed to the earth at any time, if
so be the owner forces not for the yield of the seeds, but they otherwise
ought to be sown in the Months of December, Januarie and Februarye, for
the gathering and occupying after the Month of March, unto the mids of
Auguste. And the plants after the sowing, when the blades be well shot up,
ought lyghtely to be trodden down with the foot, and not to be watered for
four days after. When the young and tender blades be shot out of the seeds,
and that the owner minds to have the heads grow big, he ought not after the
pulling up to set them again, before all the small roots be cut away, and
the green blades nighe half cut off, which done, that small pote shardes, or
oyster shelles, be laid (as it were) right under each head, and then
diligently covered with earth, whereby the heads may so increase the bigger,
in the which doing, the worthy Greek Sotion forbyddeth the watering of the^
til four days after (if a drouth ensew) otherwise water the^ not at all. The
skillful Neapolitane Rutilius instructs, that when the Leekes be grown to a
finger bigness, by cutting the blades half away, and the hearie roots quite
(least these seed and draw away of the substance) then in the setting in
earth mixed with sand and anointed fresh with Cow dung, let the plants be
distante in beds well four or five fingers one from the other, and when these
have sent forth roots sufficient long, let the owner (gently putting under his
Dible) raise softly the heads, that these remaining (as hanging in the Earth)
may on such wise fill the rooms or emptye spaces by the greatenesse of the
heads growing. And that in fewer words I utter this instruction, if so be the
owner would enjoy vnsette leekes, he may bestow the seeds in beds the
thicker together. If these to grow into a head, then the thinner in the
earth, and shall cause them to prosper the better through a daily weeding,
and feeding with fresh Cow dung.

The seeds ought to be committed to the Earth, in the months of April, May,
and June throughout, to possess the herbs in the Summer time, in the
Harueste, September, and October, for to enjoy the plants in the Winter time,
but these especially require, to be often weeded and dunged, which grow into
heads. The Leeke shall yield a far bigger head and stem, as after
Columella Rutilius wrote, yea before them both the worthy Greek Sotion, if in
thin linen cloutes, or clothes much worn, the owner shall bestow and tie
up many Seeds together, which so handled, to cover diligently with soft
dung and earth, and immediately to water them so lying in the earth, for these
thus knitte up (through the runnyng of the Seeds into one) will send forth
leekes of a wonderful bigness, which practice also may the husbandly Gardner
try in the other seeds of plants.

I like experience will come to pass, if the owner bestow a Rape seed into
the head of a Leeke, with out making a hole, with any Iron instrument, which
so handled, set into the Earth, for on such will it grow very big, as
both Rutilius and diverse Greek instructers of Husbandry report. There be
some, which making holes in the head with a wooden prick, or piece of Elder
Cane, or else reed sharpened, bestow (in place of the Rape) the Gourde
seeds. Others there are, which taking up so many seeds as they can
handsomely retain with three of the fingers, and poured into a thin Reed,
do commit those to the Earth, with soft dung covered and laid about, which
practice does even like agree, to the former uttered.

The said Greek Sotion commends and affirms, that immediately after the
seeds shall be sown, the soft earth of the Beds, be trodden with the feet
into small and shallow furrows, and the Beds for three days (as if they
were neglected) not watered at all, but in the fourth day, to be helped
through the sprincklyng of water on the Beds, for such wise handled, to the
Blades coming up, will grow (as he reports) the more bushie and fayrer
to the eye, yet if the owner, between the sowing and planting, shall mix Sand
with the Earth, the Blades will shoot up the fuller and bigger.

The said worthy Greek Sotion adds and affirms, yt if the owner shall eat a
little Cummyne seed before, he shall breath forth no stinking sauoure at all of
the Leeke, although he shall eat a great handful at a time of the Leekes,
for by eating of the Cummyne seed is the strong sauoure extinguished or put
away.

Here out of Petrus Crescentius I have added, as a matter worthy of the
noting, that the Leeke seed thrown into a vessel of wine, causes that the
wine soureth not, but rather that veneger returns into wine, that is, puts
away all the egernesse.

This to conclude conceive, that the Leeke in the eightenth day after the
sowing, to shoot appear (for the more part) above the Earth, and to endure
for ten years, after which time to yield seeds, and dye.

The Physic helps of the Garden Leeke.
THe Leeke, after the mind of the ancient, heateth in the third degree, and
dries in the second, especially, the Garden Leeke whose Seeds may well endure
to purpose, for two years.

The worthy Greek Sotio (of whom we have before mentioned) utters, in his
singular precepts and instructions of Husbandry, that the Leeke, bruised and
applied, to cure the bitte of a venomous Beast, sooner than any other Medicine,
and the seed of it drunk with the Licour of Reasons, to recover and help the
difficulties of making waters.

To these, to help and stay the long and old spitting up of blood, if at
convenient times, in two drammes of the juice, with a like weight of the powder
of Myrtyl beries or Gauls, and the meal of Frankensence the same be drunk.

But the singular Hippocrates wills the juice to b ministered without any
myxture at al, and forbids the daily, or too much eating of Leekes, in that
this not only harmeth and dulleth the sight of the eyes, but offends the
stomach which shall be procured the lesser harmeful, if so be the Leeke shall
so long be boiled, until it become (as soft in a manner) as pap, for on such
wise handeled, the same is supposed no less to norish than flesh.

The juice of the raw Leeke (is recyted and accounted with Pliny) among the
venomous matters: for the report is, that Mela (a man of worthy Birth) accused
and sharply blamed of Tiberius for mysusing of the office given to him of the
prince, who after falling into mighty desperation, and drinking unto the weight
of three silver pence of the juice of the Leeke, dyed immediately without
grief of body. But such like are rather with silence to be ouerpassed, than
opened for instruction sake.

But to return to ye Physic helps, ye Leeke twice sodden before the eating,
draws down the Terms, procures vryne, and obtayneth a superfluous heat.
The juice of the Leeke my red with vyneger, applied on the foreheade, stays
the bleeding at the nose. The Leeke eaten raw causes vomitting and is
venomous, this also puts away drunkenness, being eaten raw.

The juice of the Leeke taken with woman's milk, amendeth an old cough, and
the ulcers of the Lungs. The Leeke bruised and myxed with Salt, applied on evil
pushes heals them. The Leeke brought into powder, and tempered with the oil
of Roses and vinegar, and dropped into the ears, remoueth the griefs of them.
The same also profits, in like manner applied against the toothe ache.

The Leek bruised with Honey and applied, purges ulcers, a plaster made of the
same, and applied on bruised members, does not only aswage the swelling, but
remoueth the blood clotted.

The juice of it drunk with woman's milk, staieth the flux of blood after
birth, the same also applied with vinegar, ceasseth the bleeding of the nose,
if ye fine powder of Frankincense be added to it, and drawn by by the
Nosethrels.

The juice of the Leeke drunk with Honye, profits against pains or aches
of the Hyppes, the juice of the Leeke taken with Honye, recouereth all
defaultes of the breaste and stomach, the same ceasseth an old coughe, and
griefs of the breaste and Lungs: and it helps the dropsy, through the
sundry times taking fasting.

Here I will not omit the practice out of Galen, that the Leekes tartness may
be abated, and to engender the less wind, if the same boiled in two waters,
the cold Licoure in the end be poured forth, and the Herb eaten, by which
means it is said, that this stays the flixe of the belly, and to amend a
hoarse voice, yea through the softnes of it, to make smooth the roughness of
the jaws and mouth.

For to purchase a clear and sounding voice, Nero accustomed to eat the Leeke
with Oil, in certain days of every month, when he contended for ye
segniorytie of loud pronouncing and uttering of words. It which times, he
only took or eat nothing, saving bread, as Pliny writes of him, which
reports yt this to be meant of the unset Leeke, to which the prince Nero
attributed a singular commendation.

If two parts of the juice, with a third part of Honye be myred, and
applied into the Nosethrels or ears, does maruellously help the grievous
pains of the head, the juice applied up, does maruellously prevail against
the exulcerations of women's privy places.

The seeds of the lack bruised, and drunk either with Cuite or pleasante
white wine, does loose the difficultnes of making water, and opens the vrinal
passages: the juice of the Leeke drunk with wine, does aid forward the
delivery of child, the Leeke seeds, after the brusing with Mirre in the Juice
of Plantain, is very sovereign for the spitting of blood, and staying the
bleeding of the nose.

The Juice of the Leeke, powdered on such wounds, which are become cold and
putrified, does both cleanse away the rotten flesh, and cures the wounds if
the Juice be mixed with the roots of white Lillies and anointed warm on the
hips, it does speedelye remove the ache of them. The fresh Juice applied with
salt on new cuttes or wounds, does incontiment close them.

The learned Dioscorides reports, that the Leeke moves and provoke the
venerial act, the same with Honey, in form of an Eclegma, sucked or suffered
to melte down, cleanses and amendeth all defaultes of the beast, the same like
used, recouereth the wasting of the Lungs: yet the Leeke often, and much at a
time used, does burden the stomach, procures thirst and inflameth the blood.

The commended helps of the distilled water of the Leeke.


THe root only of the Leeke, being shredde, is to be distilled in a Tynne
Lymbecke, in the month of June.

The water drunk unto the quantity of two ounces at a time, both morning and
evening, is a sovereign remedy for ye spitting upon cold blood: this also is
auailable, being sundry times drunk, for a Barrayne woman.

The water of the Leeke, stays bleeding of the nose, if cotton dypped in it,
beoften applied: the same drunk amendeth a costyue belly, and ache of the
Hyppes, purges the kydneys and bladder, procures vryne, and expels the
stone.

The water speedily heals wounds, if they be washed morning and evening
with the same, this also profits unto the exulceration and fracture of women's
places, which is wont to happen after the delyuery of child, if so be the
places be washed with the water, both morning and evening.

What skill and diligence required in the workmanly sowing and ordering of the
Onyon. Chap. 20.
THat the Onyons have a body compassed and compact with many cartilagies,
there is none (I believe) which knows not.

The ancient husbandmen (as witnesses Columella) named these Onyons, because
they grew in one round head together, yet not joined together with so many
heads round about, as the Garlike, which unto this day is familiarly named the
Onyon of the Husbandmen with us.

The Onions for the more part ought to be sown in the months of Januarye,
February, and March, in a fat Earth, well dunged, moiste, and diligently
trimmed, which shot up to some height, ought to be removed in the month of
April, a good distance the one from the other, and these further grown,
ought carefully to be weeded about, and often labored to cause them grow
the bigger, and to defend the^ (in time of a blustering wind) by helps set
against. The worthy Neapolitane Rutilius writes that the seeds desire to be
bestowed in a fat earth, often turned and raked, moiste and dunged, and red
also, as the Greek Sotion in his husbandry wills: which before ought to be
cast up, that it may putrifye through the cold and frostes in the Winter
time, (as the skillful Columella utters) after these the Earth to be
dunged, and within two days after, the ground leuelled forth, and cast or
trodden into beds, all the roots and unprofitable herbs before cleansed out.
These workmanly handled in the month of March, being a calm and pleasante
day, the South or East wind (at that time blowing) the seeds shall
workmanly be committed to the earth, with Sauerie intermedeled between them
(as Pliny wylleth) for so the plants prosper the better. The worthy Greek
Sotion admonishes the Gardener which would set Onyons, to cut away all the
hearye roots and tops of the green blades (before the bestowing) whereby
they may grow to big heads. Others there are, which only pluck away the
blades nigh to the root, for on such wise they send the juice to the neither
parts, to cause the head grow big: But these (after the mind of Rutilius)
ought in this manner to be placed or set thin in beds, and both raked and
weeded (if these not often) yet four times at the least, as Pliny wills:
who also taught, that t the ground be dug and cast up three times before the
bestowing of ye seeds in the earth.

If the Gardener commit seeds to the earth in the wane or decrease of the
Moon, he shall possess small and sour ones, if the seeds in the increase of
the Moon, then strong or big, and of a moyster taste, with the soreness
maystred. But the same not to be vnreme^bred nor ouerpassed, that in all the
kinds of Onyons, the same somewhat long and sharp, is wont to be sourer
than the round, and the red one more than the white, to these the dry one,
more than the green, and the raw more than the boiled, the fresh also, more
than that seasoned or poudered with salt, or the sodden one.

The Gardener or owner shall possess far greater Onyons, if when there is a
place or room for the setting again, they be laid in Earth well labored
for twenty days space, and so long left drying against the sun, until all
the moisture be gone or drawn forth by heat of the sun, after the
instruction of the worthy Greek Sotion, which Ruellius (out of Palladius)
seems greatly to mistake, in that he ascribes the same to be done to the
Dill, and not the Onyons, whose heads may also be bared, by plucking off the
upper skin, before the setting again in the Earth, to prosper the better,
and yield the bigger seeds, if they be set in the Earth well a hand breadth
asunder.

The heads to be eaten before the full rypenesse, that these may be the
sweeter, ought rather to be sown in a moist ground, among the young Plants
of the Cucumbers, Gourdes and Melones.

If the owner will rightly possess, and gather the seeds in due season: when
the green stemmes are shot up high, and yield big heads, they are then
to be guyded with two small forkes of wooded, fixed on either side (as
Columella wills) that the stems, though the stays shoaring them upright,
may not in any bygge wind, knock the heads together, to the spilling and
loss of the Seeds on the Earth, which are not asore to be gathered, that
they inioye a black color, as after the Greeks Columella, and Rutillius like
uttered.

The stemmes and knops, in which the Seeds are contained, ought to be gathered
in the decrease of the wane of the Moon, in a fair and warm time, when the
leaves or blades begin of themselves to wyther and dry, and that the seeds
begin to appear black of themselselues, for then ought the stemmes to be
plucked up by the roots, which knit together in form of garlands, or
otherwise bound up, to be laid in the Sun to dry and rypen. The Onyons will
continue long uncorrupted (as the said Sotion has noted) if so the Onyons be
put into hot water, or (as Pliny wills) into saltie and warm water, and
after laid in the hot sun, until they be through dry, which let be
hidden or covered with Barley straw, and in such manner bestowed, yt nether
touch other by any part. In many places, the Onyons be hanged in the smoke and
in Chimnies nere the heat of the fire, and on such wise preserve them a long
time.

The auntiente, and skillful writers of Husbandry utter, that if the Gardener
would possess Onyons of a wonderful bigness in the head, the seeds of the
Onyons put within the seeds of Gourdes, which so handeled, bestow in moist
beds, well turned in with dung, into a like bigness, will the heads of the
Onyons increase, if the Earth dug round about, the small heads of the
Onyons, in the heauing or lifting of the earth, shall be lifted up, yet in such
manner done, that the heads not quyte raised out of the earth or plucked up
quite by the roots, as I before uttered to be wrought with the Lecke. The like
also shall the owner obtain, if boaring the head of an Onyon, with a wooden
prick, in sundry places, and putting into the holes Gourde seeds, he bestow
the^ together in a well labored Earth.

But in this place I thought not to omit, that if the Gardener shall commit the
seeds of the Onyons in due time to the Earth, they will after grow into a
head, but they shall yield less stoare of Seed. But if the Gardener shall
bestow little heads in the ground, the heads will after whyther and ware dry,
and be shot up into a round stem.

To these I add, that the Onions plucked out of the ground and lying upon the
Earth, or hanged up in ropes, do continue longer sound in the air, but if we
may creedit Aristotle in the so^mer Solstice, these, as the Penny royal, and
many other Herbs, do at the same time flourish, which may be as if they were
of a doubtful life, that one while taking nourishment out of the Earth, and an
other whiles from the air. But the Onyons lightly budde and shoot out, not
being in the earth, and send forth fair green blades by occasion of the
moisture in the hrades, but after the stem shall be full shot out, the
heads wyther.

To which Pliny wrote, that the Nuttes be contrary, in that these do abate
the strong savor of the Onyon. I read that many skillful Gardeners used to
sow the Onyons and Garlike near to Garlande flowers (but especially the Rose)
to procure them to yield a sweter sauoure, and the same done by the counsel of
the Ancient and the worthy Pliny, which (in my opinion) deserves to be
followed.

Truly, this one thing is greatly to be marvelled at, that the Onyon alone of
all other Herbs, as Plutarch writes, receives no damage of the Moon, and
has contrary virtues of increasing and diminishing to her: for the Onio^
becomes grene and buddeth forth in the wane or last quarter of the Moon
contrariwise she increasing of Light, the Onion then withers and rotteth.

For which cause, ye Egiptian Priests in time past, refused the Onion in their
Religious meats, where otherwise fruits, Herbs, Trees, and Beasts, receive
a damage or diminishing and increasing through the occasion of this star, so
that the Onyon only obeys unto the contrary turns of the Moon, whose
preserving unto winter time, Columella prepared after this manner, he chose
the Onyon or Sealiones (that are all alyke) which be not budded forth, or that
green blades appeared, and these dried before in the hot sun after which
cooled again in the shadow, by strewing upon Time or Sauorie, he the^ laid
the^ by courses, with either of these strawed between in an Earthen pot, and by
pouring the Licoure upon, which was iii. parts of vinegar, and one of Bryne: he
strewed then a good handful of Sauery (in such manner) that the Onions were
couched or pressed under the Licoure, which when they had drunk up the
Licour, and seemed to lie dry, he poured upon and filled the vessel with
the like mixture, and in an apt place set the pot to preserve them to use.

This one thing I will not omit, although the same may seem childish, in
that it is noted by the learned man Cato, who writes, that the letters drawn
and written with the Juice of the Onion, are invisible, which then show and
appear euidentlye, when the paper shall be heated at the fire. To conclude,
the Onions set in the middle of Auguste in a red earth, do yield the year
following their high stemmes and seed, but the worser will those be, which are
bestowed in the earth, to serve green in the Lent time.

The physic commodities of the Onion.
Although the worthy Greek Hippocrates more commended the sight, than the
eating of the Onion, saying that the same in sight to be good and in body
evil, forasmuch as it is hot and burning: yet I purpose here to entreat
somewhat of the physic benefits of the Onion, and of these, part faithfully
gathered out of the Greek, and part out of the Latin writers, as well
physicians, as cunning and most diligent searchers of husbandly secrets.

The onion has the property of heating in the fourth degree, and of a grosser
substance, as Galen witnesses.

The Greek Sotion (both husbandman and physician) is Authoure, that if any
shall daily eat the tender Onion fasting with Honey, it shall maintain the
continuance of health. The said authoure reports besides, that the same
recouereth and cures ulcers: to these, that it remoueth the foul spots on the
body, being diligently rubbed with it in the Sun, and to profit the ears
running, by dropping the Juice into them. The same anointed, helps the
swellings in the throat, and these roasted under hot embers, and eaten with
Oil, do healpe the cough.

The Onion after the rosting eaten with honye, does remove the grief of an
evil stomach: the Onyon eaten raw harmeth the members, in that it too much
dries the moisture of the body: the Onion also eaten raw, procures a rough
throat, and swells the stomach: the Onion notwithstanding applied with
vinegar on Piles, does in short time open them: the Juice of the Onion is
profitably anointed with honey for the clearing of the eyes, and both remoueth
the Pin and Webbes, and amendeth the blood shotten eyes, the Juice anointed
on a balde place, recouereth the heates shed away.

There be which affirm, that the green Onion applied with Uineger, does help
the bitte of a mad dog within three days, but I rather suppose that the Juice
added with Rue, Salt, and Honye, and after the beating together workemanly
applied, to perform the same. The often eating of the Onion, harmeth the
Choleric, by procuring them hotter and dryer in stomach: but this is to
great purpose unto the flewmaticke, in that it cutteth asunder, and consumes
the superfluous humors in them.

The Onion roasted in embers, and applied with barley meal does stay the
dropping of the eyes, and help the ulcers of the Priuities: the Juice besides
dropped with woman's milk into the ears, is said to amend the pain and noise
of the ears. Which also many have given to persons suddenly swollen, by the
drinking of water: and they have prosperously given the Onion, to such as are
molested with the perilous flux Dysenteria: and these applied, have
maruellouslye profited the griefs of the Loins, and the Juice of them with
the Juice of Fennel, expels and helps the water beginning between the
flesh and skin, which together with the Rue and Honey, recouereth the down
right slumbering and sleeping, and with reasyns or figs, applied on impostums,
both ripeneth and speedely opens them.

The Onions after the rosting under hot embers eaten both morning and
evening, not only help the pains of the breaste, but cause an easy spitting
up of gross humors, and purge the stomach: the Onion after the mixing with
honey and salt, applied on wartes, does make them speedely fall off, even by
the roots.

If the Onions be often used through their sharpness, they engender in the
stomach evil humors, procure thyrste, swellyngs and windiness* yea cause
headache, and to become foolish, through the fumositie of them, ascending to
the head, and harm the Brain: for which cause, the daily and too often
using hinder reason, and procure terrible dreams, if so be a weak person,
newly crepte out of sickness, shall much eat of them, but especially raw,
in that these give no nourishement to the body.

I add out of Galen, that if the Onyons shall be twice sodden, each water
separated, and in the third water boiled, to give a very good norishment to the
eater, being boiled with fat flesh, and other pleasant spices added, yet are
they weaker than the green in working, although the euilnesse of the juice no
longer remaining, nor felt.

The raw Onyon moderately used, according to the rule of Physic, heateth and
cutteth asunder gross and clammy humors, opens the ways of the veins,
provoke the Terms and urine, and increases the appetite, the juice also
drawn up by the Nosethrels, or the savor received by the Nose, purges
maruellously the head.

The Onyon is better commended to be eaten, than the sauoure allowed, in that
the person which daily eats of the young and tender Onyons with Honey fasting,
shall continue a longer time in perfitte health and strength.

The juice remoueth the white spots as well on the face, as body, the juice
applied with Hens grease, heals the kybes gallyng of the heels by a
straight shoe: The Juice mixed with Hens grease and anointed, remoueth the
red and wanne spots of the face, the Onion bruised with vinegar, and anointed
on scabbed places, both heals and causes a clear skin. The Onions after
the boiling in wine or water, fried in Oil, and applied in plaster form
under the navel, aswageth the painful gripings and flux, happening to women
in child bed: the Onions roasted under hot embers, and mixed with leven and
oil of Lillies, and applied in plaster form on impostumes, speedily breaks
and procures them to run.

The commended virtues of the distilled Water of the Onions.
THe most chosen and aptest time for the distilling of Onions, is in the first
month of Harvest, for then ought the roots to be shred, and workmanly
distilled. This water drunk four or five times, unto the quantity of two
ounces at a time, recouereth the swelling caused by the bitte of a mad dog, or
other beast: the same drawn up by the nostrels, aswageth the grievous pain of
the head. The water helps the ache and pain of the teeth, if they be either
rubbed or washed with the same: this also causes hears to grow in any balde
place of the head, if the same be anointed with it: the drinking of the water
expels worms.

What care, skill and secreates to be learned in the sowing and ordering both
of the lesser, and greater Garlike. Chap. 21.
THe Garlike much desired, and often eaten of the husbandman, with fat Beef,
and other sodden meats, ioyeth in an earth especially white, diligently dug
and labored, without any dung bestowed in it, whose cloves broken off from the
head, ought to be bestowed on the borders of beds round about, well a
handbredth asunder, about the same time when the Onions are: and these with the
beds or little ridges made (in form to such in the field) to be high
raised, whereby the plants coming up may the lesser be harmed with the
shoures falling, and the natural moisture consisting in the earth. The Cloves
set in the ridges and borders of the beds, may not be deep, nor the earth
raised on them like to hillockes (as many do) but in an even manner, and unto
the middle joints bestowed, which when they shall have yielded or sent up
three blades, then these to be diligently weeded about, for through the often
dooyng they increase the better, and yield a bigger head.

The Neapolitane Rutilius (writing of the Garlike in his instructions of
Husbandry) wills that the seeds to be committed to the earth in the months
of November, December, January and Februarye, in a ground well dug and
labored, and the same white, without any dung bestowed in it, besides the
earth the same time indifferent dry, and in a warm day, for the seeds on
such wise handled, are caused to prosper and yield the better. Although the
learned Pliny seems to write that the seeds bestowed in the earth do
slowly come up, whereby these in the first year, only yield a head no
greater than a Leeke, but in the second year, they grow divided, and in the
third year come to their full growth and perfection, and such some suppose
to be the fairer and seemelier.

The Seeds of the Garlike with us, better agree to be bestowed in the months
of September, October, February, and March, in a earth white, indifferent dry,
and well labored without dunging. If any happen to remain in beds (as
(...) reports) after the seeds full ripe and gone, those then renew in the
year following of the own accord, both in the root and blade, yea yield
seeds the same year, which may after be sown in well labored beds, to
send forth green Garlike. If the owner would possess Garlike both great
and big in the Head, then before the same be shot up into a stem, he
must workmanlye tie all the tops of the green blades to an other growing
next to it, which after tread softly down with the foot.

The worthy Rutilius wills, that when the stem begins to appear, to
cover the same with Earth after the treading down, which in such manner to
foresee, that it increase not into a bushe or many blades, this so handled in
the hard treading down, to be daily applied that the Juice may run to the
root, and cause the head to wax the bigger. The like of which Pliny in his
time first experienced. The worthy Sotion in his greek observations of
husbandry: and also Rutilius with certain others report, that if the cloves
of Garlike heads be committed to the Earth, and the like pulled out of the
ground, when the Moon shall be discending and under the Horizone (as hid
to us) that the stinking sauoure will in a manner be extinguished so that the
breath of the eaters, shall very little be felt: which Pliny seems somewhat
otherwise to utter, instructing that the heads (unto the same purpose) ought
to be bestowed when the Moon shall be under the Earth, and to be gathered
when the Moon shall be in conjunction, or with the Sun.

The said Greek Sotion seems to affirm, that the Garlike heads may be
caused to grow sweet of favor, if in the setting the kernels of Olyues
(after the ioynyng with them) be bestowed together in the Earth, or the
sharper ends blunted on some stone, and then committed to the earth, or else
in the setting, that lies of the Olives be bestowed with the cloves. The
singular Didymus ( Ruellius noting the same) utters, or rather Sotion (as the
Greek copy shows) that the lothsomnesse or stinking sauoure by the eating of
Garlic heads is abolished or put away, if the green and raw bean be
soon after eaten. Others there are, which will the root of the Beat to be
eaten, after the rostyng under hot embers, affirming the same to be
sufficient to remove the strong savor: Also with the like remedy Menander one
of the Greek writers witnesses, as Pliny writes of him, the savor to be
dissebled and bid. Our later writers of husbandrye and Physic report*
that the rank savor of Garlike may be extinguished, with the only eating of
green Parsely blades.

The commodiouser and apter time for gathering of the Garlike heads is in the
decrease or wane of the Moon, the day being dry and fair, when the blades
be withered, that they leave or hang down.

Many of the aunciente writers of husbandry utter, that the Garlike heads will
endure a long time, and be to better purpose afterw^^des, if they be either
hid in chafe, or after the tying together hanged up in thesmoke. There be
others which after the infusion of the heads a while in warm salt water,
and letting them dry, do likewise hide them in the chafe.

But the heads handled after either manner, do for the more part remain
barraine, or prosper not after the bestowyng in the earth. To others it was
sufficient to have dried them over the heat of the fire, that they might
after grow. The learned Pliny utters, that those heads of Garlike be of a
sowrer taste, which possess the more cloves round about, and he adds that
no more loathsomeness or strongnesse of savor does consist in them after the
seething, than in the Onion like ordered. Nor he omitteth not, that the
Garlike heads before eaten, to be in steed of the white Neeswort for the
Pioners, if they mind to avoid and escape the hazard of death. There is
another wild Garlike, which the Greeks name Ophioscoridon, in english Ramsies,
growing of the own accord in the fallowe fields, through which the Kines
milk by feeding on the green blades, is caused to sauoure of the Garlike, yea
the chese made of the same milk, does sender in the eating the like
rancknesse of savor: The husbandmen name this both the wild and serpentine
Garlyke.

This Garlike on such wise boiled, that it may not grow again, and bestowed
on beds, does greatly avail against the harm of birds to Seeds, as before
is uttered in my first part, there writing, that the same of Pliny is named
Alum. But here comes to mind a marvelous matter, not to be ouerpassed,
which is, that neither the Weasell nor Squirrell will after the tastyng
Garlike presume to bite any fowls, by which practice. Pullets and other
souls in the night bring sprinkled over with the lycoure of the Garlike may
be defended from harm of either of these.

There is yet a matter more worthy the remembrance, and the same far
maruelouser, which Volateranus utters, that in his time happened a husbandeman
to sleep open mouthed in the field by a hey cock, cast up in the Harvest
time, which when he had unwittily suffered an Adder to creep into his body,
with the eating incontinente of Garlike heads, was (as by a certain preparation
against poison) delivered, yet the venom and death of ye adder, consisting or
remaining within the body distilled and shed forth in the coeating a matter to
be marueled at of ye wise.

But this also is marvelous in the Garlike, that if it be boiled with a salt
lycoure, the same does effectuouslye destroy the mites or little worms in
either peason or beans, so that the walls and floores of the barnes be wet
with this mixture. Here also I thought not to ouerpasse the marvelous discord
of the Adamant stone and Garlike, which the Greeks name to be an Antipathia
or natural contrariety between them, for such is the hatred or contrariety
between these two bodies, (lacking both hearing and feeling) that the
Adamante rather puts away than draws to it Iron, if the same before be
rubbed with Garlike, as Plutarchus has noted, and after him Claudius
Ptolemaeus. Which matter examined by diverse learned, and found the contrary,
caused them to judge, that those skillful men (especially Pt^lomie) mente the
same to be done with the Egiptian Garlike. Which Dioscorides wrote to be small
Garlike, and the same sweet in taste, possessing a bewtiful head, tending unto
a purple color. There be which attribute the same to Ophioscerido, which
Antonius Microphonius Biturix, a singular learned man, and well practiced in
sundry skils, uttered this approved secret to a friend whom he loved. And the
same as last, shall here be placed, that diverse Garlike heads hanged on the
branches of trees, do drive far off birds from the spoiling of fruits, as
the like Democritus noted in the Greek instructions of husbandry.

That big Garlike named of certain skilful Authors the Africa Garlike, is
of far bigger increase, than the Garden Garlike with us. Which the worthy
Greek Sotion, Columella and Rutilius instruct, that the cloves to be broken
from the head, and bestowed in a white ground, well labored and dressed
without any dung, and set in high ridges of beds, to the end y^ natural
moisture of the earth, nor shoures falling may offend.

The time commended for setting of the cloves, is in the months of January,
Februarye, and March, but some will to bestow them in the Earth, from the
beginning of October, unto the end of November, well a hand breadth asunder,
and unto the middle joints, or rather a finger deep in the Earth, which
grown up to some height, to be often weeded about, and the Earth diligently
raked, whereby the plants may the better prosper.

These further grown up, the skillful teach, to tie the tops of the blades,
by two and two together, which done to tread the blades down with the foot,
that the juice by the same means may run to the root to increase the heads
bigger.

The other instructions need fully to be learned, may the owner co^ceyue by
the former taught of the garden Garlike, which for the Physik benefits
deserves a place in every ground, especially in the husbandmans Garden.

The Physic helps and commodities of the Garlike.
THe learned Pliny seems to me, not to have unadvisedly written, that the
Garlike does serve unto many uses in Phisik, and to the husbandman especially
is profitable, for which cause of sundry it is rightly named, the husbandmans
Triacle.

This (according to the agreement of the skillful) heateth and dries in the
fourth degree, the Onion, Garlike, and Leeke (as the skillful Argineta
witnesses in his first book) endued with a sour virtue, does heat the body,
extenuate and cut the groste humors in the same yet the Cholerik ought to
beware, that they do not too often eat the Garlike, especially in the Summer
time and hot seasons, for at such times the Garlike inflameth and dries the
body, and increases both the red and aduste Choler. The worthy Greek Sotion
(principal of the writers of husbandry) utters, that the Garlik eaten with
meat, or hanged against the region of the stomach, does expel worms in ye
body, and applied in plaster form, prevails against the bit of either snake
or adder. The heads burned and mixed with honey, and the same applied, does
remove the black and blewe spots, and cause a fair color.

The Garlike eaten, puts away the inward swelling of the body, softneth and
opens impostumes, and draws forth matter, being before sodden, and applied
thereon.

If the head be anointed with the juice of Garlike, it kills both Lyce and
Nittes. The Garlike also is drunk to great purpose, with the decoction of
Organy (as Dioscorides witnesses) against Lice and Nits of the head.

The heads eaten do move urine, and are supposed to amend the defaultes of the
kydneys: and a cloue holden in the mouth, cease the toothache, proceeding of
a cold cause.

The Ashes of the Garlike heads, after the mixing with Honey, anointed,
stays the shedding of hear, in the same manner used amendeth the defaultes
or spots of the skin. If the ashes be strewed on foul ulcers, which are
open, it speedily cures them.

The ashes of the heads, after the diligent mixing with Honye and May butter
anointed, does in short time remove the foul scabbes and Leaprie, and
clears the skin, if the same be daily exercised in the bath or hot house.

The Garlike tenderlye sodden and eaten, procures a clear voice, and
recouereth an old cough, and corrects the stomach cooled, the same mightily
dries up the moisture of the stomach.

If any shall before eat of the Garlik, he shall not be endamaged by the byt of
any venomous worm or Serpent, the Garlike bruised and applied on the bit, does
speedily cure it.

And the same in these is marvelous (as writes the skilful Serapio) that
although the heads eaten, does harm the sound sight of the eyes, yet dor
these comfort and relieve the dullness of sight, thorough the moisture
consisting in them. The boiled heads eaten with oil and salt, do cure the
mattering and breaking forth: of whelkes, and remove, both pimples and
^etters. As Well the raw as boiled heads eaten, do recover an old Coughe: but
the boiled heads eaten, are far more profitable than the raw, and likewise
the sodden, than the roasted: and on such wise to the voice they do more
profit and help. The person which shall before have eaten sundry Garlike
heads, if he after happen to drink poison, shall not be harmed by it.

The heads with the green blades boiled in wine and drunk, does not only
move urine, but procures the Terms and draws down the after burden, if the
belly before be anointed with it: the like also may a smoke of the Garlik
procure, if a woman sitting in a hollow Chair, and covered close about with
clothes, receives the fume.

The Garlike bruised with the fig tree leaves and Camomil flowers, by a like
quantity, and applied in plaster form, does cure the bit of a mad dog or
other beast.

The person which weakly digesteth meat eaten, through the coldness of the
stomach, shall find great help through the sundry times eating of the sodden
heads with oil and vyneger.

Praxagoras used the Garlike in wine, against the kings evil. Hippocrates
supposes that ye after burden to be drawn down through the sitting over the
smoke, and Diocles, ^rensie persons they does greatly help, if they after the
boiling shall be eaten, and the fame the dropsy persons, boiled with Centorie:
and the Garlike eaten, stays the flux of the belly, which ye skilful report,
the grene more effectuously to perform, bruised and drunk in pure wine with
Coliander.

For an old cough proceeding of a cold cause, let the soles of the feet,
paulmes of the hands, and chyne of the back, be diligently anointed with the
Barrowes grease, finely tempered with three heads of Garlike clean pilled.

The Garlyke eaten with fresh butter, or applied in plaster form on the
stomach, does in short time kill the worms in Children.

The Garlike boiled with vinegar, and drunk with water and Honey, expels the
broad worms in the body, and what other harmeful creping things in the
bowels. The heads boiled with oil, and applied in plaster form, does cure
the bit of venomous things, in what part so ever the same happens.

The harms and swellings of the bladder, are removed with this ointment, if it
be sundry times applied without.

The Garlike boiled with Milk, and eaten, does heal the ulcers of the Lungs.

The Garlike boiled with Centorie in wine, and sundry times drunk, remoueth
the dropsy, gathered of a cold cause. The Garlike bruised and myxed with
Coliander, and on such wise taken with wine, helps the griefs of the Lungs,
and difficulty of the urine. The heads boiled and bruised with Beans, and
tempered either with oil Olyue or oil of Poppie, and of the same an ointement
made, remoueth headache, anointed on the temples.

There is no better thing for the toothach proceeding of a cold cause than to
wash and retain, for a time, the decoction of the Garlike three cloves bruised
in vinegar, which undoubtedly ceasseth the pain.

The heads also boiled with vinegar and Nitre, do remove the itche, and taken
in a white broth, ceasseth the grievous pain of the going often to the stool.
A Garlike head after the boylyng in sweet wine, with a half Penny weight of
Beniamine drunk, does in short time expel the quartaine.

The same bruised and mixed with fresh butter, profits very much the pyppes
of Hens and Cocks.

The person hardly making water, and subject to the stone, shall greatly be
eased of the grievous pain, by eating of Garlic sundry times.

The worthy Galen utters, that the heads tenderly boiled in two or three
waters, do remove the soreness of them, but these then yield a very small
nourishmente, in respect of the raw eaten with vyneger.

The inconveniences of Garlike out of Pliny.
THe defaultes of the Garlike are (as Pliny writes) that it dulleth the
sight, causes windiness, harmeth the stomach, and much at a time eaten,
causes thyrste.

So that for all causes it is better commended sodden than raw, and boiled than
roasted.

The Garlik boiled and roasted, brought to fine powder with Mastick and
Pellitorie, if the mouth be washed with the same decoction, does maruellously
help the toothache.

The Garlike profits Crafts men, husbandmen, and the Fluematicke, and those
which for the more part drink water, and both use cold meats, and hard of
digestion.

The Garlike avails against the infection of waters, mutation of places, and
other contagious airs (which hastily annoy) by the eating before of it, in
such suspect places.

As touching the Africa Garlike, the same may serve unto all the diseases and
griefs in a manner, which to fore are written of the Garden Garlike.

The commended virtues of the distilled water of Garlike.
THe heads with the green blades finely shredde ought to be dystilled in
the Canicular or dog days, in a Tynne Lymberke.

This distilled water, helps the swellings in the throat, if a linen cloth
wet in the same, be workmanly applied, and drunk unto the quantitye of two
ounces at a time, or gargelled so often in the mouth and throat, until the
patient be better amended.

The water drunk every morning fasting, unto the quantitye of two ounces at a
time, does maruellously amend the green sickness, and swelling of the
Spleen, being used for twelve or fourteen days space.

The water also drunk, profits unto all the said sicknesses and griefs, which
tofore are uttered of the blade and root.

What care and skill is required in the sowing and ordering, both of the Scalion
and Squyll Onyon. Chap. 2^.
THe Scalyons better prosper and come up, being set than sown, for when they
are committed to the earth in the Seeds, the owner may not hope for a seemly
grows of them, before the second year. The owner may bestow ye Scallions in
well dressed beds, from ye beginning of Noue^ber, unto the end of February, for
to enjoy the proper yield the next Spring following: and they require to be
likewise set in the ground, as before taught of the Garlik. But they are to be
plucked up to use, before that the March vyolettes be in their full pride and
flourish, for if these be longer suffered, as unto the time of the perfect
flourishing of the violettes, they are then found feeble and wythered. And for
to know when the Scallions are ripe, it behooves the Gardener to mark whether
the blades beneath be wythered, for on such wise seen, denotes the full
rypenesse of them. And to possess Scalions with big heads, it behooves the
Gardener, to bestow round about the roots soft Cow dung, and to water them
often, which grown to a reasonable height, he must also tread down and order
as before uttered in the using of the Leeke.

The Squyl Onyon better comes forward in the Garden, being set with the
head, than sown in the seed, for when the seeds are committed to the Earth,
they yield slowlye their seemelye bushe and heads.

The owner may bestow the heads of the Squyll Onyons in well labored and
dressed Beds, so that the ground be of a dry nature, and tending unto a
Saltness, whether grauellie or Sandy, for they desire a like diligence to be
bestowed on them, as is before uttered of the Onyon and Garlike.

The ancient and latter writers report, that there are two kinds of the
Squil Onion, as the Male and Female, the Male yelding white leaves, and the
Female black. This strong by nature, will continue in the hanging up (in a
shadowie place) a long time green, and it lightly grows (as Theophrastus
writes) bestowed in dry Earth, and speedily shoots up to a height, it
keeps fruits to be preserved, especially Pomegranates, the stalks before
broken off: and this is said to bear flower thrice in a year, foreshewing by
it, the three seasons of committing seeds to the Earth, as the first time of
bearing flowers, to signify the first time of plowing, the second time of
flower bearing, the second time: the third, the last time: for how many times
these appear, eue^ so often is the Earth accustomed to be labored.

The flower also of the Squil Onyon (as Beritius writes) shooting up in a
straight stem, if so be it does not hastily wyther, signifies the large or
plentiful yield of fruits.

The Physic helps both of the Scalion and Squil Onion.
AS touching the benefit of the Scalions, there is no other aid nor profit
to be hoped after, saving that these yield a more delight to the mouth, than
the health of the body, for the Scallions serve to no other purpose, than to
stir up or move persons unto the veneriall act.

The Squyll Onyon has the virtue of heatyng in the second degree, and cuttyng
especially of the toughe matter in the stomach.

The Squyll Onyon used raw, is very hurtful to the body, especially to the
inward members or parts, for which cause, the Squyll Onyon is not inwardly to
be taken, except they before be either roasted or boiled, or by some other manner
prepared.

The worthiest force of the same in Medicines is, by sharpuing it especially
with vyneger, for which cause (being so prepared) named the Squilitike
vyneger, the making of which is after this manner.

Take the heads clean pilled from the outward skynnes, those (after the
shredding) hang in a Sunnye place, being stytched through with small Packthreed
(in such manner) that the parts be a pretty dystance asunder, whcyh like
handled, let hang for xl. days space.

The dry pieces after bestow into a Hogs head of most sharp^ vinegar, but
in such manner, that these of no part touch the vessel. The Hogs head
after covered so close, that no vapors may breath forth, and set into the
hot Sun.

After the xlvii. day, let the vessel be lift up, and the pieces taken
forth, which done, the owner shall then possess a most sharp vinegar.

There are others, which make the Squiliticke wine after this manner: ye pieces
of it shred, they bestow into a vessel of wine new made (yt being put in) it
may on such wise heat together, and they use this wine to those purposes, as
the vinegar.

The Physic commodities of the Squill Onyon are (as the learned Constantyne,
in his book de gradibus utters) to amend the dropsy persons, such
fetching the wind hardely, the defaultes of the Liver and Mylte proceeding of
clammy humors.

The persons sick of the Ague, and having exulcerations or soars within the
body, ought to refrain the taking of the Squyliticke vinegar. For the
Squiliticke vinegar or wine, purges gross fleume, and corrodeth, procures
the going to the stool, and urine, and causes vomyting.

The Squil Onyon (after the mind of Dioscorides) is roasted after this manner,
this wrought in Paste or Elay set into an Oven, or covered with coals, until
the paste or crust about it be sufficientlye baked, which drawn or taken
forth, if the head be yet not sufficiently softened, then after the covering of
it with paste, the second time and set in an Oven, bake the same thoroughly.

The Onyons are also kindly baked or roasted in an Earthen pot, the mouth well
stopped with dowe or course paste, and set into the Oven.

This besides cut into round pieces, and after the flitching through with
Packthreede, that these be a pretty distaunce asunder, hang in the air from the
Sun beams, for on such wise handeled, it serves to the making of the Oil,
vinegar, and wine.

The singular Dioscorides teaches the manner of boylyng the Squyll Onyon,
after this sort: Take the middle parts (the outward skynnes pylled away)
which after the slycing into parts and boiled, throw the first water forth,
on which pour other water, boiling in like condition, and this so often do,
until no more bytternesse nor tartness in the water be felt: after these,
the slyces hanged up, and dried in the shadow, as above uttered, which done,
if half a dram of the fine powder be sucked down with Honye, the same
amendeth the long continuance of the hard fetchyng of breath, an old coughe,
and the griefs both of the Liver and Mylte, yea the dropsy and Jaundise. The
like works the Squiliticke vyneger, and the same expels worms, and other
corruptions in the body.

The Oximel made of the Squilitick vyneger, expels Melancholy, remoueth ye
Apoplexy and falling sickness breaks and sends forth ye stone, the same
also purges the Matrice of Clammye humors, and helps the ache in the
Hippes. The Squilliticke vinegar fastneth the teeth, by sundry times washing
and rubbing of them with it, and amendeth a stinking breath.

The same dropped into the ears, remoueth the clammye humors hyndering the
hearing. The oil in which the squil Onion shall be steeped, anointed on places,
puts away wartes, and cures both the choppes and cliftes of the feet: the
same anointed on moist or running scabbes, heals (or at the least)
corrects them, puts away the dandrie of the head, and profits anointed
on the bit of Serpents, and other venomous worms.

The Squil Onyon contains in it an Oil which is black: this oil tempered
with Honey, and anointed on a balde place, procures hear to grow. The
Squillitike vinegar holde^ in the mouth, amendeth the corrupted and foul
gummes. The same used, procures a clearer sight of the eyes, healthful and
profitable it is to the griefs of the sides and stomach, if a little be taken
twice a day, but hastily drunk down, it overcomes the party for a while.

The Squiliticke Onion boiled in wine and drunk, expels all the inward
diseases of the body, and helps especially a hot and corrupt Liver.

The Squil Onyon prepared in the abouesayde manner, and boiled with Wormwood
and Masticke in water and vinegar, and sweetened with Sugar, helps unto the
stopping of the Liver and Mylte, recouereth the kings evil and dropsy,
myghtily causes urine, draws down the terms, and expels the dead
yongling. If Mice happen to drink of the water, in which the Squiliticke Onyon
shall be steeped for a night, they soon after dye.

The distilled water of the Squil Onion, mixed with meal which Mice willingly
eat, and bestowed in such places where they haunte, does in short time kill
those which eat of the same.

What care and skill is required in the preparyng and ordering of the Garden
Saffron. Chap. 23.
AS touching the Garden Saffrone, it ioyeth to be bestowed in a mean and
chalkie ground, and evermore well labored, and it may very well be set in
the beds, where Onions have been newly plucked up. The Saffron refuses
wateryng and moisture, for wh^che cause the heads ought to be set in beds
(between which) furrows made, that these may receive the moisture falling,
which they greatly fear. Besides these, the heads are much endomaged
through the resort of Mice and Moles, which greatly covet to feed on the
roots or Onions of the Saffron.

The remedies against these two noyouse Beasts, are fully taught in my first
part, which the reader may resort unto.

The heads are rather to be bestowed in the Earth, than the Seeds, in that
the Seeds (after the committing to the Earth) prosper not.

The heads are to be set on ridges, in the month of April or May, and the
heads laid on a heap, to lie and wither in the shadow from the Sun beams,
for the space of eight days before, which done, to set them with the hearie
roots in the Earth well labored and dressed, and a length one by another,
well half a hand breadth asunder, and three fingers deep. Certain there are
which will them to be set for the better yield, after the mids of Auguste,
unto the middle of September, letting these so to remain for two or three
years, and that every year in the month of April and May the leaves or
blades then dry, to break off orderly, the other prospering to weed about,
and to raise the earth after, two fingers deep, but in such manner, that the
heads be not touched.

After that the herbs be sufficiently cleansed, when as the flowers be
withered and dead, especially in Auguste and toward Harvest, which,
flourishe not above a month, then these are to be gathered in the morning
after Sun rising, and after the drying by a gentle fire to be kept together
in bags of leather, in a close and dry place.

And this one thing as marvelous, is worthy to be noted, that the root or
Onion standing quite out of the Earth, yields notwythstanding the proper
flower of continuance but a day or two after the full openyng, at the season
of the year: but the head afterward (as deprived of nourishement) withers
and rotteth.

The blades be fresh and green all the winter through, in that the heads be
full of juice, and sufficient strong to endure the cold season. When the
Saffron is set, and in the third year dug up, there are found about each
head five or six heads growing, and joined together within the Earth.

The best Saffron is the same, which is fresh and new, and excels in the
goodness of color, in such manner, that the tops in which the Seeds are
contained be white, and mixed with a redness: the chiue also is not lightly
broken, and rubbed in the hand, colors the skin, and is in savor
comfortable, with a gentle sharpness. And this is named the Oriental Saffron.

The physic benefits and helps of the Saffron.
THe Saffron has the property of heating in the second, and drying in the
first degree, as Aegineta witnesses. The Saffron endures for five years in
perfect strength, being close kept in a leather bag, and set in a dry place.

Take a scruple of good Saffron, or the third part of a dram, and half a
grain waighte of pure musk, this mixed together with the best and hot wine,
drink fasting, for it is a singular remedy against the hard fetching of
breath, of what cause soever the same shall happen.

The Saffron procures a fresh and fair color to the drinkers of it, it
comfort the heart: purges and causes healthful blood, and remoueth
poisons from the heart. Taken in meat, it causes a long and easy breathing
and helps the Asthma.

Against the infection and plague inward, many after the fortifying of the
Saffron. Triacle and Mustarde Seed, in an emptye eggeshell close stopped, do
make an electuarie, with other spices adjoined, which after the taking
expels the poison or infection by sweates.

The use of it profits impostumes in the breast, and those that be short
winded, it amendeth the milte, moves the venereall a^^e, and causes urine,
this also avails against the vehemente aching and pains of the head if
such a plaster be made with the same: take of Saffron Gum, Arabicke,
Euphorbium, and Myrre, of each a like weight, these after the finely working to
powder, and tempering with the white of an egg, apply in plaster form to
the foreheade, for this without doubt avails.

The Saffrone taken either in meat or drink, procures urine, and the Terms:
this also amendeth the yelowe Jaundise, drunk especially with sweet Wine or
Malmsey: this given besides to an vlcered breaste, stomach, liver, lungs,
kidneys, and bladder, greatly profits.

For the grieuouse pain of the Gout, take a quantity of Saffrone, which with
the yolke of eggs, oil of roses, and rose water, an ointment made, apply with a
fether on the grieved place: the Saffron with crumbs of white bread and milk,
after the boiling together, applied in the form of a pultise, on swellings,
impostumes, and ulcers, does greatly assuage both the swelling and pain, yea
mightily softeneth and breaks impostumes.

If with Opium, Barley meal, milk and the white of an egg, an ointement be
made after art, and anointed on any painful and sore place, it does assuage
the griefs in short time. The Saffron (as Vitalis writes) does greatly amend
the feebling of the heart, and weakness of stomach. The saffron comfort
palsy members, and softneth the hardness of parts: for the which cause, the
same named Oxicrocie, is right profitable. The Saffron remoueth the grief of
the eyes, either of blood or other blemishe, if with rose leaves brought to
powder, and mixed with the yolke of an egg, the same be applied in plaster
form on a linen clothe to the eye. The Saffron remoueth all swellings and
griefs of the eyes, if the same be especially mixed with wine, and applied in
plaster form.

The Saffron is profitable mixed with woman's milk and anointed, for the
distilling of the eyes. The Saffron remoueth drunkenness, drunk with Cuite.
The person also which shall drink the powder of Saffron in wine, shall not be
overcome by drinkyng. This besides is very profitable for remedies of the ears.

What skill care and diligence to required in the workmanly sowing and ordering
of the Nauewes. Chap. 24.
THe nauewes and Turnups are sown after one manner, in earth well turned up,
and orderly dressed, or if the owner will in earable ground, and will endure
in a manner any air: yet these desire a dry ground, rather lean and
grauellye and diligently turned uppe.

The seeds well prosper, bestowed in a fine poudered earth, well labored before:
and to possess fair Nauewes, let not the Seeds be above three years old:
for being elder, the Seeds run into Colewortes. If the plants in the
coming up appear too: thick together, the owner may pluck them up; and
set them thinner in other well dressed places. These also in the growing up,
ought diligently to be weeded and the Earth to be dug about, and let
the greater and fairer still grow, to possess their Seeds, which in the
month of Auguste, diligently bestow in a well labored Earth.

To commit Seeds to the Earth the owner ought to stay until the ground
be well moistened with showers, for bestowed soon after, they prosper and come
the spedier up: But the owner or Gardner ought in any case to take heed, that
he bestow not the seeds in a shadowye place, for the shadowie places are
disagreable and hurtful to the plants, although the ground be good fertile
and well labored.

The property many times of the ground does alter the Nauewe into a Turnupe,
and the Turnupe into a Nauewe.

The owner ought to gather the Nauews in the month of November: and to
possess them all the winter time, he must burye the roots in Sand lying in
a seller, that he may not only eat of them in the Winter time, but all the
Lent through.

The worthier Nauewes be those, which are rather long, and as they were
crisped, and not big, and possessyng few roots, at the most but one seemly
root, and the same straight and sharp downward.

There be which make a singular composition of the Nauews, with Radishe roots,
a little Salt, Honey, Mustarde, delectabler spices, and Vinegar: yea the same
may be made without spices, both wholesome and profitable.

The Physic benefits of the Nauewes.
THe worthy Galen reports the Nauewe to be hot in the second degree, and
moiste in the first.

The Nauews tenderly boiled, do nourishe much, yet euilly or hardly digested,
and they make soft flesh, and the same puffed up, yet this less than the
Turnup, who before ought to be boiled in water, and that first water after
the boiling poured forth, then into a second water bestowed, diligently boil
them, for the hardenesse of their substance, will well be tempered, and meanly
engender a nourishment between good and evil.

The Nauewes which are not thoroughly boiled, do euilly digeste, and procure a
windiness in the body, besides a stoppyng of the veins, and natural powers:
for which cause, these yield a more commoditye to the stomach, and digeste
better, being twice boiled in fair water, and shifted a third time into a
most fat brothe, where boiled unto a sufficient tenderness, and then eaten,
there be which boil them a third time in new Cow milk, for the better
digesting.

The Seeds confected with Sugar, and eaten, increase Sperme in man. But the
Seeds bruised and druncke, do especially avail against poisons, for the
which cause, there are profitable ministered with Triacle.

What care and skill is required in the sowing and rightly ordering of the Rape
and Turnup. Chap. 25.
THe Rapes be not much differing from the Nauewes and Turnups, saving that
these be bigger, and sweet in the eating. For the Rapes or Turnips be much
greater, and in the eating pleasanter than the Nauewes: The Rapes require a
like ordring and dressyng of the earth, as before uttered of the Nauewe, which
for fronth ought to be rather sown in the Moves of September, than in any
other time, in a moist Earth, well dunged, diligently turned in and dressed:
for by that means they prosper and come the better forward, and are caused to
be fayrer, tenderer, bigger, and sweeter of taste thorough the cold season
following, like as the hoarie frostes, snow, and cold mistes, than in the dry
and warm season of the year.

After these be come up, and ready to be removed, the owner must carefully
see unto, that the leaves be not gnawen neither of spiders, nor of any other
vermin or worms, and for the avoiding of like anoyance it shall be profitable
for the Gardner (well a day before the committing of the Seeds to the Earth)
to mix the Seeds with the powder or dust of planke boordes, or rather with
the foot of a chimney, which after wette with water, to the end the Seeds
may receive some moisture, and being thus ordered, bestow the whole together
in the Earth the next day following.

The skillful Neapolitane Rutilius reports that the Rape or Turnup (as the
Nauew) prospers under every air, and desires to be bestowed in a fat and
loose earth, and the same so loose, that it in a manner falls to powder,
whereby the Seeds may prosper, and come the speedier forward.

The seeds also are to be bestowed with fine poudred Earth, to the end the
plants may not come up too thick together, about the end of July, unto the
mids of September: and if rain happen not the day before, then the day
following, moisten the ground with water gently sprinkled upon.

If the seeds committed to the Earth be bestowed thin, the plants in the
coming up (by diligence of the Gardner) will increase the bigger, for which
cause, where the plants grow thick together, and these come so some strength,
the owner may pluck up sundry; and bestow those a good distance asunder,
whereby they grow the bigger in root.

And for the better furtheraunce of their growth the owner shall sundry times
water and weed about the plants. The seeds may be sown in the open field,
and where Corn grew, if so be the ground be diligently plowed, and the
roots weeded forth, these after the bestowyng in the Earth, may the owner
only cover with the harrowe or rake, because the seeds lie shallow on the
ground.

The Seeds joy in an open field, far from the shadow of Trees, in that these
lying under shadow be much harmed: if the owner mind to commit Seeds to the
earth in a dry season, he may then bestow them in some well dressed place
being moiste and shadowie, thick together after the manner of the Coleworte.

After this, when the plants be well grown up, and the earth sufficiently
moistened with shoures, the owner may remove and set the plants in larger
places well dressed, from the end of August unto the entering of the Sun into
Libra or middle of September.

The Rapes to serve in the winter time, ought to be gathered in the month of
October, and those which are the fairer, by plucking away the outward leaves,
may be set again in well dunged and dressed earth to yield Seeds the Summer
following.

And to preserve the Rape or Turnup roots, to serve the Winter and Lent time,
the owner may work after this manner, by washing first the roots, and these
raw, bestow in ranks one upon another, and in each rank strew salt, fennel
seeds, and sauerie, or only cover them with salt, close couched, and on such
wise letting these remain for eyghte days, pour so much fair water upon,
as will well cover them: Which done, let the vessel stand in some vaulte
or Seller, to serve for the above said times, or longer if the owner will, if
so be he fill up the vessel, when these lie bare and dry. These hitherto
Ruellius in his instructions of husbandry.

This one thing is in marvelous and worthy the noting, so small a seed to
increase in root, to such a bigness as we many times see them, of which
the like has been seen to have wayed thirty, yea forty pound weighte, to
the admiration of many.

The owner ought especially to take heed, that the seeds to be committed to
the Earth, be not above three years old. For the ground otherwise of the
Rapes, will change and bring forth Colewortes.

For to enjoy fair and big roots, let the owner new set those roots which
be grown unto a finger bigness, well a span distant one from the other. Which
done, and these somewhat more grown, the owner ought to tread down with the
(...), and diligently cover the heads thick with Earth, whereby the Juice
of the leaves and stalks may run to the increasing of the roots.

The roots after the gatheryng in the month of November, may likewise be
preserved, to serve the Winter and Lent time, as before is uttered of the
Nauewe.

The physic virtues and helps of the Rapes.
THe Rapes brate in the second degree, and moisten in the first: these cause
many humors, hardely digests, and increase much wind. The sown Rapes are
hard of digestion: which notwythstandyng boiled do swell the bellye, and
increase humors in the body.

The Rapes have a marvelous property in sharpning the sight, as the singular
Auerrois writes: Yet these throughlye boiled, as I before uttered to be done by
the Nauewes, do yield a nourishement, and are profitable to the body:
contrariwise these eaten rawishe or not well boiled, do hardelye digeste, cause
wind in the body, and moleste the stomach.

The Rape seeds used in the steed of Triacle, recouereth and helps
poisoning, if any having druncke or eaten poison, shall take the seeds bruised in
water and honye, this of experience known, represseth or abateth the force of
the poison, that the same can not harm.

The Rape or Turnup roots confected with vinegar, does cool and engender
wind, yet these extinguishe the hot and dry blood, of which most great and
perilous sicknesses are caused. The roots and seeds eaten do stir and
move the veneriall act.

They are profitable to health, being eaten after the third boiling, and if any
foul arrayed with scab^, which represent the kind of a Leaprie, do wash all the
body with the water in which the Rape seeds shall before be boiled, it does with
the same cause in short time a fairer and clearer skin. The rape roots boiled
in May butter, after the tender see thing, eaten with a little salt, do loose
the breaste: the decoction of the^^ taken, ceasseth a dry cough, boiled with
oil Olive, and eaten with pepper and a little salt, do help digestion: The
roots daily eaten, do engender gross humors, for which cause greatly
misliken of Democritus, to be used for a proper sustenaunce.

The decoction or broth of the roots tenderly boiled, applied on palsy
members, the hot E^^te, and ki^e^ hecles, do speedilye amend and help these: if
any in the side of the root; after the making of a hole, do bestow in it the
oil of roses, and unwrought wax, and after the tender roastyng under hot
embers, do apply the same in vlcered or sore kybes, it shall in short time
cure them.

The benefits of the distilled water of Rapes.
THe Garden Rape or Turnup, both leaves and roots shred, ought to be distilled
about the rude of June, in a Tin Lymbecke.

This water preuayleth against the galling of members, if those be daily
washed and supled with the same, and that a linen cloth wet in it, be applied
twice or thrice a day.

This helps any burning or scalding, if the same be washed with it, but after
a crust gathered on the place, the same will in no manner be removed, but
through the daily washing of it with this water, which in the end perfitly
cures the sore.

The distilled water of the putrified Rapes, applied often hot with a linen
cloth wet in it, does greatly profit the swellyng and sores of the feet,
caused of cold.

What skill and diligence is required with the secrets to be learned in the
sowing and ordering of the Radish. Chap. 26.
THe Garden Radish with us, is better known, than I with pen can utter the
description of the same, for in a manner every person, as well the rich, as the
poor, the Cytizen as Countreyman, when their stomach is slack or yrketh at
meat, they then to procure an appetite to feeding by the same root, by
cutting ye roots either into a length (on each side) or into round slyces, do
workmanlye season them with salt, beating them for the more delight to the
mouth, between two (...), supposing a more tenderness caused to the roots,
through the like ^doyng: whose care and diligence in the bestowing of it in the
Earth, ought (after the mind of Columella) to be after this manner, then
the beds, before the bestowing of the seeds, be well labored, and workmanly
turned in with dung, and when the roots be grown to some bigness, then the
Earth to be raised and diligently heaped about them, for if the roots
shall be naked or lie bare of Earth, that does the Sun and air beat upon
them, then will they become, in their further growth, but ^ hard and hollow
like to the Mushrome, as Pliny reports, which prescribes to these, both a
loose and moist Earth.

The worthy Rutilius (in his instructions of Husbandrye) utters, that the
Radishes refuse a hard, Sandy and Grantllie ground, and do joy in the
moisture of the air: besides, these ought to be sown in Beds a good
distaunce asunder, and the Earth deep dug after a late or new rain fallen,
except the place by hap shall be moist, and soon watered.

The Seeds committed to the Earth, ought immediately (and with dyligence, to
be covered light with the Rake, and neither dung bestowed within, nor strawed
upon the Beds (although Columella otherwise wills) but only chafe of
Corn, as after shall further be uttered.

The skillful practiced in Garden matters report, that these better prosper
being orderly set, than curiously sown and that these to be bestowed in the
Earth, as both sown and set, at two times of the year, as in the month of
February, and beginning of March, if the owner would enjoy the roots
tymely, and in August unto the mids of September, if the owner would enjoy
them much sooner: and these then bestowed in the Earth, are without doubt far
better, for as much as the Radishe in the cold season, grows and increases
especially in the root, and is the same time tenderer, whereas the plants
otherwise in the fair and warm season, run up into a leaf and stem. Yet
this manner of travail, to possess them in the sharp winter, is little in
use with us, because the Radishe can ill abide the bitter air, which once
bytten and taynted with the frostes either wythereth, or soon after dies, yet
the learned Pliny writing of the Radish utters the same to joy so much in
the cold air, that in Germanye has sometimes bin seen a Radish, which grew
in compass so big as an infants middle.

The skillful Aristomachers (in his learned instructions of husbandry) wylleth
that the leaves of the Radishe in the winter time be broken off, and thrown
away, and to heap the Earth high about them, leaffe puddles of water do
stand in the Beds: for the roots on such wise increase, and be big in the
Summer time.

Howsoever the roots shall be handeled, certain it is, that the cold air
and frostes do increase and sweeten the roots (as before uttered of the Rape)
if so be they may continue the winter time: for the cold air conuerteth the
increasement into the roots, and not into ye leaves, although that those (as
Theophrastus utters) do wax then hard, in many places.

The roots are caused to grow the sweeter in eating, and more delectable in
taste, if the leaves be broken off (as Pliny has noted) before the Radishes
shoot up into a stem.

And the leaf of the Radishe, how much the smaller the same shall be, even
somuche the tenderer and delectabler root will it yield, which by watering
with a Salt Lycoure or Pickell, causes to breath forth the bytternesse quite,
if any such rest or be in the root.

As the like Pliny wrote, that the Radishe to be fed, yea and willed the
roots, for the tenderness, to be often watered with Pickle, or salt water.

The Egiptians watered with ye Nytre, to the end the roots might be
commendabler in sweetness and delight to the mouth, which possess a
Cartilage and thick rynde, to these, in many roots, sharp in taste, yet
delectable in the eating, which part left bare above the ground becomes
toughe and hard, through the occasion before uttered, and hollow (like to the
Mushrom) unless they be well covered about with light Earth.

There are Radishes supposed to be of a Feminine kind which be so sharp, and
these possess smaller leaves, and to the eye be a fayrer green, as Rutilius
utters of them.

If the owner couete to enjoy sweet roots in taste, then after the counsel
and mind of the singular Florentine, let him stiepe the Seeds for two days
before, in either water and Honey, or Cuyte, or else Sugered water, and these
dried in the shadow, to commit them orderlye to the Earth.

If the Gardener desire to possess fair and great roots, let him (after the
mind of the Neapolitane Rutilius) when the roots be grown to some bigness:
pluck away all the leaves, saving two within to grow still, which done, cover
the Earth often over the heads, whereby the juice may the more run to the
roots, in causing them to grow the sweeter and pleasanter.

A like experience in causing the root to become marvelous big, does Pliny
skilfully utter and teach, after this manner, by taking a great dyble, with
the which making a hole in the Earth well six fingers deep, fill it up with
fresh Chafe, after bestow a seed of the Radish with dung and light earth over
the mouth, covering the same in like manner even with the Earth, these
performed, the root will grow and increase unto the bigness of the hole.

The skillful practicioners report, that the goodness of the Radish is known
by the leaves, which the sweeter they be (after the manner) somuche the
tenderer and more pleasant are the roots in the eating, the like teaches or
shows the rynde, which the thinner ye same is, so much the delectabler is the
root in taste of the mouth.

The thin bestowing of the Seeds in well dressed beds, from the end of
Jugust unto the mids of September, and after the coming up diligently weeded
about with the leaves broken off, the light Earth covered about, and often
watered with salt water, do procure the roots not only to wax, or grow the
bigger, but tenderer and sweeter in the eating, for as much as the salt pickle
very much abateth the bitterness consisting in them, as by a like we
customably see, that these be eaten with vinegar and salt.

And the plants better prosper, coming up in an open air, than bestowed in a
shadowie place, where in the increase, the roots be much hyndered.

If the owner happen to commit seeds to the Earth in a dry season, let them
be sown the thicker in beds, and if the same may be, in a moist ground
lightly watered.

The plants grown to a reasonable height above the Earth, and ye shoures have
moystned the ground a day before, the plants may then be removed, and set
into beds well labored and workmanly dressed, which by diligence bestowed,
grow the bigger and pleasaunter in the eating.

That the Radishes may not be harmed with the Garden ^leas, Theophrastus
wills to sow in the Beds among them, the pul^^ named Eruum.

Other singular helps for the most Herbs, may be learned in my first part:
which I have gathered for ye most part out of ancient writers.

Here is not to be ouerpassed, that in Radishes a bitterness consists
according to the thicknes of the rynde, as the worthy Pliny vtereth, which
writes that these also do offend the teeth, by blunting or setting them an
edge.

But in this place comes to mind, a secret very profitable, and to be
esteemed with vinteners, which the Author freely utters to them.

If the vintener cutteth a Radishe into slyces, and bestows those pieces in a
vessel of corrupt wine, it does in short time draw al ye evil sauoure and
lothsomnesse (if any such consists in the wine) and to these the tartness of
it, like receives, which if the root be not able to rid and draw quite
forth this defaulte, let the same immediately be taken forth (and if need
shall require) put in a fresh root like ordered. For this no doubt has often
been proved, and profited many by understanding of the secret.

This no doubt is a secret very marvelous, that the Radyshe in no wise
agrees to be placed or grow nigh to the vine, for the deadlye hatred between
them, in so much that the Uyne nere growing, turns or windeth back with the
Branches, as mightilye disdayning and hating the Radishe growing fast by: If
we may credit the learned Pliny, Galen, and the Neapolitane Rutilius, which
seem to have diligently noted the same.

And the reason they report to be like as before uttered of the agreement of
the Coleworte with the vine, which is, through the hyd discord of natures
consisting in them, so that if the places were changed, yet for all the
removing, will they in no manner joy together.

Of which Androcides affirmed the Radishe and Colewort, to be a sigular
remedy against drunkenness, so that the ancient in Greece, commonly joined
and matched the drinking of wine, with the Radish, as I before uttered in the
Chapter of the Coleworte, so that no marvel it is, if these be used so common.

The Radysh in time past has been of such account, and so worthily esteemed,
that Moschion the Greek wrote a large pamphlet of the worthy praises of the
same: yea the Radishe before other meats, was so preferred in Greece, that at
Delphos in the Temple of Appollo, the Radishe was esteemed as Gold, the Beete
as Silver, and the Rape or Turnup as Lead.

The Radish also is said to polishe very fair the yudr^e, and but^ed in a
heap of salt, does alter and reduce ye same into a watery pickle.

The Radish to conclude, in the removing and setting again, loses the
sharpness resting in it, and this has a singular delight in the rind, so
that the same be new gathered and not too old of growth, therefore by the
example of many seldom eaten, do unadvisedly refuse and omyt the using of it.

And drawing to an end, I think it right profitable to utter the making of
vinegar with the Radishe, as the learned Petrus Crescentius (in his work of
Husbandry) has noted the same. The roots of the Radish (says he) being dried
and brought to fine powder, and bestowed into a vessel which has wine in it,
let stand to settle (after the well laboring and mixing together) for certain
days: which done, the owner shall enjoy a Radish vinegar, very laudable and
much commended for the dissoluing and wastyng of the stone in the kidneys, and
many other paynful griefs.

The Physic benefits and helps of the Radish.
THe Garden Radish (after the mind of the learned, heateth in the third
degree, and dries in the second, but the wild Radishe in physic causes, is
more effectuous.

This one incommoditie (among the physic helps) does the Radish possess,
which is, that it procures many times belching, after the eating at Supper:
for a remedy of this annoyaunce or incommoditie, may be or she incontinent
rate, certain branches of Isope, Time, or Organy, or rate the root with pure
Oil.

And for this one incommoditie joined with it, the root yields a marvelous
number of benefits, for the health and case of persons.

Here further learn, the other incommodities written by the wise, which are,
that the Radishe eaten, either before or after meals, does cause wind, the
resting of the stomach, dulleth the brain, eyes, and reason.

The singular Greek Florentinus (in his instructions of Husbandry) writes,
that the Radish does profit very much the Fleumaticke, and maruellously
helps the stone in the kidneys, and stopping of the urine by Gravel: If any
especially boil the rind with white wine and water, and drinks the same
morning and evening, or the rynde of the Radish bruised and strayned, and drunk
fasting in the morning, and that the patient shall persevere or continue with
the same for certain days.

The fresh rynde after the steeping in white wine for eight hours drunk with
a fourth part of the powder of Medler kernels, like avails.

The Radish taken fasting in the morning, with warm water prepared, procures
vomytyng, for which matter, the Physicians rather appointe the seeds boiled,
than the root. If the root be eaten with oil Olive, it stays the belchings
of the stomach, which are woonte to be caused by the same, in that the oil
suffers not such wind to rise.

The juice drunk with Cuite, cures the kings evil, and drunk with water and
Honey, amendeth the cough, which on such wise ministered, does help those
fetching the wind short and painefullye.

The whole substance of the root, so much avails against poison, that
taking the same fasting, it shall nothing harm the creature.

And the hands anointed with the juice of the Radishe, as before uttered in my
first part, may handle Serpents without fear.

The juice of the Radishe dropped into the ears, does speedily aswage the
wind and noise in them, the same drunk with water and Honey, recouereth the
Jaundise. The leaves boiled in porredge in steed of Colewortes, and eaten
sundry times, amendteh the stoppings of the Liver and Mylte.

The seeds bruised and given with white wine, is right profitable against all
sorts of poisons, and other dangerous diseases.

And if any by a punishemente, receive grievous strokes and spots by
whypping, by brusing, and applying the Radish on the places, shall speedily
cure them.

The same also clears scarres and reduces wanne spots unto the persit
colors, and remoueth the pimples in the face: this besides delivers the
quartayne Ague, if the same be daily given by the way of a vomit, at the
coming of the fit.

The juice of Radish boiled with Honey, and after the adding of a little
vinegar, the same strayned and drunk, profits against the quartaine ague, and
stopping of the Mylte.

The Radish applied in plaster form, delivers the water between the skin,
and helps a hard and swollen Spleen, as Dioscorides witnesses.

The Radish well digesteth, being eaten with meat at Supper, for it heateth
the stomach, yet the same causes a strong breath, by sleeping soon after
meat.

The Seeds after the brusyng drunk with white wine, do cause vryne, and
drunk with vyneger, aswageth the swellyng of the Mylt.

The juice anointed on old ulcers, both clears, and eats away the Canker
in them, the like perfourmeth the powder of the root.

The Radish boiled with Mulce water or Honey and water, and drunk warm,
amendeth an old coughe: it remoueth the clammy Fleume of the breaste, by
spitting up, in the daily drynkyng for certain days.

The fresh ryndes of the Radish well bruised and taken with vinegar and Honey
procures the patient to vomit, the like perfourmeth the Seeds, drunk warm
with water.

The Seeds have a singular property in expellyng, for which reason, these are
right profitable to them having eaten Mushromes, which they can not dygest.

If a round flyee of the Radish be applied on the nauyl, it does spedely cease
the grypings in women, as the skillful Hippocrates writes.

The often eating of the Radish, procures plentye of Milk to women gyuing
suck and Nurses.

The juice of the root drunk with Honey, sends down ye Terms, and expels
the worms in the belly: the juice gargelled with Honey and vinegar, aswageth
the swelling in the throat.

The commended helps of the distilled water of the Radishe.
THe root finely shred in the beginning of September, ought to be distilled
in a Tin Limbecke, or rather glass body in Balneo Mariae. The distilled water
of Radishe drunk morning and evening unto the quantity of three ounces at a
time, healpeth the digestion of the stomach, the kings evil, and kills the
worms of the belly: the radishe also received, cleanses the stomach of all
clammy humors and other matters, which hinder digestion, this besides opens
all manner of stoppyng of the inner members and veins. This drunk in the like
order and quantity, does extenuate the clammy humors in the lungs, and
amendeth the swelling of the milte: this also cleanses the breast of clammy
humors and causes a clear voice.

The water drunk unto the quantity of three ounces at a time, both morning
and evening, recouereth the poisoning taken either in meat or drink. The same
quantity drunk at a time, profits against the Quartaine Ague, draws
down the Terms, and sends forth the Stone.

This water helps those which are stinged either with the Be or Waspe, or
venomed with the spider, if they shall wash the grieved place with the same,
and shall apply linen clothes wet in it. This water helps the pricking and
stitches of the side, if the same be bathed with the water. The water dropped
into the eyes, clears the humors falling which dimmeth the sight, it also
remoueth the spots of the face, by the often washing with the water, this
remoueth the yelow or blackish spots by beating, if the places be often rubbed
with the same.

The water gargelled, and retained in the mouth, amendeth the swelling of the
throat, and ulcers of the gummes, for this resolves, consumes and breaks
them.

The water often drunk morning and evening, chiefly at the going to bed unto
the quantity of three ounces at a time, for thirty days together, not only
clereth the kidneys and bladder, and the places which contain the stone, but
breaks the stone, and causes urine.

This water drunk for three or four weeks together, unto the quantity of
three or four ounces at a time, both morning and evening recouereth the water
between the skin, and sends the same forth by the urine, so that the
patiente refraineth the ouermuche drinking: for how much the lesser he
drinks, so much the more water by the urine is sent forth, through which
the patient is also sooner recovered.

What care and skill is required in the sowing and workmanly ordering both of
the Parsnep, and Carote. Chap. 27.
THe seeds of the Parsnep and Carote, require one manner of diligence in the
sowing, and to b^e bestowed in a ground painfully dug, well turned in with
dung, and workmanly dressed before: but the seeds to be committed to the
earth, may not be bestowed in beds very thick together, to the end
these in the increasing, may grow the fairer and bigger.

The plants are in the like manner to be set, and at those times sown as before
uttered of the Radish, as sown in December, January, and February, to serve in
the Lent and Spring time, but these better commended, to be sown in the
Harneste time to enjoy them all the Lent.

The Gardner which would possess fair and big roots, ought to pluck away the
leaves often times, and to cover light earth on the heads, as before uttered
of the Radishe: besides these grown to some bigness, at the least so big as
the finger, ought to be thinner set, and often weeded about, whereby the
roots may grow the bigger and sweeter in the eating.

The physic benefits and helps of the Parsnep and Carot.
THe virtues and properties of these two roots are in a manner like, and serve
rather for the kitchen, than to the use of physic, in that they be of a
small nourishemente, and lesser nourishe than the Turnep or Rape does.

The Parsnep root (by the agreement of the Ancient) heateth in the middle of
the second degree, and moistneth in the first, but this in causes of physic
smally allowed.

The roo^^ is brought to a more temperamente for the body, if so be it be
boiled in two or three waters before the eating, for on such wise handled, it
harmeth the stomach the less.

This otherwise sodden (but in one water) ingendreth wind in the body,
through which it causes and moves a desire to the veneriall act, and often
used, ingendreth evil blood.

The root tenderly sooden in two waters, and removed into a third, procures
urine, assuageth the Colicke passion, and sends down the Terms in women.

The Garden Parsenep, eaten with butter and pepper, and a little salt,
profits the Melancolike, and as Vitalis writes, this increases good blood.

The Parsenep seed drunk, and applied to the privy place (as the learned
Dioscorides writes, draws down the terms, helps the straightness of
making water, recouereth the water between the skin, and amendeth the stitches
of the side or pleurisy.

This commended for the sting or bitte of any venomous worm or beast: This
also applied to the privy place, draws forth the dead yongling, the leaves
shred and applied with honey, does thoroughly clear and amend the great ^ating
in of ulcers.

It is thought that no venomous beast may hurt the creature which wears or
carries the root about him: and the root hanged about the neck, does
profit against the swelling of the throat.

The Garden Carote is thought to heat and dry in the third degree, but the
leaves and stoures especially, and many times the one used for the other in
physic causes.

There is another kind of Carot (being red in color) which may be eaten
raw, but the same sodden with the Turnep, seems a pleasant and dainty
dishe: and this may in the like order be sown, as the others above taught.

The Carote growing of the own accord; which of most men named the wild,
more avails in the leaf and flower for physic purposes, than the root
does: So that the leaves are to be gathered to use, when the same yields
the flower, which after the separating of the root, ought to be dried in a
shadowie place, and kept in leather bags for the whole year: for these have
the propertye of dissipating, consumyng, and attracting, and is of qualitye
drying by substance.

The head bound about with the powder of this herb, made sufficiently hot,
amendeth a cold reume: the herb (after the boiling in wine) drunk, and a
good quantity of it after the stieping in wine and oil for ten days, boiled
so long, until the wine be wasted, and after the hard wringing forth of the
herb, the whole set over the fire, and a little wax put to it, in making
thereof a plaster, which applied, amendeth the pain of the stomach,
proceeding of wind or through cold, the strangurye, and stoppyng of the
urine, and both the Collike, and Iliacke passion.

This Carote boiled in wine, with a quantity of figs to discretion, and the
same drunk fasting, remoueth a dry cough: the decoction drunk does likewise
help the hard fetching of breath; If the head be washed with the water or
lie, in which the herb before is sodden, does remove the flux of the head
proceeding of a cold cause.

If three handfulls of this herb be boiled in wine, to which oil added in
the boiling, and applied to the bellye, does remove wind and beat the
stomach: if a Sirrope be made of the herb and flowers, and the Juice of
Fennel, and the same drunk morning and euenyng, amendeth without doubt the
stopping of the liver and milte.

The herb boiled with Mallows, and herb Mercurye, both in wine and water,
and the same after the boiling, applied on the navel, amendeth the vexings and
gripings of the belly.

The virtues and helps of the distilled water of the Parsenep.
THe herb with the root finely shred, ought to be distilled about the end
of March, in a Tin Limbecke with a soft fire.

This distilled water drunk morning and evening, unto the quantity of three
ounces at a time, and the trembling members bathed with the same, does in
short time amend the shaking of them.

If the water every evening (at the going to bed) be drunk unto the quantity
of six ounces at a time, does not only move forward the veneriall act, but
increases Sperme.

This water drunk unto the quantity of four ounces at a time, both Morning
and Evening, recouereth in short time the straightness or painfulnesse in the
making of water.

The diligence and skill to be used, both in sowing and ordering of the Garden
Poppie. Chap. 28.
THe Garden Poppy (after the mind of the Neapolitane Rutilius) ought to be
committed to the earthe' in the month of September, if it be in a hot and
dry place: but the Seeds in colder and more temperate places, may be bestowed
after the middle of February unto the end of April, and sown in beds among
the Colewortes.

The plants come the better forward, if so be vine branches or other boughs
of trees be burned in the places, where you after mind to bestow the Seeds.
To be brief, the seeds of the Poppy and Dyll, require the like order and
diligence in the bestowing in the earth, as before uttered, of the herb
Cheruill, and Arache.

The physic benefits of the Garden Poppie.
THe white Poppy as al ye other kinds, cools in the fourth degree, and the
seeds full ripe, before the gathering in the Summer time may be preserved for
five years.

The grene heads of the garden Poppy, boiled unto the thickness of Honey,
profit unto many griefs: this received procures sound sleep, remoueth the
cough, it also stays the flux of the bellye, if any annointeth the belly
with it.

The Poppie Seed (after the bringing to powder) mixed with new milk or
brothe, and given to children to drink warm, procures them to sleep.

The seeds bruised and spread on a toste of Butter, do cause children to
sleep: the seeds confected with Sugar, and eaten, do maruellously prevail,
in procuryng the weak patiente to sleep soundly.

The Sirrupe of Poppy helps the reume, cough, and lack of sleep, by
preparing it after this manner: Take of the new heads both of the white and
black Poppy one pound, of rain water four pints, boil these so long
together, until a pint and a half remain, to which after the straining add
of Sugar, and ye Pennites, of each six ounces: these boil unto a height,
according to art, and this they name, the simple Sirrope.

The compound is made after this manner: take of the fresh heads, both of the
white and black poppy, twelve ounces of maiden hear two ounces of licourice,
fine drammes of tuiubae, thirty in number, of lettuce seeds five ounces, of
the Mallows and Ouince seeds an ounce and a half, these after the boiling in
four pintes of water unto two, strain through a cloth, to which add of
Sugar and the Prunits one pound, making thereof a Sirrope according to art:
for this recouereth a dry coughe, the consumption of the Lungs, the Reume, and
debilitie of sleeping.

A plaster made of either seed, to which woman's milk, and the white of an
egg added, this applied on the Temples, procures sleep.

The Seed or Herb of the white Poppy, (after the tempering with the oil of
Roses) applied on an ulcer caused through a bruise, draws forth the heat
in it, and the same applied on a hot Liver, greatly profits.

The powder of the white Poppy Seeds, mixed with oil olive, and anointed on
the chine of the back, remoueth the grief of the Joyntes, and strengthens
them, the seeds after the brusing with oil Olive, applied in plaster form
about the head, not only procures rest, but sound sleep.

The patiente which cannot sleep, may bruise certain beads, and after the
heating, press forth the Juice, with which washing the face, like avails.
The heads of the grieve Poppy, boiled unto a thickness of bony, profit unto
many causes: for this taken procures sleep, remoueth the cough, stays the
flux of the belly, if any annointe him with the same. The Juice of Poppy,
mixed with the oil of Roses, and annointyng the feet therewyth, remoueth the
rage of the Gout: the seeds of the white Poppy brought to ponder, and mixed
with the oil of Violets, and the chine of the back anointed with the same,
profits against the Ague, and heat of the Liver.

The commended virtues of the distilled water of the white Poppy.
THe aptest time for the distilling of the white Poppye, is in the beginning of
June, and that the herb finely shred be distilled in a Tin Limbecke with a
soft fire.

This water profits against the red spots of the face, if the same be
washed with it twice a day, this procures white hands, if they be washed with
it.

The distilled water druncke unto the quantity of four ounces at a time,
before the going to bed, and anointing the Temples or beating veyns of the
Wrests, does not only procure quiet rest, but sound sleep, this also used,
mitigateth the pain of the head proceeding of heat.

This water applied with linen clothes wet in it, extinguisheth any heat, and
profits a burnt skin through the Sun, in removing the heat, by the often
applying of linen clothes wette in it.

What skill, diligence and secrets is to be learned in the sowing and ordering of
the Cucumber. Chap. 29.
THe ancient in time paste confounded or rather contrary matched the Gourds
with Cucumbers, as the like also Pliny did, and Euthydemus the Athenia^ in his
book which he wrote of pothearbs, named the Gourd, the Indian Cucumber, and
Menedorus a follower of Erasistratus defines two kinds of the same: the one,
to be the Indian, which as he utters, is the Cucumber: and the other to be
that, which is named the common Gourd. The Cucumber besides (after the sentence
of Varro) is so named, for the crooking of it, and the Greek physicians named
it both Sicyon and Sicys, for that it staieth and represseth (as Demetrius
writes) the veneriall act, through the coldness consisting in it.

But leauyng further to utter of the kinds, let us come to the matter, in
teaching what diligence is required, about the well handling of the Cucumber.

The Seeds after the mind of the Neapolitane Rutilius, desire to be bestowed
in furrows not thick together, and these raised well a foot and a half high,
but in breadth three foot, and between the furrows must the owner leave
spaces of eyghte foot broad, whereby the Cucumbers (in the growyng) may
freelye wander and spread abroad.

These after the coming up, need neither to be raked nor weded about, for that
in their first coming up, they joy and prosper the better, by growing among
other herbs, of which these are greatly strengthened and aided.

The plants creep a long, on the Earth, and spredde into branches much like
to the Uine, which for the weakness of the stalk, are caused on such wise
to spread abroad on the ground, except these be otherwise shored up in their
growing, with proppes workmanly set in the Earth, for the better staying up
of the weak arms and branches, that the fruits corrupt not by lying on the
Earth.

The Seeds for the more part, appear by the sixte or seventh day after the
sowing: being sufficientlye moistened with store of water for that space and
time, by a pot or pottes of water dropping continually down with a list or
woollen clothe hanging forth of the mouth of the pot, which manner of
watering is named filtring.

This kind of wateryng, is one of the chiefest matters required, in that the
plants prosper and come speediest forward through the much moisture, in which
they mightilye joy: Yet these are much hindered, and greatly fear the
frostes, and cold air. For which cause the plants ought at such cold times
to be workmanly fenced with mattresses of straw diligently spread over them.
The skillful Rutilius writing of the workmanly orderyng of the Cucumber,
wills the Seeds to be committed to the Earth in the month of March, and
for danger of the cold or frosts, to cover the beds with mattresses of
straw, unto the middle of May, at which time the plants ought to be
removed, and set again into beds well dunged and thick laid for to run
forth and creep abroad on the ground, but the plants yield the more: if
they be bestowed in beds well filled with earth and dung, and these raised above
afoote high.

In the bestowing of the Seeds in the earth, the owner ought to have a care,
that he set the Seeds in beds a length, and these well two foot
asunder one from the other, herein considering whether the Seeds be broken by
the eighte or tenthe day followyng, which found ryther hard or broken,
does denote a perfectness or goodness of the Seeds: But these in a contrary
manner descerned soft, are unprofitable, and to be cast away, in whose
places others require to be set, proving by the sixte or eighte day, if the
Seeds be broken or otherwise soft, which in a contrary manner seen, bestow
others in the places, as above taught.

The plants, after the coming up, need not to be weeded in any manner, for
as much as the plants better prosper and grow the fairer, by coming up
among other Herbs, of which these take a norishment.

If the seeds before the sowyng, be stieped for two days in sheeps milk as
Rutilius wills, or in water and Honey, as Pliny instructs, or in Sugered
water, which cause the Plants, after their perfect growth, to yield
Cucumbers, (both sweet, tender, white, and most pleasant, as well in taste, as in
sight, as the singular Columella has uoted, and before him the Greek
Florentinus, also after both, Pliny and Palladius, to al which experience
confirms.

The Gardener which would possess Cucumbers timely and very soon, yea and
all the year through, ought (after the mind of the Neapolitane) in the
beginning of the Spring, to fill up old worn Baskets and Earthen pannes
without bothomes, with fine sifted Earth tempered before with fat dung, and to
moysten somewhat the Earth with water, after the seeds bestowed in these,
which done, when warm and Sunny days succeed, or a gentle rain falling, the
Baskets or Pans with the plants, are then to be set abroad, to be
strengthened and cherished by the sun and small shoures: but the evening
approaching these in all the cold season, ought to be set under some warm
cover or house in the ground, to be defended from the frostes and cold air,
which thus standing under a cover, or in the warm house, moysten gently with
water sundry times, and these on such wise handle, until all the Frostes,
Tempests, and cold air be past, as commonly the same ceasseth not with us,
let about mids of May.

After these, when opportunity or an apt day serves, the Gardener shall
bestow the Baskets or Pannes unto the brymme, or deeper in the Earth well
labored and trymmed before, with the rest of the diligence to be exercised, as
before uttered: which done, the Gardener shall enjoy very forward and
tymelyer Cucumbers than any others.

This matter may be compassed, both easier, in shorter time, and with lesser
travel, if the owner (after the cutting of the waste branches, does set them in
well labored Beds, for these in far shorter time and speedier, do yield fair
Cucumbers.

This one thing I think necessary to be learned, for the avoiding of the
daily labor and pains, in the setting abroad and carrying into the house,
either half Tubbes, Baskettes, or Earthen Pannes, which on this wise, by
greater facilytie, ^ may be done, if so be the Gardener bestow the vessels
with the plants, in Wheelebarrowes, or such like with wheels, for these, to
men's reason, causes marvelous easines, both in the bestowing abroad, and
carrying again ^ into the warm house, as often as need shall require.

The young plants may be defended from cold and boistrous winds yea frostes,
the cold air, and hot Sun, if Glasses made, for the only purpose, be
set over them, which on such wise bestowed on the Beds, yielded in a
manner to Tiberius Caesar, Cucumbers all the year, in which he took a great
delight, as after the worthy Columella, the learned Pliny has committed the
same to memory, which every day obtained the like, as he writes.

But with a lesser care and labor, may the same be perfoumed, as Columella
writes, if in a Sunny and well dunged place (says he) besundry rods set a
row, as well of the Osior as Bremble, and these so planted in the Earth, after
the Equinoctial of Harvest, to cut a little within the Earth, whose heads
after the wider enlargyng with a stiff wooden prick, to bestow soft dung
either within the pithes of the Osiers and Brembles consisting in the mids:
these done, to fix or put Seeds of the Cucumber into the places, which after
the growing to some bigness, join with Oslers and brembles.

For the plants on such wise growyng, are after not fed with their own, but as
it were by an other mother root feeding, which by the same means yield
Cucumbers, that will endure the cold season and frostes.

The learned Pliny utters the same matter, admonyshyng here the reader, of
the wrong instructions of Columella, although he seems to allege an
Authoure, for which cause it shall be to great purpose to hear the sentence of
Pliny in this, who removing the error of Columella uttered, that Cucumbers
may be enjoyed all the year green, instructs and wills, that the greatest
rods of the Bremble* be set again into a Sunny place, where these be cut,
well two fyngers long, about the Equinoctial Spring or myddle March, and into
the heads of these, after large holes made, the Seeds to be bestowed lying
especially within the Pythes of the Brembles, and filled with soft dung,
which done, that fat dung and fine Earth, after the well myxyng together,
ought to be thycke laid, and dylygentlye heaped about the roots, which may
the better resyste the cold.

But how so ever these ought to be handeled, it well appears, that Pliny
does dysagree with Columella, in this instruction.

For Pliny wylleth these to be set, about the Equinoctial Spring, but
Columella, about the Equinoctial Harvest, as the Neapolitane Rutilius
interpreted and noted the same, to whom, as it should seem, he bare a favor.

The plants much fear the Thunder and Lyghtning, for which cause, the
Gardener may not set nor remove them at those times, besides if the tender
fruits be not covered over with sheets or thynne Couerlets, when such
Tempests or storms happen, they commonly after perish and wyther.

The Gardener myndyng to possess long and tender Cucumbers, ought to set
under the young, fruits growyng, an Earthen Pan, Bole, or half Tubbe filled
with fair water, well five or six fyngers, yea half a foot distaunce from
them, for these by the next day, will be stretched unto the water, so that
setting the Pannes lower into the Earth, or raysyng the fruits higher, ye
shall daily see them stretched forth toward the water, unto the admiration
of the owner, for the length of them, which deprived of their vessels of water,
shall in a contrary manner see them wynded and crooking, so much these joy
in the moisture, and hate the drouth. The fruits likewise will grow of a
marvelous length, if the flowers be put to grow within hollow Canes or Pypes
of the Elder. But the same, is otherwise to be learned of the Oil, for as the
Cucu^bers so deadly hate (as Pliny writes) yt setting vessels of the oil, in
steed of the water under them, they after* bend and wind away, as disdayning
the Licour, which the owner shall well try and see that these to have bended so
crooked or winding as an Hook, in one nights space.

But there must be a special care, as Columella (after the Greek Florentinus)
admonishes, that no woman, at that instant, having the reds or monthly course,
approaches nighe to the fruits, especially handeleth them, for through the
handling, at the same time, they feeble and wyther.

If she in the place be like affected, shall she after kyl the young fruits,
with her only look fixed on them, or cause them to grow after unsavory, or
else corrupted.

The Cucumber will yield fruits without seeds, if three days before the
sowing, the seeds be stieped in oil Sesaminium or Sauine oil (as the
Neapolitane Rutilius has) noted, or that the seeds before be steped in the
juice of the Herb named of Pliny Culix, or as the same in Greek may be
coniectured Coniza, in English Fleabane.

The like shall be wrought, if the first arms or branches (after the condition
of the vines) be on such wise dug about, that only the heads of them appear
naked, which a third time to be like bared, if need shall so require, yet such
a diligence to be exercised in the same, yt what branches grow out, and
spread on the earth, to be workmanly cut away, preserving only the stem and
branches, that last shote forth *which on such wise handeled, yield fruits
with the only Pulpes, having no seeds in them.

If the Gardener desires to enjoy Cucumbers, having Romayne letters, strange
figures, and skutchings or Arms imbossed on the grene rynde without, he may,
after the lively cou^terfayting of forms on the Mouldes of wood, bestow of
the potters Clay or plaster of Paris, unto the thickness of a finger, which
like handeled, and cut into two parts, let dry in a fair and hot place, that
these may the sooner serve to use, after bestow into the hollow mouldes, framed
to a like bigness and length as the fruits, of the young Cucumbers, which fast
bound about, and so closse together, that no air breath in, let these on such
wise ha^g, until the fruits have filled the mouldes within, which they joy to
do, and be ready to be gathered.

For the young fruits of property, by the report of the skilful, do so much
desire or be so wonderful desirous of a new form, that into what workma^ly
vessel or moulde ye young fruits be bestowed, they by an earnest will and
desire, represent the figures counterfayted within, as the same found noted,
in singular work of Husbandry which why Rutilius may ascribe to Gargilius
Martialis) I see no reason.

To be brief, as the coming of the moulde shall be, such will the beauty of
the fruits, be for many fruits have bin seen (as Pliny reports) which
represented the image of a winding Dragon on them.

The owner minding to enjoy Cucumbers, a long time fresh and fair ought to
bestow them in white wine lies uncorrupted or not turned, the vessel, after
the well pitching without, covered with a heap of sand, in some low Seller or
vaulte in the ground.

The Cucumbers do like continue a long time, if they be beestowed in a proper
Pickle, made of water and Salt.

But the freshnes and delight of them, will a longer time be preserved, if
after the husbandlye instructions, the owner hang them so high in Barrels or
Ferkyns, being a quarter filled or somewhat less, that these in the hangyng
do in no manner touch the vyneger.

And the vessels shall be dilygentlye pitched about, which the owner prepares
to serve to this purpose, that the force of the vinegar, in no manner breaths
forth, for by nature is otherwise penetrable or perceth, through the thynnesse
of parts. And by this practice, may the owner at due times, all the winter
through, make delectable Sallets of them.

The Cucumbers, by report of the skilful) are the longest time preserved fresh
and green, if so be these are bestowed in a Glass vessel, filled with the
purest distilled vinegar, which if the owner will, he may also preserve a
long time, if that he cutteth them off, whiles they yet be young and small,
and these bestow in a vessel of hot water to be scalded, which done, lay
the Cucumbers abroad all the night time, to be thoroughly cooled, after lay
Cucumbers into a vessel filled with a sharp Pickle, made of water and salt
for this will preserve them, by the former means, until new do come or may be
had.

The Ancient report, that a Pickle may be made, to preserve the Cucumbers
and Gourdes a long time, with Salt, vyneger, Fennel, and Maioram, if so be
the Cucumbers in some vessel be laid by courses, and these above named,
strewed between.

There be others, which affirm, that these may a long time be preserved
fresh and green, if they be bestowed into the Pickle made of vyneger and
Mustarde Seed wroughte together.

The learned Pliny wylleth the Cucu^bers to be laid in a furrow made in a
shadowie place, strewed after the form of a Bed with sifted sand, which on
such wise handeled, to be covered over with Earth and dry Hey.

Athaeneus reports, that the Cucumbers be byggest and fairest to the eye, at
the full of the Moon, so that these receive an increase, acording to the
Moons light, through the watrye moisture consisting in them.

For which cause, if the Gardner myndeth to enjoy fair and big Cucumbers,
let those be gathered at the full of the Moon, where in the decrease or wane
of the Moon, they be then slenderer and not so sightly to sale.

To these, this Athaenaeus (favored of Pliny) adds, that how often it
thundereth and lightneth, the Cucu^bers so often (as stricken with a fear)
turn and bend.

This one thing is marvelous, that Moyles and Asses are exceedinglye d^lyghted
with Cucumbers, in so much that they receiving the sauoure far off, are by a
marvelous delyghte allured to run and break into the place, where these
many times grow. For which cause, the hedges and bancks about must be strongly
made, whereby they may in no manner, break in to tread down and waste the
Cucumbers.

But the same is more marvelous which in the Greek instructions of
Husbandrye is noted, and of many has been proved, that if an Infant sick
of the Ague, and suckyng still of the Breaste, be laid on a Bed made of the
Cucumbers to sleep, being framed of like length to the Child, and that he
sleeps on the Bed but a little time or a nappe, he shall immediately be
delivered of the same, for while he sleeps, all the feuerous heat passes
into the Cucumbers.

If the owner would enjoy Cucumbers, having but little water in them, he must
dig a furrowe, of a reasonable deapth, and the same filled half up with
chafe, or the wast branches of Uynes or trees, fynely broken, cover over with
Earth, into which then bestow the Seeds, of a reasonable distaunce asunder,
and in the coming up water not the Plants, or these moysten very little,
but in the rest, order the Plants as before taught.

As to the loosing and purging of the body belongs: if the owner shall
steep the Seeds in the roots of the wild Cucumber bruised, either Ruberbe,
Turbyth, Agaricke, Ellebore, or any such like made into a Potable water, for
three days together, and for five days together, after the Plants shot
up, does often moysten them with this licour, he ^ shall after enjoy
fruits, which will gently purge the belly.

And they may be caused to work the stronger, if the roots, while they send
forth their branches, be dug about, and the smaller roots upward cut
away, in the places of which, a quantitye of the Ellebor, or some other
purging simple laid, and the Earth dilygently covered about.

The Physic commodities and helps of the Cucumber.
THe Garden Cucumber, is moist and cold in the second degree, but the seeds
dried, have the quality of drying in the first, or beginning of the second
degree.

Dyphilus Carystus (a Physician among the Greeks berye well learned, and in
Husbandry singular) disallowed or rather forbade the Cucumber to be eaten at
the beginning of Supper, as a meat incommodious to the Creature, in that the
same (after the eating) procures the person like to rest, as the Radyshe
does, but this eaten last at the meal, works an easier dygestion of the
meat, where otherwise in many, this casts up the meats eaten.

The tougher part enclosing the seeds, is of a hard digestion, but the softer
Pulpe or substance within, is of a far speedier and easier digestion, and
profitable to the Chollericke, and hot and dry stomachs, being moderately
eaten, for that this both cools, and extinguisheth thyrst.

The whole substance of the Cucumber, may moderately be eaten with vinegar and
salt of such, which daily exercise some labor of the Body.

But to such which labor not, or be Fleumaticke, this altogether denied, for
as much as this greatly harmeth especially the stomach and sinows, yet has
the water (workmanlye distilled) and the juice clear strayned forth, the
property of removing the Ague, and mitygating thyrst.

The Cucumber is not to be eaten sodden, but rather raw, with oil and vinegar,
and the better fruits are those, which be gathered at the full rypenesse, or
in the hand, discerned somewhat light.

The seeds bruised and drunk, do amend the strong savor of the vryne, but
the decoction more avails in this, and aswageth the heat of the kidneys, yea
it abateth the heat, and thirste of the Fever.

The said Diphilus instructs, that the seeds have the virtue of coolyng,
and for the same cause, hardelye dygested and sent by the wyndyngs of the
belly, yea these (as he affyrmeth) do cause a great coldenesse, engender
Choler, and abate the veneryall act.

The Seeds, after the brnsyng, drunk in either Cuite or Milk, do greatelye
profitte such as having an vlcered bladder. To These, and such as are payned
with the coughe, if so many seeds be taken and used at a time, as may
handesomelye be taken up with three of the fyngers, and these after the
brusyng with Cummyne, drunk in wine, does in short time amend the same.

The said powder drunk in woman's Milk, unto the quantity of three ounces at
a time, profits the Frensye persons, and such molested with the perilous
flixe Disenteria, yea this powder drunk, with a like wayght of Cummyne seeds,
in powder recouereth the spitting up of corruption or matter.

The whole substance and meat of the Cucumber, has the virtue of clensing and
cutting asunder, of which the same causes clear bodies, and somuche the
more, if any after the drying, finely beating, and searsing of the seeds
uses the same, in steed of a clensing powder.

The learned Galen writing of the use and properties of the Cucumbers utters
an instruction worthy the learning, that although these (says he) be well
digested of the Chollericke, and that such without care, eat plenty or much
at a time of them, do after in the continuance of time, increase a cold and
somewhat gross humor in the veins, which not able to be digested in them,
does after corrupt the sound blood.

For that cause (says he) I judge it profitable to refrain the meats being
of an evil Juice and nourishemente: although that those in certain persons,
may easily be digested: For to us not taking a care and regard of them, is an
evil Juice gathered (after a good distance of time) in the veins, which
as soon as the same once putrified by a light occasion, does immediately kindle
and cause wicked fevers: these hitherto Galen of the incommodities of the
Cucumbers.

What skill and secreates are to be learned in the sowing and workmanly ordering
of the Gourde. Chap. 30.
ALL the kinds of the Gourdes, require the same travail and diligence in the
bestowing in the Earth, as before vttred of the Cucumbers, which after the
large setting asunder, and often watering appear (for the more part) above
the Earth, by the sixte or seventh day after the bestowing in beds.

The weak and tender branches, shot up to some height, and coveting by a
certain property in nature upward, require to be diversely aided with poles to
run up in sundry manners, as either over a round and vaulted Harbor, to give
a more delighte, through the shadow caused by it, and the seemly fruits
hanging down, or else by poles directed quite vprighte, in which the Gourde
(of all other fruits) most earnestly desires, rather than to run braunching
and creeping on the ground like to the Cucumbers.

The plants love a fat, moist, and dunged loose ground, as the Neapolitan
Rutilius in his instructions of husbandry has noted: If a diligence be
bestowed in the often watring of them, the plants require a lesser care and
travail, in that they are very much furthered, by the store of moisture,
although there may be found of those, which resonably prosper with small store
of moisture, or being seldom watered, and that they of the same yield fruit
of a delectabler taste.

If the owner or Gardner happen to commit Seeds to the Earth in a dry
ground, and that the tender plants appear above the Earth, his care shall then
be, to water them plentifullye for the speedier shooting up after this manner:
by taking certain pottes filled with water, into which tongues of clothe before
laid to the bottoms of the pottes, that these may the workmanlier distill and
drop often on the plants, through ye stouping forward of them: which no
doubt, profits greatly the plants in drowth and hot seasons.

The longer and smaller have few Seeds in them, and for the same more
delectable in the eating, yea these better accounted of, and sold in the
Market.

The Gardner minding to commit of the Seeds to the Earth, ought before to
stiepe them in a boll or pan of water for a night, whereby the Seeds apt
to be sown, may the surer be known, which he shall well perceive by those
resting in the bottom, of the cunninger sort preferred and used, but the
others, swimmyng above (as unprofitable) and serving to no use, are willed to
be thrown away.

The chosen Seeds are to be set in beds two together with three fingers unto
the middle Jointes, and the sharper ends fixed upward, but the beds before
ought to be dug two foot deep, and so many broad, and the Seeds bestowed
well three or four foot asunder, one from the other (in these filled up with
old dung,) well turned in with the earth, or rather to procure them speedier
to grow and yield the fruit the sooner, let the beds be filled with hot
horse dung, new taken out of the stable.

If the Gardner would possess Gourdes of diverse forms, as long, round, and
short, it behooves him to choose and set the seeds accordinglye. For those
Seeds taken out of the neck of the Gourde, shall the owner after the
council of the singular Columella, learned Pliny and Rutilius, set in well
dunged ground, with the sharp ends upward. Which after the well watering (as
above taught) yield fruits, long in form, tenderer, and better esteemed. The
Seeds taken out of the mids of the bellye, and set into the Earth with
the big ends upward, do yield (after the husbandely handeling) and
watering, great fruits, round, and large, of which after the through
drying, and meat taken out, be bottels and other vessels made, to serve for
diverse uses, in that these grow far larger in the belly, than any of the
other kinds.

The Seeds taken out of the bottom of the Gourde, and set with the gross or
big ends upward, do also yield after the workmanlye ordering, fruits both
great and large, yet these far lesser and shorter. And the Seeds in general,
in what place they be set, ought to be bestowed in earth well dunged, and
the rather with hot horse dung, new taken out of the stable, if these be set
in the month of March. But ye seeds in no manner, may be bestowed in low
places, lest shours of rain falling, hinder and corrupt the fruits, through
the ouermuche water cloying and standing in the Alley or other low place. The
plants shot up to some heigthe, ought to be diligently weeded about, and
the earth heaped high up, and when need requires in the hot seasons, to
water them often.

If the Seeds happen to be set in a Earth smally labored and hollow, when
the plants be somewhat grown above the ground, the owner ought to dig away
of a good depthe from the young plants, the Earth round about, that the
roots may the freelier run and spread abroad: the plants further grown and
shot up, may the owner erecte to run and spread like to a Uine, well a man's
heigthe.

If the plants happen to be annoyed with the Leke or Garden fleas, the owner
shall remove and drive them away, by the only setting of the herb Organye, in
sundry places among them, on which (if these happen to light) they either are
incontinente killed, or caused to increase but few after, as the Greek writers
of husbandry, in their skilful practices witness. Out of which with diligence
we have also gathered these, that to the owner or gardner, may happily appear
profitable: as the Gourde (a matter somewhat strange) to yield fruits without
seeeds, If the Seeds before the setting be stieped for three days at the
least, in Sesaminum, or Sauine oil, as the Neapolitane Rutilius utters, or
in the Juice of that herb infused, named Conyza, in English Fleabane.

The like may be wroughte, if after the condition of the Uine, the
principallest and first stem shot up, be on such wise dug about, that
alonely the head of the same be left bare. Which as it shall increase, must
the owner repeat, yea a third time, if need shall require the same.

And in this doing, must the owner have a care, that as the branches spread
forth (whether upright or on the ground) to be cut away, herein preserving
only that stem, which shot forth last.

The Gourdes on such wise handled (as the Cucumbers before noted, will yield
fruits without seeds, possessing only Cartilages, and a soft pulpe within. If
the owner would possess fruits timely and very soon, then after the
instruction of the Greek writers of husbandry, bestow in earthen pannes or
old baskets without bottomes, fine sifted earth intermedled with dung, about
the beginning of the Spring, in which the Seeds set, sprinkle and moisten
sundry times with water: after this, in fair and Sunny days, or when a gentle
shower falls, set them abroad, but when the Sun goes down, bestow the
baskets with the plants within the house again, and these like order so often
(and water when need requires) until all the frostes, tempests, and cold
season be gone and paste. After this as soon as opportunity and time will serve,
and that a fair day be present, bestow all the baskets and pans of earth
unto the brimme, in well labored and dressed beds, and apply that other
diligence required, through which the Gardner shall possess timely fruit,
as well of the Gourde as Cucumber.

The same matter shall the owner b^ing to pass and cause, with lesser cost,
travail, and time, if he cut away the waste branches of the Gourdes, or
tender shootes of the Cucumbers, for on such wise handled they speedelier
yield and send forth their fruits.

If the Gardner covers to enjoy diners forms on Gourds, or sundry caracters
on Cucumbers, let him bestow the flower or tender young fruit of either, as
the same shall yet be hanging on the branch, into a moulde of like bigness
as the fruit. Which to handled, will after cause whether the same be Gourd or
Cucumber, to possess on the upper face, the like figure or caracters, as were
before imprinted within the mould.

For the fruit of either after the mind of Gargilio so much desires a new
form, that it like represents the Image or figure imprinted within the
mould. In so much yt of what form the mould of the Gourd shall be fashioned, on
such manner shall the fruit grow within ye mould: And Pliny for confirmation of
the same reports, that he saw many Gourds fashioned in their full growth
after the form of a winding dragon. If the owner endeavors to possess long
and slender Gourdes, he must bestow the young fruits new grown, and hanging
still on the Uine branches, either into a Truncke of wood, or a long Cane
boored through all the Joyntes, which in time growing, will stretch and
shoot forth into a marvelous length. For the same substance which should
increase into a breadth, is caused through the hollow pipe to stretch and
grow slender, whereby the narrowness of the hole so hindering the bigness of
growth, procures the fruit to run into a length, as the like Gourde by the
same occasion, Pliny saw to extend well nine foot of length. The like
fruits altogether shall the Gardner purchase, if under the vines, he set of
some deepenesse in the ground earthen pans filled with water, and they
distante well fine or six fingers from the Gourdes hangyng down. For by the
morrow or next day shall he see the fruits stretched even down to the
water, by which leading and handling of the pans with water they may be caused
to grow of a wonderful length.

But the pannes for a time removed or taken away, will cause the fruits to
crook and wind upward, so much of property they joy in moisture, and
refuse or hate the drouth: yet of the oil is otherwise to be learned, for
so much as they deadly hate the same as Pliny writes, which if in the steed
of water it be set under the fruits, causes them by the next day to wind
an other way.

If this likewise they can not do, yet do they wrythe, and as it were
disdainyng the same crook upward after the manner of a hook, as a like form
of the fruit may be tried in one night space.

This one matter ought especially to be cared for, as Columella after the
Greek Florentinus warns, that no woman come or very seldom approach nighe
to the fruits of the Gourdes or Cucumbers, for by her only handling of them,
they feeble and wither, which matter if it shall happen in the time of the
Terms, does then either flea the young tender fruits with her look, or
causes the^ to be unsavory, and spotted or corrupted within. The Gourds
determined to be kept for seed, ought after the mind of Rutilius the
Neapolitane to hang still on their Uine, unto the Winter time, and cut or
broken from the same, to be dried either in the Sun or in the smoke: for the
Seeds otherwise are prone to putrifye, and not after profitable to any use.
The Gourdes and Cucumbers will endure, and be kept a long time fresh and
fair to the eye, if they be hyd and covered with white wine lies, not over
egre or sour, in the hangyng down in pipes or hogs sheads. They bein like
manner defended and preserved by bestowing them in a pickle or brine. But they
will a long time continue fresh and fair (as the worthy instructers of
husbandry report) if so be they hang so high within the vessels, that they
be nothing near to the Uineger. And the vessels appointed for the only
purpose, shall diligently be pitched over and round about, least the spirits
of the Uineger in the mean time breath forth, which by nature otherwise is
penetrable, thorough the thinness of parts. The Cucumbers may in like manner
be kept for a long time if they shall be bestowed in a vessel of distilled
Uineger: for on such wise they putrifye not, as has bin tried of the
skillful searchers of secreates.

Thus by these practices, may the owner enjoy fair Cucumbers and Gourdes all
the Winter to use, which if the Gardner will, shall he also preserve a long
time, if while the fruits be tender, he cut them off, and scalde them in
hot water, and after lay them abroad all the night to cool, and bestow them
on the morrow into a sharp pickle or brine, made for the only purpose, which
on such wise handled, will marvelous well endure, until the new be come.

In this place comes to mind, and that very aptly, the same which Athenaeus
bosted, as touching his strange feast that he prepared for his friends, and
especially in that he served them with green Gourdes for a dainty dishe, in
the month of January, which so pleasauntly sauoured and eat, as if they had
bin new gathered, in a manner. Which like, by study and diligence of the
gardners that exercised this art, they supposed them to be preserved.

As the like Nicander long before Athenaeus and many others report, who will
the Gourds to be first dried in the air, and stitched through the heads with
a strong packthreed, to be after hanged up in the smoke, that the pots filled
with them, may leysurely soke all the Winter, and drink in of the Brine.

At this day in France, through all the Winter months, are the Gourdes
hanged up in the roofes of their houses, to be preserved for daintye dishes
green, when occasion offers to use them, especially those which are named
the Citrones, that far longer endure, and be not so lightly subject to
putrefying.

The fruits of the Gourdes, Melons, Pompons, and Cucumbers, may be caused to
loose and purge, like to many others, if the seeds be stieped for a night
and a day in the licoure made with Ruberbe, Agaricke, Turbith, Senae,
Colocynthis, Scamonie, or other simple purging medicines, and those after the
bestowing in the Earth, watered for five days together, and five times every
day. When the Gourde is felt unpleasant, the fruits by the stieping, may
after receive what sauoure and taste the owner will, if the seeds before they
be committed to the earth, be infused for a time in any pleasant licoure,
whether the same be damask or musk water, for the plants shootyng up of
these, will yield fruit of like savor, as well being sodden as raw, after
the condition of the Cucumber.

The like altogether may be wroughte or caused without any art, if whiles the
fruit is a seething, you bestow in the licoure what taste, color, or
sauoure you desire to have. For the Gourde and Cucumber are of such a kind,
that they be void of any quality.

The rind of the fruit of the Gourde grown to full ripeness, becomes so
hard as wood.

The Gourd planted in the ashes of man's bones, and watered with oil, yields
fruit by the ninth day, as the ancient Hermes affirms. Which man, for that
he teaches vain matters, for the same cause he gives me occasion to credit
him weakly. Yet experience does many times cause the uncertain to prove
certain.

The physic benefits and helps of the Gourde.
THe fruit of the Gourde, is of a cold and moiste temperament, and the seeds
especially used in medicine. That worthy physician Crisippus with the Greeks,
condemned or rather utterly forbad the Gourds in meat, as unprofitable for
their coldness to the stomach.

That skillful man Diphilus contrary affirms, that the Gourdes boiled in
water and vinegar, do strengthen the stomach.

The learned Galen writes, that the Gourde in no manner may be eaten raw,
in that the same is unpleasant to eat, but either sodden roasted, or fried in
a pan, is well commended.

The Greek writers of husbandry do report, that the Gourd does loose the
belly, and that the Juice of the same dropped into the grieved ears, caused of
heat, they affirm to profit, unto which use of it self, and with the oil of
Roses dropped warm into the ears.

The outward rind pared away, and the meat with the kernels, not fully ripe,
heated or parboyled in water, and after shred small like to the Cabbedge, and
boiled with butter, Onions, and a quantity of Salt. This on such wise
prepared and eaten, profits lean men.

Others after the cutting of the vnripened fruit into round slices, boil them
with butter in a dishe like Apples.

The wine standing for a night abroad, in the hollow of the fresh Gourde,
and drunk with a fasting stomach, purges gently the bellye costiue.

The meat of the Gourd, after the seeds taken forth applied, helps the
corns of the toes and feet: the Juice of it boiled, and rubbing the mouth
therewyth, fastneth loose teeth, and assuageth the pain of them, proceeding of
a hot cause.

The seeds of the Gourde clean picked from their skin, being sodden in
Barley water, strayned, and druncke, healpe the inflammations of the liver,
kidneys, and bladder, the impostumes of the breaste, and provoke urine.

If a sick person of the Fever, refuse to drink of this water, a Sirroppe
then with Sugar, may be compounded of the same, which mightily profits all
kinds of Agues.

The juice of the pieces of the Gourde, tempered with milk and vinegar, in
which a linen cloth wette, and applied on the Liver, very much aswageth the
heat of the Liver.

When the winter approaches, the seeds ought to be taken forth of the fruit,
and these rubbed well with Salt, that the clammy humors may on such wise be
removed.

The seeds ought after to be laid in a dry place, whereby the proper moisture
may not corrupt them, and those seeds like prepared, will endure for three
years.

The pieces of the rynde of the Gourde bruised, and anointed or applied in
plaster form one the heads of Infants, does aswage the inflammation or
burning caused of the brain, the pieces or juice of the same applied, does
like mytigate the burning Gout, and qualifye the inflammation of the eyes.

The Gourde after the fine shreddyng, applied in plaster form, aswageth
tumors and swellings, the dry Ashes applied on burnings, does maruellouslye
avail, the Ashes also of the ryndes applied on ulcers of the privy place,
beginning to putrify, both purges, and brings them to a scarre.

The juice of the Gourde, after the boylyng with a little Honye and Nytre
drunk, gently loses the bellye, the same juice myxed with the Oil of
Roses, and anointed on the Rydge bone and Loins, cools the burning of the
Fevers, this besides anointed, helps the shyngles.

Here learn that the Gourde roasted, or boiled in a dish or frying pan is more
wholesome, than raw, for that through the rosting, it leaves a great force of
waterie moisture, and therefore yields a stronger and worthyer nourishment.

The Gourde sodden, requires a tartness to be matched with it, for the same
otherwise, is felt unsavory and without delyghte, so that it better
relisheth, being matched with either salt, sour, or tarte things, that nerer
agree to the benefit of our body, and the same ought to be on such wise
prepared, that it procure not the creature to vomit, as the singular Galen,
has clearly uttered.

The benefits and helps of the distilled water of the Gourde.
THe chosen time for the distilling of Gourds, is when they be full ripe, for
those then are to be finely shred, and the kernels with the whole substance
artely distilled.

The distilled water of the fruits, mixed with a quantity of Sugar, drunk, not
only loses the belly, but cease thirst, and helps the cough proceeding of
a hot cause.

The said water drunk morning and evening, unto the quantity of three ounces
at a time; for forty days together, does maruellously help the stone in the
kidneys.

This water drunk in the like manner for ten days together, purges the
kydneys and Bladder, and causes urine, this also drunk in the like manner,
qualifieth the burning of Fevers, when no other Medicine can aswage the same:
this besides applied without, on the regyon of the heart, with linen clothes
wet in the same, like represseth the heat.

Of the care, helps, and secrets of the Pompons, Mellons, and Musk Mellons.
Chap. 31.
THe ancient both of the Greek and Latin writers of husbandry, attributed the
Pompons and Mellons, to a kind of Cucumbers which they confessed, very nere to
agree with them, in that the Cucumbers, in their growth have bin seen, to be
changed into Pompons, and Mellon Pompons, which two kinds of fruit, do
differ in themselves, especially in the form and quantifie, for when these
appear to exceed in bigness, they are then named Pompons, but they growing
round, and in form of an Apple fashioned, are by a biename of the Pompon and
apple, named Mellon Pompons. For which cause Palladius names all this kind of
form of apples, Mellons, or as if a man should say he named them aplewise or
Quincelike, which are not wont to hang, as Pliny writes, but to grow round
on the ground, and they are then grown to a ripnesse, when the stalk is
parted from the body and a sweet savor from the belly strikes to the nose.
Further those growing after ye form of a Quince, which properly are named
Mellons, have a harder and tougher meat than Pompons, and they not only enjoy
lesser wrinckles on the rynde, but be dryer, grosser, whyter of flesh, and
have more Seeds than the Pompons.

The other kind named Cytrons, be in form and color like to the Cytron,
and the leaves of ye branches divided into many small, parts after the form of
feathers or wyngs of Birds.

The other kind named the winter Pompons, are nothing so bygge of growth, as
be the common Pompons of the Garden.

But the best kind of al, are the Mellons, next the Turkysh Pompons, and those
made sweet by Art, when the seeds before the bestowing in the Earth, are
for a night laid in water well mixed with Sugar. or in Honey.

The Mellons and Pompons hardly come up in any Country at due time of the
year, without a labor, cost and diligence of the Gardener in hastening them
forward, nor these caused well to spread and yield, before the great heat of
the year become, which season, some year, happens diverse and intermedled
with cold, and either over dry, or over moist, which much hinder the ripening
of them in the harvest time and toward the vyntage. For which cause the
Gardener ought to hasten the fruits forward by dung* and heat of the beds,
which always procure a more health to persons. The seeds of Mellons to be
committed to the Earth, ought to be such, which have bin kept within the
fruit, unto the full rypenesse of the same: for these then taken forth of the
Mellon be more worth, and reserve in the^ the proper substance within the
bodies If the owner would possess the fruits of the Mellon timely he ought
before to infuse the seeds in luke warm water, for six or ten hours, and
those after to beestowe in Beds prepared, about the tenthe day of March,
well three or four foot distaunte one from the other, and the Beds to cast
well two foot high, and so many broad, and to fill them with old dung
fynely broken, and with black Earth sufficiently loose wrought together, for
on such wise handeled, they yield a bigger fuller and pleasaunter fruit.
Certain skilful Gardeners bestow horse dung in Beds, so hot as the same
comes forth of the stable, to cause the plants far sooner to shoot up, and
they turn upward six or ten of the seeds of the pompone with ye sharp
ends downward (as certain do four or five of them to come up) and those they
lightly cover over, with much beating or treding the Earth down on them.
Rutilius in his Husbandry, wills the seeds, both of the Mellon and Pompon,
to be thin set in beds, in such manner, that the seeds be placed well
two foot asunder, and the places well dug and diligently turned in with
fine dung, for the plants joy in a liberty, that they may spread at will
hither and thither, and are greatly helped by other Herbs growyng among
them, as the Cucumbers are, so that they shall need but little raking and
pluckyng away of other Herbs.

After these, for danger of the cold and frostes, the owner may cover the
plants and Beds, with light mattresses made of straw, or with mattes
spread on rods, shored up with forckes set at each corner of the Beds,
or he may for a seemlyer sight, lay abroad boordes or Tables on pillars or
other stays of stone, set at each corner of the Beds, in such manner, that
the bordes may be lifted off, when the Sun shyneth hot, and set over
again, at the going down of the Sun or when the cold air is felt.

And as soon as the Mellon has yielded leaves sufficient great, the Gardener
ought to water the same gentlye and softlye, with a list sharpened at the end
hangyng forth, and broad at the other end (restyng within the Pot or Dishe
full of water) which on such wise continually moysteneth (by the drops
falling) the Earth very dry.

The Mellons further grown, the owner ought to remove, and set the plants
again, when the fruits are yielded so bygge as Orenges, and this especially
must be done after the mids of May, when as the cold of the year is well
spente, that otherwise might hinder the growth of them, and set well six
foot distante one from the other, in Beds dilygently dunged and labored.

The Pompons purchase a far greater sweetness, and pleasanter in taste, if
the seeds before be steeped for three days in water well mixed with Sugar, or
in water and Honey named Mulse, and in like manner ye fruits are found sweet in
the eating, if the seeds steeped in new Cow milk, (...) then set in well
dressed Beds.

The Pompons in like manner will obtain a sauoure of Roses, if the seeds
before be laid among dry Roseleaues for twenty or thirty days together, and
those after with the leaves, set in well dressed beds, or ye seeds steeped in
Rosewater, or other odoriferous licour, which after the drying in ye shadow,
then as before uttered, co^mited to the earth.

As the worthy Authoure Florentinus in his Greek instructions of Husbandry
writes, and after him the like that worthy Rutilius.

Here I think it a matter not to be omitted, that Cats by an earnest desire
covet the Pompons, for which cause the owners have a care to look diligently
thereunto.

To procure Pompons to continue a long time without decaying or corrupting, let
the owner water the plants for a time, with the juice, of Houseleeke.

The other matters to be learned, are fully taught in the secrets of the
Cucumbers and Gourdes, where many devises are uttered, that may be used common.
As if the owner would enjoy timely fruits, and having strange forms on
them, big, laxatiue, and without Seeds, let him diligently read and consider
the former Chapiters, both of the Cucumber and Gourde.

The Mellons and Pompons ought then to be gathered, when the stalks begin to
feeble, and the fruits to yield a pleasant savor in the eating, at which
time the owner must diligently take heed of Cattes, that have an earnest
love and desire to them, as before is uttered

Also the Gardener ought to conceive, that those named the winter Pompons, do
never grow to a full rypenesse on their beds, and for that cause, to procure
them speedily to rypen, he must (after the gathering) hang them up in the
roof of the house, and eat of those, when they appear yellowe within.

The Physic commodities of the Pompons and Mellons.
THe learned report, that the Mellons cool and moysten in the second degree,
yet those feale sweet in taste, are temperatly cold. The seeds also are used
in medicine, and possess the same property.

Diocles Caristius (in libris salubrium) utters, the Pompon to be easy of
digestion, and to comfort very much the heart, yet the same yeldeth* but a
small increase to the body.

Diphilus reports that the meat of the Pompon does make fat, yet very hardly
digested, through coldness myxed with the moisture of the same, besides it
rendereth a small nourishmente, and hardly moves the belly.

Phaenias reports, that the Pompon must be eaten after the stomach is
empty, for that this otherwise is lightly converted into those humors, which
of the same occasion hinder digestion, through the preeminence that it then
obtains in the receptakle of the meat or stomach.

Therefore he wills the Pompons, to be eaten with a fasting stomach, and to
pause from eating any other meat, until this in the stomach be half
digested.

Diphilus writes, that the Pompons eaten, do greatly aswage unnatural heates
of the stomach, and mytigate wicked Agues.

Galen reports, that all kinds of Pompons, have the property of cooling,
and enjoy a large moisture, yet those not without a manifest quality of
clensing, in that the seeds maruellously cleanse the face of sun burning, of
pymples, and foul spots.

This Author further adds, that the same does yield and cause a wicked
juice, although it may sometimes be well digested of the stomach.

Besides he affirms the same to cause Choler, and to yield the plenty of
moisture out of order.

The Pompons ought to be eaten for the first meat, but in such manner that
such which are fleumatik to drink old wine after the same, and the Choleric,
to drink some sour or tarte thing after it, for on such wise handled, is all
manner of harm avoided.

For this kind of meat does lightly alter into Choler, or floume, for which
cause the over sweet Pompon does offend the Chollericke, and the fruit
unripe the fleumaticke.

Many worthy men prefer the long Pompons before the round, yet do all the
kinds move or loose the bellye, and cause urine, so that they shall be ripe. For
which cause they are judged profitable for the kidneys, but the seeds more
avail, in so much that stones there prepared they maruellously expel.

The outward rynde of the Pompon applied to the foreheade does effectuously
aswage and stay the running of the eyes.

Such which have a hot stomach, and encombred with Choler, are greatly
harmed, if they drink wine after the eating of the same, in that of the owner
nature it is lightly caused, and the wine immediately increases it more, and
causes a sharper humor in such bodies, and apt to vomyte: yea this also
extenuateth, gross and clammye humors, yet does it well agree, that the
fleumaticke eat of the Pompon, for as much as in the same is a substance
tender and soluble, that is, the same which is next to the seed, for this
does not lightly corrupt.

The persons which eat of the Pompons, may not immediately eat and other
meat after the^, in that those both corrupt, and alter the same eaten.

At the kinds of Pompons provoke vomytyng, in bodies prepared, exceepte the
meat enjoying a good juice, be eaten immediately upon, for they on such wise,
move the speedier downwarde.

The greater number of Physicians write, that those eaten, does mitygate the
venerial act, and do a^ate the genytall seed,

The seeds properlye, cleanse the face, if the skin be sundry times washed
with the decoction of them, the Mellons, as Galen reports ( in lib. de
facultatibus alimentorum) have the property of clensing, for which cause they
may aptly clear su^ny spots, pimples, and other foul spots both on the face
and body.

The seeds of the Mellon clean picked from their upper skyn, and diligently
brought to powder with Bean flower, this after the artely myxing with
Rosewater, and dried in the sun like cakes, dissolve in fair water, washing
the face sundry times with it: for this maruellously cleanses, and procures
with wine a clear face, yea the same mu^difyeth all foul spots on the
skin.

The seeds also have the property of causing urine, yea those purge both the
Loins and kidneys, but the seeds more avail in the Loins, than in the
Bladder, so ye a mightier remedy must be invented for the stone of the
bladder, than for the stone of the Loins and kydneys.

The roofes of the Mellons, not only cleanse, but heal the ulcers fuly of
mattier, being applied with Honny in plaster form.

Many there be, which eat the Mellon with vinegar, but to it they add and
myxe, the Pennyroiall and Onyons, by which the harmeful force of the cold,
might so be tempered.

Dyphilus writes, that a little piece of the Mellone put into a pot with
meat, causes the speedier boiling of the Nettle or Mustardseeds or the slyppe
of the fig tree, on such wise ordered.

The commended helps of the distilled water of the Mellons.
THe best time for the distillyng of Mellons, is when they be thoroughly ripe,
which shredde small, distill after art, about the Harvest time.

The distilled water of the Mellons drunk, helps singularly the stone,
procures vryne, and cleanses the kydneys, the rather, being used both morning
and evening, for three or four weeks together, unto the quantity of three or
four ounces at a time.

The said watre, for a time drunk, not only cools the Liver, but cools
and extynguysheth all inward heates not natural, yea this tempered with Sugar
and drunk, cease maruellouslye thyrst.

The water drunk, in like manner abouesayde, amendeth speedilye an old coughe.

The water applied without the Body, with Lynnen clothes wette in the same,
not only expels the heates, but the swellyngs of the Body, wheresoever
those shall happen.

Worthy instructions about the sowing and setting of sundry Physic herbs, to
these of the greatest number of fragrant herbs, and pleasant flowers, and
first of the blessed Thistle. Cap. 32.


WHere before we have sufficiently written of the apt placing, and workmanly
orderyng of the most herbs, and fruits, both for the pot and sallets, and of
their benefits for the use of physic: in this part following (for a further
increase and comfort of the simple) we purpose to ^ntreat not only of the
artly placing of sundry physic herbs, but to what uses these serve for the
aid and benefit of health.

And of these we entende to begin with that worthy herb named the Blessed
Thistle (for his singular virtues) as well against poisons, as the pestilente
Ague, and other perilous diseases of the heart: Which to many at this day
is very well known although great controversies have bin amongst the
Ancient physicians, about the true description of the herb: for both the
name and form of the herb, do declare the same to be a kind of Thistle:
yet the learned Ruellius writing of the blessed Thistle, came nearer to a
troth, and faithfuller described the form of the herb: in that he affirmed
the same to have a big stalk, and leaves crisped with prickles (after the
condition of the Endive) the flower yelowish, and seeds small, contained
within the soft down, (as in the other Thistles,) and that they do late wax
ripe.

This herb named the Blessed Thistle, requires to be sown in a well
labored ground, and the seeds ought to be committed to the Earth in the
first quarter of the Moon, but those not to be bestowed in beds, above three
fingers deep.

The Herb also ioyeth and well prospers coming up among Wheat.

The physic benefits and helps of the blessed Thistle.
THe herb of quality is hot and dry, which the bitter taste of the same
well demonstrateth, besides it dries and somewhat digesteth.

The Herb has the nature and property of opening, the stopping of members,
of pearcing and causing urine.

The blessed Thistle either eaten or drunk delyuereth the patiente from the
mighty pain of the head which vexes about the eyes: this also puts
away giddiness of the head, restores (by a like reason) memory lost, the
hearing, and diseases of the Lungs.

The leaves brought to powder, and drunk in wine, consume and send forth
the fleume of the stomach, but the leaves are the better and handsomer taken,
if of the powder pills be made.

This in like manner purges the breaste and blood, and very much profits
the consumption of the Lungs. The leaves boiled in Wine, and drunk hot, does
cease gripings, provoke sweat, break the stone, and help the monthly
Terms.

The herb for a time used, comfort the brain and sight, not only if the
same be eaten, but if the eyes also be anointed therewyth.

When the Juice of the herb cannot be had, then let the powder, or the Herb
it self dried, be stieped for a night in water, and the eyes washed with the
same. The Juice also dropped into the eyes, remoueth the blonde consisting in
them.

The blessed Thistle refraineth or stops the bleeding of the nose, or
mouth, if the herb be applied to the place, from whence it runs.

The powder of the same herb purges the Vuula, the Jaws, and throat, and
causes that the patient may the easier cast and spitte forth fleume and
gross humors.

The herb drunk in wine, amendeth a weak stomach, procures an appetite to
meat, and abateth the heat, yea this consumes the evil blood, and
engenders the good.

If the herb shall be boiled in water and druncke, the sam^ ^^^meth evil
humors, and preserves the good, this boiled in wine and druncke, provoke
sweat.

The herb druncke boiled, or raw with wine, breaks the stone, the same
eaten, strengthens the palsy members, and recouereth the exulcerated Lungs.

The blessed Thistle boiled in the water of a healthful male Child drunk,
profits the dropsy persons, healpeth the plague, and dissolueth all
impostumes, yea this remoueth the Canker and falling sickness. The powder of the
leaves, unto the quantity of half a walnutte shell at a time druncke in wine,
is a most present remedy against the plague, if the same shall be received
within four and twentye hours space of the time grieved. If wine be boiled
with the herb, and druncke, profits the like: this by a like manner
received, amendeth the rotten Fevers of the stomach, and such encumbred with
the Fever Quartaine. The down proceeding of the flowers of the blessed
Thistle, applied on deep cuttes, and new wounds, does in short time cure
them without pain.

The powder of the herb mixed with meal, and a plaster employed of the same
with hot Uineger, helps the pushes and other swellings of the plague. The
herb cures any manner of burning, and the blisters proceeding of the same: if
before dried, and mixed with the proper Juice it be applied on the places.

This Herb druncke with white wine, remoueth the Colliks, and puts away
feables the Herb chawed in the mouth, amendeth a stinking breathe: the
herb also bruised, and applied on botches speedely cures them, yea this
recouereth the defaultes of women's places, and causes the Terms.

The bitte of venomous beasts may be helped, either with the Juice, or
decoction of the herb in water, the powder of the herb eaten or drunck,
helps stitches in the side, and the pleurisy and this also profits
infantes incombred with the falling sickness, and worms.

Many worthy physicians affirm, that the powder or Juice, or the decoction of
this herb does expel al manner of poisons: The example of which matter,
Hieronimus Tragus (in his Herball) learnedly utters, where he reports, that
there was a certain young maiden, which unknowing thereof, did eat poison in an
apple given to her, whose body incontinente swelled, and no medicine could
assuage the swelling, until that the distilled water of this herb was
ministered to her, which in short time mitigated or abated the swelling, to the
wonder of many, so that on this wise the child was delivered from al peril of
the poison.

A like history reported of others, that a Child happened to sleep in the
field open mouthed, into whose mouth an Adder crepte and went down into the
body, but after two ounces of the distilled water was ministered, the Adder
incontinente crepte forth again (by the fundamente) without further harm or
hurt unto the Child. Wherefore against all poisons, they affirm the powder,
Juice, decoction, or distilled water of this herb, to be a singular remedy
applied either within or without the body: But after the taking either of
these, the patient ought to be diligently covered with clothes, that he may
well sweat for three hours space.

The wine made in Harvest of the blessed Thistle, and druncke in the time
answerable, profits and healpeth all the griefs before uttered.

The commended virtues of the distilled water of the blessed Thistle.
THe time and order of distilling of the same, is that the herb alone, about
the end of May be distilled.

The water distilled of the blessed Thistle druncke unto the quantity of two
or three ounces at a time, both morning and evening, puts away headache,
comfort memory, helps the giddiness of the head, and recouereth
especially all the griefs of the eyes, although they be but washed with the
same.

The water in like manner taken, profits such being in a consumption of the
body. The water in like quantity drunk both morning and evening, breaks the
stone, and cures any burning, by often, applying, linen clothes wette in the
same.

The patient molested with the Quartayne or any other Ague, by taking three
ounces of the distilled water of the herb fasting, well a quarter of an hour
before the fytte of cold beginning, and lying down to sweat, be well covered
with clothes: shall within certain fittes so using himself, be delivered
either of the one or other Ague, the like does the decoction of the herb or
the powder druncke hot with wine.

Against eating Cankers, or any other putride ulcers, there is scarcely to be
found any other worthier than the leaves, the Juice, decoction, or water of the
blessed Thistle. And notable diseases has the herb recovered, especially
in women, whose breasts were eaten and consumed with the Canker, even unto the
bare ribs, by clensing first the places with this water, and applying after
the powder of the herb, which on such wise handled, healed them in short
time.

And Bathes are profitably made of this herb, for the dissoluing of the
stone, and provoking of the Terms.

What care and secrets ar to be learned in the sowing and setting of the herb
Angelica. Chap. 33.
THe herb Smyrnium, which at this day of all the physicians and poticaries
through out Europe is named Angelica: this when in the first year it shall
come up of the Seed, yeldeth stalks of a foot and a half high, a finger
big, round, tender, smoothe, and bendyng back to the Earth: these also
divided and spread forth into two, three, and many times four smaller
stalks or arms, in whose top are leaves in form like to the leaves of the
Smallache, but far greater, and those divided into three parts, sharp
fashioned at the end, and growyng unto twelve fingers in height and breadth,
and green all the Winter.

In the second or third year, the stem shoots up out of the middle of the
leaves, and in height two or somtymes three cubits, increasing a within
thombe bigness for the more part, round, ioynted, whitish and smoothe, and
as the same were sprinkled with dusty spots and hollow within, beset also
with leaves in ioynte form, much lesser than the abouesaide. This also has
little branches, and certain stemmes shooting forth, in whose top are
great tuffes, well five or six inches broad, and those in form imbosed
round, and full of whitishe flowers in which do after succeed two seeds,
conjoined together, long, cornered, and of an ashie white color: those also
contained within the hulke, be long, plain, black without, white within, and
the tough kernel covered with a rind or pillyng sharp edged. This increases
in root many times so big as the hand can clappe about, and sometimes
bigger, yea it sends forth the root, before the stem be come up,
which root increases in years well a soote of length, or into many parts
divided, being black without, and white within, big, soft, and full of
Juice, which being cut sends forth a yelow Juice or licoure, from the inner
side of the rind, and a like licoure is contained in the veyns of the leaves,
but the same more watery.

The root, seeds, and leaves possess an eger taste, fretting the jaws,
somewhat bitter, thin, and aromaticke or sweet smelling.

The most effectuous of all the parts, is the proper licoure, next the
seeds, then the root, last the flowers and leaves.

The herb Angelica ioyeth to be sown in a well labored earth, and the same
rather dry than moiste, for the harming by worms, after the coming up, this
requires to be diligently weeded about, and seldom watered. This Angelica
florisheth and bears flowers in the months of July and August.

The physic commodities of the Angelica.
THe herb of quality is botte and dry in the third degree, it opens,
extenuateth, and dissolueth.

This has special properties against poisons, it clears the blood and the
body.

The root is sovereign against the plague, and all manner of poisons, the
like does the distilled water of the root prevail.

The powder of the herb, unto the quantity of half a dram, with a dram
waighte of pure Triacle, given in four or five ounces of the distilled water
of the same, and the patient well covered to sweat, does maruellouslie help
the infection of the plague, and sudden agues or sweating.

And for lack of the Triacle, may a whole dram of the powder be ministered.

The root of the herb (after the infusing in vinegar) applied to the nose,
or the powder of the root drunk sometimes fasting in wine, very much avails
against a pestilent air.

The distilled water of the Angelica, or powder of the root, ceasseth gripings
of the belly proceeding of cold, if the belly otherwise be not costine. To be
brief, the distilled water and powder of the root, recouereth all inward
griefs of the body, and in the pleurisy or stitches of the sides, this is
profitably ministered. The powder of the Angelica (or as some write the
distilled water of the herb, helps ruptures, and the diseases of the Lungs,
it puts away gripings of the belly, amendeth the strangury, sends forth
the yongling and Terms, and dissolueth all inward swellings of the body.

The root voyled in wine, or water and honey, and drunk, prevails in all the
above said griefs, being in due order ministered. The Juice bestowed into hollow
teeth, stays the running of them, the water of the herb dropped into the
ears, does like avail in the same. This also amendeth the dimnesse of sight.
The leaves of the Angelica wroughte with the leaves of Rue and Honey in
plaster form, and the same workemanly applied, does not only heal the bit
of a mad Dog, but the sting of venomous worms. This plaster applied on
the head of the patiente sick of the ague, does in short time draw to it,
all the heat of the fever. The distilled water, Juice, and powder of the
herb, workmanly applied in old deep wounds, do cleanse, and regenerate, or
renew flesh in the places.

The destilled water applied with linen clothes wet in it, does maruelously
assuage the ache of the hippes and gout, in that the same consumes soft and
clammy humors gathered.

Many other virtues of this herb may be gathered by the former helps
uttered.

The seeds have like properties, as the root possesses, the wild Angelica
is weaker in virtue, but boiled in wine and applied in plaster form, does
especially cure new and old ulcers.

What care and diligence is required in the artely sowing of the herb
Ualerian. Chap. 34.
THe Ualeria^ grows up with a long and high stem, ioynted and hollow,
bearing on the top a tuffe, and flowers purple mixed with a whiteness, or
white mixed with a redness, after the form of Organy, the root as big as
the little finger, and white, with many other small roots braunching in the
earth, and these yelowish of color, sweet in sauoure, and yielding the
force of the spike, by a certain strength of the sauoure. And this does
Hieronimus book report, to be the true Ualerian, and that rare to be found,
which for the rareness, is at this day sown in many Gardens. The Ualerian
comes very well up, being bestowed in a moist and well dunged ground, and the
herb after the coming up, requires to be often watered, until it has
yielded a high stem.

The physic benefits of the Valerian.
THe herb of quality heateth in the third degree, and dries in the
beginning of the second, and the root especially serves for the use of
physic.

The root of the Ualerian brought to powder, and druncke in wine, provoke
sweat and urine, the like performs the root it self, being boiled in Wine:
yea this also amendeth the pain and stitches of the sides and back.

The root dried may be kept for three whole years, and gathered especially
in the month of Auguste.

The powder of the root of valerian, mixed with the white helelbor or
neeseworte, and the flower of wheat, this in apt places laid, kills mice.
The root boiled in white wine with fennel and parcely seeds, does mightily
provoke the urine, cold, healpeth the pains in the sides, and moves the
Terms.

This also prevails against poison, and the plague, by drinking of it.

Certain do boil the root of Ualerian with Fennel, Annise seeds, and
Licourise, for the coughe and straightness of breathe.

The green Herb and fresh root bruised, and applied, does mytigate the
pain of the head, stay fluxes, and profitteth the shyngles.

The flowers or root boiled in wine, and dropped into the eyes, procures a
clearness of them, heals the great pyles in the fundamente, and other
ulcers, but this especially amendeth the dymmes of sight, as Jeronimus book
witnesses.

The worthy virtues of the distilled water of the Herb.
THe convenient time of the distillation of the same is that the root, Herb,
and stem, with the whole substance be shred together, and distilled about the
end of May.

The distilled water of Ualerian, drunk unto the quantity of four ounces at
a time, does morning and evening, and linen clothes wet in it applied upon,
does in short time amend ulcers, old soars, and those causing swellings,
yea this avails against the pyles, by applying linen clothes wet in it.

The said water drunk in like quantity, both morning and evening profits the
creature having any bone broken. This also helps a rupture, or a body broken
and drop in the eyes, clears them.

The distilled water of the valerian, drunk unto the quantity of a sponfull
at a time, every morning fasting, does expel the long worms in children.

This water druncke in like manner, as before uttered, profits against
poison, and a pestilente air: it heals new and old wounds, clears ulcers
and impostumes within the body, and remoueth the ache of the hippes.

The distilled water orderly druncke, procures clear eyes, remoueth the pain
in chins, and provoke sweat; this poured into troubled wine, causes the
feign (...) purer to be drunk.

The said water assuageth the pain of the members, proceedyng of an
intemperate coldenesse, by daily annoynting the members with it.

The virtues of the distilled water of the roots of Valerian.
THe distillation of this water is to be wrought, from the fifteenth day of
August, unto the eight day of the month of September.

This distilled water drunk, as before taught, does remove poison, and
profits against venomous beasts.

The distylled water drunk fasting, unto the quantity of six ounces at a
time, before the fit comes, delivers the Quotidian Ague.

The said water in like quantity given, and both anointed, and applied with
linen clothes wet in it, amendeth the stitches in the sides.

When two persons at variance, shall drink a quantity of this water out of one
cup together, does after procure them friends, and loving one to the other.

The diligence required in the bestowing of the Herb Bytonie. Chap. 35.
THe Betony is an Herb, having a slender stem, and four square, growyng in
many places a foot and a half high, the leaves long and soft, and indented
round about, like to Oken leaves, and sweet smelling, among the which,
greater leaves are those, growing nighe to the root, in the top of the
stemmes is the seed, eared after the manner of Sauerie, the roots spreading
small, and bears purple flowers.

The Herb Betonie ioyeth to be sown in a moist and cold ground, and by a
brick or stone wall to enjoy the shadow of the same, for the Herb much
delights to stand in the Sun beams.

The Physic commodities of the Herb Bitonie.
THe Herb Betony (after the mind of the learned) is hot and dry in the
first degree complet, or in the myddle of the second, and has the nature of
cutting asunder, which is manifest of the taste, that is sour and somewhat
bitter.

The Herb boiled with the flowers in wine and drunk, stays belching, the
rawnesse of stomach amendeth, and the sour restings corrects. The self same
may be distilled water, or a confection made of the flowers with sugar, or the
powder of the dry Herb it self, or ministered with Honye.

The Herb drunk in wine, very much profits the diseases of the Matrice:
and this, to be brief, is auaylable to all inward griefs of the body, in
what manner soever the same be taken. For this given in Mulse vinegar unto ye
quantite of a dram profits in the sending forth of ye harmeful humors of ye
stomach, liver, milte, kidneis, bladder and matrice.

The person which fears to have drunk poison, by taking a dram wayghte of
powder in wine, shall be delivered of the harm, both by urine and siege.

The Herb (after the boiling in water) drunk, profits the Frenzy persons,
such having the falling sickness, the Paulsie, and ache of the Hyppes.

The Herb helps digestion, if any after supper, eats unto the bigness of
a bean of the same, being before boiled in Honey, this also steeped in wine for
a night, and drunk, stays vomyting.

The Herb boiled in wine and drunk, expels the Ague, and ministered to the
wayght of two drammes with Hidromel, sends forth the water between the
skin, and many humors.

The powder of the Herb to the wayght of a dram drunk with wine, does
speedily help the Jaundise, and sends down the Terms.

The Betony boiled in wine and strayned, if with three drammes of ( Hiera Picra
Galem) myxed and drunk fasting, gently purges the belly. The Herb boiled
with Honey, recouereth the consumption of the body, and matterie spittings of
the Lungs.

The Herb bruised, and applied in plaster form on the hurt of the head, as
witnesses Apuleius, does by a marvelous speediness close and heal the same,
yea this has such a property, that it fasteneth broken bones, and by his
force draws pieces forth, and dissolueth the clotted blood.

The powder of the herb given to the weight of a dram in wine, stays the
spitting up of blood.

The leaves bruised and applied in plaster form on ye eyes, does speedyly
help the eyes bruised or hurt by a strype: the roots also of the Herb
boiled to a third part in water, and the eyes suppled with the same water, do
speedyly remove the pain of them.

The juice of the Herb dropped into the ears with the oil of Roses remoueth
all manner of pain in them, the same amendeth the hardness of fetching
breath, if the breast be anointed therwyth. The Herb eaten, cause the
clearness of the sight.

The Bytonie boiled in old wine and vinegar, unto the consumption of a third
part, and gargelled in the mouth, remoueth too thach.

This drunk in wine recouereth an ^ud color of the body, the same boiled in
wine and drunk, they affirm of experience to profit the diseases of the Mylte.

The eating of two ounces of the powder with Honyfor eight days together,
aswageth the cough, two drammes of Betonie and one of Plantaine, ministered with
four ounces of warm water before the fit of cold puts away the coridiane.

Three drams of the powder, with one ounce of pure Honey, given in three ounces
of warm water, before ye fit (...), does maruelously remove the uttes of the
Tertian and quartayne ague.

For grief of the bladder, take four drammes of Bytonie, of Parsely roots
three scruples boiled, but the (...) of ye Parsely before boiled in a pynte of
water unto the consumption of the (...), and then the Bitony added to, and
given to drink, which (...) the (...), that (...) after it comes again.

The Bytony drunk in wine, (...) the hone, and helps at painful griefs of
the bladder, yea this is those more effectuous in the (...) certain persuade,
for a singular (...), to drink the pouders of Bitony, veruay (...).

The roots of Bitony boiled with the leaves, unto a third part away, and
drunk in water, with the Herb applied alone, do maruellously aswage (of
experience known) the pain of the Gout. The leaves heated between two new
Tyles, and applied to the fortheade, do mitigate the grief of the eyes and
stay the running of them, in that this among the other herbs, which they apply
to the head, obtayneth a principality.

The commended virtues of the distilled water of Betonie.
THe time of gathering, and distilled the Bytonie, with the whole substance, is
about the end of May.

The distilled water of Bitony, as Hieronimus Brunsuicensis, a most expert
Herbarian, witnesses, drunk unto the quantity of four ounces at a time, both
m^rning, noone, and evening, puts away the dropsy, Jaundise, and any ague.

The distilled water helps the diseases of the kidneys, mylte, and Lungs, and
all those griefs tofore uttered, the water either drunk or applied on the
places with linen clothes wet in it, if the evil or grief shall appear
without the body.

The skill and diligence required in the artly bestowing of the Herb Louage.
Chap. 36.
THe Louage ioyeth to grow by Ways, and under the Eiuesyng of an house, it
also prospers in shadowye places, but especially delyghteth to grow near to
a running water.

This in the growing, sends up a long and slender stem, like to the Oil,
ioynted, with leaves round about like to the Melylote, sweet sauouring,
tenderer and softer, toward the top smaller and much more divided. In the
top of the stem grows a touffe, in which consists the seed, black,
hard, and long, like to the Fennel seed being sharp in taste, and sweet in
smelling, it also bears a yelow flower, and has a pale root within, but
black without, sharp, sweet sauouring, tender, full of juice, and biting the
jaws.

The Herb for his sweet sauoure is used in bathe, but the seed is of greater
effect in medicine.

The Physic benefits of the Herb Louage.
This Herb of quality is hot and dry, in the third degree, the seeds
endure in strength and virtue for three years.

The dry root bruised hates the stomach, helps digestion, expels
superfluous humors, and drunk in wine, unto the weight of half a dram at a
time, cease all inward griefs, this also expels poisons, causes urine
and the Terms, and perfourmeth the like matters, which the Angelica does.

The Herb boiled in wine or water, and drunk, opens the stopping of the
Liver and milte, the Herb bruised and myxed with Cummyne very much profits
if the same be drunk in wine, for this recouereth ye stomach, and expels
noyous winds out of the bowels.

The herb Louage with Galingale and Cinnamon boiled in wine, and druncke with a
fasting stomach, amendeth the diseases of the stomach, milte, and bowelles, a
powder like to an Eclegma prepared of the Louage seeds, Cinnamon, Raponticke,
and Galingale, with sugar in equal proportion mixed, and druncke in wine,
avails unto the above said diseases.

If any drink a quantity of the Louage seeds, in wine fasting, procures
the person to purge both upward and downward, the seeds after the boiling,
given up in glister form, does greatly ease the person pained with the Gout
in the feet.

The Seeds stieped for a night in white wine, and drunk fasting, do mightily
draw down the Terms, yet are the seeds of themselves over forcible unto the
use of medicine inward, in that they ministered or applied in plaster form,
both break and open ulcers, yea expel mightily the dead yongling.

For which cause the strength of those seeds must be tempered, by alike weight
of the Fennel and Annys seeds, which on such wise ministered works his
property in the body without harm.

But the seeds may safely be applied without the body in any manner, without
any other addition to them.

The Louage seeds boiled artely in wine, do aswage the grypings of the belly
and bowels, remove the swelling of the stomach, digest the humors of the
stomach, cure the bitle of venomous worms, procure urine and the Terms.

A bath made of the Louage, Rosemarie, Penieroyall, Sage, Catmynte, Cammomyl,
Mellylote, the Cytryne Staechados, Mugworte, and Fenigreke, these together
boiled in wine and sitting over the fume to sweat, not only opens the poares
of the body, and draws forth evil humors, but dissolueth the stone,
procures urine and the Terms heals the Crampe, proceeding of the fullness
of body, the pain of the Gout, the Palsy, the kings evil, and heateth all the
inner members.

The root bruised and applied in plaster form, does greatly avail on the
bitte of a mad dog, and venomous worm, in that the same both mytigateth and
expels poison.

The commended virtues of the distilled water of Louage
THe time of the distillation of the same is, that the leaves shred together
with the stems, be distilled in the middle of May.

The distilled water of the Louage drunk morning and euenyng unto the quantity
of two or three ounces at a time, does in short time help them, payned with
stitches about the breaste and sides, remoueth the grief of the stone in the
Loins and bladder, clears the hoarsnesse of voice, and puts away the
dangerous swellyng of the throat, by washyng and applying on the same, lynnen
clothes wette in it.

The distilled water asuageth the swelling of the head, and the aching of the
same, if linen clothes wette in it, be applied upon, it procures a white and
lovely countenance, if the same be diligently washed, both morning and evening
with the water.

This helps the pushes, and redness proceeding of heat, happening commonly
from the knee downwarde, by applyng linen clothes wet in it, that cease the
heat and cures the pushes.

This cures the Canker of the mouth, if it be often washed with the same, and
that at each time, the powder of the Barberie root be sprinkled upon.

This also cures the grief and exulceration of women's places, if these be
washed therewith, for three or four times a day, the same does the said water
perform, if linen clothes wet in it, be sundry times applied upon.

What care and skill is required in the bestowing of the Herb Elecampane. Chap.
37.
THe Herb Elecampane grows up with a long stem, big and Mossie, and the leaves
with mossie bears on the one side on the top of the stem, being many times a
man's height, is a big yealowe flower growing, in which the seeds are
contained, and those by feeling procure ytche.

The root within the earth reddish without, and white within, big, sharp in
taste, and sweet smelling. The root is dug up, at the beeginning of summer,
and slyced, dried in the sun.

This especially flourishes in the month of July.

The Elecampane may not be sown, in that the seeds bestowed in beds prosper
not, but rather set the young buds broken tenderly from the root in Earth well
dunged and labored before. And those begin to set, in the month of
Februarye, well three foot asunder, one from the other, in that those send
forth big leaves, and long roots spreading in the Earth.

The Physic commodities of the Elecampane.
THe Elecampane of quality heateth in the end of the third degree, and
moystneth in the first.

The powder of the dry root mixed with pure Honye, and used in form of an
Eclegma, ame^deth the cough, ye root also of the Elecampane (artelye prepared)
defends the Lungs of evil humors remoueth the ache of the Hyppes and
joints, and sickenesses proceeding of a cold cause.

This expels the gross humors in man, and aswageth the ache of the
Hucklebones, boiled also in wine, and mixed with Sugar in the drinking,
amendeth that hard fetching of breath by the neck especially holden upright,
and procures urine.

The powder of the root druncke in like manner sends down the Terms, and
this is profitably ministered against poison, and the bit of venomous worms and
beasts.

The root canded with honey or Sugar, is said very much to prevail against
the danger of a pestilent air, being before eaten, for which cause (the raw
root of many) is eaten in the plague time.

The root of the Elecampane, is canded after this manner, by plucking the root
out of the Earth in the month of October, at what time the same is grown to a
full ripeness, which then is to be rubbed and cleansed with a course hearie
cloth, after this scraped fair with a sharp knife, and those roots which
are big, to be sliced into three or four pieces so long as a finger, which
after the puttyng into a brass chafer, to be te^derly boiled with vinegar, but
in such manner, as the pieces burn not to the sides or bottom of the chafer:
Within three days after the boiling, they are to be dried in the Sun, and then
bestowed into a new earthen pot, well pitched about, on which a pleasant
Cuite poured to soke them in, and store of the herb Sauerie pressed down upon
them: which done, the mouth of the pot to be diligently stopped with a skin
or thick partchement.

The roots may otherwise be ordered in scrappyng them clean, and after the
cutting of them into two or three pieces, well a finger long, to set those
stiepe in water a whole day, over hot embers, which done, to boil the
pieces two or three times over, in as much weight of honey or sugar.

The confirm of the Elacampane root, may be made by clensing and scraping
the root in the manner above taught: Which done, to cut them into thin round
slices, letting them soke in water over the hot embers, for a long space, and
to boil them until the licoure be all wasted, then to beat those in a stone
mortar, lettyng them after to pass through a strainer or linen clothe: this
done to boil the whole with a like waighte of honey or sugar, two or three
times over.

All other roots may in like manner be canded, and made into conserve, but
far pleasaunter in the eating, if to the confection a quantity of Sinamom be
added.

The same also they name to be canded, when the root or the thing canded,
remains whole after the canding, but the conserve in a contrary manner
remains not whole, in that the same is beaten small, to the making of it.

The leaves of the Elecampane boiled in wine, and a plaster made of the same,
applied to weak and loose members, does so much heat them, that in short
time they recover strength and health.

The Elecampane puts away ire and heaviness, comfort the heart, and
sends forth the superfluous humors by urine: this also (after the mind of
Hippocrates) causes mirth.

The herb defends and preserves the skin of the face, and like
garnisheth the whole body with a continual seemelinesse, the wine also of the
Elecampane made, heateth cold members, the same drunk orderly, helps all
the diseases which are before uttered.

Here note, that all wines boiled or made of the Herbs, do more prevail in
the morning, than at evening.

The Elecampane boiled with Pellitory, and mixed with oil, applied hot to the
belly, cease the gripings of the bowels, and the same applied under the
Nauel, remoueth and helps the strangury.

The worthy virtues of the distilled water of the leaves of the Elecampane.
THe time answerable to the distillation is, that the Herb and root shred
together be distilled in the end of May.

This water druncke morning and evening, for five or six days together, to
the quantity of an eggeshell full at a time, expels the grief of the stone.

The distilled water druncke in the said manner, or a quantity bestowed in
drink, helps the person broken: the same also drunk, and the head
anointed therewith, in such manner as the same may dry in, greatly
comfort the head.

The distilled water drunk morning and evening for certain days together,
comfort and strengthens the stomach, amendeth the hard fetching of breath,
the coughe, pleurisse, poison, the stone, and terms in women.

The distilled water strengthens the members anointed therewith, and the more
by daily drinking thereof. This also expels the stone of the kidneys and
bladder, and the same clereth ye parts of the body, and causes urine, by
drinking of it morning and evening, for certain days together.

The commended virtues of the distilled water of the root.
THe root of the Elecampane is to be distilled about the end of May, or from
the month of July, unto September.

The distilled water of the same drunk many days together, unto the quantity
of two or three ounces at a time, heals an inner rupture. The distilled water
drunk in the said manner, helps the stone, provoke the Terms in women,
assuageth the grief of the stone, and provoke urine: yea this drunk in the
abouesaide manner, sends the dead yongling out of the mothers womb.

The distilled water either drunk or applied with linen clothes wet in it,
remoueth the swelling of women's places: the said water also drunk or applied
with linen clothes, assuageth the swelling of the testicles, and only this
druncke often, does amend them.

The distilled water druncke sundry days unto the quantity abouesaide, both
morning and evening, ceasseth the coughe, and consumes the gross and clammy
humors about the stomach.

The care in the bestowing of the herb Pepperworte. Chap. 39.
THe Pepperworte is a seemly herb, yielding leaves greater and broader, than
the peache, or Baye tree, and those thicker, greener, and softer, the herb
also growing a foot and a half, and sometimes, two foot high, with a stiff and
round stem, bearyng on the top white and very small flowers, after these a
small seed and long root.

The leaves are sour, and bite in taste like pepper on the tongue, for which
cause this is rightly named Pepperworte. This grows every where in Gardens,
and well ordered in the ground, endures for two years, in certain places also
(as witnesses Ruellius) it continues grene ten years. It florisheth or
bears flowers in the month of June, and July, and next yields the Seed.

The herb Pepperworte ought to be set before the beginning of March,
after the growing up, to be clipped and cut like the Siues, but this not
often: for after the first day of November, the herb ought not to be cut,
least it perishes or dries through the cold season ensuing. The herb
prospers and continues two years, if the same be well dunged about, and
diligently weeded.

The physic benefits of the herb Pepperworte.
THe herb of quality heateth and dries in third degree, as Brunsfelsius
reports, but Galen affirms the Pepperworte to be hot, as the Cresses is,
in the fourth degree, yet lesser dries than it, and the leaves of this herb
does by property exulcerate: the nature also of the Herb, is to cut and
extenuate the meat received, and clammy humors.

The Pepperworte is not to be used or taken inward without milk, and it has
the like properties as the Cresses, which after the manner of condite things,
must be condited with milk and salt. And the same may be made after this
manner, by infusing the fresh leaves in new milk: and after the third day,
the whey pressed forth, to which then green Sauery, the dry seeds of
Coriander, Dill, time, and parseley mixed, and diligently beaten together,
this well sodden and strained, to add so much salt, as shall suffice.

Seeing the leaves possess such a sharpness (as Dioscorides reports) that
they do exulcerate parts within, for that cause may they aptely serve unto
exulcerating in the pain of the hippes, if after the brusing with an
Elecampane root, it be laid to the place a quarter of an hour. And this in the
like manner lying to, assuageth the swelling of the Milte.

The root beaten with barrows grease, or with the Elecampane root, and
applied in plaster form on the hippe grieved, does deliver the ache in short
time.

This amendeth the skin of the face, by exulcerating, so that the same be
after healed, with oil of Roses and wax. And on such wise it easily takes
away foul scabbes and Leprie, and the marks of Ulcers.

The root of the Herb Pepperworte tied on the Arm, or hanged about the
neck, is supposed to cease or aswage the toothache.

The care in the bestowing of the Celondyne. Chap. 39.
THe Herb Celondyne shoots up a foot and a half high, and somtymes is
more slender of them, bearing many leaves, and those like to the Crowfoote, but
softer and to a yelowish color tending, yeeldyng also a yelow flower like to
the Violet.

The juice in the Herb of yelowe color to Saffrone, biting the tongue,
sour, somewhat bitter and strong sauouring. The root above all one, but within
the earth shed into many yellow hearye roots: it commonly grows in
shadowie places, by walls and in stony heaps: this florisheth at the coming
of the Swallows, and all the Summer, but it wythereth at the departure of them.

The Celondine comes up in any earth, yet does the same more joy bestowed in
a shadowie place, and the seeds ought to be committed to the Earth in the
month of February, which after the coming up, will endure for two years,
if after the shedding of the Seeds, the stemmes be cut away, well four
fingers above the roots.

The physic benefits of the Celondine.
THe Celondine is of quality hot and dry, in the third degree absolute: but
Platearius affirms the herb to be hot and dry in the fourth degree.
Four things are preserved of this herb, as the leaves with the stem, the
roots, seeds, and Juice.

The Juice of the herb boiled in a Copper vessel with honey on the coals, and
dropped into the eyes, procures a clearness of them, and puts away the
dimnesse of sight.

The Juice mixed with salt Armoniacke, and dropped into the eyes remoueth the
pin and web grown on them, and causes a clearness of sight. The herb
with the flowers diligently beat boiling them after in water, and that water
boiled, pour into a pot, setting the same again over the fire, and well
skimming it in the boiling: when the licoure begins to sees over, strain
it soon after through a linen clothe, which keep close stopped in a glass
or a pot to use: for this dropped in the eyes, remoueth the dimnesse of
sight.

The Juice of the root clears the leaprie, if any annointeth the places
therewith, and the patient after takes the Sirrope of Fumitorie for nine days
together, both morning and evening, which without doubt recouereth and
healpeth the same.

The Juice is to be purchased in May, as well out of the roots as leaves and
flowers beaten together, and pressed forth, which after the drying in the
shadow, to be formed into little pasties.

The root of the Celondine, boiled in white wine with Annise seeds, and drunk
fasting, delivers the Jaundise through stopping in the body, and applied
(after the boiling in wine) or chawed in the mouth, assuageth the toothache.

A handefull of the Celondine purged, boiled in an equal quantity of
Rosewater, and strained, to which an ounce and half of Triacle added, is a
most effectuouse remedy against the plague.

The root boiled in wine, and applied in plaster form on the shingles or
Tetters, speedely heals them, the herb bruised (as Platearius reports)
boiled in wine, and applied upon, or a sponge wette in the said decoction:
remoueth the Cholicke passion. The powder of the root, sprinkled on wounds
and ulcers, both cleanses and heals them.

For the Canker of the mouth, bone, or synewes, the powder of the said root,
with the powder of roses wrought together with vinegar, and boiled unto a mean
thickness, like to mustard, and the cankerous parts anointed with it, does
much avail.

For prouokyng of the Terms, and clensing the matrice, let a fomente be often
applied with the water of the decoction of the same.

The commended virtues of the distilled water of Celondine.
THe time of gathering and distilling the Celondine is, that the herb with the
whole substance be small shred, and distilled in the middle of May.

The distilled water druncke unto the quantity of four ounces at a time,
both morning and evening, expels the yelowe Jaundise: this drunk in the
like manner, avails against the gripings of the belly.

The distilled water druncke in the abouesayde manner, mitigateth the ague, and
remoueth scabbes caused of cold, if they often be bathed or soupled with it.

The distilled water drunk unto the quantity of two ounces at a time, either
twice or thrice a day, profits unto the stoppyng of the liver, and milte.

This water dropped into the eyes, corrects the pin and web, puts away
the redness of them, and causes a sharp and ready sight.

If the mouth be washed with the said water, it ceasseth the toothache and
puts away spots of the face, if the face be washed with this water.

The distilled water dries and heals a Canker, yea Fistula also, and
remoueth pestilent pushes, if a linen cloth wette in it be applied on the
places twice or thrice a day.

The care in the bestowing of the herb Filipendula. Chap. 40.
THe herb Filipendula grows in stonye and roughe places, as on hills,
bearing a leaf like to the wild parsenep, or parseley, the stem big, and
a foot or somewhat more in height, yeeldyng on the top a white flower, in the
month of July, after that the Seed like to the Orache, and a big root, out
of which many round heads or kernelles grow.

The root ought to be dug up in the end of harvest, which endures for
ten years.

The Filipendula comes well up in any Earth, yet does the Herb more
joy, being sown or set in a stonye or grauellye ground: the Seeds require
to be committed to the Earth in the month of April, and to be like ordered,
after the shooting up in the weeding and watering as before taught of the other
herbs.

The physic commodities of the herb Filipendula.
THe Filipendula of quality is hot and dry in the third degree, which
(his vehement bitterness) sufficiently declares.

The seed, leaves, and stem of the Filipendula, druncke in wine and honey
boiled together, send down the after burden, and further the birth of child.

The root of the Filipendula brought to powder, and drunk in wine, not only
helps the Kings evil and strangury, but the stone, pain of the kidneys, and
ache of the hippes.

The powder of this root taken in wine, remoueth the swelling and coldenesse
of stomach, healpeth the hardness of fetching breath, and such short
winded, yea all sicknesses which proceed of a cold cause. The meal of this
root mixed with meat and given to eat, recouereth the falling sickness, by
sundry days using.

Against the hardness of fetching breath, take this powder, and Gentiane in
like weight, and use the same in meat, for this without doubt avails in
short time.

The commended virtues of the distilled water of Filipendula.
THe chosen time for the distilling of it is, that the whole herb with the
root be finely shred together and distilled in the end of May.

The distilled water of Filipendula, drunk unto the quantity of three ounces
at a time, both morning and euenyng, recouereth the plague. The said water
druncke unto the quantity of four or six ounces at a time, avails against
poison, if a man by hap hatne either eaten or drunk poison.

The distilled water drunk unto the quantity of four ounces at a time, both
morning and evening, dissolueth and cures the stone of the kidneys, and
bladder.

FINIS.
A necessary Table to the second part of this Book, briefly showing the
Physical operations of every herb and plant therein contained, with the
virtues of their distilled waters.
A.
ANgelica cures poisons, clears blood, and preserves the body against the
plague. fol. 162 Angelica avails against a pestilente air, it ceasseth
grypings of the belly, it recouereth all inward griefs, it helps ruptures,
it amendeth the dimnesse of sight, the bit of a dog, the heat of the fever,
deep wounds, renueth flesh etc. fol. 163 Angelica, asswageth the ache of the
hippes, and the Gout, it cures new and old ulcers. fol. 163 Artochoke
reformeth the sauoure of the mouth. fol. 53 Artochoke causes urine and
venerial act. fol. 53 Artochoke amendeth the hardness of making water, and
the rank savor of the arm pittes. fol. 53 Artochoke strengthens the
stomach, and helps the privy places, that men children may be conceived.
fol. 53 Arage or Orage helps yt stopping of the liver, it cease the
sheading of ye gaul or yelow Jandise, it casts up choler, softneth the
belly, heals impostumes, swellings, swimmings drawing of the wind short,
expels worms, provoke vomityng, helps a hot liver, it loses the belly,
and delivers the pain of the blader, helps the ague, profits against
spitting of blood, it helps the matrice, draws a thorn or nail out of the
skin, it loaseth rough nails from the fyngers, it helps the hot gout in
the feet, it softneth the belly being hardened by heat, and remoueth
swellings. fo. 18. 19.
B.
Beer loses the bellye, provoke urine, purges the body of evil humors,
it helps the smellyng, the pain of the ears, the pain of the gummes, it
procareth hear to grow, and kills lyce, nittes, and dandrie, it heals
whelkes, blisters of scalding or burning, gripings of yt belly, stays a lose
belly, drives away the worms of the belly, helyeth the obstructions or
stoppings of the liver, the corrupted Spleen, and the shingles. fo. 14. 15 The
discommodities of the Beete: it grypesh and byteth the stomach, and increases
evil humors. fol. 15 Blete softneth the belly cures the biting of a scorpion,
the beating parn of the temples, it profits the Oil on the mytt, it
restrayneth the Terms. fol. 17 Borage procures gladsomnes, it helps the
giddiness and swimming of the head, the trembling and beating of the heart,
it increases memory, and remoueth melancholy, and the kings evil, it does
only comfort. Bugiosse prevails for the roughness of the throat and cough,
it procures gladsomnesse, it purges red Choler, it recouereth the Cardiake
passion, it expels the noisome humors of the Lungs, it remoueth the swelling
of the feet, it preserves a good memory, it comfort the heart, and
engenders good blood. fol. 28. 29* Buckeshorne helps the griefs of the
joints, it binds, it puts away the fever. fol. 77 Betonie stays
belching and rawnesse of the stomach. fol. 165 Bitonye profits the diseases
of the matrice, and all inward griefs. fol. 165 Bitonie purges all poison, it
profits frensy persons, falling sickness, palsy, ache of the hips, it helps
digestio^, stays vomiting, it expels the ague etc. fol. 165 Bitonie
fastneth broken bones, dissolueth clotted blood. fol. 168 Bittonye stays the
spitting of blood, it helps the eyes bruised, and the pain of them, it
helps the pain of the ears, it causes clearness of sight, remoueth
toothache, the cotidian, tertian, and quartaine ague, the grief of the bladder
etc. fol. 168 Bittonye assuageth the pain of the gout etc. fol. 169 Blessed
thistle causes urine, helps the megrim, restores memory, and hearing,
helps the diseases of the lu^gs, purges fleume of the stomach and blood,
helps consumption of the lu^gs, gripings provoke sweat, breaks the stone,
and helps the monthly Terms. It comfort the brain and syghte, purges
the blood in the eyes, stops the bleeding at the nose, purges the Vuula,
and ceasseth the Spittyng of fleume. fol. 158 Blessed Thistle helps a weak
stomach, procures appetite, abateth heat, consumes evil blood, provoke
sweat, strengthens the palsy members, recouereth the lungs exulcerated: It
profits against the dropsy, helps the plague, impostumes, cankers, and
falling sickness, it is a present remedy against the plague, the fevers of the
stomach, and the quartarn: It cures green wounds, pushes, swellings of the
plague, any burning, the cholicke, scabbes, a stinking breath: It helps
womennes priuities, it healpeth Stitches, Pleurifies, and infantes encombred
with the falling sickness. fol. 159. Blessed Thistle expels poison with two
examples. fol. 160
C.
COleworte helps the hardness of making water, the Canker sores, the Ulcers
in the pappes of Women, aches in the joints, hardness of hearing. fol. 9.
Colewortes procures the monethlye course of women, it cures the forenesse of
eyes, it profyteth against the eating of venomous mushroms, it makes Children
to go speedylyer alone, cures the Disease of the Spleen and Jaunders, it
cleanses the scurfe and scaprie, it amendeth the voice, and grief of arteries,
it cures the bit of a dog, it healpeth the Reume, and falling of the vuula,
it helps the bit of a Serpente or adder, it cures the gout, joint
sickness, old ulcers, purges the head, draws the terms or reddes down,
and qualifyeth inflammations. fol. 10. Coleworts assuageth great swellings, it
breaks botches, stays the shedding of hear, the disease of ye spleen, it
cures eating ulcers, canker sores griefs of the flanckes or sides, headache, a
dry coughe, it dries a moist belly. fol. 11 Colewoortes brings these
discommodities, it hardens the belly, it harmeth the flewmaticke, and women
having the Red course on them. fol. 11. Cheruill provoke urine, and sends
down yt terms in women: it loses fleume, it puts away gripings of the
belly, it engenders wynd, it kills worms in the belly, it heals a canker,
it cease ache in the hips, it remoueth the dandry of the head, it heals
running sores, it heals the bit of a mad dog, it breaks the stone of
the bladder, and provoke vryne, it dyssolueth the blood gathered into
knobbes. fol. 72. 73 Cheruill heals impostumes behind the ears. fol. 73
Cresses dries superfluous humors, it expels the dead yongling, it caseth
the cough and loses the breast, it avails against the palsy of the tongue.
fol. 73 Cresses are not to be used alone. fol. 73 Cresses restrain the
distillations of the head, cleanse the brain, and pain of the head, help
against the palsye, provoke sneesing, and amend the lethargy or sleepyng out
of measure: dries the vuula, helps infections of the head, as knobbes and
dandry: staieth the going out of the fundament, expels the round and flat
worms in the body: these help the griefs of the bresie, the ache of the
hips, and grief of the loins, purchase a redier understanding and wit, remove
the Chollike proceeding of a cold cause, healpe the Strangury, remove the
pain of the teethe, and does assuage the swelling of the milt. fol. 73. 74.
Carots amend a cold reume, the pain of the stomach, stoppyng of urine, and
cholicke, a dry cough, the hard fetching of breath, the flux of the head,
remove wind, heat the stomach, the stopping of the liver, the vexings of the
belly. fol. 128 Cicory cures scabbed places, causes a fair skin, recouereth
the stoppyng of the liver, it purges the matrice, helps the liver, yt vexing
pain of urine, the kings evil, the plague, burning -agues, pestilent pushes,
the gout proceeding of heat, and cures the shingles. fol. 56. 57 Celondine,
the juice of the herb clereth the eyes, remoueth the Pin and web, being
myxed with salt Armonyacke: The herb remoueth the dymnesse of syghte, the
juice cleanses the Leapry, the root dr^ueth away the Jandise, and helps the
toothache, and heals Tetters or shingles: The herb remoueth the Colicke
passion, the powder of the root cleanses and heals ulcers, healpeth the
Canker of the mouth, bone or sinews, being anointed with the same boiled in
vinegar with the powder of roses. fol. 78 Celondine boiled in rose water, and a
quantity of triacle added to yt same, is a most effectuous remedy against
the plague. fol. 178 Filipendula is of quality hot and dry in the third
degree. fol. 180 The leaves and Stem of Filipendula drunk in wine and honey
mingled together, healpe the after burden, and furthereth the birth of child,
the root brought to powder, healpeth the Kings evil and strangurye, the
stone, pain of the kidneyes, and ache of the hippes. Taken in wine it remoueth
the swellyng and coldness of the stomach, hardenesse of fetchyng breathe, and
all sickenesses proceeding of cold causes. fol. 179 The water of Filipendula
being drunk Morning and euenyng, unto the quantity of three ounces at a time,
recouereth the plague. The same also being drunk four ounces at a time is good
against poison, and also dissolueth and cures the stone of the kydneyes and
bladder. Folio. 180
E.
Endive prevails against the stopping of the liver and mylte, against the
simple and double tertian against the heat of yt liver, against burning
impostumes it draws hot pushes, it cures the Cardiacke passion, it stays
the flix, it helps the kings evil, the shingles, hot impostumes and
swellings, assuageth headache, the spitting of blood, the excess of sperme.
fol. 57 58 Elecampane amendeth the cough, the ache of the hippes, expels
gross humors, caseth the hard fetching of breath, it procures urine, etc.
fo. 172 Elecampane is profitable against poison, against the pestilent air and
plague, etc. fol. 173. Elecampane recouereth strength, helps the strangurie.
etc. fol. 174.
G.
Garlike heateth the body, extenuateth gross humors, it expels worms,
cures the bit of a Snake, takes away black and blew spots. fol. 100
Garlike harmeth the Chollericke person. fol. 100 Garlike puts away inward
swellings, opens impostumes, kylleth lyce and nittes of the head, moves
urine, helps toothache proceeding of a cold cause, staieth the sheding of
hear, cures ulcers, recouereth lepry procures a clear voice, and remoueth an
old cough, corrects the stomach cooled, dries up the moisture of the
stomach, it is a preparation against the bitte of a serpent, relieueth the
dullness of sight, heals tetters and whelks: it resists poison, remoueth
urine, procures Terms, draws down the after burden, cures the bitte of a
mad dog, helps the digestio^ of a cold stomach, the kings evil, frenfre
persons, dropsy, it stays the flux, an old coughe proceeding of a cold
cause, it kills worms in children, expels the brood worms in bodies, it
cures the bitte of venomous things, the swellings of the bladder, heals
ulcers of the lungs, dropsy being of a cold cause: it helps the griefs of
the lu^gs, and difficulty of urine, headache, tooth ache proceedyng of a cold
cause, ytche, the pain of going often to the stool, expels a quartaine,
cures the pippes of Hens, it helps the stone. fol. 100. 101. 102. 103
Garlike profits against contagious airs. Gourde comfort the stomach,
loses the bellye, helps the heat of the ears, profyteth lean men, purges
gently, helps the corns of the toes, fasteneth loose teeth and helps the
toothache, the inflammations of the liver and bladder, impostumes, provokes
urine, helps all agues, asswageth the heat of the liver, the inflammations of
infants heads, the burning guote, the inflammations of the eyes, assuageth
tumors, ulcers on the privy places, loses the bellye, cools burning
fevers, helps the shingles. fol. 148 and. 149.
L.
LEeke cures the bit of a venomous beast, helps the difficulties of making
water, stays the spitting of blood, dulieth the syghte of the eyes,
offends the stomach. fol. 86. The Juice of the Leek is deadly. fo. 86 Leeke
twyce sodden draws down the terms, procures urine, obtayneth a superfluous
heat, stays the bleeding of the nose, causes vomiting, and puts away
drunkenness being eaten raw. fol. 86. Leeke ame^deth an old cough, and the
ulcers of the lungs, heals pushes, the grief of the ears, and the toothache:
it purges ulcers, remoueth the blood clotted in bruised members, stays the
flux of blood after birth, cesseth the bleeding of the nose, profyteth against
pains of the hippes, stomach cease an old e^ough, helps the dropsy,
staieth the flixe of the belly, and helps a hoarse voice. fol. 87 Nero
accustomed to eat an unset leke with oil for his sou^ding voice. fo. 87 Leeke
helps the pain of the head, it prevails against the exulcerations of
women's privy places, loses the difficultnesse of making water, aydeth the
delivery of child, for the spitting of blood and staying the bleding of the
nose is very profitable, cleanses the wounds, helps the ache of the hips,
recouereth the wasting of the lung. fo. 87. 88 Lettuce procures steep,
causes good blood, helps digestion, loses the belly, causes
plentifulnesse of milk in the breasts, sharpeneth the sight, cools
impostumes, helps yt dropsy, cures the sheding of sperme, procures sleep
being laid under the couerict, and profyteth Chollericke persons. fol. 63
Lettuce is noisome unto married men, it dulleth the syghte of the eyes, it
abateth the veneriall act, it harmeth the fleumatike: the ouermuche eating of
Lettuce is as perilous as Hemlocke. fo. 64 Lettuce helps the Tertian ague, it
loses the beliye, it represseth drunkenness. fol 64 Lettuce procures
sleep. fo. 65 Louage helps digestion, expels superfluous humors, it
cease inward griefs, it expels poison, causes urine. etc. fol. 170
Louage expels the stone of the kidneys and bladder. etc. fol. 171
M.
Marigold helps the after burden of a woman, stays the flux of pissing of
blood, it kills the worms, it heals pushes, and stoppings, and griefs of
the liver, comfort the stomach, and procures appetite to meat, heateth a
cold breast, assuageth the pain of the teeth, it recouereth the palsye, a fit
of the plague, is a preparative against the plague, it helps the quartaine,
it helps the milte or cold stomach. fo. 32. 33 Mintes vncurdeth milk. fo.
42 Mintes staieth the belching of the stomach and vomiting, it profits
against the long worms in the body, it helps the swollen priuities,
asswageth the flux of the bellye, and scouring with blood, it stays the
reddes in women, it heals ulcers on the infants heads, quickneth the spirits,
brings appetite, amendeth the default of the nosethrills, retayneth the
fluxes of blood, softneth the pappes, and defends them from mattering: it
loses the bellye, procures a seemly color, profyteth the spitting out of
blood, assuageth the headeache, and the noise in the ears, it remoueth the
dimnesse of sight, it amendeth the strong savor of the mouth, it helps the
teethe, and purges the gums, and heals the blisteryng of the tongue, it
comfort in cold sicknesses, it stays the will to vomitte, and helps the
shingles, it dissolueth and cures impostumes, and helps the spots in the
eyes. fol. 43 Mallows or Holihoke remove a hot coughe, recouereth the lungs
blistered, and is a singular remedy against the consumption of the lungs,
heals the putrifyed sores of the throat and mouth, loses the bellye, and
helps the hoarsenesse of the voice, it ripeneth any impostume and softeneth
it. fo. 44. Mustarde seed heateth and ripeneth, it breaks Impostumes
without pain, it cures the biting of a venomous beast, it helps the
palsy of the tongue, and avails against all palseis, it helps the dropsy,
the blistering of the mouth, the swelling of the throat, it procures a good
memory, it helps the cold gout, sciaticke, and feebleness of sinews, it
remoueth the diuinesse of sight, and puts away the spots and web in the
eyes, it causes thirst, and provoke the veneriall act. fo. 79 Mustard seed
preuenteth the falling sickness, it purges the brain, it cleanses the brain
from humors, it ame^deth the falling of the vuula, and ulcers of the throat,
it draws down fleume from the head, it remoueth the swelling of the Jaws,
it helps the suffocation of the matrice, it ceasseth the ache of the teeth
coming of cold, it breaks the stone in the bladder, and procures the
Terms, it causes a clear voice. fo. 79. 80
N
NAuews nourishe much, profyt the Stomach, increase Sperme in man, prevail
against poison. Folio. 113.
O.
ONions maintain health, cure ulcers, remove spots on the body, profitte the
ears runnyng, healpe swellings in the throat, and the cough, remove the grief
of the stomach, open ^iles, clear the eyes, remove the pin and web, amend
the bloudshotten eyes, recover the hears shed away, the biting of a mad dog
etc. fo. 93. 94. Onions eaten raw harm the members. fo. 93 Onions harm the
Chollericke, and profit the fleumaticke person. Folio. 94. Onions stay the
dropping of the eyes, healpe ulcers of the priuities, pain and noise of the
ears, Disenteria, grief of the Loins, the water beetweene the flesh and the
skin, cure slumbering, and impostumes, pain of the breaste, spittyng of
grass humors, purges the stomach, cures wartes. etc. fo. 94. Onions often
used, engender evil humors, procure thyrste, swellings, windiness,
headeache, cause to become foolyshe, they nourish nothing. Folio. 94. Onions
twice sodden nourishe. Folio. 95. Onions eaten raw cut gross humors
asunder, open the veins, provoke Terms and urine, increases appetite,
purge the head, remove the white spots on the face, heal kibes, remove the red and wanne spots of the face, heals scabbes, assuageth fluxes and
gripings in childbed, heal impostumes speedily. fo. 95
P.
PImpernell is especially applied for poison, it drives venomous blood from
the heart, it cease the headache, it heals a green wound, ulcers and
other wounds, by an experiment tried upon a Cock: It moves fucate,
expels poison, remoueth the disease of the hippes, the coughe, and purges
the breast, the stone of the kidneys and bladder, and remoueth the strangury:
the gripings of the bowels, the stopping of the liver and milte, it puts
away any fever an experiment against the Physic of the lungs. fo. 26 Parsely
does incarnate Ulcers and Carbuncles, it does resolve the impostumes of the
pappes, it amendeth the stoppyng of the Liver, it provoke urine, it stays
loosenes of the belly, strengthens loose parts and helps the stone, it
heals the shingles, the hardly making of water, and softeneth the hardness
of the paps: It helps the kidneys, remoueth ulcers out of the mouth, and
Jaundise, and healpeth women's monthly course: it is delectable to the
stomach, it expels wind in the body, remoueth scabbes, and makes a fair
skin: It helps the sweling of the stomach and dropsy, it cleanses the liver
and leapr^e, and remoueth the pain of the loins and bladder, it preuayleth
against a fever, it procures a sound brain and perfect memory, and purges
the blood, assuageth the strangury, and helps the biting of a mad dog. fo.
36 37 38 Parseleye Seeds are the principal causes, the Roots the next, the
Leaves as third in woorkyng. Folio. 39. Purselane assuageth hot and
Chollericke fluxes, and healpeth the burning fever, healpeth the teeth being on
edge, healpeth the Shingles, hinders veneriall act and abateth sleep, it
expels the worms in the belly, it stays the flux Disenteria, cease the
toothache, it healpeth the stomach swollen, it cools inward heat, amendeth
the ulcers on the priuities, it heals an hot impostume, it remoueth the
ulcers of the head. fo. 68 Purselane helps swollen eyes, and spitting of
blood, it remoueth the burning fever, it qualifyeth the heat of the stomach,
it stays women's monthly course, it stays the bleeding at the nose, and the
headache, it extinguisheth the heat of the eyes, it staieth Disenteria, it
strengthens both the kidneys and bladder, it helps burning Fevers, it
kylleth the worms in the bellye, and stays the spittyng of blood, it
healpeth excoriation in women's bowels, and the rawnesse of privy place^
^^^peth the headache, it mitigateth (...) furious heat, it helps the nauels
of infants, it stays the loose teeth in the head, it assuageth the kernels
and ulcers in the mouth, it mitigateth the desire of often drinking, it
remoueth wartes, it assuageth the gout and inflammation of the pappes the fall
of the vuula. etc. fo, 68. 69 Parsnep and Carote moves veneriall act,
procures urine, and assuageth the Chollicke, sends down the Terms in women,
it profits the Melancolicke, increases good blood, healpeth the
strayghtnesse of making water, amendeth stitches of the side or pleurisyes, the
bitte of a venomous beast, it amendeth the eating of ulcers, the wearing of
this root is profitable. fo. 12 Poppy procures sleep, healpeth the Reume,
coughe, and lack of sleep. folio. 129 Poppy recouereth a dry coughe,
consumption of the Lungs, Reume, and debilitie in sleeping, it draws heat out
of an ulcer, healpeth a hot lyver, strengthens the Joyntes, remoueth the
rage of the gout, profits against the ague. fo. 130 Pompons or Mellons, are
easy of digestion, comfort the heart, assuageth unnatural heates in the
stomach, they take away sunneburning and foul spots. fo. 154. Pompons
profit the Reumaticke and Choleric person. fo. 154. 155 Pompons which are
round loose the belly, and cause urine. fo. 154. Pompons assuage the runnyng
of the eyes. fo. 155 Pompons mittigate the veneriall act, cleanses the skin,
causes urine, purges the loins, kidneys, and bladder, heal ulcers, and
cause speedy boiling. fo. 155. 156
R.
ROchet encreseth the sperm causes veneriall act, causes a giddiness and
pain in the head, increases a strong heat, is hurtful to the head,
increases milk in women and nourses, causes urine, softneth the bellye,
comfort the stomach, helps digestion, recouereth black scarres unto
whitenes amendeth pimples, or pushes in the face, kylleth nittes and worms of
the head, helps bruised bones, and bitings of venomous beasts, the Jaundise,
and hard swelling of the milte. etc. fol. 69. 70 Rapes or Turnup sharpneth the
sight, yields nourishment, extinguisheth, heat and dry blood, it sturreth
veneriall act, cures scabbes, helps digestion, hot goutes, and kibed
heels. fol. 116 Radishe eaten before or after meat causes wind, dulleth
the brain, eyes and reason. fo. 122 Radishe profits the fleumaticke, helps
the stone, stopping of the urine by gravel, procures vomiting, stareth
belchings, the kings evil, the cough, profits against poison, and to the
handlyng of serpents, it helps the noise of the ears, the stopping of the
liver, it avails against all sorts of poisons and diseases, it cures
strokes of whippes or bruses, it clears scarres and pimples in the face, it
delyuereth the quartaine ague. fol. 123 Radishe profits against the stopping
of the milte, it delivers the water between the skin, and swollen milt, it
eats out the Canker of ulcers, ame^deth the old cough and fleume, it
procures vomitings, it causes musheroms to digeste, it helps gripings in
women, procures milk, sends down the Terms and worms in the belly,
assuageth the swelling in the throat. fo. 124.
S.
Saffron amendeth the hard fetchyng of the breath, procures a fair color
comfort the heart, causes healthful blood, remoueth persons from the
heart, causes long breath, expels infections, helps impostumes in the
breast, moves the veneriall act, and causes urine, helps headache,
procures the terms, remoueth the yellowe Jaundise, it profits an vlcered
breast, stomach, liver, lungs, kidneys, and blader, it helps the gout,
impostumes, swellings, the griefs of any sore, feebleness of the heart,
palsy, the grief of the eyes, the distilling of eyes, remoueth drunckennesse,
and diseases of the ears. fo. 110. 111 Sperage helps the palsy, kings
evil, strangury, a hard milte, and stopping of the liver, it recouereth the
sheding of the gaul, it remoueth the swelling of the belly, and cholick, it
procures urine, and dissolueth the small stones in the bladder, it helps the
griefs of the womans privy place, it profyteth against the stinging of Bees,
it helps the hardly making of water, the pain of the gummes, teeth, mouth,
breast, and chine of the back, it remoueth veneriall act, and loses the
bellye, the dropping pain of the urine, the difficultnesse of the same, the
flix Disenteria: It clears the kidneys, and stopping of the liver. fo. 22.
23. Spinach softeneth the belly, moysteneth the body, remoueth the griefs of
the breast and lungs, it profeteth in hot causes, it nourishes more than
arage, it assuageth Cholar, it helps the soreness of the throat, hoarse
voice, the hardness of breath the coughe etc. fo. 24. Sorrel procures
appetite to meat, preserves against yt plague, it ripeneth sores, it
assuageth the flix Disenteria, the pain of the bellye, and aborment of the
stomach, it helps the leaprye and Ryngwormes, and tough nails, the ytche of
the body, the pain of the ears and teeth, the kings evil, the headache, any
sickness coming of heat, Jaundise, the reds of women, all fluxes of the belly,
the swelling of the milte, the burning of the fever. fo. 25. 26 Strawberry
leaves helps hot impostumes. fo. 77 The Strawbery amendeth the hardenesse of
the spleen, the stone, heals wounds and ulcers, procures the terms,
stays the bloody flux Disenteria, and causes urine, it helps inflammations
of the liver, and cleanses both the kidneys and bladder, it helps aches and
provoke urine: It fastneth the teethe, and stays the reume: it is good for
Choleric stomachs, it puts away the impostumes of the throat, it
remoueth the rednes and pimples, which happen on the face through the heat of
the liver, it assuageth the redness of the eyes, the Jaundise, fetchyng the
wind short, and cools thirst. fo. 78. 79 Stalions or Squil Onio^s move
veneriall act, cut the tough matter in the stomach. fo. 106 Squil Onions
amendeth the dropsye, the fetching of wind hardly, the defaultes of the liver,
the ague, exulcerations, purges fleumes, and the belly, causes vomiting. fo.
107 Squil Onions amendeth the hard fetchyng of breathe, an old coughe, griefs
both of liver and lungs, expels worms Melancholic, apaplexie, falling
sickness, the stone, purges the matrice, cures the ache of the hips, fasteneth
the teeth, amendeth the savor of the breath, helps the hearing, dryueth away
waries, choppes of the feet, running scabs, the dandry of the head, the bitte
of Serpents, procures hear to grow amendeth foul gummes, the sight of the
eyes, griefs of the sides, expels all diseases of the body: It kills
mice etc. fo. 10.
T.
TIme remoueth ioynte sickness, purges Cholier, and humors, it helps the
passions of the bladder, the swelling of the belly, it remoueth the grief of the
hippes, loins and sides, it amendeth the breast and the inflamatio^s of
Hipocha^dria or ye flancks, it helps melancolike, blearnesse of the eyes, and
the pain of them: It assuageth the grief of yt cold gout, the stiffenesse of
limbs, it assuageth the swelling of the Testicles, it purges the bowels, it
helps the hard fetching of breath, and falling sickness, it breaks the
stone of yt kidneys and bladder, it helps the stinging of a Be. fo. 40. 41
Black time is not to be used. fo. 41 Time which has a purpure flower, is
commended: all Time is mightilye hot. ibidem. Time heals the bitte of an
adder or snake, it helps and spitting of blood, it stays the Reume coming
of a cold cause, it caseth the coughe and a cold stomach, the headache,
frensinesse, Litharge, and often slumbering, it opens the stoppyngs of the
liver and milte, and moves urine, it recouereth the bittes of venomous
beasts, it helps the swelling in the throat, the cough, and purges the
breast, it stays bloody vomitings, it heateth the stomach, it remoueth wind
in the bowelles, it eases the strangury, it moves urine, and expels the
stone. fo. 39
V.
VAlerian provoke sweat and urine ame^deth stitches, kills mice, moves
the terms, preuayleth against the plague, helps the straightness of breath,
the headache, fluxes, and Shingles, procures clearenesse of sight, and heals
the pyles. fo. 164. 165.
VV.
Water of the herb Ualerian distilled amendeth Ulcers, old sores, swellings,
pyles, bones broken, ruptures, clears the eyes expels worms, it profits
against a pestilent air, impostumes and ache of the hippes, it provoke
sweat, etc. folio. 165. Water of the roots of Ualerian distilled, remoueth
poison, the quotidian ague, and stitches. fol. 168 Water of white poppie
distilled, cures the red spots of the face, procures white hands, it helps
the headache proceeding of heat, it extinguisheth any heat. fol. 131 Water
distilled out of Gourdes, loses the belly, cease thirst, ye cough, helps
the stone, purges the kydneys and bladder, qualifyeth burning fevers. fol.
150. Water of mellons distilled, helps the stone, procures urine, cleanses
the kydneys, cools the Liver, cease^^ thirst, breaks the cough, expell^^
heates and swellings. fol. 15^ Water of the blessed Thistle distilled, puts
away headache, comfort memory, healpeth giddynesse and all griefs of the
eyes, consumption of the body, breaks the stone, and cures burnings. fol.
160 Water of the leaves of Elecampane, expels the grief of the stone,
helps the person broken, comfort the head, stre^gthneth the stomach,
amendeth the hard fetching of brea^h the cough, pleurisse, poison, the sto^e
and Terms of women, causes urine. etc. fol. 172. Water distilled out of the
root of Elecampane heals an inner rupture, assuageth the grief of the stone,
provoke urine, it sends the dead yongling out of the belly, it assuageth
the swellings of the testicles, it cease the cough. etc. fol. 175. Water of
Strawbery leaves distilled, remoueth the kings evil, it loses the breast,
purges the lungs, healpeth the cough, cleanses the leaprie, it mitigateth the
heat in the eyes, it cease ouermuche sweating, it is healthful for the
stopping of the Liver. fol. 82. Water of mustard seeds distilled amendeth
ulcers of the gummes, it helps the consumption of members, it heateth the
marow in the bones, this water profits against a cold disease in the
joints. fol. 82. Water distilled out of Lekes remedieth the spitting of cold
blood, it profits a barren woman, it stays the bleeding of the nose, it
helps a costiue belly, and ache of the hyppes, purges the kidneys and
bladder, procures urine, expels the stone, heals wounds, it profyteth
exulcerations and fracture of women's places. fol. 88. 89. Water distilled out
of onyons, recouereth swellings caused by the bit of a mad dog, aswageth
headache and tootache, causes hears to grow, expels worms. fol. 95. Water
distilled out of Garlik, helps the swellings in the throat, also the green
sickness, and swelling of the spleen. fol. 104. Water distilled out of Rapes,
helps gallings, burnings, scaldings, swellings of the feet. fol. 117. Water
distilled out of Radyshe, healpeth digestion, ye kings evil, worms of the
bellye, cleanses the stomach, it opens all manner of stoppings extenuateth
the humors in the lunges, cleanses the breaste, causes a clear voice. fol.
125. Water of Radishe recouereth poisoning taken in meat or drink, healpeth
the Quartaine, draws down Terms, and healpeth the stone: assuageth the
stinging of a Be, profyteth against the venim of a spider, healpeth the
pryckyng in the side, clears the eyes, and the face: It remoueth yellowe or
blackysh spots by beatyng, also the swellyng of the throat, and clears the
kidneys, breaks the stone, and causes urine, and expels the water between
the skin. 125 Water distilled out of Parseneys helps the palsy, moves the
veneriall act, and increases the sperme, helps the paynfulnesse in making
of water. fo. 128 Water distilled out of the root of Louage, helps an inner
rupture, helps the stone, provoke the terms in women, remoueth the
swellings of women's places, and cease the coughe. etc. fo. 171 Water of
Coleworts stays women's reddes, it profyteth the birth of a child, the
dropping of the urine, it stays a loose belly. fo. 12 Water of the red
Colewortes softneth the belly, puts away yt giddiness of the head, healpeth
the Apoplexy, the Crampe, Palsy, inflammations, swellings, ulcers within the
body, and without. fo. 12. 13 Water of the white Beetes, prevails against
the stone, it cease the vexing pain of Joint aches. fo. 15 Water of Sorrel
preuayleth against the plague, it remoueth al inward heates, cease thirste,
helps the liver and milte, also remoueth the shingles, scaldyngs, or burning,
the kings evil, it cools the burning heat of agues. fo. 27 Water of
pimpernell helps stone of the Kydneys and bladder, and purges the reins, it
healpeth the plague, profyteth women whose matrice is cold, and sends down
the reds, it helps the shaking of the mem^ers, it expels grief from the
heart and evil humors, and provoke urine: it profyteth against poison, and
causes a white skin. fo. 27 Water distilled out of Borage, assuageth the
gripings and swellings of the belly, it cures Disenteria, and hardness of
fetching breath, it comfort the heart and brain, and rendereth a help to
memory and wit: it purges evil blood and frensinesse, it eases the stingyng
of a Be or spider, it procures clearenesse of syghte, it remoueth the ringing
and pain in the ears, it comfort the the heart, it helps the reume,
burning fevers, and Jaundise, it cools the liver, it helps the flixe
disenteria, the paynefull fetchyng of breath, and decay of mind, the weak
brain: it purges the blood and pricking about the heart and breast. it
cleanses the scaprie and scabbes, and staieth the stilling of the head, the
headeache, the burning of the ^^es, the ringing of the ears, fo. 30. 31 W^^er
of Marigoldes distilled, re^^ereth all defaultes of the eyes, and procures
clear eyes, and also p^^ieth away the griefs of the head Folio. 33 Water of
Parseley distilled, profyteth against the stone of the kidneys and loins, it
purges the kidneys and bladder, and greatly provoke urine. fo. 39 Water
distilled of runnyng Time, strengthens the head, brain, and stomach, it
also procures appetite to ^eate, it remoueth the noise and rumbling of the
belly, it softneth the hardness of the stomache and moves ^^yne, it comfort
the sight, and consumes distillations of the head, it helps a quotidian
ague, it amendeth a cooled liver and Mylte, and heals the bowels exulcerated,
it opens yt sloppyng of nosthrels and ears, it restores hearing, helps
giddiness, stays desire to vomit, and expels the grypings of the belly,
it breaks the stone, and moves urine, it cures bruised members. fo. 40 Water
of Marigoldes or holihoke distilled cures the breaking out of the mouth, as
also the outward and inward heates, the Shingles, ulcers, and al swellings, it
cures al inward heates of fevers, it cools all impostumes of the lungs and
sides, it mitigateth the flux Disenteria, the hot swellings of wome^s places,
the kidneis and bladder, it expels the stone, it procures sleep in a hot
Fever, and cease thirst. fo. 44. 45 Water of Mints distilled, strengthens
the stomach and digesteth the meat received, it helps the stoppyng of the
liver and mylte, it opens the ways of the vryne, it procures an appetite to
meat, it staieth belching and vomityng, it recouereth a (...) king breath, and
putrified gum (...) it stays sounding and giddin^^^^ purges the matrice,
it dissolue^^ milk courded in hard papp^ (...) heals ruptures within, it
restor^ (...) the vuula fallen, it heals the (...) of children, it helps
worms, (...) heateth a cold stomach. fo. 45. 4^ Water of Lichory cools the
heat (...) the stomach, it preserves from the plague, it cures carbuncles,
it sta^eth the rising of the lungs, and stops the stipe Disenteria, it
opens the stopping of the Lyver, it helpe^^ the swelling of the vuula and
throat, helps wasted members, and the bit of venomous beasts, helps the
ulcers in the eyes, and the dimnes of sight, the pin and web etc. fol. 58
Water of Lettuce distilled profits ye liver, it cools yt blood inflamed, it
stays yt flix Disenteria, it ame^deth trembling of members, and helps sleep
it healpeth women lacking milk, it cease a dry cough, it moltifieth the
throat, cleanses the breast and lungs, ceasseth thirst, te^preth heat of ye
stomach, liver and kidneys, it loses the belly. fol. 65. Water of Cheruil
distilled, helps me^ bursten, and hurt by grievous fail, and resolves the
blood clotted in lu^ps, it profits against the stone of ye kidneis, it
loses the belly, it procures a good stomach, comforts the heart, puts
away shaking of the fever, is healthful for the head, and comfort the
senses, it remoueth the pains of the lungs. fol. 75 Water distilled of
Strawberies, ame^deth an unnatural heat, ceseth thirst proceeding of the liver,
or of choler, it cools the liver, loses the breast, refreshes the heart,
purges ye blood helps the kings evil, prevails against the stone, loins
and kidneys, it cures blisters in the mouth, it procures women's Terms,
helps a broken leg, heals al foul legs, it cures filthy wounds, and
assuageth swellings of ye face, helps the Lepry, purges blood, remoueth
spots out of the eyes, and comfort nature, expels poisons, asuageth
burning humors, and comfort conception, stays warting in the eyes, and
cools heat in the^, restores a dim sight, it cures pimples in ye face.
fo. 81. 82. Water of Betonie distilled, puts away dropsy, iaundise and agew,
cures ye diseases of ye kidneys, and milt. fo. 196
FINIS TABVLAE.

