NEW-ENGLANDS PLANTATION. OR, A SHORT AND TRVE DESCRIPTION OF THE COMMODITIES
AND DISCOMMODITIES of that Country. Written by Mr. Higgeson, a reverend Divine
now there resident. Whereunto is added a Letter, sent by Mr. Graves an
Enginere, out of New England,

The second Edition enlarged.

LONDON, Printed by T. and R. Cotes, for Michael Spark, dwelling at the Sign
of the Blew Bible in Green Arbor in the little Old Bailey. 1630.

To the Reader.
REader, do not disdain to read this Relation; and look not here to have a
large Gate and no building within; a full-stuffed Title with no matter in the
Book: But here read the truth, and that thou shall find without any frothy
bumbasted words, or any quaint new-deuised additions, only as it was written
(not intended for the Press) by a reverend Divine now there living, who only
sent it to some Friends here, who were desirous of his Relations; which is an
Epitomy of their proceedings in the Plantation. And for thy part if thou
meanest to be no Planter nor Venturer, do but lend thy good Prayers for the
furthrance of it. And so I rest a well-wisher to all the good designs both of
them which are gone, and of them that are to go.

M. S.

NEW-ENGLANDS PLANTATION.
LEtting pass our Voyage by Sea, we will now begin our discourse on the shore
of New England. And because the life and welfare of every Creature here
below, and the commodiousnesse of the Country whereas such Creatures live,
does by the most wise ordering of Gods providence, depend next unto himself,
upon the temperature and disposition of the four Elements, Earth, Water, Air
and Fire (For as of the mixture of all these, all sublunarie thin^^ are
composed; so by the more or less inioyment of the wholesome temper and
convenient use of these, consists the only well-being both of Man and Beast
in a more or less comfortable measure in all Countries under the Heavens)
Therefore I will endeavor to show you what New England is by the consideration
of each of these apart, and truly endeavor by Gods help to report nothing but
the naked truth, and that both to tell you of the discommodities as well as of
the commodities, though as the idle Proverb is^ Tra^ellers may lie by
authority, and so may take too much sinful liberty that way. Yet I may say
of my self as once Nehemiah did in another case: Shall such a Man as I lie? No
verily: It becomes not a Preacher of Truth to be a Writer of Falshod in any
degree: and therefore I have been careful to report nothing of New England
but what I have partly seen with mine own Eyes, and partly heard and inquired
from the mouths of very honest and religious persons, who by living in the
Country a good space of time have had experience and knowledge of the state
thereof, and whose testimonies I do believe as my self.

First therefore of the Earth of New England and all the appertenances thereof:
It is a Land of diverse and sundry sorts all about Masathulets Bay, and at
Charles River is as fat black Earth as can be seen any where: and in other
places you have a clay soil, in other gravel, in other sand^^^s it is all
about our Plantation at Salem, for so our Town is now named, Psalm. 76.2.

The form of the Earth here in the superficies of it is neither too flat in
the plainness; nor too high in Hills, but partakes of both in a mediocritie,
and fit for Pasture, or for Plow or Meddow ground, as Men please to employ it:
though all the Country be as it were a thick Wood for the general, yet in
diverse places there is much ground cleared by the Indians, and especially about
the Plantation: and I am told that about three miles from us a Man may stand on
a little hilly place and see diverse thousands of acres of ground as good as
need to be, and not a Tree in the same. It is thought here is good Clay to make
Brick and Tyles and Earthen-Pots as needs to be. At this instant we are
setting a Bricke-Kill on work to make Brickes and Tiles for the building of
our Houses. For Stone, here is plenty of Slates at the I Will of Slate in
Masathulets Bay, and Limestone, Freestone, and Smooth-stone, and Iron-stone,
and Marble-stone also in such store, that we have great Rocks of it, and a
Harbor hard by. Our Plantation is from thence called Marble-harbour.

Of Minerals there has yet been but little trial made, yet we are not
without great hope of being furnished in that Soil.

The fertility of the Soil is to be admired at, as appears in the
abundance of Grass that grows every where both very thick, very long,
and very high in diverse places: but it grows very wildly with a great
stalk and a broad and ranker blade, because it never had been eaten with
Cattle, nor mowed with a Sithe, and seldom trampled on by foot. It is scarce
to be believed how our Kine and Goats, Horses and Hogs do thrive and prosper
here and like well of this Country.

In our Plantation we have already a quart of Milk for a penny: but the
abundant increase of Corn proves this Country to be a wonderment. Thirty,
forty, fifty, sixty are ordinary here: yea Joseph's increase in Egypt is
out-stript here with us. Our planters hope to have more then a hundred fould
this year: and all this while I am within compass; what will you say of two
hundred fould and upwards? It is almost incredible what great gain some of our
English Planters have had by our Indian Corn. Credible persons have assured
me, and the party himself avouched the truth of it to me, that of the setting
of 13 Gallons of Corn he has had increase of it 52 Hogsheads, every Hogshead
holding seven Bushels of London measure, and every Bushel was by him sold and
trusted to the Indians for so much Beauer as was worth 18 shillings; and so of
this 13 Gallons of Corn which was worth 6 shillings and pence, he made about
327 pounds of it the year following, as by reckoning will appear: where you
may see how God blessed husbandry in this Land. There is not such great and
plentiful ears of Corn I suppose any where else to be found but in this
Country: being also of variety of colors, as red, blew and yellow, etc. and
of one Corn there springs four or five hundred. I have sent you many Ears
of diverse colors that you might see the truth of it.

Little Children here by setting of Corn may earne much more then their own
maintenance.

They have tried our English Corn at new Plymouth Plantation, so that all our
several Grains will grow here very well, and have a fitting Soil for their
nature.

Our Governor has store of green Pease growing in his Garden as good as ever
I eat in England*

This Country abounds naturally with store of Roots of great variety and
good to eat. Our Turnips, Parsnips and Carrots are here both bigger and sweeter
then is ordinarily to be found in England. Here are also store of Pumpions,
Cowcombers, and other things of that nature which I know not. Also, diverse
excellent Pot Herbs grow abundantly among the Grass, as Strawberrie leaves in
all places of the Country, and plenty of Strawberries in their time, and
Penyroyall, Wintersauerie, Sorrel, Brookelime, Liuerwort, Caruell and
Watereresses, also Leekes and Onions are ordinary, and diverse Physical
Herbs. Here are also abundance of other sweet Herbs delightful to the
smell, whose names we know not, etc. and plenty of single Damask Roses very
sweet; and two kinds of Herbs that bear two kinds of Flowers very sweet,
which they say, are as good to make Cordage or Cloth as any Hemp or Flax we
have.

Excellent Vines are here up and down in the Woods. Our Governor has already
planted a Vineyard with great hope of increase.

Also, Mulberries, Plums, Raspherries, Corrance, Chestnuts, Filberds, Walnuts,
Smalnuts, Hurtleberies and Hawes of Whitethorne near as good as our Cherries
in England, they grow in plenty here.

For Wood there is no better in the World I think, here being four sorts of
Oak differing both in the Lease, Timber, and Color, all excellent good. There
is also good Ash, Elm, Willow, Birch, Beech, Saxafras, Juniper Ciprus, Cedar,
Spruce, Pines and Fur that will yield abundance of Turpentine, Pitch, Tarry,
Masts and other materials for building both of Ships and Houses. Also here are
store of Sumacke Trees, they are good for dying and tanning of Leather,
likewise such Trees yield a precious Gum called White Beniamen, that they say
is excellent for perfumes. Also here be diverse Roots and Berries wherewith the
Indians dye excellent holding colors that no rain nor washing can alter.
Also, we have materials to make Sope-Ashes and Saltpeter in abundance.

For Beasts there are some Beare^, and they say some Lions also; for they have
been seen at Cape A^^e. Also here are several sorts of Dear, some whereof
bring three or four young ones at once, which is not ordinary in England*
Also Wolves, Foxes, Beauers, Otters, Martins, great wild Cats, and a great
Beast called a Molke as big as an Ox. I have seen the Skins of all these
Beasts since I came to this Plantation excepting Lions. Also here are great
store of Squerrels, some greater, and some smaller and lesser: there are some
of the lesser sort, they tell me, that by a certain Skin will fly from Tree to
Tree though they stand far distant.

Of the waters of New England with the things belonging to the same.
New England has Water enough both salt and fresh, the greatest Sea in the
World, the Atlanticke Sea runs all along the Coast thereof. There are abundance
of Islands along the Shore, some full of Wood and Mast to feed Swine; and others
clear of Wood, and fruitful to bear Corn. Also we have store of excellent
harbors for Ships, as at Cape Anne, and at Masathulets Bay, and at Salem, and
at many other places: and they are the better because for Strangers there is a
very difficult and dangerous passage into them, but unto such as are well
acquainted with them, they are easy and safe enough. The abundance of Sea.
Fish are almost beyond believing, and sure I should scarce have believed it
except I had seen it with mine own Eyes. I saw great store of Whales, and
Crampusse, and such abundance of Makerils that it would astonish one to
behold, likewise Cod-Fish abundance on the Coast, and in their season are
plentifully taken. There is a Fish called a Basse, a most sweet and wholesome
Fish as ever I did eat, it is altogether as good as our fresh Sammon; and the
season of their coming was begun when we came first to New England in June,
and so continued about three (...) space. Of this Fish our Fishers take many
hundreds together, which I have seen lying on the shore to my admiration; yea
their N^ts ordinarily take more then they are able to ^ale to Land, and for
want of Boats and Men they are constrained to let a many go after they have
taken them, and yet sometimes they fill two Boats at a time with them. And
besides Basse we take plenty of Sca^e and Thornbacke, and abundance of
Lobsters, and the least Boy in the Plantation may both catch and eat what he
will of them. For my own part I was soon cloyed with them, they were so
great, and far, and lussious. I have seen some my self that have weighed 16
pound, but others have had diverse times so great Lobsters as have weighed 25
pound, as they assure me. Also here is abundance of Herring, Turbut, Sturgion,
Cuskes, Hadocks, Mullets, Eeles, Crabs, Muskles and Oysters. Beside there is
probability that the Country is of an excellent temper for the making of Sa^^^
for since our coming our Fishermen have brought home very good Salt which
they found candied by the standing of the Sea water and the heat of the Sun,
upon a Rock by the Sea shore: and in diverse Salt Marshes that some have gone
through, they have found some Salt in some places crushing under their Feet and
cleaving to their Shoes.

And as for fresh Water the Country is full of dainty Springs, and some great
Rivers, and some lesser Brooks; and at Masathulets Bay they dug Wels and
found Water at three Foot deep in most places: and near Salem they have as
fine clear Water as we can desire, and we may dig Wels and find Water
where we list.

Thus we see both Land and Sea abound with store of blessings for the
comfortable sustenance of Man's life in New England.

Of the Air of New England with the Temper and Creatures in it.
THe Temper of the Air of New England is one special thing that commends this
place. Experience does manifest that there is hardly a more healthful place to
be found in the World that agrees better with our English Bodies. Many that
have been weak and sickly in old England, by coming hither have been
thoroughly healed and grown healthful and strong. For here is an
extraordinary clear and dry Air that is of a most healing nature to all such
as are of a Cold, Melancholy, Phlegmatic, Reumaticke temper of body. None can
more truly speak hereof by their own experience then my self. My Friends
that knew me can well tell how very sickly I have been and continually in
Physic, being much troubled with a tormenting pain through an extraordinary
weakness of my Stomach, and abundance of Melancholic humors; but since I
came hither on this Voyage, I thank God I have had perfect health, and freed
from pain and vomitings, having a Stomach to digest the hardest and coursest
fare, who before could not eat finest meat; and whereas my Stomach could only
digest and did require such drink as was both strong and stale, now I can and
do often times drink New England water very well, and I that have not gone
without a Cap for many years together, neither durst leave off the same, have
now cast away my Cap, and do wear none at all in the day time: and whereas
beforetime I clothed my self with double clothes and thick Wastcoats to
keep me warm, even in the Summer time, I do now go as thin clad as any,
only wearing a light Stuff Cassocke upon my Shirt and Stuff Breeches of one
thickness without Linings. Besides, I have one of my Children that was
formerly most lamentably handled with sore breaking out of both his hands and
feet of the Kings-Euill, but since he came hither he is very well over he was,
and there is hope of perfect recovery shortly, even by the very wholesomnesse
of the Air, altering, digesting and drying up the cold and crude humors of the
Body: and therefore I think it is a wise course for all cold complections to
come to take Physic in New England: for a sup of New-Englands Air is better
then a whole draught of old Englands Ale.

In the Summer time in the midst of July and August, it is a good deal hotter
then in old England: and in Winter, January and February are much colder as
they say: but the Spring and Autumn are of a middle temper.

Fowls of the Air are plentiful here, and of all sorts as we have in England
as far as I can learn, and a great many of strange Fowls which we know not.
Whilst I was writing these things, one of our Men brought home an Eagle which
he had killed in the Wood: they say they are good meat. Also here are many
kinds of excellent Hawks, both Sea Hawks and Land Hawks: and my self
walking in the Woods with another in company, sprung a Partridge so big that
through the heaviness of his Body could fly but a little way: they that have
killed them, say they are as big as our Hens. Here are likewise abundance of
Turkies often killed in the Woods, far greater than our English Turkies, and
exceeding fat, sweet and fleshy, for here they have abundance of feeding all
the year long, as Strawberries, in Summer all places are full of them, and all
manner of Berries and Fruits. In the Winter time I have seen Flocks of
Pigeons, and have eaten of them: they do fly from Tree to Tree as other
Birds do, which our Pigeons will not do in England: they are of all colors
as ours are: but their wings and tails are far longer, and therefore it is
likely they fly swifter to escape the terrible Hawks in this Country. In
Winter time this Country does abound with wild Geese, wild Ducks, and other
Sea Foul, that a great part of winter the Planters have eaten nothing but
roastmeat of diverse Fowls which they have killed.

Thus you have heard of the Earth, Water and Air of New England, now it may
be you expect something to be said of the Fire proportionable to the rest of
the Elements.

Indeed I think New England may boast of this Element more then of all the
rest: for though it be heresomewhat cold in the winter, yet here we have
plenty of Fire to warm us, and that a great deal cheaper then they sell
Billets and Faggots in London: nay, all Europe is not able to afford to make so
great Fire as New England. A poor Servant here that is to possess but 50
Acres of Land, may afford to give more wood for Timber and Fire as good as the
world yields, then many Noble men in England can afford to do. Here is good
living for those that love good Fires. And although New England have no Tallow
to make Candles of, yet by the abundance of the Fish thereof, it can afford
Oil for Lamps. Yea our Pine-Trees that are the most plentiful of all wood,
does allow us plenty of Candles, which are very useful in a House: and they
are such Candles as the Indians commonly use, having no other, and they are
nothing else but the wood of the Pine Tree cloven in two little slices
something thin, which are so full of the moisture of Turpentine and Pitch, that
they burn as clear as a Torch. I have sent you some of them that you may see
the experience of them.

Thus of New-Englands commodities, now I will tell you of some discommodities
that are here to be found.

First, in the Summer season for these three months, June, July, and August, we
are troubled much with little Flies called Musketoes, being the same they are
troubled with in Lincolneshiere and the Fens: and they are nothing but Gnats,
which except they be smoked out of their houses are troublesome in the night
season.

Secondly, in the Winter season for two months space, the earth is commonly
covered with Snow, which is accompanied with sharp biting Frosts, something
more sharp then is in old England, and therefore are forced to make great
Fires.

Thirdly, this Country being very full of Woods, and Wildernesses, does also
much abound with Snakes and Serpents of strange colors, and huge greatness:
yea there are some Serpents called Rattle-snakes, that have Rattles in their
Tails, that will not fly from a man as others will, but will fly upon him
and sting him so mortally, that he will dye within a quarter of an hour
after, except the party stinged have about him some of the root of an Herb
called Snake weed to bite on, and then he shall receive no harm: but yet
seldom falls it out that any hurt is done by these. About three years since,
an Indian was stung to death by one of them, but we heard of none since that
time.

Fourthly and lastly, Here wants as yet the good company of honest Christians
to bring with them Horses, Kine and Sheep to make use of this fruitful Land:
great pity it is to see so much good ground for Corn and for Grass as any is
under the Heavens, to lie altogether unoccupied, when so many honest Men and
their Families in old England through the populousness thereof, do make very
hard shift to live one by the other.

Now, thus you know what New England is, as also with the commodities and
discommodities thereof: now I will show you a little of the Inhabitants
thereof, and their government.

For their Governors they have Kings, which they call Saggamores, some
greater, and some lesser, according to the number of their Subjects.

The greatest Saggamores about us can not make above three hundred Men, and
other less Saggamores have not above fifteen Subjects, and others near about
us but two.

Their Subjects above twelve years since were swept away by a great and
grievous Plague that was amongst them, so that there are very few left to
inhabit the Country.

The Indians are not able to make use of the one fourth part of the Land,
neither have they any settled places, as Towns to dwell in, nor any ground as
they challenge for their own possession, but change their habitation from
place to place.

For their Statures, they are a tall and strong limmed People, their colors
are tawny, they go naked, save only they are in part covered with Beasts
Skins on one of their Shoulders, and wear something before their Priuities:
their Hair is generally black, and cut before like our Gentlewomen, and one
lock longer then the rest, much like to our Gentlemen, which fashion I think
came from hence into England.

For their weapons, they have Bows and Arrows, some of them headed with Bone,
and some with Brass: I have sent you some of them for an example.

The Men for the most part live idly, they do nothing but hunt and fish:
their wives set their Corn and do all their other work. They have little
Household stuff, as a Kettle, and some other Vessels like Trayes, Spoones,
Dishes and Baskets.

Their Houses are very little and homely, being made with small Poles pricked
into the ground, and so bended and fastened at the tops, and on the sides they
are matted with Boughs, and covered on the Roof with Sedge and old Mats* and
for their beds that they take their rest on, they have a Mat.

They do generally profess to like well of our coming and planting here;
partly because there is abundance of ground that they cannot possess nor make
use of, and partly because our being here will be a means both of relief to
them when they want, and also a defense from their Enemies, wherewith (I said)
before this Plantation begun, they were often endangered.

For their Religion, they do worship two Gods, a good God and an evil God:
the good God they call Tantum and their evil God whom they fear will do them
hurt, they call Squantum.

For their dealing with us, we neither fear them nor trust them, for forty
of our Musketeeres will drive five hundred of them out of the Field. We use
them kindly, they will come into our Horses sometimes by half a douzen or
half a score at a time when we are at victuals, but will ask or take nothing
but what we give them.

We purpose to learn their language as soon as we can, which will be a means
to do them good.

Of the present condition of the Plantation, and what it is.
WHen we came first to Nethum kek, we found about half a score Houses, and a
fair House newly built for the Gouerners, we found also abundance of Corn
planted by them, very good and well liking. And we brought with us about two
hundred Passengers and Planters more, which by common consent of the old
Planters were all combined together into one Body Pol^^icke, under the same
Governor.

There are in all of us both old and new Planters about three hundred, whereof
two hundred of them are settled at Nehum-kek, now called Salem: and the rest
have Planted themselves at Masathulets Bay, beginning to build a Town there
which we do call Cherton, or Charles Town.

We that are settled at Salem make what haste we can to build Houses, so that
within a short time we shall have a fair Town.

We have great Ordnance, wherewith we doubt not but we shall fortify our
selves in a short time to keep out a potent Adversary. But that which is our
greatest comfort, and means of defense above all other, is, that we have here
the true Religion and holy Ordinances of Almighty God taught amongst us:
Thanks be to God, we have here plenty of Preaching, and diligent Catechizing,
with strickt and careful exercise, and good and commendable orders to bring
our People into a Christian conversation with whom we have to do withal. And
thus we doubt not but God will be with us, and if God be with us, who can be
against us?

Here ends Master Higgesons Relation of New England.
A Letter sent from New England, by Master Graves, Engynere now there Resident.
THus much I can affirm in general, that I never came in a more goodly
Country in all my life, all things considered: if it has not at any time been
manured and husbanded, yet it is very beautiful in open Lands, mixed with
goodly woods, and again open plains, in some places five hundred Acres, some
places more, some less, not much troublesome for to clear for the Plough to
go in, no place barren, but on the tops of the Hills, the grass and weeds
grow up to a man's face, in the Lowlands and by fresh Rivers abundance of
grass and large Meddowes without any Tree or shrubbe to hinder the Since: I
never saw except in Hungaria, unto which I always parallel this country, in
all our most respects, for every thing that is here either sown or planted
prospers far better then in Old England: the increase of Corn is here
far beyond expectation, as I have seen here by experience in Barley, the
which because it is so much above your conception I will not mention: And
Cattle do prosper very well, and those that are bredd here far greater then
those with you in England. Vines do grow here plentifully laden with the
biggest Grapes that ever I saw, some I have seen four inches about, so that I
^m bold to say of this country, as it is commonly said in Germany of Hungari^,
that for Cattle, Corn, and Wine is excels. We have many more hopeful
commodities here in this country, the which time will teach to make good use
of: In the mean time we abound with such things which next under God do make
us subsist, as Fish, Foul, Dear, and sundry sorts of fruits, as
Musk-millions water-millions, Indian-Pompions, Indian Pease Beans, and many
other odd fruits that I cannot name, all which are made good and pleasant
through this maine blessing of God, the healthfulnesse of the country which
far exceeds all parts that ever I have been in* It is observed that few or
none do here fall sick, unless of the Scuruy that they bring from aboard
the Ship with them, whereof I have cured some of my Company only by labor.
Thus making an end of an imperfect Description, and committing you to God, etc.

A Catalogue of such needful things as every Planter does or ought to provide
to go to New England; as namely for one man, which being doubled, may serve for
as many as you please, viz.
Victuals for a whole year for a man, and so after the rate for more.
8 BVshels of meal. 2 Bushels of pease 2 Bushels of Otemeale. 1 Gallon of
Aquavitae. 1 Gallon of Oil. 2 Gallons of Vinegar. 1 Firkin of Butter.
Apparel.
1 Monmoth Cap. 3 Falling bands. 3 Shirts. 1 Wast-coat. 1 Suit of Canuase. 1
Suit of Frize. 1 Suit of Cloth. 3 Pair of Stockings. 4 Pair of Shoes. 2
Pair of Sheets. 7 Else of Canuas to make a bed and boulster. 1 Pair of
Blankets. 1 Course Rug.
Arms.
1 Armor complete. 1 Long piece. 1 Sword. 1 Belt. 1 Bandilier. 20 Pound of
powder. 60 Pound of Lead. 1 Pistol and Goose shot.
Tools.
1 Broad How 1 Narrow How. 1 Broad Axe. 1 Felling Axe. 1 Steel Handsawe. 1
Whipsawe 1 Hammer. 1 Shouell. 1 Spade. 2 Aug^es. 4 Chissels. 2 Percers stocked.
1 Gimblet. 1 Hatchet. 2 Frowes. 1 Hand-Bill. 1 Grindstone. 1 Pickaxe. Nails of
all sorts.
Household implements.
1 Iron pot. 1 Kettell. 1 Frying pan. 1 Gridiron. 2 Skellets. 1 Spit. Wooden
Platers. Dishes. Spoones. Trenchers.
Spices.
Sugar. Pepper. Cloves. Mace. Cinnamon. Nutmegs. Fruit.
Also there are diverse other things necessary to be taken over to this
Plantation, as Books, Nets, Hooks and Lines, Cheese, Bacon, Kine, Goats, etc.

The names of the most remarkable places in New England.
The old names. The new names. Cape Cod. Cape James. The Harbor of Cape Cod.
Milford Haven. Chawum. Barwick. Accomack. Plymouth. Sagoquas. Oxford.
Massachusetts Mount. Cheuit Hills. Massachusits River. Charles River. Totan.
Famouth. A great Bay by Cape Anne. Bristow. Cape Tragabig sanda. Cape Anne.
Naemback. Bastable, so named by King Charles: But by the new Planters now
called Salem. Aggawom. Southampton. Smiths Isles. Smiths Isles. Passataquack.
Hull. Accominticus. Boston. Sassanows Mount. Snowdon hill. Sow^catuck. Ipswich.
Bahanna. Dartmouth. A good Harbor within that Bay. Sandwich. Ancociscos Mount.
Shuters hill. Ancocisco. The Base. Anmoughcawgen. Cambridge. Kenebecka.
Edenborow. Sagadahock. Leth. Pemmayquid. S. John's town. Segocket. Norwich.
Mecadacut. Dunbarton. Pennobscot. Aberden. Nusket. Low mounds, Monahigan.
Barties Isles. Matinack. Willowbies Isles. Metinacus. Haughtons Isles.

But whosoever desires to know as much as yet can be discovered, I advise them
to buy Captain John Smiths book of the description of New England in Folio;
and read from Fol. 203. to the end; and there let the Reader expect to have
full content.

FINIS.

