A SVRVAY OF THE PRETENDED Holy Discipline.

Containing the beginninges, success, parts, proceedings, authority, and
doctrine of it: with some of the manifold, and material repugnances, varieties
and vncertaineties, in that behalf.

Faithfully gathered, by way of historical narration, out of the books and
writings, of principal favorers of that platform Anno 1593.

They would be Doctors of the Law: and yet understand not what they speak:
neither whereof they affirm. 1. Tim. 1.7. Sententias vestras prodidisse,
superasse est. Hier. ad Ctesiph. adu. Pelag, c. 4. To acquaint you with their
discipline, is to overthrow it. Imprinted at London by John Wolf. 1593.

TO THE READER.
THere are many in England I perceive, that are so addicted unto their own
opinions, as concerning the pretended holy Discipline, and such a reformation,
as they themselves have devised: that they cannot with any patience endure, to
hear either contradiction or argument to the contrary. I know some of them
(says a certain aduertiser touching the controversies of the Church of
England) that would think it a tempting of God, to hear or read what might
be said against them: as if they could be at quod bonum est tenete, without
an omnia probate, going before. Which manner of persons, the Prophet David
resembles unto the deaf Adder, Psalm. 58.
that stops his ear, and will not hear the voice of the inchaunter, though
he be expert in charming. S. Augustine writing upon these words, says: that
the serpent delighting in the darkness, wherewithal he has enclosed
himself, clappeth one of his ears very hard to the ground, and with his tail
stops the other: least hearing the Marso, he should be brought forth to the
light. And so do a great number of these Serpentine persons, whereof the
aduertiser made mention: they stop one of their ears so hard with earth, that
is, with a most insatiable and greedy desire of riches: and the other with
their tails, whereby says Aug: posterior a intelliguntur, that is with a
sacrilegious hope, that hereafter under pretense of setting up their
discipline, they may come to the massacre and spoil of the Church: and will
fleere and Ieere, much against their own consciences, (god knows) when any
inchaunter or Marso assayleth either by words or writing to charm them. With
these men or any else, whose hearts are thus possessed, either with this earth
and hope, or with any other such like poison, for what respects soever: I have
nothing here to do: but only to pray for them, that god mollifying their
prejudicial and obstinate minds, they may be content, first to behold, and
then with humility to acknowledge the truth.

There is an other sort both of the Clergy and laitye, who notwithstanding
they favor the pretended discipline, even with singleness of heart, and in
good earnest (I am persuaded,) as supposing it to be the Lords own
workmanship, and holy institution: yet forasmuch as they do very well know,
that many dishes are washed clean on the outside, and yet are foul within:
that many sepulchers are gorgious to the eyes, and yet inwardly have nothing in
them but bones and corruption: that men may be often times deceived with shows
and probabilities, as always heretofore many have been: and that there are
no spirits of any prophets in our days, which ought not to be subject to the
spirits of other prophets: they will be pleased I trust, to yeald themselves
unto the Apostolical rules of trying of all things, and not be carried away,
either with rashness or prejudice, to believe any spirit, until they have
tried it thoroughly whether it be of god.

In the behalf of these men, and for their sakes especially, I have presumed
to offer unto their wise and indifferent consideration, such simple notes and
observations, as I had formerly gathered, when according to the said rules of
the Apostles, by occasion of the great opinion, which began to grow of the
Geneua-forme of ecclesiastical discipline, I was bold to try and examine it,
according to the measure of such small ability and judgment, as god has
endued me withal. Whereby if either they or any other shall reap any profit,
to the establishing of their minds in this giddy age, from running up and
down after every young start-vp, hither and thither, to secke new platformes
of Church-gouernment in this place or that place: when as we have one of our
own, which is in my conscience truly Apostolical, and far to be preferred,
before any other that is received this day by any reformed Church in
Christendom: I shall think my pains well bestowed: nay, I shall be right
glade in my heart, and always most thankful unto almighty god for it.
Otherwise if by reason of such weakness and infirmities, as I do acknowledge to
be in my self, and to have showed themselves in every part of this Treatise,
there shall any offense be taken, that may blast or hinder the said fruit,
which I do indeed most earnestly desire, I cannot choose but be very sorry
for it, satisfyinge my self in the mean time notwithstanding, that in the
whole process following, (the contents whereof you may see in the next pages)
I have set down nothing, which I do not think I have set down truly.
Liberaui animam meam. I have therein discharged my conscience: and so I
commit you to God.

The Contents of this Book.
How under pretense of the Prophets love to Syon: some men would gladly set up
their own fancies. Cap. 1. fol. 1. How, by whom, and where, the platform of
Presbytery discipline, was first devised, and established. Cap. 2. fol. 7. By
whose instigation, and how, the pretended Discipline of Geneua has enlarged
her jurisdiction. Cap. 3. fol. 41. Our English Geneuaters upon a better
inquiry made: are grown to a great uncertainty, touching sundry points of
the Geneuian platform. Cap. 4. fol. 60. With what distraction, uncertainty,
diversity of judgments, pretense is made, that the Geneua Discipline is of
very great antiquity. Cap. 5. fol. 70. The seekers of the pretended
Discipline are not yet agreede, what name they should give unto their
Hierarchicall parish-meetings. Cap. 6. fol. 88. Of their uncertainty concerning
the places, where this pretended regiment should be erected. Cap. 7. fol. 96.
Of Bishops generally: of the pretended equality, of Pastors, or new
parish-bishops, and how the chief impugners of Bishops begin to relent. Cap.
8. fol. 104. They disagree very greatly concerning Doctors. Cap. 9. fol. 144.
Their Aldermen must be men of good calling. Cap. 10. fol. 154 Their
disagreement about the name of their ruling Associates. Cap. 11. fol. 156. They
cannot agree, where to find their Elders qualities described. Cap. 12. fol.
162. Of their uncertainty, whether their Elders be ecclesiastical men, or
laymen. Cap. 13. fol. 170. Their disagreement, concerning the continuance of
their Elders in their office. Cap. 14. fol. 174 Their uncertainty, where to
find the particular offices of their Aldermen. Cap. 15. fol. 177. Of their
Aldermens ioynt-office with the Ministers in the election, abdication, and
ordination of Ministers: and of their disagreement about the same. Cap. 16.
fol. 183. Of their Aldermens ioynt-office with the ministers, in binding, and
loosing of sins, and of their disagreeme^t therein. C. 17. f. 190 Of the first
institution of the old Deacons: and of the disagreeme^t, about the new
disciplinary Deacons. Cap. 18. fol. 198 Of certain Widows, which are made
Church Officers: and of the disagreement, which is about them. Cap. 19. fol.
215. Of the charge to be imposed upon every parish, by means of the
pretended Eldership. Cap. 20. fol. 227. Of their desire, that those things
which have been taken, by Sacrilege from the Church, might be restored
again to the mayntenance of their Elderships. Cap. 21. fol. 233 They take from
Christian Princes, and ascribe to their pretended regiment, the supreme and
immediate authority under Christ in causes Ecclesiastical. Cap. 22. fol. 250.
In the oppugning of Princes authority in causes Ecclesiastical, they join
with the Papists. Cap. 23. fol. 258. Their disagreement in suppressing the
authority of princes in church-causes, and in the advancing of their own. C.
24. f. 268 In what causes more particularly, their Elderships are to deal, as
they pretend. Cap. 25. fol. 281. Those things they reprove as unlawful in
others, they allow in themselves. Cap. 26. fol. 298 How they deal with the
ancient Fathers, Ecclesiastical Histories, and general Councels, when they
are alleged against them. Cap. 27. fol. 329. Their dealing with all the new
writers, and many reformed churches, when they make against them. Cap. 28.
fol. 354. How they depend upon their own Synodes and favorers. Cap. 29.
fol. 364. How falsely they allege the ancient fathers, for their pretended
parish-Bishops and Elders. Cap. 30. fol. 381. How and with what disagreement
they wrest and misconstrue the Scriptures, in the behalf of their discipline.
C. 31. f. 396. What account the solliciters for this pretended government do
make each of other. Cap. 32. fol. 416. Of the praise and disprayse of this
pretended regiment. C. 33. f. 421 Of their disagreement, concerning the
necessity of the Consistoriall government. Cap. 34. fol. 436. Of the
pretended commodity, that the Elderships would bring with them, and of the
small fruits, that they bring forth where they are. Cap. 35. fol. 450.
FINIS.
CHAP. I. How under pretense of the Prophets love to Syon: some men would
gladly set up their own fancies.
THe holy Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 62* 1.
foreseeing the miserable captivity, which the Jews (for their transgressions)
were to sustain under the kings of Babell: did think it necessary, to
prepare their hearts to patience, by assuring them, that the Lord (in his due
time) would work their joyful and happy deliverance. To the which purpose
(amongst many other most notable persuasions, and prophecies) he uses these
words: for Syons sake I will not hold my peace, and for Ierusalems sake I will
not rest, until the righteousness thereof break forth as the light, and
salvation thereof as a burning lamp: Calvin upon Esaias.
that is, donec erigam piorum animos spe futurae salutis, etc: until I may
confirm the minds of the godly (says Calvin) with the hope of their
restitution again: so as they may understand, and be fully persuaded, that God
will be the deliverer of his Church.

The false Prophet H.N. the most illuminated father of the family of love,
counterfaiting the imitation of the Prophet of God in this place: does take
upon him to tell the world, of a far greater captivity, not of 70. years,
but of more then a thousand and five hundred years: that is, ever since the
Apostles times. Wherein (says he) darkness of error has ouershadowed the
earth: Euang Regni
lumen vitae incognitum factum est, the light of life has been made unknown:
and the truth has been hid, as under the mask of Popery, until this day of
love. He turns the whole doctrine of our salvation, into a vain mystery,
and an allegorical conceit of his own: leaving the Church no mediator at all,
besides himself. He has framed a platform, or new kingdom and gospel of
his own invention: bearing this title, Euangelium regni dei: the gospel of
the kingdom of God. H.N. 1 Exhortation, page 33 and 43.
Into this kingdom, as Vicegerentes he has brought: for our ministers, his
seniores sanctae intelligentiae, Elders of the holy understanding: patres
familiae Christi, fathers of the family of Christ, and for our Archbishops and
Bishops, his Primates, or principal Elders, his seniores parents, Elder
fathers, and I know not how many illuminated and deified governors. And
perseuering in these and in many other such like very gross and fond
imaginations: he lewdly presumes, to apply the said place of the Prophet, to
himself, and his own conceits, for the better animating of his followers to
stick fast unto him: saying: Euang Regni.
O Syon, tua causa non silebo, etc: O Syon for thy sake, I will not hold my
peace, and for Ierusalems sake I will not rest: until the righteousness thereof
break forth as the light, and salvation thereof as a burning lamp: that is in
effect: until the holy government of the family of love, be established upon
the earth.

T.C. a man I confess, not to be sorted with H.N. (were it not upon this
occasion) will needs take upon him likewise, the person of the Prophet: and to
advertise us of a wonderful servitude, that has continued in the Church of
God, (in effect, with H.N.) from the apostles times also, and which yet
remains (as he says) in the church of England. From the which servitude, he
reckons, that it shall never be delivered, until it submit it self, to be
newly reformed again, by the advice of his deep understanding (assisted with
those that diligently wait upon his illuminated devises) after the manner of
Geneua. To win himself therefore the better credit, for bringing this to
pass: he lays about him, and would have al things turned topsie turuie (as
they say) even the vpside down. Our ministry, their callings, our service,
our sacraments, and all we have, is out of joint: Councels, fathers, histories,
they are but dishcloutes with him: he shakes them off, as it were with a
shrugge: they are indeed (as after it shall appear) no body in his hands: but
he flingeth them here and there at his pleasure.

He in like sort with the assistance of his partakers, has framed after the
fashion of Geneua, a platform and new kingdom, or rather an infinite number
of little petite kingdoms: but yet every one of them of an absolute power:
as well over Lords, Earls, Dukes, Princes, Kings and Kingdoms, as over the
meanest whosoever under them. This kingdom he would impose upon this land.
Wherein for our Archbishops, Bishops, ministers, etc: he places his graund
Elders, (whom he terms pastors): his second sort of Elders, (whom he
terms Doctors): his third sort of Elders, (whom he terms Governors)
joining unto them Deacons, to carry their purses, and widows to wash their
feet, where need shall require. And with this devise, he is so possessed,
that he thinks all them bewitched, and adversaries to the truth, that do
impugn it. He supposes the present estate of the Church of England, (wanting
that Allobrogicall devise, though reformed as it is,) to be as yet, under the
yoke of a wicked and unlawful government, as it were, under that Jewish
captivity of the Church, under the Babilonians: And therefore the better to
encourage such factious persons, as do gape for a change, out of Gods blessing
into the warm sun: he takes upon him to be their Prophet, and (as it were
another Esaias) says: For Syons sake I will not hold my peace, and for
Hierusalems sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof break
forth as the light, and salvation thereof as a burning lamp: that is in
effect: until the said glorious kingdom of this Geneuian Eldership, be
enthronized in this land, and do carry the scepter over every parish in
England.

There is also another sort of Schismatickes amongst us: The Barro^^ists.
who although they condemn T.C. for a false Prophet, and all his platform, as
a mere forgerie: yet do they join with him in slaundering, not only of our
church, most hainously: but furthermore also, of all the rest of the Churches
in Christendom: as having conspired together ever since the Apostles times, to
shut Christ out of his own kingdom, and to run headlong into a voluntary
bondage of greater blindness, then was ever in Egypt. In respect of the which
our miserable estate (forsooth) in England: grounding themselves upon
Cartwrightes propositions, (as they profess): vz: that seeing our Church: our
government: our ministry: our service: our Sacraments, are thus and thus,
as he writes of them: therefore they will not pray with us: they will not
communicate with us: they will not submit themselves to our Church, or to the
government of it: they will not baptize their children with us: they will have
nothing to do with us: but in effect, as though we were profane persons,
Ethnickes, or publicanes, do abandon our societies.

And these men come in, with another, a far more royal kingdom then Cartwrig
hts. But it consists partly of his said officers, and partly of some other
of their own: that is, of all the people: whom they greatly magnify, not
seeing their own confusion. Which form, or devise, they have in such
admiration, for their conceived purity of it: as that all the parishes in
England (they say) must be first disparished, and all the people of the land
first sanctified, and made a chosen people unto the Lord, before the same may
be planted amongst us. And therefore one of them, (whether Barrow, Greenwood,
Harrison, Glouer, or which of their scholars, I do not now remember) but one
of them I am assured; does so greatly dislike the thraldom (in his conceit) of
the Church of England, at this day: and so thirsts to drink the waters,
which they have drawn out of their own cisternes: that as, ravished in spirit,
and for the comfort of his companions, he protests that for Syons sake, he
will not hold his peace, nor for Ierusalems sake, take any rest, until the
righteousness thereof, break forth as the light, and salvation thereof as a
burning lamp: that is (in effect): until all the parishes in England be
purified after their fashion; and then an Eldership, (abridged by a popular
authority) be placed in them.

But of all the cryers, that I have read of: he shall wear the garland for
crying, Petition directed to her Majesty.
that presumed of late to printe a petition, directed to her Majesty: but
published and spread abroad amongst her subjects, for what other purpose I
know not, then to withdraw them from their duetiful allegiaunce, and liking of
her government: when thereby they should be informed, sufficiently (as he
deemed) of such notorious abuses, as he falsely pretends: and that
notwithstanding, her highness being acquainted with them, yet she cared not
for the reformation of them. They say the man has been of a crased judgment:
and I easiely believe it: partly for that he has so giddily and so untruly
sought to disgrace, as much as in him lies, the present government of the
Church: and partly in respect of his desperate boldness, that after so many
rebukes, given to such frantic fellows in the like cases: he durst presume
again, to offer to the world, such a fardell of malicious collections, and
untruths; and yet think them fit matters to be dedicated to her Majesty.
But the thing that most astonisheth me, is this: in that he says thus; I do
not now write either to pull down Bishoprics, or erect presbyteries. With
whom the truth is, I will not determine. For I know not etc. And yet he
takes the said sentence out of Esaias (somewhat turkised) for his poesy as well
as the rest. And to the condemnation of the present government, and
justification of the disturbers of it (if he understand himself) he plainly
professes: that although he knows not which part has the truth: yet for
Syons sake he will not cease, nor for Ierusalems sake hold his tongue: till he
has advanced his own conceit, and depraved that which he knows not,
as much as possibly he is able.

And thus you see, what love on all sides is pretended to Syon: and how the
prophets words are wrested, by every one of them, to serve their own turns.
But they who have judgment, will not be much moved with such pretenses. It
has been an ancient practice of the adversaries of the Church of God, then
especially to be complotting of some mischief, Esra. 4.
both against Syon and Jerusalem: when in outward show, they have pretended
most of all, to be desirous to repair them, and to seek their glory. There
are some men spoken of in the scriptures, Psalm. 12.
who vaunt: that because their tongues are their own, they will speak what
they list. To whom also these men that profess, they will not hold their
peace, may be more fitly compared, then with the holy prophet Esaias. Or I doubt
it, that if a man should judge of many of them by the course which they have
taken: or if they of themselves would resort indeed to their own colors:
they might soon appear to be so far from bearing any true affection to Syon,
as that we should rather find them in the tents of the Edomites, Psalm. 138.
cryinge in their hearts against the good estate of the Church of Christ, now
in England: as the Edomites did in the day of Jerusalem: Down with it, down
with it, even to the ground. But because T.C. and his followers (for with the
rest I will not further meddle) have such a conceit: as that the light and
salvation of Jerusalem, cannot well break forth, until his pretended
Eldership may be generally admitted of in England: I will leave their hearts to
God, and deliver unto you historically, how this platform was devised, and
grew to be so much in request: which will be the contents of the two next
chapters following.

CHAP. II. How, by whom, and where, the platform of Presbytery Discipline,
was first devised, and established.
THe world now a days, is set all upon liberty. Every man almost is of their
humor, which thought scorn, Numb. 16.
that any should be lifted up above the congregation. The cantoninge of
kingdoms, is in many men's mouths. You shall find it, a great matter amongst
those that have been trauailers; and it is their usual discourse, vz. what a
notable thing it is to live in Venice. There, (forsooth) every gentleman
lives with as great liberty as the Duke himself. They have noe Earls, no
Barons, no Noblemen; of whom their Gentlemen should stand in awe. What is a
Nobleman (say these discoursers) but a gentleman* And I am as good a gentleman
as the best of them. Surely it is very well spoken: and like a gentleman. But
whilst you brave so upon noblemen: do you know what you do* Be there not
some in the world (and yet none Anabaptists) that will say: what is a
gentleman, but a man* And am not I in behavior as gentle as he* and for my
manhood, as good a man as he*

A certain writer for reformation; having (as it seems) a great dislike of
Bishops: Treatise of obedience.
compares the Bishops Rochet to a white smock, and the Bishop himself, to a
porter of the Stillyard. This will not dislike some. But read (I pray you)
with patience, what he also writes of noblemen and gentlemen: for that which
he says, touches them both alike. Whereof came (says he) this division of
such personages from others: Ibid. pa. 114.
seeing all men came of one man, and one woman* was it for their lusty hawking
and hunting* for their nimble dicing, and cunning carding? for their singing
and dancing? for their open bragging and swearing? for their false flyring and
flattering? for their subtle pilling and stealing? for their cruel polling
and pilling etc. No, no: there was no such thing. You would then be glad (I am
sure) to know what thing it was. Indeed the same author does not conceal it.
In effect it is (though it be delivered in better words) vz. that their
rebellion and treason against their governors, procured them that prerogative
with the people. Because (says he) they revenged and delivered the oppressed
people out of the hands of their governors, Ibid.
who abused their authority, and wickedly, cruelly, and tir annously ruled
over them; the people of a grateful and thankful mind, gave them that
estimation and honor. We live in a world (you know) that cries out: the
first institution, the first institution: every thing must be brought to the
first institution. The words be good, if they be well applied. John Wall, o^
Ball in the time of Jack Cades rebellion, in Rich. 2. days.
But something was amiss in the Priests application of his text, being such a
like saying, amongst a multitude of rebels: vz: When Adam dug, and Eve
spanne, who was then the Gentleman. What is a nobleman, or a gentleman now (say
many in the world of the said Priests humor, when noblemen and gentlemen will
not satisfy their desires) but an usurper of such honor, as the people
bestowed upon their ancestors at the first, for defending of them against
their governors* which honor or prerogative their children enjoying after
them by the negligence or conniuencie (forsooth) of the people: has grown
into a tyrannical superiority: Whereby they lift themselves above the rest of
the children of God, to whom indeed the inheritance of the world does equally
appertain; by the same right, that all true Christians are fellow heirs
together of the kingdom of heaven. Call they this the bringing of things to
the first institution* Surely such and the like conceits do tend to nothing,
but to blood and confusion.

The course which was taken in Schwitzerland, and other places in high Almayne
(where the people made havoc both of their noblemen, and gentlemen) shall
never (whilst I live) get my approbation: Let all the Consistorians in
Christendom commend it never so much, and that under pretense of the doctrine
of true obedience. Be it that their governors, their noblemen, and their
gentlemen were become tyrants: yet (as Melancthon truly says of that
matter): Chroni. par. vlt.
excessit medicina modum: the medicine passed measure. He might have said in
mine opinion, excessit medicina malum: the medicine was worse then the disease.
But I will not meddle with such kind of freedom. If the Emperors of Germany
do think it a matter for the glory, and for the strength of their Empire, to
have it (as it were) distributed into so many free Cities, so many popular
states, and little petty soueraignties: it were a saucie part for me (as I take
it) to busy my self with it. Howbeit that any such doctrine or examples,
should be published, or once dreamed of, in such a kingdom as this is: there
is no pretense of religion, no show of reformation, no platform of
Discipline, although it should come from Geneua, that can sufficiently warrant
it. And yet we find it to be true by our own experience in most places,
that such kind of pretenses can do very much: especially if some of Geneua,
shall but give them their credit and good countenance unto it.

One Franciscus Boniuardus, at master Caluins request, did write a short
description of the city of Geneua: Munster.
wherein he affirms that about the year 1124. the Bishop of Geneua was the
Prince of it: and that after some contention with one Aymo de imperio
ciuitatis, for the soueraintie of the City: the said Bishop going to the
Emperor Frederick the first: obtinuit vt ille solus Geneuae principatum
obtineret Regali iure: obtained that he alone might enjoy the principality of
Geneua, by a kingly interest, that he should be free from all tributes, and be
subject in temporal causes, but only to the Emperor. Not much disagreeing
from this, is that which Simlerus writes. Simlerus de repub. Helu.
Episcopatus huius vrbis, etc. The Bishopric of this City (meaning Geneua)
had most large privileges, and immunities: but notwithstanding the Citizens did
carefully conserve the proper liberties, and perpetual conditions with their
Bishops, that they had received from their forefathers. It appears
furthermore by the said Boniuardus, that notwithstanding the Bishops right
mentioned, for the principality of that City: Munster.
yet there was still some contention about it, betwixt the Bishops and the
Earls, and Dukes of Sauoy: even (says he) vsque ad nostra tempora: till our
times. In respect of which troubles, the Citizens of Geneua, as well for the
assisting of their Bishops right (I suppose), as for the defense of themselves,
and their own privileges mentioned: did join themselves in league with the
Heluetians, and with them of Berne, and Friburge. By means of which league, or
how else it came to pass (I know not) but it appears by Bodinus, Bodinus
de repub. pa. 353
that after some time, the Citizens of Geneua, growing weary of the foresaid
troubles: did begin to profess, that they would not be bound either to the
laws of the Duke of Sauoy, or of the Bishop. But (says the same Bodinus) they
thought it not safe for them, to attempt any thing, until there did arise a
quarrel for the principality, not only betwixt the Duke and the Bishop: but
likewise betwixt the Bishop, and the people. The contention or dislike between
the Bishop and the people, grew hereof (as I take it): for that by the pains
and preaching of Farellus, they began to dislike of Popery, and inclined to
a reformation of Religion, as diverse Cities near unto them, and with whom
they were in some league, had done. Which inclination of theirs, was altogether
misliked, (ye may be sure), by their popish Bishop. Whereupon, as also in
respect of the said iarres, between the Duke and their Bishop: the Citizens
receiving some good encouragement diverse ways (I doubt not), nouandae
religionis studium ac reipub. commutandae oblatam occasionem arripuerunt, they
took upon them the endeavor of altering religion, and omitted not (says
Bodine) the occasion offered, of changing also the estate of their common
wealth.

It rests now to be considered, by what means (in part) they brought their
said purposes to pass. It appears by Caluins words to Cardinal Sadolet:
that if the Bishop would have harkened at the first, to Farellus, for the
abolishing of Popery, they would then, have been very well content, to have
admitted still of his Episcopal jurisdiction. But (as I said) he would not.
And then both Farellus, Viretus, and all their favorers, did set upon the
Bishop, withal maine and might. They said it was not meet, for a Minister to
have so great a living. They pronounced him, clara voce fure^ esse, with a loud
voice to be a thief. The Bishop being at this time (that I speak of) in
possession of the sovereignty and civil government of that City: Calvin to
Sadolet. page 172
and having then in his hands (as master Calvin confesses) ius gladij and
alias ciuilis iurisdictionis parts, the power of life and death and other
parts of civil jurisdiction: The said Ministers exclaimed against that civil
authority in Bishops: Ibid.
they taught it, to be utterly unlawful, for a Bishop, to have any such
sovereignty: they said he was an usurper, and what not* By which proceedings
and doctrine of the ministers, no marvel of the Citizens, acknowledging no
right in the Duke of Sauoy over them: began to think, that then the Bishop by
the word of God, having none in like manner: the sovereignty of the city must
needs be in themselves. In this contention therefore, (which Bodinus speaks
of) for the principality betwixt the Bishop and the people (how matters fell
out I know not) but such was the present occasion: that (as it seems) the
Bishop with many of his popish crew, gat him thence. Quo eiecto Geneuates
monarchiam in popularem statum commutarunt: Bodinus de repub. pa. 353
who being cast out (says Bodinus), the Geneuans did chaung their monarchy
into a popular state. In respect whereof, the said Bodinus: Bodi. meth. page
243.
does add, the city of Geneua, unto those cities of Heluetia: which for the
avoiding of the tyranny of their governors, have entered into a confederacy,
and shaken them of. Upon the eiection of the said Bishop, the citizens (by such
advise as they liked) ordained a new form of popular government: such a one,
as they themselves thought meetest for the state of that city. A council was
chosen, to consist of two hundred: which council has the highest, and a
standing authority, saving that for the making of laws, for the choosing of
their principal magistrates, for decreing of peace or war (which were iura
magistratis: notes and rightes of sovereignty and regality) these be reserved
to the whole people and multitude of citizens. They ordain also two other
counsels: the one of threescore, and the other of five and twenty: and
likewise also four Syndicks, their chiefest magistrates, to be yearly
elected, with many such orders as they thought convenient, for the better
government of the city. Whilst they of Geneua were busyed in these affairs,
which were necessary for their state: the Bishop with all his shauelinges and
adherentes, was not idle I assure my self. De. repubHelu.
He labored (as it seems by Simlerus) a reconciliation with the Duke of
Sauoy: and (by what means I know not) did grow into such a friendship with him:
as that he obtained of him his assistaunce: meaning to have recovered, by
force and arms, his said right and authority. They of Geneua understanding
of this course: did fortify themselves, Munster Cos. Sleidan lib. 10 Simlerus
de rep. Heluit.
with the strength of Berne. Insomuch as the Duke and the Bishop, assaultinge
the city anno 1536. they were both of them discomfited. Bernatibus illis
auxilium serentibus: they of Berne assisting them of Geneua. And since that
time, the city of Geneua: has been ruled by such a kind of government, as
has briefly been touched.

I would not have any man to think, that I take upon me, to censure the
doings of the civil state, either of Geneua, or of any other place. Only I
have been bold, to set down the premises, as I find them reported by the
authors mentioned: because they contain some such matters, as are necessary to
be understood, in some ouuert sort; in respect of that, which follows,
concerning the first institution of the pretended consistoriall discipline.
Besides (propounding to my self, throughout this whole book, to deal with
nothing, whether it be good or evil, further then as it concerns the
affairs of the Church:) I doubt not, but that I may presume, without any man's
just offense, to speak my opinion, as touching the Divinity, which was
pretended, by the said Ministers of Geneua against their Bishop. For in deed
I do dislike it. If such dealinges were simply to be urged by the word of
God: they might reach further, then would be convenient. Ineuer thought it
agreeable to Divinity, for ministers to cast of their rulers, at their own
pleasures. M. Calvin writes wisely to Cardinal Sadolet: but the course, which
(there he shows), was held by the Ministers, (say what men list,) cannot be
justified. I know one that has written thus of that matter: D. L.
eum principatum, euangelij lux ciuitati restituit, the light of the Gospel,
did restore to the City, that principality which the Bishop had. But all the
learned Divines in Germany, at their conferences with the Emperor (about that
time) were of a contrary opinion, as touching the Bishops in those countries,
who are great Princes. And surely it would seem strange to me: if the Gospel
should wrest the sword, out of any civil Magistrates hand: let him be of what
profession he list.

I do therefore subscribe to Zanchius judgment, for mine own part, where he
says: We deny not, that such Bishops, as be also Princes, besides their
Ecclesiastical authority, have also their politic laws, and secular powers,
as other Princes have: vz. right, in commaundinge in secular matters, right of
the sword, Cap. 25. Aphoris. 21.
right of electing, and confirminge of some kings and Emperors: and right of
ordayning, and administringe of other politic affairs: and that they have
right to compel the people their subjects, to perform the duty of their
subjection unto them. And therefore we confess, that their subjects ought to
obey their civil commandments, (which may be kept without the breach of Gods
law:) and that not only for fear, but also for conscience sake. Thus far
Zanchius, whose judgment in this point, will be esteemed of (I suppose)
hereafter, when all that either is, or can be said by any man to the contrary,
will fall to the ground, or vanish like smoke. If it be said that Zanchius
writes truly, but that my allegation of his words is altogether impertinent;
for that the Bishops of Geneua, had never any settled right in the civil
government of that city: I am not the man that will either justify mine own
discretion, or impugn any thing, which may be brought for the civil
proceedinges of that state, or of any other: so as they carry no false grounds
of Divinity with them, which may prove dangerous unto our own: De auth. mag.
in subd. etc. vindic. cont. Tirannos. Hottom. Francog. etc.
such as have been since published, for the authorizing of subjects in many
cases, to depose their Princes. Christ refused to be a deuider of private men's
inheritances: and then surely it does not become me, to be a decider of any
titles, to countries, cities, or kingdoms. I pray for all: and will not
further meddle with any.

Now it remains, that having made relation unto you, of the premises (as you
have heard): I should also acquaint you, more particularly, with the alteration
that was made at Geneua, in the order and form of the gouernemente of the
Church. Wherein you shall find, some greater variety both of actions and
policy. Beza in vita Calu.
M. Beza speaking of the reformation of religion in that city, says: that
Christ's Gospel was established there, mirabiliter, wonderously. A wonder the
common saying is, does last but nine days: but that wonderful course, which
he speaks of; will not be forgotten, I suppose in have.

As you have heard, that the Bishop of Geneua was dealt withal, for the
principality of that City: so was he used as touching his Bishopric. The
Ministers cried out, that his Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, was as unlawful,
as his civil. Whereupon the Bishopric was dissolved: and that form of
Ecclesiastical government, utterly abolished, whereby that city had been
ruled in Church-causes, from the time, that first it received the profession of
christianity. Together with the overthrow of which Bishopric; all the orders,
constitution, and laws of the Church: (which had been in framing by all the
learned men in christendom, ever since the Apostles times) were at one stroke
quite chopte of, and wholly abrogated: under pretense (forsooth) of the name of
cannon laws, the popes laws, and I wot not what. Wherein the ministers dealt
as wisely in mine opinion: as if some king, succeeding four or five of his
predecessors (whom he hated): should thereupon overthrow, all the laws, that
either they, or any other of his predecessors, had ever made before him.

Master Calvin being charged by some (as it seems) with the rashness, Calu.
de neces. ref. eccl. pa. 64.
which was used at Geneua in this point* does excuse it thus in effect: vz.
that they deal therein, as men do with rotten houses: they ouerthrewe all the
whole form, of ecclesiastical building as once, as it were into a rude heap:
out of the which they might the better make choice, and take of that old
stuff, as much as liked them, to build withal: again afterward. Indeed
there are many builders in these days: of such a kind of humor. Nothing will
content them: but that they build themselves. And therein also they are very
inconstant. Now this must down, now that must up; now this must be
changed, and that must be enlarged* here the workmen mistook me: this is
not in good proportion, away with it: I will have this square changed into a
round: and this round altered into a square. A fitter metaphore could not
well have been found: to have showed the unstayed minds of such manner of
reformers.

But to proceed. The ancient form of ecclesiastical government with all the
Elders thereof, being thus ouerturned; as the citezens in the framing of their
new civil government, had an especial eye to the manner of the civil
government of their neighbor cities and states adjoining: so had both the
magistrates and the ministers at the first also great regard of the
ecclesiastical policy in the same cities: relying principally upon their
form of Church-gouernement, and upon their orders and ceremonies in that
behalf provided. But this Church Model; was also shortly after wholly
misliked. For the ministers perceived, that (as they thought) the civil
magistrates, had too great authorie given unto them in churchcauses: and that
they themselves had a great deal too little. Master Calvin speaking of this
manner of reformation: Calu: to Sad:
calls it, but a correcting of the Church. And Beza yields a reason: Beza
in vit. Calu:
why Farellus and Viretus contented themselves with such a simple
Church-gouernement: vz. in effect (to my understanding): not that they were
ignorant, what insufficiency there was in it: but because in such a hurly
burly, and great change of things, they could have no better; and afterward
when they would feign have bettered themselves, the rest of the ministers,
that should have joined with them therein, were fearful to attempt (so soon)
any new alteration.

The same year, that Geneua was assaulted (vz. 1 5 3 6.) Master Calvin came
thither: and was there admitted non concionator tantum (hoc enim primum
recusarat) sed etiam sacrarum liter arum doctor: Ibid.
not only for their preacher (for he had refused that before) but also for a
doctor of the holy scriptures. In which place, he was scarcely warm: when
like a man of courage (rejecting all fear) he took in hand to frame a new
platform for the government of that Church, (or as Master Bezaes word is)
ecclesiam componere to compound the Church: being of likelihood before in his
opinion, tanquam dissoluta scopa, as a dissolute Chaos and undigested bundell.
And in very short time, he did so far prouaile therein: as that he caused
the citizens (being assembled together) to abjure their former popish
government (as they termed it) by Bishops: Beza in vit. Calu.
and to swear to a certain draught of discipline paucis capitibus
comprehensam: comprehended (as Beza says) under a few heads.

What the form, of this draught was: I find it not any where mentioned. But
whatsoever it was: it appears that both he, Farellus and Viretus, so used
themselves in the administration of it: as that the rest of the ministers, and
the chiefest of the city grew quickly, very weary of it. For through their
rough dealing in diverse points: especially in opposing themselves against the
orders of Berne, Capit. to Farell. epl Call. 6
(before that time received there) and particularly for their obstinate
refusing to administer the Lords supper with unleavened bread; Beza invit. Call.
according to a resolution given to that effect by a Synod at Lausanna of the
ministers of Berne. which resolution, since, Beza calls iniquissimum
decretum: for these and such like causes (I say) they were al three of them
within nine months (after their setting up of their short plat of
discipline) bannished the city. The causes before mentioned of this their
bannishment, were given out thus in general terms: Tyranni esse voluerunt in
liberam ciuitatem: voluerunt nouum pontificatum reuocare. Capit, to Farell epl.
Call. 6.
They would have been tyrants over a free city: they would have recalled a
new papacy.

And here began the Consistorian humor, (which reigns now amongst the
factious sort in England) to show it self: but yet in a more secret sort,
by their private letters one to an other. Their favorers and partakers, (whom
they left behind them at Geneua) presently after their departure, entered
into faction: and refused to receive the communion, with unleavened bread, as
it had been ordered, Beza in vit. Call:
they should do, by the said Synod at Lausanna. The ministers that remained
in the city after them: were greatly disgraced. For in that they continued
their ministry there, without the new Discipline: they were said to hold
otiosam functionem, Capit. to Farell. epl. Call. 6.
an idle function. The Senate of two hundred, that expelled the said three
preachers, Call. epI. 40
was termed by Calvin, tumultuos a perditorum hominum factio, a tumultuoas
faction of rakehells and castaway es. Beza says: Beza: in vit. Call.
that in that council, the greater part overcame the better. But then by the
way, they were not all of them, such manner of men, as Calvin reports The
chiefest magistrates of the city, even the Syndickes, were termed, factionum
et discordiarum duces, the ringleaders of factions and dissentions. Call. epl.
10.
They were resembled to Nabucadnezar: and the exiles to Daniell. And generally
they gave it out against all their back friends: that they went about to
overthrow the Church, and that they had obdurated themselves against the Lord
Jesus Christ. These and such like speeches, you must think were given out then
secretly: but since, they are published in printe, for other ministers
instructions: which may hereafter receive any check about that kind of
discipline.

Hitherto for ought I find, the pretended discipline had no great success. I
must therefore proceed on forward. These three preachers being thus banished,
their friends at Geneua were maruailous earnest, to have them thither again.
Many letters were procured from certain churches and learned men, to the
magistrates in that behalf: as you shall partly perceive by diverse epistles
set out under the title or together with Caluins epistles. Every one likewise
in the City, that held for the discipline, did his best with the people. But
Master Calvin was the man, whom they all of them most desired: for the rest
(being else where placed) they cared not much.

Unto these endeavors may be added: some very wise courses taken by Master
Calvin, in the time that he discontinued from Geneua* Cardinal Sadolet having
written to the Geneuians in dislike of the alteration, both of their state and
of the Romish religion, admonishing them to return to their old byace:
Master Calvin answered him, and justified as he thought meet their
proceedinges therein: to their very good contentment. Also, where some (and
that of his own friends) had greatly labored to discredit, the ministers of
that city, (which were left,) to the grief of the magistrates: and
endeavored to have brought them utterly into contempt, for executing their
ministry without the pretended Discipline, etc. Master Calvin stayed that
course by writing unto them, that he doubted not, but that their ministers
delivered unto them, the chief heads of Christian religion, which were
necessary to salvation: and that also they joined thereunto the right use of
the Sacraments. And then (says he) where those two points are performed,
Calu. epist. 17
illic substantia ministry viget: there is the substance of the ministry:
and a lawful honor and obedience is to be given to that Ministry.

Lastly, the mutiny mentioned, which was about refusal, Beza in Vit. Calu.
to communicate with unleavened bread, he likewise appeased: by persuading the
authors of it: that it was a matter of indifferency, for the which they ought
not to disquiet the peace of the Church. By which occasions, together with the
former suits mentioned, the City (as I judge) having conceived a better
opinion of master Calvin then they had before: and supposing, that if he came
again amongst them, he would use a great deal more mildness, and moderation
in his proceedinges then he had erst done: they were at the last contented,
(after two years bannishment and more,) to recall him unto them: vz: in the
year, 1541.

Whilst his friends were laboring for him, (as you have heard:) Calu. to
Viret Epist. 25.
he himself perceiving, that he should return thither, was still harping to
his friends upon this string: how he might have the City so bound to the
form of Discipline, which he had in his head, as that afterward they might
not when they list, Calu. to Farel. Epist. 50.
start from it. And therefore as soon as he was come thither: he employed his
study that way especially. At the first offering of his pains to the Senate:
he told him that the Church there, could not possibly continue, except there
were same certain form of Church government established. Whereupon the
Senate ordered at his request, that he and five other of the Ministers should
confer together, about such a form as they thought meet: and that having so
done, they should offer the same to the consideration of the said Senate.

Here then you shall see the strength of master Caluins wit. He wisely saw,
that notwithstanding, the Bishops ecclesiastical authority had been utterly
disgraced, and was thereupon rejected, as being (forsooth) Popish and
tyrannical: yet it was not good for the Church, that the ministers should bate
the city one ace, of an ecclesiastical authority, aequiualent at the least,
to that which their Bishops formerly had enjoyed amongst them. Howbeit, he
well perceived withal, that for the bringing of this matter about; there must
be very good policy, and circumspection used: or else that it would be a
thing impossible, to bring a people, (having gotten their liberty) into the
like or a worse servitude, then they were in before. His plot therefore (as I
take it) was, as follows.

He labored to persuade the people and the Magistrates: that as there was a
civil Senate, for the government of the City, and the territories thereof,
in civil causes: so by the word of God, there should be an ecclesiastical
Senate, for the government of the same City and territories (containing above
twenty parishes) in causes ecclesiastical. And to this purpose he wanted not
(I warrant you) very many probable reasons. The persons that should bear
authority in this Senate: (I nothing doubt) but that he could have been very
well contented they should have been all of them ministers: even as the civil
government did then wholly consist of civil persons. But by reason of the
great authority, that the preachers had before entitled the civil
magistrates unto, for the bannishment of their Bishop, and for their dealing in
Church causes; (wherewithal they were in some sort possessed) he very wisely
considered with Farellus and Viretus, that if they took that course, they
should find irresistable opposition. And therefore they devised a way, which
if they could obtain, should be in effect, all one, as if they had been all
Ministers: and yet should carry such an outward show, as though there had
been, no such matter intended.

And their devise was: that their ecclesiastical Senate should consist of
twelve Citizens, to be chosen yearly (not out of the baser sort of the people,
but out of the civil councels of the City, all of them to be states men): and
but of six Ministers, who were to continue for their lives, except there fell
out some occasion, to remove them. With this invention, after many persuasions
used, both publicly in the pulpit, and privately upon every occasion: the
Citizens at length were contented. They saw, there should be twelve of them
continually, (as any matters should fall out,) to six ministers: which was
odds enough. They imagined, that notwithstanding they yealded to such a
platform, for the satisfiyng of their Ministers importunity: (when they saw
that needs they would be some body amongst them:) yet they should in effect
keep the raines still in their own hands, and be able to curb them at their
pleasure. Upon these and what other such like considerations I know not: Calu.
epist. 54.
but after master Caluins very great pains taken about that matter, insomuch
as he was therewith all almost oppressed, Beza in Vit. Calu.
the City at the length was induced, to admit of their platform, with the
laws and prerogatives thereunto appertaining. And this was the first time, for
ought I find, that the pretended consistorian Discipline, ever drew breath.

Master Calvin, having thus (as you have seen) prevailed in this attempt: it
was not long after, but that the wiser sort of the City, perceived their own
oversight. For under pretense of ecclesiastical causes, there was nothing done
in the City, (which this new Senate misliked,) but by one means or other,
they drew it unto their cognizance. They would say that this and that was an
offense to the godly: and then forthwith it was a cause for the Consistory.
Besides the manner of their proceedings in such causes, as were brought before
them, was altogether misliked. They endeavored by all their devises: Call. to
Viret. Epist. 76.
to win the people unto them. If any of the Magistrates fell into their
hands: especially, Calu. Epist. 71
if they had no good opinion of them, they were sure to pay for it. A very
rigorous course was held with certain of the chief of that City, about their
dauncinges (upon a certain time) privately in one of their friends houses: as
you may read in the 26. chapter following. And their especial drift therein,
(besides their affectionate dealing upon a quarrel toward one of them,) was:
(as I take it) to curry favor with the multitude. Oh (says Calvin) (writing
how like men both he and his associates had proceeded in this dancing matter)
exemplum valde proderit etc. Ibidem.
the example will do much good. For now it is already a common saying amongst
the people, nullam esse spem impunitatis, cum primarijs non parcatur, that
there is no hope of impunitie, seeing the chief men of the City are not
spared.

But you will say, how came it to pass, that the twelve Elders all of them
statesmen, would suffer such things to be done in that Senate, as should
breed such coffeehouse amongst the Citizens? You may remember that I told
you how master Calvin in this matter showed his great wit, and ouerreached
the Citizens notably. He was not ignorant, how easy a matter it would prove,
for him and his fellow ministers, to overrule twelve simple men, all of them
unlearned, as being either apronmen, artizans, or marchantes. But his chiefest
reach was: that he knew these twelve graund governors, would certainly
remember, that their office was but annual: and that if they opposed
themselves against their ministers, being their superiors in office, (and
whose authority was still to continue) they might afterward peradventure be
caused to repent it. And in deed according to his good foresight, so it came
to pass; which increased the citizens general discontentement and dislike of
that manner of Churchgouernement.

Besides, an other thing there was, that especially grieved them: and
disclosed their want of providence. They saw their citizens of that Senate,
not only ouer-ruled by the said six ministers, but likewise all the ministers
so ouertopped by Master Calvin, as that in effect he was Domine fac totum: and
took upon him to do all in all. Whereupon there were some that began to
fear; least (as I suppose) Master Calvin sought (by his cunning) to bring
them again, to the government of one: which they altogether detested. Thus
he himself reports in effect of this matter: vz. that there was a
supplication found, which was meant to have been exhibited to the people, at
their most general assembly, wherein these two propositions were contained:
Nihil esse legibus vindicandum, Call* to Viret. cp. 77.
nisi quod rempub. laederet: that nothing was to be punished by law, but that
which did hurt the common wealth. And the other: periculum esse, ne dum haec
vrbs vnius hominis melancholici cerebro obtemperat, excitata seditione, perdat
mill ciues: that there was danger, least, whilst the city, obeyed the
brain of one melancholy man, upon some rebellion raised, it might overthrow
a thousand citizens.

But it will be said, that Master Calvin reports this as a slander. I
confess he does so. And yet for my part, this I believe was true: that in
effect he ruled there in that Senate as peremptorily, as ever the Bishop of
that city did before him, by virtue of his ecclesiastical authority. And I
am led to judge so, by his own words. For in the time of his banishment, when
he was urged by sundry ministers, to admit of equal conditions, and to return
to Geneua, for the good of that Church: he answered them partly thus. Ad
tantam multitudinem regendam, qui sufficerem? Call: to Farell. ep. 23.
how should I be able to rule such a multitude? Again: desuetudine oblitus sum
artis regendi multitudinem: through want of practice, I have forgotten the art
of ruling a multitude: And to Viretus, speaking of his going to Geneua: Cerno
quam arduum sit munus ecclesiasticum regere: Call. to Viret: ep. 25.
I perceive how hard a matter it is, to mauage an ecclesiastical function.
Again I am nescio quid factum sit, vt animo incipiam esse inclinatiore, ad
capessenda eius gubernacula: I know not how it now comes to pass, that I am
of a more inclininge mind to take the government of that Church upon me. What
do all these speeches mean (I pray you,) but that notwithstanding his
pretense of assistantes: yet he meant so to lay his plot, as that they should
all be constrained, all the sort of them, to dance after his pipe?

But howsoever these things may be interpreted, this is most apparent: that,
(as I said) such were the Consistorian proceedinges, as that both he and his
Consistory, did grow into great hatred and malice. Insomuch as writing to his
friends, Call. ep. 79.
he complayneth in this manner. We have too many, of a hard and untamed neck,
who upon every occasion do endeavor, to shake off the yoke: that by their
tumultes, they might abolish the lawful order of the Church. Call. to Viret.
ep. 73.
There are in that number, both old men, and young men. The youth especially,
is here most desperate. And to Viretus: Nisi dominus etc. except the Lord, do
rebuke the sea and the winds; I see there are great storms toward us: which
they move, who ought rather to appease them. Call. to Viret. ep. 3.
I dare not call you hither, for many causes. The chiefest is: for that I am
afraid, how at the length we must give place unto them, who will never end,
until they have overthrown all. Likewise to the same Viretus. Many, are such
children, that they are affrayde, at the ridiculous shaking of a head etc. Si
desistam, Call. to Viret. ep. 73.
totum consistorium ruat necesse est: if I desist, there is no remedy, but
down falls the consistory. Great tumults, were up amongst them in the
city: and therefore he altered his former mind touching his not calling of
Viretus: and requesteth him most earnestly: (as being more gracious then
himself) to come and help to appease them. You cannot possibly do a thing
(says he) that shall be more grateful unto me: then if you shall make a good
end of these quarrels: me ad Garamantas relegato, though I be bannished into
the farthest parts of the world. Call. to Viret. ep. 82.
And in another epistle: Eo prorupit improbitas, vt retineri qualemcunque
ecclesiae statum diutius posse (meo praesertim ministerio) vix sperem. Impiety
has gotten such a head, that I can scarsely think, there can any
tolerable state of the Church continue here, especially, by my ministry.

These dissentions proceeding thus on for a time: at the last they came to this
issue: Call. ep. 165.
vt mayor Senatus receptum et bactemus seruatum ecclesiae ordinem repent
conuelleret. Nos restitimus: that the greater Senate did suddenly overthrow
the order of the Church: which had been received and kept. But we withstood
them. An argument of very good subjection. Much trouble would surely have come
of it, but that upon a sermon* preached by Master Calvin, and after upon a
motion made by him, and the rest of the ministers to the Senate, order was
taken, that for the quieting of all parts, the said sentence of the greater
Senate, should be suspended, until the state of Geneua had taken the advice,
of four Heluetian cities, Beza de vit. Calvin:
their neighbors and friends; touching the points in question: vz. about the
authority of their Consistory, to suspend men from the communnion, as they
saw cause: which is the very scepter of that pretended Syon.

When this course was taken: mark I pray you Master Caluins policy. Calu. to
the minist* of Tig. ep. 165.
He knew (as in effect he says) that none of the magistrates of any of those
four cities, would write any answer, to the citizens letters of Geneua,
but by the advice of their ministers. Whereupon, whilst the Syndickes with
their counsels were conferring about their letters to be sent to the foresaid
cities, how, and what, they should write; yea peradventure, who should endite
them: Master Calvin presently, speedeth a messenger one Budaeus, with his
private letter unto his private friends, as to Master Bullinger, etc. and
with other letters also to the rest of the said Ministers jointly: of purpose
to prepare and pre-occupate their minds beforehand, against their magistrates
should write thither. Now I am come to the very panting or short breathing of
the Consistoriall pretended Discipline, whether it should live or die at
Geneua. The danger it lay in, was exceeding great: but master Calvin applied
all his skill and medicines, for the recovery of it. Few Physicians will take
such pains for their patientes.

Calu. to Bull. epist. 164.
In his said letters, he omitteth no point of his oratorie faculty. Calu. to
the minist. of Zurick epist. 165
The adversaries of his discipline he painteth out in their colors: as that
their Senate was possessed with a lamen table blindness: that they had dealt
contumeliously with poor strangers: that they had used Farellus very hardly:
that diverse of them were such as shamed not to defend Seruetus the heretic:
and that they were Satan's Ministers that stirred up these strifes. He
indeuoureth to move all commiseration toward himself and his associates, in
respect of their pains and dangers, undertaken in the behalf of that Church:
as that for seven years together, they had been impugned, by all those that
sought to live riotously, from under the yoke: that for the space of four
years, nothing had been pretermitted by the wicked, whereby they might by
little and little overthrow the state of that Church: and that for the last
two years, their condition was no better, then if they had lived amongst the
professed enemies of the Gospel.

He ascribes very much unto the ministers: to whom he writ: which was an
especial means to procure their good favors. As (when he says) now the
matter is come to this point, that all our ecclesiastical orders shall be
quashed, nisi istinc afferatur remedium: Ibid.
except there come a remedy from you. Again: you must so deal, as if the
state of our Church were in your hands. Again, nunc extremus actus agitur:
now the last act is upon the stage: and the enemies of the Gospel, are
beginning already, to triumph against Christ his doctrine, his ministers, and
all his members. Again: so persuade your selves: that if Satan be not now
bridled by you: habenas ei laxatum iri: he will get the liberty of his bit
hereafter at pleasure. And again, I beseech you brethren, by the name of
Christ: to think that it is no common matter, that is committed unto you: but
that the consultation to be had, is of the state or very being of our Church.
He touched furthermore, all other points: which he was sure would be
especially regarded by them, being themselves ministers: in that (he says)
that if their adversaries get the victory, the whole authority of the
ministry, is not only gone in Geneua: but that it will be subject, to every
base rakebels reproaches. Which if it should happen, he tells them, that he
was resolved to depart thence.

Unto all these artificial points, thus insisted upon by him: he adds
another, of no less importance, to draw the said ministers minds unto the
bent of his bow. For notwithstanding he ascribes so much unto them, as
before has been showed: yet he qualifieth all, in such sort, as that they
might suspect, that except they did concur with his desire, he would hardly
for his part, yeald to any thing that might cross him.

He writes unto them, very moderately, of his co^sistoriall platform. He
says, he is not ignorant how diverse learned men, Ibidem.
do not think that form of Discipline, that he writes for, to be necessary:
but yet he adds, what his own opinion is of it, and that he trusts no man
of judgment will improoue the use of it, where it is. He also goes further,
and protests, that whilst he sustaineth the person, that then he did,
(meaning belike whilst he should be the chief pastor at Geneua) he would
strive to the death, for that form of Discipline. But yet toward the end, he
tempereth all again in some sort. For else it had been a ridiculous matter,
to have referred their doubts to those Cities; and withal to have signified
unto them, that thus and thus we are resolved: and if you shall judge
otherwise, we care not for your judgments: for we will surely stick to our
own. He therefore thus qualifieth this point, saying, nec morositate nostra
fiet, vt loco potius cedamus, quam sententia: we will not be so wilful, as
that we mind rather to leave our places, then our opinions. Meaning (as I
take it) that seeing they had put their cause into their hands: they would be
content to stand to their directions.

You do look I am sure to know, to what purpose master Calvin used all this
Rhetoric: and what the matter was which he desired at their hands. He
himself shall tell you, as he told master Bullinger. Breuis summa est, etc.
The sum thereof briefly is this: that your honorable Senate may give this
answer: vz: that the form of our Discipline, which heretofore we have
followed, is consentanea verbo dei: agreeable to the word of God: deinde
nouitatem improbet: and then let them reprove the newsanglenesse of our
Citizens. Indeed if he can get that answer, it is to the matter: and (of
likelihood) will serve his turn. But what do the magistrates of Geneua all
this while, you will say* Surely: I told you before. As soon as they could:
they writ, and sent their letters, to the said four Cities. Of those that came
to Zuricke, master Bullinger writes: that they were but short: and so I
think we may judge of the rest. The effect of which letters was: Bullinger to
Call. epist. 166
vz: that they of those Cities would resolve them. 1. How excommunication was
to be used by the word of God. 2. Whether it might not be used by some other
means, then by a consistory. 3. What the practice of their Churches was in
that point. Upon the receite of these letters, (even as master Calvin foresaw
it would come to pass) there were appointed in Zuricke four: the Consul and
three Senators, to consult with three of their learned Ministers, what answer
was meet to be given, to the said three questions.

If the magistrates of Geneua, had met with as good an orator, as M. Calvin
was: that would have laid open the qualities and proceedings of the
Consistorian faction; how they intermedled in all the common affairs of the
city: how they used to keep men from the Communion, without yielding any
other reason why they do so, but because soome of the godly brethren
(forsooth) were offended with them: how, if a man have committed any offense,
for the which he is punished, and professes his hearty repentance for the
same, yet they will keep him from the Communion, until it please them to say,
that he is penitent enough, which they do, as they affect the party. If in
their letters they had infourmed, how upon any light displeasure, or rash
information, their wives, their children, and servants: were called into the
Disciplinarian Consistory, (a place for criminal persons) so as thereby, they
were infamed: how they affected popularity, wholly, which might endaunger the
Magistrates of the City, upon any displeasure conceived against them: how
they of the city had been compassed, in the framinge of the platform of the
Consistory: how although there was a pretense of a Senate, yet one man did all,
and the rest, were but attendants of his pleasure: how by experience, they
found, that their Bishop, did never tyrannise more over them, by his spiritual
jurisdiction, then now some one man did: how the authority which had been taught
to belong unto them (being civil Magistrates,) was wholly taken from them
again, and nothing left unto them, but to be the executioners of their
Consistoriall men's pleasures: If they had foresene how likely it was, that M.
Calvin, would seek to discredit them all, to his uttermost, and had therefore
signified unto the Magistrates of these four cities, that there were as
honest and religious men in the City of Geneua, that misliked that form of
Church-gouernment, as there were that spoke for it: that if in their letters
they depraved any, their evil words ought not to prejudice the cause,
committed unto them: for that it is their custom, to slander all those, that
do impugn them: that they for their parts, the magistrates of that City,
rested all of them, as fully resolved to continue the preaching of the Gospel
amongst the^, as ever they were glad at the first to procure and admit it: If
they had given some round intimation, that they the citizens were resolved, to
have their Church reformed according to some of the platformes of the Heluetian
Churches, and that they would no longer endure to be so ouer-looked and
hampered, in their own free City, by such a pragmaticall and intermedlinge
Discipline: If (I say) their letters had been penned after this or some such
like sort, as I suppose there was good cause: (the proceedings of that
Consistory being such at that time as since they have been in other places) I
doubt not, but that the ministers of those cities, would have advised their
magistrates: to have given an other kind of answer then they did. For they
the said ministers believing Master Caluins information, that all was true
which he had reported unto them: and considering, what a small matter it was,
which he and the rest of his associates required at their hands, and that the
satisfying of them therein, might break the backs of such a wicked conspiracy,
as was pretended to have been made even against Christ himself and his
Church: and not only preuente that mischief for that time, but procure the
establishinge of the Gospel there, for time to come hereafter; they dealt no
otherwise for the said answer, then I am persuaded all the Bishops that now
are in England, (if then they had lived) would have done in the like case.

And that was in effect as Master Calvin wished: saving, that whereas he
would have had them to have said, Bull. to Calu. epist. 166.
that the form of the Geneua discipline was consentanea verbo dei, agreeable to
the word of God, they refused to write in that sort: but were content to say
that it did accedere ad verbi dei praescriptum: that is, that it drew toward
the prescript of gods word, or looked that way. But you shall hear Master
Bullinger himself report the answer of their Senate: which was: that they
were grieved, their Church was so troubled, as that one quarrel and contention
did begette another: that they had lately heard of the consistoriall laws of
that Church (for Calvin had sent such of them as he thought good, unto the
said ministers by Budaeus his messenger) and did acknowledge them to be godly,
and to drae toward the prescript of gods word: and therefore that the
changing of them by any innovation, was not to be admitted in their opinions:
that it was better, they should be wholly kept, especially in this age when men
wax worse and worse: that although (say they) our discipline does not agree
with that of Geneua in all points: yet the same being framed according to the
circumstaunces of times, places, and persons, does not import any overthrow of
yours: and that according to their desire of Geneua, they had sent unto them,
the form of their discipline, not minding (as they said) to prescribe any jot
of it, to them: for that they deemed their own at Geneua, to be more meet for
them there.

This being the sum of the answer agreed upon by the said Senate at
Zuricke; Master Bullinger presently dispatcheth the same in a private letter
to Calvin: Bull. to Calu. epist. 166.
and not that only, but he also writ his letters at the same time, to the
ministers of Schafhusen and Basil (two of those cities belike, to the which
the deciding of the said questions was also referred) signifying what answer
the magistrates of Zuricke had made: that they likewise there, might concur
with them in their aunsweres for the peace and edification of the Church of
Geneua, although (says he) you have not the like form of discipline in your
Churches.

After that M. Bullinger had thus dispatched his private letters: the Senate
then, soon after, sent their said answer to Geneua. Which being received,
perused, and considered of: there was great muttering in the city. The
magistrates thereby did find themselves as it were in a laberinth. The
strength of their state, did depend especially (as I judge) upon the league and
friendship, which they had with the said four cities. So as they might not
do any thing: that should dislike them. And on the other side, remembering
the great abuses of their Consistorialls, how they had formerly dealt with
them, and tyrannized over them (as they supposed:) it greatly troubled them, to
confirm unto them, any such authority. It seems therefore, that they
endeavored to protract the time, as much as they could. And yet because they
thought it meet, that some thing should be done upon the receipt of the said
answer: they caused a kind of general reconciliation, by giving their right
hands, Calu. to Bull. epist. 171.
and an oathe was taken, that none of them, for the time to come, would support
any evil causes.

Master Calvin being discontent with this plausible color of peace, as
perceiving that thereby the restoring of the Discipline, vnicus pacis custos:
the only preserver of peace (as he terms it) was neglected, and that their
Church was still, like Noah's Arc in the flood: he grew (after a short time)
to be resolute, and provoked the magistrates, to give their answer; whether
they would follow the advice of the said former Cities, or they would not.
Whereupon (as it seems) the matter was put to voices.

And now see the vpshoote. In illa promiscua collunie suffragijs fuimus
superiores, in that confused ofscouring of the whole multitude, Calu.' to Bull.
epist. 207.
(says master Calvin) we had the most voices. It is very worthy the
observation, and to be kept likewise in perpetual memory: in what honorable
presence (according to master Caluins own estimation) by how reverend a
company of learned fathers, and famous persons, and with what singular
gravity, great wisdom, and mature deliberation, this solemn and glorious
form of the pretended holy Discipline, was revived again and entertained at
Geneua. In illa promiscua colluuie suffragijs fuimus superiores. In that
disordered dunghill of riffraffe, tagge and ragge, our presbyteriall platform,
having most of their voices, carried away the bucklers. No doubt a worthy
victory: For if an assembly be called colluuies (as I take it is) a maiori
part, of the greater part: what godly man living would not then have flung up
his cappe and rejoiced, to have seen the noble Consistorye triumphing that
day, with the applause and approbation of so honorable a company. Men may
talk hereafter of the council of Nice with shame enough: if they shall
compare it with this royal assembly. In good earnest, seeing the multitude of
all the Citizens of Geneua, was content to gratify master Calvin so much: it
might have become him well enough, to have recompensed their friendships with
some better terms. But let that go: if the Citizens themselves do take it
well at his hands to be so used by him: it shall not any way trouble me any
further.

When master Calvin had well considered, how hardly he had obtained his
conquest, and how it was not very unlike, but that some of those, who had
before opposed them selves, would still be practicing to overthrow his work
again, if possibly they could: he advised (as it should seem) with his best
and surest friends, what course was meetest to be thought of, and taken for
the preventing of so notable a mischief. And their plot was: how they might
strengthen their said Colluuies or greater part, for the better continuance of
it. The present opportunity served their purpose. Whereupon like wise men, they
so hammered their matters whilst the Iron was hot: that they procured fifty
of master Caluins own nation, all of them mere Frenchmen to be admitted
Citizens at one time in Geneua. Bod. de repu. lib. 2 Calu. 6.
Which was a point of very great importance. For (as I take it) the people
having reserved to them selves (as Bodiue says) ius i^be^^dae legis,
authority to make laws: the Eldership being set up by them, could not be
overthrown afterward without them. And then to have such an increase of
assured friends, that would stick as fast to master Calvin, as the skin did
to his forehead: was surely a great matter in so little a town. And as this
policy was put in practice for the Citizens: so I conjecture it was also from
time to time, as touching the ministers.

None but Frenchmen might rule there in that Consistory: if master Calvin
could help it. When the Magistrates upon a time would needs have one
Trollietus a Geneuian borne, to be one of their ministers: hear (I pray you)
how master Calvin writes thereof, to his friend Viretus. Call. to Viret.
epist. 586.
Trollietus quidam, quod natione sit Geneuensis etc. One Trollietus, because he
is a Geneuian borne, is obtruded unto us: in whom there do appear many
signs, which none of us like of. And I see not any thing in him worthy a
Minister: nisi quod Simiae amant suos catulos: but that apes love their
whelps. So as I guess, that for master Caluins time: no Apes were fit for his
turn, but his own. Though master Calvin writ in this sort, (merrily
peradventure) to his familiar friend: yet master Beza was not bound to have
published such a disgrace in print against those, that have deserved better of
him. But this partiality in the choice of their ministers; was not a matter
that much offended any; for ought I find. Marry the other devise, of making
fifty Frenchmen, Citizens at a clappe: did wonderfully trouble many. It caused
a present mutiny in the City and a great uproar: the sparks whereof were
never quenched, as long as master Calvin lived.

And thus you have the birth, and confirmation, of the Consistoriall discipline
with a devise for the continuance of it: collected (for the most part) out of
such Epistles as Beza has thought meet, to publish, for master Caluins
commendation. If I should have set them both down; as some others have done:
(who are no Papists) you should have heard another manner of history. But I
like not to take things, at the worst hand. The truth was it I sought for.
And I would not have done that neither in this point: but because certain
persons of the consistoriall humor, do daily upon every occasion, still dash
us in the teeth, with the orders of Geneua: the discipline at Geneua: and the
Consistory in Geneua: as though that form of discipline, had come lately from
heaven: with an embassage from God, that all the Churches in the world must
frame and conform themselves, to the fashion of Geneua. Which gave me just
occasion (in mine opinion) to search (as you have heard) into the secrets of
that manner of Discipline: to know indeed, from whence it came, whether it
would, who devised it: when, and how, it was planted at Geneua: the first place
that hatched and received it.

CHAP. III. By whose instigation, and how, the pretended Discipline of Geneua
has enlarged her jurisdiction.
IT was not long, after that M. Calvin had obtained his desire, (as you have
heard in the former Chapter,) for the planting of the platform of his
pretended Discipline in Geneua: when for the better backing of himself he
procured master Beza, his especial friend, (a man whom he knew to be of a
very great courage, wise, learned, and one wholly addicted to applaude to all
manner of his procedinges) to be likewise placed with him there. And then being
both together: two such excellent men amongst a company of Artizans and
Marchaunts: what might they not compass and bring to effect? From the time
that master Calvin came first to Geneua, 1536. and had gotten the allowance of
his first draught of Discipline, vz. 1537. he grew daily more and more into
liking with it: especially after the fuller enlargement thereof 1541. when he
was restored again to his place at Geneua. But most of all, when about the
year 1554. he had triumphed as it were the third time, by the greater part
of the voices of the ignorant multitude, and had also gotten master Beza his
applauder into his company: then we may not marvel, if that his platform so
travailed for, seemed glorious unto him.

In those days when master Calvin did first show himself in his writings
against the Papists: he was the only man of especial account of all the
French nation. Insomuch as all the rest of his country men, that began more
freely to profess the Gospel: did principally in a manner depend upon him:
especially after he had possession of his great authority in the Presbytery at
Geneua. For then by reason of the quiet estate of that City: the free access
and entertainment of such Frenchmen as fled thither for religion: the want
of sufficient men in other places of their own country, to give advise and
Council, what was to be done in such distresses of the Church, as then were
usual, and by reason of the fame, ability, learning and policy, both of
himself and of his assistant Master Beza: and likewise of their willingness
or rather desire to intertaine all occasions of busying themselves: the City
of Geneua became in short time (for their sakes) to be of great estimation in
France. He that shall read master Caluins and master Bezaes two books of
Epistles, and likewise the Commentaries of France, with diverse other
discourses, about those affairs, and should withal give any credit either to
Heshusius, Baldwinus, Carpentarius or others, me^ learned all of them, and some
of them known Protestants: would certainly marvel to understand into what
actions and dealinges they thrust themselves: of war, of peace, of subjection
how far it extended: of reformation without staying for the Magistrates: of
leagues: of impositions, and what not. They writ their Letters, to this state
and that state: to this Prince and that Duke: to this king and that Emperor:
what their desire was, should be done in such, and such a matter? Not like the
persons either of Newington or Hitchin, (that I may use Cartwrights examples of
such Episcopal Seas, as he allows of) but rather like two Patriarchs at the
lest. Generally for Churchmatters: they had engrossed the whole managing of
them into their hands. And then you may easily guess, what favor the
pretended presbyteriall discipline was like to find with them: it being the
only pretense for all that their authority, or whatsoever else they took
upon them to deal in.

And mark how the opportunity served them. The number of zealous professors
in France daily increased: who exempted themselves from the tyrannous
commandementes of their Romish Bishops. They had then no order or certain form
of Church government: how to proceed and behave themselves in their religious
assemblies. And to have framed it to any foreign platformes: would have
stirred up coals amongst them. Nay it was not possible to have been
compassed, Master Calvin and Master Beza sitting at their stern. So that it
came no sooner in question, what manner of ecclesiastical regiment was meetest
for those Churches: but the form of discipline used at Geneua, was presently
agreed upon. From which time you shall find that the reformation of religion
in France, did wholly proceed after the rules of that kind of discipline. It
was not sufficient to have the exercise of religion: but the Churches must
vindicari in plenam libertatem, be restored to her full liberty, Pet. Carpent.
ad Franc. portam.
Synodes were held, laws were made, and decrees were put in execution. What
orders then in request: Comment. of France.
what ceremonies: what manner of service: what kind of subjection: what way to
reform religion: but after the fashion of Geneua? Which course of proceedinges
together with the rules thereof, diverse well affected in religion did greatly
mislike. Master Ramus had written a book against it, P. Carpent. ibid.
(if Carpentarius say truly, and I take him to be an authentical author,
because the late petitioner alleges him for the government of his Elders,)
tearming the fountain thereof, or the platform of such a discipline Thalmud
Sabaudicum, the Sauoyan Thalmud, and greatly reproouing the obtruding of it,
upon the Churches of France.

Much more might here be added, and that out of their own authentike writers
of this disciplinarian canker: how and by what means it spread it self in
France, and in some other Countries. But I will pass that over, and come to
acquaint you, how the same infection has been transported from those coasts
to this side of the seas, amongst us. If Master Calvin, but especially master
Beza, could have been content to have contained themselves, within the limits
either of Geneua or France, and to have intermedled and reigned there only:
and to have urged their platform and devise no further: they might the better
(for us in England) have been borne withal. But now seeing they have not so
done: who can be offended that I should make mention of it? to the end, that if
they dealt amiss therein, their examples and proceedinges might have the
estimation, which indeed they deserve.

I omit how in K. Edwards time, certain malcontents grew up in the Church of
England; because sundry matters might not be ordered as they were at Geneua:
master Calvin having written sundry letters into England to some such like
effect. In Queen Mary's time, as soon as certain of our Countrymen were come
to Franckforde: they were assaulted with the orders of Geneua. Quarrels arising
about the communion book and form of the service of England in King Edwardes
time: there were particulars collected out of it, by Knox, Whittingham, and
such as had already tasted of that intoxication, and sent to Geneua to be
censured by M. Calvin. Who upon the receipt of them: returned his answer,
concerning the said Book (compiled and confirmed before by such men, and such
an authorititie as he ought to have reverenced): In Anglicana Liturgia, Epist.
to Knox and Whitting ham 200.
qualem describitis, multas video fuisse tolerabiles ineptias: I see that in
the English form of service, as you describe it, there were many tolerable
foolleries. When Knox and Whittingham had gotten this letter, they published it
to the Congregation. Which being read, it so wrought in the hearts of many
(says the discourser of the troubles at Franckford) that they were not before
so stout to maintain all the parts of the Book of England, Discourset page
36.
as afterward they were bent against it. If you have Caluins Book of
Epistles, I pray you read it. Although Beza thought it meet to be published
in print: yet shall you find it, to contain no one point of substance in it
able to persuade a child. So as thereby you may judge of their giddiness: who
were moved so greatly with it.

When some of the said parties: Discourse. pa^
Whittingham and diverse others, of a more violent humor, came first to
Franckford, they fell also presently into a very especial liking of the Geneua
discipline, as finding it to contain such rules and practices, as did greatly
concur with their own disposions. In England popery was restored, and much
cruelty used, whereby they were constrained for the saving of their lives, to
leave their Country, their livings, and their friends. In which case a man
may easily guess, how acceptable these points were unto some kind of humors:
vz. that if Bishops and Princes refused to admit of the Gospel: they might be
used by their subjects, as the Bishop of Geneua was used, that is ( deposed,)
and that every particular minister with his assistants according to the
platform of that discipline, was himself a Bishop, and had as great
authority within his own parish, as any Bishop in the world might lawfully
challenge: even to the excommunicating of the best, as well the Prince as the
Pesaunt. And indeed accordingly, these positions (as afterward it will
appear,) were so pleasing to Whittingham and his consortes, as it had been a
very mean form of discipline, (I suppose) that having such principles annexed
unto it, would at that time have been refused by them. Howbeit many there were,
and that of the learnedest of those, that then departed the Realm, as Doct.
Cox, Doct. Horn, M. Jewel, with sundry others: who perceauing the tricks of
that discipline, Discourse page 47.
did utterly dislike it. So as when they came afterward to Franckford, they
wholly insisted upon the platform of England: and in short time obtaining of
the Magistrates the use thereof, they did chose either D. Cox or D. Horn, (as
I guess) or some such other as had been of especial account in K. Edwards
time, to be (as it were) their Superintendent.

For the bringing of which matter to pass, one master Clanbourge a chief
magistrate in that City, having showed them some especial favor: complaint
was made thereof (as it seems) to M. Calvin. Whereupon the said M. Clanbourg
did write to him, (as it should appear,) that he was induced to yeald to such
a choice, the rather because the said Superintendent had some such like
superior place in England, before he came thither. Unto the which point,
master Calvin, (that he might thrust his oar into every man's boat,) to
disgrace the said platform of England, as much as lay in him, and to encourage
the factious company at Franckforde, (that were besotted with his pretended
discipline,) did return this answer: (If Beza has set out his letter
truly): Calu. Epist. 229.
I would one point had been omitted, which was suggested unto you, I doubt not
by that one party. (I think he means the said superintendent.) For
otherwise it would never have come into your cogitation, (as though he had
still kept his whole estate in England,) to have established his former
ministry there with you, in a perpetual possession of the authority thereof.
Peradventure there is nothing that from the beginning, (his meaning is,
since the Englishemen came thither,) has stired up more contention, or at the
least displeasure, and so has kindled strife, then this emulation: in that
the greater part did think themselves to be thrust from their equal degree,
and to be contumeliously excluded from the common society: if the Church
which had received intertainment with you, (meaning the company, that had
received his form of discipline, before the said learned men came to
Franckford,) should receive their laws from the other part or side.

Within some short time after this, that, the said order of the English Church
was established, (as you have hard) at Franckford: diverse of those men, who
had been earnest for the Geneuian discipline, divided themselves from that
Church, (as Whittingham, Gilby, Goodman, and others,) and went to Geneua.
Where, to the great discredit of the estate of the Church of England in King
Edwardes time: to the great grief of such godly men, and afterward worthy
Martirs, as remained here in Queen Mary's time in England: and to the great
discouragement of sundry weak professors then also in England: they rejected
the whole form of our English reformation: the book of common prayer: our
service: the order of our sacraments, and of all things else in effect there
prescribed: and conformed themselves altogether to the fashions of the Church
at Geneua. Where they had not been long, when they had sucked and disgested
the whole doctrine before mentioned, to be as the appendants necessarily
annexed to that form of new discipline: and which was afterward enlarged by
Beza, (as I take it,) Hotoman, and others of the disciplinarian humor, in their
books entitled: De iure magistratuum etc. Vindicia contra tirannos:
Franco-gallia. etc. The general sum of which their allobrogicall food, so
much as concerns this point of the disciplinarian reformation: (that I may
omit their desperate points of deposinge of Princes, and of putting them to
death in diverse cases of resistance against reformation) was this: that if the
sovereign magistrates refused to admit it: the ministers, the inferior
magistrates, the people etc. might set it on foot themselves. Of these and
such like arguments, diverse books were allowed of, by the ministers of
Geneua: to be then printed there in English, and to be published for England
and Scotland, as containing such doctrine in them, whereof the world might take
notice, that as they had practiced some part of it themselves, so they would
be ready upon all occasions to justify it.

I have heard many, greatly commend the intertainement, that was given in
Queen Mary's time to Englishmen, at Geneua. And surely the citizens there, are
(in mine opinion) to be greatly commended and assisted for it, as occasions
shall require. But yet (to speak what I think) it had been better for this
Island, that neither Englishman nor Scottishman had ever been harbored or
acquainted there, History of the Church of Scotland page: 145. 213. 214. 216.
218. 303. 307. 308. 330. 343. 372. 373. 500. 502. 503. 504. 507.
in respect of such disciplinarian new lessons, and consistoriall practices, as
they have brought with them from thence. If ever you meet with the history of
the Church of Scotland, penned by master Knox, and printed by Vautrouillier:
read the pages quoted here in the margent: likewise peruse the English
Chronicles of Scotland (as they stand corrected by some men of good experience
and credit, appointed for that purpose,) in the places also noted: but
especially procure for your perfect instruction, Engl histo. of Scot pa. 433.
446. 448.
the Acts of the Parliament held in Scotland 1584. as they are printed and are
abroad in many men's hands: and then tell me whether you be not of my mind, for
the fruict of master Knox his being at Geneua.

I could refer you to some other Books: but those shall suffice. For there
Histo. of the Chu. of Scotl. page 211. 213. 214. 216.
you shall find, that the whole course, which has been held in that country,
concerning the points I speak of; was complotted at Geneua, amongst the
ministers there, and Calvin is named. There Act of Parliament 1584
you shall find the form of the Consistoriall pretended Discipline, being
set up without public consent, overthrown by Act of Parliament, and
afterward restored again, you may see Eng. chron. of Scotl. page 446. 448.
how.

As soon as this said pretended discipline began to get a head in that
Country: then again (as amongst certain of the French Ministers,) no form
of Service, or of the administration of the Sacraments, no orders, nor any
thing else, but all must be done, as it was at Geneua. As any doubts did arise
amongst them, concerning any Churchcauses, though they were but very simple,
and such as a student of mean capacity and judgment, might very easily have
satisfied: yet no man but master Calvin for his time, Calu. Epist. 283. 285.
and afterward master Beza, (as though they had been such Peter's for the
Protestants, as the Bishop of Rome pretends himself to be for all Papists)
was accounted of sufficiency, or able to dissolve them: when they had
overthrown the ancient state of their Bishops, and set up the Geneua minion
by such means, as you have heard: and had so far prevailed therein, as that
now they began to please themselves exceedingly. See how Beza, being informed
thereof, does allow of their dealings, and incourageth them to go forewarde,
in such their obedient and right Consistorian courses. He terms their
reformation after the Geneua mould, Beza to Knox 1572. Epi. 79
(if I understand him,) Caelum in terris situm: a Heaven placed in the earth:
or at the least he compares the force, which had been used about that matter,
to the power of God. He says: that no nation in so few years, had abidden
more assaults of Satan, to have hindered the said pretended Discipline: and
thanketh God, that Knox is their Pilotte to guide that ship. He exhorts the
said Pilot, and his fellow mariners, that seeing they had both pure Religion,
and pure Discipline now amongst them, they should keep them both together,
and never suffer, (as though they had been all of them Princes,) the authority
of Bishops, in any wise to be restored again.

Afterward, there being some new attempt made, (as it seems) in the behalf
of the Bishops: and (as I perceive) defeated by the pretended reformers, upon
information thereof given by one Lawson a minister to Beza: Beza to Lawson 1580.
he returns him an answer beginning in this sort, (though he were then
sick,) Beastime: you have made me an happy man. The same year also he writ
the discourse of his three kind of Bishops: vz. of God, of men, and of the
Devil: and sent it unto a man of great state in that country. It has since
been translated into English by Field (as I take it) for our instruction in
England. The judgment of a most reverend man.
Wherein Beza deals, (I will not say) like what kind of Bishop: but rather
like some new start-vp Oracle: and dissolueth questions, Pellmell: vz. that all
Bishops, (other then such as have an equality amongst them, and such as he
allows and requires, that every minister should be) must of necessity be
packing: that the chief Elders should be admitted to be present in their
Parliaments, (as the Bishops were,) to deal in Church-causes, and to answer
in place of God, if any other matters fell out, wherein the Lords would be
resolved: that Papists may not to be excommunicated, what sin soever they
commit: and that it is Sacrilege, for any lay person, and such a sin as
God will revenge, to stain his hands with the goods of the Church. He
further prescribes, the whole course of the church government, for that
kingdom to be fashioned after the platform of Geneua: taking much more upon
him therein, then Eleutherius, the Bishop of Rome would do, having a far
better occasion offered him by the king of Britain, Lucius. Who after he had
newly received the Gospel, moving the said Bishop (in respect of his great
fame) by his Ambassadors, to prescribe unto him some orders for the Churches
within his Realm: he returned unto him, this answer in effect: that the King
being Christ's Vicar, and having the Scriptures, he the said Bishop would not
presume to prescribe any thing unto him, but leave him, to be directed by them.
Such an answer as this, had been more fit for a man of Bezaes place, then in
such a pope-like manner, to forbid and prescribe laws to such a kingdom. But
I will leave these and such like Geneuian dealinges, in that part of this
Island: because peradventure they are desired to be continued there still: and
come unto the Geneuating, for the self same platform of discipline, here at
home amongst our selves.

As soon as her majesty, (whom Almighty God long preserve to reign over us,)
was come to the Crown: word was sent into this Realm from Geneua, Knox exhort.
to Eng. pa. 92.
in a Book printed there 1559. that those Princes, that would live without the
yoke of Discipline, (meaning that Geneuian form,) were to be reputed for Gods
ennemies: and therefore unworthy to reign above his people. About the same
time, Goodman, Whittingham, Gilby, and some others, returned from Geneua into
England. What violent and seditious doctrine they brought home with them, (at
the least they three that are mentioned,) I leave to some other opportunity. But
for the Geneuian discipline, all their desires were in that point insatiable.
They had seen how Calvin and Beza did reign at Geneua, and thought scorn
thereuppon to be subject unto any. It seemed unto them a notable matter: If
every one of them might by and by, have obtained an absolute authority, where
they should have been placed. Coming from Geneua: they thought they should
have been admired. But finding themselves therein deceived, and that their
Geneuian motions, were little regarded: it wrought in them a very great
coffeehouse, and made them so wilful, that nothing would please them, which
was not practiced in Geneua. So as thereby great contentions were presently
stirred up by the^. Their first assault was made against the Communion Book:
with the orders and ceremonies that are therein prescribed. In the which
quarrels, perceiving themselves in many respects (as I take it) to be
ouermatched: what was their refuge, but (forsooth) they must complain to
master Beza? Which complaint received, Beza Epist. 8.
he writ his Letter in their behalf unto Doctor Grindall 1566. then Bishop
of London. I wish a man would read the Epistles of Leo, sometimes Bishop of
Rome, and confer them with this of Bezaes: to consider, whether took more
upon him; Leo where he might command, or Beza, where there was no reason he
should at all have intermedled. But let him go on. He finds faults with the
manner of apparel, appointed for our Ministers, with the Cross in Baptism,
with kneeling at the holy Communion, with all ceremonies that carry with them
any signification, and withal the ancient Fathers, applying himself
altogether to strengthen and encourage his factious old acquaintance, in their
froward and perverse obstinacy. And because his course taken therein, should
not be unknown; with the same mind that he writ this letter, now you see
he has printed it.

The year after 1567. when the said malcontents perceived that
notwithstanding Bezaes letter, there was no place given unto their giddie
fancies, but that every day they were withstood more and more, and that with
such sufficient reasons, as (for mine own part,) I think, that all the Bezaes
in Christendom will never be able sufficiently to confute: they began to
stagger, and knew not what they should do. They could find no directions in
the scriptures, how they might behave themselves: and therefore they were
constrained to fly again to Beza. Observe well I pray you, Beza. epist. 1^
what he himself writes hereof. Saepe multumque etc. Being often and greatly
desired of my dearest beloved Brethren of the Churches of England, that in
their miserable state, Consilium illis aliquod suggereremus, in quo acquiescere
ipsorum conscientiae possent, (I would give them some council, whereupon their
consciences might rest,) diverse men houlding diverse opinions etc. A long time
I differred for diverse weighty reasons so to do: and I profess, that most
willingly I would yet have been silent, but that I think I should greatly
offend, if I should still reject their so many petitions, and most pitiful
mournings. We in England may think, we have had great jewels of these
disturbers, and that for all their pretenses of great learning, and gravity,
they were indeed of a very shallow judgment, that could find nothing to stay
their consciences upon, but what should be sent to them from M. Beza. It was
a fond part for them to write so unto him, and a very insolent part for him to
take so much upon him: but in that he has published so much to the world in
print: (their childishnes, and his own pride, I may term it,) but I want a
word to express my conceit.

Hereby it should seem, that if Beza had taken such a course as might well
have beseemed him: it lay greatly in his power, to have very much quieted all
those present troubles. But that mind was far from him: and yet it would
have tended a great deal more to his own credit. For he gives his said
dearest beloved Brethren, very unwise, unlearned, and ungodly council:
although ever since that time, (according to their promise) they have very
gravely builded their consciences upon it. Beza Epist. 12
And it was this in effect, that if they could not enjoy their ministry,
without giving their consents, to the manner of making of our Ministers by the
Bishops, without the voices of such a Presbiterie, as he and his Scholars do
dream of, without giving their consents to the use of the Cap and Surplise,
and to the manner of excommunication in the Church of England etc. They should
then give place manifestae violentiae, to manifest violence, and live as
private men. Let any man that list read over that Epistle also, and then judge
indifferently, by what light advise, this peevish opposition has been
continued amongst us.

After some time spent in these brables: then they bethought them, to fall more
directly in hand, with the Geneuian Discipline. To this purpose certain
persons assembled themselves privately together in London: (as I have been
informed): namely Gilbye, Sampson, Lever, Field, Wilcox, and I wot not who
besides. And then it was agreedvpon (as it seems) that an admonition (which
the now L. Archbishop of Canterbury did afterward confute) should be
compiled, and offered unto the Parliament approaching, Anno. 1572. Against which
time, it was also provided, that Beza should write his letterr, to a great man
in this Land, for, and in the behalf of the chief contents thereof: vz. for
the admitting in England, of the said Allobrogicall Discipline. Which office
(you may be sure) he performed very willingly. Understanding (says he) of an
assembly of the Estate of England, Beza. 1572. Epist. 69.
wherein there would be dealing with matters of Religion, I could not chose,
but write unto you of that matter. And so he proceeds; showing, that all men
do allow of our doctrine, but not of our Discipline. That except, where there
is pure doctrine, there be also pure discipline (meaning his own Geneuian
Darling): the Churches are little the better, and that therefore her Majesty,
and her faithful Counselors should procure the setting up of this pure
Discipline, notwithstanding any difficulties whatsoever that might hinder it.
The same year also 1572. he writ to the Queens Majesty, an Epistle
dedicatory, before his annotations upon the new Testament. In the which,
although he does confess, that her Highness has restored to this Land the
true worship of God: yet he insinuates that we want a full instauration of
Ecclesiastical Discipline: that our Temples are not fully repurged: that some
high places remain as yet not abolished: and wishes that those wantes and
blemishes might be supplied and reformed: meaning (as I think he would
confess if he were deposed) that her Majesty should conform the present
Apostolical and most ancient estate of the Church of England, unto that newly
devised, and unbridled new-platforme of that demy-Parish of Geneua: as I may
well call it by way of comparison. Now you must understand, that as our old
English Geneuians did wear out or grew out of date: So there did start up a
new brood in their places. Cartwright and Trauers finding (as it seems) that
itching and stirring humor in themselves, which delights altogether in
novelties, they would needs to Geneua. Where in short time they were notably
confirmed in that doctrine of contradiction: and returned home, like the rest
of our Geneuian Proselites, ten times more wayward then they were before. Which
disposition of theirs being known to the Crew: who then but these two, after
their several returns thence, to be the Champions successively, for the
Allobrogicall Discipline? Since which times you shall find little omitted, of
those Disciplinarian practices: whereby this Lady their Mistress most
indirectly, and by all unlawful means, has been elsewhere advanced. Their
writings (I speak now generally of all our English Factioners, that have
written for this forgerie) are full of bouldnes, of Sophistications, of
falsifications, of perverse wrestings, of seditious assertions, and of many
such corruptions. They have sought by all indirect and unlawful means, to
allure the people unto them: and have entered into a kind of an associatio^
amongst themselves. Neither the Bishop of Geneua, nor the Bishops in Scotland
(for ought I find) were ever more Turkifhly handled by Heathenish Libels and
most unchristian calumniations, then our Bishops have been, by diverse of these
our Geneuating Passauantians. By the like course also, and in the same manner,
have they dealt (as far as possibly they durst) with her most excellent
Majesty, with the high Court of Parliament, with the Lords of her Highness
most honorable Privy Council, and with the Judges and Laws of the land. The
reformation of religion, which almighty God has wrought amongst us by her
Majesty's means, some of them have termed a deformation: and all of them do
disgrace and deprave it to their uttermost ability, most lewdly and falsely.

Since the time, they have seen little hope, that her Majesty and the other
states of this land, would ever give place to their unstaid vanities and
Phaetonicall presumptions: they have applied themselves to the practice of the
inseparable Disciplinarian adiunct mentioned: vz: that when such states do
refuse, and will in no wise be persuaded to embrace and establish within their
dominions, the pretended ChurchDiscipline, so liked of at Geneua: the Ministers
may draw the people unto them by all manner of allurementes, and so betwixt them
set it up themselves. And in this course, they have already far proceeded:
altogether (as you may perceive by the said act of Parliament in Scotland,
Anno. 1584.) after the same manner that the Ministers of Scotland did proceed.
They have had their subscriptions, their Synodes of diverse sorts, Classical,
Provincial, and General. In those Synodes they have practiced Censures, made
laws of their own, and disallowed some of those, which the state of this
realm has made. Unto these and such like their private Conuenticles, they
have appropriated the name of the Church: and having separated themselves in a
sort, from all those Christians, that favor not their mistress, they are
become joined into a new brotherhood of the Allobrogicall Discipline. As there
grew some occasion of fear amongst the^, that these their Consistorial
proceedings, were likely to break forth, before they were ready and able, by
the strength of their assistance to stand to their tackling: consultation was
had, and the matter ouerruled, that none of that brotherhood, (if he were
apprehended) should in any wise appeach another: but utterly refuse to detect
such dealinges of the godly brethren, as they themselves so greatly liked, and
were of opinion to be most honest and just. He that would take the pains to
peruse the examinations of Cartwright, and of some others in the
Star Chamber: (as any may easily do, now that they are published) should
find all these particulars and many more, then here I will speak of, to be
most true.

And thus you see the Geneuian Discipline devised by one man, procured at the
first by his coming, great entreaty, and friendship, being then a simple and a
poor Gentlewoman, God knows, fit peradventure, in the alteration of a
Monarchy into a popular state, to receive some intertainment: but (as I say)
now you may plainly see what a Lady she is grown to be: through the
instigations and practices of master Calvin and Beza, and how and by what
means she has enlarged her Dominions, and set her foot into this Island, of
Britain.

I could further add hereunto: how they have not bin content to keep
themselves within the limits of Geneua, France, England, and Scotland,
dealing as you have heard: but have sought to take the very same course in
some other Countries likewise. Master Beza doubted not (as he says) omnes
principes hortari, to exhort all Princes, to admit of the Sauoyan platform.
Beza de presbyt. page 123.
And this you shall find a thing ordinary, both in master Caluins and
master Bezaes writings: that as soon, as they have heard from time to time of
any country, that has begun to abolish Popery: by and by, they have come
upon them, with most earnest solicitations, and gloses for the contracting of
this their gallant Consistorian minion with them. What letters have been
written into Germany, Transiluania, and Polonia, wherein that point always
plays a chief part? One letter written by Beza into Polonia, I cannot choose
but make mention of.

After diverse attempts and suits made, in the behalf of their Discipline, to
have had her placed in Polonia: one Sarnicius writ to Beza, (as it seems) in
this sort: timetur altera tyrannis: now the Pope is bannished, it is feared
here, that this your platform of Discipline, would prove to be as tirannous
a kind of government, as ever the Popes was. Sar. in. Beza. Epist. 14.
Whereunto he answers. Recte quidem: It is well said: sit ergo disciplinae
regula verbum Dei. Let the word of God be the rule of Discipline. In effect as
though he should have said: Let our platform at Geneua be admitted of amongst
you: and then your Elders, they will easily see, what they may do, and how
far they may proceed in causes, by the word of God. Or if they cannot: send
to Geneua, as other Churches have done: and whilst I live, you shall have such
authentical resolutions, as (you may be sure) shall prevent all that danger.
And a little before in the said letter. Scis etc. you know there is one, Ibid.
and the self same author of doctrine and Discipline (meaning that of
Geneua.) Quorsum igitur vnam verbi partem, alter a repudiata reciperemus? to
what purpose therefore should we receive one part of the word without the other?

To what purpose shall we receive the doctrine of our salvation, by Jesus
Christ: except we receive also the manner of the Discipline used at Geneua? It
was no lewder a saying of Pope Boniface (to my understanding,) Ex^^au, de
mayor, and obedient.
when he affirmed it a point of the necessity of salvation: for all men to be
subject to the Bishop of Rome.

If they of Zuricke, Berne, Schafhusin and Basil, the Magistrates and
Ministers there, had but suspected, or once but dreamed, that their assisting
of master Calvin to the having of his will over the Citizens of Geneua, would
have grown to such insolency: would have brought forth such pride, such
sedition and so great presumption, as that like Pharaoes evil favored and
lean Kyne, the said his devise would have sought to devour all other
Churches, their orders, their service, and forms of Discipline, much fayrer
creatures, and in better liking, then his scragge: I am persuaded, that all the
friendship, all the entreaties, devises and stratagemes: nay all the gold and
goods in the world, could never have drawn them unto it.

But I will end this Chapter. They were no Iosephes, to foresee these
mischiefs: or what a dearth of true reformation indeed, both in France,
Germany, and diverse other places, the urging with such boldness, and
violence, of such a mere fancy, and most apparent forgery, would procure, or
did portend. Time has disclosed it. And Gamaliels Council has proved true.
The factioners in this folly have been so long suffered to take their own
swinge: that now they are grown giddie, Acts. 5.
and find not what to stand upon. It was from men that they sought for: and
therefore it begins already to come to naught: as by diverse points
following, I trust it shall appear.

CHAP. IIII. Our English Geneuaters upon a better inquiry made: are grown to a
great uncertainty touching sundry points of the Geneuian platform.
1. These. 5.
THe rule of the Apostle, being well understood, is very notable, where he
says: try all things, and keep that which is good. Many things have fair
shows: but try them, and like the apples of Sodom, they fall into dust. In
gold (the chiefest metal) there is great sophistication. He that will be
easily led: is soon deceived. To hold a thing for good, before a man have
tried it: (by such a touchstone as is meet for his calling,) I hold it great
folly. The credit which Popery grew unto: did partly proceed of such rashness.
Men were content, having a good opinion of their Priests to be led by them, as
it were a Bear by the nose: and without any trial to accept in good part of
whatsoever they gave them. And as the people were carried thus away by their
own persuasions of their Priests: so were the poor Priests themselves (many
of them no doubt) misse-led through the honorable regard, which they had of
their superiors.

It is wonderful, what time and custom will work. A man may tell a lie so
often, that forgetting himself to be the author of it: he may think he heard
it, at the first from some person of credit, and so believe it to be true. It
may be that the Bishops of Rome, through the continual flattery of their
Parasites, telling them still, they could not err, and that they were the
Lords of the whole world: though at the first, they knew they lied: yet
afterward, beginning by little and little to believe them, they are now in
time come to this, that he who says otherwise, they will by no means endure
him: he is become an heretic, and I wot not what. The Bishops also and other
great learned men, following the streams as they ran in their days: did
grow by degrees to reckon of the Popes, as they found them, in their times, to
account of themselves. And thus I suppose, (or at the least by some such
means) that both the Priests of all sorts, and likewise the people, became
in time, to be so drowned in the puddles of Popery: all of them together from
the top to the toe, forgetting the Apostles said rule, of trying every thing
whatsoever, before they held it for good. Which notable point of this
Apostocall wisdom being of later years fallen into practice, by every man
that feared God: according to the measure of his gifts and as his calling did
require: we see it to be true by our own experience, that even children now
(in a manner) are able to discern the truth, in sundry things, wherein many
men of judgment and good learning were heretofore blinded. And even in some
such like sort has it happened in this matter of the Geneua Discipline.

Men have been carried headlong with it, before they knew well what they did:
and all under godly pretenses. It is a plausible matter with the people, to
hear them depraved, that are in authority: but especially to understand of
any liberty or power which may appertain to themselves. Besides when men
have been bitten with abuses, it is an acceptable point, to hear the things
themselves which were abused, exclaimed against. For it falls not under every
simple man's cap: to distinguishe well in that matter. Furthermore also it is
not unknown, to any of judgment, what the profession of any extraordinary
zeal, and as it were, contempt of the world: does work with the multitude.
When they see men go simply in the streets: looking downward for the most
part: wringing their necks awry: shaking their heads, as though they were in
some present grief: lifting up the white of their eyes sometimes, at the sight
of some vanity, as they walk: when they hear them give great groans: cry
out against this sin, and that sin, (not in them their hearers, but in
their superiors) make long prayers, profess a kind of wilful poverty,
speaking most earnestly against some men's having too much, and some men too
little (which beats into the peoples heads a present cogitation of some
division to be made in time.) when I say the multitude does see, and hear such
kind of men: they are by and by carried away with a marvelous great conceit
and opinion of them: especially when withal they take upon them to show a way
or manner of Discipline; which shall be (forsooth) nothing prejudicial to the
people: but rather bring them great liberty, and yet shall be such a way, as
shall reform all things amiss, and that in such sort, as they themselves
would either wish or desire.

And as many people in this our time have been thus beguiled, by a certain
crew of Ministers: so they the Ministers amongst themselves, upon the like
outward shows, and false pretenses, in this point I speak of, (concerning the
pretended holy Discipline) have been greatly misled, one sort by another: the
inferior, by the superior, (as by Cartwright and some others) and these
superiors here, with us, by two men especially, master Calvin, and master
Beza, whilst the first sort have wholly depended upon the second, and the
second upon the third.

Master Calvin that devised the said platform, was surely an excellent man:
and so is master Beza, who since that time has been the principal
maintainer of it. But yet both of them in their times: have not wanted the
common affections of men. Much trouble there was, before their said devise was
received: which made them afterward the fonder of it. We have a saying, that
the Crow thinks her own bird the fairest: and so do men and women (for the
most part) their own children. Nature does therein bear sway with the best.
But especially she shows her force most, in the fruicts of a man's mind. For
as our minds ought to be more dear unto us, then our bodies: so are the
fruits of our minds, of greater account with us, then the fruits of our
bodies. Few men that we hear of, will give their lives for their children: but
many we see, will do it most readily in the maintenance of their opinions.
Which things considered, I cannot but in some sort excuse master Calvin, and
master Beza: in seeking all manner of ways, all shows, all shifts, all
aduauntages, that possibly they could either find or devise: whereby they
might justify in some sort the birth and bringing up of their misconceaued
offpring. The chiefest oversight was in my opinion, that other learned and wise
men, do not well observe, these manner of natural and common affections in
them: but were carried after them (as it were with a whirlewind) to like as
they liked, to say as they said, and to do as they did. If master Calvin and
master Beza affirmed it: why it was enough.

I have heard it credibly reported that in a certain College in Cambridge,
when it happens that in there disputations, the authority either of Saint
Augustine, or of Saint Ambrose, or of Saint Jerome, or of any other of the
ancient Fathers: nay the whole consent of them all altogether is alleged: it
is rejected with very great disda^ne: as: what tell you me of Saint Augustine,
Saint Ambrose, or of the rest? I regard them not a rush: were they not men?
Whereas at other time, when it happens that a man of an other humor does
answer, if it fall out that he being pressed with the authority either of
Calvin or Beza, shall chance to deny it: you shall see some begin to smile,
in commiseration of such the poor man's simplicity: some grow to be angry in
regard of such presumption: and some will depart away, accounting such a kind
of fellow, not worthy the hearing. Were not this a pretty and pleasant
Interlude, or Comedy: to behold such Parasites, playing their parts, so
Disciplinarian-like* And all these follies and dependances; that the people
have doted so much after some kind of Ministers: that the inferior sort of
those ministers have taken all for current coin, that has been paid them by
their superiors: and that they the superiors have been also so far
ouercaried with the credit of the said two persons: all these follies (I say)
did proceed from this fountain, that neither the people, nor their rash
seducers, did in time put the holy Apostles rule in practice: vz. try all
things, and keep that which is good. But it is better late then never. Since
men of all sorts, have entered more carefully into the trial of all the said
pretenses, together with the very substance of that their pretended holy
platform, the furious rage of that flood has been pretily well diuerted. And
the very chief Captains themselves, being urged of necessity a little to fall
on searching: have found that (which I fear) they are sorry for: and are
become (as it seems) like men greatly amassed, to be at their wits end. And
now to this purpose I will tell you a wonder.

If Cartwright and his adherents were to begin the course again, that they
have run: I am persuaded, they would never tread so much as one step in it.
But now they have engaged their credits, they must shift things of, as well as
they can: and where their wards serve them not, beare-of the blows, that shall
fall upon them, with their heads and shoulders. In the year 1572. (as you
have heard in the former Chapter) the first admonition was offered to the
Parliament, as containing a perfect platform of the worthy pretended
Discipline, to have been established within this Realm. Within a year or two
after, Cartwright taking in hand the defense of that platform: did alter it in
some points, especially where it seemed to ascribe too much unto the people.
And then if it be true which is reported: that one desiring upon a time
conference with him, about these manner of causes; he answered: what need you
to talk with me? you may have my Books, they are Est and Amen: I doubt not
but he would have sworn upon convenient occasion, that the admonitioners
platform, so qualified by him, was a most perfect pattern for all Churches.
Howbeit within a while after, it proved not so. For about the year 1583. where
before the platfourme of Geneua (as it was left at large in Cartwrigts Books)
had been followed: now there was a particular draught made for England, with a
new form of common Prayer therein prescribed.

The year ensuing 1584. the seven and twentieth of her Majesty, out starteth
this Book, with great glory at the Parliament time: and forthwith the present
government of the Church, with all the orders, laws and ceremonies thereof,
was to be cut off at one blow, and this new book or platform must needs be
established. But it prevailed not. Shortly after that Parliament, the said
book and platform was found amongst themselves, to have some thing amiss in
it. And the correcting of it was referred to Trauerse. A letter of Field to
Trauers 1585.
Which work by him performed, came out again about the year 1586. when there
was an other Parliament in the nine and twentieth of her majesty's reign. But
it was then (as I suppose) severed from the said book of Common prayer: and
become an entire work of it self. And then also at the said Parliament there
wanted not diverse solicitors, Examinat in the Star-cha-
for the admittance of it. Afterward a new conference was had again, about
this second corrected book. For still there were some things out of square in
it.

In the year 1588. at an assembly in Couentry, these doubts, Ibidem.
which were grown, were (as it seems) debated: and so were many other,
Cartwright himself being present. But which of the said doubts in their
platfourme were then resolved, I find it not. This appeared, that some of them
remained, which they were not able to resolve upon. Ibidem.
For although they then concluded, that the platform it self was an
essential form of Discipline, necessary for all times: and subscribed unto
the practice of the greatest part of it, without any further expecting the
magistrates pleasure: yet in their subscriptions, they excepted some few
points, which were reserved to be discussed, by certain brethren in an other
assembly. Where this assembly was kept, I canuot certainly affirm. Articles
annexed to their book of dis.
But it appears upon deposition, that the next year after, there was one
held in Saint John's College in Cambridge. Where Cartwright being again
present and many more besides: diverse imperfections in the said Book of
Discipline were corrected altered and amended: Master Barber examined in the
Star. chamber.
and there they did not only perfect the said Book: but also did then and
there (as the examinate remembered) voluntarily agree amongst themselves, that
so many as would, should subscribe to the said Book of Discipline after that
time.

Well then, at the last, I trust we have found out, what they are agreede
upon: and what they will stand unto. You see there has been much plotting
amongst them: and it is time (a man would think) that after such stirs,
meetinges, conferences, and Synods made in that behalf: they should be
resolved at the last of the things they desire. But now I come to my wonder,
before mentioned: for so I esteem of it. Cartwright, and the chiefest of
those, that have been lately in prison, in one of their foresaid examinations
in the Star Chamber, do plainly avouch it, upon their oaths: (and so I
believe them) that there are some things in their said draught of Discipline,
wherein as yet they were never resolved. What? Is neither, Geneua, France, nor
Scotland, able to satisfy them? Have they sought unto them for their opinions:
and do they disdain to make them any answer? Or else think they scorn to
ask council of any men: but had rather, then they would so much discredit
themselves, dwell still in their doubts? Surely I would be very glad to know
what doubts these were, wherein as yet, they were never resolved. I have
desired diverse, to have told me of them: but they would not. Notwithstanding I
will tell you, what I guess, they were; not at randon (as they say) but upon
some good probability. I met by chance with a paper, of no mean man's among
them, wherein (as I take it) some of them (at the least) are expressed, and
they are these following.

Whether there ought to be Doctors in every Church? W. F.


Whether the Doctors may administer the sacraments?

Whether there ought to be women Deacons in every reformed Church?

Whether the Presbitery be not described, too generally, obscurely, and very
imperfectly?

Whether suspension may be proved by the word of God?

Whether suspension can be proved to be a censure of the Church?

Whether the Elders ought not to be perpetual as the Pastors are?

Whether men must stand to the sentence of the greater part of the Consistory?

Whether marriages and spousals, and things concerning them: do belong to the
ministers?

Whether there should be sureties in Baptism?

Whether there ought to be no abstaining from, or noting of such a one, as for
disobedience to the Consistories admonition, is in the way of excommunication?

Unto these quaerees, I could add some other if I list. What if Beza himself,
begin to doubt, as concerning his Discipline: or at the least begin to
find some defectes in it? What if he desire to be caput Episcoporum: the head
of all Bishops within his province? what if he would have the presidentship of
every Synod to be a continual office? But hereof afterward in the chapter.
In the mean while, I could wish with all my heart, that those who are wise,
would thoroughly consider, how this Church of England, and the state of the
whole Realm, her Majesty, the high Court of Parliament, the present form of
our Ecclesiastical government with the laws and orders thereunto
appertaining, and generally all her highness dutiful and loving subjects have
been used, by these so distracted, so presumptuous, and so notorious
rash-pates: in that after so many admonitions, supplications, petitions,
deprauations, inuections, humble motions, draughts, platformes, demonstrations,
and what not? (which have bred already a million, of great inconveniences and
mischiefs.) Now being pressed upon their oaths, they are constrained to
acknowledge, that as yet they are not resolved in all points what they would
have. If the state had been as rash in their grauntes, as they have been
shameless in their demands: peradventure the Realm and Church of England by
this time, might have been in some such like case, as (if sundry reports be
true) there be some in the world.

It may be here objected peradventure, that supposing the testimony alleged
for the doubts mentioned, were sufficient: yet they are but about matters of
small importance: whereas in points of substance they do all concur and are
agreed together. Whether the doubts which I showed unto you, be of any
importance or not: I leave it to your consideration. Indeed, if a man may say
the truth, without their offense, there is nothing which they hold concerning
this Allobrogicall devise, wherein we do withstand them, that is of any good
importance of substance. But for any agreement or resolution in any of the
parts of their platform, whether of substance almost or not of substance, you
shall not find it I assure you amongst them: as in the process following it
will appear. And I am of opinion, that they will disagree every day more and
more: until by trial of their former rashness, they shall be contented to
embrace the present form of Ecclesiastical government in England, and from
the bottom of their hearts thank almighty God for it.

CHAP. V. With what distraction, uncertainty, diversity of judgments,
pretense is made, that the Geneua Discipline is of very great antiquity.
AS I have said, in the second chapter, if my life lay upon it, I could not
find, that there was ever in the world, any such platform of Discipline, as
is now urged, by the patrones and defenders of it, before master Calvin
devised it, and with much trouble set it up, at the last in Geneua. I know it
is said now a days: that it is of a far greater antiquity. And if I were
not otherwise by reading settled, I might peradventure be ouercarried that way
with their pretenses. The Herroldes at arms they say, can do very much, in a
man's pedigree. Though peradventure his Gentilitie be not of fifty years
standing: yet if need require, William Conquerours time is nothing: they will
fetch it from Adam. You shall have the first finder out, Bathes in England: The
Book of the Bathes.
so gentilized. And even such a like course is taken, for the Geneua
Discipline. She must needs be a Lady, of an ancient stock. And therefore her
feed Herroldes do take great pains in her behalf. Such chopping and changing:
such clayming and disclaiming of kinreds: such coating, intercoating and
quartering of her arms, with this great personage in that country, and with
another as great in this country: you shall rarely find (I am verily
persuaded) in all the ancient records and rules of Herrauldry. To leap over
a thousand and five hundred years, at the first skippe, over almost two
thousand years at the next, and in a manner to Noah's Arc at the third: is but
a small matter with them. There was never poor gentlewomans credit more
sought to be set forth: with the smoakie images of her worm-aten ancestors,
then hers is. The Geneua platform to be reckoned so late a devise, as that
master Calvin should be the first author of it: they cannot abide it.

But I will come to their first skippe: which is in effect, from the year
above mentioned 1541. unto the Apostles time backward. For as I remember I have
read it in one of their books: that in all the ancient fathers, you shall
find a little, but as it were of the ruins of it.

But the ruins of it in all the ancient fathers? What luck had they, that
the building of so gorgeous a piece of work, stood not in their days, as now
it stands in Geneua, that they might have seen the beauty, and the glory of
it. If it were so ruinate before the times, wherein the ancient fathers lived:
then surely it will follow (in spite of whosoever says nay) that it is of
greater antiquity, then all the fathers were of. But I marvel how it grew
into such ruin, before their times. For (to my understanding) the Apostles
times, were next before the time of the ancient fathers. The learned
discourser, will help us, for this plunge, Learned discourse. page 7
out of the briars. The ecclesiastical offices (says he) namely of Pastors,
Doctors, Governors, and Deacons, were exercised in the primative and pure
Church, until the mystery of iniquities, (working a way for Antichrists
pride and presumption,) changed Gods ordinance, etc. And when was that? The
mystery of iniquity began to work in the Apostles days. 2. These. 2.
Was it then? Peradventure he means, that immediately after the Apostles
times, there was some age, wherein there lived no ancient fathers: and that then
this mischief was wrought. I would it had pleased him, to have devised such a
prouiso, in the behalf of those most notable men: many of them very godly and
holy Martirs. But the discourser was (as it seems) a plain man: he will lay
the fault, where it was: as indeed it is reason, that every man should bear
his own burden. Hear him therefore again. Our fathers of old time, Learned
disc. page 12.
were not content with the simple order instituted by Christ, and established
by his Apostles: but for better governing of the Church thought good: some
offices to add thereunto, some to take away, some to alter, and change, and in
effect to pervert and overthrow all christian and Ecclesiastical policy,
which was builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus
Christ being the chief corner stone. A strange conceit, that all the ancient
fathers, should thus conspire, to thrust Christ out of his kingdom: and to
overthrow all Christian policy. What? not a man amongst them, as learned and
as godly affected, as either Calvin, Beza, or this discourser? Not one in those
ages that would stand to Christ's Discipline? A pitiful case. But I promise
you, for my part: I rather doubt of the discoursers credit in this point:
then that I will think, there should be such dishonesty, in the ancient
Fathers. Nay I durst certainly swear it, that if there had been any such
government of Christ in their days, they would have been as careful, for the
continuance of it, as any of the purest platformers in Christendom.

Trauers in his Book of Ecclesiastical Discipline, makes eight degres of the
declination of this new pretended regiment: to have grown before the Council
of Nice: procured (as he says) cunningly by Satan: Fol. 140. 141.
but yet so, that (as he adds) there are evidences to be showed of sundry
parts of it, in the writings of the ancient Fathers etc, and that also in
this age, page 103.
it is exercised in France, the low Countries, and in Scotland. page 9.
All out of square, from the Apostles times: till Geneua was illuminated. Some
blind evidences there may be found, (he says) for sundry parts of that
Discipline: whereby a man may conceive, that there was once such a thing in
being. Well, yet if that were true, the ancient Fathers deserve some little
commendation: in that they were content to leave some scroules or shiuers of it
unto their posterity. To the same purpose also in another place the same party
confesses, that the ordinary offices (as he terms them) in the Apostles
times, page 79.
have been now of many years out of use, either in part, or altogether before
the last restoring of the Gospel in this age. A great leap (as I think) from
the Apostles time: to this ourage. If I had framed the scope of my second
Chapter, after this man's pleasure: I might (as you see) have safely set it
down with Trauerse consent: that from the Apostles times, till master Calvin
was fully placed in Geneua, the now pretended order and form of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, was not to have been found in all the world.

Master Cartwright, though he say in his first Book, that the Eldership did
most flourish in Constantines time, page 182.
and defends the same, page 67.
in the second part of his 2. reply, (saving that he leaves out the word most)
with such shifting and falsehood, as I durst make any learned man judge of his
dealing therein: yet (I say) in his Table to the first part of his second
reply, and also in the second part thereof: he acknowledges in effect (to my
understanding) that of the Elderships declining, there are to be found in the
Fathers, but certain traces and marks, whereby we might come to the knowledge
of it: Ibid. page 43.
and understand that certain Churches, (as at Alexandria) went out of the way.
As if he should have said: look how a man seeks for a Hare in the snow, and
seldom finds her, till he come to her form: so you must seek, for the
Eldership (as now it is urged) in the ancient Fathers: still pricking after
it: till having run past all them, you come to the form of it, in the
Apostles times. Or, as if he had said: the best use that a man can have, either
of the ancient fathers, or of the Ecclesiastical writers is this, concerning
the Geneuian Discipline: that a man by them may learn, when men go out of
their right way, but how to get in again, when we are once out: if you will
have any direction for that point: you must either go to Geneua, or to him, or
to some of his fellows. There goes the Hare away: for the Fathers cannot help
you.

But believe me, such is my dulnes, as I do not well discern: how these words
of Cartwrights will stand well together, with those of the Elderships
flourishing in Constantines time: seeing now in the ancient Fathers, we have
so little of it: vz. only as it were some few marks, traces or footesteps of
a thing which had been, and was gone before their times. For as concerning the
state of the Church in Constantines time, there are whole Cart-loads of most
pregnant evidences, in the ancient Fathers of it: and yet but traces (as he
says) or empty steps in them, for his Eldership. In effect as if he had said,
the Geneua Discipline flourished most when it was not. One that has sent us, a
printed Book out of Scotland, taking upon him to know belike, the minds of
all the Scottishe Ministers, that seek for the pretended Discipline, as
concerning the time, how long they account it, since it was in any good
reparation, says plainly: (not as Cartwright affirms, that it flourished
most in Constantines time) but thus: we must needs confess in deed, that this
government of the Church fell to decay long before the Council of Nice.
Disco. against R.B. Ser. p. 21.
But yet one step further, after master Cartwrights dubling: where speaking in
his second book of the corruption, (as he terms it) that one Bishop had a
prehemine^ce given him above other ministers (which he cannot deny to have been
an ordinance in Alexandria from Saint Marks time etc.) he says: from the first
day, wherein this devise was established, corruption grew in the Church etc.
Lib. 2. pa. 569
And the first resistance by any settled Church against that corruption, was by
those that abolished that devise of man, and received the order in the Apostles
times, touching the equality of Ministers: as the Bohemians, Merindols, the
Churches in Germany, and Geneua. See, what carieers are here. From Geneua to
the Apostles times; and thence back again to Geneua at a leap. From Saint
Marks time, till the time here limited: the pretended Presbitery with all the
complements thereof (as now it is urged) has lain alla-mort. No one settled
Church, (that is, in Cartwrightes language,) no one particular parish in all
the world, for a 1500. years, did ever account it unlawful for a Bishop to
have authority above other Ministers. Or thus: there has not bin upon the face
of the earth, within the space of a thou sand and five hundred years, so much
as in any one parish, such an equality amongst the Ministers of the word of
God, as is now pretended to be in the Presbitery at Geneua: and so consequently
in all that time not such a Presbitery. Or thus: within the compass of the
Heavens, there has not been one Church for above 1500- years: that ever
dealt so with Bishops, as of late they have been dealt withal, especially in
Geneua, and in some other such places as have followed therein the example of
that City.

Well hitherto then you see, that since we came from Geneua: vz: the year
1541. the men themselves that talk so much of their Geneua platform: cannot
find it flourishing, in the days of all the ancient fathers, nor in all the
world for the space of above 1500. years. The fathers, (alas) some of them
were but simple men: some were ambitious, and some were ignorant. They poor
men had small experience: and less policy. They wanted judgment, and zeal:
either to discern, or to keep in her virginity, this gallaunt Dalila. They
chopped and changed, the institution of Christ at their pleasure. Any examples
that shall be fet from them: are very dangerous. They were but men. But if you
will leap over all them, and come to Geneua: there you shall find wise men,
learned men, humble men, zealous men, nay rather Angels, then men: there you
shall see the glorious ranks of Elders, sitting upon their thrones: the
worshipful company of Deacons, attending upon the contributions, the well
Disciplined multitude, bringing in the price of their lands and goods, and
pouring all down at the Deacons feet: there Christ carries his own scepter,
in Bezaes hand: there this pretended holy Discipline, so disgraced by the
fathers, so corrupted and so defaced: there she reigns, there she
flourishes, and there she is magnified. The author of a brief discourse of
trobles in Germany. pa. 49.
The Church of Geneua (says a good fellow) is the purest reformed Church
(forsooth) in Christendom. Again, Geneua is the chiefest place of true
comfort in Earth. Now, what is here said of Geneua, and her Ministers: except
you extend it, to all other Churches and Ministers, that follow the Geneua
platform: they will be angry with you, and think themselves (as I suppose) to
be very greatly disgraced.

But I will leave them clawing one of another, and come to the Apostles times:
to see if the Geneua Church-gouernment, may be found out amongst them. For
either there, or no where. The Apostle Saint John lived much longer then any of
the rest of the Apostles did. Saint Jerome says that he lived after Christ's
passion, threescore and eight years. So as the Apostles times, after the
largest account, are not further to be extended. Now (as Baronius collecteth
out of Eusebius) Saint Mark was Bishop of Alexandria about 19. years: and
died about the thirtith year after Christ's ascension. So as Saint John
out-liued Saint Mark, some 38. years. After this reckoning, if the Church of
Alexandria should have departed from Christ's institution, and so clean have
disgraced the glory of this fained Eldership, when there was a Bishop made
there; according to Cartwrightes assertion: then before we can find, the
Geneua platform, in such perfection as it is in that City: we must cut of the
said 19. years, (wherein Saint Mark had departed so grossly from Christ's
ordinance) from the before mentioned 68. years, (the full extent of the
apostles time:) which being done, you have but eleven years, wherein there is
any hope for the pretended purity, and practice of the Geneua Discipline, to
shadow or shroud her self.

Yea, but where Saint Jerome says, that there were Bishops in Alexandria, Lib.
1. pa. 107.
from Saint Marks time, etc. Cartwright has this shift: vz: that the words
from Saint Marks time may be taken exclusiuely, to shut out Saint Mark.
Whereby to save Saint Marks credit, that an Evangelist should not be thought,
to have broken the neck of Christ's government: he would have this great
defection, to have been presently after Saint Marks time: and so he excludes
Saint Mark (after the Geneua fashion) quite and clean out of his Bishopric:
and will needs suppose, that he was never Bishop, contrary to Saint Ieromes
express words in sondrie places, and contrary to the full consent and
agreement of all the ancient fathers, and of all the ecclesiastical
histories. But be it, as he would have it: yet let the reckoning be newly cast
up again, and it falls out, that this supposed departing from Christ's
institution, was about thirty and eight years, before S. John died. Which
stands hardly with the reputation of the Apostles times in my opinion. But
that, is no great matter. We know (says the author of the foresaid book,
that was sent us from Scotland) Diotrephes to have been in the Church, Page. 21.
even in the Apostles times: and we are assured, he could never be gotten out
of it, since the first hour, that he set his footing therein. And therefore we
cannot greatly marvel, though even in their time, there had been a diverse
government from this of the Lords appointment, which we labor for. For even
in the Apostles times the mystery of iniquitte began to work. And what? will
they say of Saint John the Apostle, and of all the rest of them, that out-liued
Saint Mark: as they have done of all the ancient fathers? was there so small
intelligence, amongst those most provident and wise holy men: that there could
be so notorious a defection in Alexandria, so famous a City, and they never to
hear of it? Or shall we think, that they heard of it, and conspired together,
to overthrow Christ's institution? It may be said, that peradventure, they
heard of it, and reproved it: but could not reform it. Very well. But where be
then their admonitions, petitions, supplications, and libels against it? Where
be their suspensions, excommunications and giuings over to Satan? Not a word
of that abuse, in Saint John's Gospel, written after the supposed defection?
but especially could he have pretermitted such a high point: in the book of
his Revelations? Or had he so many Revelations of other matters, of less
importance (forsooth); and was such an overthrow of Christ's kingdom, kept
from him? The Disciplinarian shifts in this case, (to make the best of them)
can be but slanderous and desperate.

But to grant (to all of them) the acceptance of the Apostles times, after
the largest account: there is (surely) nothing less to be found in those
times, then the Geneua platform. For then as particular congregations
professed the Gospel: you should have found a Priest, or minister of the word
and Sacraments, Tit. 1.5. 2. Tim. sub. besides the judgment of all the aun-
cient fathers. Tit. 1.5.
placed in them. In Cities, where there were diverse such congregations, or
whereunto sundry congregations of the country did appertain: then you should
have found some Timothy a Bishop to govern them. After that diverse Cities
had received the Gospel: or some whole Country: it was not long, but some
Titus was placed as Archbishop over them. The twelve Apostles were in those
times as twelve Patriarchs, for all the world: Beza annot. Act. 1.2.
who planted, directed, visited, commanded, and appointed the foresaid Church
governors: and what else they thought meet, for the benefit of the church. If
I were presently to leave this life, and should speak what I thought of the
present form of Ecclesiastical government, at this time in the Church of
England: I would take it upon my soul, (so far as my judgment serves me)
that it is much more Apostolical, then any other form of government, that I
know in any other reformed Church in the world. As for these men, that talk
so much of the Apostles times: they are indeed but brablers. Their devised
regiment, has not any resemblaunce at all, of that: which was in the Apostles
times. They have perverted in deed the true meaning of certain places, both
in the scriptures and in the ancient fathers, for a show to serve their
turns, (as after it shall appear): and other proofs from those times, they
have not any.

But you will say: this is denied. It is so: and of that elsewhere. Howbeit in
the mean while, that cannot hinder my purpose: to search out, the pretended
antiquity of it. For it is confessed by them; that the Apostles practiced no
other form of Ecclesiastical government in their times; then Christ himself,
in his time did ordain, and assign unto them, to be practiced afterward. And
what form was that? Forsooth (they say) it was the very same form of Church
regiment, that was amongst the Jews: and that Christ, when he said, Dic
Ecclesiae, tell the Church, did translate the same, (being called Sanedrim,
Council or Senate) into the Church: to be the only lawful government
thereof, unto the end of the world. So as here then we must fetch another
friske about: to search for the antiquity of the Jewish Senate.

Master Calvin, after he had devised the Geneua platform, and leapt over
more then a thousand and five hundred years for the strengthening of it, by
those words of Christ, tell the Church: upon occasion, he further says: that
as far as his ancient records will serve him, the foresaid Jewish Sanedrim,
was devised by the Jews, after their return out of captivity: which was upon
the point of five hundred years before Christ: Calu. in Mat. 18.
Scimus etc. we know that from the time, that the Jews returned out of the
captiuitye of Babylon, the censure of manners and of doctrine, was committed,
to a chosen Counsel, which they called Sanedrim: in Greek, (...). Hoc
legitimum fuit, Deoque probatum regimen, etc. This was a lawful regiment, and
allowed of God. And again, to cut of all childishe cauilles, how to shift
this place: (as that Calvin says not, that it was then first instituted): the
sam e Calvin speaks hereof more plainly: where entreating of the seventy
Elders, Numbers 2. that were chosen to assist Moses, he has these words:
Certum quidem est. etc. it is very certain that when the Jews were returned
from the captivity of Babylon: because it was not lawful for them to create a
king, they did imitate this example in erecting of their Sanedrim. Here is then
the time, as plainly set down again, as needs: vz. after the Captivity: the
cause why they ordained it: vz. because they might have no King: and the
pattern they did imitate: vz. Moses choosing of seventy Elders, to assist
him, in his government.

But all this will not yet serve the turn. For besides many other exceptions,
which are taken to Master Caluins extraction of the Jews Sanedrim, out of
Christ's words, tell the Church: this is one: that if they will needs enforce
such a government upon the Church, as was amongst the Jews,: then they mean
belike, to wrest from the Prince, the civil sword; and to deal themselves in
civil causes, by their own authority, which they have so much condemned in
others, (though they meddle not otherwise with them, then by the Princes
appointment): for that the Iewes-sayd government or Sanedrim, had to do as
well in civil causes, as in any other that were Ecclesiastical. Their answer
to this exception is, that in deed the government they speake-of, had to
deal in Christ's time, with civil causes, Beza de ex. com. page 106 107. 108.
etc Annot. Mar. 52.
de facto, but not de iure: and that the Priests, Iudaicis rebus confusis,
through their pride and ambition, had crastily and corruptly, procured such
unlawful authority unto themselves: to the defacing and hinderaunce of the
Lords institution, Bez. ser. cont. Erast. fol. 37
by Moses at the first. See how they carry us, from post to pillar. Master
Calvin is no body with Beza. Now we must yet further backward, vz. from the
restitution of the Jews out of Babylon; to Moses his time: almost a thousand
and five hundred years. Surely master Calvin, should have been as well
acquainted with Moses doings, as Beza is: for that he has written
Commentaries, upon all his five Books: which Beza has not. If Calvin in
sifting the Text, so painefully as he has done, cold find no such matter in
Moses, as Beza pretends: it does greatly prejudice, (in my opinion) his
lighter conceit. Beza cont. Erast. fol. 37.
But hear his words. We must omnia reuocare ad institutionem Domini per Mosem
loquentis, vt quid iure factum sit intelligamus: Call every thing to the
institution of the Lord, speaking by Moses, if we will have a true
understanding of this government, and of the right authority thereof.

Very well. Here then we must have a new issue. We must set up (as I said)
the Church-gouernement, which the Apostles practiced: the Apostles practiced
the government that Christ appointed: Christ appointed the Jews Sanedrim, to
be in every parish: the Jews Sanedrim was corrupted: and therefore we are now
sent from Geneua, to Moses: to understand what he will say unto us of this
matter. Was there ever any form of government: that has had so evil
fortune? A government so long since ordained, not to continue for the time of
the law only, but even unto the worlds end: and never to be in such use, as
it ought to have been, except it were for some eleven, or some 38. years, (and
not that neither,) until this our age, that Geneua has refined it? Miranda
canunt, sed non credenda poetae. They tell us wonders.

But because, we must be carried so far: let us see indeed, the institution
of it. I trust that point will be made most manifest unto us. Therefore I would
desire to know, where the Lord did institute this their ecclesiastical Senate?
The effect of Bezaes answer (if I have judgment to gather it) is this. Lib.
de presb. page 103.
Iehosophat appointed such a kind of Senate in his time: Mosis proculdubio
praescriptum sequutus, following (proculdubio) without doubt, the prescript of
Moses. And where learned Iehosophat that prescript? Had he it out of Moses
written books, or by tradition? what? must the beginning of this, so singular
a regiment, proceed from a tradition? But it may be said, that although it
cannot be showed in Moses, where or when it was instituted: yet you shall
find in the tenth of Leutticus, the jurisdiction of it plainly set forth: Beza
contra. Erast.
which argues manifestly, that there was such a regiment, before that time,
instituted by Moses. It is well said. Let us then see the place. The words are
these. And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying: thou shall not drink wine nor
strong drink, thou nor thy sons with thee, when ye come into the tabernacle
of the congregation, Leuit. 10. ver. 8.9.10.11.
etc: that ye may put difference, between the holy and the unholy, and
between the clean, and the unclean, and that ye may teach the children of
Israel, all the statutes which the Lord has commanded them, by the hand of
Moses. Beza de presbyt. 104.
Here (says master Beza) Synedrij ecclesiastici iurisdictio manifestissimis
verbis a civilly distinguitur: the jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical Senate is
most plainly distinguished from the civil. And again: Dico his paucis verbis
declarari, quaecunque tunc erant vere (...) nempe inter sanctum and prophanum:
inter mundum and immundum discernere, and legem domini docere: ac proinde
iudicare de controuersijs ob eas causas exortis. I do affirm it, that in
these few words are set down, what causes soever were in those days rightly
accounted spiritual: that is to say, to discern between the holy and unholy,
the clean and the unclean, and to teach the law of the Lord.

Of this exposition in another place. We are yet dealing with the pedigree of
this government. Heereunto therefore this is objected. Let this interpretation
go a while as current: yet here is no mention of any other, to exercise this
jurisdiction, but only of Aaron and his two sons. Where are then their
governing Elders? What is become of them? How chances it, that they are not
mentioned? To this master Beza, De presbit. page 102.
writing of his ecclesiastical regiment, says. Erant Leuitae in Synagogis,
penes quos adhibitis, vt probabile est, aliquibus illustribus ciuibus, erat
spiritualis administratio. There were Levites in every Synagogue, who having
joined in commission with them, certain chief Citizens, (as it is probable)
had the administration of all spiritual causes. And least you should think,
that master Beza his probabile est, were no good warrant, to build so great a
matter upon: you shall hear what account it carries in Geneua.

There came out from thence not long agone, a book: translated since into
English, and printed in Scotland: termed, and so interpreted, Propositions and
Principles of Divinity. Amongst the which principles (in my latin book)
these are three: vz: It appears in Moses book, that as Moses with his 70.
Cap. 86.
did exercise his civil jurisdiction: so Aaron with his assistants, priests
and Levites, had chief authority in the ecclesiastical: 2. And furthermore,
there were amongst the Jews certain men, whom they called capita patrum, the
heads of the fathers, etc. quos verisimile est fuisse etia^ Synedrij
ecclesiastici parts, etc. who were parts (it is likely) of the ecclesiastical
Council. 3. Constat ergo in ecclesia Iudaica fuisse huic ordini ecclesiastico
co^stitutos rectores. It is manifest therefore that in the churches of the
Jews, these men were assigned, and joined to the said Priests, and Levites,
to be rulers and governors. Verisimile est: it is likely: constat ergo:
therefore it is manifest. As though a man should reason thus. It is probable,
that these men that dare thus abuse the world, have made a shipwreck of their
consciences: therefore it is manifest, that they have done so. Unto how many
kings, princes, Countries, and states, has master Beza written, for the
advancement of this his pretended government? What petitions, supplications,
demonstrations, motions, admonitions, discourses, complaints (and I know not
what) have been published amongst us, in England to the same effect? And is
all now come to this point, probabile est? Can Beza himself find no other
ground, for his Elders? Does it depend but upon likelihoodes and probabilities,
by your own confessions: whether almighty God did ever as yet institute any
such government or not?

But to pass by Beza with his probabile est: and to come to master
Cartwright, another manner of fellow. He (it seems) does account master
Beza, to be, but a simple man in respect of himself: in that he deemed the
Eldership to be of no longer continuance, then since Moses time. T.C. lib. 3.
pa. 40.
This government (says he, by the Eldership) was taken from the government
of the people of God before the Law. And it began as soon as there is any
mention made of any fixed form of a Church, In the table of that book.
which standing of diverse housholdes, were divided into particular assemblies.
Beza is then (you see) deceived: who said that Moses did institute the
Eldership. It was long (you hear) before his time. Did I not tell you; we
should be brought (in effect) to Noah's Arc? But let us consider of his proof,
that makes him so peremptory in this point. You shall not find him so loose I
trust: as to dash us in the teeth with probabile est. Inevitable
demonstrations, or nothing from him. Forsooth (says he) it is thus written in
Exodus 4. Ibidem.
So Moises and Aaron went and gathered all the Elders of the children of
Israel: and Aaron told all the words which the Lord had spoken to Moses
etc. And what then? Indeed, that would be heard: for as yet, this point
runs harshly. But (says Cartwright) that these were Ecclesiastical
officers, thereby it may appear: for that under such a tiraunt, and such
oppression, as the Israelites were in, it is altogether unlike, Ibidem.
that they should have the benefits of Magistrates of their own. Indeed now
he has won his spurs. In effect all that he says, is but thus much: It is
likely that the Elders he builds upon, were such officers as he dreameth
of. It is likely. It is probable.

Well, I trust the vizards of such maskers will be so thoroughly weatherbeaten
(in short time,) as that the simplest will be able, to discern their
deformities. For in this cause assuredly, (they pretending only probabilities)
all probabilities indeed are flatly against them. Is it probable, if Christ
had appointed any such government, as they speak of, to have continued to the
end of the world, or if the Apostles themselves had ordained or practiced it,
in their times: that all the ancient Martyrs, Councels, and godly Fathers
would with one consent have abolished it? It is probable, Moses being so
careful, (as it is to another purpose by the^ alleged,) that he would not
omit to signify unto his people, even the smallest matters, that God gave him
in charge, till he came to their basins, besomes, and pinnes about the
Tabernacle: that he would have made no mention of such a weighty point, as
this is pretended to be: if the Lord had ever given him commandment for the
institution of it? Exodus 18. Numb. 2. Deuteronomy. 1. and 16. and 17.
Is it likely, Moses so often speaking of the institution of the public
courts, for Justice and correction of manners amongst the Jews (which he knew
were but to continue until the coming of Christ): that he would have been
silent, as touching the institution of this spiritual government, which
should have lasted till the day of judgment, if he had received any such
Commission?

To draw therefore to an end of this point. The institution of this pretended
government, cannot be showed out of the old Testament: and then by their own
confessions (in effect) it may not be urged out of the new. Because they say,
that Christ appointed no other form of regiment; then they thought they could
have found to have been instituted by Moses. But my conclusion shall be built
upon one of Vdals demonstratiue propositions: Demonst. 2. cap. 2.
vz. That government, whose original is unknown; has no warrant in Gods
word, and is unlawful. But the original of the Geneua platform of
Discipline, is unknown: therefore it has no warrant in Gods word, and is
unlawful. And thus you see, that (as I said in the beginning,) the first time,
that ever this fained Geneuian devise saw light (for ought I can read or
judge:) was at Geneua. Whether for my part, I do remitte it again, to see if
they can deduce the pedigree of it, from any further Monuments of antiquity: or
that else they may blotte it out, of their now devised Creed, whereof you
shall hear hereafter.

CHAP. VI. The seekers of the pretended Discipline are not yet agreede, what
name they should give unto their Hierarchicall parish-meetinges.
THings for the most part are not long in being, before they have their names.
In that therefore the name of this pretended government, is so uncertain, (as
now I shall show you) it argues in my opinion, that it is but a counterfaite.
The time was not long, after the creation of all kind of cattle, and of the
fowls of the Heaven, and of the beasts of the field; Genes. 2.
but they were brought to Adam, to give them their names. And I am persuaded,
the like course has still been ever observed: that in a manner as soon as
things have had their being; they have also had their names given the^: or at
the least they have not been long without them. Let Cartwright then first tell
us here, if he will still rely upon his likelihood, mentioned in the former
Chapter: What was the name of his Ecclesiastical Hierarchy before the law. But
you shall find him herein as mute as a fish. Marry if you will come to the
time of the law, when forsooth as Beza says it was instituted: then both he,
Beza, and diverse others will soon satisfy any man, that will not be
wilful* What? will they show it us in the old Testament? Surely the chiefest
of them have not yet done it, neither will they ever be able (as I think) to
do it. And therefore they are driven to seek it in the Jews Talmud, Annot.
in Mat. 15.3.
which is, says Beza, blasphemus liber, a blasphemous book.

Would a man have thought that men so curious to admit of nothing that is not
in the Scriptures; would have stooped so low: as to the Talmud? I cannot think
that seeing Almighty God would not suffer the beasts of the earth and fowls of
the air, to be without their names, past two or three days; that he could be
content, that such an excellent creature, as this is pretended to be, should
be without a name so many hundredth years; as from Moses time until the Jews
Talmud was made. I trust no man will say that Moses was in this point
unfaithful, or that the Lord bringing it unto him to know how he would call
it: he obstinately refused to give it any name. Peradventure Moses a civil
Magistrate, foreseeing that this regiment was to be placed in every parish or
Synagogue, and that so he himself should become subject unto it; did seek to
disgrace it as much as he could, and therefore left it namelesse. Indeed that
is an exception, which the Atturnies for it, in these days, do make in effect
against such Christian Princes and magistrates, as do refuse to admit it
within their dominions.

But to come to the name which they find in the Talmud: T. C. Beza. Calvin.
They say it was called amongst the Jews Sanedrim, a corrupt word by them
used: that was degenerated from the true Greek name (...)which Beza does
translate Council. A strange thing that the Hebrew tongue should be so
penurious, as that it was not able to afforde an Hebrewe name to such a worthy
regiment: or that it should be namelesse, until the Jews and the Gretians
had such familiar intercourse, as that they either could or would vouchsafe to
borow any thing from them, which (as most men think) was not till Alexanders
time, or not much before. But strange or not strange: be it as it may be. By
this doctrine then of the Talmud and master Bezaes translation: shall we
term this parochial regiment, a Council, and the Governors therein, how
many soever, so many Counselors? Surely this were greatly to the honor of
England, and to the benefit of her Majesty's subjects. For whereas now they
have many occasions to come to the Court to their Lordships, for the redress
of many great enormities: they should have a Council table, to repair unto,
in every Parrishe.

But it will here be answered peradventure, that we may not call it a
Council: For that our Savior Christ (minding as they say, to translate the
form of the Jews ecclesiastical government, termed Sanedrim, from the
law, to the Gospel) used not that name of Council, but called it ecclesia:
that is the Church. Very well: any thing will content me: Howbeit for ought I
know, there was no cause, why it might not have pleased our savior Christ, if
he had conceived so notable a liking of that Jewish platform: but that he
might, also have retained the old name, and so have made no alteration at all.
The author of the book of Discipline, having, as it should seem, some such
like consideration in his head, or what other I know not: and thinking scorn
(as I guess) to run to the Jews Talmud, for a name for this regiment: is not
afraid to dissent from Calvin, Beza, his old tutor Cartwright, and a number of
other his good masters here in: saying, obseruandum est, vnacum re ipsa nomen
etiam a Iudaeis ad nos translatum esse. It is here to be observed, that
together with the thing it self, Disc. eccles. page 124.
the very name also is translated unto us from the Jews. And what name is
that? Forsooth says he, Nomen. (...)(that is congregation, or church): saepius
apud Mosen certis and delectis viris tribuitur, qui a to^a congregatione adres
obeundas designarentur: is often given by Moses unto a certain number of
chosen men, that were to be appointed by the whole congregation to deal in
sundry affairs.

So as by this fellows saying: Christ made no alteration at all, when he said
Dic ecclesiae, tell the church: but kept even the old name of it, vz: which it
had before given unto it by Moses. How blind then was Beza, Cartwright, and
the rest, that they could not find this proper name of their sovereignty in
all the old testament: Annot in Math. 16.18.
but were feign to fly to the Talmud? But will Beza, think you, take this at
his hands? No I warrant you.

For says he: vocabulo ecclesiae significari ciuium conuentum, nemo est qui
ignoret, etc. Haebrei (...) vocant. Sed postea communis loquendi consuetudo
fecit, vt pro eoru^ caetu accipiatur, qui Christu^ profitentur. There is no man
ignorant that the word ecclesia does signify an assembly of Citizens. The
Hebrews do call it an assembly or company met together. But afterward by
custom it came to pass, that it was taken for the assembly of them that do
profess Christ. Which custom (I hope it will be confessed) did begin about
Christ's time: and not in Moses time. And then the disciplinarian Trauerser is
very well served for his sauciness, in taking upon him, to proceed further,
then his said Masters had given him in commission.

But howsoever these fellows will agree amongst themselves: me thinks a man
might be bold (by their place of Matthew) to call their parochial regiment,
Math. 1^.
by the name of the church. For they all will confess: that Christ called it
so. And then it will follow by their grounds, that every parish or church, must
have a new church erected in it: which new church must have authority to
command and censure the old, and so one Church must be over another. Yea but
(says Beza in effect) we are rather to follow the apostles, in this point then
Christ. That which he called Church, meaning the Synedrium, that is Council:
the apostles called presbyteriu^, De excom. pa. 119.
Eldership. Quod Christus ecclesiam iam mutato Synagogae vel Synedrij nomine
appellarat: Paulus presbyterium nominauni. That which Christ called the Church,
changing the name of Synagoge or Council: Paul called Eldership. Again: quod
Iudaei Synedrium, Christiani presbyterium test Apostolo vocarant. That which
the Jews called Council: the Christians (as the Apostle witnesses) called
Eldership. And why? Beza would blush, if he could not give a reason for any
thing. Idcirco fortassis, potius quam Synedrium, ne qua pateret calumniandi
occasio, Contra Erast. fol 36.
quasi Christiani statum publicum turbare and de magistratuum authoritate ac
jurisdiction quicquam ad se protrahere vellent. The Apostles peradventure
called this regiment rather Eldership then Council, least there might be given
thereby some occasion of slaundering: as though the christians had purposed to
have troubled the public state, and to have taken to themselves some part of
the Magistrates authority and jurisdiction.

Well: and are we yet come to an issue, how we may call this form of
government? Shall we term it the Eldership? No surely: if we will follow
some other reformed Churches, which are so often commended unto us. Presbyterium
vocare Consistorium apud nos mos est. De excom. page 110.
It is the manner and fashion with us at Geneua (says Beza) to call the
Eldership a consistory. With whom agrees, I.B. the superintendent (as it is
thought) of the Italian Church in London: saying: Although we have in our
churches the same order, which the Apostles ordained: De polit. ciu. and eccle.
page 170.
yet we have changed the name of Eldership, and do call it now by another name,
vz: consistory. And good reason. It is so called at Geneua. The Apostles call
it Eldership: but yet they dispensing with that point, do call it, as they
list. Men no doubt; of a sovereign prerogative. But to proceed.

It should seem, that as these men, have changed the name of Eldership into
Consistory: so have others in some places done it into Synod. Sohnius To: 1.
page 231.
Against both which sort, Bannosius in his long and tedious disciplinarian
discourse, is very bold to write his mind: that it ought rather to be called
Eldership: then either Synod or consistory: De pol. ciu. dei, etc. pa. 80
And that for two reasons: vz: first because some men do not distinguish
sufficiently the assemblies of the christians, from the Synodes of the Jews:
and secondly, because the Hierarchy of Rome, Ibidem.
does call their presbyterium Eldership, consistorium a consistory.

From all these, as I suppose, many of the French Churches: or at the least
that of Heidelberge does dissent. For thus Iunius, Ecclesiasticus lib. 2. cap.
3.
lately (a chief Ruler there) writes. Concilium ecclesiae Senatumue
appellamus: quod Paulus presbyterium: That which Paul called the Eldership, we
call the council of the church or the Senate. and so the Elders there are
Senators.. Which names, both of Senate, and Senators (says Beza) Vt ciuilibus
dignitatibus couuenientius and calumniae obnoxium: De excom. page 112.
videtur studio quodam vetus purior ecclesia in occidente repudiasse, as being
proper to civil dignities and subject to slander, the old purer church in
the West, does seem of purpose, to have rejected. And Bannosius affirms:
that the reason that moved those, where he was, to call the Eldershippe a
consistory, was: quod nomen minus odiosum quam Senatus esset, because it was a
name less odious, then the name of Senate. You have heard also before out of
Beza, that the Apostles themselves refused the name of Synedrium, as being all
one with Council or Senate, for the same respects: But all this
notwithstanding, now, (that belike) they think themselves in some places, to
have laid such sufficient foundations for the continuance of their regiment, as
that it shall not be removed, (what soever the Magistrates shall conceive of
it:) they show themselves in their colors, and do call it plainly a Senate:
neither respecting the wisdom which themselves do ascribe unto the Apostles,
nor the foresaid example of the purer West Churches.

And indeed, although at Geneua, the name of the Consistory be most in use:
yet I guess that Beza, would gladly bring it, to be changed, and called a
Senate. And I do partly so think, because in his printed Book of
excommunication: he has left out the reason, why the Apostles called it not
Senate but Eldership: which reason is in his written Book that Erastus
confuted. Besides also, oftentimes in his notes upon the new Testament, he
terms the form of that government, by the name of Ecclesiastical Senate.
And namely, where they dream it was commanded by Christ in these words. Dic
Ecclesiae, tell the Church, Constat hic agi de Ecclesiastico Senatu: it is
manifest, (says he) that here Christ speaks of the Ecclesiastical Senate.
In another place also (he says) tell the Church, that is the Eldership: De
excom. page 4.6.
and here in effect, tell the Ecclesiastical Senate. So that (to my
understanding) he confounds Eldership and Senate; making them both one. Which
peradventure will bring himself within the compass of his own words against
Castalion: To translate, Presbyterium, Eldership, Senatum, a Senate: does argue
a great vanitye of wit, and is indeed a profane innovation.

But to let that pass: by hook or crook, it must be a Senate, Fenner theol.
page 277.
which tickleth and pleases some of our reformers: insomuch as in their Latin
discourses of Discipline. there is little, Disc. Eccl. so. 124. 123.
but Ecclesiastical Senate and Senators. Christus pro more Iudaeorum
Ecclesiam Ecclesiasticum Senatum appellauit. Christ after the custom of the
Jews, called the Ecclesiastical Senate the Church. Again: Ecclesiastical
Senate is an assembly of Elders etc. And again: Cum hic Senatus (...)a Paulo
appellatur: Presbyteros esse hos Senatores necesse est. Seeing this Senate is
called by Paul an Eldership: it follows of necessity, Learned disc. page 96.
85.
that the Elders must be Senatoures. I omit some old English names, which
have been given to this Minion, Iunius. pa. 82.
as Congregation, Assembly, Segniory etc. and some Latin names also, as the
Epitome of the Church and Diaconia Presbyteroru^, Iunius pa. 61.
the Deaconship of Elders: because they are now grown (as it seems) to be
too base. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Rather let us call it with Iunius (if I conceive his meaning) materfamilias,
De excom. page 124.
the huswife of the Church in Christ's absence: or with Master Beza, Tribunal
Christi, the Tribunal seat of Christ.

But yet, for all these words: I greatly doubt it; that such honorable titles
will not long be continued. For if Master Beza his interpretation of Christ's
speeches, Dic Ecclesiae, does prove to be authentical: then they must be
enforced (in my opinion) to call their government by a name of no great
estimation; Annot. Mat. 18.17.
amongst those, that profess Christ. Annot. Marc 5.22.
For let the place be considered, and he makes Christ in effect to say: Tell
the Church, that is, tell the Senate, Archisynagogorum, of the Archrulers of the
Synagogue: who had the power and jurisdiction, that is there spoken of, in
their hands. By which exposition, if Christ had been pleased to have spoken
properly, without using of any figure: when he said, Tell the Church, he
should have said Tell the Synagogue: and the word Church in that place must
needs be so expounded. Whereby it follows: that (if Christ's authority by
Bezaes exposition may be regarded,) they ought by theyrowne collections and
interpretations, to call their several Senates, so many Synagogues. Besides:
Annot. Mat. 10.17.
Master Beza says, that Synedrium and Synagogue were both one in Christ's
judgment: and there is nothing more reasonable in their writings, then to call
their Senats Synedria: which shows, that at the least, they may as well, by
Christ's testimony, call them Synagogues if they list.

I would not have troubled you with this tedious discourse of the several
names of this pretended regiment: but that you might understand, how their
tongues are divided about such a trifle, and thereby also perceive, the infancy
or new birth of this fancy of theirs; in that as yet they are not agreede, how
to name the Child. If it fall out, that it get the name of Senate: what an
honorable style will this be: Senatus populusque Romanus, the Senate and
people of Saint Giles in the Fields, and so, of all other parishes in England*

CHAP. VII. Of their uncertainty concerning the places where this pretended
regiment should be erected.
Master Cartwright, and all his English followers, (that I have read) do
affirm it most confidently: that by the commandment of God, by the
institution of Christ; by the rules of Gods word; and by the practice, and
commandment of the Apostles: There ought of necessity to be an Eldership in
every Demonst. cap. 10.12, 14. Hay any work page 11. T.C. Lib. 2. page 360. T.C.
Lib. 3. pa. 49.
parish: in every Lib. 1. pa. 173
Congregation: Lib. 174.
Church by Church: in every particular ib. 2. pa. 516
Congregation: and not only in Lib. 3. 45.
Cities, but in all Churches: in the Lib. 3. Page 73
Country and vplandish towns wheresoever there is a Lib. 3. page 46 Demon. ca
12.
Pastor: without the which Eldership, every such church; or Congregation, is to
be accounted Mart. junior these. 14.
maimed, imperfect, no Them. cap. 12.
entyre body: 10 T.C. lib. 1. pa. 176.
want the exercise of the principal offices of charity: to be destitute of no
small part of the Gospel of true Religion, of Christ's government, of the
pillar of truth, and of all those priueledges, and profits, which are assigned
by them, unto the enjoying of it.

Hereunto, is fit to be added; what they have further written; concerning this
word, Church, and how they describe their said Parish. The Church (says
Cartwright) is either taken in the Scriptures for the whole body of the
Catholic, Lib. 2. page 515
church, or for one particular congregation, or for the faithful company of
one house. T.C. Lib. 2. 356.
This one particular Congregation, Hay any work page 11.
when it has an Eldership placed in it; they term it, the body of one
particular Church, and a perfect and vnmaymed body of Christ: Defense of
ecclesiastical govern. pa. 36.
wherein the ministers of the word and the Elders are the eyes; and the
Deacons, the hands: without the which members, though it may live a while
(they confess), yet (say they) it so pineth and wants; that in the end, it
will become, a dead corpse upon the ground. And for the quantity of this
body the dimensions of it, or the description of such a particular Congregation
or Parish, Lib. 2. page 360.
as they speak of; thus M. Cartwright squareth it out: Every competent
congregation and particular body of a church, should have her parts in
neighborhood of dwellings well trussed one with another. Again, a Parish well
bounded is nothing else, but a number of those families, which dwelling near
together: may have a commodious resort, and be at once taught with one mouth.
With these points of our English Eldership; I meruell how their associates in
other Countries will be satisfied. By the Discipline in France, concluded
upon by five general Synodes of the reformed Churches of that Realm: It was
agreed upon, that request should be made to the Princes and other of the
Nobility that follow the court, to have particular Consistories in their
private houses: Cap. 1. Sect. 11
consisting every one of a minister; and some of the honestest of their
Families. Here, are then Consistories to be erected in the church according to
Cartwrightes third acceptance of the word church; that is in private houses:
and likewise a Parish not of many but of one family. And peradventure in time,
it may so come about, as that this will be current doctrine in England, not
only for Noblemen, to have Elderships in their private houses, but for
Gentlemen likewise. For now it is already groen thus far; that many of both
sorts, yea some but mean gentlemen, will have their several ministers: and
for coming to their parish churches, though they be hard by their doors, they
account it a dishonorable matter: their parlor-seruice, and private speaking
(as they term it) pleases them best. Sohn. meth. Theo. to. page 212.
I might here add, how D. Sohnius is bold to dissent from Cartwright: where
speakinge of the diverse significations of the word church, he says
Particularis etc. The particular church is divided, and has her name agreeable
to the diuersitye of places, that is Nations, Provinces, Towns, Parishes,
Houses, or Families. For so, there is a church of one Province, of one City,
of one town, of one house. And so he quoteth many places of scripture, for
this his assertion.

But to proceed, Danae. de eccles. cap: 10:
Danaeus, a man as well learned (for ought is yet seen) as Cartwright is: does
not think that by the institution of Christ, there must needs be an
Eldership not only in every City, but in every vplandish and country town
also. For he says (if I understand him) that in the Apostles times, the ruling
Elders; (of whom the Eldership is chiefly named) was used to be established in
vnaquaque tantu^ ciuitate, in qua erat ampla et populosa ecclesia, et magnus
fideliu^ numerus, In every city only, where the church was populous. In which
city (he further adds) quaeque ciuitatis et ecclesiae pars seu paroecia
suu^ habebat presbyterum, Tit 1.5. Act. 14.23
Every parish had a priest or minister, as the parishes in the country had
also: oppidatim that is town by town a priest: much like to those whom we
call in our times Curatores, Curates. Furthermore also: the reforming ministers
of Scotland do account their platform now in practice there, to be as
agreeable to the word of God, as M. Cartwrightes: and yet (as the Chronicles
do report) they have but 52. Elderships in Scotland: and those placed in their
chiefest cities and great towns. Unto every of which Elderships (as I am
informed) 24. particular churches or parishes (for the most part) do
appertain: none of them having any such particular Eldership of their own,
but are ruled, controled, and censured, by those in the said cities, or
towns; whereunto they are adjoined and subject.

In the Low countries, it is true; that every parish has her Eldership. But
what a kind of Eldership? Hear a very learned and a grave man of that
country: Ruri in pagis etc. In the country villages, in some places they have
but a Pastor, one Elder, and a Deacon. In Gaunt every parish, likewise had
their Eldership, consisting of more or fewer as the quantity of them were: and
besides those, there was a consistorye for the whole city. All which
particular Elderships, in the country and cities, when any matters of greater
moment fell out, especially for exco^municatio^; Ea potestas nulli particulari
ecclesiae concessa est; that power or authority is granted to no particular
church, sine concilio et assensu generalis consistorij in magna vrbe, et in
pagis et oppidulis colloquij sieve classis; without the council and consent of
the general consistorye in cities, and great towns, and of the conference or
classis in the country towns and villages. So as here we find a number of
Christ's kingdoms set up: but they want their scepter and power: without the
which our men, would not give a pin for all the rest. For so they are
imperfect, and maimed bodies of Christ.

But to come to that, which is the pattern of all right church regiment: even
to the Eldership of Geneua. There are in that city (as I have heard) four or
five great parishes, and in the territory, belonging unto it, almost 20. and
yet for the censuring and guiding of them all, they have but one Eldership
according (as it seems) to the Jewish order: there being in Jerusalem but one
Sanedrim, and yet many Synagogues. Of the which Geneuian reformation, Beza de
presb. page 102.
it may justly be affirmed (if Cartwright and his fellows with us say truly):
first: that the church of Geneua has neglected the commandment of God, the
institution of Christ, the commandment and practice of the Apostles: in that
there is not placed an Eldershippe there in every parish: and secondly: that
the said church, being neither the catholic church, nor one particular
parish, nor the faithful company of one family, cannot rightly have so much,
as the name of the church, nor be truly termed the well squared body of
Christ, with all the true dimensions and limits of it. And certaynely there is
here no starting hole (as far as I can discern) for the excuse of that
Reformation and platform: except it may be justified, that all these four
or five and twenty parishes or there aboutes, are so trussed together, that
they do and may all at once meet in one Congregation, and are taught with one
mouth: which to affirm (besides that their practice is otherwise) will be
thought I trust great boldness, unless they can find a pastor with Stentors
voice, who (by report) could make as great a noise as fifty men.

I cannot choose but put you here in mind of a point in Master Cartwright,
that seems very strange unto me. He says, that there were more that did
externally profess Christ, T.C. lib. 1. Page 49.
in the Apostles times, then there are now: insomuch as we are not now the
tithe of them: that is the tenth part. Now set these things together. The
Church in the Scriptures, where it signifies not the Catholic Church, nor
one private familye, does signifye one particular congregation: and no more are
rightlye to be of one congregation, then may at once be taught by one mouth.
And thereuppon, will it not follow; that (if the Apostles were as wise as
Master Cartwright to bound their Congregations) whereas there is mention in
the Scriptures of the Church of Rome: Romans 16. 1. Cor. 1. Act. 13: Act. 20.
of the Church of Corinth: of the Church of Antioche: of the Church of Ephesus,
and of the Church of Jerusalem; we must think there were no more christians
there, in any one of those Cities; then might at one time hear one preacher?
And by that account, there are more christians within the city of London, and
the suburbs, the were in all those cities, and twice as many more. Which if M.
Cartwright will deny to be true, he must needs co^ses for the credit of
Scotland or of Geneua at the least, that (of all likelihood,) as diverse
housholdes (by his own rule) do concur together to make one convenient
parish: So diverse parishes in one city, suburbs, and territory thereof, may
be united, and rightlye bear the name of the church. Except we shall think,
that Christ referring (as they suppose) his Apostles to the imitation of the
Jews church government, Josephus.
they were so negligent workmen, as (there being at that time 400. Synagogues
in that one city,) they had erected in all their times, but one congregation,
christian church, or parish, answerable to one Synagoge: it being lawful for
them (by the square of that platform,) to have erected, if they had could, 400.

But let this pass (as a thing impertinent) and to return to the maimed and
pining Parishes at Geneua. You will say, did not Cartwright know the
ecclesiastical government of that city; when he writ his books? or shall we
once conceive, that he thought to condemn that regiment: which in other places
he does so greatly extol? certainly for mine own part, although I do not
greatly respect what he will say that he either knows or thinks: yet I
suppose he will never for shame deny it, but that he misliketh that form of
church regiment. For first besides the premises, being urged with Caluins
authority, who thought the church of Geneua, with all her said Parishes to
make but one body of a church: Lib. 2. page 631.
his answer to that point in effect is this, Admit Calvin so thought. I am of
opinion that if Calvin had not so thought, he would never have erected up
such an Eldership. And if Beza, did not think so still; I judge he would
alter it. Secondly also, (upon another occasion) he resembles the order of
certain reformed churches (which in this sense must be necessarily either of
Scotland, Lib. 2. pa. 596.
Flaunders, or Geneua) unto the custom in S. Ieromes time ( when Bishops
besides their one only church, had certain other congregations belonging to
their oversight,) etc. and in mislike thereof, says (for part of his answer
to this point, being pressed by his adversary against him), I appeal to the
institution of God, and use of the purer times after the Apostles. But amongst
other qualifications which he makes; least we should think, that where such
reformations are made, as have diverse parishes belonging to one Eldership,
there the old Diocese and Bishops are in effect, not abrogated, but a little
altered, he says, that one in such Eldership is above the rest, Lib. 2. pa.
631.
but for a time, (as Calvin was chosen thereunto, every two years,) and not
during his ministry. Which authority over many parishes, but for a time,
although he will not plainly condemn it, in the reformed churches which he
favors, Lib. 1. page 123
yet speaking against the order of the church of England, Lib. 2. pa. 622*
both he and his companions do make it a step, Defense of ccclesiasticall
govern. pa. 80.
whereby Satan did advance the kingdom of Antichrist.

Lastly, as hitherto you have found M. Cartwright with his friends, opposite
in this matter unto Geneua and Scotland; (differing also much from the churches
in the Low countries): Page 637.
so he seems to me, to cross himself. For in his second book he says,
that particular churches are now in steed of Synagogues, and that their
Synagogues, were the same that our particular churches are. And in his third
book he writes thus, Lib. 3. page 46.
For my part I confess, that there comes not to my mind, whereby I could
precislie conclude out of the old testament, that there was an eldershippe
amongst the Jews in every of their Synagogues. If that can not then be showed
out of Moses (who was so faithful in setting down all that was committed to
his charge) and that Christ commanded no new thing, but such as Moses
instituted: how has he urged so mightily, that we must have his Elderships in
every Parish? We shall see peradventure that in short time M. Cartwright will
give over this hold, and betake himself to the city consistories, framing
new Diocesses, to be subject unto them: as in other countries, you have heard,
they are. Well, I would wish, that before their Elderships were granted unto
them: they should agree together, where they ought to place them. But now, to
the several parts of every Eldership.

CHAP. 8. Of Bishops generally: of the pretended equality, of Pastors, or new
parish Bishops, and how the chief impugners of Bishops begin to relent.
IN the old testament, the high Priest, besides that he was a figure of
Christ, had also under Moses, Joshua, the Judges, and Kings (for the better
ordering and government of the church,) authority and jurisdiction
ecclesiastical, within that country of Canaan, under whom for the same
purpose were other Priests at least 24. that were called Principes Sacerdotum,
Princes of the Priests; all of them inferior to the high Priest, but superior
to the rest. In the new testament, our Savior Christ, whilst he lived on the
earth, had his Apostles, and in degree under them, his 70. Disciples. After his
ascentio^, the same inequality of the ministry of the word; continued in the
Church (by all men's confession) as long (at the least) as the Apostles lived.
In the Apostles times Saint Mark was Bishop of Alexandria, Saint James was
Bishop of Jerusalem, Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus was Bishop of
Crete: if the ancient fathers, and Ecclesiastical histories be of any credit.

The Apostles having received the promise of the holy Ghost; after a short time
dispersed themselves (by advise) into diverse regions. And there by painful
preaching and laboring in the Lords harvest: they planted no doubt very many
Churches. As the number of Christians grew, and had their particular
assemblies, and meetings in many Cities and countries within every one of their
circuites: they placed pastors in every congregation, they ordained certain
Apostolical men, to be chief assisters unto them: whom they placed, some one
in this particular country, another in that, and some others in sundry Cities
to have the rule and oversight under them, of the Churches there: and to
redress and supply such wantes as were needful. And they themselves, (after
a while, and as they grew in age, and escaped the cruelty of tyrants)
remained for the most part in some head City within their compass: to ouersee
them all, both Churches, Pastors, and Bishops or Superintendents: and to give
their directions as occasions required, and as they thought it convenient.

When any, either of these Apostolical assistantes, or of the Apostles
themselves, dyed: there were ever some worthy men chosen and appointed to
succeed them in those Cities and Countries, where they had remained. For we
may not idly dream, that when they dyed, the authority, which was given
unto them, ceased: no more then we may, that the authority of Aaron, and of
his natural sons expired and ended with them. Besides it is manifest by all
Ecclesiastical hystories: that many Churches were planted after their deaths.
And furthermore, it could not be, but that some Churches, especially under
those Apostles, that were soonest put to death, were (when they dyed) in the
same case that Crete was, when Titus was sent thither, and had therefore as
much need of a Titus as ever Crete had. Furthermore, who can be accounted to
be well in his wits, that will imagine, that Christ should ordain such an
authority, but for some threescore years* especially the same causes
continuing, why it was first instituted, that were before. Nay I may boldly
say: that there was greater need for the continuance of it afterward. For the
Apostles having so great power to work miracles, and by their prayers to
procure from God such strange executions of his pleasure upon the
contemptuous, as did fall upon Ananias and his wife, (and I doubt not but in
like cases, sometimes, upon some others): their ruling and commanding
authority, was not so necessary then, as it was afterward, when that power
to work miracles ceased.

But what should I need to use many words in a matter so apparent* After the
death of the apostles, and of their assistants: vz: the Bishops placed by them,
as is mentioned, the Ecclesiastical hystories, and the ancient fathers, have
kept the register of their names, that succeeded sundry of them, and ruled the
Churches after them, as they before had ruled them. Whereupon they were called
from all antiquity: the Apostles and Apostolical men's successors. This
inequality in the Ministry of the word, has been approved and honored by
all the ancient fathers (none excepted): by all the general Councelles, that
ever were held in Christendom: and by all other men of learning (that ever I
heard of) for many hundred years after the Apostles time: saving that Aerius
the heretic, an ambitious person, growing into great rage, for that he
missed of a Bishopric, which he sued for: first broached the opinion, which
is now so current amongst his Scholars: that there ought to be no
difference between a Bishop and a Priest. Epiph.
Whereby he took upon him, to be equal with the Bishop, that prevailed in
the said suite against him: and challenged to have as great authority, he being
but a Priest, as the other had, being a Bishop.

In this latter age of the world, when after a long darkness, it pleased
almighty God to restore unto us, the light of his Gospel: the chief
instruments that God then used, and adorned with most singular gifts, for such
a mighty work, were very far from that conceit, ^and rash presumption,
which afterward possessed certain persons of Aerius humor, and yet does
boil in many of their followers breasts. It is true, that many things are to
be found in their writings, which (at the first show) do make very greatly
against Bishops. But diverse persons in these days, not well considering the
circumstances of those times: do greatly abuse the world, in extending them
further, then they meant them. It was far from their intent that those
things which they had written against Popish Bishops (the ennemies of the
Gospel): should ever have been urged, against such Bishops as did willingly
embrace it. I will acquaint you a little with the proceedings of those times:
and then leave this point to your wise consideration.

When the said learned men began to seek the reformation of Religion in
Germany, it is not unknown unto you, into what subjection the Pope had brought
all Christian Princes and states. The Bishops as his vassals, did then wholly
depend upon him. They held their Bishoprics by his authority: and nothing
could be done, especially in Church matters, but by the Pope and them. So as
when Luther and the rest began to disclose the enormities of Popery, and
desired some godly reformation of them: you may easily conceive (the Pope and
his Bishops being the chief maintainers of that corruption) what little
encouragement they found at their hands. It is evident in their writings,
how earnestly and humbly at the first they dealth both with the Pope and with
many other of the chiefest Bishops: that they would be content and pleased to
reform such things as they found to be amiss in the Church. But all their
endeavors to that purpose, were in vain. The Pope and his Clergy, stood too
much upon their reputation. If they should have yealded, they imagined the
world would have condemned them: in that they had not in time, of themselves,
prevented or redressed so notable abuses. Whereupon Luther and those learned
men that joined with him, were driven to fly unto the Civil magistrates, and
to advertise them of their duties, proving it unto them most plentifully out
of the scriptures, that in such an obstinate defection amongst the priests, it
appertained unto the^, (every one within their own free states and
territories) to reform religion themselves: as the godly kings in the old
testament had done in the like cases. And the rather to move them thereunto,
they labored by all the means they could, to make the Popish Clergy most odious
unto them. They inueighed against their pride, against their superfluities,
against their tyranny, and against their corruptions. After much pains taking
to these and the like effects, it pleased God to move the hearts of many of
the civil magistrates, to think better of their duties, and plainly to
perceive, how the Pope and his Bishops had formerly abused them. The godly
kings and magistrates in the scriptures, when they reformed religion, were ever
most careful, that the liuinges appointed by God for the Priests, might be
thoroughly preserved. If any by abuse had bin alienated: they caused them to be
restored again. And so I suppose the civil magistrates, should have done in
this latter age. But it has fallen out otherwise: and all the other godly
learned men in christendom, do mislike it. The persuasions to Princes that the
Bishops and Abbots had too much: was very plausible. The free Cities,
notwithstanding their freedom in respect of the Emperor, yet they were subject
all of them unto Bishops: and were not discontented, that so good an occasion
was offered unto the^, to procure their greater liberty. Luther and the rest of
those learned men regarding nothing, but that the light of the gospel might be
restored: were content to yeald much, and to bear (against their minds) with
many unequal conditions. So as at the last: by their wisdom and diligence,
they prevailed. God moved the hearts of diverse civil magistrates: to begin a
reformation. The Pope, the Bishops, and the chiefest of the Clergy impugned
it, by all the means they could possibly. Whereupon, there being no other
remedy, their authority employed to hinder those proceedinges, was rejected:
and the most of their livings (which they had in any of those territories) were
seized into the hands of the civil governors there. upon these and many such
like occasions, great trobles did arise. The bishops, thought themselves greatly
iniuried. Diverse great princes, took their parts: and so did the Emperor. They
misliked the reformation; which was proceeded in, after that sort: the
authority of Bbs. was greatly insisted upon. Insomuch as, (notwithstanding
that the said learned men had offered in the beginning to the Bishops, to
perform al due obedience unto them, if they would be content to reform
religion) they were now again constrained, to make the same known more
generally, both to the Emperor, and to all the said Princes; still offering
for their parts, as much as they had done before, and that if they would but
cease, to impose upon them their intolerable burdens, of single life: of men's
unlawful and wicked traditions, (which they did further specify): and to
forbid them to do those things which God commanded, they should do: that
then, they would with all their hearts most willingly yield unto their
Episcopal jurisdiction, and to the restoring of the same, where it had been
abolished. Vouchsafe (I pray you) to hear their own testimonies, to this
purpose. You shall thereby well perceive, that if, they were now alive in
England, and should find their names so used as they are, against the
government of our Bishops: they would take it in very ill part, and be heartily
sorry for it. Thus the authors of the Augustane confession, and all the learned
men that have subscribed thereunto, (in which number Calvin is comprehended,)
have professed touching this matter.

The Bishops might easily retain the obedience due unto them: ^^sto. conf.
August. per Chytr: p. 109
if they urged us not to keep those traditions, which we cannot keep with a
good Conscience. They impose a single life, and will receive none that will not
swear, never to teach the pure doctrine of the Gospel.

Apol. conf. Augu. Ibi. 363
Again we have often protested, that we do greatly approve the Ecclesiastical
policy and degrees in the Church, and as much as lies in us, do desire to
conserve them. We do not mislike the authority of Bishops: so that they would
not compel us to do against Gods commandment. Furthermore; Apol. conf.
August. per Pap. page 137.
we do here protest, and we would have it so recorded, that we would
willingly preserve the Ecclesiastical and Canonical policy: if the Bishops
would cease to tyrannise over our Churches. This our mind or desire, shall
excuse us with all posterity: both before God and all nations, that it may not
be imputed unto us, that the authority of Bishops is overthrown by us.

Besides: Ibid. pa 305.
I would to God ( says Melanchthon) I would to God, it lay in me to restore
the government of Bishops. For I see what a manner of Church we shall have: the
Ecclesiastical policy being dissolved. Video postea multo intolerabiliorem
futuram tyrannidem, quam antea vnquam fuit: I do see that hereafter will grow
up a greater tyranny in the Church, then ever there was before.

Moreover: Erasmus Ebnerus. Hier. Ebnero ibid. page 310.
mira dissipatio erit Ecclesiarum ad posteritatem etc. There will be a
wonderful confusion of Churches left to our posterity: except they may now be
joined together again, and have certain Bishops who may be enforced to govern
the church, and look unto them more diligently then in times past they have
been looked unto. Again: by what right or law may we dissolve the
Ecclesiastical policy: Melan. to Camerarius in Hist. con. August. per Chytr.
p. 389.
if the Bishops will grant us that, that in reason they ought to grant* Et vt
liceat, certe non expedit. And if it were lawful for us so to do, yet surely
it were not expedient. Luther was ever of this opinion: whom many for no other
cause I see do love, but for that they think they have cast off their Bishops
by means of him, and have obtained a liberty, minime vtilem ad posteritatem,
which will not be profitable for our posterity. For tell me what estate will
the Churches be in hereafter: if all the old orders be abolished, and that
there be no certain rulers ordained?

To the same effect also says George Prince Anhalt, Earl of Ascaine Lord of
Sewest and Brewburge: vtinam etc. I would to God that those which carry the
names and titles of Bishops, Conciones Geor. Princ. Anhalt. fo. 61
would show themselves to be Bishops in deed. I wish they would teach nothing
that is disagreeable to the Gospel, but rule their Churches thereby. O quam
libenter, etc. Oh how willingly, and with what joy of heart would we receive
them for our Bishops, reverence them, obey them, and yield unto them their
jurisdiction and ordination etc. Id quod nos semper, and Dominus Lutherus etiam
etc: which we always and Master Luther both in words and in his writings very
often have professed.

And Calvin himself writing to Cardinal Sadolet, concerning the course that
had been held at Geneua, (as touching the reformation of Religion and in
excuse thereof against his challenge) does show himself to be of the same
mind he was of, when he subscribed to the said confession of Augusta:
professing that for his part he could have been well content, that the Bishop
there should have kept his authority and jurisdiction still, so that he would
have yielded to the bannishment of Poperye. For thus he writes. Call. to Sadol.
Talem nobis Hierarchiam si exhibeant etc. If they bring unto us such an
Hierarchy, or Priestly government, wherein the Bishops shall so rule, as that
they refuse not to submit themselves to Christ, that they so depend upon him
as their only head, and be content to refer themselves to him: in which
Priestlye government, let them so keep brotherly society amongst themselves,
that they be knitte together by no other rule then by the truth: then surely if
there shall be any, that shall not submit themselves to that Hierarchy or
Priestly government reverently, and with the greatest obedience that may be: I
confess there is no kind of Anathema or curse, or casting to the devil,
whereof they are not worthy.

And again in the same Epistle, he uses these words following: tending to
the great commendation of the authority of Bishops. Statue quaeso, etc. Set
before your eyes (I pray you) the ancient face of the church, as it was
amongst the Grecians in Chrysostom. and Basils times: and as it was amongst the
Latinists, when Cyprian, Ambrose and Augustine lived: and then behold the ruins
of that face, as now they are retained in the Church of Rome. And there will
appear as great difference between them, as the Prophets describe unto us,
between the excellent estate of the Church that flourished under David and
Solomon, and that Church which in Zedechia and Ioachims dates was fallen into
all kind of superstition, and had defiled altogether the purity of the worship
of God.

This Epistle was written by Calvin to the Cardinal 1539. at such time as being
removed from Geneua, he remained at Strasburgh: where having great acquaintance
with Melanchthon, Beza in vi^ Calvin.
Bucer, and diverse other learned men, he carried himself in such sort, as
was greatly to their likings. Insomuch as whilst he remained at Strasburgh,
Bucerusinter Epist. Calu. 27. and 28.
the Colloquies at Worms and Ratisbone, being appointed by the Emperor for
the compounding of controversies in Religion: the learned men that were sent
thither, for the Protestants, reckonned Calvin a meet man to take thither with
them. Which I thought good to observe, because hereby it will further appear:
what mind and judgment Calvin still carried concerning Bishops; so as they
would admit the reformation of Religion: contrary to Cartwrights shameless
assertion, T.C. l. 1. p. 11^
that Calvin would have shaken at the name of an Archbishop: and have trembled
at the office of a Bishop. For in the articles agreede upon at that time by
the said learned men, ( Calvin being amongst them) for a reconciliation in
the behalf of the Protestants: thus they declared their judgments of this
matter. Arti. protest. cap de unit. Ecclesiae.
Vt omnia ordine fierent in Ecclesia etc. That all things might be done orderly
in the Church according to S. Paul's rule etc. For the auiding of Schisms,
there was a profitable ordination, that a Bishop should be chosen out of many
Priests: who should rule the Church by teaching the Gospel, and by retaining
the Discipline: and qui praeesset ipsis Presbyteris, and who should govern the
Priests themselves. Afterward also there were degrees made of Archbishops, and
above them of Patriarchs, etc. These ordinations (if those that govern do
their duty) as preach, ouersee the doctrine and manners of their Churches,
correct errors and vice, practice Ecclesiastical censures, etc. Resp. protest.
are profitable to preserve the unity of the Church. And again in their
additions to the said Articles. As concerning ordination, we especially
approve the ancient custom of the Church: that those, that are to be
ordained, should first be tried, instructed, and upon the public testimony
of some godly and learned men, etc. admitted into the Ministry. This difficult
and necessary charge for the Church, it is to be wished (reformation being
made) that the Bishops would take upon them. And we hear that our learned men
have expressly so yielded ordination unto those Bishops, si praecedat
reformatio, if first there may be a reformation. Likewise also in another
treatise that was then made by Master Bucer, with the advice of the said
learned men, De refor. aduer. Eccles. p. 95.
and offered to the Emperor: it is thus written. Annitendum est etc. We must
endeavor, that that form and distribution of Ecclesiastical government,
which the Cannons do prescribe to Bishops and Metropolitanes, be restored and
kept. And after in the same Treatise. Concerning names and titles, and all
those things, wherewithal that external power and dignity ought to be adorned
and established, and the lawful obedience of such as be under them confirmed:
it will easily be agreed upon.

Much more passed in those Colloquies and treatises to this purpose: Calvin
himself as it has been said being then present, and in company whith those
learned men. And the reasons that moved them so to offer, agree, and protest at
that time in this behalf, I think (besides the former reasons mentioned) were
these, and such like: which Bucer (a principal man then amongst them) has
elsewhere set down: When speaking of Bishops and Metropolitanes and of their
authority over the Churches, and ministers within their Dioces and Provinces,
he says thus. Hoc consentiebat legi Christ's, Bucer de vit. and vsu minist.
page 565
fiebatque ex iure corporis Christi. This was agreeable to the law of Christ,
and was done by the authority of the body of Christ. And in another place. Buc.
de regu. Christi pa. 67
I am ex perpetua etc. Now by the perpetual obsexuation of all Churches even
from the Apostles times, we do see: that it seemed good to the holy Ghost,
that amongst Priests to whom the procuration of Churches, was chiefly
committed, there should be one, that should have the care or charge of diverse
Churches, and the whole Ministry committed unto him: and by reason of that
charge he was above the rest, and therefore the name of Bishop was attributed
peculiarly unto these chief rulers of Churches. Nay he goes further and says:
that in the Apostles times one of the Priests or Pastors was chosen and
ordained to be the Captain and Prelate over the rest: Buc. de cura ^ura^. p.
251.
who went before the rest, and had the cure of Souls, and the administration
of the Episcopal office, especially in the highest degree. And this he proves
by the example of S. James Act 15. and after concludes in this sort. The like
ordination has been perpetually observed in other Churches likewise as far
as we may learn out of all the Ecclesiastical histories, and the most
ancient Fathers, as Tertullian, Cyprian, Irenaeus, Eusebius and others.

Hereby then it may appear unto you, what was thought of Bishops and of their
authority by the learned men of those times: who sought as narrowly into that
calling, what was lawful, and what was unlawful, and were as well able to
judge thereof: (I may speak it I trust without offense) as either Carwright or
all his accomplices. There were some busy bodies indeed a little before or
about the time of the Colloquies mentioned, who were very angry with the said
learned men, and especially with Melanchthon, for yielding so much concerning
Bishops. Of whom he himself writes in this sort. Melan. to Camerar. hist,
conf. August. per Chytr. pa. 304.
Hoc male habet scilicet quosdam immoderatiores etc. This forsooth does anger
some immoder at men: that the jurisdiction and policy Ecclesiastical is
restored: interpreting the same to be the restitution of the Romish souerainty.
And thus also to Luther: Mel. to Luth. Ibid. pa. 306
you do not believe into what hatred I am grown with them of Noricum, and with
certain others: for the restitution of jurisdiction unto Bishops. Ita de regno
suo, non de Euangelio dimicant socij nostri. Our fellows do so fight for
their own kingdom, and not for the Gospel. Camerarius to the same purpose in
like manner makes this report. Camer. in vit. Phillip.
Audiui quosda^ etc. I have heard some accuse Phillip in that respect,
inhumanissime, most barbarously, when one of them said: that if he had been
hired with a great sum of money by the Roman faction to have defended their
state, he could not (in his opinion) have dealt more effectually for them, then
he did in maintaining of Bishops: and that Phillip was not to be accounted a
Patron of his own part, but of his adversaries, and that a chief and a
singular Patron etc. These things and diverse other more slanderous they
uttered without shame: quorum magnopere postea paenituit and puduit plaerosque:
Whereof many afterward repented and were ashamed of them. But notwithstanding
all these and such like slanderous hare-braines; the grauer sort, the best
learned, the godliest, and the wisest men amongst the Protestants, that then
lived: did follow and proceed as Phillip had begun, even accordingly as before
I have mentioned.

And since that time (for any thing I can find to the contrary) although the
bishops (still cleaving to the Pope, and opposing themselves against all kind
of reformation, further then it pleased them): were thereupon even of
necessity rejected (as before I have signified): yet as soon as the said
learned men grew to be able to establish their churches, in any reasonable
manner, they ordained amongst themselves the very same offices in effect,
throughout the most of the reformed Churches in Germany, Obseruat.
changing only the old Greek names (as Zanchius reports) of Archbishops
and Bishops into new and worse Latin names of superintendentes, and general
superintendentes, Erneste the Duke of Brunswick, Ernest. Regius in vit. Vrbani
Rhegij.
presently after the assembly of Augusta, procured Vrbanus Regius to go home
with him: and ecclesiarum in toto Ducatu Episcoparum ipsius gubernationi
permisit: and committed unto his government the Bishopric, Geor. Anhalt. page
611.
or superintendencie of all the Churches within his Dukedom One Sydonius being
thrust (as it seems) from the Bishopric of Mersenburge, (as cleaving wholly
to Popery), was afterward (upon his leaving of the Pope, and upon promise
made to maintain the reformation of religion, made in his absence, restored to
his bishopric. Geor. Anhalt. page 60.
And after him succeeded (as I take it in that bishopric) George the Prince
Anhalt before mentioned: being chosen thereunto as he says himself, vniuerso
capitali consensu, by the consent of the whole chapter. He had been brought up
in learning, and was at the time of the said election, In operib. Geor.
Anhal^. page 630.
a Priest or Cannon in the Cathedral Church of Mersenburge. Of whom being
bishop Henricus Stenius says: regebat ecclesias in Mersenburgensi diocaesi:
he ruled the Churches in the dioces of Mersenburge. And again: praesuit
ecclesijs vniuersae ditionis Mysorum: he governed the Churches of all the
dominion of Mysya.

Agreeable as well to these examples, as to the saying of Zanchius before
specified, is that which Ia: Haerbrandus a very learned man, and in his time
Divinity reader of Tubinge, Ia. Haerb. loc. com. pa. 699.
writes in his common places: Debent gradus esse, etc. There ought to be
degrees amongst Ministers, etc. as with us in the Duchy of Wirtenberge, there
are subdeacons, Deacons, Pastors, special superintendentes, and over them
general superintendentes. And in another place the same Haerbrand showing his
judgment generally: Loco de eccl. page 699.
Saluberrimum esset, etc. It were a most profitable order for the welfare of
the Church: if every particular province had her Bishops, and the Bishops
their Archbishop. And Iacobus Andreas, he is much of the same opinion (as
certain Ministers of Heidelberge do report) vz: Epist. contr. minist.
Heidel. page 8.
where he says: that it is a difficult matter to defend the peaceable estate
of Churches except there be some chief ruler and Bishop amongst them, to
whom rerum summa deferatur, the full ordering of matters, may be referred.

To this purpose in like sort, Osiander writes: even as though he had spoken
of the Church of England. Loc. com. cap. 10:
Although in the Primitive church (when she flourished with miracles) there
were diverse degrees and orders of Ministers: some Apostles: some Prophets, some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Doctors: yet as now the state of the Church
is, the Ministers may be divided into three orders or degrees: vz: Deacons,
Pastors, and Superintendentes, etc. To the Pastors particular Churches are
committed: Nec dubitatur, etc. and it is not doubted, but that every one of
them, may rule the Church committed unto him, sine collegae concilio, without
the Council of any fellow. Those pastors we call superintendents, who are so
set over other pastors; that they may visit the state of their Churches, and
punish both the Pastors and the people, if any thing be done amiss: or if any
thing fall out that they cannot correct, then they refer it unto a higher
court, consisting of deuines and politic men, who by the civil Magistrates
authority, or approbation, do amend such defects, etc.

Hemingius also affirms: Just. deguber. eccle.
that there are dispares dignitatis gradus in the ministry, and that partly by
the law of Cod, and partly by the approbation of the Church: that as Christ
ascending into heaven: gave gifts unto men: Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
doctors, and pastors: so he gave to the Church authority for edification: that
the Church by virtue of that power ordained ministers for her profit: that the
purer churches following the Apostles times, ordained some Patriarchs, some
Bishops, etc. some Pastors, and some Catechists, etc. That the reformed
Churches, have their Bishops, doctors, Pastors, and under them chaplains (we
call them cur^tes, as I think): That the Churches in Denmark, do acknowledge
degrees of dignity amongst Ministers: that they judge it meet, that other
Ministers should obey their Bishops in althings which tend to the edification
of the church according to the word of God, and the profitable government of
the Church: and that they judge Bbs. to have authority over other Ministers of
the church, ius non despoticum, sed patrium. Ieremia Hombergus a worthy man in
the Churches of God about Styria, Carinthia, and Carniola; but now removed
thence through the persecution, which the Jesuits have kindled in those parts:
affirms in his common places of divinity, reuiewed and allowed at Ratisbone
with very direct terms: De ministerio
that God himself has appointed degrees of ministers in the church, even
amongst those which have a mediate calling: vt concordia inter ministros
co^seruetur, etc. that concord amongst ministers might be preserved, and the
works of their ministry performed more easily, and more decently. And after
he has specified the common duties both of Bishops and ministers: he sets
down those, which he thinks are peculiar to Bishops, and to be executed by
them, vz: excommunication, ordination, and confirmation.

And with him agrees the Divinity reader at Lauinge, Phill. Haylbronner: De
minister. eccle.
writing upon the first Epistle of S. Paul to Timothy. Where he shows that
the Apostle appointed Timothy to be Bishop of Ephesus: that accordingly, there
are and ought to be degrees and orders of ministers of the Church: and having
described the common duties likewise of all ministers generally, he says thus.
Episcopus, etc. Besides the said common offices, to Bishops was commended the
public oversight and government: so as it belonged to them to appoint fit
ministers for the churches near them: also to hear the accusations and
complaints which are made against the Pastors of their churches, and to decide
them, etc. Sic enim Paulus scribit Timotheo Ephesorum Episcopo: for so Paul
writes to the Bishop of Ephesus: lay thy hands rashly upon no man, and
against a Priest admit not an accusation, etc.

Of the same judgment in like sort is Egidius Hunius, the divinity professor,
at Marpurge, in his commentary upon S. Paul's Epistle to Titus. He affirms:
that, the Apostle appointed Titus, the general superintendent for the
government over the Churches of that large and noble Island of Crete: that his
duty was to ordain Pastors in every parish, and likewise to make Bishops:
that the Bishop or superintendent has his dioces, the Pastor his parish or
church: as Paul commanded Titus to place priests in every parish: That
thereby, it appears God does require, that there should be orders and
degrees amongst Ministers, vt alij praesint, alij subsint: that some may rule,
and some obey: that this order is not newly devised, but received in the church
from the Apostles times: and that God himself made a distinction between
Ministers, and appointed degrees, according to that he gave some Apostles,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, and Doctors, for the repayring
of the Saints for the work and the Ministry, and for the edification of the
body of Christ. And again, upon these words: A Bishop must be unreprovable
etc. he meets with the common objection, for the equality of Ministers,
because every Minister is called a Bishope sometimes in the Scriptures: and
says: that the word Bishop notwithstanding it be oftentimes used by S. Paul
for every pastor of the church of God: who have a kind of oversight over their
several charges, and so may suo modo after a sort be called Superintendents
and Bishops etc. yet here it signifies (...) Primarios illos ecclesiarum
pastores etc. Those chief pastors to whom the oversight of the lives and
manners of the other ministers is committed, whom according to the force of the
Greek appellation, we in these days do call Superintendents.

Hitherto then, it appears (as I take it) what is both the practice of the
reformed Churches in Germany, and the judgment also of the chief learned men
there, since Melanchthon and Bucers times: concerning Bishops or
Superintendents, with their pre-eminence, charge, and authority. Some there
are, indeed, beyond the seas, who (followinge the immoderate, proud, and
slanderous humor that Melanchthon and Camerarius spoke of before) have uttered
their great mislike of the German Superintendents; and that with less
modesty a great deal, then does well become them. In reproof of one of them,
Gerlachius a learned man of Tubing writes in this sort. Ger. in hyperas. Dan.
p. 30.
Licet titulos ordinum etc. Although thou beholdest with disdain (as it were
from above) the titles of orders; after the fashion of hypocrites, and of the
Anabaptists: yet with a vain persuasion of knowledge and foolish arrogancye,
whereby thou contemnest our countrymen in respect of thy self, and do
challenge especial knowledge to thee and thy fellows only: Plus turges quam
omnes Doctores et Superintendentes nostri: Thou swellest more with pride then
all our Doctors, and Superintendents. And what comes into thy mind that thou
should cavil at the degrees of ministers, as though it were not lawful to
ordain such degrees for the building and government of the Church? Did not God
himself in the old Testament appoint a chief Bishop, Priests, and Leuits? And
in the new Testament gave he not some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, and some Pastors, and Doctors? Had not the primative church
accordingly: Bishops, Priests, and Deacons? And again, a little after in the
same book: whilst thou a proud man girdest so often at the title of
Superintendent: Iud. Numb: 16.
I affirm that thou reprehendest the Apostle Paul himself, who has given
this name to a distinct order of ministers of the church. And our Ancestors
following this Apostle have thought it meet, that for the edifying of the
church, and for orders sake; there should be certain Superintendentes, that
is, overseers not only of the flock, but of the nisters in like manner.

Thus far Gerlachius: who if he were in England and knew into what an
extremity the like persons, are grown unto in the same case amongst us: It
would peradventure move him. For now there is no remedy, with our ministers
of that consorte: but they must all be equal. They cannot endure it, (no the
meanest of them) to have any of their own coat, their Superior. They are
fallen into the contradiction of Chors, and do tell both Moses and Aaron,
that they take to much upon them. All Pastores (say they) are and ought to be
of equal authority in their several Parishes, and no one to have power over
another. Every parish Priest with them; must be a Bishop: and have as full
jurisdiction in his Parochial dioces, as it is lawful for any Bishop in the
world either to have or to execute. For orders sake they are content, that in
their Classical, provincial, or National assemblies, some one minister be
chosen from amongst themselves: to be the moderator for the propounding of
matters and gathering of voices etc. But his office and pre-eminence, is to
continue no longer, then whilst those assemblies last. Otherwise or for any
further authority either of Bishops, or Archbishops (whether they have
abolished popery, reformed religion, maintained the gospel, abandoned
superstition, or whatsoever they have done, or yealded unto,) they hold it
altogether unlawful: and do rail against them all, and against their
callings, and against all that defend them, and that with more then heathenish
scurrilitie.

Cartwright is the chief man, T C. lib. 2. page 438.
that began this course in England; and you shall see how pretily his
scholars follow him. T. C. lib. 2. page 485.
Archbishops and Bishops (says he) are new ministeries, T. B. lib. 1 p. 82 and
85.
never ordained by God. The first step to this kind of Bishopric began at
Alexandria, and not at Syon. The name and office of an Archbishop is unlawful,
his function is of the earth, and so can do no good but much harm in the
church: he is a knobbe or some lump of flesh: Them. mart. etc
which being no member of the body does burden it and disgrace it. Whereupon
forth come his scholars crying out amain: Hay any work page 14.15.20. 21.28.
that Archbishops and Bishops are superfluous members of the body of Christ:
and that they mayme and deforme his body: Vdall dial. C.^ D.2.
making it by that means a monster. Hay any work Ma. these. 49.34
That they are unlawful, false, and bastardly governors of the church. That
they are the ordinances of the Devil: That they are in respect of their
places; enemies of God: that they are petye Popes, mart, sen. B. 4. C. 1,.
pety Antichrists, Bishops of the Devil, and incarnate Devils: that none ever
defended this government of our Bishops, but Papists and such as were infected
with Popish errors. That the Laws that mayntaine the Archbishops and Bishops
are no more to be accounted of, then the Laws that mayntaine Steves: and that
the true church of God ought to have no more to do with them, and their
Synagogues, then with the Synagogue of Satan.

All which Consistorian and modest assertions, as well for the equality of
Ministers, as against the calling of Bishops being joined together: are wholly
opposite to all that, which hitherto I have writt^e touching this matter. Even
as though they should have cast down their gauntlets and proclaimed an utter
defiance, to all the Churches, that ever were established in the world, for
much above three thousand years: the Churches whilst the law continued; the
churches in Christ's time; the Churches in his Apostles times; the Churches
throughout all christendom for a thousand and five hundred years: against all
the general Councels: all the ancient fathers: and all ecclesiastical
histories: against all the chief reformers of religon in this latter age:
against all the learned men's judgments before mentioned, and against all the
reformed churches whersoeuer in christ^edome, that either have BB. or
Superint^edents. God forgive th^e this great sin of pride and presumption: and
deliver th^e out of the number of those, 2. pet 2: Jude.
of wh^o it is said, that their mouths speak proud things, that they despise
government: that they stand in their own c^oceit: that they fear not to speak
evil of th^e that are in dignity and authority, and likewise of those things
that they know not: that they use swelling words of vanity; that they beguile
unstable souls; that they separate them selves from other, and that they have
not the spirit.

It will not surely serve their turns one day: to say that (in such their
wilful opposing of themselves, as it were, against heaven, and in such their
outrageous railing and bitterness, against so holy a calling), they followed
certain of their brethren the ministers in Scotland, or in the low
countries, or in Geneua. For in this vain, they have exceeded them all,
especially them of the two countries last mentioned. Master Calvin although
after his restitution to Geneua, he might be thought to have had some harder
opinion of Bishopps then he had before: yet if you compare him with these
fellows, you would think him an especial favorer and defender of them. He
could well enough endure it^ to use these honorable terms to Archbishop
Cranmer. Illustrissime domine: clarissime presul et mihi ex animo reverend:
commendinge his authority, his wisdom, and his integrity, and desiringe him
to put them all in practice, for the benefit of the Church. And in his letter
to the King of Polonia he shows himself to be far from Cartwrights mind,
vz. that the Popes authority is more necessary over all Churches; then the
authority of an Archbishopp over a province, and that neither of them can
discharge so great an office. For there, writing against the pope, he
propounds to the Kings consideration, the ancient form of
church-gouernment by Archbishops: tearminge it a moderate honor: (meaning
thereby) as I take it (the pre-eminence and authority which Archbishops then
had,) as being limited for the execution of it, within the compass of man's
power: whereas the Popes pretended authority, being of so large an extent as
comprehending the whole world, could not possibly be executed by any man
living.

But yet I am short of M. Caluins moderation in this matter: for discoursing of
the state of the ancient churches, (before the time of popery): of Bishops,
Archbishops, and patriarchs, their authority and superiority in their
circuites, dioces and provinces: he uses these modest speeches. Call: Instit:
lib. 4. Cap: 4.
Although the Bishops of those times, did set forth many canons, wherein they
might be thought to express more then is expressed in the scriptures, yet they
framed their whole government according to the only rule of gods word, with
that caution: vt facile videas, nihil fere hac part habuisse a verbo Dei
alienum. that you may easily see there was nothing almost, in this behalf
disagreeing from the word of God. If there may be found any imperfection in the
orders which they made: yet they endeavored with a sincere study, to keep the
institution of God: from the which, ibid. sect. 2.
no^ multum aberrarunt, they swarued not much. And a little after: the elders
that were ministers of the word, did choose one from amongst themselves in
every City; unto whom especially they gave the title of Bishop, Ne ex
aequalitate vt fieri solet dissidia nascerentur: least by aequalitie, as it
usually happens, dissentions should arise. As touching the beginning of this
order: he agrees with S. Jerome, that it has continued in the Church since S.
ibid. sect. 4.
Marks time. And (says he) that every province had her Archbishop: that also
in the Nicene Council, Patriarchs were appointed, who were in order and degree
above Archbishops: Id ad disciplinae conseruationem pertinebat; It did pertain
to the preservation of discipline. But his conclusion is yet more full, and
differs but a little (if it differ at all) from that which the learneder sort
in England, do now maintain with all antiquity. For speaking of the form of
government so framed (as is said) in the council of Nice: he uses these
words: ibid. sect. 4.
Si rem intuemur, reperiemus veteres Episcopos non aliam regendae ecclesiae
formam voluisse fingere, ab ea quam Deus verbo suo praescripsit: if we look to
the form of government it self, we shall finds that the ancient Bishops,
would not devise another form of churchregiment, differing from that which God
has prescribed in his word.

And thus you may perceive, what great difference there is betwixt our men's
spirits, and Master Caluins; their outrage, and his modesty: their pride,
and his humility: their rashness, ignorance, and giddines, and his sobriety,
learning, and judgment. The form of ecclesiastical government agreed upon in
the council of Nice: differs not from that which God has prescribed: and
who then but men that have shameless foreheads, dare so encounter it? But it
may peradventure be said: that, howsoever Calvin did carry himself in this
cause, yet Beza is of an other opinion.

Indeed he is so: but it turns more and more, daily to his own discredit. He
succeeded Master Calvin in place; but neither in his learning nor in all his
virtues. And I do attribute it unto his want of judgment: that he has showed
himself such a busy body, where he had nothing to do. It is chiefly he, that
has set the pretended reformers, in this whole land, so much a gogge against
Bishops: by his secret letters, and other disordered writings of encouragement
unto them. And yet (forsooth) he can write to other men; and pretend the quite
contrary. Consider the process following: and then, if I be too blame thus to
write of him, Epist. 2.
tell me of it.

In one of his epistles dated 1570. he affirms that Archbishops and Primates
are a shadow and image of the policy of Room: that they are petty tyrants in
respect of the Pope: and that although the names be never so ancient, yet it
ought to have been enquired, whether it were lawful to bring them into the
church etc. It had been a maruailous beneficial matter to all posterity:
that Beza had been the commander at Geneua in the times of the Primitive
church, that so the learend and grave fathers of those ages might have inquired
this point of him and known his pleasure.

In the year 1572. it seemed good unto him, (as it has been said before) to
write his letter into this Island, to Knox the reformer in Scotland: at what
time the Bishops there had received the Gospel (at the least many of them as I
think) though it would not serve their turn to keep them in their places.
In which letter amongst many other good consistorian documents, he writes
thus. Epist. 79.
But I would have you, and the other brethren to remember that which is before
your eyes: as Bishops brought forth the Papacy, so false or counter set
Bishops, the relics of Popery, will bring in Epicurisme. They that desire the
churches good, let them take heed of this pestilence. And seeing you have put
that plague in Scotland to flight: quaeso etc. I heartily pray you that you
never suffer it again under any pretense or color of keepinge of unity: which
pretense deceived the ancient fathers, even many of the best of them.

But least any man should imagine, that I do Beza injury in applyinge his
words, to the purpose for the which I bring them: and, that he writ not thus,
against such Bishops as did embrace and maintain the true religion, which we
all profess; but against Popish Bishops: Cartwright himself will clear both
me and Bezaes meaning. For he (a man of the same spirit) has brought both
those places, and urged them, for Bezaes judgment against our Bishops now in
England. Beza (says he) is so far from allowing Archbishops, that our kind
of Bishops he calls counterset Bishops, relics of Popery, such as will
bring in Epicurisme: and so he proceeds on with the rest of Bezaes words,
to Knox as before they are set down. But I shall not needed to labor much
upon this point. Beza will himself vouch safe (you shall see) to deliver his
mind, as plainly as one would wish.

In his treatise that he writ into Scotland, about the year 1579. of three
sorts of Bishops mentioned in the third Chapter: vz. the Bishops of God, of
man, and of the devil: He writes thus (by no good direction, I am sure) of
that ancient, and the most godly Council, that ever was held since the
Apostles times, vz. the honorable council of Nice. The Nicene Council
pretending ancient custom, confirmed the patriarchship, and made a way for the
horrible papacy of Rome, (sliding on), and vnderlaid the seat for the harlot
that sits upon seven hills. And afterward, where M. Calvin spoke, as you
have heard, of the form of Church government, which was then concluded upon,
that it differed not from that which God had prescribed: Beza is bold (if Field
his translator have dealt well with him) to call it a deuillish Oligarchie,
making the fathers of the said Council, to be the deuisers, or at least, the
aduancers of the Bishops of the devil. Under which member of his division, he
brings all the Bishops in Europe (excepting his own parochial Bishops)
notwithstanding any reformation of religion whatsoever. And therefore advises
all godly Princes, that at once they abolish them.

Neither is he in effectanie thing more gracious or bountiful to his second
sort of Bishops, the Bishops of men. But before you hear his censure of them,
you shall understand how he describes such a kind of Bishop. The Bishop of
man (says he) brought into the Church by the alone wisdom of man, besides
the express word of God, is a certain power to one certain pastor, above his
other fellows, yet limited with certain orders, or rules provided against
tyranny. They which did bear this office of Bishop, are called Bishops in
regard of their fellow Elders, and the whole Clergy, as watchmen set over
the Clergy. And I marvel why the ministers after the Apostles time should
not have as great need of such watchmen, as they had when the Apostles
themselves lived: who were then their watchmen by all their confessions.

But now let us see what Beza will do with these kind of Bishops. Surely by
his advise, down they must as well as the former, or to use his translators
phrase, they must be chased away. And his chief reasons are these, First,
because that unless this root also be plucked up, it will come to pass, that
the same fruit will sprout and bud forth again: Secondly, for that Christ (as
he falsely supposes) has shut this superiority out of the church: And
thirdly, because (as he says) Where the remnants of this government by a few,
are not clean taken away, the word of the Lord is openly hindered. He
means (I think) his counterfeit platform of discipline: for the inordinate
urging whereof, some few disordered persons have been put to silence. But what
has he to do with that? You see then the man's boldness, and with what
presumption he aduanceth himself against all the learned Fathers; against all
the general Councels; against all the flourishing Churches, that have been in
the world since Christ's time; against the judgments of all the chief
learned men (almost) of ourage: and (that which is most with him) even against
the judgment of his superior master Calvin; and you see also the pit and
smoke, from whence the Locustes amongst us of late years came, that with
their venomous libels and railing discourses, have infected the hearts of many
good men, with a dislike of the holy calling of our Bishops. That some have
been mis-lead heretofore, with the violent stream of this faction, I wonder
not But for mine own part, I shall little pity any of them hereafter, if
when they shall see these things, they will notwithstanding yield over
themselves to be seduced by so gross, so palpable, and so childish illusions:
but especially if they shall hear Beza himself begin to alter his mind, and
to sing a new song.

I will not affirm much for his alteration: but when he has opened himself
a little further unto you, account of him as God shall move your hearts. Surely
he will not prove a man (in my opinion) for any to build their faith upon. In
his confessions, he once affirmed, that the constitutions of the ancient
fathers concerning Bishops, Beza Conf. ^^. ^
Metrapolitanes, and Patriarchs, their seats, limits, and authority, were
made optimo zelo, with the best zeal. It was then, I trust, a zeal joined
with knowledge. And having both such zeal and such knowledge, did they agree
in the Council of Nice upon such a deuillish Oligarchie?

Of late years he has written two or three Letters, to the now Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury: with an other manner of style, then (I suppose) he would have
done, if he had thought him to have been the Bishop of the devil. Beza and
Sadeel to the L. Arch. 15. Sept. 1589.
For thus he indorsed them. Reuerendissimo viro, et in Christo patri, Domino
Archiepiscopo Caentuariensi, serenissimae Reginae Conciliario, et totius
Angliae primati. To the most reverend man and father in Christ, the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Councellor to the Queens majesty, and primate of
all England. And one of them was thus subscribed. Amplitudini tuae addictissimi
in Christo, Theodorus Beza, A. Sadeel, nomine totius nostri caetus, nec non
totius Ecclesiae Geneuensis. Most addicted to your greatness Th. B.A.S. in the
name of our assembly, and also of the whole Church of Geneua. But it is of
especial consideration, that he writes in the other Letter.

It should seem, that the said now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury has written
somewhat unto Beza, as concerning his ouer-busying of himself about our Church,
without any lawful commission. And in defense of himself he answers thus.
Caeterum reverend mi Domine, Beza to the L. Arch. of Cant. 8. Mert. 691.
But my reverend Lord, in that you thought it meet to move us in your Letters,
that we should think well of that kingdom, and likewise of your Church, and
the government thereof; surely it troubled both me and Sadeel in some sort, as
being greatly afraid least any sinister rumors are brought to you of us, or
least those things, which we have written of Ecclesiastical policy, properly
against that Antichristian tyranny as necessity required, are taken by some
in that sense, as if ever we had meant to compel to our order those churches
that think otherwise then we do of it, and the governors of them, agreeing
else with us in the truth of doctrine agreeable to the word of God, and that
except they followed our order, we accounted otherwise of them then their
godliness and dignity, and mutual brotherhood does require, etc. Far be this
arrogancy from us. Quis vllum nobis in vllam Ecclesiam imperium tribuit* Who
does give us authority over any church* Far be it from us that we should
think (so the substantial matters be kept) there ought nothing to be granted
to antiquity, nothing to custom, nothing to the circumstances of places,
times, and persons, etc.

Again in his book against D. Sarauia, having spoken of the tyranny of
Popish Bishops, Page 126
he makes this exception, Neque tamen: But we do not therefore accuse all
Archbishops and Bishops (now so called) of tyranie. For what arrogancy were
that? Nay so as they do imitate the examples of the old holy Bishops, and
endeavor as much as they can, to reform the house of God so miserably deformed,
according to the rule of Gods word, why may we not acknowledge al of them now
so called Archbishops and Bishops, obey them, and honor them with all
reverence* So far we are from that which some object unto us most falsely and
most impudently, as though we took upon us to prescribe to any Church, in
any place, our examples to be followed, like unto those unwise men, who
account well of nothing but of that which they do themselves. And to the same
effect a little before, Page 111
If now the reformed Churches of England being underpropped with the authority
of Bishops and Archbishops, do continue, as this has happened to that Church
in our memory, that she has had men of that calling, not only most notable
martyrs of God, but also excellent pastors and doctors: Fruatur sane ista
singulari dei benificentia quae vtinam illi sit perpetua: Let her truly enjoy
this singular blessing of God, Zanch. d^religi page 217
which I wish may be perpetual unto her. Furthermore, it should seem, that
Zanchius (as moderate and learned a man, as ever favored the pretended
Elderships) was appointed some 12, or 16. years since, to draw a conf^ssion of
religion for the Churches of France, and others, as Melanchthon had done the
Augustan confession for Germany. Accordingly he drew it, and in the same,
speaking of Bishops, he uses these words: Non improbamius patres, Zanch.
derelig. cap, 25.
etc. We do not disalow the fathers, in that after a diverse way of
dispensing the word and governing the Church, they multiplied diverse orders of
Ministers: seeing it was lawful for them so to do, as it is unto us, and
seeing it appears, that they did it for honest causes, appertaining at that
time to the order, decency, and edification of the Church. And in the next
article: Hac ratione, etc. By this reason, vz. that the nurseries of
dissentions and of schisms may be taken away, we think that these things
which were ordained before the Council of Nice, concerning Archbishops, nay,
as touching the four Patriarchs, may be excused and defended. When this book
was perused, and this clause found in it, then forsooth a devise was had, for
the staying of it, under pretense, that now it was thought more meet, that
there should be a harmony made of all the confessions of diverse churches.
Derelig. pa. 218
But Zanchius himself makes this the chief cause (if I understand him) why
his book did mislike some of them: for that he had written, as before is
mentioned, of Bishops. For so he says, Magnus quidam vir, etc. A certain
great man, (meaning Beza, as it is supposed,) did write unto me of this
matter, as follows. Your confession was read by me and N. and others, with
great delight. It is written most learnedly, and in a most exquisite method,
and (if you except that which you add toward the end, touching Archbishops
and the Hierarchy) mihi summopere placuit, it pleased me exceedingly.

Upon this occasion (as it seems) Zanchius printed his said confession, with
certain annotations. In the which annotations, he shows three reasons, for
his allowance of Archbishops and Bishops. The first, is grounded upon the
practice of the primitive church presently after the Apostles times: the second
is, for that he thought it his duty in the draught of his said book, to have
regard to those reformed churches which retain both Bishops and Archbishops:
and the third, because all the reformed Churches generally, although they have
changed the names, yet in effect they do keep the authority: as where they
have superintendents, and general superintendents: Nay (says he) where these
new, and base Latin names are not admitted, Ibi tamen solent esse aliquot
primarij, penes quos fere tota est authoritas: yet there are in those places
usually certain chiefemen, that do in a manner bear all the sway. But I pray
you be pleased that I may deliver unto you, the manner of his setting down of
his first reason, and that in his own words: for they carry with them a
notable condemnation of other men's great pride and rashness. Cum haenc
conscriberem fidei confessionem, etc. When I writ this confession of faith, I
writ all the things in it of a good conscience: and as I believed, so I freely
spoke the scriptures, teaching men so to do. And my faith first of all, and
simply, does rely upon the word of God, and then somewhat also upon the common
consent of the whole ancient Catholic Church, if the same be not repugnant
to the scriptures. For I believe that what things were defined and received by
the ancient Fathers assembled in the name of the Lord, with a general consent
of them all, and without any contradiction of the holy Scriptures, the same
surely, although they be not of the same authority with holy Scriptures, yet
did they proceed from the holy Ghost. Hereof it comes to pass, that those
things which are of this nature, neither would I, neither dare I with a good
conscience disallow them. And what can be showed more certainly out of
histories, out of the councels, and out of the writings of all the ancient
fathers, then that those orders of Ministers, of the which we have spoken, have
been ordained and received in the Church, by the general consent of all
christian commonwealths. And who then am I that should presume to reprove that
which the whole Church has approved* This is true and religious humility.
Thus all grave and discreet godly men have euerwritten. Those that contemn all
the learned Fathers that went before them, do open a window to their own
discredit by those that shall come after them. That which this godly and great
learned man ascribes to the holy Ghost, and durst not with a safe conscience
reprove: every saucy Jack with us, every ignorant dolt, and every
Bridewell rake-hell dare disdain and condemn. Tell them of Fathers and
Councels: they make but a mock at it.

But as yet you know not the cause: why I have especially alleged all these
things out of Zanchius. I will therefore now tell it you. And it is this. You
have heard how Beza and some others disliked of Zanchius confession, and
wherefore. But now he is come about, and is grown to be fully of Zanchius
judgment; if a man may believe him. For whereas D. Sarauia had cited these
places of Zanchius in the behalf of Bishops, and Archbishops; Beza contra
Sarau. p. 161.
M. Beza answered directly: that neither he nor his brethren do dissent
therein from Zanchius: a quo minime certe dissentimus. But I may not conceal
this from you; that although Zanchius has written so modestly of the callinges
of Archbishops and Bishops: (as it has been showed), yet he rather fancied
the new platform of Elderships: which Beza omitteth not to put Sarauia in mind
of, when having yielded to Zanchius his said opinion of Bishops, he adds
other places out of him for his allowance of the Eldership: and then
concludes; Beza contra Sarau. p. 164.
Si Zanchio assentiris, qua de re contendimus? If you agree with Zanchius,
where about contend we* Whereby I observe into what a straight Beza is brought.
For notwithstanding any thing that he has written formerly against such
Bishops and Archbishops, as profess the Gospel: he can now be content to
revoke it wholly, so as they at Geneua may hold their Elderships. He has so
far engaged his credit for that kind of government, as gladly he would
preserve the reputation of it. But he sees (I am persuaded) it will not be,
and that the equality they have dreamed of, tends to confusion, and therefore
he begins to retire himself from that conceit, as well as he may. It is much
(his former proceedings considred) that ever he could be brought to Zanchius
moderation. But yet he comes nearer unto us; for although his Bishop of man
found so small favor with him before, as that he made him the root of
iniquity, and needs he must be plucked up: yet now he is much more favorable
unto him (if I understand him,) and says he calls him the Bishop of man,
non simpliciter, Beza contra Sara. page 143
sed comparate, not simply, but by way of comparison, in respect (he means)
of his Bishop of God. Now he acknowledges him to have had place in the church
ever since S. Marks time: and that one was so chosen (says he) certe
reprehendi nec potest nec debet: assuredly it neither can nor ought to be
reprehended. Nay, he affirms: Justice de causis fieri debuit, Beza contra
Sara. page 153.
That for just causes it was necessary: Vt vnusquispiam ande. presbyterio
(...)esset and permaneret: That some one should be the Prelate over the
presbytery, (not for a day or an action, as Cartwright says) but to remain
and continue: allowing well of S. Ieromes reason, why such a choice ought to
be made, vz. In remedium schismatis, for the remedy of schisms.

But one thing remains, which passes all the rest. You shall see that for
all the former storms; Beza could be very well content at the length (if he
might) to be in effect an Archbishop. Doctor Sarauia, amongst diverse other
proofs, for the calling and authority of Bishops; bringes an order out of the
Apostles Canons, so called because of their antiquity. First you shall see it:
and then also hear Master Bezas judgment for the matter of it. Canon Apost.
cap. 35.
The Bishops of every nation ought to know, who is the chief amongst them,
and to account him as it were their head, without whose allowance they ought
to do nothing of any moment, but every one those things only, which belong to
his own parish, and the villages which are under it* Neither let himself do
any thing without the knowledge of all. Beza contra Sarau. p. 115. 116.
For so there shall be concord, and God shall be glorified through our Lord in
his holy spirit. Thus far the Canon: whereof Beza writes in this sort. There
is here mention made of him, that was the chief amongst his fellow Bishops,
who was afterward called the Archbishop. And a little after speaking of the
same Canon. Quid aliud hic statuitur, quam ordo ille, quem in omnibus locis
ecclesiis restitutum cupimus* What else is here appointed, than that order which
we desire should be restored to the Churches in all places* And is not the
spiritual government of Geneua as yet in her perfection* Have they rashly
ouerthrown there such Offices of the Church, as now they would gladly should
be restored again? Those Churches that have followed Bezas humor, in the
abolishing of their Bishops, and Archbishops, may they not justly wish he had
never been borne? It is an easy matter to overthrow: but he and they all,
shall find it a most difficult thing to build up again. Have they pleaded so
long for an aequalitie amongst all Ministers, that now they can be content to
be as it were the heads and chief over the Bishops within the same countries?

Well, the conclusion is this: Either Beza writ not the Epistles mentioned to
Duditius and Knox, (though he has set them out in his own name:) or, what
he writ in them against Bishops and Archbishops; he meant should be only
extended against popish Bishops and Archbishops, (and then Cartwright has done
him great injury, in affirming that he meant our Bishops:) or, he is not
the author of the treatise of the three sorts of Bishops, (albeit he calls
it, Scriptum meum, my discourse: and says as much in effect in his annotations
upon the Epistle to the Philippians:) or, Beza to Law^. Annot. Philip. 1.
verse. 1.
he supposes in that treatise, that there were popish Bishops, and
Archbishops, before, and at the time that the Council of Nice was held; (when
in all the world there was neither popery nor popish Bishop:) or, he was
ignorant, that Field had translated the said treatise into English, and that
it was published amongst the brethren here, and held for current doctrine: or,
by his agreeing with Zanchius; by his writing (as he does) to the now L.
Archbishop of Canterbury: by his allowing the choice of one Minister, to have a
permanent office of primacie over the rest: by his wishing the restitution of
the orders mentioned in the Apostles Canons: by these things and the rest,
specified, (being thoroughly considered.) or (as I said) he has now altered
his opinion (whatsoever he has written else where to the contrary) or else you
must take him as you find him. For my part, I will think the best: and that he
has been formerly abused very greatly by slanderous reports, which caused
him to write as he has done.

But, howsoever this course against Bishops has been carried on hitherto
amongst them: God be thanked for some amendment. And let us take hold of
that which they have granted. You may be bold to build upon it for a truth:
that they are so constrained to yield unto. And then to end this chapter:
Forasmuch as God himself, appointed an inequality amongst the Priests in the
old Testament: Forasmuch as Christ, though he calls himself a Minister, to
minister unto others, was yet the Master over his Apostles and Disciples:
Forasmuch as by Christ's institution, and in his own time, the Apostles were
superior unto the seventy Disciples: Forasmuch as the Apostles when the
gospel began to spread it self, appointed sundry Timothies and Titus, to
govern the Churches in diverse countries and territories: Forasmuch as all the
ecclesiastical histories, do record the superiority of Bishops, and do
set down, the Catalogues of many of them, and which of the Apostles and
Apostolical Bishops, and in what cities and countries they succeeded:
Forasmuch as all the ancient general Councels, and all the ancient and godly
learned Fathers, have allowed of Bishops, and of their superiority over the
rest of the clergy: Forasmuch as Bishops have been accounted generally
throughout the world, to be the Apostles successors, and have continued in the
Church ever since the Apostles times: Forasmuch as there was never any one of
all the ancient Fathers, nor any learned man for 1500. years but Aerius the
heretic, that ever held, that there ought to be no difference betwixt a
Bishop and a Priest, (I mean an ordinary Minister of the word:) and that his
opinion was imputed unto him 1200. years since by Epiphanius and S. Augustine,
for an heresy: Forasmuch as all the chief of the learned men that were the
principal instruments under God in this latter age, for the restitution of the
Gospel, allowed fully of Bishops, and of their authority, and would not
willingly have submitted themselves to their obedience, if they might have been
received with any tolerable conditions: Forasmuch as all the reformed
Churches in Germany, that do embrace the Augustane confession, have (for the
most part) their superintendents and general superintendents, the same in
effect with our Bishops and Archbishops: Forasmuch as the chiefest of the
Germain writers now living, do justify the calling and offices of their
superintendents, and general superintendents by the word of God. Forasmuch as
none of later times ever condemned the calling and authority of such Bishops
and Archbishops, as embraced the Gospel (for ought I find) but Beza and his
scholars. Forasmuch as Zanchius, a fauorer of the Elderliship equality, and
now Beza himself joining with him, do both of them confess, that the calling
and authority of Bishops and Archbishops may be defended: that they did
proceed from the holy Ghost, and that there is nothing more manifest in all the
Ecclesiastical histories, all the ancient councels, and in the writings of all
the ancient fathers, then the allowance of them, throughout all christendom:
Forasmuch as Beza for his own part, has written so honorably to the now L.
Archbishop of Canterbury, and so generally of all our Bishops now professing
the Gospel, condemning those of great arrogancy, that shall presume to speak
against them: Forasmuch as you perceive by Bezaes confession, that there ought
to be Bishops or Prelates, such as were in the Church from S. Marks time, for
the avoiding and staying of contentions and schisms. And forasmuch (I say) as
all these particular points, are in sort, as you have heard, the most of them
confessed, and the rest by diverse learned men proved to be true, and so still
always to be justified, with as full consent and authority, as may satisfy
any men, either of learning or judgment: I see no reason why this
Anabaptisticall dream, of equality amongst pastors, should not be sent back
to the place from whence it issued: why the vrgers of it, with such
bitterness, ought to be accounted otherwise off, than hereby, I trust, you
may see they deserve: why Cartwright, and his libelling generation, against the
present form of our Church-gouernment, should be any longer endured: or why
any calling in the world, next unto the calling of every Moses and sovereign,
within their own dominions, should be more esteemed, cherished, reverenced, or
honored, by all true christians, then the callings, offices, and authority of
Bishops, and Archbishops: having so general and continual an allowance, both
of God himself, and of all godly and rightly zealous men, ever since there was
any outward form of church government appointed.

CHAP. IX. They disagree very greatly concerning Doctors.
IT is now become, to be a received opinion, especially amongst those that
desire to have the kingdom of the pretended Elderships, to reign over them:
that S. Paul in the fourrh to the Ephesians, does make the Doctor, a distinct
office, from the Pastor, contrary to the judgment of S. Augustine, Hierome,
Chrysostom, Bullinger, Musculus, etc. who make them but one office, even as
feeding and teaching, are all one. Of this devise (for ought I do remember)
Calvin was the first author; whose conceit Beza follows. And then it may not
be meruailed, though all the rest of that humor, do faithfully embrace it. Of
this office, our reformers (all of them jointly) do carry this resolute
opinion: Trau. def. of dis. T.C.
that it is a distinct ordinance of Christ, to continue in the Church for ever:
that there ought to be a Doctor in every Parish, wheresoever there is a Pastor:
that the doctor is one of the members of the body of Christ: that the doctor is
one of those officers, to who^ the government of the Church (by Christ's
appointment) is committed: and that co^seque^tly, he has by the same
authority his place and voice in the Consistory, as well and by as good right,
as either the pastor or Elder.

So as, if there be any reformed churches in the world (where there are
pastors) that have not these doctors, and which do not admit them, to have any
such authority, nor give the^ either place or voice in their consistories,
then surely all those, and many such like speeches following, do even as
properly fall upon them, as they do upon our church, against the which they
were first coined, and uttered. Learned dis. pa. 17.18.
They refuse the ordinance of God. They deprive the Church of the free gift of
Christ: T.C. l. 2.465. 463.
they purpose, not to have the Church flourish in true knowledge. They want
some necessary gifts which are tied necessarily to that office. Def. of dis.
p. 12.
The knowledge of the son of God (being necessary to salvation). Def. of dis.
p. 54.
The means thereunto are absolutely necessary: T.C. l. 1.
which is the having of pastors and doctors, Demonst. cap. 3
so long as men are subject to ignorance: The church is miserably destitute;
that wa^teth the doctor. They cannot take away those ministeries, that God
has placed in his Church. No christian Churches, ought to swerve from the
officers (he names doctors) that God has appointed. Mart. These. Godly ser.
40.41 Def. of dis. p. 16.
If they do, they maime the Church, they take away a member from the body of
Christ: they maime his body and deforme it. Which, after the manner of their
amplifications, is a matter of as great importance, as the addition of any new
officers, unto the Church, or unto the body of Christ, making it thereby, both
ways, a monster.

There is a saying of Will Summer, that whosoever pinched him, he would be sure
to strike him that stood next him. And I cannot more fitly resemble our
reformers rashness. Things go not here as they would have them, which pincheth
them; and thereupon whilst they would be revenged upon those that hinder their
plots, then (laying about them like mad men) have stroke one for another: and
so (as in such cases it often falls out) have maimed very sore their next and
best friends. For I do not remember, that either Geneua, France, the low
Countries, or Scotland, do so account of Doctors, as our men do. They reckon
them not among those officers, that Christ has appointed for the government of
the church. They have no places or voices, but of courtesy, in their
consistories: their Senates, or glorious body of Christ, is without them; and
yet they esteem of themselves, to be as perfect and entire bodies, as comely,
and of as beautiful a stature, as our platformers, (their scollers) can
devise, and counterfeit any. But hear their own words.

The Ecclesiastical discipline of France, speaks in this sort: Of the
Consistory.
The Elders and Deacons do make the Ecclesiastical Senate, wherein the
Ministers of the word sit as chief. And after, thus of doctors (as I take it.)
The professors of divinity may be admitted into the consistory. It is also
thus decreed in the national council held in Hage 1586. Artic. 34.
In all churches the consistory shall be compounded of Ministers and elders.
By Ministers they mean pastors, as it appears there afterward, in the 74.
article. In Scotland likewise, the managing of their discipline, The form,
etc. printed 1584.
is wholly in the hands of their pastors and Aldermen. They make mention indeed
of doctors; but yet so, as their consistories, may be perfect enough without
them. And I see no other office assigned there, unto them, then to be
schoolmasters, or to read Lectures in the universities. I find it reported
in like sort; that at Geneua, Beza is both pastor and doctor. Furthermore,
Calvin is of opinion, Remonst. p. 14^ Call. Instit. l. 4. c. 3. sect. 4.
that the Doctor has not to deal with the administration of Discipline. And
it is apparent by the laws of Geneua, and of that school, that (saving now it
falls out, Beza is the Rector of the school), otherwise the doctor, as
doctor, (for any thing I find) is not of the consistory: at the least (I
suppose) that many are not. Laws of Geneua.
For they say, that as things are now disposed, they comprehend under this
title of Doctors, etc. the order of schools, teachers of tongues, and of
humane sciences, as well as teachers of divinity.

But Bertrand is plain and direct: Treatise of the Church. cap. 9
The Doctors charge (says he) reaches not to the charge of government, and
execution of discipline, etc. Again, Ibidem cap. 14.
The Consistory, is composed, made, and consists, of the Pastors, and
Elders. Whereunto also are admitted and received, the doctors and Deacons: so
far forth, and in as much, as they shall judge it to be expedient, etc.
Sohnius also says. Open. to. 1. p. 224.
Doctores non habebant Ecclesiae inspectionem aut gubernationem. The Doctors
had not the ouer-sight or rule of the Church: but were like to the catechisors
and teachers of young-linges; Dan. Isag. part. 3. cap. 54.
which were afterward appointed. Danaeus, declaring that the administration of
their discipline, does only belong to their Pastors and Elders, tells us
also (and that from Geneua) that for a need they may take Deacons into their
Consistories: but does not once so much as name the Doctor to be a man worthy
of any such favor. To. 7. ob. pa. 257
Vezelius likewise sends us word from Newstade, that the Doctors office is
not amongst the ordinary functions, which are to be perpetual in the Church;
and that it does rather appertain to the schools. Eccl. li. 2. cap. 1 and 5.
Franciscus Iunius (a principal consistorian) is also most resolute, that the
Doctor has not to deal in the Ecclesiastical government, but only in the
scholasticall: and that his office is not otherwise an ecclesiastical office,
but as schools are Seminaria Ecclesiae, the Seminaries of the Church; and so
schoolmasters, ecclesiastical officers. Whose duty (says Bannosius) is to
teach youth, De pol. ciui. Dei. cap. 9
not as Pastors do in their common language, sed Graeco, Latino, and Hebraeo,
but in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. And for any place in their Elderships,
Chap. 10
he assigns them none: making their Consistories to consist only, of
Pastors, Deacons, and Elders.

Now, if these things be true, which here I have reported, is it not
wonderful, with what faces Cartwright and the rest, dare tell us so
confidently, of such necessity of their pretended doctors, as before I have
noted* Do all the reformed Churches which they brag of, dwell in such
darkness, as that they deforme and mayme Christ's body, and know it not* Nay,
peradventure if they be pressed over eagerly with these examples and
testimonies, they will not stick, to tell either Geneua, or the best of them
all, another manner of tale. Where it is objected, against the great necessity
of Doctors, which is pretended, that, some Churches have them not: answer is
made, that Sacraments are very profitable, and yet sometime the Church cannot
have them: Def. of dis. p. 69
and that, although they are not simply, and absolutely necessary to
salvation: yet so necessary they are, as the contempt and wilful neglect of
them, is damnable. And there is their answer: implying (forsooth) such a like
necessity of his Doctors, as though, none could be saved, that contemned
this fancy of theirs. Which answer, is puffed up with an heretical humor,
of condemning all men, that do withstand them; or, if his dearest friend
should speak for him, the best sense that it can possibly carry, is this:
that those who encounter with these Doctors, are, in his opinion, but silly
and ignorant persons. For otherwise, if they knew but as much as he, and his
companions do know, and should resist these officers, there were then no
remedy with them, by his divinity, but fall they must needs, within the same
danger, that remains for such, as contemn the holy Sacraments. So, as if
he escape the said imputation, of that heretical humor, of condemning: yet
another mark thereof sticks faster, both upon him and his favorers, then
(I fear) they will easily shake off from them; and that is, pride, and an
ouer-weening of themselves, and their own learning. But it is a shame, that
such insolency is not more carefully repressed. They have rashly written, they
know not what; and for their reputations, (with most ridiculous obstinacy,
even against Gods forbod, all the world in effect impugning them) yet they will
needs look big on the matter, and blush not. In their first admonition,
they themselves did most faithfully (after their manner*) assure the high Court
of parliament, Admon. 4
that the officers, which had to deal in the Ecclesiastical discipline, (by
them at that time urged so vehemently) were Pastors, Elders and Deacons. And
after, To these three jointly, the Ministers, Seniors, and Deacons, is the
whole regiment of the Church committed. So as then, these parochial Doctors,
were clean out of request. And is not this the lightness, 2. Corinthians. 1.17
and fleshly mind, which the Apostle renounceth, in that they come thus unto
us, with yea, and nay.

But as yet you see not all the uncertainties, follies, iarres, Eccle. pa. 95
squaringes, and contradictions, which I find about this matter, Iunius says,
that of doctors, some were prophets, and some were doctors. Beza, he holds
that S. Paul's meaning, was to divide Prophets, into Pastors and, doctors. Whose
divisions or opinions cannot both be true; if the rules of division be duly
observed. For by the first, every prophet is a doctor: and by the second, every
doctor is a prophet. Furthermore, as Iunius very cunningly will draw, both a
prophet and a doctor, out of a doctor, Def. of dis. p. 61
and as Beza wringeth the doctor out of the prophet: so Trauerse he can fetch
him out of a Bishop. Of Bishops (says he) some are pastors, and some are
doctors. By whose extraction, every Geneua schoolmaster (that teaches but
petits) is now become a Bishop. And peradventure I do epsy his policy in it.

A great while it went vnchecked amongst them, for an Ecclesiastical canon (as
though the king of Persia had made it), that a Doctor was inferior to the
Pastor, and to hold the second place. But since it was better considered of,
and wisely foreseen, that Cartwright and some others, might more safely take
upon them the office of doctors, the^ of pastors (who are tied more strictly to
the observation of diverse ceremonies*) they seem to me, to be quite come
about, and to assign the first place mentioned, unto the Doctor: and so no
marvel if they make him a Bishop. Page 15.
The office of teaching (says the learned discourser) is the chief and
principal office in the church. And afterward. The office of a Doctor is to
teach. With whom the godly Sermoner seems to agree, when he says: Page 73.
Man's soul has two parts: vz. reason, or the mind; and the heart, or the
affection. By the fall of Adam there is darkness in the mind, and rebellion in
the heart. Now the Lord, to cure these diseases, has given remedy to his
Church: First a Doctor to teach us, and then a Pastor to exhort us, etc. And
Fenner-likewise, Sacrae Theolog. Page 275.
does place the Doctor before the Pastor.

But of this matter I have no great regard: whether soever goes first, as
proud comes after. And peradventure, they have some way to shift it. I will
not therefore stand greatly upon it: especially, having some other of their
Doctoral points to advertise you of: which are of greater importance. For as
yet, they are not agreed, (for any thing I can find) whether their Doctors in
that they are Doctors, be Ministers, to take (as we commonly speak) the cure
and charge of souls upon them, in particular parishes, or not. In the whole
treatise of the discipline of France: the rules and orders set down for
making of Ministers, do belong altogether unto such as our men term Pastors.
And the same course is also held, in the service book of Scotland. But most
plain it is, in the general Synod of Hage, (vz. that Doctors are not such
Ministers) where having set down (after the newest fashion) the four
functions left us (as they say) by Christ: vz. Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and
Deacons: it presently follows in this manner: Art 3.
Nemo sine legitima vocatione, etc. No man ought to take upon him to preach, or
administer the sacraments without a lawful calling; although he be a Doctor,
an Elder, or a Deacon. Whereby it appears (as I said) that their Doctors in
some places beyond the seas, are no Ministers, without some further calling.
Dis. eccles. sac. cap. 1. etc.
And yet our English reformers, are generally of another judgment; making
Ministers of the word to comprehend, as well Doctors, as Pastors: as it
appears in all their several treatises. I will not quote any other places,
than their subscribed new draught of discipline: Dis eccles sac. cap. 1.
and their Captains resolution: T.C. l. 1. page 85. etc.
that the officers mentioned Ephesians. 4. were all of them, assuredly, Ministers
of the word.

Lastly, if they should be able in time to compass this point: that their
Doctors, by virtue of that calling, might go for such Ministers; yet a new
controversy thereupon arises, not inferior to any of the rest: vz. whether
it appertains to these kind of Ministers of the word, to be Ministers also
of the sacraments. Calvin thinks, Inst. lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 4.
that this is a part of the difference between the Pastor and the Doctor: Quod
Doctores, nec disciplinae, nec sacramentoru^ administrationi praesunt: That
Doctors have neither to deal with the discipline', nor with the administration
of sacraments. But Cartwright (little esteeming Caluins judgment in this
matter) is most earnest to the contrary: who grounding himself (as he would
seem) upon diverse reasons, examples, and authorities, gives out these Oracles.
T.C. l. 1. p. 139.
The Ministers of the word and sacraments, cannot be pulled in sunder. It is a
perpetual ordinance; that the same should be the Ministers of the word, and
sacraments. These words are plain enough, to express a man's mind. But you
may not give any faith unto him. For (as I suppose) he has altered his
judgment. And yet, if you will peruse the place; you shall not find him more
peremptory, in any one point, throughout all his writings.

In the new draught of discipline (whereunto he has subscribed,) it is thus
defined. The Church Officers are first the Ministers of the word, etc. And
those are Pastors, Qui doctrinam and sacramenta administrant; Who administer
doctrine and the sacraments: or Doctors, Qui versantur in sana doctrina
docenda, and conuincendis erroribus; Who are occupied in teaching of wholesome
doctrine, and in confuting of errors. And thus his second sort of Ministers of
the word, is quite debarred, and cut off, from the administration of the
sacraments. Not to gratify, I suppose, either Calvin, or the truth: but
because it concerns most, their own present estate. For as the Doctor, for
their sakes, began to be advanced a step higher than he was before: so is he
now likewise (as I imagine) in the same respect, disburdened of that base
office. They can find in their hearts, to preach: but, urge them to administer
the sacraments, and their common answer is this: we have nothing to do with
that duty: it belongs to the Pastors, and we are Doctors. The matter is;
they will not observe the orders of the Church, in the administration of
sacraments: whereupon it is now come to pass, that there may be certain
Ministers of the word, who have not authority to administer the sacraments.
Proverb. 5.^.
But let them go. They have not written truth, in the tables of their hearts:
and therefore she has forsaken them.

CHAP. X. Their Aldermen must be men of good calling.
AS concerning the number of these pretended rulers, there will be a more
fit place to speak of that hereafter. Now you shall first know: what manner
of men they must be. In most parishes of England, no doubt, but the brethren
must content themselves, with very mean fellows, Husbandmen, Tailors,
Butchers, Carpenters, Shomakers, Thatchers, Dawbers, and such like. Indeed at
Geneua they flaunt it out. For there having twelve in number, Laws of Geneua.
they must all be men of state: vz. Two of the Lords of the little Council:
four of the Council of three score; and six of the Council of two hundred.
Which policy pleases the Ministers there so greatly: that (to their
commendation be it spoken) they wish the like order to be observed in all
places, as nearly as may be. M. Beza speaking hereof, Epistle before Heluet.
conf.
says: That there must be consideration had, that Princes, and Noblemen, and
such as have authority, be chosen to be of the Segniorie. Who being so chosen
(says Cartwright, Lib. 3. page 70. Demonst. c. 14.
and his demonstrator if they should disdain to join in consultation with
poor men, they should disdain, not men, but Christ himself. According to
some proportion of which precept (as Iiudge) the said Cartwright in another
place affirms: T C. lib. 1. page 179.
that is the practice of the Churches reformed, (after his fashion) to choose
such Elders, as are able to live without charging the Church any whit. So that
as near as they can, they will have the chiefest and the richest, to be their
Elders; that so the honorable estate of the Ministers, might show it self
with greater glory. For, as it is set down, in the seventh Geneuian article:
In case one of the two Lords of the Council chosen, should then also be a
Syndicke; yet he must not be in the consistory, but as a common Elder, to
govern the Church with the rest of the company: Demonst. cap. ^ Def. of
eccles. gou. 141.
Yea, and which is more; Every such officer is to be continually resident upon
his charge, and that in his own person. What, not a substitute to be admitted
for a Nobleman? It is well. Then Kings, Princes, Magistrates, Lords, and
Gentlemen: look well to your charges. De eccles. c^. 1^.
Mark (if it please you) how you are raunged: and give place to your betters.
For (says Danaeus Your degree or kind; Long est dissimile, ac inferius ordine
pastorum, Is far unlike, and inferior to the order of pastors. You are but
made their assistants, as the 70. were to Moses. Ergo quae inter eiusdem
Collegij and Curiae assessores, sieve consiliarios, and ipsum praesidem
differentia est, eadem est inter presbyteros and pastores eiusdem. And
therefore know this: that there is as much difference betwixt you, and the
pastors of your consistories (wherein you serve:) as is betwixt a king, and his
counselors. Fie upon superiority, may these Ministers say, fie upon it.
Indeed we (says one of them in effect) do rest, Def. of eccles. gou 70.
not in names carrying show, of worldly rule and lordly commandment, etc. but
of service, guiding, leading, ouerseeing, directing, and such like. Which
makes me to remember the Friar in Chaucer, that desired of the Capon, but the
liver; of a white loaf, but a shiuer; and after that, a roasted pigs head: but
for him he would not any beast were dead. They will seek to be no higher, than
be above princes. They will take nothing upon them (men of great humility) but
even, to be guiders, leaders, overseers, and directers. And as for names of any
great show or honor, they care not for them: so they may have but only the
estimation, which is due to men, that have such vain titles. Even Chaucers
Friar, up and down. But what names will please them, you shall find that
after a sort, in the next chapter.

CHAP. XI. Their disagreement about the name of their ruling associates.
YOu must not think, but that in agreeing by what name their pretended
governors must properly be called, they will be very curious. For in
christening, but of private persons: their new discipline provides, that no
names be given, Quae paganismum, vel papatum resipiunt: which smell either of
paganism, or popery: but such especially, as are in the scriptures. And
therefore, for Robert, Alice, and such like, etc. some of them (as one notes)
have devised these names for their children. The Lord is near: More trial:
Reformation: Discipline: Joy again: Sufficient: From above: Free gift: More
fruit: Dust: names, in our English phrases, not very usual, or often found in the
scriptures. As if for example; where we read: Adam knew Eve: or Kain killed
Abell: we should say after their fashion: Red knew living: and Possession slew
vanity. If they should translate the scriptures: they would do it (as it
seems) very properly. But now, if in a matter of so little weight, (in
respect of that I have in hand) they have thus bestirred themselves, and that
with so great discretion: you must think, that for their Aldermen, (the
sinews of their own strength:) they have left no one corner in their heads
unsearched, to set them out to the world in their best colors: indeed every
man (almost) as his fancy has lead him. By that which has bin said already in
the sixth chapter, it follows consequently: that, if upon their agreement
together, (which I never look for) it happen: that their pretended regiment,
shall be called Synedriu^ then their new Aldermen, whether they be Princes,
Magistrates, Lords, Gentlemen, or (where they want) Cobblers, Tinkers, Brokers,
or Tapsters: they must be called (as I suppose) Synedrians: if Council, then
Counselors: if Consistory, then Consistorians: if Eldership, then Elders: if
Assembly, then Assemblistes: if Deaconship, then Deacons: if Church, then
Churchians: if Senate, then Senators: and if Synagogue, then Archisynagogians.

To these also, may be added some other: so as you will content your selves, to
see some little more crossing. Presbyterorum proprio Christianis vocabulo
comprehendi pastores, Serranus To. 4. cont. Ies. pa. 118
and doctores, nemo nescit. No man is ignorant (says Serranus) that amongst
Christians, this word Priest, does properly signify a pastor and doctor, that
is, Ministers of the word. Nay, says Cartwright, in effect: that is a lie, by
your leave. The name of Elder most properly agrees to those, which have the
government only. Lib. 3. page 33.
And Trauerse his scholar, will not shrink from him an inche. Those Elders
(says he) which only rule, proprio nomine presbyteri appellantur, Dis. eccle.
p. 124
if you will speak properly, are to be called Priests, or Elders. I think he
means, amongst Christians. It seems also, that they be called not simply
Elders: but Elders of the people. For Beza is resolute, that, adiecto epitheto,
the rulers in the Synedrion, or Consistory, had this addition to their names,
Annot. Math. 16. 21. and 26. 25.
to be termed, seniores populi, Elders of the people: with whom,
notwithstanding his credit, an other incountreth: a Bussard in respect, but yet
a fellow as confident as Beza, saying: Seniores populi non erant ex
eclesiastico Synedrio, I.B. polit. p. 100
sed ex civilly. The Elders of the people were not of the ecclesiastical
Senate, but of the civil. By whose judgment then, our Elders may not have
that epithete, which Beza affirms was due unto them.

Besides, if we shall believe Beza, and Cartwright, etc. these Elders are
commended unto us in the scriptures, Annot. Phil. 1.2. Act. 20.28.
under the name of Bishops, T.C. Counterp. 169.
and so we may call them. From whom Trauerse (if he be the author of the
defense of ecclesiastical government, Def. pa. 61. 62.
and of the book of ecclesiastical discipline) first dissenteth: and then
secondly also, from himself. For in his said defense, he is most peremptory:
and brings diverse reasons for it: vz. That ruling Elders are not
comprehended under the name of Bishop: Disc. 122.
and yet in his other book, he says generally of all their Elders, both
Ministers, and Rulers. They are said (...) to govern, rule, and ouersee. Now if
their duty set down in the scriptures, be (...) their office is surely (...)
and the word (...) must needs comprehend them, as well as the Ministers of the
word.

But, that I may omit their thwarting; thus the stream runs, Lib. 3. pa 34.
from Cartwright and Iunius fountains. The titles of Christ's vicars, and of
good prelates, do both agree (says Cartwright) unto the Elders, Eccles. lib.
2. c, 2.
which only govern. And Iunius thus in effect. The scriptures do call, both
Ministers and Elders indifferently: 1. Cor. 14.32.
sometimes Prophets, (as The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets:) sometimes Episcopos, id est, inspectore^. Act. 20.28.
Bishops, Phil. 1.1
that is, ouer-seers (as Take heed to your selves, and to all the flock, 1.
Tim. 3.2.
whereof the holy Ghost has made you ouer-feers, Tit. 1.7.
to feed the Church of God, etc.) sometimes rulers, or laborers; and rulers: 1.
Thef. 5.12.
(as We beseech you brethren, that you know them which labor among you, and
are over you in the Lord:) sometimes ductores, Heb. 13.17.
seu duces; leaders or captains: (as Obey them that have the ouer-sight of
you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must
give account, etc.) sometimes pastors: (as, Ephesians 4.11.
He therefore gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and teachers:) sometime Elders: Act. 14.23.
(as When they had ordained them Elders in every City, Romans 15.16.
etc.) sometimes (...) *Ministers: (as Where Paul says thus of himself, that
I should be a Minister of Jesus Christ toward the Gentiles, ministering the
Gospel of God, etc). sometime (...) Ministers: Act. 26.16.
(as, I am Paul whom thou persecutest: but arise, and stand upon thy feet:
for I have appeared unto thee for this purpose, to appoint thee a Minister, and
a witness, both of the things which thou have seen, and of the things in the
which I will appear unto thee:) sometime deacons, that is Ministers; as, Who is
Paul* Who is Apollo* But the Ministers by whom ye believed, etc. And again,
the same Iunius, in the book before noted, Eccles. p. 119.
of both their kinds of Elders: Math. 5.15.
Sunt salterrae, sunt lux mundi in sua ecclesia singuli: They are the salt of
the earth, they are the light of the world, every one of them in their
several Churches.

If Augustine, Ambrose, Jerome, Chrysostom, and all the rest of the ancient
Fathers were now alive, and should understand to what purpose these scriptures
were thus alleged; would they not wonder, that ever any men should live, that
durst with such boldness, and so little show of truth, so abuse the word of God,
themselves, their readers, and all the world* Nay, I am persuaded; that if M.
Calvin himself (that first devised these officers) were now alive, he would be
greatly ashamed of this corruption, and so notorious an abuse. But God has
dealt with them already: according to his wonted custom in such a case. For
they are wonderfully divided, and do confound themselves, in their expositions
of the several places; as when I come unto that point, it shall in some sort
appear.

But of all these confused number of names, for their Elders, if I were asked
upon which I gessed they would in time most properly insist: I fear it will
prove to be that, of Arch-synagogians, or of Arch-rulers of their said
government, Counterp. p. 12.
deduced, as they confess, from the synagoge. For (says the Counter-poison)
God has ordained for the rulers of the synagogue, Churchrulers, or Elders.
Likewise Cartwright. The chief of the synagogue, are the same, which we call
Elders, and ancients of the church. And Beza also. Archisynagogi dicuntur, Lib.
2. pa. 444.
qui particularium ecclesiarum negotia administrabant, and propterea cense^tur
ecclesiae nomine Mat. 18.17. They are called Arch-rulers of the synagogue, who
did manage the affairs of particular churches; and are therefore in Math. 18.
termed by the name of the church. Lib. 3. pa. 637.
But the said Cartwright passes. Their Synagogues (says he) being the same,
that our churches, in every one of them, being not one, but many princes: the
urging of that example, brings diverse chief governors, or Archbishops
intocuerie particular church. His meaning is (as I take it) that if they be
urged too far, and so constrained to speak their consciences (which
peradventure as yet they would be loath to do) they must the^ of necessity
deal plainly with us, and tell us roundly; that all the Elders which they
look for (esteem them as we list, that have no such divine insight into
them) they are indeed, and must be; our chief governors, our Archbishops, and
our Princes.

Surely such artizans, and mean persons, as should occupy these rooms in
most parishes, if they had their platform, might well have been contented with
his former titles given unto them: of Christ's vicars, and Gods prelates; though
they had wanted these. But it would be remembered, that if such as are under the
Ministers, be of this great honor: what are we to think of the Ministers
themselves, that are so far above them. I had forgotten to tell you how
Cartwright affirms, though falsely: that the word priesthood is sometime taken
in the ecclesiastical writers, Lib. 2. page 370.
for this kind of Elders. Whereby I conjecture, that their graund pastors,
(especially, in such cities as have many parishes under one consistory,) must
be, if not summi sacerdotes, the high priests: yet at the least, principes
sacerdotum, the princes of Elders: or rather, reges regum, kings of kings.

But by what titles they will maintain their own great pre-eminence above
their Elders, I do not greatly regard it. This is strange, that after so many
disputations, and libels, against the names of our Archbishops, to prove them
Antichristian, Annot. Act. 13.
or unlawful, (we having but two of them in all England) they would now (if
they might be suffered) impose upon us, Lib. 2. page 407.
seven or eight Archbishops in every parish. What a wringing and wresting is
there of this word (...) by Beza, Cartwright, and others: as being for the
imperiousnes of it, unmeet to agree with the Ministers of the Gospel* And yet
now, their new devised Elders (worthy men for the most part I warrant you) may
every one of them, lawfully be called an Archbishop. I would gladly know for my
learning, why (...), joined to this word Bishop; should be rather an unlawful
name for some Minister, than when it is joined to all their own Synagogians, or
Church-rulers? They that dare propound such ridiculous things, as these are,
and defend the^: may say and maintain what they list. Shomakers, Peuterers,
Barbers, Pinners, Pointers, and Painters, (being chosen to be of this
synagogue) to become presently thereby, our pastors, leaders, watchme^ of our
souls, Christ's vicars, Gods prelates, Bishops, and Archbishops, continuing their
occupations, and having nothing to do with the word and sacraments: would have
been accounted by all the ancient Fathers, to have been, rather the conceit
of some frantike mad men, than of any, that had either learning, or judgment.

CHAP. XII. They cannot agree where to find their Elders qualities described.
I Think it can hardly be showed in the scriptures: that God himself did ever
ordain any special officers, either ecclesiastical, or civil: but he
likewise appointed, what manner of men they should be, in respect of their
abilities and virtues, for their faithful discharging of them. Which makes
me, more than to suspect, that these pretended Elders, for all the outcries
made in their behalf: to be indeed but counterfaits; in that they cannot agree
among themselves, where they are described. The form of prayer made at Geneua,
Learned dis. page
and practiced in Scotland, and with diverse alterations, offered not long
since, to have been (by parliament) established in England, and others that
follow them, do thus describe them. The Elders must be men of good life, and
godly conversation, without blame and all suspicion, careful for the flock,
wise, and above all things, fearing God.

And for all these qualities, the chief place alleged (as I think) is out of
Numbers: Numb. 11. 16. 17. 24. 25.
where it is said, That God appointed Moses to choose 70. men of the Elders of
Israel to bear the burden of the people with him: which Moses having
performed, the Lord, according to his former promise, took of the spirit,
which was in Moses, and put it upon the 70. ancient men, and when the spirit
rested upon them, they prophesied, and did not cease. Out of which words, I
find nothing for the^: except they will have them Prophets. But I do here
dispute nothing, let the^ speak for themselves. Welsurely, then says a
discouerer of untruths, that came lately from Scotland: Page 8.6.8.
They are ignorant in the cause of Christ's government, that will affirm
these were Ecclesiastical officers. The very place it self, and all the
circumstances thereof, do prove them civil. And where it is said that the
seventy Elders prophesied, it can no more prove them to belong to the
government of the Church, then the like gift bestowed upon Saul can make him a
Church officer.

Bannosius, he relieth not upon the book of Numbers, for this matter: but if
you will be content with Exodus, he can fet the^ thence with a wet finger:
marry you must have it by way of collection. Si ex praecepto Domini etc. If by
the Lords commandment the governors of the common wealth of the Hebrews,
were men of courage, fearing God, men dealinge truly, hating coueteousnes,
multo magis tales esse debent Presbyteri etc. Much more these Elders ought to
be such valiant men. In good time. And other place out of the old Testament for
this purpose he names not any: which shows he was brought to a very low ebb.

There is a description of the visible Church, which (they say) was printed at
Rochell: Wherein these Elders are thus described. They must be of judgment and
wisdom, endued with the sprite of God, able to discern between cause and
cause, between plea and plea etc: and to that end, besides the place of
Numbers mentioned, they quote another out of the Chronicles, where Iehosophat,
speaking of the judges of the high Court, 2. Chro. 19.9 10.
for all causes at Jerusalem says: thus shall ye do in the seat of the Lord,
faithfully and with a perfect heart, and in every cause that shall come unto
you, from your brethren that dwell in their cities: between blood and blood,
between law and precept, statutes and judgment ye shall judge them. Where I
note, the warines of these fellows, in attributing unto their Elders
Commission to discern between cause and cause, plea and plea; that they leave
out purposely, between blood and blood etc. For the which Beza will not give
them any thanks at all: having devised a trick (as after it shall appear)
how they may deal in those matters, as well as in the other. Indeed in all
alike. But this place rather serves to show their opinions, what causes the
Elders are to be Judges in, then to describe their qualities, otherwise then
that they must be faithful men. They will play small play before they sit out.
And thus you have what they bring to this end (for ought I find) out of the
old Testament: with such good agreement as has been declared, Which causes
me to imagine that the Lord never thought of any such officers, in the time of
the Law. For if he had: Moses surely (in mine opinion) would have described
their qualities: as well as he did the 70. Judges and other officers (to diverse
purposes) by him appointed, and not have left them (especially such noble
Prelates and Cherubins) to be described in this sort: hit I, miss I, by guess.

But peradventure, there are more pregnant places in the new Testament, to
supply some want in Moses: whereupon they do iumpe with one consent and good
agreement together. I would be glad to see that: but he lives not, I am
persuaded that shall ever see it. When proud men dissent: they are hardly
reconciled in matters of wit and learning. De polit. 71.
Let us try them. The qualities required to be in an Elder, are set down by
the Apostle in the Epistle to Titus (says Bannosius) and some others, in these
words thus in effect. An Elder must be unreprovable, the husband of one wife,
Tit. 1.
having faithful children, which are not slaundered of riotte, neither are
disobedient, not froward, not angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given
to filthy lucre, but harbarous, one that loves goodness, wise, righteous,
holy, temperate, etc. Nay (says Calvin) though there be two kinds of Elders,
Call. in Tit.
yet contextus statim ostendit, hic non alios quam Doctores intelligi, hoc est,
qui ad docendum ordinabantur: The Text does show, that here no other are to be
understood, but Doctors, that is those that were ordained to teach.
Ecclesiasticus page 64.68.
With Bannosius agrees Iunius, T. C. lib. 3. page 35.
and with Calvin, Cartwright. So that as yet we have no certainty. But let Beza
be heard, and then all shall be well. You shall hear, Iunius Ecclesiasti. 6 8.
both Beza and Iunius jointly. They are out of all doubt, that where the
Apostle in his Epistle to Timothy, Beza annot. 1. Tim 3.1.
does describe the qualities, which are required in a Bishop, there also and in
the same words, he sets out the Elder in like manner: For that the word
(Bishop) does comprehend in that place, both a Minister of the word, and the
ruling Elder also. Now then we have him: and because we have been so long
seeking for him, you shall have him at large, according to these men's opinions.
He that desires the office of a ruling Elder, desires a good work. A ruling
Elder therefore must be unreprovable, the husband of one wife, watching,
sober, modest, harbarous, apt to teach, not given to wine, no striker, not
given to filthy lucre, but gentle, no fighter, not covetous, one that can rule
his own house honestly, having children under obedience with all honesty: for
if any man can not rule his own house, how shall he care for the Church of
God? He may not be a young Scholar, least he being puffed up, fall into
the damnation of the Devil. He must also be well reported of, even of them
that are without, least he fall into rebuke and the snare of the Devil. There
is not a Shoemaker in Geneua, but he is such a one ye may be sure: and in
England you may have a dozen of them in every parish.

But may we now indeed, rest in these men's opinions* Do what you list. But
Calvin and Trauerse are directly against them. For Calvin never comprehends,
the only ruling Elder, under the word Bishop: and upon this place of Timothy,
he makes Pastor and Bishop, words of one signification: as he does also upon
the 1. to the Philippians, and the first to Titus: which quite excludes this
counterfaite Elder, from shrowding himself here under the Bishop. With Calvin
also agrees herein, Disc. Eccle. fol. 57.58.65. and 101. Page 61.
our peragon Trauerse, even in all the places cited: as likewise the author of
the defense of Ecclesiastical discipline (whether it be Trauers or not) saying:
they cannot be here contained under the name of BB.

And where shall we then find them? It is a plain case (says Trauerse:)
where should we find them but where they are* Ibidem.
They are contained in that Epistle to Timothy, under the name of Deacons. Nay
says master Calvin, where Saint Paul speaks of Deacons, quod alij ad
Presbyteros referunt Episcopo inferiores, caret fundamento: in that some
refer it to Elders that are inferior to the Bishop, it wants a foundation.
Restat vt Diaconos intelligamus, quorum mentionem facit Lucas Act 6.. Sunt qui
curam pauperum habebant. It remains that we understand those Deacons of
whom mention is made Act. 6. And those were they that had the care of the
poor committed unto them. But now comes in M. Cartwright on the behalf of
his pupil Trauers: saying in effect. It is true that Calvin was a learned man
in his time: Lib 3. page 34
but yet herein Trauers does seem to be of the sounder opinion. These be his
words: In the word Deacons (as it is well observed in the book of the
Discipline of England) the Apostle comprehends both the Elders, and those
which had the Alms to dispose. Indeed master Cartwright is a fellow for a
dead lift. For if I understand him well, he will have his Elders described, both
under the nams of Bishops and of Deacons: as though they were, a third thing
compounded of them both. Lib. 3. p. 54.
I have showed (says he) that both they and their office be there: which is
the same with the Bishops: that only of teaching excepted. But Iunius, when he
sorteth them with the ministers of the word, leaves not out that point as
impertinent to them: Eccles. 69.
but makes the^ (...), apt to teach. From whom (as I take it) Beza
dissenteth not much, Anno. 1. Cor. 12.8.
when speaking of these Elders, he says: qui and ipsi interdum doctrinae
verbo praeerant, even they sometimes did preach the word. These. Geneu. pa. 217.
And Abraham Henric, is direct: presbyteris, peculialiter sic appellatis, verbi
quoque administratio commissa est, etc. The administration of the word is also
given to the Elders peculiarly so called, etc: but to another end then to
Pastors and Doctors: vz: vt iudicijs ecclesiasticis, praeeuntibus pastoribus
praesint: that next after the Pastors they might bear rule in their
ecclesiastical judgments, or courts of justice.

This Henric may mean well: but to my seeming he does not well express
himself. Master Beza can open this point more directly. Indeed he has so
opened it, as he has already almost undone his Elders. For now by his statutes
of Geneua, the twelve Elders, must all be preachers. This mystery was never
revealed, so directly to the world before, as I think till now of late. The
Elders we speak of, (says Master Beza) do feed the church with doctrine,
being joined with the Pastors and Doctors, in the exercise of ecclesiastical
judgments. Yea what differs that public preaching of the word, which is
proper to Pastors, from that which is exercised in the Consistories, according
as it is meet, that some should be convinced, some instructed, some reproved,
or some comforted, saving in this, that the Pastor preaches publicly to the
assembly, and the Elders but to private men, being called into the Consistory?
If their Pastors preach no better in their Pulpets, then I imagine their
Artizan preachers do, in their Elderships: peradventure he that should say
their preaching were but prattling, might sometimes say it truly.

But what should we respect any of these fellows: let us follow Cartwright
and Trauerse (in the point they agree in) and through their spectacles,
behold: how these Elders are to be furnished, under the shadow of Deacons.
They must be honest, not double tongued, not given to much wine, neither to
filthy lucre, having the mystery of faith in pure conscience: Tim. 3.8.9.10
11.12.13.
And let them first be proved, then let them minister if they be found
blameless: Likewise their wives must be honest, not evil speakers, but sober
and faithful in all things. They must be the husbands of one wife, and such
as can rule their children well, and their own housholdes. For they that have
ministered well, get themselves a good degree, and great liberty in the faith,
which is in Christ Jesus.

And thus you have your Elders, with their complete armor, laid out before
you: after this and that man's fashion, agreeing as justly, as Germans lips
together. But I may not omit one thing, before I end this point. It may
peradventure seem strange unto you (as surely it does to me) that any men of
judgment: (whether they will have their Elders endued, with those qualities
that were required in the 70. chapter of Exodus, or in the Judges, Numbers, 2.
or in the Bishops, or in the Deacons, Tim. 3. and Tit. 1.) should but once
dream, that there might so many men of such virtue and qualities be found in a
kingdom, as might supply every parish with six, or eight of them. But I will
tell you what Cartwright faith for remedy hereof: T.C. lib. 1. page 180.
believe him as your discretion shall direct you. When men are called (faith
he) to a lawful and profitable calling, and especially to a public calling,
God does pour his gifts on that person, which is called so plentifully, that
he is as it were suddenly made a new man. An excellent conceit. But to see my
simplicity. I ever thought, that where God appoints, what manner of men (for
their gifts and qualities) should be chosen, to such and such offices, there
ought ever especial care to be had, that none destitute of them, as near as
might be, should be admitted unto them. And if I have been deceived herein, I
marvel how it comes to pass, that many men unfit for their gifts, being
upon diverse occasions more necessary, then can happen for the choice of their
Elders, admitted into the ministry, such wants have not been so plentifully
supplied, and they suddenly become new men. But the rule holds of likelihood,
only for their Elders. Ah he means (I suppose,) that God will take off the
spirit, that is in him and the rest of their Pastors and doctors, and put it
upon them, as he did from Moses, for the 70. Numb. 2. and this you may believe
when you hear them all prophecy. Surely (for ought I can see,) they have not
any such abundant store of the gifts of Gods spirit, that they can spare
much to be taken from them, except they shall be left wholly destitute. But it
were good we sent into Scotland, and some other Countries, to learn more
certainly of this strange metamorphosis, before we be too light of credit.
For as I take it, we may not look for such extraordinary matters now. And
besides, I fear, if their Elders should receive any portion of that spirit,
which is in some reformers; it will be of that which offered himself, to be a
lying spirit in the mouths of certain Prophets: and then it were better for
us, they never prophesied.

CHAP. XIII. Of their uncertainty, whether their Elders be ecclesiastical
men, or lay men.
THere has been an ancient distinction, betwixt the Priests and the people:
the one sort being termed the Clergy, and the other the laity. Which
notwithstanding Beza misliketh: Veteres patres cleri nomen ad collegium
Ecclesiasticorum ministrorum transtulerunt. Annot. 1. Pet. 5.3.
The ancient fathers did transfer the name of Clergy unto the College of
Ecclesiastical Ministers, etc. but they ought not to have done so. If they had
been as wise as Beza is: it is like they would not. The pretense of this
reproof, which is made by diverse, is said to be in respect of Gods people,
for that they are thereby iniuried. And have they devised, a way how to
recompense them* Surely they have. But it is, as mean a one, as ever you knew.
For they divide all Christians, into Church-Ministers, or officers: and into
Idiots. Christ said not (...) to the Idiotes: (that is unto all the people:)
whose sins ye remitte, etc. Sed ecclesiastica authoritate praeditis: but to
such as are endewed with Ecclesiastical authority, Beza de excom. page 54
(says Beza.) Again, touching the same words. Sunt iudicialia haec verba. De
excom. page 60.
Ideoque ad (...) id est, nullo publico munere in Ecclesia fungentes, (quos
postea laicos vocarunt,) minime pertinentia. They are judicial phrases. And
therefore do not appertain unto Idiots, that is, to those that have no
public office in the church, who^ afterward they called Laymen. Laicis
postea hos vocarunt quibus oppositi sunt Ecclesiastici. After they called them
Laymen to whom the Ecclesiastical were opposite. And because hereof great
abuse did grow: they will now renew the former distinction.

So now as many, as are neither pastors, Doctors, Elders, nor Deacons, be they
Kings, Counselors, Lawyers, or whatsoever, they must satisfy themselves, with
the names of Idiots. And if you will know the very nature of the word
Idiota, Ann. 1. Cor. 14.
master Beza will also tell you. Idiots are quasi priuati as it were private
men. But more fully in another place. By the name of Idiots, (proprie
significantur plaebeij and viles etc. Ann. Act. 4.13
Iam vero quia eiusmodi homines sere indocti sunt and rerum imperiti, idcirco
factum est vt Idiotae dica^tur, qui minime ingeniesi sunt aut intelligentes:)
Plebeiall and base persons are properly signyfied. Now therefore because such
men are for the most part unlearned and ignorant, it is come to pass, that
they who are not ingenious or men of understanding, are called Idiots. Wise
men, and Idiots. And did S. Paul make this division? well: I fear that they
themselves will prove the Idiots. But in the mean time, the state of the
Land, that has no place in your regiment, is beholden unto them, for
marshalling them so discreetly.

Besides this distribution, they allow also of another; wherein all the said
Idiots are termed civil men: and their wise governors ecclesiastical
persons. A name as strange, almost for Artizans and men of trade, (such as
before are mentioned) as the former of Bishops and Archbishops. And yet it must
needs be so. For says Cartwright: Lib. 1. page 183 Heb. 13. 17, Lib. 3.69
For so much as they were Church officers and ^uer the people in matters
pertaining to God, and such as watched over the souls of men, though they were
no pastors to preach the word, yet they were no laymen (as they term the^) but
ecclesiastical persons. Which if any man will deny, let him deny also,
Counterpoys. page 1^0.
that two and two makes four. For, says the Counterpoyson: Whosoever is
called with due examination and trial; with the consent of those to whom it
appertains, and are with fasting and prayers, or with prayers only and with
imposition of hands, separated or put a part to that office, they are
ecclesiastical persons, and not Laymen (as they term them.)

But Beza (as I take it) is plain in this point: Beza de exco. page 112.
and to our men very opposite. For says he, in proof of his Elders: Certe
nisi etc. Surely except some men chosen out of the body of the whole assembly,
should sit in that company, by whom the whole Church is governed: The general
name of the church would scarsly agree to that company: with which name
notwithstanding it is adorned, because through that means, men being chosen
out of all the parts of the whole Church, they might represent the whole
church. By which words, his meaning either must needs be, that for the better
representation of the whole church, there must be Laymen, (as we call them)
as well of the Eldership, as Ministers; or that their Elders ought to be chosen
out of the company of men, of every trade and vocation; which cannot in any
wise agree to the practice of Geneua, where men of the state, and Counselors,
are only chosen. Now if upon their choice, as being Idiots before, they are
become wise; So of Laymen, they are presently made Ecclesiastical persons:
then the representation of both the estates, is drowned: by which means their
Eldershippe might loose the name of the Church, or at the least scarsely
continue it.

Here comes also further into my mind, another opinion of Bezaes, fit for
this place: which in my judgment does mightily thwart not himself only, but
all his abettors for erecting up of their Eldershippe. He says, De. excom. pa.
53.
when Christ used these words: Tell the church etc. Math. 18. In discipulorum
persona legitimum ecclesiae nomine consensum congregatu^ intelligebat, he
understood, in the person of his Disciples, a lawful Senate or company
assembled together in the name of the church. And in his confessions, Cap. 5.
sect. 43
he also affirms; that the keys of the kingdom of heaven were given,
omnibus vere presbyteris; to all true Elders, including his only ruling Elders,
in persona Apostolorum, in the person of the Apostles. Which opinion of his,
first overthrows his collection: that there must needs be vnpriestly Elders,
for the said representation by him devised. For here we see, the Church
represented sufficiently in his judgment. Math. 16.19. and 18. v. by Christ's
disciples and Apostles, they being all of them ministers of the word, and
sacraments, to whom Christ there spoke. Secondly, if the Apostles, in receiving
the keys, sustained the person of all true priests: and if Peter, when Christ
said unto him, unto thee, I will give the keys, sustained the person of the
Apostles: It follows that one man may sustain, the person of all Bezaes
true Elders or Eldership: and so consequently, it is not against the word of
God, if we say, Tell the Church, that is, tell the Bishops vz. one man.

But to leave Beza to his own pleasure, both to say, and do what he list:
especially in his own Consistory. And yet truly it were good reason, if
their Elders be Christ's vicars, Gods prelates, Bishops, and Archbishops, they
should be accounted ecclesiastical persons: and I am persuaded that the one is
as true as the other.

CHAP. 14. Their disagreement concerning the continuance of their Elders in
their office.
AT Geneua, their Elders are simplye chosen, but for a year. In the French
church in London, they are elected (as I hear) for three years. It was thus
ordered in the National Council of the Belgicke churches at Hage 1586.
Seniores et Diaconi duos annos inseruiant: quotannis numerus dimidiatus
commutabitur etc. Let the Elders and Deacons serve two years, and the half of
them shall be changed every year, etc. The elect of elder.
Scotland follows the Geneua order (if their book be true of the form of
their prayers printed 1584.) and does retain them, but for a year. And then
every man as he was before. A prelate, Christ's vicar, a Bishop, an
Archbishop, an ecclesiastical man, this year; and a plain Dauber, a
Thatcher, a Tailor, a Cobbler, and a Tinker, the next year: and so by turns,
backwarde and forward, if any of the same persons shall be diverse times chosen,
as often as it falls out amongst them. What* election and ordination by
trial, prayers, fastings, and imposition of hands, and all but for a year*
It makes me to remember a saying of Tertullian in the like case: Of
prescript. against
Ordinationes eorum temerariae, leaves, inconstantes etc. Their ordinations are
rash, light, and inconstant, etc. Alius hodie Episcopus, alius cras, etc. Hodie
Diaconus qui eras lector, hodie presbyter qui cras laicus. This day one is a
Bishop, and to morrow another etc. To day a Deacon, and to morrow a Reader, he
that is a priest or an Elder to day is the next day after become a Layman etc,

Now, if they will say: that they have some rules, out of the scriptures for
this their mutabilitie: (as I trust they will be ashamed to say otherwise) and
that (as Cartwright says, T.C. Lib. 1.
) These Elders did not flourish in Constantines time: shall we think, that the
Bishops in the Council of Nice, when they went about the matter that
Paphnutius withstoode, did ever intend, that such an Elder or ecclesiastical
person (becoming a layman again after a year or two,) should upon his
choice to that office, from thence forth, not company with his wife which he
had married before? It may peradventure be answered, that Christ's order for
this annual or bienniall change, was through corruption altered, before that
Council; and grown to be a continual office. Indeed they may be bold with
those times: to speak of them, as they list. But what will you think if now
the matter begin to be called in question: whether Geneua first, and then
after, whether other their reformed churches of the Low Countries, and of
Scotland have done well, in making these Elders but temporal officers, rather
then Ministers of the word. Certainelye a Learned man of that humor, told me
playnlie, that both Geneua, and the rest were thought by diverse grave men to
have done amiss therein. And peradventure by degrees, you shall see some
alteration about that matter. For the Brethren of England, in their
subscribed Discipline, do begin to make some qualification that way (as it
seems unto me) when they say: Presbyteri non sunt perpetui, neque tamen
facile moueantur. Let not the Elders be perpetual, nor yet easilye removed.
They must not be perpetual: but yet; no time is prescribed. So as, they may
continue Elders by this rule: through the strength of one ordination, twenty
years, if the rest of their company be so pleased. And Carolus Gallus in his
book of Discipline is already come to the point: affirming directly,
Presbytero Ecclesiae post biennium aut triennium stationem suam deserere non
licere: That it is not lawful for an Elder of the Church after two or three
years to give over his charge, but must continue the same vsque admortem,
until his death. Which assertion he takes upon him to prove, after the
manner of these men: by many arguments (such as they are) both out of the old,
and new Testament: with whom agrees Bannosius, De polit. ciuit. dei. etc. 71.
alleging this old Cannon: which provides Ne bis presbyter ordinetur, et ne
quispiam bis baptizetur: That a Priest or Elder be not twice ordained nor any
twice baptized. For (says he) Ordinatio est perpetuae functionis consecratio,
quemadmodum baptismus perpetui foederis cum Deo initi est testificatio:
Ordination is the consecration of a perpetual function, as baptism is a
contynuall testimony or witness of our League made with God. This surely
draws deeply.

How it will be taken at his hands I know not. I am persuaded, that whilst
Beza lives: it will never be admitted at Geneua. For so if their twelve Elders
did see their authority to be of such continuance: they might paraduenture,
hold the six ministers noses to the grindstone. Whereas now, they knowing
their kingdom, to be of such small continuance, even as they please the
ministers: do suffer them to reign and do what they list; fearing what
afterclapps might light upon them, the year after: if they should do
otherwise. Besides, if they should be offices of such endurance, those princes,
noblemen, and gentlemen, that would be content paraduenture, for a year to
become ecclesiastical persons, amongst them, and execute their office
(forsooth) in their own persons: would be twice advised, how they left their
other affairs; to attend upon that worshipful service. So as what will be
the issue amongst them herein: god knows. For my part, I do not: and
therefore I will leave them to their consultations, what course they were best
to take, for their own credits: and proceed to the qualities, wherewithal
they affirm, that their Elders (by the word of god) must needs be endued.

Chap. XV. Their uncertainty where to find the particular offices of their
Aldermen.
FOr my better entrance into this point followinge; I will begin with some
of their own grounds. Thea government of the church ( says Martin) must be
by these officers and offices alone, Mart. lib. a.
and by no other: which the Lord has set down, and limited in his word. And
the demonstrator: Corah Datha^ and Abiram were punished, having no warrant of
that they took in hand. A very good caveat for their Elders. Let us then see,
what those particular duties are, which they ascribe unto them. But here you
must understand, that every parish is to be divided into several Tribes,
according to the number of their Elders: every Elder having one of them
assigned unto his charge. Out of diverse of their books but especially de disc.
eccle. fol: 121. The judgment of a learned.
And their office is: if any thing be done amiss privately within their
compasses, to reprove or correct the offenders privately: but if the offender be
obstinate, or the offense public, they must bring them to the Eldership.
Secondly: they must know every house and particular person in the parish, that
they may inform the ministers of their estate. If any stranger come to dwell
within their several tribes, they must signify the same unto the pastor, that
he may examine his religion. Thirdly; Beza: de exco: page 102. Laws of Geneua.
if any infants are to be baptized, they must likewise give the pastor notice
thereof. Fourthly; at the time of the communion, they must all jointly see, that
no excommunicate persons, come into the church: likewise help and assist the
pastor, (at Geneua the Elder ministers the cup): take heed that none come
to the Lords table, whose religion and honesty should not be known unto them,
and with whom the pastor and Doctor, should not have dealt before. In general
terms their whole duty is to help, to inform and to aid the pastors and
Doctors, and to have a vigilant eye to the observation of all such ceremonies,
laws, and orders, as they themselves, with their fellow Senators should
constitute and ordain.

Now surely it were a goodly fight, (and I have occasion, often to repeat it),
to see the noblemen, and gentlemen of England, discharginge all these duties,
in their own persons; and especially, ministringe the cup at the holy
communion. In what reputation should the ministers be; that should have such
eyes, such aiders, such informers* What would the people (think, you) say,
when they should see these noble men and gentlemen come to the Pastors with
their caps in their hands severally, saying: May it please you Sir, there is a
stranger come lately to dwell within my Tribe: another, there is a child to be
Baptized within my tribe: another, this and that fellow are obstinate persons,
within my Tribe: and altogether (if they know any that presumed to come to the
Communion:) Oh Sir, here is a fellow, you have not spoken withal: and (when I
say) the people should see these things etc. on the other side likewise
perceive, and hear their Ministers (as I imagine) give a nodde with their
heads and answer unto them: very well: ye have done your duties, and we
commend you for it: bring this: take away that etc, would they not fall down
think you, and worship these Rabbis? But you must remember always that they
hate superiority. Equality, that is it, which pleases them. Indeed they talk
of an equality amongst themselves: but otherwise they affect no small
superiority over all men besides.

Well it is meet we should now consider, what proof they have: for all these
particular duties, out of the word of God. And here (I pray you) first of all
remember, that Beza is brought to this issue: that whether there were any such
Elders at all, ever instituted by Moises (from whom they fette them) or not: he
has nothing else to say, but probabile est, it is probable there were such.
And much to the same effect it is, that he brings for their several
offices. For speaking of them especially, besides that he names only this one
office, (as finding no others in the old Testament): vz. that the duty of the
chief rulers of the Synagogues was, non admittere ad Synagogas, quos
Hierosolomitanum (...)indicasset, De excom. page 102.
not to admit them to the Synagogues, whom the Council at Jerusalem had cast
out: he brings but this simple demonstration for the proof of it. Horum
proculdubio parts fuerunt, out of doubt, it was their parts thus to do:
Proculdubio, probabile est: out of doubt, it is probable. Notable proofs.
Whosoever will take the pains to read, that part of his Book, de
Presbyterio: shall find little else in it, but his probabilities and
groundless assertions. Saving that he further says: there is mention made in
the new Testament of governors and ruling Elders, Romans 12. 1. Cor. 12. 1. Tim.
5.
(which we deny with all the ancient fathers to have any relation to their
devised Elders,) and thereupon whatsoever has been thought meet to be the
office of rulers, is ascribed belike at Geneua unto them. The treatise is
surely unworthy such a man's, as master Beza would be accounted.

And upon the like conceit also, our English Reformers have taken upon them
to set down all the former duties mentioned of their Elders: not that they
find them in the word of God, but because they fit their turns, and do
account them necessary to set up their own kingdom. For proof whereof, De
Discipl. eccles. fol. 121
I will only trouble you with one man's authority, but that shall be authentical
both with the brotherhood of England, and also with them of Geneua, where the
book for the excellency of it has been reprinted. The author of that book
having at large described the said duties, with a kind of so forth, and alia
huiusinodi: so as they may add more when they list; the force of truth does
wringe from him these words, First that all these said duties, speciatim in
Scripturis non exprimantur, are not specially expressed in the Scriptures. Why,
then let your Elders remember your former rule: least for usurping such
offices, as they have no warrant for, out of the word of God, they perish with
Corah, Dathan and Abiram. Yea but (says he) though the Scriptures do not
express them, yet that there should be such Archrulers with these offices,
as were in veteri Iudoeorum Ecclesia, in the old Church of the Jews, it
greatly tends ad ordinem, decorum, vtilitatem and fructum Ecclesi^: to the
order decency, profit and fruit of the Church. And what if this be denied* or
who shall judge whether they be so profitable or not or when will they prove
that the duties mentioned, did belong to the Archsynagogians? And yet for all
these uncertainties, or (as Cartwrights term is) mere beggeries, he
proceeds to another Consistorian demonstration.

There are no other Elders mentioned in the Scriptures, Ibidem.
to whont these so profitable duties do appertain, but these our Elders:
therefore I think they are to be referred to them. I think: Behold he is
not certain. There are no other. When shall that be proved? by the coldness of
his conclusion, (considering the man's warm disposition:) it seems to me, that
if the same things might be brought to pass, without these Elders, that they
ascribe to their offices, they would not much insist to urge them any longer.
Which makes me to remember the notable Counsel, which Gualter gave to the
Bishops of England, 1574.
in a Letter of his to the Bishop of Ely* Where prosecuting certain points of
more then popish tyranny, practiced by some of his neighbor Consistorians, and
commending those in England, that did oppose themselves to the innouators
here, he gives this adui se. Ne tamen hi habeant plausibilem calumniandi
occasionem etc. But least your disturbers and unquiet persons may have a
plausible occasion of slaundering, it is necessary to ordain, by the,
Magistrates authority, a Christian means or Discipline for reformation of
manners, whereby the Ministers, if their lives be dissolute: the too much
liberty of great men, and the corrupt behavior of the common people may be
restrained. Nam si id fiat, non habebunt illi quod quiritentur, nisi apertam
Imperij affectationem profiteri velint. For if that be done, those persons
shall have no cause to complain; except they will publicly profess the
affectation of the Empire.

It appears by diverse letters of Gualters, that the present state of the
Church of England, is so depraved beyond the seas by these companions amongst
us: as that it has been conceived by godly men, that we had no laws, no
good orders, no discipline, but that every man might do what he list: which
caused him to give this advise. Whereas if he had known the truth; he would
rather have urged the Bishops, to a more careful regard, then hitherto they
have had, for the executinge of such laws, as we have made to our hands
already, then for the making any new. For the best reformed churches in Europe,
may cast their caps (as the saying is) in this respect, at England. Which
heapeth a greater judgment upon them, that can not be content to live
quietly, under the present government: but do so frowardly, so seditiously,
and so fondly seek to disturb the same: and to bring unto us, they know not
what, a counterfeite Chimera, without either top, or toe, proportionable to
that which is pretended.

But this is by the way. My purpose was to inform you, that for the duties or
offices (before so largely ascribed unto their Elders, to be severally by them
executed in their particular tribes,) they have no warrant in the word of God:
but are driven to silly shifts, their proculdubio, their thinkinges, and (as
you have seen,) in effect, to confess as much. So that by their own
divinity, those men that dare take upon them such offices: are in danger to
perish. Now I will come to those offices, which they affirm they are to
execute, with the Pastor and Doctor.

CHAP. XVI. Of their Aldermens ioynt-office with the Ministers in the election,
abdication, and ordination of Ministers: and of their disagreement about the
same.
THe Elders (says master Cartwright) are jointly to execute with the
Ministers, T.C. lib. 1. page 183.
election or choice, and the abdication or putting out of Ecclesiastical
officers. Tush: why omitteth he ordinatio^* Demo. cap. 7. Iunius eccle. fol. 53.
Let it be added out of his demonstrator, and others: to go with the other for
company. T.C. li. 2. 1. part: p. 274.
Every officer of the church (says the Demonst.) he must be ordained by the
laying on of the hands of the Eldership Demo. ca. 15.
. Indeed here is now good fellowship. The second is: in excommunication of the
stubborn, or absolution of the repentant. The third: is the decision of all
such matters, as do rise in the church, either touching corrupt manners, or
perverse doctrine.

A man would have thought these Elders had been sufficiently laden before: but
here is a surcharge with a witness. I trust their proofs for these things
are very pregnant: or else their presumption will be more then palpable. You
must not forget: that whether these Rulers in Moses time, did join with the
Priests in the execution of any of their offices, at all or not: Beza though
he labor to seek out their first institution, and so to find them, when
they were at the best: yet he is driven to his probabile est, for that point:
and can go no further that way. Besides, will they say that in the old
testament these their Elders, had to do in the electing or chosing of Priests,
and so consequently in their deposition? Lay it in them or in their voices: to
make new Levites? It is a mockery. Besides: what if their Elderships
themselves, have no such authority? shall it not in some sort impair the
credit of their Aldermen? Or if the Ministers, the masters of the game be cut
short: may not their attendantes be contented, though they be somewhat abridged?

Laws of Geneua*
At Geneua in the election of their Ministers: the council of state, has in
effect a negative voice. For after their Ministers, (upon examination of the
party, and hearing of him preach) have thought him a meet man for the
ministry: he must again preach before some of the Council: and if the
Council like him not, he cannot be chosen, but is repelled. And as the civil
magistrate has there his ordinary authority in the electing of ministers: so
has he (when any of them do incur the danger of law) the like authority,
to depose them again from the Ministry. Ibid. Artic. 23
This were a disgrace indeed: if our grave Eldership, should be thus ouerruled.
But for their Aldermen, in all that action of both sorts: vz* election and
abdication: I do not find them, so much as once mentioned by those laws:
except they be included, in the name of ministers. And then some of their
ministers, are dumb dogs.

By the decrees of the national Synod at the Hage: the election of ministers,
Synod Hage Art. 4.
may not be, by the Consistory alone, but the Deacons are also joined in
commission with them, and likewise the Classis: or if there be none, then two
or three neighbour-ministers. Ibid.
And for deposition of any from the ministry: that is, Penes caetum
Classicum: belonging to the Classical assembly. It seems that the Elders
(being more in number in every Eldership then the ministers) began to play
false play, and showed some wilfulness: so as now they must in this sort be
bridled, with a plurality of more Priestly voices. By which means, though
they seem to have some interest in these affairs: yet in effect, it is none
at all.

Furthermore, French disc. Art. 4.
it is ordered by the great Synod in France, that a minister may not be
chosen, by one only minister with his consistory, but by two or three
ministers: or if there be a colloquy, by the coll^quy, with the consistory: or
else by the provincial Synod, Art. 10.
if it may be. But touching the deposition of any: that is reserved only to
the provincial Synod. It should seem that in these places, they have not the
same word of God, that our men have. Or otherwise, (if our reformers say
truly) that election and abdication do belong to the Eldership: and that it
is as the sin of Chore, Dathan, and Abiram, for any that are not of the
particular Eldership, to intrude themselves, and meddle with the matters which
are there to be handled: and so consequently to take upon them to deal in
such things, as are not prescribed unto them particularly by the Lord
himself. Alas in what great danger are all those Elders, both Classical and
Provincial, in swaruing so greatly from our men's platform; to the unspeakable
prejudice of the presbyteriall Aldermen in every particular Eldership. I might
here show the silly proofs, which are brought by our reformers out of the
new testament, to confirm their judgment. But I have a more fit place for
that: So as now I will proceed to that, which follows of their imposition
of hands.

A man, that is no minister to have an interest in the ordaining of a minister,
by imposition of hands: was it ever heard of, by the space of a thousand and
five hundred years in the Church of God? The Papists at the first did trouble
us much with an objection: that we had no Priests nor Ministers, because we
had no Bishops to ordain them. Whereupon answer was made: that a Priest or
Minister of the word, and a Bishop was all one: and that Luther, Zwinglius,
Oecolampadius, and diverse others being Priests even after the Popish order,
had therefore authority to ordain ministers. Mark the reason: because they
were Priests. These vnpriestly Elders were not then hatched. If they had: the
answer would have been thereby much more strengthened. But will these men
be constant in this point? Is imposition of hands allowed of, by them at all:
Lib. 3. pa. 232.
or not? It is the ordinance of God (says Cartwright) and may not for any
abuse be taken away. The Apostles continual observation of imposition of
hands, in ordaining of Ministers, Instit.
praecepti vice nobis esse debet: ought to be as a precept unto us, (says
master Calvin). And many reasons are brought by the Demonstrator, Demonst.
cap. 7. and 9. Disc. ecc. so. 53.
and Trauerse: for the proof and profit of the continuance of it. Indeed
the old doctrine has been, no ordination by imposition of hands, no
minister. But all this will not serve the turn: away it must. We are often
called to the example of Scotland: and there the Discipline is so purely
practiced, that imposition of hands (as a fruitelesse ceremony) is quite and
clean bannished thence. Hear the history of the Church of Scotland
published in the name of their ministry. Hist. of the Church of Scotl. pa.
557.
Albeit the Apostles used imposition of hands (in the ordayning of Ministers)
yet seeing the miracle is ceased: the using of the ceremony, we judge it not
necessary.

And what ceremony have they instead thereof? Surely if I understand them, such
a one: as good fellows do use, when they meet at the alehouse: They take them
by the hands: and bid them heartily welcome into their society. Iunius who is
charged by Thyreus to neglect the Apostolical order of imposition of hands,
does call this Scottish new order, or where else so ever it is used, (if it be
used in any other place) porrectionem dextr^e societatis in caetu
presbyteroru^, a giving forth of the right hand of society in the assembly of
the Elders. Master Calvin is dead. And therefore, too them, Cartwright, with
your scholars. Will you suffer your own crew, to tread down gods ordinance
in this sort under their feet? or if they do well therein: out with it
presently forth of your books. But you may not (as one said) yeald in any
thing: for fear of discrediting the rest of your devises. Heart. to Field:
It is well. Defend your self then and your scholars as well as you can: in
that you make imposition of hands a joint duty to be performed by the
Eldership; that is, as well by your only ruling Elders, as by the ministers of
the word.

For Master Calvin will not endure it; but shows himself to be of a
contrary opinion, and does withal extort the only place you account of in
effect, for your purpose out of your hands, as altogether insufficie^t to serve
your turns. Hoc postremo habendum est, non vniuersam multitudinem manus
imposuisse suis ministris: C^l. inst. lib. 4. Cap. 3. sect. 16.
sed solos pastores etc. This also is to be understood, that the whole
multitude did not lay their hands upon their ministers: but the pastors only.
What is become then of these vnpastoral Alderme^? Quanquam incertum est an
plures semper manus imposuerunt nec ne. Ibd.
Although (says he) it is uncertain, whether more then one did always impose
their hands or not.

This is much: only ministers, and uncertain whether one or many? Bring out
your evidence Master Cartwright. But in the mean while give ear to Master
Caluins reasons. Ibid.
It appears (says he) that diverse pastors did lay their hands upon the
Deacons: Paul, and Barnabas: and some other. 2. Tim. 1.
Sed Paulus ipse alibi se, non alios complures, Timotheo manus imposuisse
commemorat etc. But Paul in an other place reports, that he himself alone
without any other, did lay his hands upon Timothy. But now he pincheth the
brotherhood. 1. Tim. 4.
Nam quod in altera epistola de impositione manuu^ presbtyerij dicitur etc. For
that which is spoken in his other epistle of the imposition of the hands of
the Eldership: Ibid.
non it a accipio quasi de Seniorum collegio loquatur etc. I take it not as
though Paul did speak of the college of Elders: but by these words I
understand the ordinatio^ it self: as though he had said: Fac vt gratia, quam
per manuum impositionem recepisti cum te presbyterum creaui, non sit irrita.
See that the grace which thou receiuedst by imposition of hands, when I
created thee a priest: be not in vain. Now that this place is thus wrested
from you: all the pack of you bring one other out of the new testament: for
your unsanctified Aldermens imposition of hands. Nay you see already, that
Totnam is almost turned into french: and there is nothing, why our Bishops
might not, for any thing that they themselves do bring to the contrary, use
imposition of hands.

Besides, all our reformers shifts in one respect are hereby cut of. For when
we ever alleged for our Bishops authority in this point, the example of Saint
Paul: who says that Timothy was made priest, by the imposition of his hands:
they still would tell us (but of their own heads without any further warraunt)
that he did not so, as by his own authority, but in the name of the
Eldership. Which cannot in any wise be true: for that which may be done in
their names, may be done by themselves. In that therefore, they might not do
it themselves: they could not depute it to the Apostle. So as it remains
that he did it, by his own authority: or at the least, in the name of the
rest, that were ministers of the word; which will not agree with our men's
platform. If here exception be taken to Calvin, as that in some other of his
writings, he is of an other mind: you must be advertised, that he beginning
to write betimes, did in diverse things upon better advise change his opinion.
And therefore in one of his epistles, desires those that will read his works,
that they would first take the pains to read his institutions; as conteininge
in them, (for those things there set down) his very mind and settled judgment.
But what if Beza do in sort agree herin with Calvin? Beza. Anno.
Surely if I understand him: he does. For upon these words: Cum impositione
manuum presbyterij id est (says he) ordinis presbyterorum: qu^ nomine caetus
omnis ille significatur, qui in verbo laborabat in ea ecclesia: that is the
order of Priests or Elders: by which name all that company is signified which
did labor in the word in that Church. Disburden then for shame, your
counterfeit Aldermen, of this ioint-dutie in your Eldership: or at the least,
let them rest, until you be better resolved amongst your selves, how to
imploie them: least you bring them within the compass of the punishment of
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, as I have said before.

CHAP. 17. Of their Aldermens joint office with the ministers, in binding, and
loosing of sins, and of their disagreement therein.
T.C. lib. 1.183 Beza Daneus and the rest.
COncerning their pretended authority, equal with their ministers, (for their
procedings are by voices:) in excommunication of the stubborn, and absolution
of the repentant, will they trouble themselves, (think you) with any
testimonies out of the old testament? Indeed they affirm, that these
censures, were resembled there; by the authority of discerning bettwene the
clean and the unclean, between the holy and unholy, of shutting up the
leprous, and releasinge them, of purginge the unclean, of cursing (resembling
bindding:) of blessing (resembling loosing etc.) And be it so. But where is
there mention in any such places, that your pretended Elders, had any
authority to intermeddle with these matters? Are they not, throughout the
whole old testament; evermore ascribed to Aaron and his sons? Nay, might any
that were of other tribes, then of the tribe of Leui deal heerwithal? Speak
franckly and truly: might they so? Beza could find no answer to this question,
but Probabile est, it is probable they might: whereas I am persuaded, there are
few assertions of greater absurdity* or of less probability. For the
Levites themselves, that were not of the sons of Aaron: had nothing to do
in these things.

Discip. eccl. fol. 127.
Trauers defininge what suspension is: says: it is a commandment or
prohibition of an Elder, of abstaininge for a certain time from the receiving
of the Sacraments. For the proof whereof, Ibid.
he groundeth himself upon this shadow, (as he terms it): That by the law
the unclean and uncircumcised were prohibited the celebrating of the
Passover, and entrance into the Temple. Which caused (says he) Ioiada the
priest to appoint certain porters to the gates of the Temple. By which
testimonies what he else proves; then, that his Elders were of the number of
these Porters; I find not. Beza de presb. page 102.
And that surely agrees best, with Bezaes opion mentioned. Horum proculdubio
parts erant etc. It was out of doubt the duty of the Arch-rulers of the
Synagogues, not to admit excommunicated persons into the Synagogues.

With which offices, if they of that consorte, will be content to infeoffe
their Aldermen, and go no further: I see no cause, why any man should greatly
envy them that preferment. But when from dore-keepers they must be so
advanced, as that they must be abdicators and comforters, as they term them:
that is more, then upon such weak collections is fit to be allowed of. For
where they give them these iointe offices with the Minister, of abdicating the
stubborn, and of consolation of the repentant, if they would speak out, it is
as much as though they should say: that they have equal authority with them,
of suspension and excommunication, of bindinge and loosing, of retaining and
remitting of sins. No no, they may send them to Parishgarden, to loose and
bind bears, for they are far unmeet to have any such authority over men's
souls. That those which were not Bishops, or Priests (that is ministers of
the word and sacraments) should have that authority (which they speak of), is
a matter that was never heard of, in the Church of God for a 1500. years.
Cartwright in handling this point, was able to bring for his purpose, but one
pertinent authority, in show, out of all the ancient Fathers: vz. out of
Tertullian, of certain Presidents, that shut offenders from prayers in the
Congregation: which presidents as he well knows, the same Tertullian says
expresslie, in an other place, were Ministers of the word and sacraments: in
these words, (speaking of the Lords supper): Nec de aliorum manu quam
presidentium sumimus, neither do we receive at the hands of any other, but of
the governors.

It is worthy the consideration, to see into what extremities, men do
commonly fall; that will presume to build the Church upon the straw and
stubble, of their own devises. All the world cannot persuade the papists, but
that the keys of the kingdom of heaven, were only given to Peter, and so to
his successors; and that from him the rest of the Apostles were to receive
them, and so must their successors from the Pope. Against whom, we insist, with
the ancient Fathers; that what was said to Peter, Math. 16. Ioh. 20.
appertained to them all: as namely for one reason; in that, where the keys
were promised to Peter: tibi dabo, I will give them to thee: when this promise
was performed, Christ gave them unto all the Apostles alike, and to their
successors: Whose sins ye remit they shall be remitted, and whose sins ye
retain they shall be retained: which is the true use of the keys. Now who
are to be termed the Apostles successors, if we will believe the said ancient
Fathers, that were in my opinion as honest, and learned men, as those that
oppose themselves against them? we must confess, that they were at the least
Ministers of the word and sacraments, and so we have pleaded in this cause
against the papists.

But now on the other side, the world is so come about: that whereas the
papists do give the keys but to Peter only, and so to the Pope: where the
ancient fathers do give them to all the Apostles equally, and so to their
successors, ministers (as I said) at the least: now these new start-ups, will
needs thrust their aldermen into that number, and they must be also the
Apostles successors. If men will be seduced wilfully by such falseteachers:
Confess. cap 5 sect. 43.
they may. What a ridiculous saying is this of Bezaes? That: In persona
Apostolorum, the keys were given, Omnibus veris presbyteris, to all true
Priests or Elders, including in that number his vnpriestlie Eldermen. Again
upon these words of christ: nont., Math. 16.19.
the keys etc. Hac metaphorica loquutione significatur oeconomi potestas (Esa
22* 22.) qua funguntur omnes ministri in ecclesia dei vt apparet infra. 18* 18.
By this metaphorical speech is signified that power of Christ mentioned in
Esaias, the key of the house of David I will lay upon his shoulders: lo he
shall open and no man shall shut, and he shall shut and no man shall open:
which power all the Ministers in the Church of God do enjoy, as it appears
in Matthew: Whatsoever ye bind in earth shall be bound in heaven, Annot. math.
18.17, 18.
and whatsoever ye loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. De excom. pa. 61.
And upon that place of Matthew the 18* Chapter, and in many other places; by
the Church, and those binders and loosers there spoken of, he understands
his Eldership, and so consequently as well his Aldermen, as the Ministers of the
word. He that with an open face (to use Cartwrightes term) does affirm that
either in Matthew the 16. 15. or in the place of Esaias mentioned, these
unpreaching Elders were meant or prefigured: needs not (I warrant him) at any
time a vizard.

Indeed master Cartwright is not of Bezaes mind herein. For, (says he) in
Math. 16. and in Ioh. 20. Christ under stands that every one of the
ministers, Lib. 3. page 83.
binds and loses by preaching: but the words Math. 18.18. cannot be
drawn to the particular person of the minister. Surely you have sponne a
fair thredde. For if your Aldermen, be not as well understood in the words of
Christ: Unto thee I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven: as in these:
Whatsoever ye bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye
loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven: It will fall out that they will have
no keys either to open or shut withal: except peradventure you will make your
locks with a spring, and so indeed they may shut the door: but for
openinge of it they may blow their nails.

Here you see Beza and Cartwright opposite: and now you shall have a fellow to
impugn them both, in a Theological position printed at Geneua, set out by
Ant. Fayus and maintained there by one Danyell Niellius, These. theolo: page 243.
out of Math. 16.19. thus (says he) we may reason. To them only the power
of binding and loosing is given, unto whom the keys of the kingdom of heaven
are given (for to have binding and loosing is that same, that it is, to have*
the keys of the kingdom of heaven): but unto Peter the keys were given, and
unto them in whose name Peter answers, Christ demanding whom the Jews said
he was. And because they were given ratione officij, in regard of his office:
it follows, that they were given to al, qui in veritatis doctrina predicanda
sunt ipsis successuri: Who in preaching the doctrine of truth shall succeed
them. By these words then, their disguised Aldermen must either have assigned
unto them, the same office that the Apostles had, and be made preachers, or
else they may put up their pipes, and go shake their ears. These. Cene^.
But yet more plainly we are advertised, in the same place from Geneua, out of
John, 20.23. We may also infer after this sort; Christ after he sent his
Apostles as he was sent of the father, he breathed on them the holy Ghost,
saying whose sins ye remit, they shall be remitted: whose sins ye retain,
they shall be retained. To all them therefore, and only to them who are sent,
that authority is given: But the Apostles only are not sent. For it is
Christ, who ascending into heaven, gave to his Church Pastors, and Doctors: and
altogether to that end, and for handling that work. Ephesians. 4.11.13. Now, join
both these inferences, with that which Beza and Cartwright have before set
down: and let him (for me) bear the bell, for a reconciler of contrarieties,
that is able in any probable sort to make any one of them, friends with
another, or for ever hereafter to agree together.

And yet I know, that they of Geneua can do much. You must bring them very
strange discords, but they will make some harmony of them. Whereas the
confessions of Bohemia, of Augusta, and the Apology of the Church of England,
do a cribe these censures (we speak of) to the Priests or Ministers of the
word only: the Geneuians, to make the world believe, that (in effect) all the
reformed Churches, do agree with that of theirs, and with those other, that
wear her colors; will needs take upon them in their annotations, (joined to
the end of their harmony), to expound the meaning of the said confessions, and
how they must be rightly understood. Harmonia. Sect. 2.
As for example, it is committed to the ministers of the word^ (says the
confession of Augusta): excludere impios, etc. a^communione ecclesiae: to
exclude the wicked, etc. from the communion of the church. Nimirum: that is to
say: (affirm the Geneuians) ex presbiterij legitime congregati fententia, etc.
according to the sentence of the Eldership lawfully assembled, whereas it never
as yet set up any such Eldership.

Again, the said confession. Hic necessario, etc. here the Church must yield
them due obedience, Ibidem.
meaning to the said ministers, so excluding the wicked: Nempe (come in the
Geneuians) verbi ministris, and senioribus, (that is to say) to the Ministers
of the word, and to the Elders: who were never allowed of by that confession
to this purpose pretended. The Apology of the Church of England, having showed
that the administration of the keys, does only belong to ministers of the
word, and that Sacerdos, that is, the Bishop, (as I think he means) for
the execution of these censures, is the judge: Sacerdos, that is (say the
Geneuians) vnus designatus ex pastorum collegio: one chosen out of the College
of Pastors: Ibidem.
Deinde etiam intelligiturpraeire (quum de censuris ecclesiasticis agitur)
leg^tinam presbyterij cognitionem: And furthermore also, let it be understood,
when speech is of the ecclesiastical censure, that there goes before a
lawful determination of the Eldership. Whether the Apology, have that
meaning, the meanest of any sense at all, may judge. And thus they deal also,
with the Bohemian confession. So that (as I said) to serve their purposes, they
can make ex quo libet, quid libet, of any thing, what they list. And by these
examples, ye may also safely learn, what credit is to be given in this cause,
both to them, and all the rest of that humor: when they would seem to allege
either scriptures, Councels, or Fathers, for their most unwarrantable, and
counterfeit Aldermen.

But if it were granted unto them, for a month or two, that their Eldermen
should be joined, with the ministers of the word: and have an equal
authority with them, of binding and loosing: would they content themselves
therewithal* It is certain that the Barrowists would not: and not they
only, but even some others of a little better credit, then any of our English
botchers: who will needs have the people to have in effect, as great an
interest, in the execution of the Church censures, as all the rest, both
ministers and Eldermen. Thus Vrsinus writes hereof. Fiat excommunicatio, etc:
Let excommunication be done, by the consent and authority of the whole
Eldership, Expla. para. 3. page 350.
and ecclesiae, and of the Church: not of the Church alone, nor of the
Ministers or presbytery alone. For this power is not given by Christ to a few,
or to Ministers only (although the administration and execution of it, is
committed oftentimes to few, or to one Minister) sed toti ecclesiae, but to
the whole Church. If he will not hear them and others tell the Church.
Potentes dominantur, vos autem non sic. Princes bear rule like Lords: but you
may not do so. The consent therefore of the Church is to be required. 1. Because
it is Christ's commandment. 2. For the authority of the action. 3. That no
man be iniuried. 4. Least the Ministry should be changed into an Oligarchy,
or Popish tyranny. Thus far Vrsinus.

In whose judgment you see, the Eldership is to be charged already, though it
be but newly set up, with the same faults that are imputed to our
church-gouernment, by the brotherhoode amongst us: that is, with the
alteration of Christ's institution, with Lordlinesse, and with a Popish
tyranny, etc. So as, by this devise, the people are to be understood in the
person of the Apostles, as well as their Elders: and the one has no more
authority to bind and loose, then the other. But nothing will content them
long. Give them the head, and every year will bring forth a new platform. It
will not be enough for master Beza to say: Neque enim eis assentior, Conf.
cap. 5. sect 43.
qui non nisi totius ecclesiae, etc. I do not agree with them, who will not
have any man excommunicated, but by the consent of the whole Church, and of
every man particularly. For Christ has given this authority, sani iudicij
hominibus, to men of sound judgment: that is to the college of Elders,
according to the manner of the Jews. Vrsinus, and those that are of his
opinion, will answer: that the rest of the Church, are not of their wits:
that it is but his pride, and his Elders presumption, to take so much upon
them: that they would be Lords over their brethren: and (for the place of
Matthew:) that they know Christ's meaning, as well as he, and all that take his
part.

T.C. lib. 1. page 183.
Of the third joint office, that Cartwright says doth^belong unto his pretended
Elders, to be executed jointly with the ministers, (as it was touched in the
beginning of the 16. chapter.) I shall have a more fit place to speak, in the
22.23.24. and 25. chapters following.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the first institution of the old Deacons: and of the
disagreement, about the new disciplinarie Deacons.
IN the apostles times, when after Christ's ascension, they began to preach in
Jerusalem: such was the charity of those, that professed the Gospel: that
many of them, sold all, or the most part, of that which they had, and brought
the price of it to the Apostles feet. The especial reason that moved them,
(as I take it) so to do: was this. The greatest part, that (at the first) did
follow the Apostles, 1. Cor. 1.
were of the poorer sort. Who upon their new embracing of that so
comfortable a doctrine, did give over themselves, to the careful meditation,
and thoroughly learning of it: leaving their trades, (though not altogether, yet
surely as I suppose for the most part,) until (at the least) that they grew to
be more fully instructed therein. To the which purpose, they kept as much
together, with the Apostles, as possibly they could, and had their holy
assemblies, their exhortations, prayers, and the administration of Baptism,
secretly in private houses, for fear of the Magistrates. Now (as I said) the most
of these being poor men, and the Apostles themselves having nothing to live
upon: When any of the richer sort did join themselves, to that meeting or
congregation: they sold such things as they had, or thought meet, and brought
the price of it unto the Apostles: not only for their own maintenance, but
committed the distribution of it, unto them, for the relief also of the rest
that wanted, and were not able to provide for themselves, those things that
were necessary.

This charge, as well for the said religious exercises in their private
assembly, as for this distribution equally to be made, as the occasions
required: the Apostles took upon them more particularly for a short time, then
they did afterward: vz. until the number of Christians in Jerusalem increased
from 120. unto five thousand at the least, and did grow daily more and more: so
as they were (as I think) constrained to have diverse Congregations. And then
because they found it to be some hinderaunce, unto the execution of their
general Commission, for (the further dispersing of the Gospel:) they caused
seven men to be chosen, Acts 6.
such as were known to be of honest report, and full of the holy Ghost, and
wisdom: Unto whom that business was more specially committed. Who
thenceforth might not only according to their honesty and discretion, take
into their hands, such money, as should be brought, from time to time, to the
godly disposed, for the purpose mentioned: but also in the Apostles absence,
agreeably with the fulness of the holy Ghost, (whereby they held, the mysterye
of faith in a pure conscience) were to teach, 1. Timo. 3.
to comfort, to move, to confirm in the faith the brethren, in their
particular congregations or meetings: and likewise to offer their common
prayers in all their names unto the Lord, and to baptize the children of the
faithful.

For the Apostles in appointing of these new officers, had as well regard to
the Souls of the people, as to their bodies. And because at that time, (which
was the infancy and first spring of the Church) there were not such meet men,
as might be made Priests, or (as they term them now a days) preaching
Elders: it pleased the Apostles, to have them trained up in that exercise, and
to make the office of Deacons, a degree and a step to the fulness of Priesthood.
1. Tim* 3.
Which is expressed by Saint Paul, when he says of Deacons: qui been
ministrant, gradum bonum sibi acquirent: they that minister well, shall purchase
to themselves a good degree. And this order or office of Deacons, being thus
(as you have heard) first instituted at Hierusalent: was afterward upon the
same occasions, and for the same ends ordained in other Churches: where,
always they executed, all the parts mentioned of their offices: so long as the
Church^s continued, wherein they were placed. Or if it happened, (as it did
after in Jerusalem) that their Churches were dispersed, so as contributions and
collections ceased: yet they continued, their preaching, their exhorting, and
confirming, of the we^ke brethren: their baptising of children, and the rest of
the duties mentioned, as they might be suffered and accepted of, wheresoever
they came. Examples of such Deacons and offices, as here I have spoken of, we
have in the scriptures delivered to us by S. Luke, Act. 8 6.7.
where he sets down the actions of Steven and Phillip, both of the^ Deacons,
how they preached: how Phillip baptized, and what is said of any one of them;
must be understood of the rest. Unto these examples, and for the further proof
of these premises: I might add the general consent of all the ancient
Fathers, and the ordinary practice of all Churches, either in their times, or
since: especially, for the continual practice, of the Priestly part of the
Deacons office.

But as in times of dispersion, they could not execute the other part,
consisting in collections and distributions: so afterward, God blessed his
Church in such sort, that indeed it needed not. For when great men, Lords,
Princes, Kings and Emperors, had embraced the doctrine of Christ, so as men
had the Gospel brought (as it were) home to their doors, and might frequent
(with commendation) the public assemblies, and practice of religion, and
withal, follow their own trades, and particular callings more diligently:
when also the said great men, Lords, Princes, and Emperors, (besides many
other well disposed Christians) had provided for the ministers, and for the
poor sufficient maintenance, for the one, partly by the tithes, which are due
unto them, and partly by other gifts, according to their places: and for the
other, (that is, the poor) by setting them on work, (such as were able) and by
providing of hospitals, and such like means (for those that were impotent)
that part of the Deacons office, became, to be in time superfluous. And since,
they have applied themselves to the more material part of their office,
whereby they might obtain the other good degree of Priesthood.

With these points, I thought good to acquaint you: before I came to the
Disciplinary conceits, about Deacons. For even now, as though there were no
provision made, either for the ministry, or for the poor: they are most
instant, for (I know not) what kind of Deacons. But as therein they have cut off
themselves from the truth: so are they at great disagreement one with another.
Our English reformers are all of them peremptory, that we must have such
Deacons, as (they imagine) were in the Apostles times. But the Geneuia^
ministers, do think their platform of discipline to be the parago^ of the
world, although they have no such Deacons in it. There is in Geneua an
Hospital, whereof there are four Proctors and overseers, and these four are
with them in steed of Deacons. For otherwise they have not so much as the name
of Deacons there. By which rule (if we shall square the pretended discipline)
we have such officers already, as may serve our turns for Deacons, vz.
Proctors of Spitle-houses, masters and overseers of hospitals, as sufficient,
honest, and fit me^, to execute their places: as there is any (I assure my self)
in Geneua. But peradventure the matter which they shoot at, is this. They would
have an Hospital in every parish. And yet there is no such thing at Geneua. In all their whole Territory, they have but one hospital.

Well, let Geneua therein do what it list: our men will needs have another kind
of Deacons: and what kind is that? Surely no such kind as was in the Apostles
times. Admonit. 1. T. C. lib. 1. T. C. lib. 2. Beza cont. Sarauia. ca. 7.
But they know not indeed what they would have. The Deacons which our men do
require, must not inter-meddle (for a 1000. li.) with any part of the office
that belongs to a minister. Their deaconship in no case may be reckned to be
a step to the ministry. How beit some other me^, as wise and as learned as they
are, do hold a contrary opinion. First, all the ancient fathers are generally
against them, in both the points mentioned, and so is the practice of the
church of God, ever since the Apostles times. All the learned me^ in Germany
(for ought I find) that maintain the Augustane confession, are against the^.
Yea what if some of their chief Captains be against them? Discipl. of France.
Of Deacons.
The Deacons in France, were once within these few years, allowed to
catechize publicly in their reformed Congregations. And as yet, one part of
their office is to go through families, and to catechize them at home
privately. To be a Catechist, with our men, is the especial duty of their
Doctor: whom they make a Minister of the word. So as then, there is no more
difference in that respect, betwixt their Doctorall minister, and the French
Deacons: saving that the one does catechize publicly, and the other
privately.

If all this be nothing: then let us hear Beza; the Consistoriall oracle: who
turns himself into every man's colors. Truth is mighty: and drives men to
their shifts, when having rashly ouershot themselves, they will still (to
maintain their credits) impugn it. Beza con. Sat. cap. 7.
Hear him, (I pray you) how he plaieth his prize. It is (says he) absurd,
to think that Deacons had the office of preaching committed unto them. But in
his confessions thus: Conf. cap. 5. Apho. 25.
The office of pastors and Doctors, is to preach and say prayers: under which
duties I do comprehend, the administration of the sacraments, and the blessing
of marriages (according to the perpetual use of the Church) although oftentimes
Deacons did supplye these things, instead of the Pastors. Again. Beza con.
Sar. cap. 7.
The fathers and late writers, who supposed that the office of preaching did
belong to Deacons, decepti sunt, were deceived. But in his annotations upon
the 1. of Tim. 3.9. (That the Deacons must hold the mystery of faith) thus:
Diaconoru^ enim erant nonnullae etia^ in docendo parts, quoties necesse
fuisset, vt ex Stephano et Philippo apparet: the Deacons had also some thing to
do in teaching, when it was needful: as by the example of Steven and Philip it
is manifest.

Again: in his book against D. Sarauia; finding himself, (as I suppose) to
be prejudiced by his said annotation, or having been reproved for it by
Cartwright etc. or fearing some inconvenience, that might ensue thereof; he
would gladlye get him some startinge hole. Cartwright, to auiode the example of
Steven the Deacon, says in effect; that he was no preacher, but an Apologizer.
But Beza, has not learned that evasion, as yet. He has another: Cont. Sar. c.
7,
which is indeed, as good as none at all. Stephen the Deacon (says he)
although he was most worthy to be apreacher: yet in that he was only a Deacon
in the Church of Jerusalem, he is not said to have taught in the Church: but
in the Synagogues of the Jews. As it is now constantly held; our
Church*assemblies, are the same in effect, that the Jews Synagogues were. So
as then, bee-like Deacons may not preach in Cathedral churches, (which I
resemble to the temple of Jerusalem) but they may preach in Country
parishes. One of the places which Beza alleges to show the manner of
Stephens teaching in the Synagogue, is the Example of Christ; where he took a
place of Esayas, Luke 4.
and expounded the same in the Synagogue at Nazareth. If a man may say that
Christ, did then preach: the same may also be affirmed of Stephen, when (as
Beza says) he taught in the Synagogues of the Jews. Whilst you hear Beza
driven thus to his shifts: do you not imagine, that if his case in this point
were good, he could defend it better?

But now, as concerning Cartwrightes confident assertion, that the Deaconship
is not to be made a step to the ministry. Besides the said ancient fathers,
and continual practice of the church for 1500. years: the chief learned men
of Heluetia, Bullinger: Gualter. Hemingiu^.
and Denmark are flatly against him, where they entreat of this place of the
Apostle: He that ministers well, shall purchase to himself, a good degree.
Alexander Alexius a Scottishman; though in some sort he be a Consistorian, yet
he is also against him. For writing upon the same place: They shall get to
themselves a good degree: that is, (says he) digni iudicabuntur officio
Episcopi: they shall be judged worthy the office of a Bishop. But Bezaes
pretty apish toy, I could not chose but laugh at; in this place. He sees the
stream of all antiquity to run for this step to the ministry: insomuch
(as I am persuaded) that neither he nor all the pack of his adhere^ts, are
able to show, that there was ever any one minister since the Apostles times,
(til now of late) but first he was a deacon: and therefore to come as near the
truth as he can, and miss it, he says, that in Geneua, when they choose any
to the ministry, they ever prefer their Deacons being meet me^, before any
other, of whom they have not so good experience. So as there, to be one of the
4. proctors of their spittlehouse, is one good means to get into their
ministry. But I will leave these spittlehouse-deacons, to climb as they can
into their Consist. Bishoprics; and come to another manner of deacons, that
would be hardly induced to be thrust either into a spittlehouse, or accept of
the ministry.

It appears in the 10 Chapter, how prouidently it is ordered at Geneua, that
none but councellers of the state, ca^ be any Aldermen of their grande
presbyterye: and likewise how Beza a duiseth all other Churches, that will
receive their holy platform, to endeavor as much as they can: that Noblemen and
princes may take that office upon the^. Which order and advise is thought to be
of such importance (as it seems) for the glory of their Eldership, that our
English discourser, has thought it meet to extend the same, in some sort to
the choice of their Deacons. Every ignorant contemptible person (says he) is
not to be allowed to this office (of Deacons): Dis. page 110.
but as godly, wise, and worshipful, as may conveniently be found in the
Congregation, may not think themselves too good to minister unto Christ in
his members, and in the name of the Church. Away then with these base
Artizans, that have dreamed peradventure, that if the Discipline were up, they
should be (I know not what): away with them I say; these Tailors,
Shoemakers, Mercers, Drapers, and such like ignorant and contemptible persons:
and give place to your betters, the wise and worshipful Gentlemen of the
parish. Indeed where great Lords and Princes are Elders: forasmuch as Deacons
may chance sometimes to be joined in Commission with them: It is very meet
they should be men of worship. But yet me thinks all the parts of this
Senate; are not fully suitable. For where the Deacons are men of worship: where
the Elders are Noblemen and Princes: what must the Pastors and doctors be?
Surely if proportion be kept: they must be some body: the Doctor a king,
and the Pastor an Emperor.

What needed the learned Discourser then to suspect* that peradventure some men
would be loath to take the office of Deacons upon them: when they should be
matched in this sort, with such worthy and honorable Colleagues. A great
preferment no doubt for any aspiring mind; and few gentlemen (ye may be sure)
will refuse it. But yet his suspicion, does rise of some thing. For what if
these gentlemen Deacons, when their Pastors, Doctors, and their
Noblemen-elders, were consultinge together; should be thrust out of the
doors, notwithstanding their worships? I tell you truly that point is not
yet resolved. Bertrand de Loques a French Disciplinarian, affirms: Bert. of
the Church. c. 14.
that although the Consistory is indeed composed of the Pastors and Elders:
Yet the Deacons are received into it so far forth, and in as much as they
shall judge it to be expedient and profitable: to advise, give counsel, and
consider of the censures, and of that which is requisite and necessary for the
guiding and government of the Church. Well: this is some thing for the Deacons:
but the ancient Council of Hage, which was held (as it has been said) in
the year 1586. Council. Hage Canon 35.
has gone much further. For there it is decreed: That in those places, where
there are but few Elders, Consistorio Diaconi adiungentur, the Deacons shall be
adjoined unto the Consistory. Before they were to expect, until they might be
received into the Consistory: but now they are of it. Before they were but
only to give advise; but now being of it, they must have their voices in it.

But what should I insist upon such paltrie proofs? You shall hear a Canon
of the Ecclesiastical discipline in France, resolved upon (I know not) by
how many Synodes, at Paris, Poictiers, Orleance, Lions, etc. There it is set
down for a Law in this sort: The Elders and Deacons do make the
ecclesiastical Senate or Consistorye: Dis. of France. of the Consist.
wherein the ministers of the word sit as chief. And with this French decree,
the authors of the second admonition here in England do fully accord. Where
they assure the high Court of Parliament 1572* Admonitio 2.
that the whole regiment of the Church, is committed jointly to the ministers,
Elders, and Deacons. Thus far then the matter runs well: for our
worshipful Deacons. Howbeit: now hear, what is said to the contrary.

You have heard how the said Councels, and admonitioners have joined the
ministers, Elders, and Deacons together: but now in comes another sort, and
they will needs disiointe them. It would hardly be endured by the Ministers
of Geneua, to have one of the proctors of their hospital, to sit (by virtue
of that office) cheek by iowle with Beza. And therefore the general
resolution of all that are there; is quight against the Deacons, in that
behalf. Beza in his treatise against Erastus, Beza de presb. Beza Epist. 85.
and else where, does allow of none to be of the Presbytery; but Ministers and
Elders. Cartwright and all the rest of our reforming sconces (except the said
Admonitioners) do wholly therein agree likewise, with Beza: So as I shall not
trouble you with any further allegation to this purpose, saving one: and that
you shall have: because it contains in it, not the judgment only of any
particular man; but is the full resolution of Cartwright, and all his crew here
in England; contained in a certain book of Discipline, whereunto the chiefest
of the^ have subscribed: The presbyterye (says that book) is an assembly or
senate of elders. By the name of elders are meant, ministers of the word, and
those that are properly called Elders. They mean such as in their place I have
spoken of. Here then you have that Deacons are of the presbytery: and that
they are not of the presbytery. Choose, which side you will believe: I think
they are bewitched. If I might advise you: believe them both alike.

But some will peradventure say, that it makes no great matter, whether side
has the truth: that the point betwixt them is of no importance: and that I am
too blame, to make so much of nothing. Whereunto I answer, that if there be
any who shall so conceive: he is not well acquainted with the depth of this
matter. For indeed it works a marvelous alteration in the Deacons office.
Admit them to have their places and voices in the Consistories: and then
their authority is grown to be very great. Then they have equal right with
their pastors and Doctors, to ordain ministers by imposition of their hands.
Then, the forgiving and retaining of sins: does appertain unto the^. Then
they are become the Apostles successors; and do carry the keys of the
kingdom of heaven as well as any of the rest. Cart. etc. new discipline.
For in Consistorio standum maioris partis sententiae: In the Consistorye men
must stand to the sentence of the greater part. One man's voice there, is as
good as an others. And so in all other matters, that do belong to the
Consistory, and which are to be executed there, jointly by them all together;
the Deacons bear swaie and have a stroke with the best of them. Whereas on the
otherside, if they be excluded out of the Consistory: (as Beza and our men
would have the^:) then they have nothing at all to do with any of these
matters: but are restrained, and drawn into a more narrow compass: and must
content themselves, to be either proctors of hospitals, or else collectors and
distributers of the peoples devotion to the poor. And therein also they are
subject to great controlment. For as the laws and certain grounds of Geneua,
affirm: (and therefore also commonly so held elsewhere) Diaconoru^
administratio, These. Geneu.
pastorum inspectioni est obnoxia: the deacons administration is under the
oversight of the pastors.

It is true, Beza cont. Sar. Cap. 7.
that Beza is pleased, to allow the deacons, a little more scope, the^ hitherto
I have mentioned. And that is: that in the celebratio^ of the Lords supper,
they may by their office carry the cup to the communicants. M. Cartwright
goes a little further, and tells us also, that they may likewise distribute
the bread. In all reformed Churches almost (says he) the Deacons do assist the
minister, in helping of him to distribute the cup, T.C. lib 1: page 61.
and in some places also the bread. If none would be angry with me: I would
gladly ask this question: vz. why the Deacons might not as well help the
minister to baptize, and to distribute the word, as well as the Lords supper?
But, as I said before of the Noblemen Elders, so do I also of our worshipful
Deacons. What a sight were it to see a Justice of peace, peradventure in his
velvet cloak, his chain of gold, and such correspondent attire, as is
agreeable to that calling; delivering to the people (that I may speak of so
holy a sacrament, sacramentallie) the most blessed body and blood of our
Savior Christ? And yet I allow the sight as reasonable, as to see the proctor
of a Spittlehouse executing of that charge. Peradventure it will here be said
again; that if there be any deformity in the beholding of either of these
sights, it is not in them; but in the beholders. For they are ecclesiastical
persons, as soon as they are made Deacons. And then why does it not belong
unto them: to deal in ecclesiastical causes? It is well objected. That point
indeed would not be omitted.

It is generally agreed upon amongst them (I confess) that their new found
halfe-partie Deacons, are ecclesiastical persons. For our Counter-poisoner
says: That whosoever are called (as you must understand their Deacons are) to
bear office in the Church, Count. pa. 130
with due examination and trial, and with the consent of those, to whom it
appertains; and are with fasting and prayers, or with prayers only, and with
imposition of hands, separated or put a part to that office: they are al
Ecclesiastical persons, and not lay men, as they term them. Surely, if our
Noble men, were once become Elders, and our chiefest Gentlemen Deacons: and so
both the sorts of them, Ecclesiastical persons: what a clergy should we have
in England? Now there is no one calling, in the whole common wealth, that is
grown, to be more contemptible with many, then the calling of Clergy men. But
that would soon be recovered, when such men of estimation, should be in the
account of Ecclesiastical persons. There was an old saying. Soluat Ecclesiae,
let every man pay to the Church. Which now is altered, and made aunswerable to
the humor that now reigns. Soluat Ecclesia, let the Churchmen pay for it.
And indeed, if we had such Elders and Deacons, to be of the number of us,
that are Churchmen and Ecclesiastical persons: we might surely pay well for
it. At the least if their tenths and subsidies should be in all respects
rateable to ours. And there were no reason, that the Pastors and Doctors, men
so far in degree above the Elders and Deacons, should find less favor,
then their inferiors: or be more deeply charged, except their livings were in
true value, according to their degrees.

But this would be the mischief of it: that the Disciplinary platformres, have
so far ouershot themselves already, as certainly they have marred all these
their former speculations. For they have made the Deacons office, but annual.
And I am persuaded, that if our noble men and worshipful Gentlemen, were but
for one year to all respects become Ecclesiastical persons, they would hardly
be drawn to continue in that calling the next year after. It was never heard
of in the Church of Christ, for the space of a thousand and five hundred
years, that the deacons office should be annual. Imposition of hands by the
Presbytery, to an office for a year* In what Apostle, in what Evangelist, in
what History may we find it* A man shall be an Ecclesiastical person to day,
and to morrow (without any fault committed by him) he shall become a lay man
again. Master Beza seeing the absurdity hereof, does endeavor to salve it, as
well as he can. And wot ye how* Surely he says in effect, that few men will
be willing to ^arry long in that office: and that therefore they are glad to
have them as they may, and to frame their laws accordingly. But you shall
hear his own words to Doctor Sarauia, who does mislyke that the Deacons
office is annual. Restitue igitur nobis faelicia illa Apostolicarum
Ecclesiarum tempora, etc. Restore then unto us (says Beza) those happy times
of the Apostolical Churches, Beza cont. Sarauia. ca. 7.
and stir up such men, in every place if thou can, who will not refuse
this office with that condition.

See I pray you how weak in faith Master Beza is. Tush (says Cartwright) and
some others, even in the very like case: grant unto us once, that we have our
Presbyteries established, and as concerning fit men to take upon them the
offices which are there required, God will stir them up thick and
threefolde: you shall be sure there will be no want that way. You have heard
before, the place I mean, T. C. lib. 1. page 180.
but such a good tale cannot be told too often. When men are called (says he)
to a lawful and profitable calling, and especially to a public calling: God
powers his gifts on that person, (which is called) so plentifully: that he is
as it were soddenly made a new man. Now if this be true: of all the gifts
which are most necessary in any man of calling, I take it, that this one may
go in the number: that a man having put his hand to the plow, should not look
back, but continue in the calling which he has taken upon him. So as then
Bezacs answer is not worth a straw, to tell us that the Deacons office, is
not of such continuance now, as it was in the Apostles times: because men will
not now take that charge upon them. For Cartwright either tells him in
effect: that Deacons must be chosen for their lives, as in the Apostles times,
(except there be some extraordinary occasion to the contrary): and that then
God will make them willing to continue in their office, according to their
duties: or else if he shall restrain his said speeches, (which are general)
to his Elders, and so exclude their Deacons, from that sudden influence of Gods
graces he talks of: then certainly, I shall doubt, and so I think others
will do in like sort, that his Divinity in that point, is much like his
platform of Discipline: that is, forged and counterfaite.

But one thing yet more I am to advertise you off: concerning the worshipful
Deacons. And it seems strange. Our men as you know, and as it is elsewhere
mentioned, have been most earnest upon this point: that the body of Christ
must in no wise be deformed, neither by increasing, nor diminishing, nor
confounding of those officers and offices, which he himself has appointed in
his Church, and to that end distinguished. Hear I pray you the Demonstrator:
where he goes about to prove, that a Deacon may not intermeddle, either with
the word or Sacraments. Demon. ca. 13
That which the Apostle (says he) makes an ordinary and distinct office from
other in the Church, must be attended upon by them, that are in the same
office, and not to be mingled with any other. But the Deacons office is such a
one consisting in distribution with simplicity, as Calvin and Beza etc. do
affirm. And therefore consequently the Deacons office must be attended upon,
and must not be mingled with any other office. I will not meddle with the
insufficiency of this argument: but take every part of it, as the demonstrator
meant it: and you shall see what will thereuppon fall out. If his minor be
true: vz. that the Deacons office, consisting in distribution, is of that
nature, that it must be attended upon, and may not be mingled with any other
office: What would ye say to him, who should affirm, that notwithstanding
the Elders and Deacons are distinct members of Christ's body, and have distinct
offices appointed unto them by Christ: yet those offices may be mingled
together, and one man may execute them both* Surely master Beza is the man. As
near as we can (says he) we (in Geneua) do choose our Deacons (being endued
with good gifts) to be likewise Elders: because (the censure and judgment of
manners, being no daily function) has duas simul functiones obire facile
possunt: the Deacons may easily discharge both these functions together.
Indeed it was meet that the Proctors of their Hospital (carrying the purse)
should be entertained with them, by one devise or other. But in the mean
while, T. C. lib. 1. pa. 190.
our demonstrator runs against them with all the force of his Engines,
quoting Cartwright and Trauerse for his chief authors, with their (...)one
instrument to one use: etc (...) one man may not have two functions or offices:
and so amongst them they make (by consequence) the holy platform of Geneua,
to be a maimed, a dismembered, a confused, and a mangled platform of
Church Discipline. And thus you see (concerning this matter of their new
devised Deacons) how they agree together, like Harp and Harrow.

CHAP. XIX. Of certain widows, which are made Church officers: and of the
disagreement, which is about them.
TOuching this matter of Widows; I will not trouble you much with it.
Certain poor godly and impotent widows, that had neither goods nor
friends, nor were able in any wise to help themselves, were maintained in the
Apostles times, with such money, as was brought in, by the richer sort, and
laid at the Apostles feet. The places of scripture, wherein these widows are
mentioned, the Papists bring for their Nuns, and our disciplinarian men, for
a fifth sort of their ecclesiastical governors: both of them (as I take it)
with no great sincerity. The office ascribed to Nuns, was single life,
fasting, and prayer. The office ascribed to the ruling Widows, is to wash the
feet of the saints, and to attend upon the poor, that are sick. This matter
of Nuns, is notably handled, by Chemnitius: and so is the other of the
pretended ruling Widows, Chemnit. ex. council. Trident: par. 3.
by Doctor Sutcliffe. How grossly the Papists have erred in their devise:
Doct. Sutcliffe of Ecclesi. Discip. cap. 6.
I have not now to deal with it. The disagreement which I find in the other
sort, touching their widows: is the point, which is propounded.

First I see, there is some doubt, whether the persons, who, (as they say) did
execute the office mentioned, in the Apostles times: were men only, or women
only: or some of them men, and some of them women. Cartwright, he is for the
women only: where dividing Deacons into two kinds, he says thus of the
second: Some had charge over the poor strangers, T. C. lib. 1. page 190.
and the sick poor only: and those S. Paul calls in one place Diaconisses,
and in another place widows. By his opinion then, they were women. But
Trauerse in his discourse of discipline, where he speaks of deacons, and
casts them out into their orders: can find no other Church officers to have
executed that charge, in the Apostles times, over the sick poor, but only
men deacons. A third sort there is, Discip. eccles. 118.119.
which depend upon master Beza: and they will be sure not to miss their
aim: and therefore they hold, that both men and women were then capable of that
office. I agree to them ( says Beza) who think, that saint Paul in these
words: (he that shows mercy with cheerfulness:) understands those which
were appointed to cure the sick: vt sere erant viduae: such as for the most
part the widows were. Not always widows, but for the most part* So then
belike it is a matter, after a sort indifferent. Indeed in Geneneua, they
have no such widows at all: but a physician and a Surgion, Order of Geneua of
Deacons.
maintained by the wages of the town, to look to the sick in their
hospital. Now all these three sorts of men: have their partakers. The most
hold for the widows, with Cartwright. Iunius gives this reason why such
women were rather appointed to that office then men: Iunius, eccle. lib. 2.
cap. 4.
because, aptiores sunt quam viri: they are more fit then men, to be about
sick persons, and to help them. The author of the fruitful sermon, he
inclines to Beza, where he says; that a shewer of mercy is he, or rather
she, etc. And Trauerse, in like sort is not without his adherent. Which
disagreement amongst them, is not lightly to be regarded. For if widows were
appointed by the Apostles to that office, then men might not execute it: if men
were appointed, then it was unlawful for women to take it upon them: no more
then it was lawful for them to be either pastors, doctors, Elders, or men
deacons.

But be this point, as it may be: I will come to a second jar. It has gone
a great while for good payment from Beza and Cartwright, etc. that the whole
Church being divided, Beza annot: Romans 12. and cont. Erast. T.C. lib. 1. pa.
190.
into ecclesiastical governors and Idiots: the men or women that did attend
the poor sick, or rather the women (that I may use their phrase,) were no
more to be reckoned amongst the lay Idiots in their parish, but must be
thenceforth accounted in the number of Church governors. Learn. discourse.
Fruitful Sermon.
A widow in a Spittle house, an ecclesiastical person: nay an ecclesiastical
governor and commander. It seems that some have been driven from Beza,
Cartwright, and the rest of their associates: with the very cogitation of this
so gross an absurdity. And therefore to salve up the matter, (and yet to come
as near as they could unto them) they have displaced these widows from their
seats of government, and have made them plain Idiotes again, as they were
before. Or rather, which is much worse: whereas before they were governors of
the Church; Fenner defense Fruitful sermon.
they have now thrust them into the lowest place, that may be, and say, they
are to be esteemed but as Church servant, such as were appointed by the
governors of the Church, and consent of the people, to that servitude. Here is
then a great fall, as I think. From a wise woman to an Idiot, or from a
public person to a private condition: and from a Church governor, to a poor
Spittle-house servant. Who would wish to his enemy a greater change*
Peradventure there will be some distinction devised, that shall stop up this
gappe: but if it be not a good one, it may so chance; that all their
sovereign rulers will be masshed with it.

Thirdly, if these the foresaid helpers of the poor sick, should be men, as
it is in Geneua, diverse great questions will rise. As for example: where the
holy Ghost has described their qualities? How well seen, they ought to be in
physic and surgerie* who should try their skill before they were chosen?
Being chosen, who should admit them? Whether the Eldershippe must be able
to try them? And whether it be an Apostolical rule, that Physicians and
Surgeons should be ordained for practicioners, by the imposition of the
hands of the presbytery? And again, on the other side also, if the said
mercy shewers do prove to be widows, (although as they say, there is some
kind of description of them in the Apostles first Epistle to Timothy, 1. Tim. 5.
wherein they agree:) yet some thing will still fall forth, to be out of joint.
Every such widow as they require, must be threescore years old at the least,
and such a one (says master Calvin) as was, vnius viri vxor, the wife of one
husband: Call. in 1. Tim. 5.
that is, was never married but once. And he yealdeth this reason of that the
Apostles order: because when a woman comes to those years, and has been
content all her lifetime before, to have had but one husband: it is very
likely, that afterward she will live both continently and modestly. So then by
master Caluins judgment, there might no widdowe have attained to the said
Church office, of governing the sick poor: if she had been twice married.
But M. Cartwright relying upon master Bezaes annotations, will (as it seems)
none of that: but says, that it is sufficient, if such a widdowe has had but
one husband at once, and has not been married unto another after an
insufficient divorce. T.C. lib. 2. p. 116.
By whose opinion, every such widow, might have had in the course of her life
four or five husbands: without preiudicing her self thereby, from being as
likely to live continently, after she came to the age of threescore: as any
other which should have had but one husband at all. If the reason of the
Apostles words depend any way upon that point: peradventure Master Caluins
exposition, will prove to be the better.

But there are here two points, which I marvel at. It seems that by the
opinions of them all three, a widow being once chosen to be a
church-gouernour, might not afterward marry (at the least), and keep her
office. And why should the^ either physician or surgion that is married, have
that charge committed unto him* Cannot an old woman, that has peradventure as
old an husband, be as diligent and careful about the sick poor; as a
physician and Surgion of middle years, that may have both of them
peradventure, young wives* The second point I spoke of, is this. Master Beza
in his exposition of the place mentioned: vnius viri vxor, the wife of one
husband, notwithstanding he knew Master Caluins fore said interpretation of
the same words to be opposite to his, and that he takes upon him to confute
his reason before specified, vz. of the probability, that such women, as had
been married but once in threescore years, were more likely to live chastely
afterward, then if they had been married four or five times: yet for the
honor and reverence (as I take it) of M. Caluins name, he does not once make
mention of him. You will say, this is a slender marvel. M. Calvin was his
friend, and therefore he named him not. Indeed, that is the manner of the
world. Men are often favored: as they are frended. But it is pity, that the
ancient Fathers have no more friendship, with Beza. For, that is the point I
marvel at. Hear him how he comes over them, or rather how he descrediteth
himself. Hac in re sane etc. In this thing surely, I do not easily agree to
the ancient fathers, especially the latin writers. And again: If any man
shall oppose against my exposition, the authority of certain of the aunciente
fathers: ad verbum dei prouoco, I do appeal to the word of God, and I desire,
that the reasons, which I have brought for it; may be refelled. How crancke
he is with the ancient fathers? but not a word of M. Calvin. And his reason
(as I take it) was this: because M. Caluins authority seruinge him much better,
for the credit of diverse Disciplinary positions, then all the ancient fathers
do: he is more desirous for the continuance of his reputation, then of all
theirs. A fourth matter there is also, concerning these widows, which is of
the greatest importance: and is yet no better agreed upon, then as you have
heard of the rest. Be it, that in the Apostles times there were such widows,
as they affecte: yet the question is; whether it be necessary, that now there
should be such church officers, or new colleges of widows, set up in every
parish, to look to the poor that be sick or not? Some of their proctors, do
waver much, in this point: some are resolute for them, and some are as resolute
(to my understanding) against them. First (I pray you) let M. Cartwright speak
his pleasure. T.C. l. 1. p. 190
Saint Paul reckons up all the ordinary and perpetual offices of the
Church; of the Doctor, of the Pastor, of the Deacon, of the Elder, and leaves
not out so much as the Widow. Again. Now there is not so great use of these
widows with us etc. Part of the necessity (why they were first founded) grew
both by the multitude of strangers etc. and by the great heat of those East
countries, whereupon the washing and supplinge of feet, was required. Again:
For as much as there are poor, which are sick in every church: I do not see a
better order can be devised etc. if there can be any widows gotten. And
again. I conclude, that (if such may be gotten) we ought to keep that order
in the church. In good time. It is a very substantial conclusion.

And is he come to this: If such can be gotten? Has God appointed such
officers to be in every parish, as cannot be gotten* He told us before in the
behalf of his Elders, (as you shall hear again the third time) that when
men are called to a lawful and profitable calling, T.C. l. 1. p. 180
and especially to a public calling, God does power his gifts on that person
(which is called) so plentifully, that he is, as it were, soddainely made a new
man. Whereupon he infers, that do but once make choice of such Elders, as
he does after: and God will by and by make them fit persons to execute their
offices. And may we not then also affirm, by the Analogy of the same
doctrine: that when God appoints an ordinary and perpetual office in his
Church, he does also provide, either ordinarily or extraordinarily, that there
shall be always some to undertake it* What prerogative have his Elders above
his Widows, that God having appointed them both alike, to bear a continual
office in his Church: the one sort should be so miraculously provided for, even
upon the soddaine, and the other be suffered so far to wear out, as that
they cannot be gotten* May it not be as truly said, set up the Eldership
in every parish, and God will provide Widows: as set it so up in the most
Clownish parish in England, and God will presently by inspiration, make the poor
husbandmen, Carters, Thatchers and Dawbers, newly chosen to be Elders, such
meet and able men, to govern the church: as the keys of the kingdom of Heaven,
may be safely committed into their hands?

Whether through these and such like other conceits, or upon what grounds else
I know not: but there is a second sort of Disciplinary Widdowistes, that are
very far grown past Cartwrights, Ifs. Fenner.
One that writes the defense of the godly Ministers, (as he intituleth
them,) has in that Treatise, framed ten arguments of a wonderful power, as
many have supposed. Wherein he al'wayes comprehends the widows: and names
them as necessary parts of the form of that Church-gouernement, which Christ
and his Apostles have appointed to be the ordinary and perpetual platform for
the guiding and gouerninge of the Church, until the end of the world: and
makes them, (by such force as his arguments have,) as necessary, for the
ordinary continuance of them, as either Pastor, Doctor, Elders, or men Deacons.
The learned discourser likewise agrees with this Defence-maker; where having
spoken of Widows, amongst the rest of their Church Officers: and of all their
offices: he says, that being instituted by the spirit of God, Learned disc.
page 104.
for the necessary use of the Church, which use still continues, they ought
also to be retained amo^ngst us. I may not here also omit the author of the
Fruitful sermon, Fruitful Sermon. pa. 39.
who expounds so pretily, the similitude which S. Paul uses of that
mystical body, whereof (as I take it) Christ is the head: that he excludes
the whole Church, from being any members of it, except they be either Pastors,
Doctors, Elders, Deacons, or Widows. A member (says he) is such a part of
the body, Ibid.
as has received from the head, some particular and necessary guifte, to help
and benefit the whole body, and every member thereof. And so he reckons us
his members, as I have said. His meaning therein is this, (as I think,) that
the rest of the body, is but as it were a rude lump, which is to be framed
and fashioned, by the said members: by every one, according to the office of
it. And after for the necessity, vz. that every one of his said members, no
more, no fewer, should always continue in the body: he uses these words, If
nature lack any one member, be it never so base, Ibid page 40.
if it be but one toe, she is sorry, she is grieved, she lamenteth, she
judges her self maimed, yea she would redeem it with the peril of loosinge
the rest, such is her love and desire, to appear in her beauty and perfection.
As though he should have said, that he and his fellows are so far bewitched
with the desire of their Eldershippes; that rather then they will miss their
Widows, even the meanest members of it, they care not to hazard the being of
the whole Church.

Unto this fruictfull sermoner mentioned: Defense. page 135.
I will add one of Fenners invincible arguments, because it enforces the said
similitude of the members of the body so syllogistically. Whatsoever officers
are ordinary members of the Church: are set into the same of God for ordinary
etc perpetual duties, with ordinary and perpetual gifts, wherein they are
commanded to abide, and wherewith the Church is commanded to be content:
Those are ordinary perpetual and the best, for no man may remove the members
of Christ's body, having ordinary gifts and actions for the perpetual use of
the body. But these of Doctors, Pastors, Elders, Deacons, Church-seruants, are
ordinarye members of the Church: are set into the same of God, for ordinary
duties of teaching, exhorting, ruling, provision for the poor, and attendance
unto them: all which no man in his wits will deny to be perpetual, and in
these, expressly they which have the gifts, are commanded to abide, and to
content themselves with them: Wherefore etc. These men you see, must either
have their Widows, or else all is marred. And have them they will, if
distinguishing, similitudes, dividing, sillogismes, and logic, will get them.
And besides you may perceive what most vehement, patheticall, and peremptory
men they are, in this behalf.

Howbeit you shall find that other men, nay whole Churches (for all this heat)
are of another opinion: and withal, such men and Churches, as neither the
defender, discourser, nor sermoner, nor all the private disciplinarye
conuenticles in England, will presume in any sort to compare themselves unto
them. Master Beza does not think the having of Widows, to be such an
ordinary and perpetual institution, as it has been pretended. For at Geneua,
not such a Widow, if you would give a pound for her. And yet that platform
is either perfect by this time: or else there hanges some curse over it. But
this I am sure of: that he who durst take upon him, to tell them in Geneua,
that by their omission of these Widows, they have cruelly wounded the body of
Christ: they had like desperate ruffians, cut of one of his members: and that
in these respects, the form of their Disciplinary regiment, is maimed and
deformed: might peradventure repent him of it. Indeed either I am very much
deceived, or else this dream of widows begins to vanish. The very
principal, nay the only place, vz. He that shows mercy with
cherfulness, whereupon they have hitherto builte, to prove them to be such
Church Officers, as they have imagined them to be: is boldly, and with main
strength wrested out of their hands: notwithstanding that Master Calvin, M.
Beza, and M. Cartwright, had laid as fast hold upon it, as they could. Or
peradventure I might rather say, that the two which be alive, seeing their
tenure was naught, have willingly given it over. The Champion I mean, that
has done this great deed, is Master Trauers. De disci. Eccles. fol. 119.
Who writes of this point, after this sort. That which follows of him that
shows mercy; nullum certe munus ecclesiae indicare puto etc. I think it
means not any certain office, but what duty, the whole Church ought to show
in relieuing the poor. Thus far and further Master Trauers, in his Latin
book, as if you will peruse the place, you shall perceive.

But you must remember, that I do refer you to his Latin book: and not to
the English translation of it. Why? some may say: is it not faithfully
translated? Shall we think that such zealous men, as had to deal therein,
would serve us as the Jesuits do? It is, we know, a practice, with that
false hypocritical brood, to leave out and thrust in, what they list into the
writings of the ancient Fathers: that thereby in time, nothing might appear,
which should any way make against them. But we will never suspect nor
believe, that any man who fears God: and least of all, that any of that
sort, which are so earnest against all abuses and corruptions, should play us
such a prancke. Surely ye do well to judge the best: and I my self was of
your opinion. But now I am clean altered. How were some of Vrsinus works
used at Cambridge? And it is true that some other Books have been handled
very strangely elsewhere. But concerning the present point, this is the
truth. The translator of Trauerses Book, has quite omitted the words which
I have alleged: and all the rest that tends to that purpose, even
seventeen lines together. So as if you see but the English Book, you shall
not find so much as one step, whereby you might suspect, that ever Master
Trauerse had carried so hard a hand over the pretended Widows. If the
translator had received any Commission from the author to have dealt in that
sort with his Book: yet it should have been signified either in some
Preface or in some note, or by some means or other: but to leave such a matter
out, and to give no general warning of it, I tell you plainly it was great
dishonesty and lewdenesse. It were better for them to give over their
platformes in the plain field: then to seek to maintain them with such
apparaunt falsehoods.

Well, let them take their course, and yet all their sleightes will not
prevail. But the Translator or Councellor, or peruser, one or more, or how many
soever: they were but all of them sottes: if they thought by such their
corruption, to bolster up the credit of their Widdowe Church-gouernours. For
it is evident (in my judgment) that either most of their own men, do begin
to come to Master Trauerses opinion before mentioned, or else that generally
it is held by them, that the first ordaining of Widows, was but for a time,
and never meant to be an ordinary, and perpetual institution to continue for
ever.

In Geneua (as I said) there are no such Widows. Scotland in their approved
Book after the Geneua fashion, does not once think of them. The Synodicall
constitutions, for the Presbyteriall platform of all the French Churches, do
make no mention of them. The general Council of Hage, and so all the Low
Countries, have wholly forgotten them in their decrees and Canons. In the
platform, and new Communion Book, which was offered once or twice to the
high Court of Parliament in England, (concerning these Widows) there is
nothing but silence. Whereas also there has been great pains taken of later
years, amongst the Disciplinary brotherhoode, and many meetinges, and Synodes
held, about another more particular draught of Discipline, for this Realm,
till at the last they have subscribed unto it, to be a necessary platform for
all places and times: yet you shall not find, that they have spoken, so much
as one word, of those Widows. Whereupon I conclude, that their cause is
desperate: and so I leave, both them and their patrons, with all their
contrarieties, uncertainties, and wranglings about them: and will come to the
consideration of another material point: vz. what charge this Consistoriall
devise does bring with it, to every parish.

CHAP. 20. Of the charge to be imposed upon every parish, by means of the
pretended Eldership.
BY the common account of our disciplinarie devises: there are diverse
ecclesiastical persons to be maintained in every Parish. Now, there is but
one, in most places, the Parson or the Vicar: and (God knows) in many
parishes, their intertainment is full bare. But admit of the Consistoriall
Senate in every parish: Page 131.
and then consider how they shall be charged. First the current assertion is;
That in every Congregation there must be a Pastor: but the learned Discourser
says; there should be two at the least. Then they must have a Doctor. And for
Elders, they may be more or fewer: as the circuit of the Parish is. Except
Master Bezaes collection prove to be authentical: and then their number
will be great. You have heard that we must have the form, of the Jews
Sanedrim or Counsel in every Parish. And in that (says Beza) there were
twenty four Ecclesiastical Judges. By which account, abating the Pastor and
the Doctor: there ought to be two and twenty Elders in every parish. You
shall hear Bezaos words, and how heegathereth that there was such a number.

There is mention made in the Apoca. of a throne: upon the which Christ
sits, Apoca. 4.
and of the four and twenty Seats about it, whereupon four and twenty
Elders sat: who were clothed in white raiment, and had on their heads
Crowns of gold. Beza: cont: E-rast. lib. script.
Now says Beza (concerning the said number mentioned of ecclesiastical
Judges) 24. numero fuisse etc, That they were in number 24. that is to say,
two of every Tribe, it seems it may be gathered out of the Apocalypse: where
certum est, it is certain, that those heavenly visions were framed or
accommotated to the form of the Israeliticall Church. Where by the way, it
would be observed; what a glorious church-regeme^t we are in time to look for.
Our Elderships must be framed, after the fashion of the Elderships which were
amongst the Jews. And if we doubt of the state and form of the Jews
elderships; we must have recourse to the Apocalips, where the glory of Christ
and his Saints in the kingdom of heaven is set forth. And agreeablie to those
heavenly thrones; we must set up thrones for our 24. Elders in every parish.
For this Beza is certain of, that the heavenly visions in the Apocalypse, were
agreeable to the form of the ecclesiastical regiment in Israel. But as
touching the number of his elders: he is not as yet, for any thing I perceive,
so thoroughly resolved. And therefore we are at liberty till we hear to the
contrary from him: to place more or fewer in every parish as we list.

At Geneua they have but 12. Elders. Knox of elect of Elders.
And they either have; or had once in Edinburgh: as many. Likewise, every
parish must have certain Deacons. They had once in Edinburgh (as I remember)
16. Deacons. And concerning widows, (if they will urge us with the examples
of the Apostles times, and withal in like manner press us with their own
expositio^s) then there must be a College of widows in every parish. These.
Geneu. page 220.
So the grounds of Geneua divinity tell us; Beza Ann. Act 6.1.
and so does Beza likewise, if I understand them. And all these, how many i^
ever it shall please our reformers to impose upon every parish: pastor or
pastors, Doctor, Elders, Deacons, and widows: must all of the^ be found by
the same parish. For the ministers of the word there was never doubt made
amongst the^, but that they ought to have their maintenance of the parish: and
so likewise must the poor widows. But as touching the rest, there has been
made some question. It was a good devise of Beza, that princes and nobleme^
might be elders: and so was it of our learned Discourser that the worshipful
gentlemen of every parish might be chose^ Deacons. The rby indeed the parishes
might save charges. For if they be able to live of themselves: then they must
not burden the parish (in Cartwrightes opinion) but serve upon their own
charges. The Elders at Geneua, (being all of them statesmen, I mean such as
be of their Senates; men conveniently able to live of themselves) have no
allowance for any thing that I can find. But where the Elders are poor men, so
as their attending upon their offices, might greatly hinder them; T.C. Lib. 1.
page 187.
then M. Cartwright has decided the question, and affirms by S. Paul's Rule
(as he says) that they ought to be plentifully maintained by the Church. How
far this word plentifully will be extended; I know not. But a man may guess.
The humble motioner would have the Pastor and Teacher in every parish, to have
allowed unto the^ two hundred pounds yearly: in chiefer places more, and in
none less then two hundred marks. By which rate I imagine that their Elders
(being so great men by their office and the governors of the parish) cannot
well be allowed under forty pound a piece yearly. The deacons that carry the
purse (if they be not well looked unto) will be their own caruers: but surely
their stipend will be for every one of them above forty marks. As for the
Widows they cannot well live to attend the sick and wash the Saints feet:
with less: then twenty nobles a year, how many of them so ever they are. All
which sums, being cast together: will prove a rank charge, to be imposed
upon every parish. But yet this is not all. For how shall the pastors and
doctors wives and children live: when their husbands and parents are dead?
This is also foreseen. Provision must be made not only for the ministers
sustentatio^ during their lives, but also for their wives and children after
them. For we judge it a thing most contrarious to reason, History of the Church
of Scot. page 560. etc:
godliness and equity, that the widow and children of him, who in his life time
did faithfully serve the church of God, should after his death be left
comfortles of all provision. In what sort, these widows are to be relieved: I
find not any particulars of it. But they may not be, of the number, of the
Church officers; except they be threescore years of age, or have some
privileges by their late husbands for those rooms. And as touching the
children of ministers, this order is required for the^: Ibid.
that the men children may have the liberties of the cities adjacent, where
their fathers labored, freely granted the^: that they be sustained at
learning, if they be found apt thereto: and failing thereof, that they be put
to some handicraft or exercise in some virtuous industrye: and likewise for the
women children, that they be virtuously brought up, and honestly doted, when
they come to maturity of years, at the discretion of the Church etc. Not at
the peoples discretion who must bear the charge: but as it shall please their
Elderships to tax them.

Furthermore, and besides the officers and charges mentioned: Disc. sacra.
it is also ordered by the new Book of our English Discipline, that there
ought to be in every parish, a College or certain number of young Divines:
such as are meet for the exercises to Divinity, and especially to expound the
Scriptures: whereby they may be trained up by preaching. And all these must be
likewise maintained, diuitum liberalitate, by the liberality of the richer.
Here you see is charge upon charge. But indeed it were a notable matter, to
have a College of young Prophets in every parish. In the Universities there
are Schools, for reading of Lectures and for disputatio^s: but (as our
platformers tell us) these their parish Schools of Divinity, are chiefly for
preaching. They must preach privately amongst themselves by course: and having
an auncienter Divine with them, (I suppose it will fall to the Pastors lotte,)
they are afterward to confer of the faults or defects, which are found in
the young preacher, and to tell him of them, that he may amend them. Certainly
if these men had been suffered to have run on foreward, I fear they would
have run mad. What speculations be these? All their Elders must be such
men, as Saint Paul requires a Bishop to be: they must be able to preach in
their Consistories, and privately. And now you must have in every parish
diverse young men, such as are meet for the exercises of Divinity before they
be admitted. And where will they have all these? It was precisely said of
Master Cartwright, vz. thus in effect: Never let that trouble you: set up the
Eldership, choose your Elders, etc. and God will make them fit for their charges
upon a soddain. It had been very prouidentlie handled of him, if he had
likewise taught the people, that they should never have sticked for any cost,
which they were to bestow for the maintenance of the said Church Officers,
though they should be twice as many: because in bestowing their goods after
that sort, God will make them rich and fill their tubbes, their oil bottles*
their barns and their purses upon the soddaine.

It was but a simple suite* made by the author of the complaint of the
comminalty: Complaint of the comminalty.
that as the Papists builte Seminaries to advance the kingdom of the Devil:
so there might be more Colleges, and Seminaries of true Religion erected. For
now you see, it is appointed: that there shall be such a Seminary in every
parish. And how the coiners of this devise, did ever grow into any such
conceit: I cannot certainly guess, except it be, because there is such a
kind of School or Seminary in Geneua. Indeed when the State there had seized
upon the Church-liuinges: they erected a School with some small allowance,
according as our English proverb runs, of taking away a goose and sticking
down a feather. The profit which they have by the one, exceeds far the charge
of the other. If now our men could invent such a way for every parish:
peradventure they might be heard. They talk indeed of a matter, how to have
their Elderships with all the appertenannces thereunto belonging, Humble
motion. Complaint Trauersi dis. Eccles. The learned discourse.
and yet not greatly to ouercharge any parishes. But it is not after the
fashion of Geneua. There the Magistrates fleeced the church, but they would
have all themselves: the Bishops liuinges, Cathedral Churches, Impropriations,
and rather then fail all the Abbaie lands, and such things as did belong to
all the rest of the houses of Religion. If any parish in England should ask my
counsel, whether I thought they might safely enter into such a present charge
for the maintenance of so many Pastor, Doctor, Elders, Deacons, Widows,
Ministers wives, their children, and poor Students of Diuinities in hope that
all the said Church-liuings should be bestowed for their ease, upon such their
Church officers: I should say unto them (if I spoke my conscience) that I my
self am far from any such cogitation. No, no, for all the outcries that the
Disciplinarians make (as in the next chapter you shall perceive:) that all the
Church-liuings, might be emploide to the maintenance of them and their
Elderships: well they may procure in some other age, the further impouerishing
of the Church, but they shall be sure to be little the better for it.

CHAP. XXI. Of their desire, that those things which have been taken by
Sacrilege from the Church, might be restored again to the maintenance of
their Elderships.
EXperience they say is not a foolish mistres: but a mistres of fools. In the
beginning of the late reformation of Religion, in most places of Europe, diverse
notable me^ did greatly ouershoote themselves. It is Aristotle's rule, that one
way to come to the mean, is to proceed ab extremo in extremum, from one
extremity to another. And it may hold in the example by him alleged, of
making a crooked stick to be straight: but it is not to be allowed of in any
sort, in the course of Divinity. There it is reckned a point of great weakness,
(and so it is also with the profane writers,) to run from one extremity to
another. Many examples I could bring of this weakness: as how in many places,
men have leapt from auricular confession, to the contempt of all private
conference with their Pastor: from pharifaicall long prayers, upon a pair of
beads, three or four times said over by tale, at one time, to little prayer
at all, two or three words, (if so many) and farewell: (agreeable to men's
consciences, even as the Proverb faith. A short horse is soon curried:) from
most gros and palpable Idolatry and superstition, unto very great security
and profanation. Many other such examples I might allege, of running from
one mischief to another: but there is none fitter then of the course which
has been held, in this very matter, whereof I entreat.

In times past, men thought they could not give too much to the church, but now
many suppose, they cannot take too much from the Church. In times past there
was so much given to the church, that the k. of England was fain to make a law
for the stay of so great liberality, Exodus 36.
(as Moses did when there was sufficient provision made for the building of the
temple): but now men's hearts are grown to such a contrary extremity, and are so
far from incurring any danger in breaking that law for restraining the^, as
notwithstanding her most excellent M. has continued and made her self, very
many notable laws, that the church might keep that which other men has given
her, and for the binding of me^, to pay their duties to the Church: yet every
man sees how under pretense of concealements, and by many other means the
Church-goods are thirsted after, and how the poor ministers are most
pitifully defrauded in the payment of such duties, as do belong unto them.
Insomuch (by report) as now in sondrie places, if they shall but seek or sue to
have their own: either they are greatly misliked, or presently are indicted
for common Barators: or if they escape that, out flies a prohibition from one
place, a sequestration from another, and I know not what else, nor from whence.

And the cause of these and many other such extremities, I do not impute so
much unto the laity, as to sundry men of the Clergy: whose proceedings have been greatly by extremities. It was an extremity, when Wickliffe affirmed, that
tithes (appointed by God himself) were merae eleemosynae, mere alms. But of
all extremities, that passes, where some now a days would have all taken from
the Church, that so Ministers might live, as they did in the Apostles times;
that is, only upon voluntary contributions. And this they think, to be a
part of the Apostolical reformation, which they seek for. Whereunto I (for my
part) might peradventure yield, if the laity would be sworn before they
took that from us, which we have already: to deal with us indeed for our
provision and maintenance, as preachers were dealt with all in the Apostles
times.

I know, what will here be answered. When we see that you that be Ministers,
are become such men as the Apostles were, we will use you as they were used.
What? will ye persecute us* No, we will bring that which we have, and lay it
at your feet. I beshrew my heart if I believe you. But if I did, the matter
were not great. For there never were such men, nor ever shall be to the end of
the world, as the Apostles were. So as where they limit their liberality with
that caution: it is as much as if they should say: we would be glad to finger
that which you have, and then get more as you could. Nay it smells surely of
a greater profanation. For your ministers do teach you now the same doctrine:
that the Apostles taught. And would you desire more? Do you look for it at
their hands, that they should work miracles? Is your pretended great zeal
come to this, that now you have need of miracles?

If any man think I fight against mine own shadow, and that there are none
so wickedlie bent, as to wish an utter spoil of the Church: he is to be
advertised that M. Barrow, Barrow. p. 55. 58. 61
with all his Sectaries (more in number then is imagined, Petition to her May.
p. 49
and lately increased by one, a frantic petitioner) they are the men. Indeed
the other sort of Consistorial reformers, are grown to be wiser. For a while,
it is true, that many of them dreamed of such a matter. They talked, how much
of the church livings, might be emploide this way, and how much that way.
Tithes were Popish toies: Humble motion p. 100.etc
yet lay men might have them, and Ministers should be paid out of the
Exchequor. The humble motioner makes mention of some such way, to put
Ministers to their pensions: but he confuteth it and brocheth another devise of
his own. Disc. Eccl. fol. 95.96.
Trauerse he does not think that Tithes are due by the word: but yet he would
have them to be continued to the church, howbeit not to be gathered in such
sort as they are. The Magnifico could be content to have the Tithes: but for
sooth Princes must take order to have the^ brought truly into the Ministers
Barns, that they may not be troubled with so base a thing, as to look to the
manner of tithing. Nescio quid habet sordidi singulorum agros, ne fallatur,
aestimare, etc. that is, as his Translator in Ca^bridge says: It is a base and
vile thing for them to view every man's field, least they be deceived, and to
know the number and increase of every man's flock, or cattle: and of other
things etc. Many Ministers in some Countries not far from hence, who think
themselves as iollie fellows as Master Trauerse, would be glad with all their
hearts to abase themselves to this nescio quid sordidi, if they might.

When reformation of Religion was first urged, it was thought such an effectual
motive, as would procure attention, vz. to entitle Princes after a sort to the
churchgoods. The learned men persuaded themselves, that if by any policy
they could overthrow popery, it would be afterward a very easy matter to
recover them again. If error and superstition had been so beneficial to the
Church, they nothing doubted, but that truth and sincerity would bring forth
at the least as plentiful fruictes. Besides, they did not so yield over their
right in those matters to Princes: but it was done with diverse cautions and
prouisoes, by virtue whereof they supposed in time, to recover all again into
their own hands. But it is not good to dally with Princes. Indeed they
plaide, warye beguile themselves: which since has wonderfully moved them.
And now they (all of them in a manner) do run upon this ground, vz. that
Kings and Princes are bound by the word of God to restore to the Church such
goods, as heretofore they have taken from her: and generally that nothing once
separated from a common use, and bestowed upon the Church, may be afterward
alienated to any other use.

Cardinal Sadolette charging the Ministers of Geneua: Sadol to the Gene. p. 162
that by the which course they had taken there: they did nouas sibi potentias
and nouos honores quaerere, seek to themselves new powers and new honors: ^al.
to Sad. p. 172.
M. Calvin answers in this sort, that they did not affect nor gape after any
other riches or dignities, then such as at that time was fallen to their lot:
testes erunt omnes qui nos audierunt: as all they can witness that have heard
us. Howbeit the perceived within a while after, that the ministers had too
little, and that the civil magistrates had greatly ouerreached them in that
behalf. Whereupon he began in all his sermons for the most part, to insist
much upon the restitution of the Church-goods. Capito confesses in general
terms (but such as may well be extended to this matter) that the rash dealing,
which had been practiced, for the abolishing of Popery, had been very
inconvenient. Dominus videre dat etc. God does le^ us now see etc. quantum
praecipiti indicio, vehementiaque inconsulta abijciendi ita pontificis
nocuerimus: Epist. to Farel. in Call. Epist. 6.
what hurt we have done by rash judgment, and inconsiderate vehemence of
banishinge the Pope after such a manner. One Zuickius finding the mischief
also in Constance, of the Magistrates grapling very greedily for the
Churche-goodes: Zuick. to Call. in Call. Epi. 33.
writes thus to Master Calvin. Quanta bonorum Ecclesiasticorum s^l ratio
habenda, etc. What regard there ought to be had of the goods of the Church, I
need not to recite: use your endeavor with all good men, that they would
exhort our Magistrates earnestly to the lawful use of those goods. Huc enim
ventum videtur, etc. For now it seems to be come to this pass (which I say
not without grief) that a great part of our Magistrates do believe, that then
only indeed, they escape from under the kingdom of Antichrist, si cum bonis
ecclesiae ludant pro libito, nec vlli disciplinae subsint, if they may play
with the goods of the Church at their pleasures, and be subject to no kind of
Discipline. O egregium Christianismum: O worthy Christianity.

Whether Master Calvin did satisfy Zuickius desire, in moving the magistrates
of Constance, to the effect mentioned; I know not. But what he writ to Farellus
(upon the very same occasion): you shall hear. The churchliuings, were used in
the very same manner at Neocome; that they were at Constance. Farellus, being
the minister, entreated M. Calvin to write to the magistrates at Neocome: for
their desisting from that sacrilegious course. To who^ Master Calvin returned
this answer, in effect: vz. that they themselves, the ministers at Geneua,
were as hardlye handled in the same respect, with their own magistrates: and
that it were therefore a very absurd point for him to seek to reform the
magistrates of other Cities abroad, before he should have reformed his own
first at home. His words are: as it follows. Timendum est etc. It is to be
feared, Calu. epist. 66.
least we seem ridiculous to your magistrates, in requiring that of them,
which as yet we have not obtained of our own. We shall teach, what the right
use is of church, goods, and who are the lawful Stewardes of them, that by our
authority we may urge those of Neocome. Cur non potius exordium a nobis
facimus? But first why do not we begin with our selves* Take heed therefore
least in attempting to do you good, that we do not rather hurt your cause. How
much more forceable would that be, which is in the book, that I procured to be
printed when I was at Strasburgh. For there the Princes, as many as embrace the
gospel, do promise the restitution of all, which they have in their
possessions, if once there were any godly concord agreed upon. Your magistrates
are to be admonished by the example of those Princes, that at the least until
that time, they would keep them all wholly together undisposed of, or
distracted in their own hands. You will ask me why I cease or hold my peace,
if I see the same mischief in Geneua that vexes you? Ego verono^ cesso etc. I
do not (truly) cease openly in my sermons, as often as opportunity serves
thereunto. Contestor Deum and homines, grave nobis imminere iudicium. I do with
grief and prayer call God and men to witness, that a heavy judgment hangs
over our heads. I have also affirmed diverse times as much in our Senate:
neither do I think that as yet I have discharged my duty, seeing I have
nothing prevailed. But I do follow Ambrose, who retayning the doctrine and the
place of a pastor, so as in defense of them he was ready to have spent his
life; agros tyrannidi Imperatoris Valentiniani sinebat: he permitted the
possessions of the Church to the tyranny of Valentinian the Emperor. For our
magistrates do suspect, that the strife is, but of emulation, as though our
grief only were, that they have wrong those things out of our fingers which
now they possess: except peradventure they give it so out, not because they
think so, but for that they would thereby discredit our words in that behalf.
But yet notwithstanding we must so avoid suspicion, that we do not wink at
sacrilege.

And again, the same master Calvin in another epistle to Viretus: does
signify unto him, how he dealt with the magistrates of Geneua, at one
especial time, when there was speech about certain stipends. When I saw how
hard they were in that matter, acriter aurem illis vellicaui etc. I made their
ears to burn (says he) as concerning the administration of Church-goods: how
in time they were to think, what account they should make both to God, Call. to
Viret epist. 108.
and men: Papam fuisse furem et sacrilegum, videndum ne simus successores, that
the Pope was a thief and a church robber, and they were to look to it, that
they proved not his successors. I did use a preface, that might cause
attention: vz. That the wounds of a friend were better etc. and that they
should not seek any Balaam, qui illis in maledictione benediceret, who in
their cursed estate should bless them. Hitherto master Calvin; whose words I
have set down at large: that you might the better understand, the estate of the
most worthy Reformation of the church of Geneua: and how the discipline being
there in her full prime and brightness, it is not possible that any gross
enormities should continue in that City. Indeed it is much, and I marvel how
it is endured, that master Calvin should resemble the magistrates of Geneua,
to such cruel, tyrannouse, and sacrilegious persons, Valentinian the Emperor,
and the Pope of Rome. But most of all I wonder that master Beza would publish
such letters in print. Being but written to private men: the matter could not
be great. Marry now they are thus offered to all posterity: the testimony of
such tyrannous sacrilege will be ever had in memory. For which kind of
dealing: they are much beholden to Beza. It was indeed, handled of him
politickly. Of likelihood the sacrilege mentioned does continue there still.
But he being a provident man, thought it better that master Calvin, being dead
should tell them of it; then he himself being alive, and therefore subject
unto their displeasures. For otherwise master Beza for his part, is as
earnest against sacrilege, as ever master Calvin was: and it may be for ought
I do know, or remember to the contrary, that he has dealt himself as
roundly with them. But sure I am of his judgment: which does appear in his
treatise of his three sorts of Bishops, Beza.
where this question being propounded unto him: vz. Whether these things which
had been once vowed to holy uses, might afterward be otherwise employed: he
makes this answer: Concerning the goods of the Church: first of all we
suppose great heed ought to be taken, that none does stain himself with
handling the church goods. For if God has taken revenge of such sacrilege,
even amongst the very Idolaters, what trow we will his judgment be against
them which have spoiled his Church: and have profaned the things which were
set a part for his true worship. Moreover it is evident, that this turns
greatly to the reproach of the name of God, and of his holy gospel: as though
for sooth papistrie has been abandoned not for the love of the truth, but to
rob the Church of her goods: as though new thieves have entered into the
rooms of the old* etc. Viretus in like manner, for his earnestnes in this
point, Viret 3. dial. of white diucles.
is neither short of Calvin not Beza. The less authority that the ministerye
and ministers have: the greater liberty have sacrilegers, thieves,
extortioners, and other wicked ones. Again, I know many which liked the
gospel well, when in the beginning their preachers cried against the abuse,
that they said was in the Romish church, and in priests and monks. They liked
well also that the goods of the Church should be taken from Priests and Monks,
to have the government of them themselves, under color that the Priests and
Monks abused them, and that they should be put to better use: but God knows
how evil they are bestowed upon many, and in many places. The worst is, that
those which have not done herein as they ought, and which daily forget
themselves more and more, cannot now a days so much as suffer the preachers to
admonish and reprove them, and to stir the^ up to bestow it where they ought to
bestow it, according to the order and discipline etc. ibidem.
And in another place. These fellows (that will not restore the
church-liuings) may be likened to those Diuils, which cry: why art thou come to
torment us before our time? And the same fellows also say: Qui nostra tollit,
inimicus est: he that takes away ours, is our enemy. They regard not
whether they have gotten the goods, that they possess, well or evil:
wherefore they esteem all those to be enemies, that in reason demand
restitution of them, and declare that it belongs not unto them, but that they
have stolen it away from the Church. ibidem
Likewise afterward: I doubt not, but if they were called to account, for the
bestowing of such goods: and if it were taken out of their hands, as it was
taken from Priests and Monks, ibidem
and given to such as should better bestow it: they would take pepper in the
nose, and fall to playing the Devils part. Lastly, I put the case (says he)
that a whorehunter or baude steal an honest man's wife, and the husband
comes and demands this wise of this russia^ that has stolen her away: and
reuileth this Russian or Baude, for the wrong that he has done him, and goes
to law with him, whereby there arises great strife: I would ask of thee, who
were in the fault? Either the husband, who has had this wrong: or the
Rauisher who has played him this wicked pranke? And the answer is thus
framed: The whorehunter or baude, has as much reason to complain and be
angry, as has a theife or robber: which is called to account of thefts and
robberies, which he has committed, and which is called to judgment for the
same.

But I will come from Geneua into England: Admonitio 2. to the parlia. 15 7 2:
that you may perceive, what our chief disciplinarie Reformers, do think of
this matter. It is no better then sacrilege and spoiling of God (say the
Authors of the second Admonition 157 7 2, to keep back any way the
provision) which has been made for the ministry. And the curse of God
threatened by Malachie, to those that spoiled the Levites then: belongs and
will light upon our spoylers now, and upon them, in whose bands it is to
redress it, if they do it not. The Author of the book, de disciplina
ecclesiastica, speaking of Bishops livings etc. says thus: of many in these
days, who under a pretense of zeal, do cry out for reformation. Haec orati^
gratissima est nonnullis, qui suam causam agi putant, et iampridem haereditatem
istam spe deuorarunt. Fol. 94.
These words etc. are most acceptable to some, who think they tend to their
profitte, and have already in hope devoured this inheritance. For they
thinking that we seek only, that Bishops might be spoiled, do expect
thereby the like pray, that they got by the ruins of Monasteries. For as for
religion they care not, what become of it, modo ipsi praedari possint, so they
may wax welthyer by sacrilege and robbery: and would not stick (if it were
possible) to crucify Christ again, vt tunicam eius sortirentur, ibid. fol. 87:
et vestimenta diuiderent etc. But this our age has many such Soldiers, many
such Dionysians, who think that a golden gown is not fit for God neither in
summer nor winter: and yet that it will serve them well at all times and
seasons. Again, They had rather all religion were banished, that al opinion of
worshipping and fearing God were abolished, that all faith in Christ, and hope
and looking for everlasting life, were forgotten amongst men, Ibidem fol: 95.
then to maintain it with any pennye of theirs. Yea further, they will not
only give nothing to the maintenance of the ministry: but most unjustly scrape
unto themselves, that which was liberally given by others: and spoil the
Church, robbing her of her goods etc. But they must either restore it again,
that the church may be prouided-for of worthy teachers, or else make themselves
guiltye of the loss and destruction of so many souls, ibidem fol. 97.
as by their means are destitute of a preacher, and shall perish in their
ignorance. And again: Let good princes not only not spoil the ministry
themselves, or suffer it to be robbed of others: but liberally according to the
commandment of our Savior Christ, see it maintained and provided for through
their Kingdoms: nor suffer that which was once given to this end, to be
prodigally spent and wasted, in aulicos luxus atque delicias; nor bestowed
upon Noblemens servant, nor other innumerable sorts of so vng^dly and
intolerable abuses, by sacrilege and the church robbery etc. M. Cartwright
also, in his last book very well allowing of the former man's judgment, and
utterly misliking of such greedy cormorants (for so he terms them) as gape
after the pray, (at large before mentioned) writes in this sort. Our meaning
is not, that these goods should be turned from the possession of the Church,
to the filling of the bottomless sackes of their greedy appetites, which yawne
after this pray, and would thereby to their perpetual shame purchase themselves
a field of blood. There was a book published, Supplicat. of the comminalty.
in the parliament time 1585. entitled, A lamentable complaint of the
Cominaltie. Wherein the authors have at large handled this matter. Know ye not
(say they) That the unjust shall not inherit the kingdom of God* What greater
injustice then to defraude God of his glory, the ministers of their right etc.
How can we say that we love Christ? No not so much as Antichrist loves the
Devil. For Antichrist is bountiful to maintain his service; if the like
liberality were used amongst us, without all doubt a great number would be
stayed from passing the Seas to Room or Rhemes to become Jesuits. We read
Leuit. 27. That nothing separate from common use may be sold etc. because it
was holy unto the Lord. The which Law is not ceremonial but judicial: ibidem.
the equity thereof endures to the Church for ever, and the violation of the
same law, has been horriblye punished in former days; as appears by the
examples of Achan, Nabuchadnezar, Balthazar, Ananias, and Saphira etc. And the
like justice no man can escape either in this world, or in the world to come,
that commits the like offense. Upon that place of Mal. where it is said:
That the spoiling of the Priests was the spoiling of god: Thus also they
write. ibidem
Has not the whole nation of England spoiled the Lord in like manner, and
rather more? Surely this is written for our learning, that we might know that
things consecrated to God for the service of his church belong unto him for
ever.

A number more, of such speeches; I could allege out of their writings. But
these may serve to let you know, that whatsoever in times past, any of their
sort did seem to yealde unto for a time, touching the alienation of
Church-liuings: yet this was always their purpose, to get them again into
their own hands in the end. It had been a happy matter for the Church, if
this lesson had been ever observed: Thou shall not do evil, that good may come
of it. Things had not the^ grown to such extremities: as they are brought unto
in many places. When the Sea makes a breach, it is hardly stopped: and a door
once opened to such impiety; will be hardly shut again. And yet (you see)
they do what they can to shut it, now that they perceive the very great
falsehood, which they find in their own fellowship. Certain hypocritical
Brethren of the Laytie, have clapped them (as it seems) upon the shoulders,
followed their sermons, set the^ at the upper end of their tables, and sought
by all their strength to procure them credit and favor with the people: not
that they cared either for them, or for Religion, or for Christ himself: but
hopinge that by the violent course, which they saw these men run into, the
Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy; would be growe^ in short time to be so
odious: as it would be a very small matter, to disposses the^ of all their
livings, whereof some portion might come to their shares. Which manner of
policy now (you may perceive) these brethren have espied, and therefore they
spare not (as you have hard) to set forth such hipocrits in their plainest
colors, very lively and (in their opinion) truly.

God of his infinite mercy multiply her M. days, that she may reign many
and many years still over us. If it had not been, for her most princely and
most religious care of the Church, the children of Edom, had long before this
time greatly indaungered it. But this I will say unto the^: that if ever they
obtain their desires (which I know they shall never do in her highness time) they
shall not possess a penny worth of the church-goods, which (I am persuaded)
will not prove unto them, to be like the gold of Tholossa, whereof none had
part, that ever prospered afterward. I could show some reasons of this my
persuasion, but I am a man not very grateful to that sort of reformers. I will
therefore spare that pains, and the rather, because their own masters hau^
dealt plainly enough with them already. This only I will add, committing
it to their discretions, to be considered off at their leasures. There was
never any nation so barbarous, but it thought there was a God. Again, there
was never any nation that thought there was a God, but it likewise acknoledged,
that the same God had his priests to teach the people his will. Again there
were never as yet (to my knowledge) any men in the world, but believing there
was a God, and acknowledging his Priests, they have always either in truth,
or at the least in show, depe^ded upon their priests instructions, as touching
the will and service of God. Which points being true, I would gladly know, of
any Sacrilegious Disciplinarian, what sort of Priests they are, whose advise
he follows. Some he must needs follow, except he will profess himself to be
in the number of those, that say in their hearts there is no God. Does he follow
the Priests of the heathen? why, they ever thought that it was unlawful for
any man to spoil his God. Does he follow the Popish Priests? There are no men
(surely) that cry out more earnestly against Sacrilege. Does he follow the
council of any Priests which have embraced the Gospel* No Priest that
fears God will teach him so. Some Priests in this latter age have been
mistaken. But if any did ever teach so, he may perceive, by that which I have
said, that they have repented them of it.

For now they tell all, who will be their scholars, that they may not
endeavor to alienate the church-liuinges from the ministry. Or if they will
needs, under pretense of zeal and show of religion, seek to devour
Christ's patrimony; then they do vtterfly disclaim and renounce them, from
being of their Disciples any longer.

Then Zuickius assures them: that they are but hypocritical christians.
Calvin compares them, (be they the Magistrates of Geneua, or of any other
country) to cruel tyraunts, and says, they are the Popes successors in theft
and robbery. Beza is resolute, that God will be revenged of such persons, and
tells the^, they are new thieves, that have entered in place of the old
thieves. Viretus makes them wors then friars and monks: and resembles them to
white devils. Trauers says in effect, that they are christ's mortal enemies,
and would crucify him again, for his coat, if they might lay their hands on
him. Cartwright calls them cormorants, and likeneth them to Judas the
Traitor: certifying them, that in spoiling of the Church, they purchase to
themselves a field of blood. The whole comminaltie of England, complains and
cries against the^: that they hate Christ, that they defraud God of his
glory, that they are (all the sort of them) no better then Achan,
Nabuchadnezar, Baltasar, Ananias or Saphira: that the punishment which did
light upon these church robbers, shall light upon them, either in this life,
or in the world to come: and that they are to be reckoned amongst those unjust
persons, that shall never enter into the kingdom of heaven.

So as this is the point, which (as I said) I do commit unto the inward
cogitations of all profane Church-robbers, vz. to think with themselves, what
God they serve, and what Priests they are, that teach them such lewd doctrine:
or if none teach them so, whether in taking so execrable a course of their own
heads, they condemn not themselves in their own consciences. There is here no
refuge for any such persons, that I know of, or any reply to be made
against the premises. Except they will say that Barrowes God is their God,
that Greenwood is their Priest, and that they are all of them, devoted to
Greenwood and Barrow. Greenwood is but a simple fellow, Barrow is the man. And
will sacrilegious persons become Barrowists* I easily believe it. Like will to
like. When Barrow by roisting and gaming had wasted himself, and was ^unne so
far into many a man's debt, that he durst not show his head abroad: he bent his
wits another way to mischief, and is now become a Iulianist, devising by all
the means he can possibly imagine, his hypocrisy, railing, lying, and all
manner of falsehood, even as Julian the Apostata did: how all the preferments,
which yet remain for learning, Benefices, Tithes, Glebela^d, Cathedral
Churches, Bishops livings, Colleges, Universities and all, might be utterly
spoiled and made a pray for Bancrouts, Cormorants and such like Atheists. Well
to conclude, come the spoil of the church hereafter, when for our sins it
shall, many mischiefs and great confusion will follow it. The Church-liuings,
will serve but a few men's turns. The particular parishes in England may
whistle after their parts of that pray: and so may our new maisterships
Eldership. There are examples in the world, where all the Church-liuings are
consumed by a few: and the parishes stand burdened as they were before. Mary if
they should be then so ouerburdened with so many new paime^ts, as I spoke of
in the last chapter, they would never be able to endure it. And therefore it is
very high time, that our zealous Disciplinarians, should inueigh against
Church-robbers, and that the common people should likewise remember the points
of Sacrilege and sacrilegious persons, which they have published to the world
in their printed Supplication, against all the new Iulianistes and Atheists
mentioned.

CHAP. XXII. They take from Christian Princes, and ascribe to their pretended
regiment, the supreme and immediate authority under Christ in causes
Ecclesiastical.
IN the beginning of the reformation of Religion in Germany, the learned men
there, (opposing themselves very mightily against the Popes usurped
jurisdiction:) did very learnedly and soundly show and prove to their
adversaries, the sovereign authority of Christian Kings and Princes, in
causes Ecclesiastical, within their own dominions and countries. Which
authority (upon the banishment of the Pope) as well there as after also in
England, was both there and here united by diverse laws, unto the interest of
their Crowns, and to the lawful right of civil regiment. This doctrine since
that time, has been so very thoroughly maintained, by sundry notable men, as
Brentius against Asoto: Bishop Horn against Fecknam: Bishop Iuell against
Harding and many other learned men, against such other Papists as have taken
upon them to impugn it: that I am persuaded, had it not been that new
adversaries did rise and opposed themselves in the matter, the Papists before
this time had been utterly subdued.

For either upon the attempt in Geneua, for the erecting of the Consistorian
government (which cannot endure any superior authority over it in causes
Ecclesiastical) when Calvin and Viretus, were banished the City: or else
upon their restitution, and after they had prevailed in their said attempt,
the Ministers there, whether in revenge of their banishment, or least their
Magistrates should at any time to come, give ear to the aforesaid Doctrine, I
will not say: but upon some such occasion, they did presently thrust
themselves into this question. and that with such spiteful railing and
bitterness, as though they had conspired with the Pope and his Proctors, against
al other reformed churches, that (rejecting their pretended Discipline or new
Papacy indeed) had submitted themselves unto the said lawful authority of
Christian Princes in causes Ecclesiastical. And hereof it came (to speak the
truth plainly) that Calvin could not abide, that King Henrye the eight
should be termed, the head, or supreme governor in Earth of the Churches of
God within his Dominions. And writing to one Myconius, how certain men in
Geneua persuaded the Magistrates there, Epist. 54.
Ne potestate, quam illis Deus contulisset, se abdicaerent, that they would
not deprive themselves of that authority, which God had given them: he
terms them (according to the Consistorian language) profane spirits and
mad men: whom (says he) if we (speaking of himself and his fellows) shall
join together to encounter, and with a valiant and invincible zeal fight for
that holy authority, (vz. Co^sistorian etc) the Lord with the breath of his
mouth will destroy.

Epist. 47.
The said Myconius in like sort reports to Calvin from Basil: how some in
those borders did write to the like purpose in the behalf of Christian
Magistrates: alleging the examples of Moises, David, and other godly Kings,
which (says he in effect) is to make them Popes: and then adds: quid si
laici huiusmodi argumentis fuerint persuasi? what if lay men shall be persuaded
by such arguments? Indeed, that will cut the throat of all your
sovereignty. But of all others that have opposed themselves to Christian
Princes in this matter: (besides Martin-Marre-Prelate and some such like
companions amongst us) Viretus for railing, scoffing and biting, passes and
excels. Those that stand in defense of the Magistrates authority, he
resembles to white Devils: 3. Dialogue of while D^uels. G. 7,
and says, They are false Christians, though they cover themselves with the
cloak of the Gospel, and the reformation of the same. And again: The
Ministers, that have forsaken the Romish Church, in seeking to get the
Magistrates and peoples favor against the Pope, Priests, and Monks, have so
despised the state of Priestood, I 3.
and Ministry of the Church: and so magnified the state of the Magistrate,
that they now feel the fruict thereof: he means that the goods of the Church
are thereby gone and wasted.

Further says he: I 4.
they thought it a goodby reformation in the Church, to abolishe all the
Canons and decrees, with the good Statutes, which the ancient Fathers and
Doctors had ordained, to maintain good Discipline in the Church. They have
put all into the Magistrates hands, and have made them masters of the Church:
which (he terms) to be nothing else but the changing of the Popedom: the
taking away of both swords from the Pope, and giving them to Princes: the
euerthrowing of a spiritual Pope, and setting up a temporal Pope: which
under another color, will all come to one end. I 4.
Nay he takes upon him to prove: that these Temporal Popes, K 2.
(as he terms them) are more to be feared (if they take root) and will be
worse the^ the Spiritual Popes: K 3.
and that so the old Popish ^yr (...) is not taken away, but only changed
and disguised. And his reasons are. First, that the old Pope had not the
Temporal sword in his own hand to punish with death, but was feign to pray
aid of the secular power, which the ne^e Pope's need not to do. Secondly,
that the old Popes had some regard in their dealinges, of Councelles,
Synodes, and aunciente Canons etc. but the new Popes will do what they list,
without any Ecclesiastical order, be it right or wrong. Thirdlye, because it
chances often, that these new^ Popes have neither learning nor knowledge: and
yet these shall be they that shall command Ministers and Preachers what they
list, on pain of their sword and ministry, and shall appoint them laws
touching their estate and ministry, and likewise to the whole Church.

Give him also the hearing a little further I pray you, Who so uses such
means to reform the fault of the Pope: K ^.
does not reform the Church, but deforme is more then it was before, etc. This
I dare say: that I see already in some places, that, under title of reformation
by the Gospel, some christian Princes have in ten or twenty years usurped
more tyranny, over the Churches in their Dominions, then ever the Pope and his
adherentes did in six hundred years. And lastly: If there be any Magistrates
in these days, which under the title of authority and power that God has
given them, K ^.
etc. will make the Ministers of the Church subject unto them, as the Pope has
made them subject to him, and his, etc. the same do verily set up a new Pope,
changing only his coat and mask.

And thus far Viretus in his third Dialogue of white Devils: which was not
written (I fear) by the instinct of any good spirit: nor without some evil
direction, translated into English of purpose to seed the seditious fire, that
our turbulent Copper-smiths, (following this D^sciplinarie tract,) have kindled
already amongst us. I have omitted his earnestnes in the behalf of his own
and Caluins Discipline: that the authority (thus denied to Princes) might be
yielded to them, and their followers: and that all men (both Princes and
others) would be content to submit their necks under that yoke. Which were
to make Princes (says Erastus truly) quasi carni^ices: Farrago p. 36.
as it were the executioners only of their pleasures, quemadm^dun^ in Papatu
factum videmus, as we see it practiced in the Papacy* and in truth is nothing
else, but (that I may use their phrases) to banish one Pope, and admit of
thousands: or to deliver their Scepters from the tyranny of the old Pope, and
to subject them to the tyranny of these new Popes, T.C. Beza. Vrsious. De iure
regn^ apud Scot.
even to excommunication as Cartwright with his English crew do affirm) and
so consequently to deprivation or death, as Buchanan the Scottishe Consistorian
teaches.

My purpose is only in this place, to make it known: from whence our
brotherhood, have furnished themselves, with their inuectiues against the
authority of Princes in causes ecclesiastical: and that whatsoever they
pretend in words, yet they are of the same mind; that Viretus is, if they
durst so plainly utter it. Or if they be not, let them confess in print, that
the premises cited (out of his said dialogue) are false: and then for that
point, let them be credited. But that (I am persuaded) they will never do. I
am sure if they should: that besides their opposition with Geneua, they should
also recant their own assertions: which directly exclude the civil
magistrates from dealing in ecclesiastical causes. As for example: The Adm. ^
whole government of the Church is to be committed to Ministers, Elders, and
Deacons. The These. mar. 12
church is now to the worlds end to have no other offices in it, but of
pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons. They Them: cap: 6.
which are no Elders of the Church have nothing to do in the government of the
same. They divide T.C. Discip. eecl: and all the rest.
the Church wherein any Magistrate King or Emperor is a member, into those
which are to govern, vz. Pastors, Doctors, and Elders: and into such as are to
obey, vz. magistrates of all sorts, and the people.

Indeed Beza, will have the civil magistrate, one of the Church Officers.
Cons: cap: 5.
But Cartwright, will not consent for his part, Art. 23.
to yeald them so much. For (says he) as Pastors cannot be officers of the
common wealth; Lib. 2. pa. 420.
no more can the magistrate be called properlye a church officer. And in
truth, what Beza grants: it is in effect nothing, saving for a show, and to
serve their own turns (forsooth) vt tranquillitatem ecclesiae procurent ^t
tueantur, Beza. de presb Fol. 37. and 43.
Their office is to procure and defend the peace of the Church: whereas else
where he agrees with Viretus, ye may be sure: and in his Book against
Erastus peremptorily affirms: That Princes have no more to do with matters
of the Church, then Ministers have with the affairs of the common wealth.
Which by their doctrine generally is none at all. But said I, he agrees
with Viretus* I might say rather with Cardinal Allen, and Saunders: if he be
the author of the Book entitled, Vindicie contra Tyrannos: as it was
reported. For there he says that if any Prince shall challenge to himself
both Tributes (that is, page 18.
authority as well in Ecclesiastical causes as civil: as by the circumstances
of the place it is evident) he does, as if he would (like the old Giaunts)
scale heaven, and surprise it, and is guilty of treason: and does thereby
forfeite his fee, that he holds no less than a subject or vassal shall,
that usurps the kings royaltyes: and in this respect such kings are very
often deprived thereof, much more iustlye, then a vassal or subject may be:
insomuch as there is some proportion of comparison betwixt a vassal or
subject, and his Lord: but betwixt God and the king, betwixt a wretched man
and the Almighty, there can be no proportion at all.

Furthermore, Cartwright and some others with him do affirm, T.C. lib. 2. page
411.etc.
that Kings and princes do hold their kingdoms and dominions, Def. of
ecclesi. diset 167.
under Christ, as he is the son of God only, before all worlds coequall
with the father: I.B. de policiu. et eccl. page a 63. ad 82
and not as he is mediator, the head and governor of the Church. Whereupon
they do first build; that all Kings (as well heathen as Christian) receiving
but one commission and equal authority immediately from God; have no more to
do with the Church, the one sort then the other. as being in no respect
deputed for Church officers, under Christ; otherwise then if they be good
Kings, to maintain and defend it. And secondlye, that as God has appointed
all Kings, and Civil Magistrates his immediate Lieutenants for the government
of the world in temporal causes: so Christ, as he is mediator, and governor
of his Church, has his immediate officers to rule in the Church under him; and
those they say are no other, then Pastors, Doctors, and Elders, to whom they
ascribe as large authority in causes Ecclesiastical.

And all this (as I take it) they have learned of the Papists. For whereas
master Harding says, that the office of a King in it self is all one, every
where: not only amongst the Christian Princes, but also among the Heathen;
and thereuppon concludes; that a christian Prince, has no more to do in the
deciding of church matters; or in making ceremonies and orders for the Church,
then a Heathen: Cartwright, allows of his judgment, Lib. 3. page 162. 163:
and does expressly affirm: that he himself is of the same opinion, Lib. 2.
page 147.
professing his mislike of those, who teach another right of a Christian and of
a profane magistrate. Whereat Trauerse his scholar aymeth in like sort: when
he says in effect: that heathen princes being converted to the faith, Disc.
of eccle. disc. page 148. 174.
receive no further increase of their power, whereby they may deal in causes
ecclesiastical, then they had before. And lastly, it is no less agreeable
unto their second assertion: that whereas the Papists say, the Pope with his
Cardinals and Bishops are a true representation of the Catholic Church of
Christ, under whom the Pope (being Peter's supposed Successor) is the
ministerial and immediate chief governor of it here upon earth: now
Cartwright and others do affirm; that every particular parish having such an
Eldershippe in it (as they desire,) is a liuelye pattern and representation of
the whole and catholic Church of Christ: T.C. lib. 1. page 147.
under whom (say they) their Pastors, Doctors, and Elders, are the
ministerial and immediate governors by right, of every such Catholic
Parish Church upon earth. And thus, (if I be not deceived,) that playnelye
appears, which was in the beginning of this Chapter propounded, vz. that for
all their protestations, they derogate from Christian Princes, and arrogate to
their Elderships, the supreme and immediate authority under Christ, in causes
ecclesiastical.

CHAP. XXIII. In the oppugning of Princes authority in causes Ecclesiastical,
they join with the Papists.
THere is nothing will lightlye anger our pretended Brotherhood more, then if
ti be told them, that they deny in effect (with the common adversaries,) her
Maisties lawefull style and prerogative Royal, in causes ecclesiastical. O^
say they, we do not: we are slaundered: we yealde unto her Highness as much
authority, as any King may lawfully challenge: we abridge her of nothing
that the word of God allows her, and many other such ambiguous protestations
they use to make, in this behalf. But they plav the deceitful sophisters:
whom the Lord abhors. For these are some of their grounds. A man would
think, that they had taken them out of Hosius. The T.C. lib. 2. pa. 48.
Christian sovereign, ought not to be called the head under Christ, of the
particular and visible churches within his dominions. No T.C. lib. 2. pa. 157.
167.
civil magistrate has prehemine^ce (by ordinary authority) to determine of
church-causes. No T.C. lib. 2. pa. 165.154.
civil magistrate, in Councels or assemblies for church matters, can either be
chief moderator, ouer-ruler, judge, or determiner. No Admon. 2.
civil magistrate has such authority, as that without his consent, it should
not be lavvfull for ecclesiastical persons, to make any church order or
ceremony. No Dis. Ec. f. 88
civil magistrate ought to receive, either tenths or first fruits of any
ecclesiastical persons. The T.C. lib. 3. pa. 154.
judgment of churchmatters pertains to God: they Li. 3. p. 153.
ought ordinarily to be handled by the church officers: the T.C. lib 3. pa. 154.
principallitie or direction of the judgment of them, is by Gods ordinance
pertaining to the ministry of the Church. As for the T.C. lib. 1. pa. 192.
making of orders and ceremonies in the church, they do (when there is a
constituted and ordered church) pertain unto the ministers of the church, and
to the ecclesiastical governors: and that as they meddle not with the making
of civil laws, and laws for the commonwealth, so the civil magistrate
has not to ordain ceremonies pertaining to the church. The T.C. lib. 1. pa.
193.
ministers are to determine of controversies as they arise, and to make or
abolish needful or hurtful ceremonies. Hereunto may be added that which is
before observed: how he ascribes the same right in church causes, T.C. lib. 3.
pa. 162. 163.
to an infidel or profane magistrate, that he does to any Christian princes:
and of their mutual agreement with the Pope himself, in the manner of both
their excluding of Christian magistrates, from having any thing to do, as under
Christ, in his Church.

Hitherto then concerning all these puritane-popish assertious (so much
derogating from the lawful authority of Christian princes.) There is but only
this difference betwixt them and the rankest Jesuits in Europe, that what the
one sort, ascribe to the Pope and his shauelings: the other do challenge to
themselves and their Aldermen. Upon which occasion Cartwright, T.C. lib. 1. p.
193.
finding himself with his fellows ranged, to walk step by step with such a
crew, takes upon him, T.C. lib. 3. pa. 167.
like some dawber or bricklaier, to make a high wall (as he terms it)
betwixt the Papists, and them in this point. But God knows, it is a simple
one, and so thin, that you may easily look through it, and discern them
marching both together. First (says he) the Papists exempt their priests from
the punishment of the civil magistrate, T.C. p. 193.
which we do not. It is reason in deed, you should not. But if you do not,
what do these things mean? The author of the second admonition desires, that
he and his companions may be delivered by act of Parliament, from the authority
of the civil magistrates, Admon. 2. p. 61.
as Justices, and others, and from their inditings and finings. Furthermore
where Cartwright says, that the authority of christian Princes comes
immediately from God, Lib. 2. p.
and not from Christ as he is mediator: and that the authority of the svvord
is the same ordinance of God, as well in heathen princes, as in Christians:
does it not follow, that in his judgment Christian princes have no authority
over any of their subjects, but only as they are men, and not as they are
either Christians or priests? If you think it does not, then what T.C.
wants, I.B. p. 82.
I.B. does supply, and that in proper terms, as if it please you to peruse
the place, it will appear unto you. Besides, there goes a letter from hand to
hand, written by certain gentlemen of Suffolk, to the Lords of her majesty's
council, wherein there is great complaint made in the behalf of certain of
the brotherhood, as a matter fit to be reformed: that being ministers they had
at their assizes been presented, brought to the bar, endicted, arraigned, and
condemned. Which dealing they term to be very hard, and tending to the utter
discredit of the whole ministry, and profession of truth. So that of all
likelihood (for all Cartvvrights saying) both he and his fellows, could be
well contented to be exempted from the civil magistrates.

But let us hear the papists upon this point, or first part of Cartvvrights
wall, and peradventure you shall find them as forward for their subjection
herein, as he himself is, or at the least as small a difference betwixt them,
as ever you saw, though it were between two twi^nes Good Harding against the
Apo. 306.307
kings may put bishops and priests in mind of their duties, and bridle both
their riot and arrogancy. The Hard. ibid. 303.
prince, by the word of God, may make laws for the observation of both
tables, and punish the trangressors. I do here presently offer my self,
Fecknam to B. Horn.
to receive a corporal ^ath upon the Evangelists, that I do utterly think,
and am persuaded in my conscience, that the Queens highness is the only
supreme governor of this realm, and of all other her highness dominions and
countries, etc. And further, I shall presently swear, that her highness has
under God, the sovereignty and rule over all manner of persons, borne within
these her highness realms, of what estate ecclestasticall or temporal soever
they be. Saunders de vis. Mona. li. 2. cap. 3.
Fatemur, person as Episcoparu^ qui in toto orb fuerunt, Romano imperatori
subiectos fuisse: We confess, that the persons of all the Bishops in the
world, were subject to the Roman emperor. Rex praeest hominibus
Christianis, verum non quia sunt Christiani, sed quia sunt homines, and quoniam
ipsi episcopi sunt homines, episcopis etiam ea ex part rex praeesset; The king
rules christians, not as they are christians, but as they are men, and because
bishops are men, the king, in that respect, has authority over them. Harding
also confesses, that if the causes be civil and temporal, (and all other
causes our reformers do tie to their Elderships) Bishops may be conuented
before civil authority. Reioynder fol. 379.
And it appears amongst all the learned Papists, Pet. Mart. de magi. sect. 23.
that the cheese prerogative they have had in this point, Hard. so. 229.
has proceeded from the mere favor and good will of Christian Princes, Def.
of the Apol. 664.
the rather to cover and keep from the people such faults in the Clergy, as
might breed their contempt. Hitherto then, this wall rises up but easily,
especially if I should add in this place, the brethren of Scotland, their
divinity for this matter, when they (not the Papists) gave the king and state
occasion to make it (by act of Parliament 1584) treason, Acts of par-lement. ca.
2.
for any man to refuse to answer before the king, though it were concerning any
matter which was ecclesiastical.

Now concerning the second part of Cartvvrights wall, T. C. 2.2. p. 164. lin.
29.
it is this: The Papists (says he) will have the Prince to execute
whatsoever they conclude, be it good or bad: we say that if there be no
lavvfull ministry (as in time of necessity David did eat the show bread,
which was otherwise lavvfull for the priests only to eat of,) that then the
Prince ought to set order: and that when there is a lavvfull ministry, if it
shall agree of any unlawful thing, the Prince ought to stay it. Surely you
are very proper and right liberal sayers. Does not your admonisher affirm,
that if your platform were once on foot, all men must stand unto the
determinations of your maiesticall church officers, (that I may use master
VVakes term) except it should happen in some matter of faith, they should
make decrees against the word of God? And (I pray you) if any such thing
should happen, how could the king reform it, or (as you say) stay it? He
judges their said orders to be erroneous, and perceaueth the mischiefs that
do depend upon them: but how shall he redress and prevent them? Shall he
compel the authors of them to assemble themselves together again, and to
retract and condemn all such their decrees? They are of that humor (as
experience has told us) that it is unlikely they will be compelled to any
thing. No, it were too great a disgrace for them to yield in any thing, that
once they have broached, were it good or bad, but especially when it is decreed
in any of their worshipful meetings. And besides, if the king should press
them too far in such a matter, he might find them (peradventure) but very
ticklish subjects.

Cartwright, to shuffle up some blundering answer to these points, Lib. 3. p.
167.
says: That if in such a case the church ministers should show themselves
obstinate, and would not be advised by the Prince, they should thereby prove
themselves to be an unlawful ministry, and that upon such an occasion the
Prince might remove the^. Remouethe^? How? By any ordinary authority, which
you do allow to the christian magistrates in causes ecclesiastical? But you
have told us before your mind herein. In effect, that it must be done by an
extraordinary authority, even by the same right that David did eat of the
shewbread, which (were it not in such a case of necessity) none but the
Priests might in any wise eat of. For otherwise (as it is before mentioned)
where such a platform is in execution, as they seek for, the Prince has not
any thing to do (by their doctrine, God knows) either with placing or
displacing of church ministers.

Or, if Cartwright will say that I wrest his words to the worst construction,
and that he means plainly as purposing thereby to confirm (for his part)
her majesty's ordinary and supreme authority in those manner of causes: I am
content he make the best of his own words that he can, whether he meant
ordinary, or extraordinary authority, so that when he has done, he will
stand unto it. But let him say, what he is able, yet he has a woolfe by the
ears, and shall never be able so to shift his hands, but that it will follow,
that both he, and all the pastors, doctors, and elders, that are combined with
him, are by his words both obstinate and unlawful ministers, except he shall
withdraw this part of his wall, as being to weak to make such a separation
from the papists, as he pretends.

For, notwithstanding that the present government of the church of England, is
established and confirmed by a national synod, with the general consent of
the whole land, to be a most lawful and godly form of government,
notwithstanding that her Majesty does so think of it, and has showed
herself many ways (as by her acts of parliament, her proclamatio^s, her sundry
speeches, yea by the punishing and imprisoning of some certain persons)
utterly to dislike of their pretended discipline, as being, in her princely
judgment, a mere forgerie, and vain conceit of busy and restless heads,
contrary to the word of God, and ancient practice of all the godly churches in
the world, for 1500 years: all these things I say, notwithstanding, yet they
have rayled, libelled, and raged against the said present government. They
have, and do still, neglect, as well her majesty's settled judgment, of the
unlawfulness of their decreed platform, as also her laws, her pleasure, and
many commandments, that they should desist hereafter, from that their
erroneous devise, and submit themselves quietly to the form established. Nay,
they are so far from yielding, in this point, to any authority of her
majesty; whether ordinary or extraordinary, as that they have attempted by
very unlawful and seditious means, to advance their purposes against her
highness will, and do plainly give it out, that they will not desist, they will
not hold their peace, they will have their desires, though they be driven to
undertake such means for that end, as will make their hearts to ache, who are
their cheese impugners.

Stand now to your words, master Cartwright, if you meant plainly, vz. If the
ministry shall agree of any unlawful thing, the prince ought to stay it:
and then are not all the pack of you concluded, by your said answer, to be
obstinat persons and a false ministry? If you have any refuge in the world,
it is this; that whatsoever the said national council, the learned men's
opinions that do impugn you, the laws of this realm, all the ancient
churches, and her majesty relying upon them: whatsoever they altogether do
think and judge to be lawful: you care not, or you are sorry for it, but all
that notwithstanding, you are sure, for that you have decreed amongst your
selves, vz. that you have not therein erred, and therefore they must all bear
with you, though you rest your selves upon the truth of your own decrees, and
give no place either to council, law, prince, fathers, learned men, or any
other authority whatsoever, that makes against you. And will not H.N. and
Barovv, will not al heretics and schismatics say as much? where is then the
princes authority you spoke of? For staying such kind of proceeding, what
course shall he take? These ministers (as I said) conclude upon their own
devises. The king considers of them, and finds them unlawful, but they
deny it; what shall he do? Your refuge, Cartwright, is every Heretics
refuge. If her Majesty, with all the reasons mentioned, cannot stay you and
your sect, let never any king or civil magistrate look by any authority,
which you do give unto them in causes ecclesiastical, to stay the fancies of
any such fellows. But the substance of all their devises is nothing, but
pretenses of things that are not. And agreeable thereunto is this second part
of Cartvvrights wall, (of the difference between him and the Papists) who in
effect (for ought I see) are as frank to Christian Princes, even in this
point, as either he or his fellows.

Princes Conf. Apol. par. 6. p. 317.
extraordinarily (says Harding) have laudably intermedled with Religion, as
judges and rulers of spiritual causes. Good Ibid. fo. 304.
Christian Princes ever took into their hands the careful charge or
procuration of Churches, as pertaining to their duty. Good Hard. ibid.
Kings and Princes do maintain true religion, and by the advice of their
priests (when any great defections happen) do pull down the false. And where
Cartwright does charge the Papists to constrain their Princes for the keeping
of their decrees, be they good or bad: although it be true in deed that they do
so, and that those of his own stamp likewise where they reign, are nothing
more favorable unto them, as far as their might will reach: yet as he does
in this matter prefer himself and his adherents before them, it is but a mere
cauil. For the Papists holding this ground, that their Councels and Popes, in
such their decrees and conclusions (as it pleases them to make) cannot err:
that being granted, it follows of necessity, that every Christian Prince
ought to put them in execution, and to punish those that shall oppose
themselves against them. So that whatsoever they do impose upon the Church,
they affirm it is good: even as Cartwright does his discipline, which he
would intrude upon us: both of them ioining in this point, that as well
Cartvvrights new ministry, as the popes priesthood, will be the judges of
their own decrees, whether they be good or bad: and then what leave they to
the Christian magistrate more the one sort then the other?

Surely this wall rises very slowly as yet, but peradventure the third part
will be higher the^ the other two: when you have viewed them, judge. Our
meaning is not (says Cartwright) utterly to seclude the magistrate out of our
T.C. 2.2. p. 164. and 167.
church-meetings, for often times, a simple man and (as the proverb says) the
Gardener has spoken to good purpose, etc. He may be assistant and have his
voice in such assemblies. Out of question you deal very bountifully with your
soueraign. But to help him in building this part of his wall, I will set
down, what is the uttermost that he yields to, herein; if he have not
retracted the same, as afterward it shall be considered. The T.C. 2.2. p. 157.
Prince may call a council of the ministry and T.C. ib. 161
appoint both the time and the hours for the same. The T.C. 2.2.162.167.161
civil magistrate is not utterly to be excluded from such assemblies as do meet
for the deciding of church-causes and orders: he may be there assistant and
have his voice, but he may not be either moderator there, nor determiner, nor
judge. bid. 156.
Neither may the orders or decrees there made, be said to have been done by the
Princes authority. And therefore in times past the cannons of councels, were
not called the Emperors, but the Bishops decrees. bid. 161.
Princes may be assistant in councels, and ought to defend the same assembled:
if any behave themselves there tumultuously or otherwise disorderly, the
Prince may punish him. The T.C. 2.2. 157.
Prince ought to confirm the decrees of such councels: to T.C. 12.193.
see the decrees executed: and T.C. 2.2. p. 156.
to punish the contemners of them. Thus hereof Cartwright, and now come in the
papists.

It Saunders. lib. 2. c. 3.
was lavvfull in times past for emperors to call councels, to Ibid.
appoint both time and place for the same. And master Confut. Apol. par. 6.
309.
Harding confesses, that princes may do so still by the advice of the clergy.
Princes Hard. fol. 217. fol. 314.
and their ambassadors, according to their estates, have most honorable seats
in all councels, may sit there as assistants, give their aduises, make
exhortations to the Bishops, to be very circumspect and careful, and in the
end, may subscribe with them to the causes there decreed. But fol. 313.310.315.
they may not sit there as judges, moderators, or determiners, Hard. 317.
and therefore in their subscriptions they vvro^t not as bishops did,
definientes subscripsimus, but consentientes. Neither ard. 312
were the councels called Imperatoria, but Episcopalia. Princes He Monarch.
lib. 2. cap. 3.
may be assistant in councels. Nay (says Saunders) they may be presidents over
Bishops in councels, ad pacem and concordiam retinendam, vt nullum fieri
tumultum permittant: tumultuantem vero custodiae mancipent, and cause such
assemblies to avoid all delays. All Hard. conf. Apol. par. 6. p. 317.
Christian princes ought to confirm the decrees of general councels: to see
Saun. lib. 2. cap. 3.
the decrees executed, and to punish the contemners of them.

Compare these places with Cartvvrights words, and tell me what great
difference ye find between them. But what if Cartwright (as I said) have
retracted these points? then it must needs be confessed that the Papists do
yield more to Christian princes in causes ecclesiastical, then the puritans.

CHAP. XXIIII. Their disagreement in suppressing the authority of Princes in
church-causes, and in the advancing of their own.
IT appears in the latter end of the two and twentieth chapter, how by a fine
distinction, of reigning under Christ as he is only God, and under Christ, as
he is mediator: they first, would exclude all Christian princes from their
lawful authority in causes ecclesiastical, ascribing no more unto them, then
as if they were heathens, except it be to execute their pleasures, and to
maintain them, which they say, is the duty also of all the heathen rulers:
and secondly how by the same distinction, they lift up their own horns, as if
it were so many popes, challenging every one of them together with their
elderships, to be Christ's immediate vicars for church-causes, upon earth. In the
substance of which doctrine although they do all agree, yet when they come to
the particular grounds, whereupon they would gladly lay their foundations of it,
there they are distracted, and do confound themselves. I mean not, to enter
here any further into this matter, then as concerning the said distinction with
the several branches thereof.

Cartwright bestows sour leaves, Lib. 2. a. p. 410. ad. p. 419.
to prove, that no civil magistrate may be called the head of the particular
church, within his dominion. And his cheifest reasons are drawn, from the parts
of the distinction mentioned. Now, when he labors so much upon this word
head, he knows that we mean thereby nothing else, but a chief authority:
and he wrangleth of purpose, that whereas his opinion is direct, that no civil
magistrate (as he is a civil magistrate) has any office in the Church, he might
dazzle the eyes of his reader, as though he could be content to maintain the
right of the crown, and did only insist upon the word head.

But to muster them together about the said distinction, Cartwright says that
our Savior Christ, Lib 2 p. 411.417.
as he is the son of God only, or as he is only the Creator and preserver
of mankind, coequall with his father, he is the governor of kingdoms and
common-vvealths, and not as he is the savior and redeemer of mankind. But the
humble motioner does tell us from Scotland, another tale: peradventure upon the
credit of the brethren there. Humble motio. so. 1.
Christ (says he) has all power and superiority above all principalities,
either in heaven or in earth: he is Lord of lords, and King of kings, and the
Prince of kings in the earth; he is Lord of all kingdoms and common-vvealths,
to dispose and rule them at his pleasure: not simply as he is the second person
in Trinity, God above all; but as he is the son of God manifested in the
flesh. Nay, he goes further, and says: that Christ has all this authority,
not only as he is both God and man, but that he has it even as he is man.

Lib. 2. p. 411.
Cartwright says: that our savior Christ in the government of kingdoms and
common-vvealths, and in the superiority which he has over kings and judges,
has no superior. But if we shall believe the said motioner: he is as directly
contrary unto him in this assertion, as he was in the former. F. 1.2.
For (says he) our savior Christ as he is King of kings, Lord of lords, and
the ruler and disposer of all kingdoms of the earth: he has received that
authority of his father, and so has it 1. Cor. 15.24. If it shall be
maruailed, that the humble motioner, peradventure some swain, in respect of
Cartwright, dare thus presume to encounter with such a Goliath, especially
having an whole army no doubt that will, and his vizgerent Trauers, that does
already assist him: he may be easily satisfied, in that Beza on the other side
(a man of far greater account in Scotland than Cartwright is in England)
has promised, and pawned his judgment, to back the motioner in these points.
For he is wholly of the motioners opinion: Pater non nisi in persona filij
manifestati in carne mundum regit. Annot. 10.5.6.22.
God the Father (says he) does not govern the world, but only in the person
of his son manifested in the flesh. And again: he allows of the Fathers
where they hold that Proprie humanae naturae respectu dicitur datum esse filio
potestatem coeli ac terrae: when it is said that power is given to the son,
of heaven and earth: it is spoken properly, in respect of his humane nature
received. The world is governed only by Christ, as he is manifested in the
flesh: therefore not only (as Cartwright says) as he is God. The government
of the world is committed to the son of God, as he is manifested in the
flesh: therefore (contrary to Cartwright) he has therein a superior. Christ
the son of God has the government of heaven and earth assigned unto him
properly in respect of his humane nature, which he has received: and therefore
not only as he is the son of God coequall with the Father, as Cartwright
affirms.

So as, whatsoever either Cartwright, Trauers, or any of their followers, shall
enforce, against the authority of christian princes, in respect vz. that they
with all the heathen governors do hold their scepters immediately under christ,
as he is God only, and not as he is their mediator: it is all but as untempered
mortar, nothing fit for the purpose, as other of their friends do judge: and
(as it seems by Beza in the place quoted) might peradventure (if it were
thoroughly followed) touch them nearer then they are aware of, as men not fully
persuaded of the most high and mighty prerogative of the person of Christ
Jesus. But let that go, I am glad to hear that christian magistrates may have
something to do under Christ, as he is their mediator. And what if it may
appear, that holding their government under him, as mediator, they may have
some authority also under him, as he is the head of the church? I know, that
would come quite came to Cartvvrights humor. Nevertheless it is reason, that
men should be heard. The humble motioner affirms: that the Lord Jesus has
the regiment and power over all principalities, F. 1.
either in heaven or earth, not simply as he is God, but as he is Christ, God
and man, and so the head of the church. Let these places of scripture,
Ephesians 1. verse. 20, 21, 22, 23. and Colossians 1. verse. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
be effectually considered, (where there is speech of the great prerogative
which Christ has in the world, as he is head of the church) and they do wholly
run that way. In so much as Calvin writing upon one of those epistles Ephesians. 1.
ver. 23. says: Calu. in. ephesians. 1. v. 23.
Nihil impedit quo minus de universally gubernatione accipias. There is no
impediment, vvby you may not understand it, of Christ's universal government.

But more fitly to this purpose Beza, where speaking of Christ as the head of
the Church, Confess ca. 5. artic. 1. and. 23. de magistrate p. 556.
and of such officers as he has appointed under him: he accounts the civil
magistrate for one, as before it has been noted. But Snecanus is resolute, and
accounts them adversaries and Anabaptists, that shall deny it: affirming,
that by rulers and governors, Romans 12. and 1. Cor. 12. (where the Apostle
speaks of the body of Christ) the civil magistrates are understood, p. 557.
as well as their Aldermen: that they are to be reckoned inter officia
ecclesiae: p. 668.
nay, inter dona ecclesiae, Ephesi. 4. though they be not there named: and,
that, it is therefore great rashness to exclude the civil authority, out of
the church, Nisihanc simul tollere velint, p. 557.
Except they mean to abolish it altogether. Indeed, I like this exception
well, and so I do also of his opinion. For me thinks, that if kings and
princes be joint commisioners under Christ the head, with their pastors,
doctors, and aldermen, assigned by the Apostle for the government of the
church, they might be well content, and reckon it no disparagement unto the
best of them, that the prince their sovereign, should bear the chiefest and
the greatest sway amongst them.

And all this makes directly against Cartwright, even as though men of
purpose should have studied to have disgraced him: which surely needs not.
For if his own writings were narrowly looked into, there is sufficient in the^,
to discipher him in his colors. Lib. 2. p. 470.
I marvel what he means when he writes, that a king was necessary for the
Israelits, to shadow out to them the kingdom of Christ. Would he leave his
scholars at liberty to reason, as the Apostle does, when they should see their
time? Christ is now come in the flesh, and being our high priest, has
performed the work of our salvation: therefore the priesthood of Aaron being
but a shadow of Christ's priesthood, ought now to cease. And even so they, when
they list: The kingdom of Christ, is now come unto us, and therefore the
having of a king being but a shadow of Christ's kingdom, ought now to cease.
Surely this comes near to Snecanus conjecture, vz. Nisiha^c simul tollere
velint. But to omit surmises, and many such things else, which I marvel at in
him, you shall find him so violent in this cause, as rather then he will
grant, that Christian magistrates may be subordinate heads, or chief
governors in church affairs under Christ their savior, within their own
dominions, he can be content to reason, as if he were a notorious Swinkfeldian,
and meant to abolish all the ministers of the word, as needless instruments
under Christ, for the building, feeding, and comforting of his church. For thus
he argues: Li^. p. 413.
that for as much as Christ is never severed from his body, nor from any part
of it, and is able, and does perform that wherefore he is called head, unto
all his Church, therefore there is no need of any subordinate head over any
particular Church, or (as he says) there can be none. As if a man should
reason thus: Christ is our savior, our priest, our prophet, and our king:
Christ is our sheapheard, our doctor, and our archbishop: Christ is never
absent from his church, nor ever will be: and he is able to perform that,
wherefore he is called, our savior, our priest, our prophet, our pastor, our
doctor, our bishop, our archbishop, our archfeeder: therefore we need no
priests, pastors, doctors, bishops, or archbishops, neither ought there to be
any such subordinate, or ministerial means allowed of, or permitted for the
said benefits, of building, teaching, and gathering of the church. The
collections (in my opinion) are both alike.

Again, by the same phrase of speech: that Christ, as mediator, is called by
him els-where, the head of every particular church, Lib. 2. p. 416.
and in that respect every particular church is termed his body. So Christ as
he is the son of God only (to grant him for a minute so much) being the head
of every particular kingdom: it may be said, that every particular kingdom is
his body. Now then, whereas he reasons thus, very gravely in his own
judgment: If the church be the body of Christ and of the civil magistrate,
Lib. 2. p. 412.
it should have two heads, which were monstrous. Why may not I in like sort
make this inference? if the commonwealth be the body of Christ, and of the
civil magistrate, it should have two heads which were monstrous: which
collection being ridiculous (by his own phrase offspeech) his said argument, is
also ridiculous. For my part certainly I do think that the word heard, as it
is yielded to christian princes, signifying nothing else (as I said) but a
chief ruler, I see no cause then, why it should be a more monstrous thing, for
the^ to be subordinat rulers of the church under christ, then to see princes
thrust down, and six or seven base persons, a malster, a brewer, a baker, a
mason, a smith, a butcher, a tinker, and such like advanced, to that, so high
an authority.

Well* as our proverb says: Be it as it be may, and that is no banning. If
Princes will be thus dallyed withal, let them for me, and they shall be the
first that will repent it. But what should they do, when they hear their
authority, so substantially impugned, by so worthy persons, with such
invincible arguments, such demonstrations, such collections, such concurrencie
in their opinions, such concord, such notable agreement together, in their
grounds, for that purpose? Indeed you will say so, when you shall see how,
(after they have foiled princes in such sort as it has been declared) they
entitle themselves, and their wise and worshipful Eldermen to their
authority. You cannot imagine men's bodies, to be faster tied together, with
the strongest rope that ever was made of sand, then their minds, and judgments
are fast lincked, and united in this matter. As now it shall partly appear,
after I have laid before you three or four of their new quircks, very
pertinent to this place: some of them have been already touched, but you
cannot hear a good thing too often.

They affirm (if I can understand them) that every well ordered parish,
Demonst. Mart. These. T.C. 1.2. p. 412.419.
having an Eldership in it, is the perfect body of Christ, and that Christ is
properly to be called as well the head of every such particular body or church,
as he is of the Catholic church. T.C. l. 2 p. 416. etc.
Against whom by the way I might oppose a chief divine of New stadium (a
Consistorian town in the Palsgraues country) who says, that as the Church is
called the body of Christ, Pezel. M. 7. par ob mel. p. 31.
it properly signifies, Solos electos, the elect only, and that all
particular churches, Ibid. p. 178.345.
as the members of the Catholic church, do make but one body of Christ:
whereof he is to be called especially the head. But I will not stand upon
these points, only I touch them that it might still appear how well they
agree together. Then to proceed. The same men likewise affirm that every one
of their mentioned well ordered parishes, is a representation, and as it were,
T.C. l. 1. p. 147
a lively portraiture of the whole or Catholic church: and that singularum
ecclesiarum idem est ius, every such parish Catholic church, Disc. eccl.
sacr. pa. 1.
has equal authority, no more one then another.

And now I draw nere to the pith of this matter. For as touching the government
of every one of these particular bodies of Christ, or of every one of these
demie catholic churches, they hold that (princes being justly dispossessed)
their pastors, doctors, and aldermen, are by right, Christ's immediate and
subordinat lieutenants, or vicars general. But now, for as much as our savior
Christ (say some of them) is a priest, a prophet, and a king, and all in
respect that he is both God and man, our only mediator and redeemer. Here
begins a new skitmish, from which of these his dignities they must derive
their interest, whether their said vicegerents are to challenge their
sovereignty, from Christ, as he is a priest, from Christ as he is a prophet,
or from Christ, as he is a king. For as the great learned clearke, that made
the book of ecclesiastical and civil policy affirms, I.B. de polit. pa. 68.
whosoever is to be called Christ's vicar, he must be so termed either in
respect of all those his three offices, or of two of them, or of one at the
least.

It has been commonly held heretofore, that Christ taking upon him the
ministry of the gospel, to preach and teach the same, did ordain his
Apostles and disciples, to join with him, in that part of his priestly office.
In regard whereof, it has also been defended, against the papists, that every
lawful minister, is as much the vicar of Christ, or his substitute, to teach
his people, as the bishop of Rome, and that they ought, all of them equally,
when they preach the word, pray for the people, or administer the sacraments,
to be received, heard and entertained, as Christ's ambassadors, Christ's
ministers, even as though Christ himself in his own person, did presently here
upon earth execute these offices. Besides, it is urged by the Counterpoizer,
Countecp. pa. 12.
and many other, that Christ having translated the Jews Sanedrim into his
church, he has appointed unto us for the Jews priests, our pastors, and for
their teaching Leuits, our doctors, etc. Whereby it follows, that if the
priests of the old law were Christ's vicars, as he was their priest: the pastors
ought so to be in the time of the gospel. But the excellent politian, I. B.
he uses the matter in such sort, as by no means the ministers of the word,
may have any tenure of their offices, under christ as he is priest. Ne ipsi
quide^ pastores erunt Christi sacerdotis vicarij, quod tamen falso sibi
persuasit papa diaboli vicarius. The pastors themselves shall not be Christ's
vicars, as he is priest, which office notvvithstanding, the pope the devils
vicar, took falsely upon him.

The pastors (he says) shall not be Christ's vicars, as he is a priest. And
the^ there is no remedy: They shall not. How shall they hold then, immediately of
him? as he is a prophet. That is it. They are his substitutes or vicars (says
he) only as he is a prophet. Ibid. pa. 74.
Did any man ever say so before? Surely not to my remembrance. Fenner. Theol.
pa. 96.
Master Fenner in his divinity, perused by master Cartwright, and allowed
of at Geneua, can find but two kinds of offices appertaining to Christ, vz. his
priesthood, and his kingly office, and therefore he makes prophecy a part of
his priesthood. It is much what, also to the same purpose (and directly
contrary to I. B.) that the divinity grounds printed at Geneua, do affirm by
the mouth of one Abraham Henric, These. Geneu. pa. 219.
where they say: Pastoru^ ministeriu^ vt olim sacerdotum, etc. The duty of
pastors, as in times past of the priests, consists in three things; teaching,
administering of the sacraments, and public prayer. So as either I.B. must be
content that ministers may be Christ's vicars, as he is a priest, or else I see
not how he will bestow them. You will say peradventure, that they may be
Christ's vice-gere^ts, as he is a king; but that (as I said) he will not endure.
If any might be Christ's vicars (says he) as he is a king, I.B. deposit. pa. 70.
the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Ministers and Doctors, might be his
vicars. At ne hi quidem, quia rex est dicendi sunt vicarij. But they neither,
are to be called Christ's vicars, as he is a king. Well, some place they must
have, there is no remedy. I dare say, you would smile, if it should so fall
out, that all our consistorian ministers, will needs be Christ's substitutes,
in that he is a king. Surely, I must tell you, it proves so.

For as touching I. B. they reckon him (I perceive) but a simple politian.
Christ's kingdom, it has been truly urged, is not of this world: and it is
plea good enough against our bishops, but it holds not, to impair the
estimation of our petit consistorian kings. A distinction will help the^ at a
pinch. Christ's kingdom is not of this world, but it ought to be in this world.
Do you not here desire to know what this kingdom is? That I may not keep you
long in suspense, it is the Geneuian Eldership, and even the very same kingdom
(says our counterpoizer) where of Christ spoke many times after his
resurrection, Counterp. pa. 10.
by the space of sortie days, as the Jesuits themseluss are compelled to
confess. See the seducer. Who compelled the Jesuits to say so? would not a man
have thought, that this place had been urged by some protestants against the
papists, for the overthrow of some especial points of popery, where upon after
much pains the Jesuits bad been driven in spite of their heads, to admit of
the interpretation mentioned. But it is clean contrary: the Jesuits do abuse
this place of purpose, in the behalf of the Antichristian and Romish form of
church regiment, and so does the Counterpoizer, following the Jesuits therein,
for the setting forth of their Geneuian papacy, or Regalitie.

I could add here a number of strange sayings (whereof you shall here anon in
some other chapters following) concerning this new presbiteriall kingdom. But
now it is more pertinent, to make the point I have in hand, more apparent unto
you. T.C. lib. 2. pa. 440.
Christ as a king, prescribed the form of ecclesiastical government, says
Cartwright, not as a priest, nor as a prophet, but as a king. With Cartwright
his scholar Dudlie Fenner, Fenner. The. lib. 4. p. 110.
does agree in this point, and sets down the first part of his kingly
administration to be about the building and continuance of the church by the
officers appointed, Bez. annot. Ioh. 18. v. 36. Ep. 83.
Ephesians. 4.11.12.13. Master Beza also he runs the same course: how Christ
being a king, the head of the church, does administer his kingdom. Per
legitime vocatos pastores, G. Sonnij. op. Tom. 1. p. 399. etc.
by pastors lavvfully called. And Sonnius in like manner affirms, that Christ
does execute his kingly office in the collectio^ of the church, by the
ministry of the word and sacraments, and by the internal government of his
spirit, and the external of the ministry. Here is indeed, very royal
preferment: for all the ministers of the word. But I marvel how the ruling
elders do hold their authority? They are neither priests nor prophets, of
likelihood then, they must be little kings. Well then, Christ is the king, the
presbiterie is his kingdom, and his immediate vicegerents they are all of
them. What? Surely, by the due course of degrees (which are acknowledged) the
pastors must be all of the^ (as it were) emperors, the doctors kings, the
elders dukes, and the deacons lords of the treasury, etc. And for the
authority of every such kingdom, it must needs fall out to be very soueraign.
For if every presbiterie (as it is before noted) be properly to be called the
body of Christ, and the true portraiture of the catholic church, and that
every one of the^, is of equal authority: now that the officers in them are
Christ's immediate vice-gere^ts within their own kingdoms, who shall control any
of their doings, or whither should a man appeal, if he found himself iniuried.

De presb. p. 124
I remember master Bezas saying, That every eldership is the tribunal seat of
Christ. Which is all one almost, with the assertion of some Romish parasits,
that the pope and Christ, have but one consistory. They tell us of
appellations from an eldership, to a classis, from a classis, to a provincial
synod, from a prouincial synod, to a national, and from a national, unto a
general council. But as the papists do make every appellation from the pope,
to be as absurd, and all one, as if the appeal were made from Christ, so must
it necessarily follow, to be as intolerable to appeal from any consistory,
it being (as it has been affirmed) the tribunal seat of Christ, and the
officers in it, Christ's immediate governors. And because it is pretended, that
the regiment they speak of, is in the best perfection at Geneua, I would
gladly know whither a man might appeal (upon occasion) from that eldership
there. The churches of Bern, or Zuricke, have no more to do with the church of
Geneua (they will say) then Geneua has to do with them, or an eldership in
Scotland, with another of the low countries. But I have tarried too long upon
this matter, in collecting upon their contrary assertions. Therefore to
conclude, I would wish all christian and godly magistrates, that have as yet in
their hands, the lawful authority in church-causes, which belongs unto them
by the word of God, to keep it still, until at the least these disciplinarie
deuisers, be fully resolved, whether we must account the^ priest, prophets, or
kings: priests, if they be Christ's substitutes, as he is a priest: prophets, if
they be Christ's substitutes, as he is a prophet: and kings by the same
propriety of speech: if they be Christ's immediate substitutes, as he is a king.
And so I will go to the next chapter, whereby you shall perceive more
particularly, that (call them as ye list) they challenge authority, like
princes, or rather popes, to deal in many matters.

CAP. XXV. In what causes more particularly, their elderships are to deal, as
they pretend.
YOu have heard before, Cap. 15.16.17.
of certain of the several and joint offices of their counterfeit
church-aldermen: and likewise in the chapter, how they challenge to themselves,
in their elderships, the whole government in all church-causes. Now for that it
might be doubted how far these words, Church causes should extend: they have
taken great pains to clear their meaning in that behalf, and so have used
the matter (to my understanding) as that they have left out no one cause, of
what nature soever, but that either directly, or indirectly, by hook or
crook, they have brought it under their lee, and withwithin their compass.
Read their sayings, and then judge as you see cause.

All crimes (says Knox) that by the law of God deserve death, The order of
excom. in Scotland. Ae. 2
deserve also excommunication: as vvilfull murderers, adulterers, sorcerers,
witches, coniurers, charmers, giuers of drink to destroy children, open
blasphemers, as denyers of the truth, raylors against the Sacraments, etc. And
how will they proceed in the execution of this censure, upon such manner of
sins: the same order does specify. A superintendent must direct his letters
of summons to the parish church, where the offender dwells: or if the
offender have no certain dwelling place, then to the chief town, and best
reformed church in that diocese, where the crime was committed, appointing to
the offender, a certain day and place when and vvher he shall appear before
the superintendent and his assessors, to hear that crime tried, as touching
the truth of it, and to answer for himself, why the sentence of
excommunication should not be pronounced against him.

Here are then new summons, and new citations. Here is authority challe^ged,
not only to appoint such offices, and to use such jurisdiction: but (that which
seems strange to me indeed) to try a murderer, and such like offenders, as
(touching the very facts) whether they committed them, or not. Do they impanall
a jury think you, as we do in England, for trial of the fact? or are the
elders of the consistory judges of the facts, as they be of law? That is not
expressed. But what if the party upon his summons appear not? Ibid.
That is no great matter. Inquisition being taken of the crime, he is the next
Sunday to be excommunicated: not for his contempt in not appearing, but for the
very fact it self, as in their form of excommunication in such cases, it is
expressed. For the inquisition of the crime taken in his wilful absence, shall
be a conviction for his soul: let his body escape the temporal magistrates
hands as it may.

This is round dealing. A man is condemned of murder, and never heard: and for
sitting, but of one citation in a matter of life and death, out goes their
excommunication? Call they this, proceeding after the new discipline? But to
follow this case to the end. It happens, that this murderer is afterward
pardoned by the magistrate, but yet though he profess repentance, he may not
be received till after forty days of trial, and until he has satisfied
the kindred and friends of the man that was slain. You may say, what if they
will not be satisfied? That I warrant you is provided for. Ibid.
Then ought the church to put moderation to the unreasonable, in case the
civil magistrate has not so done before. It is very well, what the king will
not, they may. Besides, when it is said, that the church ought to put such a
moderation: you must understand that except the parties do agree to be so put,
out flies again (as I suppose) their foresaid slipperie censure.

Again, Ibid. A. 6.7.
for all other offenses that fall not under the civil svvord, and yet are
slanderous and offensive to the church, as fornication, drunkenness used,
swearing, curssed speaking, chiding, fighting, bravvling, and common contempt
of the order of the church, breaking of the sabbath, vva^ton and vain words,
uncomely gestures, negligence in hearing of preaching, or obtaining from the
Lords table, when it is publicly ministered, suspicion of avarice or of pride,
superfluity or riotousnesse in cheer or raiment, etc. All these likewise do
come by certain degrees, within the compass of their censures: all according
to the word of God, you must suppose, or else you do them wrong. Unto these may
be also further added, History of the church of Scotland.
ministers apparel, vvomens lascivious, dissolute, or too sumptuous attire,
either publicly or privately, dancing, all games that bring loss,
stage-plaies of all sorts, haunting of tauerns, or tippling houses, all
inordinat livers, and all such like matters, according to the discretion of the
eldership, cuirelinquenda sunt, whereunto they are to be left. From which
discretion, it proceeded (as I take it) that for some disorders committed in
Edinburgh, The Hist. of the church of Scotland. page 527.
about a Robin-hood, which the provost and bailifs would have stayed, the
whole multitude were holden excommunicate. But yet I have not done with these
causes. They grow upon me, more and more. And it is no reason, that our own
brotherhood of England should be pretermitted. They ( vz. the elderships) shall
suffer no lewd customs (says the admonitioner) to remain in their parishes,
Admo^. 2. pa. 46.
either games, or otherwise. You know their meaning. Maipoles, Ales, maigames,
moricedances, all must down. How does Robin-hood stick in their stomachs?
Besides, all that have lived with offense to the congregation, Adm. 2. p. 46.
although they have suffered the punishment of the law for it: yet because
they offended thereby both God and the church, they are within the limits of
the elderships, and to be censured by them. The demo^strator is also very
bountiful. The office of the church governors (says he) is to decide
controversies in doctrine and manners, Cap. 15.
so far as pertains to conscience, and the church censures. That is, if any
shall refuse their said decision, they will not (indeed) whip him or hang him,
(those are civil punishments.) But so far as the church censures will reach,
have at him. Will he run to trouble his neighbor, either to the Chancerie, to
the King's Bench, or common pleas, and may have both conscience and justice of
his eldership at home? Such a fellovv shall pay for it. It is wisely therefore
considered of the humble motioner, where he tells the lords of her majesty's
privy counsel, pa. 75.
that the church is to censure such a party, who is apparently troublesome
and contentious, and without reasonable cause, and upon mere will and
stomach does vex and molest his brother, to trouble the country. Appara^tly
troublesome, that is, apparently to their conceits: without reasonable cause,
vz. to be approved by the^. And how can they know how reasonable the cause is,
except they examine both the fact, and be skillful also, what the law of the
land is in such a case? Must he bring his learned council to their Aldermens
bar, to prove his cause reasonable? but what should I move such a trifling
question? Well, pardon me for it, and to make you an amends, you shall hear
Cartvvrights opinion of these matters. T.C. l. 2. p. 68
It is this, vz. that every fault, that tends either to the hurt of a man's
neighbor, or to the hinderance of the glory of God, is to be examined and dealt
in by the orders of the church. This brings before their consistory of elders,
all matters of right, all pleas real and personal, and all pleas of the
crown, as I imagine.

Snecanus also says, De discip. eccles. p. 460.
Quoduis peccatum, etc. Every sin is here to be understood both against our
neigbor and against God howsoever it be committed by force or by fraud, by
words or by deeds, purposely or ignorantly, manifestly or secretly. But yet
the Demonstrator goes further. Hitherto we have heard nothing to purpose, but
only of sins committed. But he will not abate you an inch of all the sins,
which the scholemen do call sins of omission. Cap. 18.
Whatsoever is enioined (says he) as a duty to be done by every christian,
if he leave it undone, he is to be compelled by the governors of the church to
do it. It is also of a marvelous reach, that the admonitioner speaks of,
when he affirms, that by this their discipline every man may be kept within
the limits of his vocation. Peradventure it will be a harder matter then they
look for, to be able to discern of the limits of every man's calling. But if
they will needs take so much upon them, because they have once said it; then if
any man, be he prince or subject, exceed the limits of his calling, where their
elderships are established: it tends surely to their condemnation, that may
reform him, and do it not.

But it may be, that some will say, we have heard of Knox, of Danaeus, of the
Demo^strator, of the admonitioners of Snecanus, of Cartwright, and we know not
whom: but what says Beza of this matter? we would be glad to hear him. I
cannot blame you, for you shall be sure that he will come in with one trick or
other beyond his fellows. You have heard all the sins (almost) that are
reckoned up already, as falling within the bounds of the elderships
jurisdiction. But if we shall believe Beza, and speak indeed properly, as he
would have us: no sins (as they are sins) do belong to the elderships to be
dealt in, De excom. p. 46.49.
but as they are scandala, that is, as they offend the godly consciences of
Gods children. For example: I hear a man blaspheme God, or break any other
commandment of the first table; or I hear or see him commit some sin
against the second table, vz against his neighbor, as against my self by doing
me some injury, either in word or deed, either in my goods, or in my name, now
in this, there are offered me 2 kinds of injuries, the first and the cheifest is
the grief of conscience, that I conceive in respect, that such a man has
broken Gods law, and thereby not only wounded my heart, but given an ill example,
which may peradventure corrupt others. The second injury is, by his hurting me
in my goods or fame. Now forsooth in this second respect, I may go to the
civil magistrate, but may not come to the eldership, by any degrees, but only
in the first respect, vz. because my neighbor in hurting of me has violated
the law of god, and so wounded my conscience. Neither must I complain to the
eldership, with any mind either to have him punished, or to have my injuries
reco^pensed, but only to bring him to repentance, and to seek the good of his
soul. By this devise you may perceive that although he seem in words to
dissent from the rest that have written more bluntly, yet in effect he agrees
with the^, or rather has increased their pretended jurisdiction. For by this
means, they may not only take upon the^ to enter into every action, but they
would bind every particular man, whosoever, to become an informer to their
court. Besides, whereas he says, that in the said second respect, we may go to
the civil magistrate, it is but a mist that he casts before men's eyes. For be
it in a matter of words, that I pretend my self to be grieved, and so
complain to their eldership: Beza and all the rest do hold, that the party
cannot pass their fingers, until he have submitted and reconciled himself
unto me. And in such a matter who will desire more? For if he look for damages
in money, he will be held cruel. And then what is left for the civil
magistrate? Again, my neighbor pretending that I have done him injury, either
in his lands, goods, or fame, charge me with the particulars, which being
indeed false, he says are true, whereupon my conscience being wounded, that he
should sin so horribly against God, first by lying, and then by justifying his
lie: I complain to the consistory. The matter is heard, I am cleared. And
except he submit himself both to ask God and me forgiveness, the censures
of the church proceed against him: and so that way also he is debarred from the
benefit of temporal law, in so much as he can have no color to begin suit
again, for that, wherein he has acknowledged me to have been by him
wrongfully charged. What is here then left for the civil state to deal in?
Furthermore in a matter of injury done unto me in my lands or goods: I pretend
to that court, that such a man has wounded my conscience, in breaking Gods
commandment, by such his injury offered unto me: Beza. de excom. pa. 52.
well, it may be the party will deny it, and then my proofs must be
produced. If I justify my complaint, the offender must likewise in this case
submit himself unto me, and acknowledge the injury. If he will not so do,
the censures proceed, and so he is debarred (as it is said before): if he do,
then on the other side, I must of necessity, forgive him the offense which
grieved my conscience, or else I also do come within their compass. Well, I do
therefore forgive him: and shall I nevertheless prosecute him in form of law,
for the injury done to me? Hereunto master Beza says thus: De excom. p. 57.
Vix potest condonasse iniuriam dici, qui de priuata iniuria fratrem non
contentus primum arguisse, deinde adhibitis testibus admonuisse, ad magistratus
vsque tribunal illum reluctante^ persequitur. He ca^ scarsely be said to have
forgiven an injury, who not contenting himself to have first reproved his
brother for his private injury, and to have admonished him before vvitnesses,
does notwithstanding dravv him (against his will) to the magistrates seat of
justice.

But be it as he confesses afterward, that in such a case a man may go to the
law, to omit that he shall thereby incur the high displeasure of these
Rabbis, (which he shall be sure to have sticking upon him until they can
wait him as good a turn) yet I say again, what is left to the magistrate?
The injury is confessed before. There shall need no trial of the fact, where
so many witnesses may be used, to prove his confession before, if now he should
deny it. All that the magistrate has to do, is to set down what recompense I
shall have for my said injury, and to tax my charges. If you say nay, he will
hear the cause again. Indeed I confess he had need to do so. But so both I
and the party should be doubly charged and troubled. Besides, that course
would turn to the utter discredit of the presbyteries, that their dealings,
fitting in the seat of Christ, should come to be scanned by those, that are but
humane ordinations. For so some of them by color of the Apostles words do
debase magistracy. And therefore peradventure they will think it meet, that
upon certificat from them, the magistrates should so pro^ceed to adiudge me a
recompense, and to rate mine expenses without any further adoo. Some such thing
it is, (though not in this very case) which the ministers of the low countries
have desired. Thus a very grave man borne amongst them, reports of this
matter. A. S.
Ministri nullam habent coercendi potestatem, nec habere volunt. Tantum
cupiunt, vt magistratus puniant eos, qui ipsorum mandatis parere detrectarent.
Quod nunquam sunt facturi, nisi prius de tota causa legitime recognouerint,
actoribus aut accusatoribus ministris consistorij. Quod seniores and ministri
alienu^ a suo ministerio esse similiter iudicant. In haec absurd a inciderunt,
propter reiectam episcoporum authoritate^, etc. The ministers there have no
power to correct any man, neither will they have any. Only they desire of the
magistrates to punish such, as should refuse to obey their commandments,
whereunto the magistrates vvil never yield, except they may take notice of the
whole cause again by ordinary course of law, the ministers of the
consistories making themselves either plaintifs or accusers. Which the elders
and ministers do judge, not to be agreeable to their ministry. And they are
fallen into these absurdities (he had also before named some other) through
their rejecting of the authority of bishops. You see their desire in this
case, and it may (in mine opinion) be stretched to the former. And then (as I
have showed) through scandales, offenses, consciences, and I know not what
pretenses, challenges, and counterfeit prerogatives, the jurisdiction of their
elderships, will be so large, as the civil magistrates, judges, and lawyers,
shall not need to be greatly troubled.

These things, with all the premises of this chapter considered, I dare say,
you long to know by what authority they challenge to deal in all these so
many, and so infinite causes. And to satisfy your longing, the learned
discourser shall first speak his mind: pa. 87.
Our savior Christ (says he) in the word (church) alludeth to the Jews
Sanedrim, which had the hearing and determining of all difficult matters
amongst them: the like whereof, he willed to be established in his church,
for administration of government. What, you will say, but weighty matters? How
come they now, to al matters: even to Robin-hood, maigames, and may poles? Ye
say truly, but Cartwright will supply this defect. For indeed this discourser
shot many bows too short. This was the policy and discipline of the Jews,
T.C. l. 1. p. 183.
and of the sinagogue (says he) from whence our savior took this and
translated it unto this church: that when any man had done any thing that they
held for a fault, that then the same was punished and censured by the elders
of the church. And M. Beza. Praef. ad lib. de excom.
Quod ius fuit Synagogae sub lege, cur non valeat in ecclesia sub euangelio,
authore Christo, Math. 18.17. non video: I see not why the same authority,
that the Synagogue had under the law, should not continue now in the Church
under the Gospel, according to Christ's institution in the chapter mentioned.

Indeed if Christ have ordained any such matter, it is good reason it should
be so. But because they will needs bring us to the Jews: let us see what
pretty tales, they will tell us of those times.

They say, (and it is true) that the Priests were the Lawyers of the land.
Polit. page 129. Beza de excom. page 104.
And would they be so now? If the same policy continue, why should they not?
They tell us further, that in civil causes, when there did arise any doubt in
law amongst the Judges, Beza de excom. page 104.
the decision thereof did belong to the Priests jurisdiction. If that also were
a good policy, and that it be continued by Christ: then I see no reason, why
it should not again be now established in all places. They say, that the 17.
of Deuteronomie, from the beginning of the eight verse, unto the end of the
thirteenth, does entreat of the ecclesiastical Senate: where it is said: T.C.
l. 2. p. 17.
that judgments between blood and blood, between plea and plea, Beza de
excom. page 104. 105.
etc. did belong to the priests, and that it was death for any man not to rest
in his determination. If this policy be in like manner continued: who then in
the commonwealth, but the ecclesiastical Elderships? Matters of blood, and of
all pleas? Who would not take those points, to be more civil causes? It is
true. But they tell us, that when the priests dealt in any of those causes,
they dealt not in them ciuilly, ^e^a de excom. page 106.
but ecclesiastically. It will trouble a man to find out their sleights. But
one example to this purpose you shall have.

When such a doubt did rise (says Beza) Non de facto; Beza de excom. page 104.
Not of the fact, (for that was mere civil) but Deiure; what the law was in
such a case: then the Ecclesiastical Eldership determined thereof: and that
done, the civil Judge gave sentence of the fact accordingly. As though there
should be two Courts in Westminster hall: one for matters of fact in civil and
criminal causes, consisting of temporal Judges: and another (for matters of
Conscience, for all sorts of offenses, and for matters of law) consisting of
ecclesiastical persons, some Pastors and Doctors, assisted in solemn manner
with their church Aldermen. Suppose then I pray you, that you are by chance in
Westminster hall: such a difficult matter in law (as is pretended) comes
before the Judges of some fact, whereupon down they come from their seats, and
go to the Elders. May it please your Maisterships, there is such a cause before
us, which seems to be a foul matter, if it fall out as the bill or
declaration is laid: what is the law in this point* The Elders consult
together, and resolve them. The Judges give them a leg, return to their
places, the cause falls out according to the complaint, and so they pronounce
the sentence, as the Aldermen taught them. Suppose (I say) all these things,
and then you perceive what Bezaes distinction means, and with what good
discretion, both he and his followers, will needs make two Courts of that,
which was but one. It is a very great marvel, that any wise men should insist
upon these so apparent and childish fooleries. In all the Courts (I think) in
the world, since there have been any: the same that were Judges of the law,
were Judges likewise to try the fact: except it be in England. And yet here
also even in the trial of factes by twelve men, we have not two Courts for one
matter: but all the evidence, witnesses, and whatsoever else, that does
appertain for the finding out of the fact, are brought before the Judges of
the law. They sift and examine every point and circumstance, that so the Jury
may be fully informed: and they are indeed the chief directors (as it is
meet) in the whole matter. And as it is, and has been in all the world: so
it was in all the Courts appointed, either by Moses, or by King Iehosophat in
Iewrie.

It is true, that all difficulties that did rise amongst the Judges of inferior
Courts in the country, whether they were of law, or facts: and likewise, all
appellations from lower Courts: did belong to the high Court at Jerusalem, to
be heard and determined. But does that prove one Court to be two* Nay, it is
most apparent, that if they will needs fetch their Elderships from the Jews
Synedria: they may challenge to themselves as well the civil government of the
commonwealth, as the ecclesiastical of the church. For so was the form of
government then, according to the testimonies of scripture, of all the Jews,
the Rabbines, the Talmudists, Josephus, and others. And I greatly do suspect
it, that in time they will begin to claim it: I find them so wavering and
uncertain in this matter. As yet; fi^, they cannot abide to hear of it. But
observe them how they stagger. Beza in his book against Erastus, whereunto he
himself, and seventeen other Ministers of Geneua subscribed, and which was
the book indeed, that Erastus did confute: both he and they all of them, were
in doubt of this point: An vero ciuilem aliquam co^e^rtionem habuerit ex iure,
ecclesiasticum illua apud Iudaeos syned^ion, definire vix possumus: habuisse
tamen, posterioribus saltem temporibus, negare nec si velimus, possumus, etc.
We can scarcely define, whether the ecclesiastical Eldership amongst the
Jews, had any authority of right to use civil punishments: that it had (at
the least in the later times, if we would deny it, we cannot.

It is very well said. And then I trust it will be confessed; that, as long as
that authority continued, he had been a fond man, that should but once have
dreamed of the former distinction of making one Court two: vz. the one of fact,
and the other of law: and of dealing in civil causes ecclesiastically, or I
know not how. Yea (says Beza) but though they had such authority, probabile
est, it is probable, that it was procured, ambitione maximorum pontificum, by
the ambition of the high priests. How like you this* When he is so pressed both
by scriptures, and with other authority, that he cannot choose but confess
the point in question: see how substantially he would seem to avoid it, with
his Theological demonstration, Probabile est. But that I do the man no
injury, he has an other shift of descant to help himself herein. Though
they had any such authority, exiure, by the law (says he) yet, Hoc nihil ad
nos, It does not concern us. Why* if the same policy that the Jews had, be
continued by Christ in his Church: how comes it to pass, that this does
nothing concern us* It is abrogated. Belike; even as much, and as little of
the policy must continue, as is in force at Geneua. But who did abrogate it*
Christ. Where? When he said, Reges gentium dominantur eis, vos autem non sic:
The kings of the nations bear rule over them, but it shall not be so with you.

They seem to be much beholden to this piece of scripture: it serves them
unto so many purposes. But if they presume in this sort upon the continual
favor of it: certainly it will leave them, when they least suspect it. If the
Jews Eldership, had to deal in civil causes, and that Christ had pu^posed to
have continued that form of government in his Church, in all points saving in
that: he would have said thus: The priests of the Jews did bear rule over
them, and had to deal in civil causes, but it shall not be so with you. It is
to be wondered ar; that Beza should content himself, with such unlikely, and
so very improbable conceits. But it seems, that upon some better aduisement
with himself, and his fellow subscribers: they grew all of them ashamed of
these shifts. Beza de excom. page 106.
And therefore in his book of excommunication (which he lately published) he
is become in some sort another man. Now both he, and his said felowMinisters,
are out of doubt, Ex clarissimis testimoniis, By most clear testimonies; Page
109.
that the authority which the priests had in civil causes, was gotten by
bribes; Ex licentia and iurisdictionis perturbatione; through the liberty and
confusion of those two distinctiurisdictions: which confusion, Christus nunquam
approbanit; Christ never approved.

Ah, very well: though they have turned over an other lease; and for Probabile
est, do brag of most clear testimonies: yet, concerning Christ's words, they
are gone backward. For his commandment, Vos autem non sic: is now turned, as
you see, into Nunquam approbauit: which carries with it no other force, than
is ascribed to a negative collection. But for all their most clear
testimonies, he must have better eyes than mine, that can discern any thing by
them, saving their inconstancy: and that there is cause, to suspect thereby (as
I said,) that when their credites are increased, they will not greatly stick
to break the bounds of their said distinctions, and deal as well with matters
of fact, as of law. For else, besides all the premises, what means this new
ground of Divinity, published of late in print to the world, from Geneua?
Ciuiles quoque lites, antequam Christiani essent magistratus (vt verisimile
est) ex Apostolica doctrina, These. 83.
amice and citra vllum fere strepitum componebantur. The civil contentions,
before there were any Christian magistrates, were compounded, as it is likely,
according to the Apostles doctrine, by the Elderships, friendly, and without
any suites of law.

So as now, if this question were once determined: whether, that may be
lawful, when there is a Christian magistrate, that is lawful to be done,
when there is none: there should (as you see) be no more suites in law for
civil causes in the land: their Elderships have entitled themselves unto
them, and engrossed them all by right, into their hands. You will say; it is
true, that they have done so indeed, if that question were resolved: but that
point stands upon an if. Nay, assure yourselues, it is past peradventure:
they would take it in great scorn, that such a matter should rest undecided.
Where it is held by the Churches of Heluetia, that such Elderships (as they of
Geneua talk of) are needless, where there is a Christian magistrate: and
thereupon the now L. Archbishop of Canterbury, for disputations sake reasoning,
that if there were any such Elders then: yet it does not follow, they should
be received now: Cartwright and his scholars are peremptory, T.C. li. 1. p.
175.
that the offices of those Elderships, are the rather to be continued under a
Christian magistrate. And the learned Discourser says as confidently in the
like case: that the same authority, Page 118. 119.
which the Church had, before there was a Christian Magistrate, does still
continue when there is one, or else (as he adds) we would be glad to learn
how this authority was translated from the Church, (in which it was once
lawfully used) unto the civil Magistrate. Agreeable to both which resolutions
is that saying of Trauerse: That Heathen Princes being become Christians, Def.
of eccles. Dis. p. 148. 174.
do receive no further increase of their authority, than they had before,
while they were in paganism.

It is well: By these rules then, all is theirs. They are Kings and Princes:
and the very immediate vicegerentes of Jesus Christ upon earth. And good
reason they should then have both the swords: nay, twenty swords if there were
so many. And besides, seeing they have to deal in all causes, they must have
all laws in the closets of their breasts: at the least authoritate; let
scientia come by Cartwrights devise, upon the sudden into them how it may: at
leisure.

But hereof sufficiently. Howsoever they cry our against our Bishops for
intermedling with mo matters, than they are able to discharge: yet you see into
what an infinite sea of affairs, they would thrust their Elderships: allowing
generally that in themselves, which formerly they have condemned in others. As
by the next Chapter it will appear more plainly unto you.

CHAP. XXVI. Those things they reprove as unlawful in others, they allow in
themselves.
THere is nothing better known, than with what contempt and bitterness diverse
amongst us have written against the authority of Bishops, especially
Archbishops: Archbish.
and yet I perceive, that if they might attain to such an authority, it would
be well enough accepted. For thus their Master Beza writes. Conf. cap. 5.
Artic. 21.
What was ordained in times past, concerning the appointing of provincial
Synodes by the Metropolitan, appears manifestly by the old Canons. Neither
are we the men, who if the ruins of Churches were repaired, do think either
that order, or some other like unto it, to be rejected. So as these two things
be observed: That a tyranny be not brought again into the Church, as though
the holy Ghost were tied to some certain seat or person: and that all things
should be done to edification, etc. Indeed, he is already the Primate,
Archbishop, or Metropolitan, in effect, of all the province of Geneua: or at
the least, he easily foresaw, that if any such order should be restored
again amongst them, he was the only man for that great preferment.

When this word (...) in the sixth Canon of the Council of Nice, is brought
and urged, to prove the authority, right, and jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Alexandria, over the Churches, in diverse countries there mentioned: then it
must signify nothing, in that place: (if we shall believe Cartwright) but
only a dignity, or pre-eminence in meetings, to go, or sit before the rest.
But if you talk of the power, authority, and jurisdiction of their
Eldershippes: then says Danaeus, Vox potestatis in hac disputatione significat
(...) Dan de potest. eccles. cap. 2.
the word of power signifies, as this Greek word does properly import. And
what is that* Forsooth, Ius and authoritatem alicuius gubernationis illi
traditae, id est, alicuius reigerendae and regendae: Right and authority of
some government given unto such a power, that is of the government and rule of
some thing. Now if this word might have been so happy, as to have retained
this signification in the said Council of Nice, where there is speech of
Bishops: Cartwright had been put to his plunge, Beza. annot. John. 1.
and Bezaes annotation mentioned, would not have helped him a rush. There is
nothing more usually objected against the present estate, superiority, and
authority of Bishops, Vos autem non sic.
than the place of Peter. Neque vt dominantes in cleris; Not as though ye were
Lords over the Clergy: And that of Luke 22. 1. Pet. 5. Luke 2a.
Vos autem non sic; But you shall not be so. And it will not be admitted in
any wise, that we should expound those places, of ambitious affectation, of
tyrannous practice, or of the abuse of such superiority, ^or jurisdiction. But
if you will speak of the right, authority, and jurisdiction of their
Elderships; the case is clean altered. There are some, as it seems, beyond
the seas, who seeing the pride of the consistorian government, do affirm;
That the power of the Church is only spiritual, and not any external
exercise, practice, and right of any authority, power, and government. With
this opposition, so much derogating from the dignity of their Elderships,
Danaeus is moved; and answering that conceit, says: that although the power
of the Church, Dan. de potest. eccles. cap 3.
ad animarum salutem sit comparata; be instituted for the health of souls: yet
notwithstanding, it has necessarily annexed unto it, an indissoluble band, an
external exercise, practice, and use, iuris and gubernationis, of law and
government. Against this answer, replye (as it seems) is made with the same
places mentioned, that are urged against our Bishops. Whereupon Danaeus, to make
all things clear, adds these words to his former answer, and publishes
the same from Geneua. Ibidem.
Nam quod etc. Whereas it may be objected out of Peter: Non dominantes, etc.
Not bearing rule, etc. And out of Luke: Vos autem non sic: but you shall not be
so: Facile soluitur: it is easily answered. Damnatur enim partim abusus, non
vsus illius potestatis, partim illius cum civilly confusio: for partly the abuse
is condemned, not the use of that power, and partly the confusion of it with
the civil power. Which is the very answer that we do make and approve,
being extorted from them by Gods good providence; for the stopping of our men's
mouths, who upon pretense of those places, have opened them so wide against
the lawful authority of our Bishops.

It has been greatly grudged-at by these reformers, New parliam. men.
that Bishops are allowed to be of the upper house of Parliament: and saine
they would have them out, if they knew how: Notwithstanding, for ought I can
find, they have enjoyed that honorable prerogative, ever since there was an
high Court of Parliament in England. And still the word of God is made the
pretense for whatsoever they desire: so as ever you understand that they
themselves are excepted. Whereof it comes, that the very same project is made
to the Lords of her Majesty's most honorable Council, which was devised by
Beza for Scotland, vz. that in place of the Bishops, Humble motio. page 52.
there might be present in the parliament house some wise and grave Ministers
of especial gifts and learning, Beza de tripl. episc.
sorted out of all the land: to yield their Council, according to Gods heavenly
law, even as the civil Judges are ready to give their advise according to
the temporal law, and for matters of greater difficulty. But would they sit
there as the Judges do, and have no voices* I take it, they would scorn that
greatly. For I nothing doubt, but if they were there, they would account
themselves the wisest in the company. And therefore, it was more substantially
considered of by him, who penned a Supplication to her Majesty, and wished,
That four and twenty Doctors of Divinity, Found amongst Fields books.
(to be called by such names as it should please her highness) might be admitted
into the Parliament house, and have their voices there in stead of the
Bishops. And would they be called Lords, if it pleased her Majesty for the
honor of that house to appoint it so? Their words do import so much: and I
make no doubt of it, but that to gratify her highness, they would be content
to humble themselves so far.

In the hope which they have conceived, to overthrow the state of Bishops,
Convocation.
and to have their devise allowed of, and established in the land: they
inueigh most bitterly against the Bishops, and the Convocation house,
misliking that the dealing in ecclesiastical causes, should be committed unto
them, in sort as now it is: affirming, that the liberties of the Parliament,
are th^reby betrayed: and that it appertains to that Court, to order matters
of religion. But what if the Bishops were excluded, and none admitted into the
Convocation house, but such as they would choose from amongst themselves: how
then? Indeed (says the Supplicator) If the Convocation house were such as it
ought to be, Suppl page 45.
etc. then were it not lawful for the Parliament to establish any thing, in
the matters appertaining to the pure worship of God, but by their direction.
Which is this in effect, Admon. 2. p. 57
(if I understand them:) that the Parliament should provide their new pretended
governors, of sufficient maintenance, and set up their Eldershippes; and then
enact it likewise: that whatsoever they should ordain in their assemblies and
meetings, for the time to come concerning Church causes: should be in full
strength, and for ever obeyed, until it might please them to make some
alteration. Which is the point that Knox aimed at, Exhort. to Engl. page 91.
etc.
in his Exhortation to England: wherein for the good instruction of her
Majesty's subjects, he sends them from Geneua, these Allobrogicall rules:
That the pretended discipline ought to be set up: that all Princes ought to
submit themselves under the yoke of it: that what Prince, King, or Emperor
shall disanull the same, he is to be reputed Gods enemy, and to be held
unworthy to reign above his people: and then says, if such order were once
established, as there he prosecuteth, and the discipline well executed
accordingly: Ibid page 99.
their yearly coming to the Parliament, for matters of religion, shall be
superfluous and vain. And this also is plain, by Cartwrights new form of
discipline, subscribed unto by himself, and his fellows. Which form they
have auowed upon their oaths to be such, as that they purposed to have been
suitors to her Majesty, for the general establishing of it. In which their
purpose, if once they may prevail: there shall never Parliament be troubled
again in matters of religion: otherwise then (as I said) for making of laws,
that the people may obey their orders. For the whole government is there
ascribed unto their Elderships, and other assemblies; insomuch, as the civil
Magistrate is not once mentioned in it.

It is well known how vehement they have been, A Councellor.
and still continue, against the now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, in that he
is one of her Majesty's most honorable privy Council, accounting it
unlawful, for a Bishop or Minister of the word, to hold any such room and
authority. And yet notwithstanding, it is greatly allowed of, and liked: that
Beza in Geneua, should be one of the Council of that state there, one of the
threescore: and they admit not any into their Consistory, so much as the
meanest of their Aldermen; but he must be either a Syndicke, or one of the
Council of threescore, or one of the Council of two hundredth. Now I cannot
possibly be brought to think, that the word of God should deal so partially:
but that it may be as lawful here, as there, if it please her Majesty, to
have a Bishop to be one of her most honorable Council.

It is apparent in the former Chapter, Their Synods must bind.
what little account they make of general Councels. The best are censured by
them, and reproved. It is not well borne by Cartwright, that the Council of
Nice should be termed a famous Council. And for other Councels, or Synodes;
they are scarcely reckoned to be worthy the mentioning. If you press one of
that forte, with the authority of them all; though he be not thirty years of
age, he will not stick to make a tush at them: and tell you, that himself is
of another opinion. No decrees made by them, will bind these fellows. And as
touching our own national Synodes and Parliaments: they are prosecuted with
the greatest contempt. The reformation of religion made by that authority: is
termed a deformation. The articles of religion, are misliked in diverse points.
The Injunctions, Aduertisements; Canons, Orders, Ceremonies, and all things in
a manner, are despised by them. For they are but men's precepts (forsooth:)
every man must try them, and keep or allow what he list; at the least, if
he will but pretend, that he does it of conscience. Howbeit, if they may
have once authority to establish their Elderships, and to meet together in
their classical, provincial, or national assemblies, there to make such
laws and orders, as they shall think good: then see (I pray you) how they
change their song. Gelibrand to Field.
Touching my departure from that holy assembly without leave, etc. Icraue
pardon. Holy assembly. It was a Conuenticle in London, about the year 1584.
Fen. to Field.
I am ready to run, if the Church command, according to the holy decrees,
and orders of discipline. Holy decrees and orders. The matter was, for his
going into the Low Countries with the Earl of Leicester, and for his absence
from his benefice. Admon. 2. pa. 31
To the determination of a national Synod, men shall stand as it was at
Jerusalem, except it be in a great matter of faith; or a great matter
expressly against the Scriptures. It was agreede upon in the Northampton
classis, Johnson and Littletonsworne.
that concerning any matters of doctrine, or about the sense of any place of
Scriptures, the brethren within that compass, must stand to the determination
of that cl^ssis. And these are the orders, to this point, in the newly
subscribed book of discipline. Plurium sententiae verbo Dei consentaneae,
singulares omnes eius cansilij, and conuentus ecclesiae parere debent. All
Churches must obey the sentence of the greater part of that Councellor
assembly, under whose direction they are, the same being agreeable to the word
of God. And again: It is made a part of their Aldermens office to see: Vt quae
a conuentibus pie decreta retulerint, a ciuibus suis earum ecclesiarum studiose
obseruentur: that those godly decrees which they shall bring from the
assemblyes, be diligently observed of their Citizens of those Churches.
Lastly: Conuentus sententia rata habeatur, donec a conuentu mayor is
authoritatis secus iudicatum puerit. Let the sentence of every assembly be
ratified, until it shall be otherwise iudged-of by an assembly of greater
authority: As a classical, to be ouerruled by a provincial; a provincial,
by a national; a national, by a general. And thus they write of their own
orders and assemblyes. Which rules, take them altogether as they lie, if they
be true: (as I do not greatly dislike them being well applied) then do these
busy bodies among us, sin most directly against their own consciences: in that
they oppose themselves, (as they do) against those things which the greater
part of the national Sinode, and high court of parliament of this Realm, has
allowed of: being most agreeable to the word of God, before some general
Council, or assembly of more authority, have judged otherwise, and
determined, for the course that they have proceeded in. General Council I am
sure they have none. And for any other assembly, that has been held, and
should have greater authority in England, than the national Synod of all our
own Churches, and the high Court of Parliament; let them name it.

In their writings generally, they exclayme against the high Commission,
Commission.
or at the least, against the Commissioners; as many of them as be clergy
men: affirming it to be against the word of God, that any such should be of
that Commission. Acts of secret Counceil printed 1590.
And yet in Scotland, it was agreeable with the Scriptures, that forty or
fifty at the least, Ministers of the word, (as I conceive it) should be
very great Commissioners from the King, Anno 1589. to very many great
purposes: even for the purging of that land from all sorts of enemies, to the
religion there professed. Likewise, earnest suite is made, in the Supplication
before mentioned, Suppl. to her Majesty.
to her Majesty, and found in Fields study: that the foresaid four and
twenty Doctors, that should be of the Parliament house, might be likewise
general Commissioners under the great scale of England (or the more part of
them) to bear and determine, all and every sect, error, heresy, contempt,
default, and misdemeanour, against the word of God, and her Majesty's laws of
reformation of religion: to deprive any Pastor, not doing or neglecting his
duty: to examine witnesses, and to imprison the bodies of all such
malefactors, and to certify their names to the Lords of her Majesty's
Council, that they may receive further condign punishment. Besides, there be
some that resemble the high Commission, now in force; unto the authority
which they challenge to their several Elderships. Whereupon one of them,
acquainted, (I doubt not) with the desires of the rest, Petition to her Maicst.
page 13.
says: That if the high Commission were settled in five hundred places more
than it is: and should govern by the word of God, and laws of this Realm;
there would rise more profit thereby to religion, than yet has been found by
the Bishops. He would have it in five hundredth places. Scotland is divided into
two and fifty Eldershippes: and of likelihood they would have five hundred in
England. And that, as I take it, is the mystery of his number of five hundred.
To conclude, I find another motion, which likes well, that if there were five
hundred Elderships more or fewer established, yet there might be in every great
Town, Humb motion page 62.
certain Commissioners in causes ecclesiastical appointed: to look that the
Elderships did their duties, and if they did not, to compel them thereunto by
civil authority. So as thereby it appears, that although our Bishops, and
other Clergy men may not be such Commissioners with us in some few places: yet
their Pastors, Doctors, and Aldermen, may, in every parish, or so many of them,
(or I know not whom) as it should please her Majesty, to assign to every
great Town. Surely the word of God is much troubled with such kind of
choppers and chaungers of it; every giddy head wresting and wringing it, to
serve his own devise. We should have Commissions to thatch houses withal (I
see:) if they might be our directors.

They are offended with the authority that her Majesty does give unto her
Commissioners, Purseuants.
for causes ecclesiastical, as being unlawful, in that by virtue of that
commission, they may send sometimes for offenders to appear before them, by
purseuants; and commit them to prison, as occasion shall fall out, and their
faults, misdemeanors, and contempts shall require. But at Geneua, the like
authority (in effect) is lawful in their Eldership. Laws of Geneua. fol. 15.
For there the Consistory has a Beadle, sergeant, or purseuant, or as you
lift to term him, appointed by the civil Magistrates to attend upon it:
whose office is, to call such before the Consistory, as the Aldermen shall
appoint him. And for imprisoning of any offenders, and contemptuous persons;
there is notany matter almost, for the which they may call a man before them:
but one part of the punishment of it, by the laws of the City, is
imprisonment. As if any when he appears in the Consistory, or else where, be
so hardy as but to speak evil of any of the Ministers, Laws of Geneua. fol.
71.
or misname them, he is to be imprisoned. Besides, as I have noted it before;
their Elders are always of the Council of state: and seldom or never, but
they will be sure to have one of the four Syndickes, to be of that bench. So
as together, they reign like Lords in their Consistory: and who dare say; My
Lords, why do you so? If they direct: imprisonment, is but a small matter. I
speak not against that order there: let them use it as they think good. Only
I see not, why the word of God should be so bountiful to them, and is so
sparing to us.

In that by the orders of our Church, Subscription.
and the laws of the Realm, there is required of Ministers, a subscription to
her Majesty's lawful authority in ecclesiastical causes; to the Articles of
Religion, and to the Communion book, etc. great quarrels have been raised,
and many exceptions are taken against it. Humb. motion.
Insomuch as one, (a wise man I warraunt you) does ascribe all the dangers
that have been complotted against her Majesty's person by the traitrous
Papists: the dearth of corn: the cause that we have had such watching and
warding by soldiers: and lastly, that the Spaniards would have invaded this
land; all these things are ascribed (I say) by him, unto the exacting of the
said subscription. Howbeit, yet Cartwright and his confederates, could take
upon them, in a seditious sort, to require a secret subscription amongst
their favorers; unto such a form of new Church government, as he with the
rest of that crew, after many meetinges and alterations, had devised. Wherein
if their fancies might once take place, subscriptions would not seem so
dainty as now they do. For there is subscription required upon subscription.
No man is to be chosen unto any ecclesiastical office with them: Nisi qui
disciplinae subscripserit; except he have subscribed to their discipline:
Whosoever is to be of any of their assemblyes, either classical, provincial,
or national, he must first have subscribed to their discipline. And not thus
content, it is there also further ordered; that none shall be admitted to the holy
Communion, except they submit themselves unto their discipline. So as hereby,
every temporal man; of what calling soever, is brought under their subjection.
Of likelihood they think, that no man can be a worthy receiver of that holy
Sacrament: that is not well persuaded of their counterfeit platform. At Geneua,
whosoever is to be admitted into their school; he must first subscribe to
their discipline. Laws of the Vniue^rsitie.
And not that only, but he is tied to make a public confession of that faith,
wherein their form of discipline is comprised for an Article^. And the like
confession is also required, of all them that will receive the Communion there.
Beza in vita Calu.
But what talk I of subscriptions, or professions? Master Calvin, when that
discipline was first set up, procured a general oath to be taken throughout
the City, for the approbation of it. Whosoever also is made Minister there:
Laws of Geneua. fol. 3.
he swears to keep their ecclesiastical ordinances; and consequently, the
discipline there practiced. All their Elders in like manner, though one of them
be one of the Syndicks, do take an oath to the same effect: Ibid. fol. 9.
when they swear, to perform their office faithfully, and to bring all
things to the Consistory, which are worthy to be brought before it. As if
the sovereign here, should take an oath, to be a promoter. But that which is
most of all: they have prevailed so much with the Magistrates, (and there is
good cause why) that it is made death, for any man, to let, or stop, Ibid.
fol. 81.
or cause to hinder, the word and service of God, and his holy Gospel. Within
which compass, you may be sure, their discipline is comprehended. Our men as
yet, talk in their platform, but of subscriptions: but if once they had
gotten so much, then forward must the rest, or else they would be angry. How
carelessly subscription is exacted in England, I am ashamed to report. Such is
the retchlesnes of many of our Bishops, on the one side: and their desire to
be at ease and quietness, to think upon their own affairs: and on the
otherside, such is the obstinacy and intolerable pride of that factious
sort: as that betwixt both sides, either subscription is not at all required:
or if it be, the Bishops admit them so to quallifie it, that it were better to
be omitted altogether. If the best, and the learned man in Christendom,
were in Geneua, and should oppose himself to any thing that the Church there
holds: if he escaped with his life, he might thank God: but he should be
sure, not to continue as a Minister there. There is no Church established in
Christendom, so remiss in this point, as the Church of England. For in
effect: every man uses, and refuses what he lifts. Some few of late have
been restrained, who had almost raised the land into an open sedition. But
else, they follow their own fancies: and may not be dealt withal (forsooth)
for fear of disquietnes. No man shall ever persuade me, but that the word of
God, does give as free liberty to the Church of England, for the repressing
of such scismaticks; as either to Geneua, or to any other Church whatsoever.

There is a kind of oath, The oath ex^ officio.
termed an oath ministered Ex officio: which is, and always has been
ministered in certain causes, in every Court almost, within the Realm: but
especially, in the chiefest. This kind of oath, being ministered also by her
Majesty's Commissioners in causes ecclesiastical, for these foar and thyrtie
years: is now especially greatly impugned, and many exceptions are taken
against it. As, a man may not be driven, to confess any thing against
himself, nor his godly brethren: what you will charge us with, prove it. You
may not admit an accusation against an Elder, under two or three witnesses. If
you have witnesses, why ask you us? And many such like objections are made,
and maintained. Howbeit this opposition is altogether without consideration,
and by them, that know not what they do. For at Geneua, this manner of oath is
current. And I am sure, the brotherhood here would be very loath, to oppose
themselves against any point of doctrine, that is allowed of there.

It fortuned upon a time, that certain persons meeting together, at one
widow Balthasars house in Geneua to be merry, did there dance. Master
Calvin hearing of this horrible sin (forsooth) procured them all, both
dauncers and beholders, to be called before him and his Elders, in the
Consistory. When they appeared; Calvin took upon him to examine them, and
used (as he terms them) certain holy obtestations, that they should tell
him truly, whether there were any such dancing or no, where it was, and who
daunced, etc. They denied the matter wholly: which he expresses Apostlelike in
these words: Impudenter nobis and Deo mentiti sunt: Call. Farello. epist. 71.
They lied impudently to God and us: Excandui, I grew pale with anger (says
he) and inueighed eagerly against such their contempt of God. But they
continued in their contumacie. Whereupon Calvin, (the matter, as he says,
being certainly known unto him,) protested before God; Poenas. tantae
perfidiae daturos, That they should be punished for such their falsehood. And
because he could not otherwise get the truth from them: Ibidem.
Censui vt iureiurando ad very confessionem adigerentur: I judged it meet
(says he) that by oath they should be compelled to confess the truth. It
should seem, they made the like exceptions, that our contumacious fellows do
make. And, one Henriche, a Minister (as it seems) who (as I take it) daunced
not, but did in some sort by way of supposition, (if any such dancing had
been) take upon him to defend it, as not being a matter to keep such a
stir about: alleged the very same place that Cartwright did in the
Consistory at Paul's, and the which all the rest of that brotherhood do
commonly allege: Ibidem.
vz. Against an Elder receive no accusation, but under two or three witnesses.
But how was this allegation liked of? Surely it was laughed at, and termed by
Calvin, Altercatio non illepida: a pleasant jest. It seems also, that
besides the threatening speeches mentioned, there were other used in like
manner, which did more terrify them. For (says Calvin:) Tandem adieci, etc.
Ibidem.
At the length I added further, that they must build themselves another City,
and live therein by themselves, except they would be contained here, under
the yoke of Christ, (he means their Consistory) and that as long as they
lived in Geneua, they did strive, but in vain, not to obey the laws there.
Well, by what means they were drawn unto their oath, I will not stand upon
it: but sworn they were, and so confessed all. Whereupon, Omnes in carcerem
coniecti; They were all cast into prison.

Amongst the said dauncers, Ibidem.
besides the said Henriche, (who was deprived of his Ministry, and committed
to prison for three days) there was in that company, one of the four
Syndickes, or chief Magistrates of the City: and he was removed from his
office, until he had given some testimony of his repentance: which upon the
admonition of the said Consistory, he presently did (as it seems) and so
escaped prison. There was also an other in that meeting, named Perrin, the
Captain of the City (as I take it) a man with whom Calvin had many
quarrels. He (as it seenieth) perceiving by Caluins eagernes, what would fall
out about that sport, got himself to Lions, hoping before his return, Rem
tacit sepultam iri: That the matter would be dead and buried. But says
Calvin of him after his return: Quicquid agat, Ibidem.
poenam non effugiet: Do what he can, he shall not escape unpunished. In this
Perrins absence, his wife Francisca, hearing (as I suppose) that Calvin should
utter some hard and angry words against her husband, rayled both against him,
and the rest of the Consistoriall associates. But Calvin answered her, Vt
merebatur, as she deserved. And this was the end of that inquisition. Perrin
with his wife were committed to prison, as the rest of his fellows had been:
he for dancing; and she (I think) for railing. Whereof Master Calvin wrote
thus to his friend: Perrinus cum vxore fremit in carcere: Ibidem.
Vidua prorsus insanit: alij pudore confusi silent: Perrin with his wife does
frette in prison: the widdowe Balthazar is quite mad: other being ashamed,
do hold their peace. Here was good Consistorian and round dealing. It should
appear, that Calvin took as much upon him, as some Bishops or
Commissioners in England do. But why should I stand so long upon this
example* It may be said, we must not live by examples. And it is true.
Hear therefore for the conclusion of this point, a Canon of the reformed
Churches in France. French dis. cap. of the consist.
The faithful may be constrained by the Consistory, to say the truth, so
far forth as it derogateth nothing from the authority of the Magistrate.
Constrained? this may reach far. But the word of God allows them there (it
should seem) what they lift. In my opinion, if such manner of proceeding be
lawful at Geneua, and in France; it may in some sort be tolerated in England.

It is a thing too manifest, Things used in Popery.
with what libelling and railing, the form of our service, of our ceremonies,
of our ornaments, of our apparel, etc. has been depraved, and shamefully
slaundered. Adm. 2. T.C.
As, That our Communion book was culled out of the Popes Portuise: this was
abused in Popery: that is papisticall: it were better to conform our selves
in outward things to the Turks, than to the Papists. These and those things
were devised by the Pope, that Antichristian beast* Whatsoever comes from the
Pope, which is Antichrist, comes first from the devil. If of the eggs of a
Cockatrice, can be made wholesome meat to feed with: or of a spyders web,
any cloth to cover withal: then may also the things that come from the Pope,
and the Devil, be good, profitable, and necessary unto the Church. Against
these, and many such like speeches, answer has been made: that it is
lawful to try all things, and to hold that which is good. That these things
which are good, were not so defiled by their being in the Popes portuise: but
that they might be taken thence, and used. That we must distinguish betwixt
the abuse of a thing, and the lawful use of it. That it is no good reason: the
Papists abused this, therefore we may not use it. That, as good men sometimes
devise that which is evil; so evil men may sometimes devise that which is
profitable, etc. But all these aunsweres, and a number more besides, to the
same effect: are misliked, denied, and condemned by these our factioners.

Howbeit, upon occasion the stream is turned, and they themselves are driven
to make the very same aunsweres, for the iustifiyng of their own
proceedinges, and for the maintenance of certain particular matters, which
they do urge and allow of. It has been laid to their charge, that for all
their goodly pretenses of reformation: yet indeed the cour^e they held, did
smell most rankly of Anabaptisme, Donatisme, and of a new kind of Papisme:
As, where they disquiet the peace of the Churches already reformed: rail upon
our Ministers, and their calling: affirm, that our Sacraments are not
sincerely ministered: that there is no Church as it should be, but those that
they like of: that our ceremonies and orders, are all unlawful: that we have
no lawful Ministers, nor Bishops: that Princes may not deal in causes
ecclesiastical, etc. These, and many such like points being laid to their
charge: Cartwright (as though he had never dreamed of any thing to the
contrary) frames this general answer in the name of all his fraternity. If
amongst the filth of their heresies, T.C. lib. 2. in the epist.
(vz. of Papists, Anabaptists, and Donatistes) there may be found any good
thing (as it were a grain of good corn, in a great deal of darnell) that we
willingly receive* not as theyrs, but as the Jews did the holy Arc from the
Philistines, whereof they were unjust owners. For herein it is true that is
said: The sheep must not lay down her fell; because she sees the Wolf
sometime clothed with it. Yea, it may come to pass, that the Synagogue of
Satan may have some one thing at some time with more conuenience, than the
true and Catholic Church of Christ. Such was the ceremony of pouring water
once only upon the child in Baptism used with us, and in the most
reformed Churches, which in some age was used by those of the Eunomian heresy.
Hitherto Cartwright. Whose answer if it be true, does concur with ours,
and may stay his own, and his fellows gyddinesse hereafter.

Cartwright was purposed once, The degree of Doctor.
to have been Doctor of Divinity. And thereof he writes in this sort. I had
the advice of more than a doozen learned Ministers, T.C. lib. 2. in the epist.
who considering that I had the office of a Doctor in the University, were of
opinion, that (for the good they esteemed might be done thereby) I might
swallowe the fond and idle ceremonies, which accompany it. To the request of
which friends I yielded. But when his Grace came to be propounded to the
University, that degree was denied him. Which (I suppose) to be the cause, why
ever since, both he, and Trauerse his scholar, have written so scornefully of
that degree: except a man may guess, that they have an eye therein to Geneua:
where, there being but as it were a Grammar school (in comparison of our
Universities) no such kind of order can well be used, and therefore it is
contemned, reproved, and laughed at (in effect) amongst them: as it may
appear by Bezaes words, in his pitiful book against M. Doctor Sarauia.

The like course against University degrees, was held by the Anabaptists,
long since in Germanye: and was mightily encountered by that worthy learned
man, P. Melancthon. Barrowe also, with his retinue at this time, do hold the
same positions in England. And, as it seems, that Anabaptisticall humor, is
not yet repressed in the skirts of France. Whereupon Franciscus Iunius has
written a book; Iunij. Acad.
entitled his Academia: of purpose, to confute such fantastical persons. In
the Epistle whereof, after he has discovered the fooleries of the Anabaptists:
he comes to the other sort: (I think he means Beza, and such like,)
whom he honors with great tytles of gravity, learning: authority, and
judgment. These men (says he) with two weapons do seem to wound to death,
the laws of our Universities: vz. with reasons, and with examples. The
examples he answers: and I will not further deal with them, otherwise than
by referring you to the said Epistle. But the reasons and his aunsweres, are
the points I aim at. Their reasons he sets down in these words: (a man
might think he had read Cartwrightes words before mentioned:) Quia plurima
sunt (inquiunt) superflua and puerilia: abusus multi: omnia profecta a
Pontificijs: Because many things (they say) are superfluous and childishe:
there are many abuses: all such orders and ceremonies, came from the Pope.

Touching the first reason, he shows such orders and ceremonies as they
use, are neither Reipsa, aut significatione; In their nature, or in their
signification: either superfluous, or childish; and so not such at all as is
objected: and that they are used, sine superstitione and iniuria vlla, Without
superstition, or any injury: and so proceeds to other arguments for them.

To the second reason, his answer is in effect: that he supposes no man of
learning will say, that The use of a lawful thing is to be abrogated, Propter
indignum illius vsum, For the unlawful use of it.

And to the last reason, that such orders came from the Bishops of Rome, he
answers: Esto sane etc. Be it so; that I may grant them so much. But
whatsoever good, honest, or orderly thing, we have received of the Popes, or
Papists, must we reject it, because it came from them? Nay rather; Whatsoever
good, honest, and orderly thing they have, let us have it common with them,
if they will suffer us: if they will not suffer us, at the least let us
retain it as well as they, for the public good. We (he speaks of himself
I think, and of the learned men about Heidelberge, and New-stade) if there be
any thing good amongst the Papists: if they have devised any good and
profitable thing: God forbid that we should be carried away with such a
mad hatred of Papists, as that we should refuse it. Here then you have the
judgment (as it seems) of those reformed Churches, either of them both
excelling Geneua. For one of them, Geneua is but a hamlet unto it. Which
judgment being joined to Cartwrightes words, does answer for all those
things before mentioned, that our lavish fraternity do still taunt at so
bitterly.

There is nothing more usually objected against the pre-eminence, The name of a
Bisho^
which our Bishops have over other Ministers, than that in the Scriptures the
name of Bishop, is likewise given to every Minister of the word. Whereupon
they infer with all confidencie, as though it were impossible to be
otherwise, that because the name was then common, therefore their functions
differed not, but were likewise all one. Heereunto, I know not how often, they
have been answered: that the community of names in the Scriptures, does not
take away the distinction of offices. Princes are called Deacons: Apostles, are
termed Priests, or Elders: and yet thereby it may not be gathered, that there
was no difference between the office of every Deacon, and of Princes: between
the office of the Apostles, and every Priest, or Minister of the word. And so
we say of Bishops: that although the name of Bishops be given in the
Scriptures to other inferior Ministers likewise: yet does it not follow, that
between the office of a Bishop, and of a Priest or Minister, there is, and
should be no difference. But all this, and much more to this purpose, will not
serve our turns: and yet with Beza to another purpose, it is a marvelous
sufficient answer.

Erastus goes about to prove, that the name of Elder, when it is taken in the
new Testament for an ecclesiastical office: does ever signify a Minister of
the word, and not any of their counterfayte and vnpriestly Aldermen. And one
of his reasons is this: Because in the new Testament, the names of Bishop,
and of Elder, are common: as if a man should say: he that was a Bishop,
was called an Elder; and he that was an Elder, was called a Bishop: therefore
their offices were all one: and so consequently; every Bishop being a
Minister of the word, every Elder must needs be a Minister of the word.
Heereunto Beza makes this answer: which if we rise not always upon our
left sides, might be of as great force in our mouths, Beaa de excom. page
11^.
as in Bezaes. Sciendum est, etc. It is to be observed, that there is scarsely
any name, whereby any ecclesiastical office is signified, that is not
sometimes taken generally likewise. Hereof it comes, that the name of
Apostles is attributed also to them, who by a more proper name were called
Evangelists: Saint Paul does call his Apostleship a Deaconship: And Peter
calls himself a Priest: and Luke calls those, Priests, who are afterward
called of Paul by a more general name, Bishops: Quitamen and reipsa and
ijsdem specialiter acceptis nominibus, distincta esse illorum munera, nemo
dubitare possit: Whereas yet notwithstanding, both in deed or in nature, the
same names being taken specially, no man can doubt, but that the offices of
Apostles, of Evangelists, of Deacons, of Bishops, and of Priests are
distinct. See what respect of persons there is amongst our pretended
reformers. I am persuaded, there is not one of them that will presume to
encounter with this answer of Bezaes: and yet when other men, as learned as
ever he was, or will be, made the same in effect, it was accounted by some
of them, not to be worth a straw.

He that has read Martins libelles, A new Ministry.
the Demonstration, and certain books of Penryes, may see what a revel they
keep with Archbishops, and Bishops, grounding themselves upon one of
Cartwrightes principles: T.C. l. 2. p. 439.
That any increase of authority, being added to a Church-Minister, does
clean change his Ministry, and makes it a new Ministry. Whereupon they
conclude, that Archbishoppes, and Bishops, having received an increase of
their authorities, by diverse Councelles, etc. are become to be of a new
Ministry, never ordained by Christ, nor his Apostles: and so consequently,
unlawful, and to be abolished. The folly of this collection has been
showed many ways; both by reasons, and by examples: but yet they have not
been satisfied. But now you shall see they are put to silence for ever. For
Beza is peremptory to the contrary of that, which they have so enforced. In
his book against Doctor Sarauia, speaking of a place of Ieromes, Page 152.
how Bishops were ordained for orders sake, etc. he says in effect: That
when they had such authority given then for orders sake; Mutatio non suit in
re ipsa: id'est, in ipso ordine, sed tantum in ordinis modo: There was no
change made in the thing it self, that is, in the order: but in the manner
or measure of the order. And afterward more plainly, where he sets down
another manner of principle than Cartwrightes: Page 153.
vz. That we must distinguish between the nature of a thing, and that which
adhereth unto it accidentally; because, Eo in aliud co^mutato, vel sublato, res
ipsa permanet; The accident being changed, or taken away, the thing it self
remains. Whereupon (if I understand him) he grows to this issue: Page
141.152.
That the increase of any such authority (as is before mentioned) or the
alteration of the manner or order, is not of the essence of the Ministry, but
a thing that is accidental, and may be changed according to the
circumstaunces of times and places. And he brings this example. Page 153.
Accidentale fuit, etc. It was accidental, etc. Vt vnusquispiam iudicio
caeierorum compresbyterorum delectus, presbyterio (...)esset, and permaneret:
That one being chosen by the judgment of the rest of his fellow-priests, or
Elders, should be the President, or the Prelate over the presbytery, and so
continue.

You will ask me perhaps, how this gear comes about: Beza.
that Beza is so opposite, to Cartwright. I will tell you my conceit. I suppose
that matters of their pretended Discipline are grown to greater ripenes in
Geneua, then they are (thanks be to God) in England: and that therefore Beza is
more frank, to let us see what they generally shoot at; then Cartwright dare
be as yet. For howsoever Cartwright presumed to tell us (as it seems
untruly) that, T. C. lib. 2. page 31. ^
their moderator forsooth should be chosen, but for one action only: and that
Calvin being chosen to that office for two years (and so as I take it from two
years to two years) misliked, that small pre-eminence should so long remain
with one, which in time might breed inconvenience: and that Beza also misliked
it for that cause: Yet now you see that Beza is far from that base conceit, and
thinks that, that office, may be permanent: and further says; Beza con.
Sar. page 143.
that to ordain it so now, certe reprehendi nec potest, nec debet, it neither
can nor ought surely to be reprehended. And his reason is this, for that it
has been an order, that one should be so chosen, to have such a permanent
preheminece in the Church ever since Saint Marks time. Beza con. Sar. page 116.
Nay, he is come to this: that he is content to yeald in effect, that the
institution of an Archbishop is agreeable to the word of God: vz. ex illa
generali et verissima Apostolica regula, etc. according to that general and
true Apostolical rule, which appoynteth that all things should be done
orderly in the house of God. Est igitur or do etc. There is therefore (says
he) an order in it self, and by it self prescribed by God, but the reason or
use of that order and the manner of it, depends upon the circumstances of
times, places, and persons, and is (as men speak) according to Laws positive.
Now if these things that Beza writteth be true: and that he himself
(peradventure) could be well enough pleased, to enjoy such an office (if the
said circumstances of time and place might serve his turn to obtain it) then
we perceive that such additions of titles, and pre-eminence, so he and his
fellows may have them; do make no such alteration of the essence of the
ministry, as with us is pretended.

There is great barking, against the church of England, for that by Act of
parliament, some parts of the Canon. Law, Canon Law.
are retained and to be used by our Bishops, for the better government of the
Church: insomuch as the very name of the Canon law, is become odious; the
common sort of simple men of the factious crew, verily supposing, that the name
of such a law, rule, or institution, is popish, unlawful, and devilish: and
therefore they cry, out crucify it, crucify it, away with it, we will not
be ruled by it: we will none of it. As though they should say: we are lawless
men: for rules and orders we detest them: whatsoever seems good in our own
eyes, that we will do: at the least if we ever yeald our obedience to any
churchlaw, it shall be surely of our own making: sie upon all former
Councels, sie upon all those decisions, which the ancient fathers made; sie
upon all old and ancient constitutions. And thus in effect they write and
speak, in their libels, and ordinary table-talke: whereas notwithstanding, if
there be any thing in the Canon Law, that will serve their purposes, they can
be content to steal it thence, and to take to themselves thereby, the
commendation which is due to the true authors and fathers of it. Cartwright,
and his fraternity in their essential draught of discipline, have drawn more
then seven parts of eight of it, out of the Canon-lawe, and ancient
constitutions. Viretus perceiving (but too late,) what hindrance grew to the
platform of their new discipline, by the utter abolishing of the Canon Law at
once, and as it were in a fury, (which, he supposed, did and would still have
bridled princes, if it had been retained and still in force) shows his
dislike of such rashness in these words. The 3. Dial. of white Diuils:
They thought it a goodly reformation in the Church to abolish all the Canons
and decrees with the good statutes, which the ancient fathers and Doctors
had ordained, to mayntaine the good discipline in the church. The chief
point indeed that grieved Viretus, (as there it appears at large) was this:
because Princes by that means, had drawn their necks, from under the yoke of
discipline. A matter so much misliked by them, as that he is flat of opinion:
that it had been better for the Church to have kept the old Pope still, then
by abrogating of the Canon law, and in giving to Princes so great authority in
causes ecclesiastical; so to have subjected her self to a new kind of
papacy: every king and prince, being (as he says) a new Pope by that means:
and much worse then the old. So that hereby, you see, what is the drift of our
factious co^sistorians in laboring, to make the name of the Cano^ law odious.
You may not think, that they differ in substance from their M. Viretus: but
they are growe^ more crafty. The matter that pincheth the^, is this: that in
the acts of Parliament which are in force, there is ever a Prouiso, that
nothing thereof shall be in force, which is contrary to the laws of this Realm,
or to the prerogative royal of the prince. If ever any K. in England should
be so far seduced, as that he would yeald to establish their counterfeit
elderships in this Realm, with all the royal authority, which they challenge
of right to belong unto the^, and changing the two former prouisoes, should
enact it, that all the cano^-law should be in force, saving so much, as should
be contrary to the orders and prerogative of their elderships: If I should then
be alive (as I trust I shall not) I durst before hand hazard a great wager upon
it, that they would most readily, and with a great applause, receive it, and
almost worship it. For as I said, you may not imagine, but that Viretus has
disclosed their very hearts.

You know, Quire.
there is in every church for the most part a distinction of places betwixt the
clergy and the laity. We term one place the chauncell, and the other the
body of the church: which manner of distinction, does greatly offend the
tender consciences (forsooth) of the purer sort of our reformers. Gilby in his
dialog.
Insomuch as M. Gilby, a chief man in his time amongst the^, does term the
Quire a cage: and reckons that separation of the ministers from the
congregation: one of the hundred points of popery, which he affirms, do yet
remain in the church of England. Howbeit, admit but of their elderships into
every parish, and the^ you have the^, who will prove it out of the word of God,
that there ought to be such a separation of their Aldermen, (every one of the^,
though he be but a Cobbler) from the rest of the Idiots, that is, all the other
parishioners, of what state soever.

Hic or do in ecclesia seruetur etc. Dan. de potest eccl. cap. 24.
Let this order be observed in the church (says Danaeus, and he sends us the
rule from Geneua) that these who do bear any office in the church,
distingua^tur et separentur a reliquo populo: may be distinguished and
separated from the rest of the people etc. It a fieri decoru^ est et vtile. For
it is dece^t and profitable that it should be so. The Bishop (he means every
minister) must stand or sit, eminente loco; alofte etc. and let the elders sit
by him: tum vt populo appareant, that the people may behold them: tum vt
ministri concionantis doctrinam facilius intelligant et obseruent: and that
they may the more easily hear the doctrine of the Minister preaching, and the
better mark it. For of likelihood, they are to be the preachers Censors.

You will say peradventure, where there is some L. Mayor, some Councellor of
state, or some other great Magistrate; Nay the King himself (for he must be
of some parish) where shall he or any of them sit? That is wisely provided
for, I warrant you. For how should it otherwise be, ibidem
seeing the Prouiso comes from Geneua? Magistratus pius, etc. Let the godly
Magistrate, who is an honorable member of the Church, sit in an honorable and
perspicuous place: where the Church may neither seem, to favor the arrogance
and pride of men, nor the contempt of Magistrates. And great discretion
therein, surely. If the Magistrate should sit too high, it would make him
proud: if too low, it would bring him into contempt. Ergo modus in loco illi
concedendo seruetur, etc, therefore let a mean be kept in appointing of a place
unto him, (Knight, Lord, Earl, Duke, King, or Emperor, the holy Discipline
respects no men's persons) that he may both understand, he is preferred before
the rest: and yet withal, that he has no dominion over the word of God. In
deed excess in any thing is naught, Sedeat itaque inferiori subsellio: let
him therefore sit in a lower seat, then the preacher of the word of God, and the
Prophet: that he may both see and acknowledge himself to be subject to the
threats of the word. The parson or Bishop of every parish with his Artizan
Elders, must sit in the highest place, that the people may feed themselves
with the sight of them: the civil Magistrates (of what degree soever) must
content themselves with inferior rooms: and the rest of the people are to sit
super mattas and sedilia inferiora, upon pesses and little low forms. I am
persuaded it would greatly trouble the subjects of England, to see such a
Metamorphosis in her Majesty's Chapel. But see what a notable thing
Discipline is: and how the Ministers of Geneua can play the Herralds, in
marshalling of every state into their due places, according to their callings.
If these men were then in England and should survey our Quiers, I suppose
nothing would offend them, but that, that they are too low. The place where the
Roode-loft was, would be thought peradventure more suitable for their Elders.
Indeed there the people might best behold them.

Lastly, Fathers: T.C. l. 1. p. 112
because I will end this Chapter: if Cartwright can get but one Scholiaste,
that does in show make for any thing he likes, it is notable to see what
reuill he makes with it. And in like sort Master Beza, when the Fathers do
fit him, as in some points they do against Erastus: Beza con: Era. lib: scrip.
fo. 12
then these manner of phrases are common. Recte obseruauit Augustinus:
Augustine well observed it etc. Again, an vero Chrysostom. etc. what, do you think
that Chrysostom and all the old Churches; Beza ibi. fo. 24
not one excepted, saw not this? Again, Hic te obtestamur frater etc. we do
here beseech you brother, that you would well consider, in whose behalf and
against whom you dispute, cum rem ipsam ab vsu non distinguas: when you
distinguish not the thing it self from the abuse of it. ibidem.
Again, Haec Chrysostomus, ibidem fol. 27.
quae tibi satisfacere recte debent. These things Chrysostom affirms, which
ought to satisfy you fully. Again, Nunquam aliter fuit hic locus in Ecclesia
explicatus. ibidem fol. 25.
This place was never otherwise expounded in the Church. And again: A
temporibus Apostolorum ad haec vsque secula nunquam illa caruerunt Ecclesiae.
From the Apostles times, even unto the age wherein we live, the Church did
never want authority of Excommunication. And as at times they are content to
accept of the Fathers: so will they also upon the like occasion; allow of
general Counsels. Whereas certain persons in Transiluania began to revive
diverse old Heresies, about the person of Christ: Master Beza writes in this
sort. An non in mentem vobis veniebat amplissimus ille Nicenae etc. Beza
Epist. ^
Did you not remember the most worthy assemblye of Nice, of Ephesus, of
Calcedon: quo nihil un qua^ sanctius, nihil augustius ab Apostolorum excessu
sol vnquam aspexit? The Son it self has never beheld, since the Apostles
departure out of this world, any thing that was more holy, or more excellent,
then those assemblies were. Thus I say both Beza, Cartwright, and the rest of
the Disciplinarie humor do write, both of the ancient Fathers, and of the
old Councels, when they please them in any matter. But otherwise, let any of
them all, naie jointly al of them together, impugn any part of the new
pretended Discipline, or cross them there: Oh, they touch the apple of every
one of their eyes, they care not for their authorities, they despise their
decrees, they cannot endure them: as now it shall be showed in the next Chapter
following.

CHAP. XXVII. How they deal with the ancient Fathers, Ecclesiastical
Histories and general councels, when they are alleged against them.
WHen, for the proof of sundry matters, impugned by them: they are urged with
the testimonies of the ancient Fathers, and of the Ecclesiastical Histories,
they either shift them off, with their own false gloses, D. W.
or if that serve not their turn, they disgrace them as much as they can and
so reject them. Where Ignatius ascribes very much to a Bishop: as, that
nothing should be done in the Church without his consent: and says that he
has a principality and power over all, ascribing unto him in that respect the
title of Prince of Priests: they expound the word, T.C. lib: 2. pa. 620. 517.
Priests, to signify both Ministers of the word and ruling Elders: the said
power over all, to extend but only to the said kinds of Priests in one
parish: T.C. lib. 1. pa. 113. 110.
and the name Prince to mean no more, but as it were a moderator, chosen out
of those Ministers, for one meeting only, to propound such matters, as were
then to be handled, to collect the voices and to moderat that action. Which
interpretation is only framed according to the practice of Geneua, and such
great Churches, (as Cartwright terms them) which have (says he) diverse
Ministers and ruling Elders in them: (...)Epist. ad Tralli.
and is (God knows) as far from Ignatius meaning and words, as falshoode is
from the truth. And yet either thus he must speak, or else if you press them
further, T.C. l: 2. p. 622.
then they shall well like of, the poor old Father is straight way rejected,
as a counterfaite and a vain man.

It being showed according to Ireneus words: D. W. Ireneus lib. 4. cap. 63.
vz. that the Apostles committed the Churches in every place to the Bishops:
and that every one of the Apostles severally, did appoint Bishops in those
Churches which they had planted, as S. Paul did at Ephesus and Creta: T.C. l.
2. p. 482
Cartwright answers thus: For the explositio^ of Ireneus, T.C. l. 2. p. 155.
which interprets. They, every one severally: if they severally ordained
Bishops, every one in his circuit, so it be understood with the Churches
consent, as is before declared, I am well content. Are ye so? Surely it is
great joy of you. And what is before declared? Forsooth Master Beza in effect
says, Annot. Beza in Act. 14. and 1 Timothy 5. v. 22 1. Tit.
that the Apostles did not appoint any Bishops: that is, any Pastor, Doctor, or
ruling Elder by their own authority: but the choice of every Church Officer
being first made by consent of the whole parish. Then, any Apostle that was
present, did consecrat the said party, so chosen, unto the Lord, by laying
his hands upon him nomine Presbyterij, in the name of the Presbytery. This
is then the issue that Ireneus must stand to. Except he will frame his speech
after the new cut, even according to Bezaes pleasure. Cartwright (you see)
will not allow him. If he were now alive, he might well think scorn to be
thus used, by either of them both, contrary to his own meaning.

Justinius Martyr, D. W.
being brought to witness for Bishops, and their authority in his time, about
the year 130. (which was some nine years after Saint John's death) where he
calls every such B. (...) that is, prelate, because the ruling of the
Ministry and people within his circuit appertained chiefly to his charge.
Cartwright terms this seeking into the fathers writings, (to find out the
historical truth of this cause so much by him impugned) a raking in Ditches,
T.C. li. 1. p. 114
and labors in this sort to rid his hands of him, saying: First, this
Prelate, was but as a moderator, to propound matters etc. Secondly, that he was
Prelate of the people, not of the Ministers, which is contrary to his first
exception; except he will say the people had then the government of the
Church, amongst whom he should be moderator. Which being observed (as I
think) by Beza, he alleges this place of Justinius, Bezae anno^ 1. Tim. 5.19.
to prove Timothy in Ephesino Presbyterio fuisse (...) id est, Antistes, vt
vocat Justinius, to have been Prelate in his pretended Eldershippe at Ephesus.
Cartwright has also a third answer in his second Book: T.C. l. 2. p. 621
be it granted, that Justinius president had superioritye over the Ministers,
yet how fondlye is it concluded: that it is lawful because it was? But his
maine Barricado for defense is this: in the days that Iustine lived, there
began to peep out in the Ministerye, some things which went from the
simplicitye of the Gospel, as that the name of (...) which was common to the
Elders with the Ministers of the word, T.C. l. 1. p. 114
was (as it seems) appropriated unto one.

For the proof of the antiquity of Bishops, D, W.
Ieromes testimony is brought: that at Alexandria from Saint Mark the
Evangelist, Jerome ad Euagrium.
there was a Bishop placed in a higher degree above Priests, as it were a
Captain over an Army. About which words they busy themselves wonderfully.
First (say they) things being ordered then by the suffrages of the Ministers
and Elders: T,C* l, 1, p. 107,
it might (as it falls out oftentimes) be done without the approbation of
Saint Mark, How it falls out amongst them, it is no great matter. That
they should ever agree, were more to be maruailed. But to lay such an
imputation upon that church: Saint Mark himself being present, I think it
a lewd part, and too full of presumption. Besides, Saint Mark might have
appealed (by their conceits) unto some Classis, if he had disliked that
ordinance. But if this shifte will not serve: then they have another, that the
words from Saint Mark may be rather taken exclusiuely to shut out Saint
Mark, and the time wherein he lived, then inclusiuely to shut him in the time
wherein this distinction rose, Hier, proem. in Matt,
Wherein he shows his ignorance: for Jerome calls Saint Mark the Bishop of
Alexandria.

In the end, he uses this fond quirke. It is to be observed, that Sain ct
Jerome says it was so in Alexandria, signifying thereby that in other Churches
it was not so: and we are rather to follow Jerusalem that kept Christ's
institution, then Alexandria that departed from it. Have you seen a Bi^de in a
lime-bushe? But yet he plungeth, and when all comes to all, if these shifts
shall be thought insufficient, this is the last, both for this point and
certain other, of the profit which the Church receaueth by Bishops, etc:
corruption grows in time: T, C, l, 1, p, 103.
as the times are, so are men that live in them: there is not such sinceritye
to be looked for at Ieromes hands in his times, as from others that went
before him: besides his other faults, he might in this matter have spoken more
soundly. And Beza shameth not, to give him the lie: (in effect) and to deride
him. For where Saint Jerome says: that when some would needs hold of Paul,
some of Apollo, and some of Cephas: it was ordained for the auoidinge of
Schism, totius orbis decreto, by a decree of the whole world, that one
should be chosen by the Priests to be above the rest. The iudgem^t of the
most reverend, Epist, ad Ia, Lauson Scoc.
That is not so (says Beza.) And in another place: quod tandem istud decretum,
quando and a quibus factum? what decree was this? when and by whom was it made?

It is most apparaunt, D, W,
and cannot be denied, but that Ireneus, Cyprian, Tertullian, Ambrose, Jerome,
Augustine, and diverse other ancient writers, do call Bishops the Apostles
successors. In so much as some of them, especially the authors of the
Ecclesiastical Histories, do draw long Catalogues of the particular Bishops
names, that succeeded the Apostles, and other Apostolical men, whom they made
Bishops. Which Catalogues and manner of speech of the said fathers, being used
by them very fitly against such Heretics as did rise up in their days, have
since in our time, been greatly abused by the Papists. Unto whom, the
learned men, that have stood for the truth against them, by writing, Iuell,
Sadeil, de legit, vocat, mi^ist, etc,
have continually answered: That the fathers arguments drawn from the said
personal succession by Bishops were very effectual, so long as the
succession of the Apostles doctrine did concur therewithal: and that the
fathers in urging of the first, had ever an especial eye to the second, some
point of Doctrine being ever called in question by the said Heretics.

And this answer, as it is in it self most true, so it has been hitherto
generally received. Yet now another must be sought. For whereas in our days,
the very calling it self of Bishops, is so brought into question, that men
are enforced to seek their original: and amongst many reasons for the
justifying of it, do bring the said fathers to testify in this cause, that the
Apostles themselves appointed BB. and that they were generally accounted in
their times to be the apostles successors: Now Cartwright with his crew comes
forth amongst us, and tells us that in all such places where the Fathers and
Ecclesiastical writers do say: T, C, l, 2, p. 572,
that the Bishops succeed the Apostles, we must understand them, that by
Bishops, they mean every Pastor in his own parish, whom he affirms to be
only the Apostles BB. T, C, l. 1, p, 63,
and that where they call them the successors of the Apostles, that is to be
understood, because they propound the same doctrine that they did. T.C. l, 2,
p, 458
In this sense (says he in another place) I grant it true, that all Bishops,
that is Pastors, succeed the Apostles. So as then, the said personal
succession is here quite excluded. Part. 1. cont. Turrian, p^g 64
And besides, for his other succession of doctrine, Sadeil being very desirous
to make the said places of the fathers to seem, as though they were greatly to
be insisted upon, sticks not much to grant, to every lay man (that fears
God) as great a privilege, as Cartwright does, to his Pastors: calling them
likewise the Apostles Successors, quatenus Apostolorum doctrinam retinent, et
Apostilicis vestigiis insistunt: as far as they hold the Apostles doctrine,
and do walk in their paths. And thus, we must expound the Fathers, even as
the Father of all such Expositions did that of the Psalm; Mat. 4.
Angelis suis mandauit de te: or else they will tell us, that they were but
men: that they speak as the times required wherein they lived: that they writ
untruly, and many things to like purpose. As if we were to account no
otherwise of them, but as of time-seruers, men-pleasers, deceauers, and
ambitious persons.

Though Jerome (being an earnest man for the abating of the Deacons pride at
Rome, Ierom ad Nep: Ierom in Esaias 60.
in preferring of themselves before the order of Priests, whereof he himself
was one, Ier. ad Euagr. Ier. ad Marco.
) does speak as much as he could devise to suppres their insolences, and to
advance his own orders: as that Priests were once called Bishops etc. yet he
was content in other places, and upon other occasions, to confess that
Bishops are in respect of Priests: as Aaron was in respect of his sons: that
Esaias did foretell that Bishops should be chief governors of the church: that
the Priest was contained in the name of Bishop 1. Tim. 3. as the less in the
greater: that Bishops did hold the places of the Apostles: and even in the
very heat of his said disputations against Deacons, he willingly and
expresselye grants to Bishops one great prerogative, vz. the ordination of
Priests, which did not belong to his order.

Now it is not unknown, what advantage is taken against all Ieromes words;
which may be with any show of truth urged against Bishops. And it will not be
admitted of, in this case, which in some other, the best of them are enforced
to admit vz. that such his words, were uttered in heat of disputation: and
not dogmatice. But whatsoever he has written in any place either in his
commentaries upon the scripture, or in his letters, when he had laid aside the
person of a party, that had interest, and stood not upon every thing that
might give any advantage, as the manner is in disputation: all I say
whatsoever, it must yeald and stoop to that which may in any sort impair
the credit of Bishops, or else, woe be to poor Jerome, Doet. Jesuit. Tom. 4*
p. 525.
he writes contraries, and I wot not what. And there is one, that has sent
us word in his book from Rochell: that he knows a knacke, how Jerome may be
expounded, that he shall not leave to the Bishops, so much as ordination.
Where we read in Jerome: Quid facit excepta ordinatione Episcopus quod non
facit Presbyter? What does a Bishop, excepting ordinatio^, that a priest does
not? Now says this fellow: vide candide Lector, number legendum sit, accepta
ordinatione: vt sensus sit: ille qui ordinatus est a compresbyteris Episcopus,
nihil facit, quod presbyter non facit. Observe gentle reader whether we may
not read, having received ordination; that the sense may be: He that is
ordained of his fellow-Elders a Bishop, does nothing that a priest may not
do. Which is too too childish.

To prove the antiquity and lawfulnes, D.W.
of the name of an Archbishop, there being alleged the authorities of Clement,
Anacletus, Anicetus, Epiphanius, Ambrose, and Sozomenus: and thereuppon a
conclusion inferred, with a saying of Augustines; that seeing the name is so
ancient and that the original thereof is not found: it should seem to have
come from the Apostles: They term the bringing-in of these authorities the
T:C. lib. 2. pa 513.
moving and summoning of Hell: they say those times T.C. lib. 2. p. 5 111.
were not pure and virgine-like, but departed from the Apostolical
simplicity, and do tread them all under their feet, with as great facility
as may be. T.C. lib. 1. pa 88.
Clement, Anacletus, and Anicetus are discharged for rogues, and men branded in
the foreheads. T:C. lib 2: pa. 493.
Epiphanius, wrote according to the time he lived in about 380. and though the
name of Archbishop was in his time amongst Grecians, T.C lib 2 page 494.
yet it follows not thereby that it was in use amongst the Latins. For
Ambrose, when Cartwright writ his first Book, and that they were not so
thoroughly angered, as now they are, he only gave him this brande. TC. l. 1.
p. 94
Ambrose holds other things corruptlye: and then he expounds him, that of
likelyhoode the Archbishop he speaks of, was no other then he, which for the
time ruled the action, when Bishops were ordained: and after the action ended
had no more authority then the rest. But since his choler increasing, first
he began (as he says) in his second book to T.C. lib. 2. p. 491.
suspect the place alleged out of his book de dignitate Sacerdotum to be
corrupted, whereupon within a short time after he grew to be so hardened
against him by finding some other things also in the said book which he
misliked: that he has bored him in the ear for a Roge likewise, and sent him
a rouing amongst his fellows, making the author of that book a false Ambrose,
which is an unlearned shift. T.C. li. 1. p. 93
Sozomenus and Volusianus, they writ not according to that which was, but
according to the custom and manner of the age wherein they wrotte. As though
he should say, they lied. And as touching T.C. li. 1. p: 9^
Augustine, his sentence is approved (say they) unadvisedly, and that thereby a
window is open, to bring in all popery. Which is a lewd reproach.

For the antiquity of the name of Archdeacon, page 144
are alleged by D.W. the testimonies of Damasus, Jerome, Sixtus, Sozemene, and
Socrates. To whose authorities, their answer is: T. C. lib. 2. page 502.303.
two of them are counterfeits: Damasus spoke in the Dragons voice: Amongst men,
the best ground bears thistles: those times were corrupt. And yet Sixtus
lived Bishop of Rome, about the year 265. and was a godly martyr.

A number of authorities, being cited: which affirm that Timothy was Bishop
of Ephesus, as Eusebius, Dorotheus, Nicephorus, Jerome, Isidorus, Dionysius
Areopagita, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Theodoret, etc. Their
answer is. T.C. li. 2. p. 313
They esteem him a Bishop indeed and not an Evangelist. But what then? if they
were for one a hundred, they cannot counteruayle, much less bear down the
testimony of the Apostle. As though they ever purposed any such matter. But it
goes hard, when for a matter of history, all these worthy Fathers, can find
no better credit. If Timothy were Bishop of Ephesus, D.W.
I trust he will not say that the Apostle is ouerborne. And that he was Bishop,
all these affirm it, who living nearer to the Apostles times, should know
as well as Cartwright, what was in fact then: and being both as religious and as
learned as he would pretend to be, could as easily have espied, what repugna^ces
there was betwixt that practice, and the Apostles writings; and would as
earnestly have reproved it, if there had been any, as he.

Saint Ciprian and Saint Jerome are of opinion, nay S. Jerome says, it was
the opinion and the judgment of the whole catholic Church: (for so I
interpret his words the whole world) that for the avoiding of schisms and
heresies, it was necessary that there should be one Bishop in every Diocese
(as our learned writers have thought of those places, writing against the
Papists) to govern and overrule the rest of the Priests within their charge,
least otherwise (as by experience it was found amongst the Corinthians,) there
would be in short time as many schisms and altars, as there were priests and
heads; and that every one might not carry his scholars after him, and so
following their own fancies tear in pieces the Church of Christ. With them in
like manner all the godly general Councels since that time have agreed, and
finding daily new mischiefs to arise, which were not before hatched, have for
the meeting with them, increased accordinglye the authority of Bishops: and so
kept the church in good order at the least for above five hundred years. Since
which time, although the Pope with extreme injury to all other Bishops, has
lifted himself by a false title, above not only the^, but above al kings, and
Emperors in like manner, never ceasing till he has set himself in the seat
of the beast: yet with many other points of Christianity, this also has been
preserved, that the government of the church by Bishops, in every Kingdom,
province, and Dioces, is Apostolical: and not only in that respect to be for
ever continued, but necessary also in regard of the causes before mentioned.
But now all this is reckoned nothing. There are some two or three; that do take
upon them to prove (forsooth) that all the said Fathers T.C. lib. 2. page 641.
^82, 492. 447. etc.
of the primative Church, all Counsels, and all whosoever that have liked that
ordinance, Beza in his reverend judgment.
have been deceived in their judgments: in that they have accounted the
institution of Bishops, and their government, to be a means for the avoiding of
schisms, or for the maintenance of the peace of the Church. But how they
prove it, I will not stand now upon that point. It is forsooth in a word: by
discourse of reason (whereof Cartwright, braggeth) and for that (as they say)
there were great controversies in the church notwithstanding their institution
etc. And now it is their Eldership, must wear the Crown, and reform all that
is amiss. Well what we are to think of their Elderships; we partly have
seen, and yet shall hear more, before I have done. In the mean time, it is
evident how they oppose their own judgment, to all the world since Christ's
time.

Cyrillus, for calling the Bishop (...) high priest (as Ignatius had done in
effect before; Tert. de baptis.
the prince or chief of priests: and Tertullian also, Episcopus est summus
Sacerdos, the Bishop is the high priest) is wonderfully censured. He that
brings in a priest into the church (says Cartwright) goes about to burye
our Savior Christ. T.C. lib. 1. page 114.
And as for him that brings in an high priest into the church, he goes
about to put our Savior Christ out of his office. This that he affirms here,
touches not only Cyrill; but the most (I am sure) of all the ancient Fathers:
who were as careful, for the office and prerogative of Christ, and have
written, as many notable works against such Heretics, as have impugned his
Sovereignty in any respect; as ever he or his Sectaries have written, or I
think will do. But his breath, may well blast himself: they, I doubt not,
are in heaven, and it cannot touch them. We upon earth are to honor their
memories: and (for all proud and wicked censure) are to learn from them, that
such names not being given to any minister in respect of any office
peculiarly belonging to Christ, may lawfully be retained in the Church of
God.

D.W.
Whereas to approve the lawful use of some holydaies, allowed and appointed to
be kept in the Church of England: amongst diverse reasons this is one, the
continuance of them in the times of Ignatius, Tertullian, Ciprian, Jerome,
Augustine, and sondrie others, together with their good lyking and approbation
of them: T.C. l. 1. p. 154
They complain: that truth is measured by the crooked yard of time: and
therefore do appeal from these Examples unto the Scriptures and to the
Apostles times. As though the said ancient Fathers, and the churches in their
times: had not known the scriptures as well as he or his Sectaries, and that
(notwithstanding the fourth commandment) it was lawful, for the church to
appoint, and observe such days, which, upon that only ground, and contrary to
the practice of the whole church, since the Apostles times; he utterly denies
to be lawful: induced thereunto (no doubt) because Geneua has abolished the^,
vz. Christmas Day, Easter Day, Ascention-day, Whitsontide, with all the rest. A
fact that in the time of the ancient fathers, would surely have been accounted
a trick of Paganism.

Justinius, D.W:
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Ciprian, Ambrose, Jerome, Basile, Augustine, Socrates,
Sozimene, the Counsel of Auricanum, of Neocaesaria, of Nice, of Gangrene, and
of Orleaunce, being cited, to prove the churches authority in things of
indifferency, and for the observation of many things accordingly not
mentioned in the scriptures: T: C. lib. 1. page 29.32.
Cartwright, first complains, T. C. lib. 2. page 87. etc.
that he is so pestred with such kind of authorities in steed of Esaias, Jeremy,
S. Paul, and S. Peter: and then he shakes the^ off altogether, because the
things which they affirm are now called into question, vz. by him and his
fellows. So as when it pleases the^ to call any thing into question that all
the fathers held, away they must, there is no remedy.

Cirill affirming, that the law of Moses for punishing adultery by death,
T.C. l. 2. p. 105
is not now in force: Cartwright answers: T.C. l. 2. p. 107
as for Cirill, I can at no hand allow his opinion: his sentence is corrupt.
Chrysostom and Oecumenius do understand the place of Timothy, for the
imposition of hands there mentioned, of Bishops not of Priests. Cartwright
thereunto says: D: W. pa: 199.
I answer at once, that it seems violent. T.C. l: 2: p: 269.
Eusebi^s giving Josephus this great commendation, that he was Historicorum
qui sunt apud Iudeos facile Princeps, the principal man amongst the Jews for
a writer of histories: Master Beza disgraceth him in this sort, in his
oration, when he was first chosen to be Rector of the School at Geneua:
Iosephum etc. I do reckon Josephus not only amongst the profane, but also
in the number of ridiculous and foolish writters. And whereas Origene,
Chrysostom, the Creek scholiast, Theodoret, Theophilact, Ambrose, and Jerome,
do expound Romans 12.8. He that distributeth, let him do it with simplicity:
not of Deacons, that give other men's alms, but of all christians generally,
such as do give alms themselves: T.C. lib: 3, page: 89.90.
Cartwright disliking this exposition, determines of them after this sort:
They often strain the text to draw them to the present use of their churches:
by reason whereof in steed of milk they sometimes draw blood. He measures the
Fathers, D.W.
by his own falsehood.

When they are told, that the ancient histories are against the^, concerning a
point by them denied, about the chosing of BB. in Ciprians time: they confess
it, that they are so indeed: and thus they avoid them: that except it can be
showed out of some ecclesiastical history of like auncientie with Ciprian;
T.C. l: 2.534.
it is nothing. By which one blow, all the ecclesiastical histories (that are
now extant of name) since Christ's time (so far as I do presently remember
except it be Philo Iudeus) are quight cut off, as insufficient witnesses of any
thing, before their own times: that is of any thing, for the space of 300*
years at the least after Christ. There were Ecclesiastical writers before, as
it may appear in diverse places of Eusebius: out of whom both he and others
after him, borrowed much: but now they are lost, and we have them not.

Where it was said in the behalf of the ancient Fathers, D.VV.
and general Councelles, for the first 500. years (being charged with
corruption, and I wotte not with what building and working to make a way for
Antichrist etc) that they labored to keep out Antichrist etc, they answer:
T.C. lib. 2. pa. 507.508.
the Fathers imagined fondly of Antichrist: they dealt like ignorant men: they
were ouer-mastered of their affections: they had many errors etc. And all this
is spoken by a man much more fond, ignorant, affectionate, and erroneous, (as
I am persuaded) then they were.

But yet hear the man and his master a little further. T, C, l, 1. p. 97.
It is a dangerous thing to ground our order or policy of the Church upon
men. Again: Although the louuer of this Antichristian building was not then
set up: yet the foundation thereof being secretly laid in the Apostles
times, Ibidem,
you might easily know that in those times, the building was wonderfully
advanced and grown very high. And Beza also: The Fathers, The iudgem^t of
the most reverend,
in the Council of Nice, vnderlaide the seat of the Harlot, that sits
upon seven mountains. Again Master Cartwright: T, C, l, 2, p. 511.
Those times were not pure, nor virgin-like: the Churches were then much
departed from the singlenes, wherein the Apostles had left them. Lastly:
Examples cannot be without great danger set from those times. And thus all,
but Calvin, page 11.
Beza, and himself are men: there is no good building but their own, nor any
purity to be found, but in them, their favorers, their devises and platformes.

It is alleged out of Theodoret, that Saint Chrisostom, being Bishop of
Constantinople, had the care not only of that Church, ^. W. p. 412.413.
but of the Churches also in Thracia, in Asia, and in Pontus: and out of
Sozemenus, that he deposed thirteen Bishops for Simonie in selling of
benefices. Unto which testimonies they answer: First, that this care was no
other then such, as every godly Minister ought to have over all the Churches in
Christendom. For example, as Beza has of the Churches in France: and so
Chrisostom was Bishop only in the Church of Constantinople, and had an eye
and care to those other Churches. Which answer proceeds from gross
ignorance or malice. Secondlye, that if Chrysostom had charge over all those
Churches, he had as large a dominion as ever the Pope had. T.C. l. 2: p. 524,
525, 526,
Wherein also he shows his gross ignorance in taking Asia there, for the
third part of the world. Thirdly, that, if he had any such authority, he was
guilty of the breach of many Canons and Councels. Fourthly, that he could say,
he was a proud man. Fifthlie, that it might be answered: that Chrisostom
deposed the said Bishops, not by his authority, but by his counsel. Sixthly,
that it was Pope-like and unlawful to put in and put out, of his absolute
authority: and lastly, that it is dangerous to build upon the examples of
those times. And thus as a man in a maze, he goes backward and foreward,
finding nothing to rest upon, but his own mere ungodly and slanderous
surmises. A fit guide he is, for giddie heads to follow.

Whereas for the antiquitye of Archbishops, D, W,
the first general council that was after the Apostles times, vz. the
Council of Nice, is alleged in these words. Let the ancient custom be kept
throughout Egypt, Libia and Pentapolis, that the Bishop of Alexandria may have
the government of all these etc. T.C. l. 2, p, 562.
First, (say they) nothing was granted by those words to the Bishop of
Alexandria, but only to sit in the highest place at meetings: which is most
direct against the tenor of that Canon, and is but a sottish shift, grounded
especially upon this, that Beza in his annotations upon John 1. does expound
this word (...)(which the Council uses) to signify dignity or prerogative.
And secondly where it is said: let the ancient custom prevail. T, C, l. 2,
p. 484
The Bishops (says Cartwright) comparing that decree with others made at that
time, and not before, called that an ancient custom. As if Ministers being
assembled together, to speak of a matter continued a score of Provincial
Synodes, and holden in the space of ten years, should say in this sort: in
such and such things we will keep our old custom. Which they themselves,
might say as well if they list, concerning their bastardly Discipline, that
secretly and seditiouslie eight or nine years since, they have agreed upon
(after their fashion like dogs and cats) in many of their assemblies. But if
either he, or any other of the said Ministers should so say, they should
certainly in mine opinion speak very foolishly and very ignorauntlie. And
whether it is likely, that all the ancient Fathers, assembled in that
Council, would use such a Sophistication in one of their Canons; that judge
you: or whether there was ever any man before Cartwright, so presumptuouslie
impudent, as to expound their words in this sort, that I leave to himself and
his followers to consider of, at their leisure.

But the Council must speak according to his pleasure: or otherwise mark how
he comes over it. First he gibeth at these titles, which are given unto it,
to be a notable and famous Council: T, C, l, 1, pa, 93,
secondly, he takes upon him, to prove, that the said Canon was not a good
decree: because as he says, some other decrees then made, are not sound:
thirdly, (allowing the decision that was given by that Council, of the
difference touching the perfect unity of substance in Trinity.) For the rest he
says thus: the most of the errors agreed upon in that Council were in the
Discipline. The most Belike there were some then in the Doctrine. Those which
he has named for such great errors, were not agreed upon as matters of
doctrine, to my understanding, but were orders thought meet in those days for
the policy of the Church. I omit what reckning has bin ever made of this
Council, by all other Councels and fathers since that time. Instit. lib, 4, ca*
^, Sect, 750,
Calvin is content to embrace the first four general Councels, quantum
attinet ad fidei doctrinam, so far as they have dealt with the doctrine of
faith: though Cartwright in the height of his pride do challenge the doctrine.
But every man now will allow, and disalow what he list. The Arrians will say as
much of the doctrine, as either Calvin or Cartwright do say of the discipline.
And so every Schismatic or Heretic: look what serves their turn, that is
holy: what they dislike; that is erroneus.

About the choosing of Ministers much has bin pretended for the peoples
interest. Against which conceit for the necessity of it: amgst many reasons
prop ou^ded, the Council of Laodicea has been alleged: where it was decreed
about the year 338. that it ought not to be permitted unto the multitude to
make election of them, Instit, lib. 4, c, 4, Sect, 12,
which should be preferred to the ministry. M. Calvin does greatly allow of
this canon, which shows his liking of the peoples restraint: and he affirms
a sense unto it, as though that Counsel had purposed to have squared out the
same platform for the erecting of Ministers, that he has devised and
established in Geneua. Read the laws of Geneua about the making of Ministers,
and you shall find them wholly to agree with his words in this place. Now if
we can be content to receive this exposition, T, C, l, 1, p. 53,
which Cartwright makes (being the very marrow of Master Caluins) vz. T.C.
l. ^. p. 256
the Canon meant not to have the people secluded from the election, but tends
only to the directing of the^ by the foreiudgement of the Elders: he will be
content to let it pass without more ado. Otherwise notwithstanding Caluins
commendation of it, he can tell us (but untruly and without any warrant) that
this Canon is suspected, whether it be a Bastard or no: and that many Councels
are against it.

Master Calvin confesses, that before the Council of Nice, there were first
BB, placed in their dioces above the Ministers: then Archbishops over Bishops:
and lastly in the said Nicene Council, that there were Patriarchs appointed
over Archbishops. Now whereas the Council of Antioch about some 15. years
after says: It behooves the Bishops in every country to know their
Metropolitan Bishop, to have care over the whole province: propter quod, for
which cause all such as have any business, must come to their Metropolitan city:
wherefore it pleases this Council that he also excel in honor, and that the
other Bishops do nothing without him, according to the ancient rule prescribed
by our forefathers, but those things only which pertain to his own Dioces.
Cartwright delivers us these gloses upon it: T.C l. 1. p. 93.
A Metropolitan Bishop (says he) was nothing else but a Bishop of that place,
which was the chief city of the Dioces or shire: and as for the name, it
makes no more difference betwixt Bishop and Bishop, T.C. l. 2, p, 556
then when I say a Minister of London, and a Minister of Newington. Secondly.
there is no mention here that BB. are subject to the Metropolitan. Thirdly, for
the honor they should give him, I have showed it out of the Council of Nice. T,
C, l, 2, p, 622,
Fourthly, the care for other Churches is but such, as every good Minister
should have of al churches. Fiftlie, the word Dioces should be parish. For the
Council did not mean that the Bishops mentioned had Diocesses: T.C l. 2. p.
565.
but every one of them one town only, having belonging unto it certain
villages, which did resort unto his church, as in Hitchin and diverse other
places with us. He should have said Geneua, but all this he affirms most
absurdly. Besides, this is his ordinary practice, that because the word used
amongst the Greek writers ordinarily for a dioces, does likewise also
signify a parish: he ever, to falsify such authors as are brought against
him, does translate for dioces, parish, as in this place he does it with a most
brazen forehead. The council of Nice, of Antioch, of Carthage, and of Sardis,
directly proving that Bishops only had authority to excommunicate: T, C, l. 3,
p, 91,
Cartwright gives no other answer unto them but this: that Master Calvin
says: how Bishops in excommunicating after that manner dealt therein
ambitiously.

Athanasius says: that Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, had the Churches of
Pentapolis committed to his care: Cartwright says, T, C, l, 2. p, 622,
that care imports not jurisdiction: and so as to the Council of Nice and of
Antioch. Cyprian says, the cause of heresies and schisms is this: that
Priests will not obey their BB. Cartwright that answers. that is iu effect, if
his unpreaching Aldermen will not obey their Pastors. Epiph. li, 2: To. ^.
here is, 6^.
Epiphanius speaking of one Peter a Bishop of Alexandria, says: this is the
custom, that the Bishop of Alexandria should have the Ecclesiastiasticall
government of all Egypt, Thebais, Mariota, Libia, Ammonica, Mariotes, and
Pentapolis: Whereupon Cartwright gloseth thus: that is, besides his own church,
T.C. l. 2. p. 56^
he procured the good of other churches, round about him. ^piph. here. 69
Again, Epiphanius of one Miletus an Archbishop, that he was subject or under
the said Peter Archbishop of Alexandria. Cartwright says, that every Bishop of
name was called an Archbishop. T: C. l. 1. p. 560.
And where it is said Miletus was under Peter: that is, under him in honor,
and not subject unto him, says Cartwright: contrary to the manifest words and
meaning of the author. Theodoret Bishop of Cyprus says of himself, that he had
the government over 800. Churches: Cartwright says in effect, that he lied:
that his words concerning his care in governing those churches, being spoken of
himself want not suspicion, and that he was condemned for writing against
Cirill: never mentioning how he was wrongfully condemned in his absence, and
afterward restored.

I omit a number of their other shifts and presumptuous dealings with the
fathers. T. C. li. 1. p. 113 T. C. li. 1. p. 41
As of Epiphanius: For him it is known of what authority he is, etc. it were
better to lay his words against Aerius, T: C. l. 2. p. 528,
upon some counterfaite and false Epiphanius to spare his credit. Likewise of
Ambrose: Many errors and corrupt expositions are found in his works: in his
exposition upon the place to the Philippians, a child may see, how violently he
forces the Text. And also their rejecting of Councels by heaps, etc. where they
have no coulor, how they may pervert them. But yet I may not let this escape my
fingars, that Cartwright, whether for his own glory, or else that God would
have him to be the instrument of his own shame, is well content, rather then
he will want testimonies, to encounter with the authority of Bishops: to sort
both himself and all his followers, in the number of those that ever since the
Apostles times have repined at that authority: and thereupon have been
ouerruled by all the ancient F^thers and Councels, as busy bodies and
Schismatics. You shall hear his words, and then judge whether I have
mistaken them. T. C. l. 2. p. 580
To what end both in the Nicene council, and in many other holden more then
two hundred years after, are there found so many canons, for the
acknowledging of the authority of one Metropolitan in every Province, for the
honor which he should have: the name he should be called by: for the place
where he should sit at their meetings: for the bounds of their circuit? Do
not all these declare, that there were some which were ennemies to that
authority, etc. To this I might add his defense to Aerius, and his
confutation of Epiphanius: not without some discredit to Saint Augustine.

Lastly, whatsoever is said, or may be said hereafter, out of all the
ancient Fathers and Histories, and out of all the general Councels,
concerning the said government of the Church, by Bishops, Archbishops, and
Patriarchs, of their institution, authority, title, circuites, and
prerogatives: Cartwright does take upon him (most boldly and most falsely) to
prescribe unto us, certain rules, how we must understand them, or otherwise
there is not one of them that will be allowed of. I blush in his behalf (I
assure you) to set it down, and am ashamed that any man bearing the name of
a Christian, should deal so like an Impostor. But this it is* That it may
appear (says he) what the Fathers and Councelles do mean, when they give
more to the Bishop of any one church, then to the Elder of the same church,
T. C. lib. 1. page, 19.110.
and that no man be deceived by the name of Governor or ruler over the rest,
to fancy any such authority and domination or Lordship, as we see used in our
church: it is to be understood, that amongst the Pastors, Elders, and
Deacons of every particular church, and in the meetings and companies of the
Ministers, or Elders of diverse churches, there was one chosen by the voices
and suffrages of them al, or the most part which did propound the matters that
were to be handled: whether they were difficulties to be soluted, or
punishments and censures to be decreed upon those that had faulted, or whether
there were elections to be made, or what other matter so ever occasion was
given to entreat off: the which also gathered the voices and reasons of those
which had interest to speak in such causes, which also did pronounce according
to the number of the voices which were given, which was also the mouth of the
rest to admonish, or to comfort, or to rebuke sharply such as were to receive
admonishment, consolation, or rebuke, and which in a word did moderate that
whole action which was done for that time they were assembled etc. And must we
thus understand the Fathers and general Councels? He might as truly say:
that the present form of our ecclesiastical government in England under her
majesty by Archbishops and Bishops; is even the very same manner of
church-gouernment, that he and his followers look for, and the right platform
of those Elderships which have so mightily bewitched them.

Men, that once have passed the limits of modesty; may afterward say and
write, what they list. The ancient Fathers, have deserved far otherwise of
the Church of Christ, then that, for the maintenance of such a forgery, as the
pretended form of discipline is; they should be used after any such manner. I
would wish all men, that are of this proud, and presumptuous humor, to peruse
the books which S Augustine has written against Iulianus the Pelagian. There
they shall find the very same contemptuous spirit in Iulianus, that reigns in
themselves, and exalts it self so greatly against the godly and learned
fathers: as also on the other side, they shall there see, the fruits of Gods
spirit: vz. in what reverend account, and very high estimation S. Augustine
had such worthy and holy men by name, as here you have heard very
contumeliously disgraced, August. contra Pelag. L. 2. c. 4.
childishly neglected, disdaynfully contemned, and most proudly rejected. Ita
intellexit Ambrosius, ita Cyprianus, ita Gregorius etc. So Ambrose understood
(such a place of the scriptures): So Cyprian, so Gregory, etc. did carry some
weight in S. Augustines opinion. Those things which diverse notable men, have
alleged out of the ancient Fathers, for the justification of the present
ecclesiastical government in the church of England; ought not so lightly to
be regarded with every princox. What the Fathers have written that agrees not
with our Fantastical giddye headed fellows pleasures, they write it not of
parciality, either to grieve them, or to gratify us: but as truth led the^.
Quod inuenerunt in ecclesia, teneru^t: quod didiceru^t, docueru^t: Ibidem ca:
10.
quod a patribus acceperunt, hoc filiis tradideru^t: that which they found in
the church (says Augustine) they held: that which they had learned, they
taught: that which they had received of their fathers, they delivered to their
children.

Though Cartwright and his company do carry so base a conceit of those times,
wherein the ancient fathers lived: yet the Fathers themselves did not so
think of the^. Iulianus the heriticke did speak (as it seems) insuch a
scornful sort of the^, as our Sectaries do. But S. Augustine lays it to his
reproach, as an apparent argument of his great folly and presumption: Ibidem
cap. 10
thinking it a most absurd point for him so to use them. Vsque adeo permiscuit
imis summa longus dies etc. has time so confounded all things (says
Augustine)? is darkness grown to be such light, and is light it self turned
into such darkness, vt videant Pelagius, Celestinus, Iulianus, et caeci sunt
Hilarious, Cpyrianus, Ambrosius? that Pelagius, Celestin^s, and Iulianus can
see, and Hilary, Cyprian, and Ambrose are become blind? And surely I do not
perceive, why I may not without offense, apply the same words to those men in
these days, which tread in the said fellows steps, concerning this their
contempt and pride. Were there never learned men; before you were taught the
principles of the Geneua discipline? was wisdom dead till you were borne? Do
you know what was in the Apostles times, better then they did, who succeeded
the Apostles? were the ancient Fathers able to defend the greatest mysteries
of our salvation, against so many pestilent heretics, and were they ignorant
in the matters of the external government of the church? Knew they the
distinction of the three persons in the blessed Trinity, and could they not
find what difference Christ allowed off, to be continued in his Church, betwixt
a Bishop and a priest? Is the darkness which pride carries with it, growe^ to be
so light: and is the light that showed it self so many ways in the ancient
fathers (as in their singular learning and great humility) become such
darkness; that Cartwright, Trauerse, Fenner, and such like, (but the shadows of
learned men in respect) should be thought so clearly sighted? and shall
Ireneus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, Hierome, Chrysostom, Augustine,
Gregory, Hilarye, and all the rest of those worthy men be reckoned blind?
Surely he is a bussard that thinks so. And therefore I will conclude this
chapter with another saying of S. Augustines, against such busy innouators, as
you are: oportet vt populi christiani vestris prophanis nouitatibus anteponant
etc. Ibidem cap. 1
It is meet that all christian people should prefer the ancient fathers,
before your novelties, eisque potius adherere quam vobis: and rather stick
fast to their judgments, then to run after your phansies.

CHAP. XXVIII. Their dealing with all the new writers, and many reformed
churches when they make against them.
THis is a ground laid down by Cartwright: T.C. lib. 1. p. 7.
that few men that are of any stayde or sounder judgment in the scriptures,
and have seen or read of the government and order of other churches, are
against them in such matters, as they have broched unto us. And agreablie to
this ground his answers are framed, when any thing is urged against him, out
of any of the new writers, except Calvin, and BeZa. If either of them do
happen to cross him: it is strange to see how he doubleth and shifteth. As for
any other, they are but a puff with him: he cares not greatly how he
handles them.

D.W.
Pellicane, Bucer, Bullinger, Illyricus, and Musculus, affirming with all the
ancient Fathers, that Timothye was Bishop of Ephesus: what then (says
Cartwright) If they were for one, a hundred, they could not bear down the
Apostle. T.C. li. 2. p. 313 T.C. li. 2. p, 114
As though they had ever meant it. Luther expoundinge a place of Zachary
contrary to his liking: his exposition (says Cartwright) is out of season.
Musculus affirms that the places 20. of Saint Matthew, 10. of saint Mark,
and 22. of saint Luke: vos autem non sic: do not condemn Superiority, but
an ambitious desire, and tyrannical usage of it: but Calvin as learned as he
(says Cartwright) is of my judgment. T.C. li. 1. pa. 23
Bucer, holds that the said 20. of Matthew does propound a general rule to
all magistrates and christians. Where Cartwrights extenuating the authority of
man, T.C lib 2^ page 423.
braueth out Bucer with this: that his judgment has counterpoise of other as
learned.

Whereas, Peter Martyr, Bullinger, and Gualter, do bring diverse reasons for
the lawful use of the surplise, and such other apparel, as is appointed with
us for Ministers: Cartwright is so far from being moved with their
authority, T.C. lib. 1. p. 74
as that he aduentureth to confute their said reasons after his manner, very
sophistically: affirming in effect (but falsely) that either they understood
not ancient fathers, alleged by them for that purpose: or that they
perverted their meaning. Bishop Ridly, and Master Bucer, approouing that where
there are no preachers, there should be godly learned homilies read in those
Churches: Cartwright thus dismisseth Bishop Ridley: being a party in this
cause, T:C. lib. 2. page 392.
he ought to be no witness. And for Master Bucers words, he says, they are
not to be weighed: insinuating that his book concerning his judgment in king
Edwardes days upon the communion book is counterfeited. T.C. lib. 1. pa.
Again, of master Bucer for his allowing of private baptism, and of the
sign of the Cross: likewise of the ring in marriage, and that the parties
married should receive the communion: he says, Bucer has other gross
absurdities: T.C. lib. 1. pa.
to this authority I could oppose other men of as great authority: sometimes
Homer sleeps: his reasons are very ridiculous, T C. lib. 1. page 199.
very slender and cold, and savor not of the learning and sharpness of the
judgment of master Bucer.

Master Fox in like sort setting down his full approbation, To. 1 page 20.
of the present state ecclesiastical: that Archbishops should be in degree
above Bishops, and Bishops in degree above other Ministers: and relying for
this his judgment partly upon the scriptures, and partly upon the primative
Church: and concluding, that this is to keep an order duly and truly in the
Church, according to the true nature and definition of order by the authority
of Augustine: T.C. lib. 1. page 117.
he is (I say) thus censured: Master Fox writing a story, does take greater
pain, and looks more diligently to declare what is done, and in what time,
and by whom, then how justly or unjustly, how conveniently or inconueniently
it is done, etc.

Bishop Jewel (a man to be accounted of, as his name does importe, and so
esteemed not only here in England, but with all the learned men beyond the
seas, that ever knew him or saw his writings,) upon occasion offered to
show his opinion, concerning one of Cartwrightes propositions: vz: that both
the names, and the offices of Archbishops and Archdeacons, are to be
abolished,) he presumed (forsooth) upon the base authority of all antiquity,
the ancient fathers, the general Councels, and ecclesiastical histories, to
call it in the margent of his answer, nouitiorum assertio, a new assertion,
or an assertion of yonglinges: and in the end, after he has briefly surueied
the strength of Cartwrightes great bulwark, he concludes in this sort.

As for these reasons, in my judgment, they are not made to build up, and
they are too weak to pull down, etc. stultitia nata est in cord pueri, and
virga disciplinae fugabit eam: It is but wantonness, correction will help it.
Whereupon incommeth Cartwright, as hot as a toste, and skorning, (ye may be
sure) to have such a main Article of the new belief to be termed, nouitiorum
assertio, he calls these words, T.C lib 1. page 118.
biting and sharp: and for his further entrance to confute the Bishops
reasons, why he misliked the said proposition, he nayleth as it were upon his
toombe, this shameful, and most slanderous inscription: Bishop Jewel
calls the doctrine of the Gospel wantonness. Mark the man's forehead: how
it is hardened. The Papist that said he recanted all his writings against
the Pope: was not more impudent. He calls their riotous opening of their
mouths against those things they either know not, or which otherwise they
deprave most maliciously against their own consciences, (as it is to be
feared,) he calls (I say) these and such like dealinges wantonness: and
not the doctrine of the Gospel.

Generally thus he writes of those most learned men, and many of them godly
Martirs, who were the chief penners and approouers of the communion book, in
king Edwardes time, and offered to defend every point of it in Queen Maryes
days, against all the Papists living: their knowledge (says Cartwright) was
in part, and although they brought many things to our light, T.C. lib. 1.
page 196.
yet they being sent out in the morning, or ever the son of the Gospel was
risen so high might ouersee many things, which those that are not so sharp
of sight as they were may see, for because that which they want in the
sharpness of sight, they have by the benefit and clearenesse of the sun,
and the light. Excellent child of light, whose knowledge is not in part. And
oh worthy Discipline, of the Consistorian Synagogues: how clearly she
carries all her implementes with her.

Let a man cast down his head, but for a day, like a bulrush, and give a groan
or two in the behalf of that kingdom: and by and by he is snatched up above
the man in the moon, and may pass amongst them for an illuminated Elder. But
it would be known what mysteries have been revealed, either by him or any
of his: that were unknown to those blessed men. Surely I know of none: except
it be that their Elderships are newly thrust into their Consistoriall belief.
A point (I confess) whereof those godly men were ignorant. Otherwise they
were well enough acquainted with these quarrels. They had weighed them, and
finding them too light, rejected them. They had skill to discern of such
unbridled spirits: and in their days greatly pitied them. In a word to
speak my opinion: they were in deed gold, if they be compared to Cartwright,
and such like dross: who have little in them, more then ordinary men, but
only painted colors, and Sophistical shows.

Many other particulars of such their dealinges with the new writers, might
be laid down before you. But these to my purpose, are I know sufficient: and
therefore I will come to their boldness and presumption against not this man
or that man, but even whole reformed Churches. And although I find some more
temperate and modest herein then others: yet when the freeholde of their
Elderships is touched, they are all like to themselves.

The Geneuians, in their Annotations upon their harmony of confessions, are
well content that every Church shall use their liberty, as they shall think
it most expedient, in these points following: vz: the reading of the Epistles
Sect. 1. obs. 1. ad conf. Boh.
and Gospels upon sondayes and holy days, so as other parts of the
Scriptures do not thereby grow into contempt: Kneeling Sect. 14. ob. 4. ad
con. Bo.
at the communion: the Sect. 14 ob. 2. ad con. Au.
use of all such ordinary ceremonies at the celebration of the Communion, as
now are used among the Lutherans, Copes, singing Organs etc. and were used
before by the papists at their masses: the Sect. 15. ob. 1. ad con. Wir.
dispensation of the communion to those that be sick at home in their houses:
Ember Sect. 16. ob. 1. ad con. Bo.
days and holy days consecrated to the godly memory of the saints: The
singinge of Sect. 16. obs. 2. ad con. Bo.
Christian hymns and songs upon the said holy days, made to set out the
glory of god, in respect of the great good works it pleased him to work by
them: The use of funeral Sect. 16 ob. 1. ad con. wir.
sermons: and the imposition Sect. 13. obs. 2. ad con. Bo.
of hands upon children, that can say their Catechism, which we call
Confirmation. In all these things (I say) they leave every Church to their
liberty: so as other churches, that use them not, be not thereby praeiudiced.
But when any confession does approve Sect. 17. obs. 1.2.3. ad con. August.
the calling of Bishops; yealding unto them all lawful obedience (if they will
not force upon men their ungodly traditions as of chastity etc.) or when
their Aldermen or Consistories are impeached: then they look about them: it is
a nail in a wound: they censure: they reiecte: they wrest and pervert, every
thing at their pleasure, as partly I have showed in the end of the Chapter:
and as any man may further see that will take the pains to view those
observations.

Which manner and carriage of themselves: I persuade my self no wise man will
like of. For besides their corrupt dealinge, it is too Pope-like, to take so
much upon them, as there they do. What a vanity is this, to say of other
Churches; we allow this, and that; if it be thus and thus understood:
otherwise we cannot like of it: we think it unlawful, we cannot digest
it? And yet I cannot blame them so much; as I do our own domestical
counterfeites. They are in possession of a government: and would be
therefore loath to loose it. They got it hardly, and do fear every thing,
that makes against it. I am persuaded if they might be sure to keep it
still: they would be content to grant (of their own goodness) great liberty
to all Churches in their own matters. Whereas our make-bates, what furious and
outrageous courses have they taken, against the Church of England; for the use
of those things, which now the Geneuians allow of? And besides, concerning
their pretended discipline: they will needs hold it before they have it: and
do show already as much or more contempt of those Churches, that dislike it,
and are as saucy with them: as any that I do know or hear of, except it be
their disciples Barrow and his companions.

It has pleased, that light headed* cockbraine, that presumed to write a
petition of late as unto her Majesty: and afterward like a seditious and
vnduetiful person published the same to the people in printe (for what cause
let wise men consider): Polit. page 13.
amongst many other doultish untruths to affirm this; vz. that the Churches
of Zuricke, Berne, Shaffhusen, S. Galls, Rethia, Mylliane, Bieuna, Polonie, and
Hungaria, have commended (by their subscription to the second Heluetian
confession) the government of the Church by Elders, to be used in all Churches
for ever. But let the whole confession be viewed, and although I doubt not but
that there was as much cunning used by the Geneuians about that subscription as
might be; yet is there not one word in it, that tends that way.

In that confession there are but two marks of the Church set down: the
third after the Geneua computation, is lest out. In the Chapter of the
ministers of the Church: they are all of them as many: as are there named,
reckoned for ministers of the word and sacraments. That which is there, and
might in any sort be wrested to that purpose is this. And seeing there must
needs be discipline in the Church, Conf. Helu.
and in times past (apud veteres) excommunnication was used, and there were
ecclesiastical judgments in the people of god, in the which this discipline
was exercised by wise and godly men: it shall also be the ministers part, to
moderate this discipline, as it may edify according to the condition of times,
and the public states, and as it shall be necessary. Which words are so
far from commendinge the perpetual use of the Geneua Eldershippe: that in
mine opinion they are quite against it. For thus they say: First that there
must be discipline, which no man denies: secondly that excommunication was
used in the times of the ancient fathers; this also is confessed: thirdly that
amongst the Jews there were ecclesiastical courts, in which this discipline
was exercised by wise and godly men (who for any thing that is here said,
might be, of the tribe of Leui, and all of them priests): and fourthly that
it belongs to the ministers to moderate this Discipline (that is) to use it,
or not to use it, as times, states, and necessitye shall require.

And that this my interpretation of this fourth point must needs be the
meaning of the Heluetian confession: it appears hereby: in that this form of
government, (which the petitioner speakeh of) is not in any Church in all
Heluetia for ought I have heard. They have no such Aldermen: they have no use
of their excommuncation. And having been many days solicited, to have
received it: for the better, reputation of Geneua, their answer has ever
been: that every Church is to have an especial eye to this point, what will
most edifye: and that for-asmuch as they have found the terpretation of the
Scriptures, which has been since the Apostles times. Defense of
Ecclesiastical discip. pa. 86.
The notablest instrument: None ever like him? Master Trauerse (I think): will
not endure that. For he is resolute in Master Bezaes behalf: saying: Master
Beza is the best interpreter of the new Testament. There was one in Basile, who
gave it out after a glorious manner: that he did attribute, Calvin. Farello pa.
412.
non minus Farello quam Paulo: no less to Farellus then he did to Paul. Which
master Calvin misliked.

Beza. Epist 12
The letter, which Beza writ unto our English disciplinaries, whereupon they
were to build their consciences, is kept I perceive by the Register as a
relic at home in Regist. pa. 30.
their houses.

In the scurrilous libell, which the brethren do tear me the practice of
prelates, Practice of Prelates D.2.
I find these words. Master Calvin, Beza, Viret, etc. Knox, Cartwright, and
such like, etc. are the only worthies in the world, that have maintained
Discipline. Worthies? A trifling commendation. He was a very notable man in
his time: that said, mediocria firma. And might no meaner a dignity serve
these men: but needs they must be Worthies? They should have called them
stupor mundi: the astonishment of the world.

There is much written of the Popes of Rome by their Parasites: as that they
have a divine judgment, and cannot err, etc. and you shall see that within a
while (if the world hold thus on,) the Consistoriall humoristes may chance to
come near them: even in this their so gross and palpable folly. Epist. ad
mise.
Zanchius tells a notable history. When he came newly out of Italy to
Geneua, Calvin and Viretus preached ordinarily there at one certain hour: the
one in Saint Peter's Church: the other in Saint Geruasins. Now there was a
Frenchman, with whom he grew into some acquaintance, that never missed
Master Caluins sermon: but would not once vouchsafe to hear Viretus.

Whereupon Zanchius demanding of him the reason: why he heard not the one
sometimes as well as the other: in haec ferme verbarespondet sed Gallice: St
veniret S. Paulus qui eadem hor^ concionaretur, qua and Caluinus: ego relicto
Paulo audirem Caluinum: the Frenchman answered plainly in these very words
almost, but in French: If Saint Paul should come to Geneua, and should preach
the same hour that Calvin did, I would leave Paul, and go to hear Calvin.

It is also written of Alexander the third, that treading upon the neck of the
noble Emperor Frederick the first; Carrion. Nauclerus.
he applied unto himself and that action, these words of the Psalm spoken
of Christ: Thou shall walk upon the venomous Aspe and Basiliske: Psalm. 118.
thou shall tread down the Lion and Dragon. And see what was written in a
letter to master Calvin, by one Iacobus Bernardus from Geneua: which letter
Calvin thought meet to be kept in store, and Beza to publish it in print.
Master Calvin being bannished from Geneua, by the procurement of the Ministers
especially that disliked his proceedinges: there was great means made for his
return thither again. So as after some two or three years absence thence, it
was agreed in the City, that he should be restored to his former place, as you
have heard before. Quod cum intellexissem, non potui non laudare Deum,
aliterque iudicare, quam quod a Deo factum istud, and esset mirabile in oculis
nostris, quodque lapis quem reprobarant aedificantes, Math. 21* Marc. 12. Luke
20. Romans 9. 1. Pet. 2.
in caput fieret anguli: which thing, (says the said Bernardus to Calvin) when
I understood, I could not but praise God, nor otherwise judge, then that it was
the Lords doing and was maruilous in our eyes, and that the stone which the
builders had refused should be made the head of the corner. Which words are
only applied in the new Testament by the Apostles and Euangilests to our
savior Christ: and were in my judgment as blasphemously applied to Calvin, as
the other were by the Pope to himself

But I will leave these immodrate and foreign dotages: and specify unto you
some of our domestical. I confess to you (says the displayer of men in their
colloures) I reverence D. Page. 37.
Fulke: and no disparagement unto any, I think him universally as well learned
as ever Calvin or Beza was. And in an other place: Page. 34.
Put it to the censure of D. Fulke, D. Whittakers, Page. 37.
Master Cartwright etc. Men I hope as well able to judge: as all the L.
Bishops in christendom. Again: No question, but Calvin and Beza are wide
sometimes. Also afterward. The very ornaments of your university indeed,
Page. 87.
whose very names and lives do carry with them aestimation to be reverenced:
D. Fulke: D. Goade: D. Whittakars: to these men I appeal. And furthermore. If
we should once or twice and use it not, Page. 112.
set D. Fulkes learned judgment against the bare authority of Calvin and Beza
in this case, I do not see that it be any great prejudice or disparagement
unto any. Diverse other such like speeches there are in that book, whereby a
man may see, how the brethren are affected unto their parte-takers. Although he
names some, who will never thank him for it, and I supose he has done them
great injury, in making them to seem the patrones of such fancies, as there
are mainetained.

I made mention before of Cartwrights place, amongst certain disciplinary
worthies. But my meaning is not so to pass him over, whom all the rest of our
men do so admire. His authority in deed is very great, as being in effect
the Patriarche of them all. Those things that he writes, are almost oracles.
Happy is the brother: that can come in his company. If he be in prison,
prayers are made for his deliverance: if he be delivered, great thanks are
publickely given unto god for the same. If he command, the rest obey: if he
shall relent; I think they will all relent. When great matters are to be
handled: he must needs be one in every place: Couentry, Cambrdige, London, etc.
And upon any new accidents: the occurrents are carried to him, as to their
chiefest counsaylor.

Salute our Chap. to F. 1585.
most reverent brother master Cartwright, for whom prayers are made with us.

As soon as I M. R. to F.
know of master Cartwrightes delivery, I sent for master Trauers, and we had
psalms of thanksgiving and prayers to the same purpose and a sermon: his text
being the 20 of Jeremy. 10.11.12.13.14. verses.

I percciue by those Wake to F. 1587.
imperfect writings of master Cartwrightes and others, that the points of
reformation are at large and particularly debated.

We want Gelli. 10*, F. 1586.
books, whereby we may come to the knowledge of the truth. I mean T. C.
books.

The form of Fen. against Bridges. 120.
government set down by T. C. is commanded by god.

I thank god Far. to Lit. 1586.
I have satisfied in part my longing, with conference with M. Cartwright: of
whom I think: as she did of Solomon

I would Gellibr. to Field.
gladly know when I might come (from Oxford to London) to see T.C.

Master Snape, Snape to Bar. bon 1590.
upon one of his examinations before her Majesty's Commissioners in causes
ecclesiastical, findinge some matters to have been further disclosed, then he
looked for: presently directed his letters thereof, into the country, moving
his friend, that master Cartwright might be advertised. It were good (says he)
you sent to T.C. with speed.

I would gladly hear whether T. C. did council you, or demand council of
you. Heart to Field.
I wish the matter may be well and closly handled. For I hear some
whispering already (yet among them that favor the cause) that he has
councelled the brethren rather to use those corruptions, then to leave their
charges. I wish and hope it be not so: not only least men should judge the man
to be inconstant, but especially for that these times be such, that in them
such yealding will do no good.

Master D. Bridges having occasion in his writings to name Master
Cartwright: did forget to carry this word M. under his girdle: but called him
plainly Cartwright. Whereat see how master Trauerse repineth. Trauers def. page
32.
We acknowledge and reverence master Cartwright, as his rare guiftes of
knowledge and zeal and his learned works, and constant suffering in this
cause, and at this time his continual travel in preaching the Gospel, do
worthily deserve: for which cause he was worthy other respect, then the
replier here does give him. If he would needs set down his name, he should
have considered the example of the Apostle, who yet seldom or never mentions
any minister of the Gospel by name, yea scarce any professor, without some
good mark of the grace of god in them. But this and a great deal more, both
he, and whosoever shall serve god, as they ought, in this cause of the further
reformation of the Church, must account to endure of them, that oppose
themselves to this most necessary service. I had lately some speech with
Master Cartwright concerning our next meeting, who advised me to put you in
mind of some things, Lord to Fen. ^589.
etc. He says that at your late being together at Wroxall, you determined our
next meetinge to be at Warwick at the quarter Sessions that twesday, for the
humbling of our selves: and the day following to consult of other matters. His
request is, that you will give notice thereof unto the brethren of our
conference, and also that by your means, there may be some of us appointed to
exercise in private that day. If this his request connot conveniently be
performed, then I take it necessary thot you write so with some speed to M.
Cartwright, that he may provide a remedy else where.

M. May and I rid with M. Cartwright to M. Throgmortons, two miles out of
Warwick; where he preached: more he said then ever he did in his life before
etc. Farmer to Little. 1586.
On tuesday M. Cartwright kept M. Fens lecture: text psalm 122. 4. unto the
end: taking thrones as Tremellius does, and vrginge the discipline, the want
whereof he affirmed to be the cause, that some friends forsook our church,
and enemies (as Papists,) would not come near her. C. Garton to Field.


I pray you remember to reserve for me one of the rare birds books his name
may be right Cartwright. God be praised though he cannot speak unto us, yet
according to his name he does write. He is a worthy wight.

Sicut discipuli olim presto habuerunt ipsum Dominum: M. Cholm. to Field 1582.
ita magistrum Cartwrightum dominum meum habeo presentem. as the disciples in
times past had the Lord himself amongst them, so I have M. Cartwright, my Lord
in presence with me.

And thus hitherto of these poor simple; but yet most palpable parasites. The
disciplinarie crew, a company of Apostles: and Cartwright their Christ.
Christ amongste his Apostles, and Cartwright amongst his Disciples. If
Cartwright and such other guides were not supposed by their followers to be
very notable Thrasoes, is it possible that any man of common sense, would show
themselves to be such flattering Gnathoes? And these are the men (for-sooth)
that in all their speeches will pretend scriptures. But when they have so
done, tell them, that they peruerte the scriptures to serve their turns: and
that thus, and thus, they must understand them according to the judgment of
all the ancient fathers: their answer in effect is this. What tell you us
of the ancient fathers? Calvin and Beza, are the best expounders of the
scriptures. Master Cartwright is a rare bird, a worthy wight, and as it were,
Christ himself amongst his Apostles. They have taught us as we teach: they
are our fathers, who have begotten in us a love and a likinge of the Geneua
Discipline, and them will we follow. In truth it is pitiful to consider:
unto what a height of pride many men are grown. It is less subject to
offense, to reject the authority of Saint Jerome, Saint Augustine, or any of
the rest: nay to refuse them altogether; then to reiecte the judgments
either of Calvin, of Beza or of Cartwright.

For Master Calvin and master Beza, I, do think of them, and of their
writings, as they deserve. But yet I think better of the ancient fathers: I
must confess it. And for master Cartwright, it is true, that he has many
good parts in him: but the ouer-weening which he has of himself, and which
many besides have of him, is like a lump of dowe, that sowereth both him and
them all. You have heard of what accounte, his writings are with his
sectaries: insomuch that one of them says in effect both for himself and for
his brethren, that without Cartwrightes books they cannot come to the
knowledge of the truth. Cartwrights books the way to the truth? To speak my
conscience: they are the way to many gross errors, and seditious fancies. Of
all his books I would think, that should bear the price, which contains
the justification of all his devises; and is the last fruits of that Worthies
wit: I mean his second reply. Touching the which book, you shall hear
master Doctor Whitakers opinion: from whence, (especially if some one or two
joined with him), the layer out of men in colors (as it has been said) will
not hastily appeal. Thus he writes.

Quem Cartwrightus nuper emisit libellum, eius magnam partem perlegi. Ne viuam
si quid vnquam viderim dissolutius, ac pene puerilius. Verborum satis ille
quidem lautam ac nouam supellectilem habet, rerum omnino nullam, quantum ego
iudicare possum. Deinde non modo perverse de principis in rebus sacris at que
ecclesiasticis authoritate sentit: sed in papistarum etiam castra transfugit: a
quibus tamen videri vult odio capitali dissidere. Verum nec in hac causa
ferendus, and alijs etiam in partibus tela a papistis mutuatur. Denique vt de
Ambrosio dixit Hieronimus, verbis ludit, sententijs dormitat: and plane
indignus est, qui a quopiam docto resutetur.

That is, I have read a great part of that book which master Cartwright, has
lately published: vz: (this second reply): I pray God I live not, if ever I saw
any thing more loosely written and almost more childishly. It is true that for
words, he has great store, and those both fine and new: but for matter, as
far as I can judge, he is altogether barren. Moreover he does not only
think peruersly of the authority of Princes, in causes ecclesiastical, but
also flies into the Papists holds, from whom he would be thought to dissent
with a mortal hatred. But in this point he is not to be endured: and in other
parts also he borrows his arguments from the Papists. To conclude, as
Jerome said of Ambrose: he plays with words, and is lame in his sentences:
and is altogether unworthy to be confuted by any man of learning. If any
shall here object that master Whittakers was not Doctor, when he writ in
this sort: My answer is this. He writ this letter about the same time, that
he began to write against Campian: when he had attained already unto such
ripeness of judgment, as there is no more danger he should now be altered
in this that he has written of Cartwrightes book: then that he should alter
hereafter from that truth which he maintained about the same time against
Campian.

And it is true: that he never gave a righter censure of any book in his
life. Master Cartwright must content himself with it: and so must his
followers. He depends himself too much upon Calvin and Beza: and so do many
amongst us upon him. Such admiration of men's persons, and of their learning:
must needs be very dangerous. It has ever been the cause of schism. And
there was never more mischief like to grow of it: then there is now. For I
know not how it comes about: but you shall seldom find any; who has once
tasted of the Disciplinary potion, that is not forthwith possessed (as it were)
with a wonderful opinion, not only of the chief confectioners and favorers
of it, but likewise of themselves. And for all other men, Fathers, Councels,
new or old, they little esteem them; if they make any thing against them. I
might heap up in this place a number of observations, which have been made
many hundredth years since, as concerning such like courses taken by many: and
how they never gat to themselves any true reputation thereby, but the
contrary. But I will spare them therein. Only, I cannot choose but tell them,
that the ancient fathers were as wise and learned men, as they are: that the
old general Councelles ought to be of as great credit with any but mad
men, as their conuenticles or Synodes: that although we ought to depend only
upon the word of God: yet for the interpretation of it, we may as safely
follow the judgments of the ancient fathers, of the first general Councels,
and of some other learned men: as of any of their chief patrones and masters:
that howsoever our own men do think of themselves, yet they are no better
then other men: Nay there are many equal to the best of them, and many who are
far their superiors. And I take it, that he shows himself to be their
best friends, who by telling them their wantes, can bring them to some
humility. In which respect Master Cartwright is to thank Doctor Whittakers
for signifiyng his judgment, touching that his great bundell of shreddes:
which some rash, and fond men do so greatly admire. It is most certain that
although the flattering of Parasites, does seem to be pleasant: yet the
wounds of a lover are much more profitable.

CHAP. XXX. How falsely they allege the ancient fathers, for their pretended
parish Bishops and Elders.
BY that which has been said in the 5. chapter; it appears unto you, what
little help, they are to look for, in the ancient fathers: toward the setting
forth of the Geneua plat form. They talk of certain steps and traces of that
hare in them: but more they confess in some places, that they cannot find. And
yet notwithstanding at another time, and when they have forgotten themselves;
they will of purpose (I fear it) to abuse the world stand very much upon the
ancient fathers, and brag of their authority exceedingly. As Cartwright
does in these words most untruly: We propound nothing (says he) that the
scriptures do not teach: the writers both old and new, for the most part
affirm, and the examples of the primitive Churches confirm. T.C. lib. 1. page
7.
Did ever any manne regard Cartwrightes credit? who (considering what has
been noted out of his books in this whole process) does not pity him,
with all his heart, to hear him so far to forget himself? He is a man of
good learning, which makes me to wonder at him. It is surely great pity
that ever he was so married unto his Eldershippe. For, it has utterly
overthrown all the good parts that be in him. The best lawyer that is, when
he gives himself to shifts and to feed his clyentes with quirkes, refusing
not to brabble in any cause, be it never so false: he loses his estimation,
and with the grauer sort is little regarded.

How truly Master Cartwright affirms: that he and his fellows do propound
nothing but that the old writers, for the most part do affirm, and the
examples of the primitive church confirm: I trust it has in part already
appeared unto you in sundry places, but especially in the 5. as I said, and in
the 27. Chapters. I have heard some Councellers at law, use the very like
course of speech: when notwithstanding the cause has fallen out most directly
against them, yet they have cried out: Oh my Lord, we have these and these
old evidences to show, such and such depositions do make for us very
manifestly: we have yet many witnesses to be examined, and thus they will
proceed with many cracking words: as though there had been nothing which had
made against them. Is Cartwright able (trow you) to find his Parish Bishops
and his counterfeit Lay Elders, (which two points are in effect all in all
with him) in the ancient fathers and primitive Church* T.C. lib. 3. page 42.45.
He may say as truly: that the Son shines at midnight. But yet he says;
that Ignatius and Cyprians Bishops, were but as our pastors or parsons arein
every parish. For his vnministering Elders, he alleges the same Ignatius and
Cyprian: and for a surcharge, he brings in also Tertullian, Hierome,
Possidonius, T.C. li. 1. p. 113.100.99.
and Socrates: where they make mention of priests. I was once purposed to have
set down the places themselves, which they so violently peruerte, to bolster
out such their apparaunt falsehood: and to have answered them. But then I
remembered how effectually that had been done already by diverse learned and
worthy men: and of late more fully and largely by two especial persons,
whose books one of them is in printing, and the other presently coming to the
press: and thereupon I altered my mind in that point. And yet something
thereof agreeably to the course which hitherto I have observed, that may
peradventure amaze some of them.

Upon some occasion falling out: master Cartwright affirms, T.C. lib. page
183.
that if the now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury had read the ecclesiastical
stories, he should have found easiely the Eldership most flourishing in
Constantines time: vz. in having then such Bishops and Elders as he fancieth
to himself. For he must be so understood. D.W. page 652.
To whom reply being made, that he should bring but one ecclesiastical
history, that affirmed so much: after some three or four years, he brought
two: vz. the history of Magdeburge, and Eusebius. His testimony out of the
first he sets down in these words. The centuries must needs have told him,
that the same orders and functions of the church were in that time which were
before. And what would he infer hereof? Surely if hemeane honestly, and do
not dally with the word ( before) refering it further then the Centuries meant
it, which was but to the age, that succeeded the Apostles, he could not have
directed a man, to any history now extant, that does more directly confound his
assertion. For there the authors of that history, do most plainly affirm:
that by and by after the Apostles death, necessitas coegit personarum gradus
aliquos constituere et conseruare: Cent. 2 de gub. eccl. Chap. 7.
necessity compelled (the fathers then living) to ordain certain degrees of
persons in the church and to conserve them. This is most directly against
Cartwrights assertion: although for mine own part (to note it by the way) I
think the Apostles, knowing the necessity mentioned, had taken that order
before. But to follow the said history. There were three degrees then
ordained, say the said authors: vz. Episcopatus, presbyterium, Diaconatus: the
degree, of Bishops, of priesthood, and of Deaconship. For the proof whereof
they cite Ignatius, Eusebius, Theodoret, etc. and the very place of S. Jerome:
where he shows how for avoiding of schism, one was chosen amongst the
ministers, to have pre-eminence over the rest, and to whom the name of Bishop
was peculiarly then attributed. And as concerning the priests or Elders they
do show it out of Eusebius, Nicephorus, Irenaeus, Iustine, etc. that their
office was to preach the Gospel, and to administer the sacraments, etc. The
Centuries thus we see; will not serve M. Cartwrights turn, Ibid.
to the justifying of the flourishing estate of his Eldership in Constantines
days. I will therefore come unto his sec^od authority, which he brings out of
Eusebius.

It is manifest (says he) that the churches were governed under Constantine by
Bishops, Elders, and Deacons: by that which is recited of an infinite number of
Elders and Deacons, which came to the Council of Nice with the 250. Bishops. It
is manifest indeed. Eusebius. lib. 1. de vit. Consta.
And it is also as manifest; that there were at that time, both Archbishops
and Patriarchs. But there were at that Council; both Bishops Elders and
Deacons. And what then* I know that many men have wrested many places, directly
contrary to the authors meaning: but I do not remember any one place,
within the compass of my small readinge, that is more grossly perverted then
this place is. For M. Cartwright running still his old biace, would have men to
think, that by Bishops, Eusebius meant so many parishe-ministers, and by
priests or Elders, his said counterfaite Aldermen. And his authority is so
great amongst his sectaries, (who profess their Gleaninge after him, 1 Page
R.B. sea. paos. 50.
) that what-so-euer he brings, they take it upon his credit, and so run on
with a conceit, that not only all other authorities, brought by him, out of
the ancient Fathers mentioned, are truly by him expounded and applied, but
that also even this place of Eusebius, is to be understood, as here he would
have it. Wherein surely they are much to blame, to depend so much upon any man's
credit. If they themselves had ever read, either the Fathers, or the
ecclesiastical histories, they could never possibly, have been miscarried so
palpably.

A frinde of mine having some talk, not many years since, with Master
Cartwright, about this place of Eusebius alleged and expounded by him, as you
have heard: urged him very earnestly, that he would indeed, tell him truly;
whether he (beeinge a man of learning, and so could not be ignorant of
Eusebius meaning,) did not sin; even against his own conscience, when he
cited that place, to such an end and purpose, as he had done. His answer
was, that he did not: and that he was still of the same mind therein, that
he was before. Why Sir, replied my friend. As Eusebius says: that there
were an infinite number of Elders and Deacons, which came to the Council of
Nice, with the 250 Bishops: Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 8.
So it is reported by Socrates, that in the said Council, it had been
decreed by the Bishops etc. (but for Paphnutius,) that Bishops Elders and
Deacons, should have companied no more with their wives: Quas cum erant laiui
in matrimonium duxissent, which they had married, when they were lay-menne. And
now must we expound Socrates in this place, as you do expound Eusebius* does
Socrates mean by priests there, your manner of lay Elders? was the Council
bent, to have debarred such men from their wives? Speak your conscience truly
I pray you. Master Cartwright answered again: that he verily thought in his
conscience, that by priests there, Socrates understood the said Elders, and
that the Council meant, to have separated them from their wives. And this
reason was: because within a while after there was some question, whether
Subdeacons might marry. My said friend replied again, that he was very
sorry to hear his answer: and that he verily thought, the like interpretation
of Socrates words, was never made before, nor would ever be made (he hoped,)
by any after him. And so they parted.

Afterward my said friend, findinge that when he told some persons of great
place, how M. Cartwright did expound the said words of Socrates, they would
hardly believe him, but supposed rather that he had mistaken them: did write a
letter unto him, desiringe him most earnestly that if he c^otinued in the same
mind he left him, he would be content to return unto him, in writing, some
further reasons thereof, then formerly he made at his being with him. Master
Cartwright hereupon, writ back again unto my friend (I have his letter in my
custody) excusing himself, that through want of books, he could not satisfy
his expectation so fully as he would. But for the point, T.C. Let. 18. Mart.
15.90.
I speak of, thus he writ. Touching that it seems strange unto you, that the
governing elders should have been in danger to have been forbidden marriage in
the council of Niece: I thought I had satisfied you, in alleging, that not
long after, there was great hold amongst the councels, whether Deacons, yea
Subdeacons, should be married So as now, that which before stood only upon the
credit of the relator, is ready to be showed under master Cartvvrights hand,
as it has already been to diverse of this disciplinarie disposition: who (as I
have been informed, and partly do know) all of them, have utterly signified
their great dislike of that point. And yet either he must of necessity so
interpret Socrates, or else be driven to give over Eusebius, and so both he and
all his Aldermen, to take their leave of the Ecclesiastical histories, and bid
them adieu.

But yet there is another thing in master Cartvvrights said letter, which is
very fit for you to understand, that so you may see how he foileth himself.
One thing (says he unto my said friend) in your letter, I think you mistake
me in: that you esteem that I should hold a bishop and a minister of the
word, all one, in the times of the Nicene council. For notvvithstanding that
I hold, that in the Apostles time, and with S. Paul, it is all one to be a
bishop and to be a minister of the word, yet it were a foul ignorance in me,
if I should not have known, that long before the council of Niece, the name
of bishop was for the most part appropriated to one in a church. C^osider I
pray you, how the man was mistaken? If by elders, Eusebius should have meant
his counteirfet lay rulers, must he not then by his 250 bishops most
necessarily have meant so many parish ministers, pastors or parsons, except he
will say that there was no such ministers there, which were as new a paradox as
the rest. But how agrees this? of the difference he confesses betwixt a
bishop and a minister of the word, long before the council of Niece, with some
other of his sayings elsewhere in print, such as there are. T.C. l. 1. pa. 99.
The bishop that Ignatius speaks of, was but the minister of a particular
congregation. Again, Ciprians Bishop was nothing else, but S. Paul's bishop,
that is one that had cure and charge of one flock. T.C. l. 1. p. 100.
Again, the bishop which S. Ciprian speaks of, is nothing else, but such as
we call pastor, or as the common name with us is, Parson, and his church
vvherof he is bishop, is neither diocese nor province, but a congregation
which meet together in one place, and be taught of one man.

Now join these things together, and see what a Gallimawfrie ye have. May not
a man misdoubt, that master Cartwright is not yet resolved of his own
opinion? Have not his scholars great cause to rejoice in glaining after so
constant an author? What can he pretend to salve his credit withal? He will
never secke a refuge for shame out of these words, vz. For the most part. As
though he should thus expound S. Jerome, where he says, that when some began
to hold of Peter, some upon Paul, and some upon Apollo (which was as I take
it, in the Apostles times) it was then decreed throughout all the world, that
for avoiding of schisms, one minister, who was called a bishop, should have
authority and jurisdiction over all other ministers in his diocese, that is
true (should Cartwright say) throughout all the world, except at Antioch and
Carthage (two little hamblets) where Ignatius and S. Cyprian were but plain
parsons, even like the parsons of Hitchin and Newington.

Not many years since a friend of mine was commanded for a certain purpose,
to contriue the cheese matters in controversy about the pretended discipline,
into certain questions. And it is pertinent to the matter I now speak of, to
acquaint you with two of them. The first (because of the pretense which is
made, as you have heard, of the ancient fathers) was this. A Question
Whether can it be shevved out of any ancient father, out of any council,
either general or provincial, or out of any ecclesiastical history, for the
space of 1500 and od years, even from the Apostles times, till of late, that
in the ordinary distribution of church officers (since that time ever used)
into Episcopos, Presbyteros, and diaconos, Bishops, priests, and deacons:
whether can it (I say) be shevved, that this word Episcopus, that is, Bishop,
was at any time taken there, and used by the churches in any country, for a
common and usual name to all ministers of the word and sacraments, without,
distinguishing thereby any one of them from another, or was: it not ever
within the time limited taken and used only in the said distribution, for one
amongst the ministers of the word and sacraments, that governed the rest both
of the ministers and people within their circuits limited unto them?

This question with the rest was sent to master doctor Raynolds in Oxford, to
the intent he might return his opinion of them, which he forbear at that time
to do, in respect of certain other business that he had in hand. Howbeit,
master doctor Robinson, (his especial and most familiar friend) being
acquainted, as it seems, with the said questions, has written in this sort
upon another occasion, not dissenting therein, as I take it, from master
doctor Reynolds. D. Robins. answ. exhib. to the L. Archb. of Cant.
I have (says he) maintained it in the pulpit, that the titles of honor
which we give to bishops, are no more repugnant to the word of God, then it
is for us to be called wardens, presidents, prouosts of colleges. And in my
judgment, they may with as good conscience be governors of their diocese,
as we being ministers, may be governors of colleges of ministers. Neither do
I think, that this was a late devised policy. Revel 2.1.
For I am persuaded, that the angel of the church of Ephesus, to whom S. John
vvriteth, was one minister, set over the rest. For seeing there were many
pastors there, why should S. John write to the angel of the church of
Ephesus, and not rather to the angels, if there had been no difference amongst
them? Act. 20.17.28.
And if this presidencie had had that fault, which is reproved in Diotrephes,
as S. Jerome proves, that the Jews had not corrupted the original text,
before Christ his coming: Quod nunquam dominus and Apostoli, Ieromin. 6. cap.
Esaias.
qui caetera crimina arguunt in Scribis and Phariseis, de hoc crimine quod erat
maximum reticuissent: So I may say, neither would our savior, who by his
servant reproves those disorders which he found in the seven churches, have
passed over this great fault in silence. Therefore as Titus was left to
reform the churches, Tit. 1.6.
throughout the vvbole Island of Crete: so I am persuaded, that in other places,
some of that order of pastors and teachers which is perpetual in the church,
even in the time of the Apostles had a prelacie amongst their brethren, and
that this preheminencie is approved by our savior. And if we come any lovver
though the word Episcopus, signify that care which is required of all, and
in scripture be applied to all, that have charge of souls: yet I do not
remember any one ecclesiastical writer that I have read, wherein that word
does not import a greater dignity then is common to all ministers. Neither do
I think that any old writer did under the name of Bishop, mean the pastor of
every parish. When the emperors were persecutors, we read of several elders,
but never of more then one bishop at once in Rome: the like is to be said of
other great cities, (...) Heb. 1^. 20. (...) 1. Pet. 5.4.
and the churches near adioining. And to meet with that offense which is
taken at the name of Archbishop, because that name is so appropriated to Christ
in scripture, that it is no where given to any other. I take it that there is
no substantial difference betvveene archbishop, (...)1. Cor. 3.10.
and archbuilder. Either therefore the Apostle offended in taking too swelling
a title, when he called himself an archbuilder, or chief builder, or it
must be granted, that this title may in some degree be given to men without
derogation to Christ.

And thus far doctor Robinson, with whom if master doctor Reinolds do agree,
I see not whither the factioners will turn them: for (as I take it) they will
not reject his opinion. They have bragged much of him indeed, and of his
judgment (in sundry of their writings) as though he were wholly on their side:
and that they held nothing, but he would justify it. Howbeit, they have done
him therein (I doubt not) exceeding great injury. For requital whereof, I would
wish him never to seek any other revenge, but to turn them to his book
against Heart, where he has written his mind, as touching this point now in
hand.

In the Church of Ephesus (says he) though it had sundry D. Rainol. pa. 535.
elders and pastors, (he uses these two words in one signification, as by the
sentence going before, it is manifest) to guide it: yet amongst those sundry,
was there one chief, whom our savior calls the angel of the church, Act.
20.17 Revel. 2.1.
and vvriteth that to him, which by him the rest should ^novv. And this is he,
whom afterward in the primitive church, the Fathers called bishop. For, etc.
the name of Bishop, common (before) to all elders and pastors of the church,
was then by the usual language of the Fathers appropriated to him, who had
the presidentship over elders. Cip. Epi. 13.
Thus are certain elders reproved by Ciprian Bishop of Carthage, for receiving
to the communion, them, who had fallen in time of persecution, before the
bishop had advised of it, with them and others.

Here then you have two for Oxford, touching the language of the ancient
fathers, when they speak of bishops. Now you shall have a Cambridge man's
opinion, no more but of one (I tell you) at this time: marry he shall be such a
one as the brotherhood, if they be of the painters mind before mentioned in
the chapter, may well be compared with the other two, seeing his judgment is
laid in equal balance there, both with Caluins and Bezaes, and that without
any disparagement unto them, you know whom I mean, it is master doctor Fulke,
who in his confutation of the Rhemish notes upon the new testament, writes
thus: Amongst the clergy for order and seemly government, D. Fulk confut.
Annot. Tit. 1. v. 5.
there was always one principal, to vvho^ by long use of the church, the name
of Bishop, or superintendent has been applied: which room, Titus exercised
in Creta, Timothy in Ephesus, and others in other places. Therefore although in
the scripture, a bishop and an elder is of one order and authority in
preaching the word, and administration of the sacraments (as Hierome does
often confess) yet in government by ancient use of speech, he is only called
a Bishop, which is in the scriptures called (...)or (...) To. 12. 8. 1. Tim.
5. 17. Heb. 13.17. that is, chief in government, to whom the ordination or
consecration by imposition of bands, was alvvaies principally committed, etc.
Which most ancient form of government, when Adrius would take away, it
was noted amongst his other errors. Hitherto doctor Fulke, so as hereby I
trust it may appear to master Cartvvrights reproach, and to all their shames
that shall pretend any authority from the ancient fathers, to impugn the
right honorable and lawful calling of Bishops, not parsons in every parish, but
Bishops in their diocese and provinces, appointed in the Apostlestimes, for
the right order and government of the church of Christ.

The second question before mentioned, being as concerning priests or elders,
was, as it follows. Whether can it be shevved out of any ancient father, out
of any council either general or prouincial, or out of any ecclesiastical
history, for the space of 1500 and od years, even from the Apostles times,
till of late, that in the said ordinary distribution, since that time ever
used of church officers, into episcopos, Presbiteros, and Diaconos, Bishops,
priests and deacons, whether I say, can it be shevved that the word presbyter,
priest, or elder, was at any time taken and used for certain mere lay men, as
craftsmen, husbandmen, citizens, gentlemen or noblemen, such as should be
chosen for a year or two, to be assistants unto the ministers of the word,
for the better government of the church, as to have authority with others, to
ordain and impose their hands upon a minister of the word and sacraments, to
bind and lose sins, etc. using in the mean time their several vocations* as
they did before, and ceasing after the said one or two years, without any
offense committed by the^ to be any longer presbyteri. Or was it not ever
within the time limited taken and used only in the said distribution for the
ministers of the word and sacraments? Unto this question, one has made this
answer. The word Presbiteri was never otherwise taken since the Apostles
times, in that distribution: but for the ministers of the word and sacraments,
as it is most evident to any that shall peruse the ecclesiastical histories, or
will take any pains to read the vvritings of the ancient fathers. But of this
point before it be long, you shall hear more by one, who, as he has done
every thing he deals with, so has he handled this very notably. Now in the
mean while, according to the order which hitherto I have kept, it shall be
sufficient for me, that the three said doctors, men well accounted of with
master Cartwright, and his adherents, and such as will not be thought to
speak any thing partially, may deliver their opinions, as touching this
matter. For to my understanding, they are as direct in this point, what the
word Presbyteri should signify in the ancient fathers, as they were before, in
the other of Bishops. If in the said ancient Fathers, the name of Bishop be
appropriated to one that had a greater dignity than was common to all
ministers, and that by the name of Bishops, they never understood the pastors
of every parish, as doctor Robinson says. If in the primitive church, and in
the Fathers language, they were called Bishops, that were the chief, and
presidents over the rest of the priests or elders, even such as our Savior
himself, by the holy Evangelist S. John, does call angels, as doctor Reynolds
affirms. If by ancient use of speech he was only called a Bishop, which in
the scriptures is called (...)or (...) If the elders that were subject to these
governors, were of one order and authority with them, in preaching the word,
and administration of the sacraments, as doctor Fulke has written, against the
Jesuits: does it not follow most necessarily, that all the Clergy being
deduced into three degrees, vz. of Bishops, priests or elders, and deacons:
that by priests, the ancient fathers must needs understand the rest of the
ministers of the word and sacraments, that were no bishops? except any will be
so impudent, as to say, that they were none of the clergy. He that will doubt
hereof, let him doubt for me, whether the sun be up at noone.

Besides, doctor Raynolds shows, that Ciprians elders did administer the
sacraments. And for doctor Fulke, after he had once incountred with the
papists, and amongst many other points, was come to this whereof I speak,
concerning the name of priests, as it is a distinct degree under bishops:
though before, and peradventure then also, he had a great fancy to the
consistoriall Aldermen, yet then that he was driven to deal directly and
truly: consider how he was enforced to alter his disciplinarie style: Those
priests or ministers that are made among us, Defen. of the Engl. trans. p. 163.
are the same elders that the scriptures in Greek calls (...) and in the
bishops letters of orders, they call them by the name presbiteri: which
term, though in English you sound it priests, elders, ancient seniors or
ministers, it is the same office which is described by the holy ghost, Tit. 1.
and in other places of scripture. Conf. of the Rhem. pa. 46
Again, We refuse not the name priest as it comes of presbiter, etc. it is
odious to some that know not the true Etimologie thereof. Ibid. pa. 210.
Again, The name priest, as it is derived of the Greek, we do not refuse it.
Again, It appears by many places of VVicklifs works, and namely in his
homily upon Phil. 1 that he acknowledges the destinction of bishops and
priests, Ibid. p. 339.
for order and government, although for doctrine and administration of
sacraments they are all one. Again, Defense of the Engl. trans. pa. 185 Ibid.
In the fathers, Episcopus and Presbiter, Bishop and Priest, are two distinct
degrees. And again, In the fathers the word Presbiter is one degree only,
that is subject to the Bishop. Whereas therefore master Cartwright with his
followers, do pretend that they propound nothing which the writers both old and
new, for the most part do not affirm, and the examples of the primitive
churches confirm. As that where the ancient fathers and ecclesiastical
histories make mention of bishops and priests, they understand by bishops, his
parish parsons; and by priests, his counterfeit Aldermen: believe both him, and
all that glaine after him therein, as they deserve, and as by the premises you
shall judge there is cause.

CAP. XXXI. How and with what disagreement they wrest and misconster the
scriptures, in the behalf of their pretended discipline.
ABout the year 420, there fell a great contention betwixt the bishops of
Affrike, and Zosimus the bishop of Rome. The point in question, was this:
whether it was lawful for them of Affrike to appeal from the proceedings of
their own bishops to the bishop of Rome. Upon which occasion partly, there was
a council held in Affrike, termed the sixth council of Carthage, wherein S.
Augustine was present. The bishop of Rome hearing of this council, and that it
was assembled especially about that matter, sent thither his factors* Faustinus
bishop of Potentia, with other two priests of Rome, Philippus and Asellus. In
this council, when the said question began to be debated, the bishop of Romes
factors (being for their wit and learning, three of the especiallest men that
Zosimus could find out, for such a purpose) did deal most expressly against the
bishop of Affrike, for the prerogative and jurisdiction of the sea of Rome. In
all the which contention, notwithstanding the said factors were such excellent
men, and used the strength of all the wit and learning that was in them, yet
they could not find any one argument, in all the scriptures, nor in all the
fathers, nor in all the world, whereupon they might insist, but did wholly rely
upon a pretended cannon of the council of Niece. Which cannon, after much
trouble, many letters written, and answers received, was proved to their
faces, by the said Affrica^ bishops, to be a most false and a counterfeit
cannon. At this time these arguments for the Popes authority had never been
heard of. Neither thou art Peter: nor, confirm thy brethren: nor feed my
sheep: nor, unto thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven: nor
any of the rest, which now are alleged out of the scriptures. As the bishops
of Rome by their practices did grow in greatness: so their parafits by their
flattering, did draw and wrest the scriptures to maintain their pride. In as
much, that of later times, even as children do imagine that the bells do ring,
whatsoever they will sing: so there is almost nothing in the scriptures
mentioned, no not from the sun in the firmament, to a piece of silver found
in the mouth of a fish that was catched with an angle in the sea: but that the
scholemen, and other popish writers, do presently conceive with themselves,
that it tends to the setting forth of the popes great power and glory. You
have heard in the second chapter, by what arguments M. Calvin induced the
ministers and magistrates of Zuricke, and so likewise (as I take it) of the
other three cities there mentioned: to write (as they did) for the obtaining of
his presbytery at Gene^a. It th^n sufficed him, that they were content to say
but thus much for his sake: that this platform of discipline, did cast but an
eye as it were, toward the word of God. He neither urged them with the Jews
Sanedrim, nor with their sinagogues, nor with tell the Church, nor with the
elders that rule well, nor with any such persuasio^s. It is true, that although
when he first devised that platform, 1537. I suppose he had not thought of
many places in the scriptures, whereupon he might build it, yet before his said
practices with them of Zuricke, 1553, etc. he had in some of his commentaries
and other writings, made mention of those places specified: but yet he had
done it very modestly, rather thereby to prove his own platform to be
lawful, than to impeach the form of church-gouernment, allowed of and
established, in any other reformed churches. So as, when he dealt with them of
Tigurine, for as much as he himself was persuaded that the form of discipline
then at Geneua, was not only in it self lawful, but for that place also,
most fit and convenient, he alleged not any one text of scripture for the
continuance of it there, but only showed what mischief would ensue in that
place, if it were abolished: and therefore craved their assistance in manner
and form, as he gave them direction. Marry after it was by his means more
fully established: then for the better preservation of it, you would hardly
bethink it, what wringing and wresting there has since been made of the
scriptures, to underprop it, with this translation, with that note, with such
an interpretation, and with such a collection. In so much as now there is
seldom mention made of elders in the old or new testament, of the words,
congregation and church, of the greatest and cheifest judges, of bishops, of
rulers, of thrones, and of the kingdom of Christ, but master Beza, Iunius,
Danaeus, Cartwright, Trauers, and all their scholars: do think they hear a
sound that ringeth out most plainly in their ears, a formal peale of their
presbyteri platform.

Having occasion to talk upon a time, with an artizan of Kingston, about his
refusal (after the purest fashion) to be examined upon his oath: because I saw
how peart he was, and rapt out text upon text (full ignorantly God knows): I
was so bold as to examine him in the second petition of the Lords prayer,
demanding of him, what he thought was meant by this word, kingdom, ther^
mentioned. Whereunto he made in effect this answer, without any staggering: We
pray (says he) that our heavenly father, would at the last grant unto us,
that we might have pastors, doctors, elders, and deacons in every parish* and
so be governed by such elderships, as Christ's holy discipline does require.
And surely as it was with this fellow, so is it with the most of those, that
talk so much of reformation, (as well with the scholars, as with very many of
their masters) put them out of their theme of railing against the orders of
our church, and of extolling the pretended platform of their counterfeit
discipline: and for other points which are of the substance of religion, you
shall find them most ignorant. And (as I take it) the reason thereof is this:
because they have found this fantastical devise, magnified and extolled so
exceedingly, by a most lewd application of all those places of scripture (in a
manner) unto it, which are written of the spiritual government of the holy
ghost, in the hearts of the faithful (as hereafter it will further appear unto
you) that they almost care for no other points, so as they can babble of
discipline, and whet their tongues like rasors, to wound all those that do
impugn it.

You may remember, that in the fifth chapter for the finding out of the
beginning and institution of this pretended eldership, we were carried by
degrees, first to the return of the Jews from their captivity, the^ to M^ses
time, and thirdly almost to the days of Noah, they might as well have brought
us within a generation of Ada^. Now according to these devises, the scriptures
are framed to serve every one of their purposes. For the manifestatio^ where
of, I will take no very long course, nor enter into any full discussing of those
places, which I find to be perverted (that work being performed already, in
diverse learned men's writings, and as it will appear to all the world more fully
hereafter) only my meaning is, that ye might perceive, and still observe, how
agreeably al things concur together in the building and setting out of their
disciplinary Babel. It is nothing else, but (as often I have said) a mere
fantastical dream. And therefore by Gods providence, that men might the
better discern it, and so take heed, least they should be deceived with such a
vanity: it is framed according to the nature of such a fancy, with discords,
contrarieties, disagreements, novelties, with stretching and straining the
scriptures, as each man is disposed: and I know not, with how many paltries, and
unlearned devises. Cartwright, who has outrun his fellows a very great way,
Exodus 4.2^.
pretends, that he is able to hammer his eldership out of the 4 of Exodus
because Moses and Aaron, when they came into Egypt, did call together, as God
had commanded the^, the elders of the children of Israel. Here you hear
indeed, that there is mention made of elders. Whereupon Cartwright finding
that name (after one or two vnlikelihoods brought out by him) will needs
persuade us that by those elders, that are meant in that place, such like
churchaldermen must be understood as he and his fellows have dreamed of. But
herein, he is not like to have any good success. For Nicholas Gallasius, a
Geneuian, to the uttermost, who has written a co^mentary upon that book, does
hold it for a certainty, that such elders are understood in that place, as did
rule the people, Gal. in Ex^. 3.
doctrina et exemplo, by doctrine and example: which should rather agree to
those that were preachers, then to Cartvvrights vnt^aching elders. If this
interpretation notwithstanding, shall ^ot be thought su^ficient to encounter
with Cartvvrights: then hear further two or three besides. ^el. in Ex^. 3.
Pellicane and Simlerus, are both of opinion, that neither Gallasius preachers,
nor Cartvvrights alderme^, Sim^in Ex. 3.
are meant there by Moses, but indeed such elders as were civil governors,
senators, and princes of the people. And unto these two for an ^speciall
advantage, I may ad a surpassing testimony of no common person, but such a one
as will bring in with him a Rabbin, to assist and maintain as much as he will
tell us. Cornelius Bertram, in his book de politia Iudaica, dedicated to Beza,
and printed at Geneua 1580 (with his approbation I doubt not) writes a whole
chapter, of purpose to prove that the said elders were civil magistrates.
Haebreos politia^ ciuile^, etc. That the Hebrews had a civil government in
Egypt it appears, because when Moses was to go into Egypt, De poli^. I^ ca.
5.
he had a commandment from God, that he should go to the elders, etc. Who
(says Bertrame) were the rulers, moderators and governors of that
Aristocraticall common wealth. For the which his judgment, beside sundry
reasons of his own there set down, he alleges also the testimony of Aben
Hezra. So as now, except Cartwright or his adherents in this point, shall
hereafter find a more probable likelihood, then hitherto he has brought forth,
to show us their elderships to have had their being before the law of Moses,
both he and they may shue the goose by these men's opinions, for any help they
are like to have for that purpose out of any place in Exodus: In very truth the
circumstances of those places which he brings, being conferred with that,
which is said of the same elders, in the former chapter, are so directly
against him, as I can but marvel that ever he durst presume to set down such
a strange assertion, upon so senseless and childish a supposall.

And now as concerning the second sort, that content themselves to look no
further for their elderships, then unto Moses time, for as much as they have
many mo shows and pretenses to dim men's sights withal, then the former sort
have yet invented: I will take an advantage which is laid before me, for the
better opening unto you of their iarres and disagreements, about those places
which are brought out of Moses, and out of some other parts of the old
testament. Master Beza acknowledges Calvin for his master, and does evermore
term him doctissimum interpretem, the most learned interpreter. And master
Cartwright expresses as much, but yet more fully. For he says, that master
Calvin is the notablest instrument that the Lord has stirred up, T.C. l. 1.
p. 32
for the restoring of the plain and sincere interpretation of the scriptures,
which has been since the Apostles times. In respect of which his excellency
(as indeed he was a singular man) master Cartwright in another place, makes
this offer to all in effect, that do not like well of the Geneua discipline.
T.C. l. 1. p. 33.
We will not refuse (says he) the judgment of master Calvin in any matter
that we have in controversy with you. Here is surely a fair offer, and no
man can desire a more direct issue. But think you a man might safely take it?
Who is so bold (they say) as blind ba^ard? Surely as blind as I am, I will
adventure upon it. Shall every thing indeed, be referred to master Caluins
judgment? very well.

This is then a controversy betwixt us. T.C. l. 3. pa. 40.
Master Cartwright, and as many as cleave unto him, do affirm, that the
eldership was ordained, and in practice before the law. We deny it. Let
master Calvin be the judge. So likewise I do say again, to as many as depend
upon master Beza, if they will join with us in the same issue, as reason is
they should, master Calvin being their leaders master, and the most learned
interpreter of the scriptures. Beza. de presb. page 104. etc.
Beza, and all such as are tied to his sleeue, do hold it (as I suppose) as an
infallible ground for discipline, that Moses did institute this (pretended)
eldership, which we deny: and let master Calvin be the judge. A number of
places are brought out of Moses books, and out of the Chronicles, and
Prophets, by Beza, Cartwright, and all their scholars: for the proof of such
an eldership to have been in those times. But we are fully resolved, that all
those places which they bring for that purpose, are wrested from their right
meaning, and do constantly deny, that there was ever any such eldership in
being, in those times. And therein also we say, let master Calvin be the
judge. Although peradventure there may be diverse, that will refuse to stand
upon this trial, as attributing more skill in the scriptures to Beza, and to
themselves, then they do unto master Calvin: yet Cartwright is surely bound,
to stand to his offer. Now then, what Caluins judgment is in all these points:
it is necessary to be considered. Surely you have heard it before in the fifth
chapter. Cap. 5. pa. 81.
The sum whereof is this: that the said pretended eldership was never thought
of in the world, till after the captivity. And the reason why then it was
ordained, he says, was this: vz. because it was not lawful for them at that
time to create a king. As though he should have said that, if the Jews might
have had a king according to their former custom in times past, such a manner
of government had never been once thought of. Whereas therefore Beza,
Cartwright, and the rest that contend so eagerly for the Geneuian discipline,
T.C. lib. 3. p. 4. etc. Bez. de pres. p. 102. etc.
do fill the margents of their books with sundry texts out of the old
testament, as out of Exodus 4.29. and 17.5. Deuteronomy. 1, 15. and 17.12.2. Chr. 19.8.
Iere. 19, 1. Ezech. 8.1, etc. where there is speech of elders, senates, and
seats of justice. Master Calvin, you see has given sentence against them,
and does in effect with Erastus, expound all those elders of the people, and
all those consistories or senats (for ought I can find) to be civil officers,
and civil courts, appointed for the civil government of that people and
nation. Besides also in the place of Leuiticus concerning the priests office,
of putting a difference between the holy and the unholy, between the clean and
the unclean (from which words master Beza is enforced to set the institution,
and jurisdiction of his eldership) master Caluins exposition is there in like
manner altogether against him, and wholly agrees with Erastus mind. vz. that
thereby Moses meaning was (as it is word for word set down by the prophet
Ezechiel) that the priests should teach the people out of the law what was
holy, what unholy; what clean, what polluted: and that as Malachy says, the
priests are and ought to be the interpreters of the law. Now, if master Beza,
master Cartwright, and the rest, will stand to master Caluins judgment, who
is so excellent an interpreter of the scriptures, what shall become of their
eldership? Neither Moses, the Chronicles, Jeremy, nor Ezechiel, can help
the^: and to have Erastus expositions thus justified, and theirs rejected, I
suppose they will not endure it. Their only shift then, and plea must needs be,
as I take it, that first where they extolled M. Calvin so highly, for his
interpretation of the scriptures, their meaning was always to except
themselves, and secondly as concerning their offer, that they are yet content
(if we will, to refer it to M. Caluins judgment, whether there ought to be an
eldership or not in every parish. Marry for the proofs that must uphold it,
for the time of the institution of it, and for such matters, therein they will
leave him, as never meaning to be judged by him in those points, which is, as
though the eye and the ear should say, the one that it could see better, and
the other that it could hear better, then he himself that made, both the eye
and the ear. Well, I am fully persuaded, that if M. Calvin were now again at
Geneua, but for 3 or 4 days, and should find M. Beza with all his partakers,
Cartwright, Iunius, and the rest, so mightily plunged for the maintenance of
his devise, as that they should be driven some of the^ to run into Egypt, some
into the wilderness to mount Sinay, some they know not whither, and al of them
to run so far out of his paths, he would be greatly offended, and much amassed
at the matter: could he take it in any good part, that Beza specially, being a
man who^ he had made such choice of, to be a principal defender of the
co^sistoriall discipline, should by his intermedling with the government of
other churches, have pulled so many men upon him, as that for the defense of
his own at home, he should be driven to seek the first institution of it in
Leuit. 10. v. 10. and either there to hunt it out, or to give it over in the
plain field. Surely there is great reason he should. But what is that to me?
otherwise then that you thereby might be informed, what constant hold their
pretended holy elderships have hither to found in the old testament, and how
they agree in the interpretation of such scriptures as should sustain them.

Lastly, as touching master Caluins own opinion, for the institution of his
eldership after the captivity of the Jews, there does not come into my
memory at this present, any especial place alleged by him, out of the
scriptures to that purpose. Neither do I find in him so much, as that God did
ever command this Sanedrim which he speaks of, to be ever erected. Only he
says, Hoc legitimu^ fuit Deoque probatu^ regime^, Call. math. 18.
They are a lavvful regiment, and allowed of God. Allowed of God, not
commanded. I know that Cartwright and some others, T.C. lib. 3 pa. 40.
do bring for the continuance of their pretended elderships, after the
captivity, certain places out of Ezra and Nehemiah, I.B. polit. p. 101.
where there is mention made of the chief of the fathers and of elders, Ezr.
1.5. and 2.68. and 10.8.
likewise of certain that stood by Ezra, Nehe. 8.4.7.9.
when he preached to the people, but the places are so apparently wrested, as
no man that reads them, can be so dull, but he must needs discern it. But I
marvel, Call. in Math. 18.
what master Calvin means, when attributing to the Sinedriu^ or council
erected by the Jews, after their return from Babylon: Censuram morum and
doctrinae, The censure of manners and doctrine. In another place (where he
speaks of the said constitution, or erecting of it) he affirms, Call. in
Nu. 2. v. 16.
that the 70 elders which were from time to time chosen, to be of the
Sanedrim, were of the stock of David, and of their former kings. I hope they
will not say, that consequently their counterfeit elders, ought all of them to
be of the blood royal. But breefely for this matter of the Sanedrim, or courts
of justice, after the captivity, I cannot judge them to be any other, then
such courts and assemblies, as were before ordained by Moses, and had to do as
well in civil caules, Sutcl de presb. c. 9. Sutcl. of disc. ca. 4. sec. 1.
as ecclesiastical, as it may at large appear to those, that will take the
pains to read some part of doctor Sutclifs books, whither for this time, if
they list, I send them. And so leaving any further to trouble you with this
disciplinarie harmony, drawn by the ears out of the old testament: I will
come to the new.

Many things have been spoken of throughout the whole course of this book,
which might be fit for this place, as their iarring and disagreement in every
chapter, almost hitherto, which always does rise, because that every one of
them in effect (if he account himself to be any body) will writh and expound
the scriptures, as occasions serve, and his affections do move him. The most of
those places in the new testament, that master Calvin does expound, of
pastors and preachers only: Beza, Iunius, Cartwright, and others of the
disciplinarie mould, (and no men else) do wrest, and violently draw them unto
their Aldermen. 1. Cor. 14.32. Act. 10.28. Phil. 1.1. Tit. 1.7. 1. Tim. 3.2.
Romans 15.16. Act. 26.16.
They (forsooth) are prophets, to whom the spirits of other prophets must be
subject: they are bishops, for the feeding of Christ's flock. Of their office
it is said, that he who desires a bishopric, desires a good work. That
which S. Paul speaks of himself, as that he is a minister of the gospel,
and a witness appointed of those things, which he had seen, when the Lord
appeared unto him, as he was going to Damascus: Iunius will needs extend, to
these consistoriall companions. Hereof you may see more in the sixth chapter,
where they ascribe unto them, all those names, that since the Apostles times
have only been given to the ministers of the word. Master Caluins authority
is little regarded in this behalf, even of those men, who account him the best
interpreter of the scriptures that ever was in the world, these 1500 years.
Cartwright being pressed sometimes with master Caluins authority, in
expounding certain places, to be meant of pastors and ministers of the word,
where he will needs thrust in amongst them, his Aldermen, does use this
wrangling shift viz. that although M. Calvin say, that such ministers are there
understood; yet he says not, that they only are there understood. By the which
manner of evasion, what can be spoken, that may not be perverted? I do not
remember that the scriptures do say in any place, that Christ had only
twelve Apostles: and then by Cartvvrights shift we may say, he had as many, as
we list. Certainly he might have employed his wit to better purposes then he
has done. God will one day require an account both of him and of all the rest
of that pack, that take upon them so presumpteouslie, not only to pervert the
words and meaning of men, but of the holy Ghost in like manner.

Apoc. 1.20. and 2.1. etc.
By the Angels mentioned in the Apocalips; we must not understand the Bishops of
those 7. churches, that are there named: But whom (I pray you,) and what? Unto
the Angel of the church of Ephesus: that is, says Carolus Gallus unto the
pastor: Cha. Gal. in Apocal. ca. 2. Iuni. annot. ibid. Bez. Annot. Apo. 2.1.
unto the Angel of the church of Ephesus, etc. that is, says Iunius unto the
pastors of the church of Ephesus: unto the Angel of the church of Ephesus, that
is, says Beza (...) that is, unto the prelate or president, of the
presbiterie. Lastly ynto the Angel, etc. that is, I.B. de polit. page 160. I.B.
ibid.
says, I.B. unto the presbiterie. To the presbiterie with a mischief? Oh, good
words: yea to the presbiterie. How so? sane (...)Angelus dici potuit: Surely
the presbiterie may be called corporally an Angel. It is goodly news. Of
likelyhod, he relieth upon the Apostles words: where speaking of the divinity
of our Savior: Col. 2.9.
Saint Paul says; that in him dwells all the fulness of the godhead
(...)corporally or bodily: that is the divinity of Christ, and his humanity
are knit together substantiallie, and essentiallie. And must we say in like
sort: set up the pretended discipline in every perish, and then the Elderships
so placed in them, and the Angels in heaven will be out of hand essentiallie
tied and incorporated (as it were) together? What a thing is it that Saint John
in one word, should have so many and so mystical meanings? Their discipline
would blush, if she had any modesty in her, to see the word of God, for her
sake thus used.

The only place in the new testament, which they do rely most upon, and from
whence they set all their royal authority, to excommunicat Princes, and to
deal with all matters at their pleasures: is that of S. Matthew where it is
thus written: Math. 18.
If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him of his fault between
him and thee alone: if he hear thee, thou have vvonne thy brother: but if he
hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two etc. And if he refuse to hear
them: tell the Church, etc. Now as concerning the exposition of these words: a
man would bless himself to consider, how they are incombred. You see there is
mention made of some thing that is amiss: and that is done against some body.
Likewise it is plain, that the thing which is here mentioned, is to be done
either privately or publicly: and that certain witnesses are to be used. But
if you ask them, what things these are against whom they are committed:
whether they must be private or public trespasses: and what kind of witnesses
are meant here by our Savior: (every one of these points being of the very
essence of their pretended discipline:) they will tell you their minds, when
they know, what to think of all these points themselves.

Si peccauerit in te. If thy brother sin against thee* Nay: that is not well
translated. You must say: If thy brother trespass against thee. Geneu.
translat.
But it were better to translate it: If thy Beza de presb. page 50
brother offend or scandalize thee, etc. The word (...) to sin, in this
place, (being referred to men) does not signify to sin, Beza ibid.
says Beza, but (...) that is, to offend. The word (...) has in this place
his proper signification, that is to Sneca. de dis. p. 461.
sin, says Snecanus. Beza, All sins or Beza de presb page 46
offensions are not here meant, but those only, that are called offendiculae,
that is stumbling blocks to men's consciences. Sneca. de dis. page 460.
Snecanus, All sins are here meant, as well against God as man; howsoever
they be committed, either by violence or by deceit, in words, or deeds, of
purpose, or unadvisedly. Again Snecanus, Christ speaks Sneca. ibi. page 458.
here of injuries committed. Beza, Christ Beza de presb. page 57
does not speak here of any injuries committed. Gallasius, Christ Gallas.
co^t. Alex.
does speak here of common faults, and not of those which are more heinous,
vz. such as tend to the overthrow either of religion, or of the common state.
Calvin, Christ Calu. inst. lib. 4. cap. 12. sect. 4.
speaks here of all sorts of sins, as well small as great, not only of
such as are delicta, little offenses; but scelera velflagitia, even the
greatest of al. Nay* says Beza, Christ Beza de presb. pa. 53.
speaks here of no sins, neither great nor small, saving of the greatest
sin of all sins, which is, contumacia aduersus ecclesiam, contumacie
against the church: that is the presbiteri. Again Beza, Beza ibid. page 49.
Christ speaks not here of any offense ob priuatum damnum, for private loss,
but of an offense that Gods commandment is broken. But Snecanus says, that
Christ Snec. de dis. page 457.
speaks of injuries whether we are hurt or sustain loss.

Si peccauerit in te, If thy brother sin against thee. Calvin, They are
deceived, who Call. est Anabap. Call. epi. 55.
think that Christ in this place does not speak, de secretis delictis, of
secret sins. Beza, They are deceived Bez. annot. Math. 18.
who think that Christ in this place does speak, de priuatis delictis, of
private sins. Gallasius: Facessere Gal. cont. Alex.
debet quaestio, etc. the question of public and manifest sins, which may
otherwise be punished; away with it. For Christ speaks here de secretis
peccatis, of secret sins. Snecanus: Christ Sneca. de dis. page 460.
speaks here of all sins as well public as private. And Cartwright:
Christ T: C. l. 2 p. 66
speaks here of private sins, and then a maiori, of public. Hereunto also
do appertain, the other two points, vz. against whom any of these sins
whether private or public are said to be committed, and of the witnesses.
Against thee. That is, says Beza, against Beza annot. Ma. 18. de pres page 47.
another, te conscio: thou knowing of it. One commits an unlawful act,
against some other man: thou know it, and art thereuppon offended: because
in committing the said act, he has broken Gods commandment. Against thee.
That is, says Gallasius: against Gal. co^. Alex
thee who art injured. In te Snec. de dis. page 458.
laeso: against thee that art hurt, says Snecanus. And master Calvin does
likewise (if I understand him) so expound that place: against thee: reckoning
Call. in Ma. 18
them contentious men, that say otherwise. But now concerning the witnesses,
being a part also of this point in hand.

Since her Majesty's reign (which the Lord for his Christ's sake continue long
over us) there was a great contention, Instit. lib. 4. ca. 12. sect. 3. Epist.
55.
between two Ministers of the French church in London: N. Gallasius, and one
P. Alexander: about this very matter. And as it should seem; there was parts
taking. Master Caluins opinion is with Gallasius, and master Bezaes, with
Alexander. Calvin and Gallasius (as you have heard) do think; that Christ in
this place, when he says, against thee, and between him and thee alone, and
if he hear not thee etc. does speak of such a sin, as no man knows off,
but only he him self, against whom it was committed. Whereupon it follows
of necessity, that when Christ says: take with thee one or two etc. for
witnesses: we must by those witnesses understand witnesses of the admonition,
which he (who takes them with him,) must give in their presence, to the party
that had offended. For witnesses of the fact, they could not be: ^al. con.
Alex:
in that they saw it not. So as both master Calvin, and Gallasius, do think,
that here Christ speaks, de testibus admonitionis, of the witnesses of
admonition. And Gallasius, amongst other reasons for him self: alleges this.
Non dicit Christus: voca testes, qui rem viderint etc. Christ says not, call
such witnesses as saw the trespass when it was committed: but take one or
two. Vnus certe testis ad rem probandam non sufficeret: but one witness (who may
serve as after he says, to prove a man's contumacie or repentance) is not
sufficient to convince a man of a fact, if he deny that ever he committed any
such fact. Master Calvin, being asked his judgment hereof, by the ministers
of Neocomum, as it seems: writ unto them, after this sort: Quod postea etc.
Call. epist. Neo com. 55.
That which follows vz. (if he hear thee not) hoc nostro iudicio
intelligendum est, non de testibus delicti, sed admonitionis: This in our
judgment must be understood, not of the witnesses of the fact, but of the
admonition.

Against this interpretation; hear now what Beza and Alexander have to say.
If this interpretation (say they) should be good: Beza de presb. page 51,
Gal, co^t. Alex.
consider then, what inconveniences would follow of it: I will set down two;
and so refer you to Beza, for the rest. It may fall out oftentimes (say
they in effect,) that the party delinque^t, confessing his fact to him, that
came first unto him, to admonish him of it, will afterward, when he shall bring
one or two witnesses with him, deny that ever he either did, or confessed
any such deed? And what then? Besides, it may well enough come to pass, that
he unto whom a man shall come, in such a charitable sort, to admonish him;
may burst forth into a choler, and say, that he is slaundered: and so
calling the said man (for his godly mind) into the law, as a slaunderer, make
them witnesses of his pretended slander, that came to be witnesses of his
admonition. For these reasons therefore, Alex. co^, Gal. Beza.
and for some other; Beza and Alexander will not admit, that Christ should
speak here of such private offenses, as none knew but one, but of such us
that there might be some witnesses of them, if the offenders should deny
them. So as now in both their judgments: Christ does speak in this place, de
testibus facti, of the witnesses of the fact.

Peradventure you can be here content, to hear some answer to these
objections. They seem to be of great difficulty, and to carry some matter
with them: Gal. con, Alex.
which may prejudice master Calvin and Gallasius. But what should men talk of
difficulties, when the truth appears. Incommoda et inconuenientia non
soluunt regulam: Incommodities and inconveniences do not (says Gallasius)
dissolve a general rule. It may be that the party may deny his fact, as
it has been said. If he do: he is to be left to the great Judge. Yea;
but he will take the Law against the Admonitioner: as a slaunderer of him.
He may do so indeed (says Gallasius again): and I have seen experience
of it. And there is no other remedy but this: the grave men, that were brought
to be witnesses of the admonition, must tell the Judge the whole matter, and
for what purpose they were brought to the plaintiff. Whereby the Judge, may
easilye understand the injury offered: and then, if he favor the Church, he
will send the party to the Eldershippe, or Ecclesiastical Senate: or else vz.
in effect, that the defendaunt in that action, must bear it off, with his
head and shoulders.

It is no marvel then you see; that our reforminge Generation, should cry
out so mightelie, for the new form of discipline: it is so substantially
compact together, and at such great unity in it self. Unto these
caterbraules, and pitiful distractions, I might add a great heap of other
confusions: all of them proceedinge from such intolerable presumption, as is
used in the behalf of that Minion, by the peruertinge, and false
interpretation of the sacred Scriptures. But I have been too tedious already
in this matter, and therefore to grow toward an end of it. Of all the places
of Scripture, which they pretend, to make for such parts of their discipline,
as is disliked by the Church of England: as either for their Jewish Sanedrim,
their parish Bishops, their vnpriestlie Aldermen; with their priestlye
functions, their Geneuian presbyteries, or Elderships: of all the places of
scripture (I say) which they bring, for that purpose, I profess unto you as
in the presence of God, that I cannot find any one, but by one means or
other, they have cast such a color upon it, as was never known in the Church
of Christ, amongst all the ancient godly Fathers, from the Apostles times,
till these our troublesome and presumptuous days.

Well, It is not enough for men to allege scriptures, except they bring the
true meaning of the Scriptures. For as Saint Augustine says: Heresies, and
erroneous opinions, August. tract. in John 18.
do not otherwise spring and grow up, nisi dum Scripturae bonae intelliguntur
non been, and quod in eis non been intelligitur, etiam temere and audaciter
asseritur: but when the good Scriptures are not well understood: and because
that which is not well understood in them, is notwithstanding rashlye and
boldly affirmed, to be the meaning of them. There was never any thing hitherto
so fondly devised: but the authors of it, did ever pretend they had Scripture
for it. For else says Saint Jerome: Hier: ad Tit. 1.
the garrulity of such persons, non haberet fidem, would never have won any
credit. All sects and Schisms, have risen (for the most part) upon
coffeehouse. And this a man may observe, in the writings of the ancient
Fathers: that as many men do marry, and so beget children, before they know
how to keep them: so commonly it has fallen out, in new and strange opinions.
Through pride and vanity, they have been rashly begotten: before the authors
of them did know how to maintain them. Marry, when once they had engaged
their credits, by broching of this and that, then they ever labored, not to
submitt themselves and their opinions, unto the truth: Sed vt sibi scriptur
as ipsi subijcerent: but (as Augustine says) that they might bring the
scriptures, August. cont. Faust. l. 32. c. 19
to be in subjection to them. Of the which kind of men, Saint Hilary also
speakinge, says: that they interpret the Scriptures, Hill: de Trinit. lib. 2.
pro voluntatis suae sensu, according to such a sense as may serve their turns
etc. Which is (as the same Hilary shows in another place) non expectare, Hill.
de Tri. l. 1^
not to expecte: for the understanding of those things, which are spoken in the
Scriptures, out of the words themselves: sed imponere, but to impose a meaning
upon them: non refer sed adferre, not to deliver the true sense of them, but
to bring a sense of their own: not a yielding to the words, but a kind of
compulsion, inforcement, or violence offered: to make that to seem to be
contained in the^, quod ante lectionem praesumpserit intelligendum, which they
presumed should be understood by them, before they read them.

Whosoever do deal with the Scriptures in this sort, well they may speak
proud things, exalt themselves, promise mountains, brag of the Prophets, of
Christ, of his Apostles, and verisimilia mentiri, as many such men in former
times have done: whereby for a season some may be deceived: but yet as Saint
Cyprian says: mendacia non diu fallunt. It will come to pass, as always it
has done hitherto: that after a short time the covering of their devises, with
so many sleights and falshoodes, grows to be detected: and then they are paid
to their utter discredit, the wages and full hire of such unrighteous dealing.

CHAP. XXXII. What account the sollicitors for this pretended government do
make each of other.
WE have Gilby page 3.
Christ and his Apostles, and all the Prophets on our sides: we are Gilby page
5:
assured we see Gods glory. The order T.C. l. 2. Epist
that we contend for, is that which God has left: the everlasting truth of
God. The Ad. 2. page 5.
matters that we deal in are Gods, and we may not for our parts leave them.
The Ad. 2. page 6.
matters we deal in are according to the very will of God. There is Ad. 2.
page 3.
nothing in our books, that should offend any, that either be or would seem
to be godly. Gods Ad. 2. page 59
cause by us is truly and faithfully propounded. No, Ad, 2. pa 38.
no, Gods cause is the matter why we are troubled: well may they confer and
yield, for never shall they overthrow the truth which we utter. It is not
possible T.C. l. 1, page 6
for us to conceal the truth: we can do nothing against it, but for it.

We Ad. 2. p. 66. 59
are the poor servant of God: and professors of the Gospel: we Gilby page 9^
are the poor little ones of Christ: we Gilby p. 34.
are the foolish things of the world chosen to confound the wise: we T.C. l
page: 7,
propound nothing that the Scriptures do not teach, the writers both T.C. l.
1: page: 16: 17.
old and new for the most part affirm, the examples of the Primitive Church,
and of those which are at these days confirm. We stay our selves within the
bounds of Gods word: we seek not to pleasure our selves, but the Lord and our
brethren: we seek not the admiration of men: we will patiently abide until
the Lord bring our righteousness in this behalf unto light: and our just
dealing as the noone day.

We Motion from Scot. pref: A. 4,
are of immortal seed: we are the lawful successors of those men, who
through faith quenched the violence of fire: we are those unto whom the Lord
made this promise: I will not fail thee: we may boldly say, the Lord is my
helper, I will not fear what man can do unto me: we are the Gilb, p, 131, 158,
chief servant of God: most worthy faithful and painful Ministers,
feeders of Christ's flock, unreprovable, modest and watchful. Now we the
Gilbe, pa. 32,
servants of God must reason with you the Proctors of Antichrist. Paul spoke
frankely Gilby pa, 161
against superstition: so do these. Paul was accounted a fool in the world:
so are these. Paul counted men's traditions dong and dross, so do these: They
have one common cause: Paul was persecuted, and so are these.

Our Gilby pa, 51;
side detesteth sin and wickedness: preaching the gospel with all faithful
diligence. Our Gilby pa, 46
Ministers quietly suffer all evil at the hands of the Magistrates: only
refusing to do evil at their commandment: as did John Baptist, Peter, and
John the Evangelist, professing they must rather obey God then men. God Adm. 2,
pa. 3.
knows we altogether seek to do good. There is Gilby p. 111,
none of our side (God be praised) but that he has some competent knowledge of
the Scriptures and in life very honest. Ours do Ibidem.
follow Christ, and labor so to do more and more. They Gilby, p. 112
of the wicked sort take part with their adversaries, but the godly do join
with us. We deserve Adm, 2, p, 16.
praise of the law and of the Church of God. Our Adm, 2. pa, 6
zeal (when they rail vnmeasurably) is to be measured with the zeal of
Moises, Elias, of the Prophets, of John Baptist, of Paul, of the Apostles, of
John the elder, and of Christ.

Indeed, there is almost nothing spoken in the Scriptures, to the commendation
of the true Prophets, and Ministers of God: or which may well be applied to
such as truly fear the Lord and walk in his ways, but they seem to
appropriat the same unto themselves, and their followers: with the same faith
and sincerity (I fear) that one in the Gospel (sustaining the person of
those which trusted in themselves, that they were just and despised others)
said: Luke, 18,
vz. O God I thank thee, that I am not as other men, extorcioners, unjust,
adulterers: I fast twice in the week, I give Tithe of all that ever I
possess. There is also another reproof set down by the same Evangelist of
such kind of men, Luke, 16,
which I wish they may look in time to escape: Ye are they which justify
your selves before men, but God knows your hearts. To whom though for mine
own part I leave them to be judged: yet I have thought it meet to let you
understand what Barrow and Greenewood, not privately, but in Printe have
published of them: Two men, who peradventure have been themselves of the same
mind and integrity, that these presently are of: and by their own hearts
they do take upon them to judge of these men's hearts now.

They (meaning our English Consistorians) are most pernicious deceauers,
Barrowes dis-couery pa: 145
presumptuous pa: 6
shepeheardes, chief Rabbines, p. 19
Baalmites, wretched pa: 19
disciples of Calvin: pa: 98
blasing stars, and paragons of the Country: new found Martins saints,
glosing hypocrites with God: fasting pharisaicall preachers, miserable guides:
counterfeyt p. 109
false prophets: p* 45
Sycophants: trencher-priests that will cunningly insinuate into some great
noble man's house: Bar: and Gren: against Giffor: page: 134
Pharisees in precisenes, outward shows of holiness, hypocrisy, vainglory,
covetousness, resembling or rather exceeding them. p. 140
Conscience brokers: most p. 174
dangerous and pestilent seducers. p. 134
Sectary precise preachers: abalienaters of the hearts and minds of the people
from their pastors, to draw them to themselves.

The perfidy p. 174
and apostasy of these reformists, is great. p. 151
The perfidye and treacherye of these miserable guides: treacherous watchmen,
sworn waged marked soldiers of Antichrist: garding his very throne and
person, building the harlotte a false Church. Their p: 150
dealing is counterfeyt and corrupt. They entangle Bar: Grenw^ 134
poor souls by their counterfeyt shows of holiness, gravity, austerenes of
manners etc. These Scorpions so poison and sting every good Conscience, so
leaven them with hypocrisy etc. that such proselytes as are won unto them
become twofolde more the children of hell, then they were before. They p. 7
abrogate the cross of Christ.

They put on Bar: 149
an outside of gravity and good conscience, they make a 145
merchandise of the word, and an open port-sale of the Gospel. They that 187
sometimes to our seeminge sought Reformation and the kingdom of Christ Jesus,
are now become of all others the most pernicious ennemies thereof, daily
studyinge for new cauills and shifts, to hide their wretchedness. They p. 108
suppose themselves to be those servant of Christ that are persecuted. These
p: 50.
disguised hypocrites: these ravening wolves, which come to us in sheeps
clothing, under glorious and swelling titles of Pastors, Teachers, and
Ministers of the gospel, men of great learning, of very holy life, and of
great sincerity, seekers and sighers for reformation; and such as abhor and
cry out against the Bishops, and their proceedinges etc. These p. 50.
pharisees, these Sectaries are they, which misleade the people in their
crooked and by paths of death, and will neither lead them, nor suffer them to
enter into the peaceable and straight ways of the Lord: but keep them
always learning, and never bring them to the sight or acknowledging of the
truth. These Prophets by their p. 99:
preachments and long pharisaicall prayers do soder the people in their sin,
and weary God with their abominable prayers, and hypocritishe fastes,
counterfeyting a great sorrow and heaviness for their sins, afflicting their
souls for a piece of a day, bowinge down the head as a bulrushe. We page
142.
find not only the marks of false Prophets, which are recorded in the
Scriptures upon them: but even Satan's uttermost deceits and effectual
delusions amongst them, suborninge and transforminge them, as if they were
Ministers of righteousness, taking unto them, the names and titles of Christ's
Ministers, preachers of the gospel, seekers of reformation, etc. whereby he
deceaueth the world.

These things I have repeated, not because I delight in such outrageous
deprauations, of any that profess christianity: nay I do utterly mislike
them. And it argues of what season those vessels are, from whence they
proceed. But I did collect them together for this principal purpose: that
therein we might magnify the judgments of God, when we see apparently with
our own eyes, the execution of that his most inviolable sentence: Luke 6.
with what measure ye meat: with the same shall me^ measure to you again. For
although the former sort of men, in seeking of the Geneua Discipline, do set
out themselves (as you have heard) for the Saints of God, (as I trust some of
them are) and for men especially sanctified: yet have many of them brought
forth most unsanctified fruits: cruel speeches, proud things, scurrilous
gybes, many cursings, much bitterness, and a huge mass of most slanderous
calumniatio^s; to the discrediting of those things, which either they knew not,
or will not know them: and of those persons, whom they were bound in
conscience to have reverenced and honored. And now even in the same manner,
they are repaied again, into their own bosoms (as you have heard) by men of
their own trayning up, 1. Tim: 1
and such as have admired them: vt discant non maledicere: that they may learn
to rail no more.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the praise and disprayse of this pretended regiment.
IT is found practice of prel* D. 2.
to be the only bond of peace, the bane of heresy, the punisher of sin,
and mayntayner of righteousenes. It is motion p. 46.
pure, perfect, and full of all goodness, for the peace, wealth, and honor of
Gods people, and is ordained for the joy and happiness of all nations. It is the
motion p 84
right stuff and gold for building the Church of Gods. It is termed motion p
69
the venerable doctrine of discipline, the most L. disc. page, 8,
beautiful order of ecclesiastical regiment: The substantiaell Count. p, 29.
form of Christ's government: Christ's motion p. 4^
kingdom, Gods Ibidem p 34
government. This would Ibidem p. 84.
make the Church a chaste Spouse, having a wonderful brightness as the morning:
fair as the moon, pure as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners.
This gouerenment is Epist, before the supp. A, ^,
the scepter, whereby alone Christ Jesus rules amongst men. The Mart. junior
these, 14.
Churches of God in Denmark, Saxony, Zurich, etc. wanting this government,
are to be accounted maimed, and imperfect. The establishing T.C. li. 1, page 3.
of the presbyteries, is the full placing of Christ in his kingdom. It is the
blade motion 49,
of a shaken sword in the hand of the Cherubins, to keep the way of the
tree of life. It is called Regist. pa. 68
by the Apostle the ground and pillar of truth. I deny Brief dis. against
R:B. sermon, page 15.
not but the true government of the church by the Eldershippe, may have the
most of those titles truly attributed unto it, wherewith the visible church
under the new testament is adorned. God has ordained the civil magistrate for
the ecclesiastical state, therefore is the supreme kingdom of God in this
world,. It is the chief throne of all excellency, wherein God him self does
sit. The political Empire is but a subalterne regiment, et quasi inferius
quodda^ subsellium, Rennecherus in psalm, 2, p. 72.
and as it were an under Court, that determines and decideth injuries,
strifes, and contentions etc. idque ad ecclesiasticae oeconomiae praescriptum,
and by the commandment of the ecclesiastical government. Those Ministers
that prefer the civil magistrate before the Ecclesiastical, Rennecherus
ibidem page 74
they flatter him for profit, and their bellies sake, and do shamefu^ly, to the
danger of their own souls deceive him. The Ecclesiastical discipline, est
inspectatrix et custos, the ouerseer and keeper of the civil regiment: that
the magistrate do not command his subjects any thing either contrary to Gods
word, Ibidem pa. 78
or against nature and honest manners. It is true that was begone to be
affirmed, vz. that the spiritual jurisdiction, Ibidem pa, 37,
does in price and dignity so far ouerweigh the political, as the soul
excels the body. The spirirituall and ecclesiastical government (by
Pastors, Rennecher. in 2. psalm, p., 71. Beza de exco. page 4
Doctors, and Elders,) is as much superior and more worthy, then the politic
regiment, as heavenly benefittes do excel earthly commodities. Presbyterium
est interpres Dei: the presbytery is Gods interpreter. I B. Beza de pres: pa
1. 24
The Eldership may be called (...) that is, bodily an Angel.

The Presbytery is erected up, pro Christi tribunali, for Christ's tribunal
seat.

He that will read, of the further commendation of this manner of
Church-gouernement: let him peruse some parts of Trauerses defense of the
Ecclesiastical discipline. def: pa. 122
One thing I may not omit: for the which he extolleth some reformed Churches
(as he terms them) where the Elderships do most flourish, above the Skies:
insomuch as he says: the examples of it might make an Infidel and vnbeleiuer
fall down on his face, and confess, that undoubtedly God is amongst them,
and in the midst of those churches. def: pa. 127
I dare say you are desirous to know, what rare, excellent, and celestial
thing that should be, which is sufficient to work such a wonder. You have
heard how Rennichere, has exalted their Elderships or new papacy, above all
kings and kingdoms: and now you shall see a singular proof of it. To keep
you in suspense no longer, this wonderful thing that Trauerse speaks off is
this: vz. that (as it seems) some of the said Churches, so highly by him
commended, have by virtue of their discipline; excommunicated already some
great princes or Kings. If he had not himself published this matter in print,
and propounded the same as a president for the honor of his discipline: I
would not have presumed (ye may be sure) to have touched it. Neither yet will
I further meddle with it: then only to set down his words. After a long
discourse, how, where there discipline is on foot, there is nothing in effect
amiss: no private administration of the sacraments: no baptizing or reading of
service by Deacons: no commutation of pennaunce: no respect of persons: he
says thus. Ibidem


Memorable is that rare, but right christian example of Theodosius the Emperor,
publicklye humbling himself under the hand of God, and professing his
repentance for his bloodye commandment, and the cruel execution done
according to it. A president well worthy so christian a prince, the honor of
the Discipline, yea and of the whole church of that age. Such Theodosians have
the reformed churches of this age to speak off, to the high honor of almighty
God, and his only begotten son Christ Jesus, king of kings. Wherein a
Prince of blood royal, and by birth within a step or two to one of the
greatest Kingdoms of these parts of the world, and for princely gifts,
worthy to have borne a Scepter in his hand, and a Diadem upon his head, when
as another David, he had been overthrown by Satan, and committed things,
for which the name of God was evil spoken off, endured to hear the servant of
God (as David did Nathan) to rebuke him: and lamenting his offense openly
before the public assembly of the Church, desired pardon of God, and rejoiced
heaven and earth, men, and Angels with his conversion from sin, to the
obedience of the living God blessed for ever, Amen. Whose christian president,
both a crowned King, and also a worthy son of that noble Father, have
followed, after that by terror of as barbarous cruelty, as has been committed
in any age, they had done otherwise then Daniell, and the young princes
brought: up with him did, in a case not unlike to theyrs, etc. Hitherto
Trauers. And what this imports judge you. I will answer no questions: who
these Theodosians are. As princes like it: let them allow it.

And thus of the commendation of this government: which if it were true indeed,
and that it had by any lawful title so Regal an authority, as here you see is
pretended, who would not almost fall down and worship it. But you must
believe them with discretion. Men that think they know this platform as well,
as the best of those that have extolled it: do carry a far differing opinion
of it. And therefore they have been bold to write of it, as follows.

It is a sillye Bar. p. 241
Presbytery or Eldership. A sequestered Bar: Gre^: 169
withdrawn Presbyterye. A sweeping Bar: 92
new reformation. A presumptuous Bar: Gren. 79
irregular Consistory which has no ground in the word of God. A second
Barrow 190
beast. Let them consider Bar: Gren. 79
how far the ^auinge of such a Consistory, and Pastor in one Congregation,
differs from that Apostolical sea of Rome, and that holy father that sits
therein. Of this Bar. Gre^: 75
Consistory through the whole testament they can show no warraunt. They make
Bar. Gre^: 7
themselves transgressors of the worship of God, disturbers and violaters of
that holy order, which Christ has established in his Church. These deceitful
Bar: 142
workmen not only build their own timber and stubble devises, but most
highly profane that heavenly frame and gracious government of Christ. In
their Bar. 151
leauened and corrupt writings of discipline, and their supplications unto the
Parliament, are declared, their pernicious forgeries, and sacrilegious
profanation of Gods holy ordinance. They fetch their (...)
reformation from the primative defection. That counterfeyt (...)
reformation, which these counterfeit preachers pretend, is as evil as that
which is already. Both these (...)
factions, pontifical and reformists, would assume the whole government of
the Church into their own hands. How cano these forgers, these coyners of
religion, seem and sue to cast out the heap of humane traditions, as
contrary, and such as cannot be joined unto, or with the testament of Christ:
and yet bring in these forgeries of their own. Is it likely Bar: Gren: 75
or possible that our Savior Christ would fetch his pattern for the Elders
of his Church, and the executing of these high judgments, from that corrupt
degenerate Synedrion of the Jews, which by the institution of God was merely
civil, and not ordained for causes ecclesiastical: as appears Exodus 18.
Number. 11. Deuteronomy. 1? The priests bearing the charge, and having the deciding of
all ecclesiastical causes Number. 18. Deuteronomy. 17. But this Council of theyrs, was
now mixed of the Elders of the people and the Priests, and handled all causes,
both civil and Ecclesiastical indifferently. Mat. 26.3. Act. 4.5. Bar: Gre^:
261
. If by the light of Gods word, you examine and measure the secret Classis, the
ordinary set Synods and Councels of ministers (as they term themselves)
which these reformists now privily bring in, and would openly set up: they
shall no doubt be found as new, strange, and antichristian, as prejudicial to
the liberty of the Saints, and to the power, right, and duties of the whole
Church, and as contrary to the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: as the
government by Bishops etc. what show so ever of former antiquity, or of
present necessity they may pretend. It is a new, r adulterate, forged
government in show, or rather in dispight of Christ's blessed government: which
they in pride, rashness, ignorance, and sensualytye of their fleshly hearts,
most miserablye innouate, corrupt, and pervert. Their most exquisite Bar: 220
plots of government, which they can devise unto themselves, are but the
instruments of foolish shepeheards to their own perdition, and of as many as
are governed by them.

There is great difference we may perceive hereby, between the opinions of
these two sorts of men; concerning this presbyteriall form of the new
pretended discipline. If any that are possessed with the former men's conceits,
shall lightly esteem what this second sort of fellows do hold or think of
their platform: he is to be put in mind, that they are not so lightly to be
regarded. Diverse ministers well reckoned of heretofore for their learning: are
lately fallen from Cartwright, and his sect, into another more new frenzy of
Barrowisme. In a letter that was taken not long since: I find some points to
this effect. The preachers of Midleborow and Flushing, have both given over
their unlawful callings. M. Johnson has written a most learned discourse,
concerning the striking of a new covenant, with some conferences had in that
country. It is also reported, and I am persuaded, by that which I have seen,
that the report is true: vz. that master Penry, is entered in like manner into
this new kind of covenant. A matter, that would seem very strange unto me: but
that I know the nature of schismatickes, to be of such giddiness: as that no
one thing will content them long. What stirs has he kept in England:
first with his two supplications unto the high court of Parlaiment: his humble
petition unto her Majesty: his exhortation unto the governors and people of
Wales: his Theses and libells, which came out under the name of Martin and his
children (wherein he with his companion a certain gentleman were, if not
authors, yet especial dealers) and then with his treatises out of Scotland.
That reformation (he means the setting up of Cartwrightes Eldershippes) is
no ennemie to our state: his humble motion (if not made by him, yet procured by
him to be printed): His discovery against D.B. and with diverse other
pamphlets, and most railing discourses? In all which books he has showed
such earnestness in the behalf principally, of Cartwrights discipline: that
he has offered to pawn his life many times for the justification of it. Which
course of his, by reason of his merueilous vehemence, wrought very greatly, (as
all men know) with certain rash and unstaid persons, who have been since
so far ouercaried, with an opinion of the arguments there used: as it has
been given out many times by them, that they could never be answered. And
yet now if he be one of Barrowes church: notwithstanding all his former
writings and arguments, you have heard his opinion, out of his brethrens
mouths: both of Cartwrights presbyteries, and of all those likewise that do
maintain them.

Some will say peradventure: that for Penry, they never made any reckoning of
him. And it is well. But what if one of their Patriarckes begin to waver? How
if master Trauerse be inclined that way? For mine own part: I do not think
him so simple a man. But yet you shall hear what goes abroad amongst that
brainesicke generation: as it is set down in the letter before mentioned.
There is good hope (says the writer of it to one of his friends) of one Master
Trauerse about London, (as I think) but how far he is come, or whereat he
stays, I cannot at this time certify you. But howsoever he stands
affected, you may assure your selves, that this latter schism grows on very
fast. In so much, that as Cartwright and his brethren began, eight or nine
years since, to set up, and put in practice, their Geneuian discipline: so
do these new vpstartes, begin to erecte in diverse places, their Barrowish
Synagogues, and I know not what cages of frantic schismatickes. One Collins
a man amongst them, not unlearned (as it seems) does write in this sort
hereof. Ecclesia potenti eius dextra adiuta, etc. The church assisted with the
mighty right hand of God, has chosen ministers: Master Johnson for her
pastor: Master Greenwood for her Doctor: Master Studly and Master George
Knife, for her Elders: Nicholas Lee and Christopher Brown for her Deacons. The
other assembly also (whereunto are added, John Nicholas: Thomas Michell: John
Barnes, and some others with me.) with Gods assistaunce, will begin out of
hand, to create unto it self ministers.

And thus they go on forward headlong, god knows whether. I am persuaded,
that if there be not good order taken in this behalf, there will some mischief
grow of it The number of them does increase daily more and more. And for the
repressing of them; it will not be sufficient (in mine opinion) to use the
ordinary course by the ecclesiastical censures or commission. For they are
entered into a league amongst themselves, of all manner of secrecy for the not
detecting one of another in any of their proceedinges, when by great chance
some two or three are met with all. If you find any writings amongst them:
you may thereby learn some thing peradventure: otherwise they will confess
nothing. And offer them an oathe, not to accuse themselves, but to purge
themselves; and as witnesses, to signify their knowledge in those points,
they are to be examined off, Rh. Test. act. 23.
as touching other men's factes: they have gotten the Jesuits doctrine (as you
may see it in their annotations upon the Rhemish Testament, and amplifyed
lately by Cartwright and his crew,) that they may neither accuse themselves,
nor their brethren, for doing of those things, which they allow off
themselves. If their number should increase; so as they might be able to do,
and set up what they list, according to one of their grounds. vz. without any
longer stayinge for the Magistrate; and so should break forth into open
rebellion; they might by no means be examined upon their oaths, because they
will say they have done nothing, but what they were bound to do; and that
therefore, they might detect no man, whereby to bring him, within the compass
of any law, for doing his duty.

But I will not enter into this matter: the cause I mentioned it, is the
increasing of this schism, and their league of fidelity one to an other. I
said the number of them would daily be augmented: and you shall have my
reasons, why I think so. They are verily persuaded, that they hold almost
nothing, but what Cartwright and his scholars have taught them. One of them
has taken upon him, to prove the chiefest of their new assertions, by their
more ancient propositions. I like well (says Greenewood in a letter
intercepted) of the arguments you have drawn against them from their own
grounds. Again: Surely it were a notable work, and no doubt might do much
good in these times, for some one that God has endued with sound judgment and
sharp sight, to gather the majors or antecedents, of all those scattered
pamphlets of Penries or Martins etc. and put new minors or conclusions unto
them: and so in one little nosegay, but as bigg as an almanac, to turn them
upon themselves, and present them unto them, for an answer.

There are two especial points, for the which we dislike them: their departing
from our churches, and the framinge to themselves of a Church of their own.
And for both these points, hear what they may say, and what indeed in effect
they do say, and consider withal of these things, which here I will set
down: as sufficient matter for a minor, that Barrowe may work upon. Thus our
holy consistorians have written; vz. That the government of our Church is by
the popish Glby pa. 77.
Hierarchy, and so is both Admon. 1. pa. 25.
Antichristian and diuelishe, that it is accursed, and Hay any pa. 13.
that none but traitors to God, do defend it: that our Gilby pa. 90.
religion is patched with the popes: whereby we join fire and water, heaven and
hell together: that we want a Admon. 1. pa. 2.
right ministry: that in the order Adm. 1. pa. 24.
of our service there is nothing but confusion: that we eat not the Gilby pa.
2.
Lords supper, but play a pageant of our own, to make the silly souls believe
they have an English mass: and Gilby pa. 2.
that so we put no difference betwixt truth and falsehood, betwixt Christ and
Antichrist, betwixt God and the Devil. A dunghill of such like sayings, might
be heaped together, which they have cast up, out of the froth of their zeal.
Whereupon now Barrowe, taking his advantage; does frame his argument in
this sort. It is not lawful for the children of God to submit themselves to
the government of Antichrist, nor to join themselves, to those congregations,
which have in their service, nothing but confusion, and in the Lords Supper
put no difference between God and the Devil. But such is the government of
the Church of England, and such are their congregations. And therefore we may
not submitt our selves unto that government, nor join our selves to their
congregations. If now, the minor were true, which he assumeth from the
Consistorians: you see how the argument would follow. So that as Penry and some
others have done already: let all the sort of the other crew add but Barrowes
majors, unto their own minors: and forthwith in this first point they are
become mere Barrowistes.

And as concerning the second point wherein (as I said) we disalow them: it is,
their framing to themselves a new Church platform. Which does thus far agree
with Cartwrightes: that they must have (forsoothe) in every assembly, their
Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons, and that the Church new framed after
their fashion, must have all the authority that Cartwright does challenge to
his Elderships: of dealing in all matters of manners and doctrine, and in
executing their censures against any person without exception whosoever. The
chief differences that are betwixt them, are generally two. The first is vz:
that whereas Cartwright, could have been contented to have erected his
Elderships in every parish, taking them as now they are: they say the parish
assemblies are popish and unlawful: they would have them dissolved: and they
will have their Elderships set up amongst no people, but first they must enter
into a new covenant. The other chief difference in like sort I take to be
this: that Barrow in all his platform, will have the people to join with
their Elderships further, then Cartwright does allow of. And for his opinion
herein he relyeth altogether in effect upon Cartwrightes grounds.

It is not unknown what a plausible course our English Disciplinarians have
taken, that thereby they might the more easily draw the people unto them. He
that will peruse the first admonition, which Cartwright maintained, T. C. lib.
1. pa. 35. lib. 2. page 325.121.221.225.226.229 etc.
and consider withal, the places of his books that are noted in the margent:
shall well perceive, how earnestly they entitle the people to a wonderful
interest in Church matters. They tell the people, that they are greatly
iniuried in this and that: that they ought to choose their Ministers: that
imposition of hands should be in their names: that the censures of the
Church were to be executed with the peoples consent: and what must be done
almost, but the people must have an oar in it. Howbeit: (all this great show
of gratifying the people notwithstanding:) Cartwright by snatches here and
there does so powder his matters: T. C. lib. 284.193.213. etc.
that in effect he gives them only an empty bottell to play withal. For
his Eldership (forsooth) must go before the people in all their actions: that
is, as though he should have said: what the Elderships think meet, those
Angels, those interpreters of God, those tribunal seats of Christ, the people
in all reason ought to content themselves with it, and to give their consentes
unto it.

Now hereupon Barrow, proceeds. He takes Cartwrightes reasons in the
behalf of the people: but denies his shifts to be current, whereby he would
take that from them again, which he had before given unto him. And thereupon
does rail upon him, and all the rest of that association: for such their
dealing and abusing of the people. These reformistes (says Barrow) for fashion
sake give the people a little liberty to sweeten their mouths, Bar. Discoue.
page 195.
and make them believe they should choose their own Ministers: yet even in
this pretended choice do they coozen and beguile them, leaving them nothing but
the smoakie wind of election only. Again. The counterfeit reformistes, they
would exclude the Church from the censures: assuming them only into their
own hands: either into the Priests hands with his silly presbytery or
Eldership, which he ouerruleth at his pleasure in every particular
congregation: or else into their Synodes and Councelles, which have power over
all Churches, and every member and action thereof to excommunicate and
absolve, to make and depose, to ordain and abrogate without the priuitie or
consent of the Churches, etc. And thus they subvert the liberty of the Church:
and pervert the ordinance of Christ. And again: How unnatural are those
members, which thus separate and seclude themselves, Bar: against Giff. page 76.
yea rather sequester and seclude the whole from them: and arrogate and assume
the public duties and power of the whole, into their own hands: as though
God had given all gifts unto them: and they had no need of others? And thus
puffed up with pre-eminence of their own place, and excellency of their own
gifts: they despise all the rest, as base, ignorant, unworthy to be in
their consistory, to have any voices of consent or dissent there, alleging
them to be tumultuous, contentious, factious, ungoverned, ignorant, inclined
to the worst, etc.

And this is (as I said) the second especial difference (as far as I can see)
betwixt the Elder Consistorians, and these new Schismatics. Wherinto how
easily a man may fall, that has digested, the Geneuian and Cartwrightian
pretenses made against our Bishops for the peoples interest: I commit the
consideration of it, to your own discretions. So that (as I said): I say
again, and again: that if good order be not taken, this schism will daily
increase and grow to be dangerous. But do I call it a schism? The word is
too mild. They are indeed all the sort of that infection, a compounded mass,
of (I know not) how many heresies: but principally they are Donatistes in
some respect, and mere Anabaptists in some other. I have thought upon it a
hundredth times, and have meruailed at it: that the now L. Archbishop of
Canterbury could foresee so directly, what would be the issue of the first
admonition. If you would be pleased to read his exhortation, before his
confutation of that admonition: You shall find, that, what he has there
written long before this monster was hatched in England, he could not, if he
were to write again, well write otherwise then there he has done: saving he
might say, that the mischief which then he foresaw, would come to pass, by
reason of the boulstring of it, by those, that should have had more wit and
judgment, is now apparently beginning to show it self to as many as have eyes
and wisdom to see.

Surely those men, that have been made instruments heretofore, to commend unto
the whole realm, I know not what books and platforms, tending directly to the
utter overthrow of the present government of the church of England, with the
whole form of our service of God, and all our laws, orders, ceremonies, and
privileges thereunto appertaining, and to have had the Geneua discipline
established in place thereof: may greatly rejoice at their good discretion:
considering, that if then they had prevailed, we had admitted of that form of
church-gouernment which the very chief supplicators, and instigators of them
at that time, do now themselves condemn (as you have heard) into the pit of
hell, and so they might have been as ready to have set forward this second
devise, as they were for the former.

But men I hope will be more careful hereafter, then to be carried away with
every novelty, if it have but any show of reasonable probability. And master
Cartwright, with the rest of his chief adherents, might certainly do God and
the church great service, if without any longer standing upon the maintenance
of their own credits, they would be content to confess their former
ouersights, in laying down those false principles, whereupon the new heretics
do build, and acknowledge the truth, vz. that the present government of the
church of England, as both holy and Apostolical, and that the reformation of
religion already made, by her majesty's most princely care and heavenly
direction, is such a reformation (abuses there may be, and it were heresy to
dream of any purity) as every good Christian ought to praise God for it, from
the bottom of his heart: and not only to allow of it, but to maintain and
defend it, both with his goods and life. Master Cartwright began well in his
epistle against Harrison: but he should do better if he would so continue and
proceed forward. One extremity is best discerned by the other. Barrovves
folly may teach him wisdom. The consequence does often show the grossness
of the Antecedent. And many learned men have been brought by the importunity
of such kind of adversaries, to see their own mistakings, and so to grow unto a
far better moderation. As even in the chapter following, and in this very
cause of discipline, it will appear I trust unto you.

CAP. XXXIIII. Of their disagreement, concerning the necessity of the
Consistoriall government.
IT were very hard, if the favorers of the Geneua platform, should urge the
same with any pretense of necessity. They talk of pastors, doctors, elders,
deacons, widows, and of many things else: but as yet, besides their
obstinacy, to continue in the course which they have begun, for the
maintenance of their credits: they are not thoroughly agreed almost in any
thing. To tell us therefore of a matter that should be necessary, and withal
to confess in effect, that they know not what it is: should argue in my
opinion, some very great rashness and folly. When master Calvin dealt with
master Bullinger and others, for their good favor and friendship toward the
continuance of his new devised platform in Geneua (as you have heard at large
in the second chapter) there was not a word (you may swear it) of any
necessity, that all oother churches should be enforced to submit themselves to
that devise. M. Calvin himself at that time (as I am persuaded) did not so
much as dream of any such matter. A very grave and learned man of the French
nation, has faithfully reported, that when the form of the Geneua discipline,
was first admitted of by the ministers of France, in one of their cheifest
synods, which has been kept there of late years about the Church affairs, it
was not then received by them in that assembly, as a necessary order
prescribed by Christ, that ought always to be continued, but as a form of
discipline, convenient and fit for the afflicted estate of their churches in
those times, which might afterward be altered and changed, as occasions
should require.

And because you might not doubt of the certayntie of this report. You shall
understand, that the author of it was himself present in the said assembly,
and not a man of the meanest account amongst them. With whom also, another
great person of that country, a man of state and great learning agreed, when
he affirmed to one of very good place in England (as the same party has told
me) that the form of discipline which is now received by the French ministers,
was never meant by them to be otherwise admitted of, then for an interim, till
things might be better considered of, and ordered. These testimonies I urge no
further then as reports: neither would I have you to give any further credit
unto them: then as you shall think meet, upon this my bare relation. Howbeit
whether the persons specified, did make any such report or not: it seems to
me, that the thing it self is true, which they are said to have reported. For
thus I find it set down in the end of the form of Ecclesiastical discipline
agreed upon by the resolution, Eccl. disc. of France.
not of one, but of five general Synods of the reformed Churches of the realm
of France. These articles (say they) which are here contained touching
discipline, are not so decreed upon amongst us, but if the profit of the
church shall require, they may be changed. But it shall not be in the power
of one private man to do it, without the advice and consent of a general
council.

In all master Caluins time (for ought I find) the necessity which now is
pretended for the consistoriall discipline: was no where insisted upon. A
church in those days, might have had all the true notes of the church of
Christ: although it had wanted that platform of Geneua. Master Calvin in his
Institutions could find but two necessary Simbola ecclesiae dignoscendae,
Calu. instit. lib. 4. cap. ^. sect. 9.10.
verbi predicationem, and sacramentorum obseruationem: signs of discerning the
church: the preaching of the word, and the observation of the sacraments.
Bertrand de Loque in like sort: he was able to bring forth no other
substantial notes of the Church: Bertr. de ec. cap. 3.
but those two. No more was Philip of Mornay, the lord of Plessis. He makes
mention indeed of a third mark, vz. the lawful vocation of pastors: but he
says, that, P. Mar. de eccl. cap. 2.
it is not a mark of substance. In the great assembly at Poictiers in France,
1561, where Peter Martyr, A Marlorat, N. Galatius, and diverse other ministers
of the reformed churches were present: master Beza being there also, and
having his turn to speak before the king of France, the queen of Navarre,
the cardinal of Lorraine, and sundry other bishops he, durst not insist upon
any other firm and certain notes of the visible Church of Christ, Comment. de
sta. relig. par. 1. fol. 121.
but the two notes mentioned purum dei verbum and sincera sacramentorum
administratio, the pure word of God, and the sincere administration of the
sacraments. There are (says he) some that do add ecclesiastical discipline,
and the fruits of preaching: sed, etc. duabus illis erimus contenti: but, etc.
we will be content with these two first. Agreeably to this doctrine, that
there are but two necessary and substantial marks of the church: the cheifest
learned men in Christendom both abroad and here at home with us, have entered
into the combat, with the cruel and mortal enemies of true Religion, the
papists.

But now it is found out by master Beza, and some others (forsooth) that all
the said learned men were deceived, and that the platform of the Geneua
discipline, is an essential note of the church of Christ, and as necessary as
the word of sacraments. If I should deliver these two points unto you upon my
bare word, without any further proof, I think you would scarsely believe me.
Hear therefore my vvitnesses, not to be excepted against I tell you. And first
for the pretended necessity, master Beza shevving the true marks of the
church (says Cartwright) adds to the two former, T. C. lib. 2. pa. 53.
the discipline framed according to the word. Conf. 5.7 So that whatsoever
necessity comes unto the word and sacraments, in that they are notes, the
same comes also unto the discipline by master Bezaes judgment. And surely
that is sufficient. He were a presumptuous companion, that would not rest in
Bezaes judgment. Well then you see the necessity of their discipline, now
mark the essentialitie of it. In a certain draught of discipline (whereof you
shall hear in the Chapter) agreed upon, and subscribed unto, by Cartwright,
and many other ministers of his bent, for a conclusion of that work, they have
set down these words. Atque haec disciplina, The new book of dis.
etc. And this discipline, the title whereof is inscribed: The discipline of
the church described in the word of God, is taken out of the most pure
fountains of the holy scriptures, and c omprehendeth the necessary, and (...),
that is, essential discipline of the church, common for all times. Take that
away from any thing, that which is of the essence and being of it, and (as I
take it) it presently cease to have any being at all.

From the conceit of this necessity of the Geneua discipline, these and many
other such like speeches, have been uttered in printed books, to the simple
people.

The T. C. l. 2. in the preface.
want of the Eldership is the cause of all evil.

It is not T. C. ibid p. 3.
to be hoped for, that any Commonwealth will flourish without it.

The T. C. l. 1. pa. 6. and 48.
discipline is no small part of the gospel.

It is of the T. C. l. 2. pa. 247.
substance of it.

Without this Register pa. 68.
discipline there can be no right religion.

They that T. C, l. 1. pa. 220.
reject this discipline, refuse to have Christ reign over them. And deny him
in T. C. table. Preface to the Demon.
effect, to be their king or their Lord.

Scis, etc. you Beza. to Sarnicius. epis. 14.
know there is one and the self same author of doctrine and discipline, to
what purpose therefore should we receive one part of the word without the other?

In some sense of Defenc. of eccl. dis. p. 7.
necessary, the ecclesiastical discipline is necessary to salvation.

It is necessary Defense. 8.
in regard of Gods holy ordinance and appointment, the contemptuous breach of
whose commandments, be they great or little in our account, is damnable to all
those that despise them.

For Ibid. pa. 33.
the use of the censures, the office of elders is in his place necessary. The
deacons office is not so directly tending to the salvation of the soul. But
yet being Gods ordinance, it is of the necessity of obedience.

In effect, the Ibid. pa. 33.
ministry of the censures of the church, is in the same absolute degree of
necessity to salvation with the ministry of the word and sacraments.

It is much that has been hitherto noted for the pretended necessity of this
Sauoyan church-gouernment: but that is most memorable that Trauers affirms of
the French churches, and of the churches of the low countries, vz. in effect
that it is become already to be one of the articles of their creed. Thus he
sets down their words following, contained (as he says) in their
confessions. We believe the true Church ought to be governed by that policy
and discipline which our Lord Jesus Christ has ordained, Confess fidei
minist. Gal. Act. 25.
namely so that, there be in that, Pastors, elders, and deacons. And the
Churches of the Low Countries: We believe that this true church ought to be
ruled and governed by that spiritual policy, which God himself has taught
us by his word: Act. 30.
so as there be in it, pastors and Ministers, Elders and Deacons, who may
make the Seigniorie of the Church. By that which here is said, being compared
with that which has been said before, of our Englishmens pretended deacons
(how they are altogether excluded from having any place in their seigniorie) it
appears that they disagree from the Churches of France, and of the
Low Countries, in some of the articles of their belief. But you shall hear
master Trauers very grave collections upon the said two of those Churches
confessions: It is very vvorthie the observation (says he) that these
Churches, Def. of eccl. Discip. p. 21.
wherein there are an infinite number of godly men, etc. in such a confession
as they declare their faith in: have thought it a necessary article, to set
down this point of the policy or discipline of the church: and that in
declaring of it* they say not what they suppose, but what they believe, using
the same word which they do use in the articles of faith and doctrine.

The papists talk much of the Colliers faith, that believed as the Church
believed: but what the church believed he knew not. And truly as Trauers
says, it is worthy the observation indeed, that seeing (as I said, and have at
large showed it in the former chapters) there is not a church in Europe, which
has received that platform, that can tell for her life, which way as yet to
turn her self, for the full maintenance of it: there should be any that
would presume to thrust it into their belief, except they do approve of the
Colliers faith, and will say, they believe whatsoever master Beza believes,
although neither he himself, nor they do know, what he believes in that
point. I do rather therefore incline to think that Trauers wresteth their
words against their meaning, and that they only purposed by that phrase of
speech (we believe) to show, but their minds and opinions of that form of
discipline, not suspecting that any man would enforce that they ever meant
thereby to make it an article of their belief. But howsoever either they or any
other have formerly meant in the heat of their desires, toward their beloved
platform, and so have gone much too far in urging the necessity of it, as
being an essential note of the church: yet upon better advise, it seems that
they are grown a little more cool.

Master Calvin loved the eldership as well as the best of them, because it was
the workmanship of his own hands: but yet he thought it not meet, to make it an
essential note of the church, or a matter of the importance of salvation. The
Anabaptists with whom he dealt in his time, Call. instruct. ad v. Anaba.
kept him from that extremity, and made him to reverence other churches, and
to acknowledge them for such churches of Christ, although they wanted the form
of his censuring discipline, as that it was not lawful for any Christian
whosoever, to separat himself either from their assemblies, or from the
receiving of the Lords supper with them. But if any so did, he assigns him
his place amongst certain old heretics. Olim duae fuerunt haereticorum sectae,
etc. In times past there were (says he) two sorts of heretics, which
troubled the Church greatly. The one sort of them were called Puritans, the
other Donatists. And both of them were in the same error, that these dreamers
are in: seeking for a Church wherein there should want nothing that might be
desired. Therefore they divided themselves from the universal society of
Christians, least they should be defiled with other men's impurities. But what
came of it? Dominus eos cum tam arroganticoepto dissipauit. The Lord himself
scattered them, with that their proud attempt, Where, by the way, it is meet
to be observed, that a man may stick so fast to the Geneua discipline, as he
may prove himself to be either a puritan, or a Donatist, or both.

Master Beza in like manner, by reason of some opposition which has been made
against the Sauoyan platform, is grown as it seems to some kind of
moderation. For speaking of the pretended necessity of it: he says, that the
doctrine only, Bez. de pres. pa. 119.
vz. what we are to believe, is absolutely necessary: and also further
adds, that seeing a man sometimes may be saved without the participation of
the sacraments: the same may be said much more of the want of ecclesiastical
discipline. Now verily we are to thank him, he has done much for us. We may
be saved though the memory of this discipline were utterly buried. But the
point which I chiefly note, is this: that there is great difference in master
Bezaes judgment, betwixt the necessity of the first two notes of the church,
and this third, of his own devise. And therein he gives in effect, the flat
lie to master Cartwright, for charging him to hold: that all the said 3
notes, as they are notes, were equally necessary. And Trauers also is checked
by his good master, in that he will needs make, as it has been said, the
censures of his co^sistories, to be in the same absolute degree of necessity,
both with the word and sacraments. But I will follow M. Beza whilst I have him
in his good mood. The whole church vvanted circumcision in the wilderness
(says he) and vvhilest they were in Babylon, they neither had temple nor
sacrifices, and yet nevertheless, they ceased not to be the people of God.
And the same may then be said much more of the ecclesiastical discipline, vz.
Ecclesias vt illa careant, tamen ecclesias vere pias and Christianas esse
posse, si doctrinam praecipuoru^ dogmatum pura^ ac sincera^ habuerint, That the
churches that want that discipline, may notvvithstanding be indeed godly and
Christian churches, if they retain the doctrine of the cheifest grounds, pure
and sincere. Now if Beza will give this testimony of a church that wants
both his discipline and the sacraments, having but only the principal grounds
of religion: what should he say of those churches which have not only a better
discipline, then that which he urges: but also the said sincere grounds, with
the doctrine and true use of both the holy sacraments, in as great reverence,
at the least, as they have them at Geneua? You shall hear him what he is
driven to say, of the present estate of the church of England. The places have
been cited in the eight chapter to another purpose. He must be pardoned to come
in with his If: because any thing from him, that sounds not after the Geneua
tune, Beza contr. Sarrau. pa. 111.
is very much. But if the churches of England (says he) being underpropped
with the authority of Bishops and Archbishops do firmly abide, as this has
happened in our memory to that church, that she has had men of that order,
not only vvorthie Martyrs of God, but most singular pastors and doctors:
fruatur sane ista singulari Dei beneficentia, quae vtinam illi sit perpetua,
Let her enjoy this singular goodness of God, which I pray she may so do for
ever. And in another place, speaking likewise with some good terms of the
Church of England, and of our Archbishops and Bishops: he turns himself
clean about, Beza ibid. pa. 127.
and says, that they of Geneua do not prescribe to any church to follovv their
peculiar example, like unto ignorant men, who think nothing well but that
they do themselves.

Again also the same master Beza, in his book which Erastus confuted, not in
that which Beza has since published, but in the written and true copy of it,
he speaks in this sort, Nomine ecclesia Geneuensis, in the name of the church
of Geneua, to those that account the Geneuian Eldership to be but humanum
commentum, a humane devise: Beza cont. Erast. fol. 1.
Petimus vt quemadmodum patienter ferimus ipsos a nobis, etc. dissentire: We
desire of them, that as we suffer them patiently to dissent from us, etc. so
they would hear us, modestly refelling their arguments, nullo cum ecclesiarum
preiudicio, quas sibi credit as administrant: Without any prejudice to those
churches, that they have taken the charge of. For where some do object, that
we account those churches, that want either excommunication, or such an
eldership, to be no churches: it is objected, immerito, Deus testis est,
undeservedly on our parts, God is our witness: and it is much more a slander,
where it is given out, that we do bring a new tyranny into the church, and
nostra velle reliquis obtrudere: and endeavor to obtrude our form of discipline
unto the rest of the reformed churches. Non est ita fratres: It is not so
brethren. Furthermore in like manner in the same place afterward: Ibid.
Quicunque vero hanc disciplinam in suis ecclesiis, non modo inutilem,
verumetiam noxiam fore iudicant, fruantur sane suo sensu, etc. Whosoever do
judge this discipline not only unprofitable but hurtful to their churches: let
them enjoy their own sense. They undoubtedly do see what their flocks will
endure, neither doubt we, but that men of so great learning, and of so great
antiquity, our reverend brethren in the Lord, have their reasons: Et quis nos
constituit alieni gregis iudices? And who has made us judges of other men's
flocks?

He seldom has uttered a truer speech. But how these sayings do agree with
that which he has said before in the third chapter, you may not curiously
scanne it. Indeed he should seem to be far now from his former opinion, when
he said in effect: Epis. 24.
That it was to little purpose for any church to admit of the gospel, and to
reject his discipline. But he writes in mine opinion, as (it has been said of
old time) some courtiers in the world do use to speak: that is for the most
part, as the present occasion serves their turns. Such company they may fall
into, as they will commend him to the skies, whom not past an hour before, they
had in an other company depraved peradventure most egregiously. And master
Beza, you must imagine, has been an old courtier, and knows well what policy
means. Plain dealing certainly is best: but oftentimes it falls out that
it is not the readiest way, for hammering and busy far reaching heads, to
compass their purposes. If this excuse do seem too simple, let any that list
make a better. No man does wish it more heartily (as I think) then my self,
that master Beza should think well of the present church-gouernment
established in England: so he do it plainly, faithfully, and directly, which
will not happen (I fear it) in have. Neither have I alleged his former words
to that purpose, as though I took all that for gold, which he can make to
glister. The point I prosecute, is this: that you might perceive, how they
begin to leave off from urging the Geneuian platform, with such important
necessity, as formerly they have done.

But most of all it pleases me to see, how master Cartwright draws
homeward. For as the Anabaptists by their madness kept master Calvin within
some good compass, and as master Beza has been compelled in some sort, to
retire himself from his former eagerness: so assuredly the phrenetical
giddiness of these our new unbridled schismatickes, who for pretended purity
are many degrees beyond all the Sauoyan disciplinaria^s, has wrought a miracle
(to my understanding) upon M. Cartwright. For hear him, how for fear of
falling into flat Donatisme, he was fain to plead against one (that had been
his scholar) in the behalf of the church of England, so bitterly before by
himself impugned. Th. Cartw. to Harrison.
The ordinary assemblies (says he) of those which profess the gospel in
England, are the churches of Christ: which he proves in this sort. Those
assemblies which have Christ for their head, and the same also for their
foundation, are Gods churches. Such are the assemblies of England, therefore,
etc. Again, they that have performed unto them the special covenant which
the Lord has made with his churches, of pouring his spirit upon them, and
putting his word into their mouths are the churches of God: but such are the
assemblies in England, therefore, etc. Hereunto may be added (says he further)
the judgment of all the churches of Christ in Europe, all which give the
right hand of society in the house of God, unto the assemblies which are in
England. Again, to prove that the church of England is the church of God,
notwithstanding it want the pretended discipline: he uses this distinction:
that as it is in man's body, so is it in this matter, there are certain parts
essential, and such as without the which a man cannot stand, and some
serving either to his comeliness, or to his continuance. And of this latter
sort he makes the discipline, and lastly he writes thus: To say that the
church of England is not the church of God, because it has not received this
discipline, me thinks is all one with this, as if a man would say, It is no
city, because it has no wall: or that it is no vineyard, because it has
neither hedge nor ditch. Thus far master Cartwright.

In which his manner of speech, you find a very great alteration, from his
ancient style. And as concerning the necessity whereof I entreat, the wind you
see is turned. There is no more necessity in England of the Geneua platform,
then that every city in this realm should be walled about. And besides, the
pretended discipline is become not to be any longer of the essence of the
church, but as appertaining to the comeliness of it. But how these things will
accord with the premises, and namely his subscriptio^ before mentioned, to the
new book of discipline, where the same discipline is made to be essential, or
whether master Cartwright has changed his judgment again, since he writ
that answer to Harrison: I will leave it to be discussed by them that know his
unrevealed mind better then I do. In the mean time, that which he has
granted, I think it meet to take hold of. And this I will add unto it, that
if master Cartwright would but confer with some that have skill in
fortification, to know of him whether an old thick wall of lime and stone,
made many hundred years since, or a new slight wall slubbered over, and
wrought with vnte^pered mortar some few years ago, whether (I say) of these 2
walls are of better defense for any city: I should be in good hope, that he
would in short time, leave the disciplinarie walls of Geneua, and content
himself with the ancient fortifications of the church of England, and the
rather because he sees (as I said in the former chapter) what a giddie and
itching humor, his novelties have bred, in the unstayed sort of many
fantastical people.

CAP. XXXV. Of the pretended commodity that the elderships would bring with
them, and of the small fruits that they bring sorth where they are.
THat which has been said of the commendation of this pretended regiment, may
fitly be applied to this place. But now further of the commodities, which they
say it would bring with it: inseparable consequents (belike) thereof. I will
trouble you only with three men's testimonies, who it seems have collected
together that which is thought fit to be published to this purpose. If we
Motion pa. 31.
had this government, God would bless our victuals, and satisfy our poor
with bread: he would cloth our priests with salvation, and his saints
should shout for joy. It Pa. 27.
is best and surest for our state, and there is nothing comparable to Pa. 59.
the establishing of it for her majesty's safety. It would Pa. 75.
make men to increase in wealth, and that Pa. 76.
they would not easily be drawn after any great man to sedition and
rebellion. That her P. 33.
Majesty's person has been so often in danger; that we have had some dearth of
late years; and that the Spaniards attempted to invade this land; they ascribe
it to the want of this their government. It Pa 74.
would cut off contentions and suits of law, etc. by censuring the party
that is troublesome and contentious, and without reasonable cause, upon evil
will and stomach should vex and molest his brother and trouble the country.
If this government were restored, then you should see Pa. 64.
learning nourished, young and old called from blindness to light, from
wickedness to virtue and piety. Then many would change pa. 37.
their studies from Law, Physic, Music, scholing, etc. and many would
leave their trades, and parents would think their cost well bestowed, and
diverse ways comforted to prefer their children to the study of Divinity.
Then there pa. 84.
would be an unity of the Church. Then should the Papist quail, the
Anabaptist wail, and the Atheistes be amazed. There pa. 59.
could not be so many seduced hanged and quartered as there are. Then no pa.
68.
licenses could steal away men's daughters, the people should find out the
truth and perfection of Justice.

By this the pa. 91.
wealth and honor of the Realm would be increased: and contentions, brawles,
and unnecessary pleas would be prevented: idle men of all sorts might be set
in order, and the poor men greatly comforted. The nobility pa. 91.
and comminalty might have their right. Men would pa. 76.
not grudge at triflinge charges for War. Soldiers pa. 77.
would be made obedient to their Captains: patient pa. 78.
and courageous. It pa. 79.
would bring strength and victory: and keep pa. 91.
out of Kings Dominions, ignorant, wicked and flattering men.

Here out of the defense of Ecclesiastical government. Page 121. 122. 123.
127. 134.

Whereof C. l. 2. Epi.
comes it that Arrians, Valentinians, and Anabaptists, with other detestable
Heretics are so rise in many places in this land? is it not thereof that
there is no Eldership? Whereof comes it, that horrible blaspheming the holy
and most reverend name of God, quarrelling and fighting, dronkennes, filthy
speaking, fornication, adultery, slaundering and such like, run over almost
in every place? Is it not hereof, that there is no Eldership? Whereof comes
it that in so many excellent laws provided against rogues and beggars: there
are yet such numbers? is it not hereof that the office of Deacons is abolished?

These are singular commodities indeed which these Elderships would bring
with them, if these men might be trusted. But have they brought forth these
fruicts and effects in those countries where they are established? or are they
but vain words of ambitious men, that by such godly pretenses do little else
but seek their own glory? Consider I pray you, what very learned and grave
men have written in other countries of these, and such like men as these and
their fellows are: together with the estate of some of those countries, where
they have their Elderships.

Master Bullinger writing to a Bishop in England of our English innouators, A
letter Mar. 10. 1574
says thus. They imitate in mine opinion those seditious Tribunes of Rome, who
by virtue of the Agrarian Law, bestowed the public goods, that they might
privately inritch themselves: that is, that you (meaning the Bishops) being
overthrown, they might succeed in your places, etc. But they go about to
erect a Church which they shall never advance as they desire: neither if they
should, can they ever be able to continue it. And after in the same Letter. I
would to God, there were not in the Authors of this Presbytery, libido
dominandi, an ambitious desire of rule and principality: Nay I think it ought
especially to be provided for; that there be not any high authority given to
this Presbytery, etc. Whereof many things might be said: but time will
reveal many things which yet lie hid.

Master Gualter in like sort, writes thus to the Bishop of London, for the
time being. Many do urge in these days under a plausible name of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, I know not what a platform, without the which they
deny that any Churches can continue. But I do greatly fear least they bring
us in an Aristocratie, which will shortly degenerate into an Oligarchie: and
become the beginning of a new Papacy. For their only labor is to set us
up a Presbytery, whereinto certain honest men, are indeed admitted: but yet
so as the Ministers will do in a manner what they list. It was of late decreed
by the Ministers at Heidelberge, that no man should be admitted to the Lords
Supper: except he first offered himself to the Pastor. For Paul's rule is not
held sufficient there: vz. that every man should try himself. The Elders
did not agree to this decree: but yet notwithstanding it is urged in the name of
the Presbytery, nay of the whole Church etc. But there was not long since such
an example of a new tyranny there, as may justly fear any, that cares for
the liberty of the Church. There is there an Heluetian the Governor of the
College of Saint Denis, as innocent and godly a man as lives. Howbeit
Oleuianus the Pastor warned him by the crier of the Presbytery, in the name of
all the Elders, that he should not come to the Lords Supper: adding this
cause, that he could not admit him, absque animi sui offensione, without the
offense of his mind. The party took this dealing (as it was reason) in evil
part: and defireth to know what he has committed that deserved such a
punishment. But they answered him not otherwise, then that they continued in
the same mind. Whereupon he offered a Supplication unto the prince Elector,
that he would compel them to show the fault, if there were any, that he had
committed. But until this day he could extort nothing else in effect from
them. This is their goodly order: this is their Discipline. Quare video nobis
serio vigilandum esse, ne ex Romanae hydrae vix domitae vulneribus noua capita
pullulent: wherefore I see we are to be vigilant, least new heads do budde out
of the wounds of the Romish hydra, scarsely yet subdued.

And in another letter, March 16. 1574.
to the Bishop of Ely, of the same matter he adds: that the Prince Elector
upon the said parties complaint, did move the Elders to show, what he had
committed that they dealt so with him. Sed ne hoc ab illis impetrare potuit:
but he could not prevail so much. Marry at the last ( says Master Gualter)
being many ways more earnestly urged thereunto, they fell to coining of lies,
and persuaded the Prince that he abstained from the Lords supper of his own
accord: and now of that his voluntary forbearing would know the cause of
them. Many such things are done which it would be too long to rehearse. Seeing
they begin in this sort, having not as yet any full possession of their new
kingdom, what shall we think they will do: si merum imperium obtineant, if
they obtain an absolute authority? By this letter also it seems, that long
since, by Oecolampadius means, notwithstanding Zwinglius withstood it: there
was such a like form of regiment erected in Basil: but shortly after (says
Master Gualter) he was compelled to give it over again, learning by
experience that he had attempted a matter of greater discommodity then profit.
I cannot therefore dislike of them, that oppose themselves to these endeavors,
who so busily in these days plead this for matter, etc. There are in
Germany, and in another certain pl^^e (he means I think Geneua) that
deny the kingdom of Christ can continue, except the Discipline which they
have devised be received in every place. I doc contain my self that I may not
be said to have begone the fight: Sin illi Classicum cecinerint, but if they
sound up the Alarm, I cannot choose but defend the doctrine of truth, and the
liberty of the Church: not doubting but that many will join with me herein.

The same Gualter also again in another letter to the said Bishop of Ely. 26
August. 1574.
I shall not need to use many words what I think of your innouators, since I
have done it in my last Letters. And surely I am greatly confirmed in my
former opinion, by the examples, which such like innouators in Germany do
bring forth. Video enim illis hominibus nihil ambitiosius, nihil insolentius,
nihil ineptius, fingi posse. For whereas there are many things most wickedly
done by them daily, yet they are not ashamed to pretend the zeal of God, in
excuse of those things, which contrary to the word of God they devise both
wickedly and maliciously against the servants of Christ. But as far as I
can conjecture: many by whose counsel and assistaunce the frame of this
Discipline was chiefly erected, are now ashamed of them.

But that which Master Gualter writ the same year to Bishop Sands, is most
pertinent. I understand that the strife amongst you, procured by certain
turbulent innouators, does wax hot, and that they are gone so far, that
under the plausible title of good order and Discipline, they desire the whole
government and policy of the Church of England to be utterly overthrown.
Surely I should marvel at the immodesty and wilful desire of contention in
these men: but that I see the same in practice elsewhere, especially in all
those places where the authority of the brethren of Geneua is so greatly
esteemed, that Geneua is accounted the Oracle of all Christendom. God has
indeed adorned that Church with diverse excellent gifts,: and the Ministers
thereof: amongst whom, Master Beza I have always reverenced and loved, and
do so still. But yet I would wish them modestius and humilius sapere, and not
seek to draw their shoe upon every man's foot, etc. What has been done in
the Palsegraues Country, I writ unto you before. Surely the state there as
touching Discipline, and the government of the Church, all men that come
thence do say, it is worse then it was before, and it is sure, that many do
repent that they ever admitted these men's counsel. But yet the Geneuians doc
still endeavor to thrust that their Discipline upon all Churches. And if they
shall deny this, they may be sufficiently convinced by the Book of
Theological examples, that Beza published this other year: that they suggest
their arguments and councels not only to you Englishmen, but in like sort to
the Germans, Phrisians, Polonians and Hungarians: whereby amongst those that
agreede well together before, rixae and turbae enascuntur, brawlings and
quarrels do arise, etc. And so having signified what troubles the innouators
beyond the seas as well as in England do procure to the Church, he moves the
Bishop to do as he and Master Bullinger did: that is, to moderat such busy
wits (as they might) for a time. For (says he) spero aedificium hoc nouae
Disciplinae breui propria mole ruiturum, quando satis constat, iam eius
pertaesos esse, qui prius illud admirabantur. I hope the frame of this new
Discipline, will in short time fall, of it self: considering that many are
now become weary of it, that had it, before in admiration.

An other likewise, a Gantois, a very grave and learned man, as well acquainted
with this Discipline, as Master Cartwright is: being desired to write his
opinion, whether it had brought forth such effects in Holland, as is before
pretended it would do in England, for answer says. Is any man able to
repeat the monstrous Heresies and errors, that Holland does nourishe etc.
under the shadow of reformed religion? this is aimed at, vz. that the
turpitude of all blasphemies, being covered with this cloak, may lie hid, and
that it may be lawful without controlement, if any list to recall the old
Paganism, or to profess Mahomets Religion, or what worse is, if there be any
thing worse. Again, the Magistrates have invaded the Church-goods. The
Ministers have little allowaunce. There is no respect of the study of
Divinity. The Magistrates do suspect the form of Ecclesiastical
government: first beca^use they fear, least it will degenerate into a worse
tyranny then the Spanishe Inquisition: Secondly, for that they see a new Senate
of Elders in their Towns, to exercise with the Ministers, a censure of manners
without laws, but such as they make themselves, and without any lawful form
of Justice. The old Canon law is abrogated, and the Magistrates will allow no
new. For they fear, that the new would prove worse then the old. Besides,
they will not commit the fame of themselves and theirs, to the arbitrament of
ignorant men, such as for the most part their Elders are, who may abuse their
authority rashly, and lay such an infamy of adultery or other grievous
offense upon a man's back, as he shall not afterward easily cast from him.
The Ministers desire, that the Magistrates would punish those that disobey
their commandments: which they will never do, except they may first by due
course of law hear the cause, they of that Consistory being either actors or
accusers: and that, the Ministers and Elders refuse to do, etc. Besides, some
of the Ministers themselves that profess the Gospel, are not free from those
swarms of Heresy, which do make their hiues there, etc.

And in an other letter, speakinge of the general event of that kind of
discipline: Vereor ne exemplum Geneuensis ecclesiae, et quarundam aliarum
ecclesiaru^ quae eam secutae sunt, maiorem quam vulgo creditur perniciem
ecclesiae adferat: I fear least the example of the church of Geneua, and some
other Churches that follow her, may bring greater mischief to the Church,
then is commonly believed.

One William Heart a minister, and the preacher, not long since at Emden,
notwithstanding all their goodly reformation in those parts, yet writ in this
sort thereof, unto his secret friend M. Field. Corruption by custom is so
strong, that none can abide the yoke, and wonder you would, if you saw what
gross things the best ministers do clean devour, and those of the middle
sort, do earnestly stand and plead for. If you did see the confused state of
the Churches of these countries: you would say that England, (how badde
soever) were a paradise in comparison: and yet I have not forgotten the blots
and wantes thereof. The truth which he speaks of the Church of England, is
to be embraced: for the rest, you may ascribe it unto his factious humors.

Furthermore also, there are some other countries not yet mentioned, where the
pretended discipline is in practice: and yet there are noe such fruits found
thereof, as are ascribed unto the intertainement of it. Be pleased to hear
what an espetiall man of some one country, a minister, a gentleman greatly
descended, a person of chief aestimation, has published to the world in
print, Cum priuilegio Regali: and procured to be sent abroad into other
countries, in certain of his servants names.

The Ser. 3.
profane multitude of this kingdom: they Ser. 4.
disdain the word spitefully. There Ser. 4.
are two sins joined in the profane multitude, glottony and blood: They Ser. 4.
go forward in all course of sin, the more they are forbidden. They make Ser. 4.
no account of the death of Christ. They are Ser. 1. in Psalm. 76.
altogether godless.

The Church Ser. 1.
is made a pray to all men, there is such disdain and contempt of the word in
the whole estate. Confusion Ser. 3.
of Church and policy does grow from day to day: and Ser. 1. in Psalm. 76.
threatens utter extermination. It is Sermon. 5.
the Lord that woonderfully continues the light amongst us, and that keeps
the face of a ministry in Scotland. There is no good entertainment, but a
very great poverty in the most part of all the ministry. The greatest part
Ser. in Psalm. 76.
of our Priests, our Ministers, their mouths have lost the truth, and their
persons have lost their reverence: the Lord has made them contemptible in the
eyes of men.

Floudes Sermon. 1.
of iniquity do flow over great men: There is no great man, but whatsoever
likes him, he thinks it lawful. The Gentlemen, Sermon. 5.
Earls, Lords, and Barons, they are so drunk with sacrilege, that before
they part with that gear, they had rather part with the life of their souls:
they had rather loose their souls a hundredth times, then bestow a halfepeny
upon the Church. Our Sermon. 6.
own mean Lords do fall into such proud contempt, that they are ready to
take up open wars against God: so as that Julian was no greater professed
ennemy, then they are like to be if they continue. The great Ser. 1. in Psalm. 76
men in this country, are become companions to Thieves and pirates, oppressors
and manifest blasphemours of God and man: ye see murder, oppression, and blood
is the only thing, that they shoot and mark at. The Lord Sermon. 1. in Psalm.
76.
has no greater enemies, then the great men, in this country, etc. They are
burning, and scalding, slaying, and murdering, using all kind of oppression
and raging, so as if there were no king in Israel.

And generally thus. This Sermon. 1.
country is heavily diseased. The sins Sermon. 2.
of the land craves, that all pulpits sound judgment. If you Sermon. 2.
look to the growth of sin: more ugly sins were never committed. The land
Sermon. 3.
is ouerburdened, with the birth of iniquity. The Sermon. 3.
best have taken a lothing of the word of God. The weight Sermon. 6.
of Gods wrath, that hangs over this land, is insupportable. O unhappy Sermon.
6.
and wrathful country, etc: the more that knowledge grows, conscience
decays. See Sermon. 6.
ye not slaughter in great measure, oppression, murder without mercy? see ye
not all law and equity trampled under foot? Is there Sermon. in psalm. 76.
any clean place in the country, etc: without the cries and lamentable voices
of terrible murder, oppression and blood? The most Sermon. in psalm. 76.
part of this country, is given over to a strange delusion: to prefer the
leaven of the Pharisees and dregs of papistry before the word of God. There is
Sermon. 6.
none that sees the confusion of this country to grow so fast: that can look
for any redress in his own time: all runs on to a desolation and
miserable confusion. Faith is Sermon. 1 in psalm. 76.
scarsly to be found; yea not faith in promises: let be faith in Christ Jesus.
God has Sermon. 5.
given us over to be deceived by the mighty power and working of the devil.

Hitherto this learned preacher: Whereby a man may see, that some countries may
be in as evil a case, that have the Geneuian platform, set up amongst them:
as some other that care not a fig for it.

But oh say the authors of the first admonition: Admo. 1. page 13.
is reformation good for France, and can it be evil for England* Is
Discipline meet for Scotland, and is it unprofitable for England* Again:
Surely God has set these examples before your eyes, to encourage you to go
forward to a through and speedy reformation. Ibidem.
And likewise master Cartwright: Whereas master Doctor would bring us into a
foolish paradise of our own selves, as though we need not to learn any thing
of the Churches of France and Scotland: T.C. lib. 1. p. 194.
he should have understood, that as we have been unto them an example, and
have provoked them to follow us: so the Lord would have us also profit and be
provoked by their example. Whereunto I make no other answer but this: that I
pray unto almighty God withal my very soul, for the long and happy
continuance of the blessed example, which this Church and realm of England
has showed in this last age of the world, unto all the kingdoms and
countries in the earth, that profess the Gospel with any sincerity: and
that also of his infinite mercy, not only the kingdoms of France and
Scotland: but all other Christian kingdoms and countries may taste so
plentifully of his heavenly graces, as that they may become daily better and
better examples to stir up another, to the right and true paths of all godly
unity and obedience, of hearty and sincere profession of religion, and of
such righteousness and holiness of life, as may be worthy the professors of
the same. This only I trust I may say without any offense: that (as I think)
we have better causes of encouragement at home to pray for the present form of
Ecclesiastical government and Discipline, that we may have it still: then we
can find abroad (the premises of this chapter being true) why we should
either wish or desire to have any foreign platformes or practices, of I know
not what kind of pragmaticall discipline brought in amongst us.

A Discipline devised at Geneua; established there by cunning: and obtruded by
practices upon other Churches. A Discipline, the more it is looked into by the
favorers of it: the more doubts and imperfections, they daily find in it. A
Discipline the original whereof is unknown: and therefore has no warraunt in
the word of God. A Discipline so lately hatched: that as yet it has no
certain name agreed upon. A Discipline of that nature: as they know not well
how to bestow her. A Discipline, that banisheth such Apostolical Bishops, as
Christ appointed: and admits like an adulteress of those, who indeed
should serve her, to have an equal commandment over her. A Discipline, that
will have Doctors of her own: and when she has them, she knows not how to
bestow them. A Discipline of such humility, as forsooth Princes and Noblemen,
must be, but her inferior officers. A Discipline so disdainefull, as she
forgetteh the very names of her said officers, or at the least knows them
not, though they be Noblemen or Princes. A Discipline, that will needs seek in
the scriptures for those new kind of rulers; but she is ignorant where to find
their qualities. Whether she would have them to be Laymen, or Ecclesiastical;
she is not yet resolved. A Discipline, that when she entertaines her servants:
casts them of again at her pleasure, without any offense committed by them.
A Discipline that having servants, does want a warrant for their employment:
either in their particular, or in their general offices, which she would
feign assign unto them. She would have Lay-menne to make her ministers: to be
her confessors: and to bind and loose her sins. A Discipline, that will needs
have her particular officers, both men and women, after her own humor: to do
nothing else, but carry her purse, and wash her feet. A Discipline, that by
reason of her train: would be very chargeable. A Discipline, that hops to
turn all the Church liuinges, which either are or have been (belike) into
Nunries: and so to become herself the Prioresse of them all. A Discipline,
that will needs be a new Pope Ioane, and have to deal in all ecclesiastical
causes, either by hook or crook: nay almost in all sorts of matters
whatsoever. A Discipline of such partiality: as what she condemns in others
she approves in herself. A Discipline, that disdaineth the ancient fathers
and general counsels. A Discipline, that dares to disgrace any of the new
writers, if they take not her part. A Discipline, that seems to allow of
nothing but scriptures: and yet depends altogether upon her own friends
and Synods. A Discipline, that sometime to dazzle men's eyes withal; can be
content, to pretend, that the ancient fathers and counsels, do plead for her
estate: but she does peruerte them. A Discipline, that to serve her turn does
wringe and wrest the scriptures, this way and that way as she is disposed. A
Discipline, that possesses men with so great self-love and pride, as for
want of good neighbors, they are feign to take pains to commend themselves.
A Discipline, that is contented to be magnified and exalted, against all that
is called god upon earth. A Discipline, that is utterly forsaken, by many that
have been her friends. A Discipline accounted by those, that do still remain
her best friends, not to be so necessary, as heretofore she has been
reputed. A Discipline, that promises mountains: and bringes forth Myce. A
Discipline, that is greatly disliked for her pride: her making of debate, where
she comes: her taking upon her like an Empress to command and rule at her
pleasure. In these respects, and many other which I could allege, she is (I
say) a discipline, that is greatly disliked of sundry of her neighbors: and
even of them, who when she was at the last gasp did revive her: little
suspectinge that ever she would have proved so ambitious a creature: as since
by experience they have found her to be. And therefore for mine own part:
seeing I find no country as yet, that is so greatly to be envied for any
especial happiness, that this pretended Cherubin has brought forth or
procured, where she is received: I will continue my former prayer, that the
Church of England, be never troubled with such a discipline: but that our old
and present Apostolical form of Church-gouernment, under her excellent
Majesty by Archbishops or Arch-builders and Bishops, practiced in the
Apostles times, approved by all the ancient fathers and general counsels,
and continued in this land since the time, that it first professed
christianity, may together, with her Highness, our most Sovereign Lady, be
long and many happy years mainetayned, blessed and preserved amongst us. The
which almighty God grant, for his Son Jesus Christ's sake our Lord.

Amen.
Errata.
Page 17. lin. 15. for Elders read, orders

Page 21. lin. 31. for he told him, read, he told them

Page 43. lin. 22. for her full, read, their full

Page 58. lin. 8. for coming, read, conning

Page 71. lin 6. and 7. for out Bathes, read, out of the Bathes

Page 73. lin. 25. for scroules, read, scrappes.

Page 75. lin. 14. for reparation, read, reputation

Page 75. lin. 29. for carries, read, carrieers

Page 92. lin. 11. for nominaum, read, nominauit

Page ead. lin. 20. for protrahere, read, pertrahere

Page 96. lin. 11. for reasonable, read, usual

Page 117. lin. 24. for capitali, read capituli

Page 122. lin. 18. for nisters, read ministers

Page 141. lin. for or, read either

Page 143. lin. 3. for not, read, most

Page 145. lin. 7. for all, read almost all

Page 146. lin. 13. for then, read they

page 148. lin. 5. for Vezelius, read, Pezelius

page 149. lin. 6. for his, read these

page 155. lin. 29. there wants, to

page 171. lin. 3. for laicis, read laicos

page 195. lin. 2. for cares, read ears

page 216. lin. 28. for adherent, read adherents

page 221. lin. 8. for does, read doteth

page 225. lin. 22. for tends, read tend

page 228. lin. 14. accommotated, read accommodated

page 231. lin. 9. for to, read of: Ibi. lin. 22. for preacher, preachers

page 231. lin. 31. for precisely, read pretily

page 234. lin. 30. for has, read have

page 238. lin. 1. the which course, read the course which

page 291. lin. 28. for more, read mere

Page 340. lin. 26. for all proud, read all that proud

page 342. lin. 27. auncienty, for antiquity

page 346. lin. 24. amst, for amongst

page 350. lin. 9. for to Aerius, read of Aerius

page 353. lin. 28. for as you are, read as they are

page 355. lin. 10. not ancient, for not the ancient

page 374. lin. 21. the word can is omitted

page 375. lin. 24. for know, read knew

page 377. lin. 23. simple, read simple men

page 392. lin. 16. read former chapter

page 393. lin. 3. for Adrius, read Aerius

page 397. lin. 3. for Bishop, read Bishops

page 399. lin. 19. read thus, as well with very many of their masters as with
their scholars

page 405. lin. 28. for he should, read he should not

page 486. lin. 21. for this, read his.

FINIS.

