Eliosto LIBIDINOSO: Described in two Books: Wherein Their imminent dangers
are declared, who guiding the course of their life by the compane of Affection,
either dash their Ship against most dangerous shelues, or else attain the
Haven with extreme Prejudice.

Written by JOHN HYND.

HOR: ART: POET. Aut prodesse volunt, aut delectare Poetae,
Aut simul and iucunda, and idonea dicere vitae.


AT LONDON, Printed by Valentine Simmes, and are to be sold by Nathaniel
Butter. 1606.

To the Right Honorable, and truly ennobled Lord, Philip Herbert, Earl of
Mountgomery, and Baron of Shurland, etc. John Hind wishes all happiness that
either this world affoords, or the heavens contain.
DVtie binds, and Affection compels me to demonstrate unto the worlds
view, how deeply I stand engaged unto your Honor. My debt, I must confess, is
great, and my insufficient estate of ever deserving the least favors which have
been extended unto me, vrge^ the presentation of ELIOSTO unto you^ aspect. I
desire but your favorable acceptance, and good opinion; wherewith protected,
let the envious pursue me with never so virulent, and austere constructions, I
shall both contemn their persons, and disdeigne their judgments. I know my
own worth, and am privy to their ignorance: where the wise and discreet sit
as Censors, there do I presume of favor: But where fools give in their
suppositions, there Jove's propitiation must be implored, unto whose benediction
I commend you evermore.

Your Honors in all duty:

JOHN HIND.

Ad Lectorem.
NOn hic Thesauros divitis ingeni,
F^cundae linguae ne^ varios sonos,
Sed forte insulsos accipies iocos,
Quos dum compon^, nescio quatenus
(...) ^rimen* parce precor m^hi
Err^nti, (Lector Candide) tu p^tes.
(...) f^ ti^ius seg^*
Ioha^nes Hind.

Uerses in praise of the Book.
WHere Virtue takes his habitation,
There all the Graces like Pedisequae,
Do burnish and adorn the room: The mind
Then being simply pure, is capable
Of every noble form, and sends forth
The Crystal streams of pleasing Eloquence^
Peruse this Work: Here has Dame Arete
Enclosed herself, and Art as swift, as is
The speedy Hind, does strive to beautify
Each Line and Leaf with Learnings attributes.
Read then: and Errors which are obuious
"Interpret mildely. The great'st enemy
" That Science has, is obtuse Ignorance.
Alexander Burlacy Esquire.

ELIOSTO LIBIDINOSO.
IN the I Will Cyprus there reigned a king called Amasias, whose fortunate
success in wars against his foes, and bountiful courtesy toward his
friends in peace, made him to be greatly feared, and loved of all men. This
Amasias had to wife a Lady called Philoclea, by birth royal, learned by
education, fair by nature, by virtues famous, so that it was hard to judge
whether her beauty, fortune, or virtue, wan the greatest commendations. These
two linked together in perfect love, led their lives with such fortunate
content, that their subjects greatly rejoiced to see their quiet disposition.
They had not been married long, but Fortune (willing to increase their
happiness) lent them a son, so adorned with the gifts of Nature, as the
perfection of the child greatly augmented the love of the parents, and the joy
of their Commons: insomuch that the men of Cyprus to show their inward joys by
outward actions, made Bone-fires and Triumphs throughout all the Kingdom,
appointing Iustes, and Turneis, for the honor of their young Prince: whither
resorted, not only his Nobles, but also diverse Kings and Princes, which were
his neighbors, willing to divulge the friendship which they bore to Amasias,
and to win fame and glory by their prowess and valor. Amasias, whose mind
was fraught with princely liberality, entertained the King, Princes, and
Noblemen, with such submisse courtesy, and magnificall bounty, that they all
saw how willing he was to gratify their good wills, making a general feast
for his Subjects, which continued by the space of forty days: all which time
the solemnities were kept, to the great content both of the Lords and Ladies
there present. This triumph being ended, the assembli^ took their leave of
Amasias; and Philoclea their young sonn^ (who was called (...)) was nursed up in
the house, to the great joy and content of the Parents. Fortune envious of such
happy success, willing to show some sign of her inconstancy, turned her
wheel, and darkened their bright s^nne of prosperity, with the mistie clouds
of mis-hap and misery. For it ^o happened that the King and Queen purposing
to take the ay^e, had appointed a day to hunt in one of their Forests to sport
themselves, where having a Stag in chase, through their hot pursuit, Philoclea
fell from her Steed, and was sore bruised, who being by her guard speedily
rai^ed, was immediately carried to the Palace door, much weakened and wearied,
with sustaining such an intestine conflict: at length such was the boy
sterousnesse of deaths continual battrie, (like unripe fruit which abides
many pluckings before it fall) she striving with often plunges, in her last
and latest gasp, gave up the ghost. This sudden event so appalled the Kings
senses, that he sunk from his seat in a swoune, so as he was feign to be
conveyed by his Nobles to bed, where he lay by the space of three days without
speech. His commons were as men in despair, so diversely distressed; there was
nothing but mourning and lamentation to be heard throughout ^ll Cyprus: their
virtuous Queen bereaved of her life* their King and Sovereign in great
hazard: this tragical discourse of Fortune so daunted them, as they went like
shadows, not like humane creatures: yet somewhat to comfort their heavy
hearts, they heard that Amasias was come to himself, and had recovered his
speech, who as in a fury reached at a Rapier to have killd himself; but his
Peers being present, stayed him from such a bloody act: persuading him to
think, that the common wealth consisted on his safety, and that those sheep
could not but perish, that wanted a shepherd, wishing that if he would not
live for himself, yet he should have care of his Subjects, and to put such
fancies out of his mind, since in sores past help, salves do not heal, but
hurt,and in things past cure care is a corasive. With these and such like
pe^swasions the King was overcome, and began somewhat to quiet his mind, so
that as soon as he could go abroad, he caused his wife to be embalmed, and
wrapped in lead, erecting a rich and famous Sepulcher wherein ^e ent^bed her,
making such solemn obsequies at her funeral, as al^ Cyprus might perceive
that he (...) did bewail her death. Amasias notwithstanding would once a day
repair to the tomb, and there with watrie complaints deplore his misfortune,
coveting no other companion but sorrow, nor any other harmony but grief. But
leaving him to his dolorous passions, let us come to Eliosto his son, being
the chief cause of the description of this history. This Eliosto being
fourteen years old, was no less finely shaped, then sweetly demeanoured, a
pattern of such perfection, as is seldom found in earthly substance. But s^th I
cannot fully express his feature, I will rehearse unto you the description of
him couched by a Cyprian pen man in a brief Ode, a conceit well known to all
Sheepeheards, and by them often recited*

The description of Eliosto in an Ode.
GAnimede the Idaean Boy,
Second glory of the day:
Phrigiaes wonder, fathers joy.
Loves content, Jove's wishfull pray.
Blyth Adonis, Beauties treasure,
Venus darling, Fancies fire:
In whose looks were heav'nes of pleasure,
Fruit too foul of fair desire.
Both these would, though both were rare,
Both the mirrors of their time,
Blush if they should make compare,
With this wonder of our clime.
In whose eyes Love lodged (...) darts,
But he did with glances aim them,
That he might subdue all hearts,
And his own by conquest claim them.
Such his face, such is his stature,
Locks resembling burnish't gold,
That his like astonished nature,
Framde not since of earthly mold.
Nature at her self amazed,
O what influence then did guide her!
Since in want such worth was blazed,
Worth which heavens have since (...) her.
May not then this l^vely boy,
For he is a lovely creature,
Well be tearmd our Cypr^s joy*
Blessed in bearing such a feature?
Well he may, and if not he
Who shall then our wonde, be?
Such and so many were his perfections, that he could not fully describe them,
much less I discover them: he was affected of many, and admired of all;
Sheepheards doated on him, Lasses droupt for him, all liked him; for who could
not love him? It is the custom of the inhabitants of Famagosta, to rest in
some shade when summers scorching heat annoyes them: being shrouded from the
Sun, they spend the time in discoursing upon their own, or their fellows
fortunes, Sheepheards I mean, men of their own profession, whether native in
Cyprus or no, as in memorizing the worth of Philoclea, praising the perfections
of Phyllis, lamenting the loss, commending the loyalty of Amyntas, mourning
for the death, yet misliking the disdain and pride of Amaryllis, pitying the
distress of the forlorn Shepherd, the unhappy admirer, though happy herald
of her worth. But if Eli^sto by hap came by, as often he did, they would abruptly
break off these discourses, and follow him greedily, gazing on so glorious an
object. Nor was this uniformity of affections only in humane hearts; for the
rural powers were touched with like simpathy. Pan sighed to see him,
remembering by him his Syrinx, though of another sex. The Hamadriades flocked
to view him, wishing him one of their troop: Faunes, Sylvans, Satyrs, seldom
seen before, were often beheld by men, while they left the hallowed groves, to
gaze in the open fields on that eye-Syren, alluring not with the sound, but at
the sight. But as no extreme is durable, so too soon to break off the knot
of this exceeding comfort, see what ensued.

Amasias having now through tract of time, sufficiently digested his sorrows,
lived in his Court, no less accompanied with the most honorable, then beloved
of the most virtuous; where finding that humors were no honors, and time lost
could never be recovered, thought good at the earnest persuasions of his
Peers, to enter again into the lists of marriage: which thing being known,
many Princes of Ionia and of Europe, desirous to insert themselves into so
royal a kindred, and to have interest in so noble a family, offered their
daughters with large portions. But only the Prince of Lemnos sped in his ^ute,
whose aliance the King accepted, as being a man noble in deed, graced with all
ornaments which Nature might afford, or Virtue challenge. His daughter also
named Cleodora, was a creature endued with such ornaments of the body, graced
with such qualities of the mind, that it seemed Nature and Virtue concurring
in one, had conspired to make her a peerless proofe-peece of their united
perfections; and though Fortune fretting at their favors so largely bestowed,
sought to cross their courtesies with her cruelties; yet ^ould s^e not at that
time, blemish the bright-shining wor^h of so famous a wonder. But as a small
clowd in a clear day may somewhat s^aine, though not wholly stop the suns
light: so Fortunes malice, did rather darken then drown her merits, in whose
Ivory brows, Chastity sat enthronizde, as guardian of her looks, Modesty
teinting her cheeks with a vermi^ian die of Virgin-redmaiden blushes,
emblazond her a map of mirrors. Majesty which beauty claimed, birth
challenged, love commanded, guided her gestures with such decent proportion, as
Juno wanted in the pride of her glory, and Minerva in the prime of her pomp.
These gifts, these g^ories did so unluckily (as the sequel will manifest)
enchant, enthrall, enforce Amasias, that having scarce vi^wed her, he vowed
her his own: such deep impressions were wrought in his affections. To be
brie^e, the parties were resolved to give Love his right, and so married they
were honorably.

For that purpose the Cyprian King sent Heralds to all the Isles adjacent, and
Provinces situate in the maine of Greece, which published in his name, leave
and liberty of access to all whomsoever, especially strangers of account which
did repair to his Court, and were present at his nuptials, and honored him
in such prince like exercises, as did best beseem the worth of that intended
solemnity. Besides a troop of meaner persons, the most worthy Heroes of
Greece appeared at the appointed time; and being present at the ceremonies of
Hymen's rights, gave honorable testimony of their performance.

Forth with many honorable sports and deeds of chivalry were exercised; in
which, Eliosto was chief challenger, suited in purest white, mounted upon a
milk white Courser, richly caparrasoned. These second solemnities thus
finished, the Lemnian Prince and other strangers departed, bruiting an
honorable report of the Cyprian Courts royalty.

This married couple for two years living in a league of united virtues,
safely floated in the seaes of security, and bathed themselves in the streams
of bliss; they were not daunted with any dread, because they saw no present
danger; they thought that the sea being calm, there could come no tempest;
that from the clear air, could ensue no storms; that quiet ease was not the
mother of discention, and that, were Fortune once tuned, in the strings could
never be found any discord. But they at length tried, though by haples^e
experience, that when Nilus fills up his bounds, ensues a dearth; when the
Angelica is laden with most seed, then he dies; when music was heard in the
Capitol, then the Romans were plagued with pestilence; when Circes proffered
most gifts, she pret^nded most guile; and that when Fortune had deprived them
of most care, then she meant to drown them in the greatest calamity: so she
thinking to give them the Mate, began thus to proffer the Check.

There chanced to be in his Court attendant upon a Noble woman, a proper
piece, named Florinda, who by birth was but the daughter of a Knight, but by
beauty seemed to be a heavenly creature. Now the destinies so ordered the
matter that the king by chance cast a look upon this gorgeous goddess, and at
the first view was so vanquished by vanity, that he thought his l^fe no longer
pleasant unto him, then when he was in her sight, and failed not daily
familiarly to frequent the Mistress co^mpanie, for the Maids cause. And
having attempted her chastity, by showing her his great good will, by
bestowing on her gifts, by large promises of preferment, and many other means;
nevertheles, missing of his purpose at that time (for as yet she stood at
defiance with incontinencie) in pensive perplexity, fell at parlee with
himself, to this purpose. Why Amasias (quoth he) art thou so squeamish that
thou can not see wine, but thou mu^ surfeit? Can thou not draw nie the fire
and warm thee, but thou must with Satyrus kiss it and burn thee? Art thou so
little master of thy aflections, that if thou gaze on a Picture, thou must
with Pigmalion be passionate? Can thou not pass through Paphos, but thou
must offer incense to Venus? Do thou think it injury to Cupid to look, if
thou do not love? Ah, fond fool, know this, fire is to be used, but not to
be handled; the Baaran flower is to be worn in the hand, not chawed in the
mouth; the precious stone Echites is to be applied outwardly, and not to be
taken inwardly; and beauty is made to feed the eye, not to fetter the heart.
Will thou then swallow up the bait which thou know to be bane? Will thou
hazard at that, which can not be had without harm? No, stretch not too far,
wade not too deep, violate not the rites of matrimony, impeach not thy faith
plighted to Cleodora, use beauty, but serve it not, shake the tree, but taste
not of the fruit, lest thou find it too hard to be disgested. Why, but Beauty
is a god, and will be obeyed, Love looks to command, not to be conquered:
Juno strove but once with Venns, and she was vanquished: Jupiter resisted
Cupid, but he went by the worst; it is h^rd for thee with the Crabbe to swim
against the stream, or with the Salamander to strive against the fire: for in
wrestling with a fresh wound, thou shall but make the sore more dangerous. Can
Beauty (fond fool) be resisted, which makes the gods to bow? Love himself
yielded to the feature of Psyche, and think thou thy fancy to be of greater
force? But Amasias, if thou will needs love, use it as a toy to pass away the
time, which thou may est take up at thy lust, and lay down at thy pleasure.
Love! why Amasias do thou dream, whom should thou love? Flori^da? what
thy servant? no sure thou art not so fond. And with that, as he uttered these
words, such thoughts, such sighs, such sobs, such tears as^ailed him, as he
was stricken dumb with the extremity of these hellish passions, scarce able to
draw his breath for a good space, till at last recovering his senses, he fell
to his former sorrow in this ^ort.

I ever heretofore thought a Princes life to be void of contention, and that
they had always passed their time in pleasure without moles^ation, but now I
s^e we are as soon exposed to sorrow as the meanest subject we have. Likewise
before this, I was o^ opinion, that the number of friends, abo^nding in riches,
continuing in health, and such like things which pertain to the body, were
sufficient to attain to felic^tie in ^his life: but now I see, it is the mind
that makes mi^th, and stirs grief; yea, the contented mind is the only
riches, the only quietness, the only happiness. Good God! how unsavory
seem those sweet meats unto me, wherein I was wont to delight? how unpleasant
are the s^orts wherein I was wont to take pleasure? how co^bersome is the
company, which was wont to content me? no game pleases me, no triumphs, no
shows, no hawking, no h^nting, yea, nothin^ under the Sun does solace me.
And would I know the cause why I have not a contented mind? The exquisite pa^ts
of Florinda do so diversely distract my mind, that only her sight is sweet,
only her society is comfortable, only her presence is delightful unto me:
the reason is, in her the Fates have fixed my happiness; in her the heavens
have laid up my felicity; her company I must enjoy, and without it I must
die. Here upon betaking himse^e to his meditations, he framed a Letter to
Florinda, to this effect.

Amasias to the fairest Florinda, health.
SVch, and so extreme are the passions of love ( Florinda) that the more they
are quenched by Disdain, the greater flames are increased by Desire; and the
more they are galld with hate, the more they gape after love: like to the stone
Tapozon, which being once kindled, burns most vehemently in the water. I
speak this (the greater is my grief) by proof and experience: for having my
heart scorched with the beams of thy beauty, and my mind inflamed with thy
singular virtue, neither can thy bitter looks abate my love, nor thy extreme
discourtesie diminish my affection. No, Florinda, it fares with me, as with
the herb Basil, the which the more it is crushed, the sooner it springs;
or the pure spice, which the more it is pouned, the sweeter it smells; or the
Cammomill, which the more it is trodden with the feet, the more it flourishes:
so in these extremities, beaten down to the ground with disdame, yet my love
reaches to the top of the house with hope. Since then, Florinda, thy beauty
has made the sore, let thy bo^ntie apply the salve; as thy virtue has caused
my malady, so let thy mercy give the medicine; repay not my constancy with
cruelty, requite not my love with hate, and my desire with despite, lest thou
procure my speedy death, and thy endless infamy. Thus hoping thou will have
some remorse of my passions, I attend thy friendly sentence, and my fatal
destiny.

Thine ever, though never thine, Amasias.


As soon as he had written his Letter, he dispatched a Messenger as privily as
might be, who speedily delivering his Embassage, was willed by Florinda to
expect an answer; who ruminating upon the contents of his Epistle, being
incited by sordid preferment, she thought by his approved loyalty, that her
may denly modesty was sufficiently strayned: and therefore, after a sort, was
at length willing, after long warding and awarding his waster, to afford him
the vennie. For who knows not (quoth she) that this Hawke which comes now so
fair to the fist, may to morrow check at the Lure. Having said this, she
wrote as hereafter follows.

Florinda to Amasias, health.
THou have followed fast, Amasias, and kept me long at a bay, which makes me
willing now at length to obey, and yield a branch of Laurel, as ensign of thy
conquest; for this thy meede does merit both Nobility and Courtesy. Certes,
thy feature is neither crooked nor crabbed; as for thy beauty, I will not, or
at least I cannot signify how gracious it is in my sight; but scarce any cold
Satyrist can avoid burning at the influence of so warm a S^nne: both these
bids me a base, and I am ready to meet thee in the midway, when lo Reason
steps in, and stoppes me running, intercepting my rashness, lest too soon I
might curse my incepted course. If I have been recklesse of thy good will I
repent me, if ruthlesse through cruel speeches, I recant them, as one loving
now that which of late I loathed, and desiring that which even now I despised;
which as often as I call to mind, I cannot but blush to my self for shame,
and fall out with my self for anger. But the purest Diamond is to be cut
before it be worn; the Frankincense is to be burnt before it be smelled, and
Lovers are to be tried before they be trusted, lest shining like the Carbuncle,
as though they had fire; being touched, they prove passing cold: f^r the mind
by trial once scowred of mistrust, becomes more fit ever after for belief:
so that Amasias, as I have pined thee with bitter Pills, I will now pamper
thee with sweet Potions; as I have galled thee with cruelty, I will heal thee
with courtesy. But I would you should think that it is not advancement that
wins me thus willingly to your will, for I know it is odious, but it is your
exceeding love toward me, (O noble Prince) that linketh my liking with yours;
it is your incomparable courtesy which forces me to yield the fort of my
faith into your hands. For as the Sun, the higher it does ascend in the
Firmament, the more heat it does extend to the earth: so Virtue and Courtesy,
in the more ^igh and princely person it is placed, the more force it has to
win the wills, and bind the hearts of the people to embrace it. To conclude,
short will be thine abode with me, and more sharp thine abandoning of me:
then shall I be le^t like see^y Sappho, or for lorne Phyll^s, a game to my
foes, and a shame to my friends. The Ivy with her embracings suffocateth the
Elm; the kind Ape with her folding arms kills her young ones; but if thou
according to thy soothest, and smoothest protestations love me be not causer
of my casualtie. And thus committing my life and living into your hands, I
attend thine answer, and rest more thine then her own.

Florinda.


This Epistle came to Amasias as acceptable as metamorphosed Jupiter, creeping
into ' Danaes lap: for surely this was gold to the King, as that a golden
shower to Danae. After this, there passed many pleasant lines between them,
neither did Amasias write s^pithily, but Florinda answered as pretily; for if
he were feign, she was fervent; if he could not digest delay, she could not
but detest the cause that kept him away: each performed their devout orizons
for their luckie loves, each thought Fortune to be f^owning, and the Fates
adverse; they termed Venus very sleepie, and sluggish, because she heard not
their prayers, or else was over hard in not granting their requests. Thus
sitting together in the sympathy of their pains and almost sinking in the sea
of their passions, they desired a thing no less difficult then dangerous, hard
to be acted and of hazard to be effected: they both wished a parley, which
could not be compassed without some inconvenience^: for never was the
dread^ull Dragon such a guardian to the Hesperides Gardens; never Argos so
^harie of his injunction, as Florinda^ Mistress was wary in watching her
Maid: but to what end? She (...) end her life, as amend her leawdnesse. Neither
was this fault peculiar to this particular only, but the folly o^ all men in
general: it is as well others fury, as it was her frenzy, to over-looke that
which maugre their beards will away. No, no, they may not strain that string
to their own tune, which being stubburne will not once stretch; they may not
restrain her madness, who rega^deth not her own chastity, were they as
quick sighted as Eagles, as subtle as Serpents.

Non mentem servare potes ^icet omnia claudas,
Omnibus exclusis intus adulter erit.
Though all things you can tame, and captivate,
And bring in compass of subjection;
Yet will the Mind disdain rebuke, and hate
What shall suppress her fond affection.
Danae would neither regard the diligent watch which attended upon her, nor the
brazen Castle that warded her, but became more loose both of her lips and lap,
then Penelope assayed by many suitors, yet observed by no overseers. The
Coltmost rages, the more he is reined up; the river then streameth, the more
it is stopped, and an unchaste woman narrowly watched, becomes more wilful, she
is sharpest set, when she is surest beset, yea, when she is most h^ndred from
vice, she most hastes unto vanity. For Florindi perceiving squint-eyed
mistrust to keep sentinel at her Chamber door, and quickesented suspicion to
follow her footing, ready to trip her least treading awrie, hanged her wits on
the teinter hooks, till she might rack out some slight to hoodwinke her
Mistress with a Cowes biggin. To be brief, the time of their meeting was
appointed on the third day following, but two days seemed so long and
loathsome, so tedious, yea, and so intolerable, that they thought two years
to have passed before the prefixed hour was present. Which Amasias finding
true, to deceive the tediousnes of the day, would go to bed with the Lamb, and
rise with the Lark; yet would the night seem loathsome: he would spend the day
in courting Ladies, and discoursing of love; yet he deemed every minute a
month, till Red-rose fingred Aurora appearing with gray hairs, all be-dangled
with silver deaw, gave a watchword to glorious Phoebus, who rowsing himself
from his watrie Couch, crowning his golden locks with a Diadem of Chrysolite,
mounted up lofty Olympus, and newly peeped and appeared in our Harrison, when
lo, Amasias, pushing at his Mistress Chamber door, which by good chance
flew open, and granted him wished passage, saw his dearest Florinda, who was
then working an handkirchiefe with black Silk and Gold: about whose snowie
neck folding his arms, they passed the time away with such delightful
sports, and new conceyved joys, as either their minds might wish to have, or
their souls desire to see. But Amasias knowing time to be beneficial unto
him, yet not too bountiful; to be large, yet not over liberal, ending delay,
and beginning to dally; first he set forth his foot, first he offered to
give the onset and assault, neither by force did he first endeavor to take that
fort, but by fair means; he required and requested the fruit of his love and
labors: the Gentlewoman waged the matter with words, which indeed are women's
best weapons, saying that she had more care of her credit, and regard of her
honor then so to shake hands with honesty; that she never passed any such
promise unto him, neither did he ever crave any further courtesy then her
company, or at the most a kiss, whereby finding occasion, she sealed the same
with her bright sanguine lips, saying that now she had given him his desired
guerdon: to which Amasias smiling, replied after this manner.

Either my arrival in this place is suspected, or not suspected; if suspected,
certes the outwardmost is suspected, if not suspected, neither will this be
revealed. Nay cut off my head (quoth he) if now I reap not the fruit of my
hope. I, but it is sin said Florinda. Sin, quoth he? It is sin, not to
swallow in delights, dangling at our lips. it is sin to abstain from
pleasure, if that only may preserve our life: Yet would I not preserve my life
by doing wrong answered Florinda. Nay, thy self erst did dest say (quo^h
Amasias) that thou went mine by right: therefore where are now your weak
reasons? weak they were God-wote, and scarce current: but let me see whether
your self be as stout to resist, as your gentle persuasions were substantial
to make me desist. This being said, Amasias, as it best beseemed Amasias
offered her gentle violence, and violent gentleness, which as some say, seldom
comes to women vnaccepted: she again for fashions sake combated, but willing
to be conquered; for indeed, ere long, Amasias rode in triumph: and which some
men may marvel at, he behaved himself like Hydra, whose necks pared off
with the heads, were renewed with two in each place: like Anteus by each fall
gathering more force; or as the stone of Thracia, which dipped in water to be
cooled, waxes most fervent. After this Florinda feasted him with as dainty
and delicate dishes, as her self could devise, whereunto wanted no V^num Cos,
the Whetstone of his fortitude. Which done, Amasias thanking his goddess for
his entertainment, they both took their leave, as though they had lost their
lives, especially Florinda, who often wringing him by the wrests, with her
whitest hands kissed him as if her heart had desired to meet with his, and
his soul to join with hers: and thence betaking her self into a window, like
the fairest garden flowers, which beholding the departure of gladsome Phoebus
to his purple bed, whose being, erst was their light and life, some hanging
down their heads as deprived of all pleasure, and others more erecting up
their lofty and leavie crests, strive to enjoy his sweet sight so far as
po^sible they may: so Florinda now pearched aloft to possess his beloved
sight, as far as her watery eyes could suffer, and now again hung down her
head in her bofome, as not able to sustain to behold his departure.

Now Amasias ever after was so wedded to the vain suppose of pleasure, and
delight, that his Peers sorowed at the course of his unbridled follies, and
his subjects groned not under the burden of his covetous desires, but were
taxed with the grief of his voluptuous appetite; for such was the
incontinencie of his life, as sacietie of wanton affections never glutted his
mind with content: but as the Serpent Hydaspis, the more he drinks, the more
he is a thirst, and as the Salamander, the more he lies in the fire, the more
desirous he is of the flame: so Am^sias the more he offended in this
intemperate concupiscence, the more his thoughts were addicted to the vice,
insomuch as every man did wish he might fall headlong into the Center of some
deep misfortune.

Wallowing thus in the self conceit of his wickedness, his ^ife Cl^odora,
through over much impatience, not sufficiently commanding his constancy, or
greatly moderating his affections, began palpably to feel extraordinary
passions within her to be praedominant: For fond Affection like a heady ruler,
possessing the chiefest portion of her interests, overruled her more honest
resolutions, at the entertainment of incestuous lust. Which when she most
evidently perceived, for the better effecting of her purpose, manifested her
grief unto a damsel, whom she had brought w th her out of Lemnos, and in
whose confidence she reposed much. Lucilla (for so was the maid named) being
upon a day in her Mistress chamber, seeing that beyond measure she was
melancholy, and that her health not a little impeached through sorrow,
strained modesty, and with these words interrupted her mournings.

Ah Cleodora, more loved of me then mine own life, and more dear unto me then
my self, would God I might be plagued with all earthly diseases, so I might
see thee free from distress: how can Luc^lla be without sorrow, to see
Cleodora oppressed with sickness? how can she but sink in calamity, to see
her but once touched with care? alas, unfold unto me thy sore, and I will add
the means to apply the salve; make me privy to thy malady, and I will procure
a medecin. The regard which ever since my first being with you, I have had of
your welfare, I had rather leave it to your consideration, then with the
rehearsal of it, but weary your patience. Which endeavors of mine, if your
Majesty shall recompense with advertisement of your grief, I will not only
study to procure your contentment by my industrious, resolutions, but my self
also not a little satisfied, shall rest in great security. Alas (quoth the
Queen) it is not unknown, not only to us, but to the whole Kingdom, how my
Lord, seduced by the flattering allurements of strumpets, has not only
violated the law of our gods, in profaning my nuptial bed, made sacred by the
holy law of matrimony; but also the law of Cyprus, which utterly forbids
such disorder and wanton actions. But since in a Monarchy the wills of Princes
may bide no check, but their reasons (howsoever unreasonable) are the
principles that may not be infringed, it rests only for me to complain, but
not to redress, lest venturing too far, I set my rest on the hazard, and so
desperately throw at all. What Madame, (answered Lucilla) have you no other
cause to disquiet your self, then the foolish love of the King? Truly this is
a very small occasion, and a cause more then frivolous, after this manner to
vex your self; remove away these dolorous passions, and endeavor to live
joyfully with those, amongst whom your reputation and credit shall be
honorable: attending til Time shall cool his ardent desires, and enforce him
to change his affections, with this proviso; that by unlawful acquaintance,
your honor likewise be not depraved. Indeed, replied the Queen, the whole
can with facility minister counsel to them that are sick; but if thou did
but feel that distemperature which permits me to take no rest in my mind,
and the cause of the anguish that does deprive me of sense, I am assured, that
having pity upon me, thou would otherwise comfort me, or else help to
execute that, which should serve for the entire solace and contentment of my
spirit. The King has led this life a long time, and it is now impossible, but
by death or extremity of age, he should alter it: in the mean while, I pass
my time away in vain, no ways comforted, which makes my grief seem more
intolerable. Lucilla perceiving without casting of her water, where she was
pained, shaped her this reply. For mine own part Madam, as yet I never had
experience of what force Love is: and therefore ignorant of the disdain and
sorrow, which such as you are sustain: yet nevertheless I verily believe,
that the passion both of the one and the other is so great and unmeasurable,
that the surplusage of the alterations that trouble and mole^t the spirit, is
nothing in respect of this inexplicable distress. But I behold and perceive
the imbecility of humane minds, and how soon, through unlawful desires, they
are disquieted; which, with no less tranquillity, are digested in the stomach
and thoughts, then the sea sands, when they are encountered with the tumultuous
blasts of powerful Bor^as. Ah Madam, where is the great chastity that made
you once more renowned then all the Ladies in Lemnos? I beseech you labor to
contain your self in that honest estimation wherein hitherto you have lived,
to the great content, both of your parents, and friends. But if Reason be curbd
by incontinency, and that you deliberate to follow the vice of wantonness for
the accomplishment of your desires, then by all means let diligent regard in
such sort intimate secrecy, that neither the house from whence you are
descended, be dishonored, nor your self merit infamy, or ignominious
punishment.

While they were thus talking, a page brought word that diverse Ladies were come
to visit the Queen, which caused them to sur^ease their talk. When the Ladies
salutations were ended, and Cleod^ra again left to her cogitations, she could
not feel one minute of such ease as was requisite: for vn^essantly she rolled
the stone with Sysiphus, turned the wheel with Ixion, and filled the
bottomless tubbes with Belides: in so much, that when she could find no
means to mittigate her malady, she fell into these bitter complaints.

Ah Cleodora, ah wretched Cleodora, how art thou without reason, which
suffer reason to yield unto appetite, wisdom to sensual will, and a free
mind unto servile love: but I perceive when the Ivi^ ris^th, it wreatheth
about the El^e; when the Hop grows hie, it has need of a poale; and when
virgins wax in years, they follow that which belongs to their youth. Love,
love, y^a but they love, expecting some good hap, and alas, both love and live
without all hope: for Eliosto is my son; and yet if he were not, he likes
not me. Since then ( Cleodora) thou art pinched, and have none to pity thy
passions, dissemble thy affection, though it shorten thy life: For better it
were to die with grief, then to live with shame: The sponge is full of water,
yet is not seen; the leaf of the tree Alpina, though it be wet, looks always
dry; and a wise lover, be she never so much tormented, behaves herself; as
though she were not touched. Yea but fire cannot be hid in the flax without
smoke, nor musk in the bosom without smell, nor love in the breast without
suspicion. Then seek some means to manifest thy love to Eliosto, for as the
stone Draconites can by no means be polished, unless the Lapidarie burn it;
so thy mimd can by no medcine be cured, unless Eliosto ease it.

Thus resolved without longer stay, she called unto her, Lucilla her chief
attendant, who from her infancy had bin brought up with her. In this Lucilla,
she conceyved her greatest hope, unto whom she said: Lucilla, since I had
reason to discern good from evil, thou know how I have tendered thee, and
how willing I would be to seek thy preferment, make trial when thou please,
so shall thou be assured of that, which justly thou may hold in suspense. But
leaving these conjuring words, I must ( Lucilla) commit unto thy secrecies, a
matter of import, whereon my honor and reputation depends: for I tell thee
Lucilla, I have made choice of thee amongst all those which I may command, as
of her I love, and have best cause so to do, having had such society, else
should I rather choose to die ten thousand deaths, then reveal it.

Luci^la which had her whole hope of good from the Queen, hearing her
speeches, with tears standing in her eyes, proceeding of joy, for the honor
done her by the Queen, protested unto her by heavens Maker, and what else he
framed, to be secret in her determinations, and do her best endeavor to
accomplish whatsoever she commanded. Cleodora taking her word for current, in
whom she never found deceit, said: Lucilla, that it is incident to all
creatures in their kind to love, I know thy wits be not so simple, but thou
can conceive; and he that made us, directs our likings as best pleases
him, be it Prince or Beggar, from the highest to the simplest: and he my
Lucilla, has linked my liking (albeit extraordinarily) to a most brav^
Gentleman (on whom I think) if Affection, which is blind, deceive me not, is
worthy to be favored of the most beautiful. To keep thee with idle speeches,
is now no time, having other matters enough whereon we must discourse;
therefore, that thou may know to whom my love is intended, Eliosto my son
is he; Eliosto, famous for his valor, renowned for his bounty, and admired
for his courtesy. He, he, Lucilla, is the joy of my heart, and my hearts sole
delight, without whom I cannot live, nor I will not live, neither may I live,
such is the service which my heart has vowed in love unto him: therefore if
thou love me as thou have professd, by thy industry seek to save my life,
which cannot but perish in not obtaining my desires.

Lucilla, listening to her discourse, willing to become second in this tragedy,
had her brains already beaten in the search of the charge committed unto her,
yet would she not sodain^ly answer any thing, Considering how displeasing
speeches spoken out of time, be to lovers, corasives: yet chering the Queen,
she requested until the next morning respite for answer, which willingly she
granted, affying greatly in her, whose j^dgement above all others she esteemed
most sound and perfect: whom to her study we leave.

Eliosto, by reason of the affable countenance, and courteous usage wherewith
daily she did gratify him, had his intrailes so fried with the scorching
flames of his metho^s beauty (O inspeakable wickedness!) that his color was
ch^nged, and his strength impaired, and he, through great grief and extremity
of his love, enforced to withdraw himself into his Chamber, where casting
himself on his bed, with a million of careful thoughts, he determined to
seek her favor, and then, by contrary motions, fearing the success of his
suit, by reason of affinity, which might give cause of great dislike and
disparagement thereof, said:

Ah thrice unfortunate Eliosto, what strange fits be these that burn thee with
heat, and yet thou shakest with cold? thy body in a shivering sweat, and in a
flaming ice, melting like wax, and yet as hard as Ada^ant: Is it love? then
would it were death, for likeher it is thou shall loose thy life, then win thy
Love. Ah ha^lesse Cleodora! would to God thy virtues were less then thy
beauty, or my virtues greater then my affections; so should I either quickly
free my self from fancy, or be less subject unto folly. But alas, I feel in
my mind fierce sk^rmishes between Reason and Appetite, Love and Wisdom,
Dang^r and Desire; the one persuaded him to hate the Queen, because his
fathers wife, the other constrained him to love her as a friend. If I consent
to the first, I end my days with death; if to the last, I shall lead my life
with infamy. What shall I then do? Ah Eliosto, either swallow the juice of
Mandrake, which may cast thee into a dead sleep, or chew the herb Carysium,
which may cause thee to hate every thing; so either shall thou die in thy
slumber, or dislike Cleodora by thy potion. Tush, what follies are these? Will
thou with the Woolfe bark at the Moon, or with the young Gr^phons peck against
the stars? Think thou to quench fire with a sword* or with affection to
mortify love? No, no, if thou be wise, suffer not the grass to be cut from
under thy feet, strike while the iron is hot, make thy market while the
chaffer is to sa^e.

Eliosto b^ing thus resolute in his opinion, began to cast beyond the Moon,
and to frame a (...) devises in his h^ad to bring his purpose to pass, fearing
every shadow, doubting every wind, stumbling at the least straw; yet at the
last pricked forward by fancy, he purposed not to omit the least occasion,
which he thought would redound to his content. Fortune, who had long spurned at
him with her foot, gave him this opportunity to raise him, whom she had like
to have overthrown, chaunci^g to look out at a window which opened into a
Park belonging to the Court, he espied the Queen, pleasantly passing away the
time with her train of Ladies, which opportunity he was not wil^ing to loose,
but with all such speed as his faint legs could make, revived by the sight of
his sweet chase, with all sails spread, in short time he recovered his
wished desire, who was no sooner of Cleodora seen, his humble duty done, and
she having requited the same, giving him the time of the day, with a most
pleasant and friendly countenance, she challenged him of negligence, whom in two
or three days she had not seen, and leading him politikely, pretending
matter of importance, to impart unto him, from the company, she broight him
near the side of a fair copesse, which so overshadowed them, that the Sun
beams could no ways be offensive unto them, where they might both boldly say
whatsoever it pleased them, without being heard or seen of any, whose presence
might interrupt their conference, which caused her to take opportunity to
discuss with him thus.

Son (quoth she) I pray thee say, of the duty which thou have vowed me, and
by those sweet thoughts which are best pleasing unto thee, what is the Lady
to whom thou have dedicated thy love? For love doubtless thou do, thy
countenance bewrays it, which I have noted with more regard then becomes
me; yet of care to thee whose health I tender, for thy courtesy and good
service done, which I would requite in the best manner I might; and for because
thy looks show that thy heart craveth to be pitied of thy Lady, let me know
her, who may chance stand thee in some stead; for women may prevail much with
one another.

Eliosto wrapped into a heaven of joys, hearing the goddess of his devotion,
with such favor and kindness to grace him, with a blushing countenance
standing at the bar before her, whose sentence p^onounced, was either li^e or
death, said. Honorable and gracious Madame, That I love I cannot deny, which
argues your skill in physic to be great; but if your highness could judge
whose love I most adore, and love have, and judging, ease me, I should have
cause to say, no Aesculapius on the earth whatsoever, might stand in comparison
with you for skill: I dare say no more, fearing to offend.

The Queen all this while gazed on the perfection of her Son, as deeply
enamored on his feature, as he inveagled with hers; for her eye made a general
survey of his excellent proportion, which she found more exquisite, by how much
the more she had bent her liking to love him.

Thus Affection which had assailed both their hearts, endued them with such a
sympathy of content, beholding themselves all alone, that with overmuch joy,
they were stricken mute, so that how much soever their hearts desired, to let
each other know their loves, they could not reveal the same. In this heaven of
happiness they had not long been, but a Lady that attended the Queen,
brought her word the King was coming into the Park, which place he had
chosen to recreate himself, where resting on a hill that over-peered the great
Mediterrane^m, he noted how Phoebus fetched his Lauoltos on the Purple plains
of Neptunus, as if he had meant to have courted Thetis in the royalty of his
Robes, the Dolphins (^he sweet conceitors of Music) fetched their carreers on
^he calmed waves, as if Arion had touched the strings of his silversounding
Instrument: the Mermaides thrusting their h^ades from the bosom of Amph^rite,
sat on the mounting banks of Neptu^e, drying their watrie tresses in the
Sunbeams: he marked likewise how A^olus forbore to throw abroad his guests
on the slumbring brows of the Sea-god, as giving Triton leave to pleasure his
Queen with desired melody, and Proteus l^bertie to follow his flocks without
disquiet. Amasias looking over the champain of Cyprus, to see if the continent
were as full of smiles as the Seas were of favors, saw the shrubs as in a
dream with delightful harmony, and the birds that chan^ed on their branches,
not disturbed with the least breath of a favorable Zephyrus. Seeing thus the
accord of the land and sea, casting a fresh gaze on the water Nymphs, he
began to consider how Venus was feigned by the Poets, to spring of the froth of
the seas, which drove him strait into a deep conjecture of the inconstancy of
love, that as if Luna were his loadstarre, it had every minute ebbes and
tides, sometime overflowing the banks of Fortune with a gracious look, lightened
from the eyes of a favorable lover, otherwhiles ebbing to the dangerous shelfe
of de^paire, with the piercing frown of a froward Mistress.

By this time nights duskie mantle shadowing the earth with a darksome
coverture, had bewrayed heavens disguise, and the twinkling stars, whose
sight the Suns brightness does in the day time obscure, did now plainly
appear, while Phoebus reposing in his Palace, waited the dewie-vprising of
Aurora, so that the King was for that time constrained to desist his walk. In
the mean time, Eliosto, whose extremes were vehement, after his abrupt
parting with his mother, grew so melancholy, as that nothing was able to
delight him: so that in outrageous manner, he exclaimed on his misfortune,
cursing the tidings bringer of the Kings repair to the Park, and his tongue,
for not revealing his grief, his Physician being so ready to hear, that
despairing of his hope, he was likely to mischief himself: yet Reason
affirming, That the learned Physician could not discover the disease of his
patient, without he show it, how near soever he guess. Entering further into
consideration of her favorable speeches, shaking off fear, like a hardy
Soldier, he determined in writing to let her know his love, since he had no
hope to meet her again at the like advantage. Therefore, like the condemned,
hoping of pardon, lived Eliosto; yet desirous to be resolved, either of
comfort, or despair, he called for pen and ynke, and wrote thus.

To the only mistress of my heart, the most beautiful Cleodora, happiness,
and hearts content.

IF Jupiter being a God was vanquished by love, and many mighty Monarchs have
been forced to seek the love of beautiful Ladies, I have less cause to
accuse my fortune, or exclaim against his soveraigntie, who has framed my
heart to like and love your excellency: how long I have honored you only, I
omit, and desist to impart the many griefs endured for your sake: Now, as you
are by nature pitiful, so vouchsafe to credit the lines of me your sworn
servant, and by your favor, reclaim from the gates of death, my soul, which
upon denial, is ready to leave her earthly mansion. Therefore peerlesse
Lady, if thou hold the life of thy servant in any regard, grant me thy love,
and with thy love, gracious liking; so shall I live to honor thee, or die
through thy cruelty. I write not as a Poet, but as a passionate lover of your
highness: and therefore if thou dislike these lines, at^ribute the shortness
of my style, to my ardencie, which without flattery, has delivered the sum
of my misery, and hope shall be by your gracious courtesy mitigated. So
attending your answer, either of life or death, I wish thy joys never to have
end, and my self a speedy death, without your liking.

Your Graces, in life most humble, Eliosto.


What man living has either heard or read of such sensual and incontinent
designs? such libidinous, and incestuous affection? Thou Hyppolite, for not
yielding to the lust of Phaedra thy Stepmother, wast through her false
accusation, by thy father, pursued, till the Chario^ wherein thou fleddest,
brake, and thou miserably among the sharp stones rent to pieces: but by thy
fall, thou have preserved thy name from black mouthed infamy, who only is
delighted with her brazen Trumpet, to sound the harsh tunes of our foul
defame: as for thee Elios^o, whom the Fates likewise have reserved to
perpetuity, must with thy licencious Phaedra, abide continually the detestable
brand of unspeakable ignominy. But I digress.

When he had ended these lines, sealed and directed the same, he could not find
by many devises which he sought, how it should be brought to his mothers
hands: at length, after many and sundry ways invented, this was thought best:
calling to mind Lucil^a the Queens Maid, which he often noted to be in some
regard with her, determined to procure her, either for courtesy, or reward, to
deliver it. And very early in the morning, as soon as he could get ready,
addressed himself to the Court, attending the coming of his mother thither,
as she usually did: but unhappy El^osto, it ^ell not out so well with him that
day; for the Quee^e distempered in her thoughts, had her mind so much on love,
as she en^oyed no sleep by night, nor content by day, so that she was enforced
with weakness to keep her Chamber, to the great discomfort and grief of all
the Ladies. But Cupid which is always benign to them that serve him, brought
him this pleasure. It fortuned that Lucilla, with whom Eliostoes chief desire
was to have some speech, passed into the Garden, either to walk, or for some
occasion of the Queens (I know not whether) whom he followed with a fear^full
countenance, more like a novice in Loves school, then any way skillful in such
enterprises: yet whet^ed on by the hopes which his heart conceyved, he saluted
the Gentlewoman, who was not a little abashed to see the Prince so near her,
nor could she judge any cause of his coming unto her.

Lucilla being willing to hear what he would say, with a face blushing,
showing a kind countenance, she enquired of his health, with other ordinary
prattle: unto which he answered, and returning her many thanks, said;
Mistress Lucilla, though my deserts have never merited favor at your hands,
yet let me crave your furtherance in a suit, for that I hear my mother is
weak, and not willing to be troubled, so that I cannot attain unto her
speech; and besides, my business of importance, compels me very shortly to
leave the Court, to deliver this Letter into her own hands, and at your
leisure to return me such answer, as she shall please to deliver: in doing,
which you shall both do me a favor of great esteem, and cause me her ea^ter,
not to wound this your kindness with oblivion.

The Gentlewoman which did know where the Queens shoe did wring her, began
immediately to conjecture his disease, and to shoot^ at that which indeed she
hit without any great aim, supposing the Prince to be wounded with like
affection, was glad to become so happy a Messenger to her, who could willingly
vouchsafe him as partner of her best fortunes; yet making a kind denial, she
said: Sir, though I could willingly do you more service then modesty will I
acquaint you with; yet it is not the part of our Country Gentlemen, to make
poasts of women, having Pages fit for that purpose: if I refuse your request,
attribute it to no discourtesie in me, which am very loath to offend her
h^ghnesse, not knowing whether the sentence of your Paper may breed any
discontent or no. That many Messengers have incurred displeasure, yea, and
loss of life, as the cause has deserved, I hope it is not unknown unto you,
yet has the harmless bearer known^ as little what he carried, as I desirous
to know of you.

Sweet Lucilla (quoth the Prince) that it is wisdom by others harms to
beware, I deny not; yet notwithstanding, it is discourtesie, not to fulfill
the request of a Gentleman, which has evermore showed himself most dutiful
unto her Majesty: can I therefore frame my heart to prejudice that Lady of
incomparable virtue? No, no, heavens never permit me life, if in the least
thought I once offend her.

Lucilla, noting by the often change of his color, in telling his tale, that
his heart was not his own, but had some more business in hand then willingly
he would reveal, loath to move his patience by her denial, answered: Sir,
persuading my self of your loyalty, I will for this time become your
Ambassador, although it should impair my credit with her Excellence, whose
favor I hold as dear as my life: and that you shall assure your self of my
fidelity herein, if you please to meet me in this place to morrow, by that
time the Suns power shall have drawn the deaw from off the earth, I shall
return you answer as you desire.

Thanks, good Lucilla, for thy courtesy, assure your self I will not die in
your debt, if ever Eliosto may requite it by any industry. In the mean time
(quoth he) favor me so highly, as wear this for my sake: and pulling off a
Diamond of great price, gave it her, which she was loa^h to accept; yet giving
him thanks for his kindness, replied. Sir, I prize not my pains, that you
should reward me with hire, or do you good, in hope of benefi^e: for as it is
unfitting a Gentlewoman to take gif^s in such m^ner bestowed; so is it
discourtesie, and no part of womanlike condition, to reject the gift of a
friend, therefore accept my thanks until such time I shall better deserve it.

Thus time passing away, Lucilla taking her leave, went toward the Queens
Chamber, and Eliosto to his lodging, where ministering fuel unto his folly,
he began in his imaginations most strangely to be perplexed; for his
propheticke soul laid down before him, both the enormitie of the fact, and
the condign punishment, which always accompanies such a crime: yet
notwithstanding he was so blind with outrageous lust, as that no such sacred
s^ppositions were of force sufficient to reclaim him from his intended
resolution: Unto which I leave him.

Lucilla seriously bethinking her self of these rare and abominable
accidents, thought good since they were committed unto her secrecy, to
smoother them up in silence, lest by their detection, both their safeties
utterly might be ruinated. Upon this she came into the Queens presence, where
being of her perceyved, she was demanded where she had spent the time so
long from her, knowing that all her attendants, besides her self, were
combersome. Madame, having been to search some dainty that might yield
delight to your weak stomach, and cause better disgesture, by chance prying
in the garden for such things, I was encountered by the best Physician in the
Dominion of Cyprus, who gave me a receipt, which I judge by my simple skill,
will give your Majesty great ease, yet does the man doubt whether your
stomach will digest it, yea or no: this (gracious Lady quoth Lucilla) has
been the cause of my absence, and no other. Alas, good wench, how am I
beholding unto thee, that regarding my health, searchest the depth of thy
skill! but, Lucilla, in vain seek thou her redress, which no Physician
with all his herbs, drugs, and simples, balmes, emplaisters, or what Art may
provide, can remedy, the gods only by their grace must finish my desires, or
give evidence, that life has left within me the due possession of her field.
What Madame, ever in this tune? once alter these discords, which makes your
Music jarre, and sing the belief with a cheerful voice, so may your mind
be a little eased, and the receipt I have to minister, work with the more
effect: I speak this of experience; for every cunning Physician will prepare
the body of his patient before he minister any thing; therefore if you will
shake off this melancholy, you shall have a taste of what I promise, if not,
your Grace must pardon me: it were great pity so precious a thing should be
cast away. Well (quoth Cleodora,) thou art disposed to cross me with thy
words, which in yielding small comfort, do nothing else but aggravate my
disease: therefore leaving these jeasts, tell me if thou have aught will do
me good, if not, use me no more thus unkindly, lest vanquished with the
extremity of my grief, I chance to say that with my tongue which my heart
will repent, or exercise my hands in such severitie, as shall not beseem my
person. The Gentlewoman seeing the wind blow so warm, at the view of the
Queens impacience, feared as much as she promised, thought not good above her
strength to moove her; for women being by nature hot, upon small occasions, often
times become unreasonable: wherefore making a preamble to her discourse, like
an eloquent Orator began thus. ( Eliosto) with that word, making a long pause,
to note her countenance, on the sudden naming her beloved, was thus
interrupted. Eliosto, Lucilla? What frantike humor in this manner causes thee
to nominate him, with whom as yet thou never had any conference? Madame (said
the Gentlewoman) (...) the rest, before you either dislike or commend me; then
proceed quoth the Queen.

This Eliosto (as I am credibly informed) loves a Lady, but whom I know not,
and as a dear friend of his certified me, is so tormented in his passions, that
the night naturally ordained for rest, (restless) he consumes in great
discontent; the day wherein all creatures delight, is unto him loathsome,
insomuch that through watching, and refusing his diet, his lovely visage, from
the sanguine is altered into the yellow colored saffron; yea, Madame, these
mine eyes are witnesses of it, who this day saw him pass into the Court so
feeble, that his weak legs could hardly support the weight of his body.

No more of this Lucilla, lest thy tongue busied too long on this tragedy, I
in the mean time be compelled to seek an end of my torments, by dispatching
mine own life. Is this thy comfortable confection? Is this the relief thou
preachest of, which would yield me such quiet of mind? Why should I live to
see another enjoy my love? have I made choice of him, and shall another, no
ways worthy of him, enjoy my ^elicitie? Peace Cleodora, whither rovest thou?
let reason subdue rage, let not every one be privy to thy incestuous love, but
conceal it as thou may, and seek some secret device, by death, which is the
best remedy to give contentation to thy heart. But hearken Lucilla, that thou
may in time, when my body shall be intombed among the dead, report unto my
son, how dear I held his love, as my countenance often showed, though he
careless of Loves toys, never regarded it; do but this for me, by his frind
to learn the Ladies name, with whom Eliosto is so inthralled: this is all the
service that ever I will exact of thee, that knowing her, I may become an
intercessor for him, whom my heart more desires then all the worlds
possessions: With this, tears which trickled down from her opticke
instruments, restrained her tongue.

In which sorrowful passion, her Maiden became a partner, and grieved for her
folly (which indeed was none) committing so heinous a fault in procuring the
same, excused her self in this manner.

How much I grieve to see you so discomforted, I cannot tell, but relying upon
the hope of your graces free pardon, if you vouchsafe to peruse this Letter,
you shall know what she is with whom your son is so strangely affected. This
Letter I received at his hands, who hearing of your disquiet, desirous (as it
should seem) to acknowledge his duty, coniured me by many fair words, and
proffers of kindness, to deliver it unto your self; which albeit for modesty
I did long refuse, thrusting that from me with my finger, which I would
willingly have drawn unto me with all my body: in the end, I consented, and
the rather, for your Ladyships quiet, which as I suppose, will bid it welcome
for the masters sake; who, if my judgment in the Planet Venus deceive me not,
will prove shortly a most rare conjunction, or I will never trust my skill
again: for Venus being in the sign of Leo, has domination over both ho^ses,
viz. He and She, or He and You.

The Queen when she heard Luci^aes tale, void of all hope to obtain her
beloved Eliosto, after she had awhile pawsd, as one at length awaked from her
memento, asfrom a sleep, answered. Now trust me, thou have cunningly gone
about the bush, and have daintily sought to enter into my deepest secrets: yet
how subtly soever you have practiced the matter, there may be a quidditie to
deceive both thee and him: but I pray thee tell me what speeches used he at the
deliverie thereof.

The despairing Prince (good Madame) for so I must call him, howsoever (as it
is reported) his valor most worthily shows it self in field, yet in
affection he is most timorous and fearful, in that not daring to reveal the
sum of his desires, must commit it to a tell-tale Paper, languishing to the
death, wanting his delight, and by silence prolonging his so^rowes, his looks
declaring more then in words he is able to v^ter. For ^e that not long since
had seen his beauty and gallant grace, the agillitie of his body, and noted
every particular lineament shall now through the pusillanimitie of his mind,
see a metamorphosis, which may moove the most adamantine heart to compassion,
the cause to me unknown, but yet suspected. The assurance I doubt not but your
Grace will soon understand, if you daine to tear the Seal, and peruse the
Contents.

Cleodora, which thought every minute a year till she had knowledge of her
sons mind, put her maiden from her pra^tle, with a fained message; when being
all alone, with a number of dolorous sighs for the Princes perplexity, she
read, and many times ^ead those lines which gave her first comfort of enjoying
her hearts content. How welcome they were unto her, it may better be imagined
then by me explaned, whose head was wholly employed in answering the same; for
which she thought it not unfit to use the help of Lucilla: wherefore resting
from her former studies until her maid came, we leave her to the
contemplation of her Love.

Luci^la having dispatched her Mistress message, repaired into the Garden,
where the consideration of the miserable estate of those two lovers presented
unto her mind a consused Chaos of uncouth and disquieted passions; so that
sitting in an Arbor, she fell into these ^ermes. Lucilla, thou see no physic
prevails against the gaze of the Basiliske; no charm against the sting of the
Tarantula, no prevention to divert the de^ree of the Fates; nor no means to
recall back the balefull hurt of Fortune: Incurable sores are without Avicens
Aphorisms, and therefore no salve for them but patience. Then Lucilla say with
Solon, Craesus is not happy before his death; confess with Saladine King of
Egypt, that the prosperous success of Policrates prognosticated some dire
event, that Fortune stands upon the weathercocke of Time, constant in nothing
but Inconstancy: for I see well, that to assign happiness to him that lives
(considering the alteration that Time and Fortune presents with sundry
stratagems) is to allot the reward of victory before the b^ttaile be fought.
The greatest mise^ie of all, says Byas, is not to bear misery; and that man
is most happy (quoth Dyonisius) that from his youth has learned to be
unhappy. Demetrius surnamed the Besieger, judged none more unhappy then he
which never tasted of adversity: for that Fortune accounts of them as abiects
and vassails of dishonor, whom she presents not, as well with bitter pills, as
sweet potions. Alluding to that saying of Plutarch, that noth ng is Evil that
is Necessary, understanding by this word Necessary, whatsoever comes to a
wiseman by fatal Destiny; because using patience in necessity, he gives a
greater glory unto virtue. Although these secret meditations were persuasions
unto quiet, yet she no sooner cast her eye to the Queens lodging, but she was
overcharged with melancholy: to avoid which, taking her needle in her hand she
fell to work, and hearing the pretti^ birds record their sweet and pleasant
notes, she warbled out this Madrigall,

Lucillaes Song.
The stately State that wisemen count their good,
The chiefest bliss that i^lles asleep Desire
Is not dissent from kings and prince^y blood:
The royal Crown ambition does require:
For birth by fortune is abased down,
And peri^es are comprisd within a Crown.
The Scepter and the glittering po^pe of Mac^,
The head impalde with honor and renown,
The Kingly throne* the ^eate and regal place,
Are toys that fade when angry Fortune frown:
Coutent is far from such delights (...) those,
Whom w^e and danger do envy as foes.
The cottage seated in the hollow dale,
That Fortune never fears, because so low:
The quiet mind that Want does set to sal^,
Sleeps safe when Princes ^eates do overthrow:
Want smiles secure, when princely thoughts do feel,
That Fear and Danger treades upon their heel.
The bitter grief that frets the quiet mind,
The sting that pricks the froward man to wo^,
Is Envy, which in honor seld we find,
And yet to Honor sworn a secret foe:
Take heed, for Incest is a sugared ill,
That Fortune lays, presumptuous minds to spill.
Lucilla had no sooner ended her Madrigale when the air on a sudden was
changed with thunders, and stormy tempests, for that she was forced, through
the fear of the lightning, to withdraw herself into the Court, who entering
the Queens chamber, found her newly awakened from sleep, with a more revived
color then before, unto whom the Queen thus spoke. Since thy being with me,
I had a dream, that held me all the time of my sleep, the remembrance whereof
does trouble me very much, which as near as I can remember, I will tell thee.
Me I thought was going through a thick wood, where were a number of nets and
snares laid in every path where should I pass, yet me thought I passed
through them so easily, as if they had bin of no strength; til at last I came
toward a great water, where near unto the shore lay a great boat, and from
the boat lay a long line, made al of gold and pearl; within the compass
whereof, treading ere I was aware, me thought some thing gave a snatch,
wherewith the line whipped about my middle, and carried me into the boat; with
the soddaine fright whereof I awaked. Now what say thou to this dream?
Lucilla, no less wittily conceipted of her dream, then noting the carriage of
her humor, made her this answer. Madame, if a blind body may catch a Hare, I
may happen to come somewhat near the exposition of this your fancy. The wood
you went in, is the Court, the nets, the eyes and tongues of your
well-willers that have no power to take sure hold of your affection; now the
great water may be the sea, and the golden Line the young Prince, that may carry
your devotion from his father: for if I be not much deceived, he has you by
the heart, whatsoever it was that held you by the middle. Unhappy wench (quoth
Cleodora) thou come too near, that hittest the mark so right; but yet
may thou be deceived in one point, though not in fom other; I have passed the
nets, that true; and I am caught, it is not untrue, but that he either will, or
shall cancel my love to the King, that I fear will not fall out. But the Gods
know all, to whom only will I leave it; Foes may be friends, and kindness where
it lights, does more than all the world besides. His presence may please the
purest eye, and for his wit, I heard my Lord wonder at it; for his bounty, our
Court speaks of it, and for his virtue, who does not see it? But for his
love, happy is she that shall enjoy it, for princely wisdom, with honorable
bounty, shows a divine spirit in an excellent nature, and of such a temper I
hold him, and for such a one I love him, and will ever honor him, though I
have never the fruition of my desires. But leaving this, I pray thee tell me,
what said my son when he delivered these letters unto thee? Madame, to say
truth, nothing touching his love* but importuned with such earnestness, for
the presenting of them unto your hands, as might have made many proud to do
so charitable a deed, craving it with words so pitiful, and looks so
ruthful. For mine own part, my heart imagining by your affection, that the
destinies which caused your grief, had fettered him, and well knowing where
love is united, there ones weal is the others good: though I were hardly won
to the same, yet at length I undertook the hazard of your good will, promising
to return him an answer thereof, wherein, without the grant of your consent I
shall break promise. Oh Lucilla, doubtest thou of my consent in answering his
kind Letters, for whose sake I have endured so many nights of unrest, and
careful days? No Heavens, never favor me with good, if I do not parallel
his affection to the utmost of my power. Therefore, as thou have played the
advocate, so make I thee my principal and chief Secretary; peruse these lines,
and in equity consider if that his wound deserve not to be tented with pity;
then let me see thy skill in inditing, to the which thou shall have my help.
Prorogue no longer the time, hunger is a sharp sauce to those that have good
stomachs, and I measuring his desires by mine own, imagine that meat can not
be more pleasing to the hungry, then the unexpected tidings of consent, from
his new acknowledged Love. Soft fire Madam (said Lucilla) makes the sweetst
malt, say our huswiues: You are far wide; what! no sooner at the style, but
over; h^ste maks waste, look before you leap, lest a block vnthoght of
chance to break your shinnes. What if these letters impart his love, how are
you thereof assured? men are subtle, and can cast many colors to deceive
women; al is not gold that glisters, under the greenest grass lurks the
poisoned adder, the crocodile sheades most tears, when he seeks most to
deceive: Try ere you trust Madam* repentan^e comes too late; therefore,
howsoever you affect him, conceal it, lightly won, is as lightly lost. The
Laborer that gameth his money by hard toil, is more chary in parting therewith,
than the purloyning thief, or the riotous youth, which by subtle practices
draws all he can from his kind parents, to maintain his dissolute expenses,
Let him bite on the bridle a while, yet gently line his curb that he g^ll not:
a little thing pleases a child, and a good countenance is wo^rth gold to
him that regards it as he professes: weigh your own estate, who is Queen
of Cyprus and his mother, with the baseness of the fact: consider what a
corrasiue this love of yours will be to the king, and if once discovered, with
what detestation amongst all men you shall live. I speak this for the
disparagement (if it be possible) of his love, and to draw your liking from
him; if otherwise, in such sort to temper your affection, that to both your
contents you may long enjoy it; and besides, so moderate your looks, that
neither the lightness, nor the liberal bestowing thereof may minister to the
jealous heads any occasion of mistrust. For princes are great marks, upon whom
many eyes are intended: If therefore you are once perceived, what peril either
part may procure, your wisdom can best conceive. Thus in duty have I spoken,
and delivered a gross advise, which I refer to your graces better
consideration. Well have thou said (quoth the Queen:) but what avails
counc^ll to a desperate mind? No more than he that seeking to quench the
flame, powers thereinto, oil: Thy good regard has so ballaunced each
inconvenience incident to both our estates, that by no means I am able to
requite the specialitie of thy good will. Now if thou can as well devise how
we may enjoy our delight, without which we perplexed can not long endure, what
is it that Cleodora shall ever be mistres^e of, which Lucilla shall not have at
her command? Then, as thou tenderest my good, bethink thee of some remedy; for
such is my love unto him, as that nothing may extinguish it. Shall I then by
writing answer his leters, or no? In this I will be ruled by thee, how gladly
soever I wish his comfort, in whom of all earthly creatures, consists my
happiness. Experience is the best wisdom (said Lucilla:) who would ever
have believed Loves power to be of such effect, how imperious soever he seemed,
had the violence of this attempt in silence been obfuscated! but I am thereby
compelled to recant my heresy, and say, Love is a god, or how is it possib^e
he should command Princes? Whereas you have referred the answer of Eliostoes
letters to me, I was never so void of reason, or so desirous to be your
Counselor, as to take so great a matter upon me, yet shall I (so please it
you to hear me) deliver my simple opinion, as I would do my self in the like
action. The old wives say, That they which feed with the devil, must have a
long spoone: and they that go about to master Love, had need of many good
and sufficient precepts: Dissuade your grace (since I am not able) I will not,
for I see it is in vain; neither would I wish you to give him his answer by
writing; for a paper is soon lost, and lost, unto whose finding it shall come,
it is altogether uncertain; as soon the envious ennemie, as the well-willer
may have the perusal thereof; in which, some word, simply meant of you or me,
may be, by them, at their pleasure construed: whereby* both a slander (which
is not easily suppressed) may be raised, and your name brought into question:
Writing is a thing whereof the subtle Lawyer takes no small advantage. To
avoid all which casualties, this may you do, pretend some matter of
conference with him, and appoint the time, when he at your lodging shall attend
you; whither coming secretly, and at such a season, as the king your husband
shall be employed in serious affairs, you may use your speech at your pleasure:
This would Lucilla do, your grace may use your discretion. I like thy devise
well (quoth Cleodora) therefore fail not to meet him for thy promise sake.
Now in faith Madam (said Lucilla) you have made a good choice for a solicitor;
but take me as I am, this is the first suite, for which I ever was retained,
and I doubt not (if I now speed well) of many cliants. As they were thus
pleasant between themselves, they heard, which caused the Queen to send forth
her page for the inquiry of the matter; who returned her answer, that the King
with his train, were setting forward to hunt a wild Boar which his Forresters
had roused: this news gave them cause of joy, hoping that fortune had favored
them with a happy time, which doubting the like opportunity, they were loath
to omit. Cleodora especially, who could not be quieted in mind, until she
had heard of the Princes answer; wherefore a Page was presently commanded to
search for him, willing him with such convenient speed as he could, to meet
Lucilla in the garden: the Page used such diligence, that speedily he was
brought unto his presence, whom he found solitary (as a holy father) at his
Orizons; whom the Page awaked with his joyful message, which was, (albeit
doubtful whether of weal or woe) most welcome unto him. The sudden hearing
of which, caused him to pause a while, when having determined, courteously
returned answer to the gentlewoman, that he would incontinently attend her. The
boy he so bounteously rewarded, as that he had cause to boast himself of his
well employed service. Lucilla having received his answer, advertised the Qu.
thereof; who commanded her to haste, least by her absence she should give him
cause of disconte^t: but for all her speed, Eliosto was long there before,
attending her coming, who was no sooner of him perceived to enter the place,
but his heart presaging some good hap, was thence more delighted, then at all the motions that ever could be imagined. After his courteous salutations done,
he encontred her thus. Sweet Lucilla, I know not what to imagine of thy
sudden message, yet willing to be resolved, as one that by thy answer
expects his doom either of life or death, I attend thy pleasure: say
therefore, what says the Queen to my letters? Lucilla purposing to be
pleasant, yet not to cloy his stomach with such pleasant confections, that
there with he should surfeit, but framing her countenance to her speech, she
told him, that of all the gentlemen in the Cyprian Court, her good opinion was
such of him, that upon his word, she thought she might have hazarded her
greatest credit, which expectation of mine being deceived. Thou art not worthy
(quoth she) to be accounted among such honorable men at arms, which deem
their chiefest reputation to consist in the perseverance of their word to
gentlewomen. At the delivery of which, he that had viewed the Princes
countenance, might have supposed him to have bin past Physics recovery: and
withal, standing so mute, Lucilla was verily persuaded, that he was ready to
deliver his life's interest, which made her in altering her words, with a
smoother method to file them; suspecting that her Comedy begun in mirth,
might prove (to the great grief of the whole country, who generally honored
him) a dismal Tragedy. Wherefore taking him by the hand, she said; Sir, I am
sorry I have charged you so far, but it is womanlike to be slain with words,
and for one of your calling no fit Passion, in such sort to be vanquished. That
you may comfort your self, I first pardon the offense against me committed,
and enioine you, as you tender your credit with the Queen, to repair at such
convenient time to her lodging, as you can best: which if you perform, the
messenger will be excused. Oh Lucilla, how have thy speeches tormented me,
filling my entrails with such a confusion of comfortless thoughts, as have
overcome my senses! Yet if thou have any spark of gentilitie abiding within
thee, inform me how the Queen did countenance my bashful paper: vouchsafed
she the reading of them? What else (quoth she) for to discomfort you any longer
it were pity, being already at so low a datum, which not a little troubles
me. Comfort I can give none to thy desires, but this, thy suite is love, as
your letters import, in which (albeit unlawful) despair not: for thy mother is
a woman, though a Qu and how compassionate our sex is, I will not boast, but
wish thee not to diffide; for (since it is inevitable) I will be a faithful
solicitor. Mis-take me^ not Eliosto, I speak as a friend, and so leave thee,
until thy coming to my Lady, which detract not, for time lost* is such a
precious thing, as that it can again never be recalled Before whom, when thou
shall come, plead thine own cause, and discover thine own grief; but with
this caution, always think that whatsoever you go about, your adversaries
eyes to be fixed, ready to take any exceptions which may blemish the luster of
your esti^ation.

Eliosto, which by these her last words had some greater hope of his content,
was so surprised with joy, that he could not bid her farewell: yet after his
memento past, farewell (quoth he) the faithfullest friend that ever I found in
my distress. Oh Lucilla, happy may thou be in thy loves, and highly
regarded amongst men, by whom my cares are thus lightened: trusty Lucilla, the
worker of my hearts happy content, by whom, past all hope, I am by thy
fidelity and truth in delivering my message, freed from such a heavy burden,
which was likely to have been my utter ruin. Thus applauding Lucilla, he had
almost forgotten his word.

But leaving further to descant upon this plain song, return we to the
Queen, who was advertised by her woman of that which had passed between the
Prince and her, not omitting his heavy looks, and pitiful speeches. And
then again, as glad to please the Queen, whom she was assured loved him,
spared not at large to set out his honors gained, his comeliness of person,
(...) and whatsoever else the world admired in him, she admirably advanced, to
the greatest content of Cleodora, who thought every minute a year until she
saw him, whom with hearty desire ardently she expected: and with that looking
out at the casement, she might epsy her beloved son: what joy it caused,
let them judge which have made better experience in lovers delights.

The Queen having the sight of her so long desired object, sent Lucilla to
entertain him, and to conduct him unto her presence. Cleodora staying to frame
her countenance for his welcome, bethought her self of sundry means;
e^tsoones, doubting by her too pleasant and kind usage, to be held too forward
in love, than what discontent her lowering aspects might move unto him, whom
she most desired to please. In this quandary, sitting upon a pallet, and
leaning her head on her pillowe, Lucilla had brought the Prince in, who doing
his duty very feebly (for the remembrance of his attempt had astonished him) was
by the queen again saluted, attending like the guilty condemned, his sentence
from her mouth, which was to give him either life or death. Eliosto thus at a
non plus, overcome with the beholding of her excellent perfection, was by her,
the mirror of affability and courtesy, removed out of his dumpes in this
manner. Eliosto, whether I should chastise thy presumption in writing to me so
bold^ly, or no, I am not yet resolved; but before I acquainted my Lord
therewith, I thought good to hear thee speak (for that I would not so
suddenly disgrace thee, whom so often I have favored) as well to hear thy
intent in committing so great a folly, as what thou can say in excuse thereof.
Princes are not to be ieasted with, nor in such manner by their kindred to be
assailed; therefore thou have greatly erred in that which is committed, and
incurred the danger of our chiefest laws, by which, were thy fact known, thou
art already condemned. The prince standing at the bar, where Beauty sat
chief judge, was surprised with many griefs, so that hardly he could utter a
word: yet revived by the hope of those comfortable and sweet sayings
pronounced by Lucilla, he shaped her this reply. Gracious Lady, in that I have
presumed fa^e, I ^an not but acknowledge; yet that I have incurred such
punishment as your Highnes^e would i^flict upon me, I deny, unless death be
the guerdon assigned the saithfull; for duetifull service, and entire affection
urged me to seekethy favor in love, without the which I cannot live, so deeply
are thy virtuous perfections imprinted in my heart, which if Ienioy not, I
desire no longer to breathe. Therefore madam, if thou disdain his love, that
living dies continually for thee: do but say the word, and this blade, so
often embrued in the blood of (...) enemies, shall sacrifice his masters own
true heart before thy face, that thy cruel self may witnes^e how faithfully
Eliosto has loved thee* The Queen grieved to hear these speeches, moved with
great compunction, could hardly forbear shedding of tears; yet modesty, the
ornament of womankinde, caused her to feign a counterfeit show of displeasure
to him, whose tears wroong drops of blood from her tender heart: yet that snee
might not too suddenly confess her desires, nor give him cause of utter
despair, made this answer.

Eliosto, that thou may see, and seeing, report in all places, where ever
thou shall become, of women's pity, I grant thee pardon for thy fault, and
with it, that life which was wholly at my disposing. For loving me as thy
prince, I heartily thank thee; but in seeking to obtain my love as thy
Concubine, in that I defy thee: let each estate frame it self in affection,
as it becomes equality; so shall men sooner obtain their desires, and their
loves in more tranquillity be maintained. Thou know that such absurd
actions are in the extremest degree of sin: Will thou therefore wish me, in
violating the faith which I have plighted unto thy father, purchafe unto my
self such a name, the remembrance whereof, is not less grievous unto me than
death? No, no, desist not any further to prosecute thy su^te, let reason
vanquish thy brain-sicke humor, which so aff^icts th^e; in doing which, thou
shall make demonstration of that true nobility, wherewith thou art endued: for
no greater conquest can be imagined, than that which upon a man's vnt^med
affections is achieved. Do this, and thou (...) find Cleodora thy loving and
faithful friend; who (...) be as careful with favors to advance thee, as I
have found chee prompt and ready by thy service to pleasure me. A^as, good
Madame, answered the Prince, it is a thing far more easy to give counsel,
than once given, to follow it. The full gorged Churl little regards the
staruing creature at his gate; but could you conceive the leas^ part of many
thousand griefs that afflict me, you would at the length pity me, though
further favor from you I received none: If thy heart be not harder than the
Adamant, yield thy grace (sweet Lady) to augment my life, or utterly for ever
deny me your good will. I expect but your answer, for my resolution is no other
than I have protested: dastards fear to die, but the noble mind prefers
death which ends all sorrows, before a life to be continued with discontent.
The Queen, as full of anguish, as he of sorrow, being at her wits end,
turned her speeches to an other matter; and requested him, to contriue as
cunningly as he could, his fancy in a fiction, willing therefore to show his
Mistress (for such I must now term her) that he was not ignorant in music,
taking a Lute in his hand, began to warble out this Roundelay.

Love was armed with fatal bow,
Shafts which Mother did bestow,
Mother gave, but Father framed,
Father, Mother, both were blamed.
Want^n Goddess did beguile,
Husband with afained smile:
For a kiss she did obtain,
(Labor never spent in vain,)
Tha^ her son by Vulcans trade,
Might the chiefest God be made.
Thus she won him to her will,
(Wily work of Woman's skill:)
But the Boy more proud then wise,
Waves his wings, and forth he flies.
Soon as he on earth had lighted,
Thus the fondl^ng was despighted.
As he vaunted (...) old,
Thinking all that glistered gold,
Tearming in a (...) thought,
Which his self conceit had ^rought,
Heau'^ his footstoo^e, gods his mark,
Men his objects, Earth his park,
Gods and men his hunting game:
Beauty natures darling came,
Beauty clad in native hue,
Whom the Graces did indue
With rich plenty of their gifts:
"Beauty cause of witty shifts,
Beauty with whose worth delighted,
Poets have sweet Hymns (...):
Fair as is the ruddie morn,
Leaving restfull Bower forlor^e.
M^rne did with Vermi^ion read,
Rising from ^ld Tithons bed.
Thus the fairest of all fair,
Denide to grace the liquid air:
Passing by where Love did stand,
Holding powerful bow in hand:
Not saluting as she went,
Him that ragde in discontent.
"Boyli^g wrath must issue find,
"Wrath that boyld in troubled mind:
For the ease of whose unrest,
Thus his fury was expressed.
"Love, said he, was Beauties better,
"She said Love was natures debtor.
Love exclaimde on Beauties pride,
Which all duties force denide.
She said Love received no wrong,
Where no duty did belong.
None might crave peculiar ri^ht,
Since they were of equal might.
"He said Beauty never prevailed,
"But where Love the heart assailed.
Beauty for it self admired,
His shafts causde to be desired.
For where Love bredno remorse,
There had Beauty little f^rce.
Psyche was more fair then any.
Loved of few, though liked of many.
Yet so liked, that none affected:
Sisters sped, but she rejected.
Yet quoth Beauty, Psyche gaind,
Cupids heart to her enchainde.
Where was then his wonted might,
Uanquish'd by a woman's sight?
Thus fell Love into a trip,
Thus she gald him with a quip.
He said, it was his own pr^curement,
She said, it wa^ her allurement.
Love said, Beauty pleased the eye,
But he wrought hearts sympathy.
He said, heart when eye had viewd,
Was by Beauties force subdued.
He said, Beauty soon decaid:
She s^id, Love no longer staid,
Then while beauty was in prime,
Thus did both give place to Time.
Cupid grieved with these replies,
Framed by her in taunting wise:
Swear, by dreadful Stygian lake,
(Greatest v^w that Gods can make)
That he would no more descend,
Till he did this quarrel end:
Vowing by his godheads might,
Beauties darlings to despite.
Thus he sa^es, and up he fl^es
Swiftly through the Empire skies.
If me^ might this strife decide,
As by men it should be tried,
Then would all agree in one,
"Beauty can prevail alone:
"Beauty able to ^thrall,
"Eyes, and heart, and thoughts, and al:
Yet three powers in one a^enting,
Stroke mine heart, heart soon rele^ting,
Eye^ saw beauty and admirde it.
Love saw heart, through eyes he fired it:
But fair looks did first constrain
Cupids shafts to shape my pain.
Fairer virtue Beauties ^ewell,
Bade me not pronounce Love cruel.
Love that forced me to affect,
Beauties worth by Virtue deck^:
Then, O three of all the chief,
Ease at last my ^oathed grief.
The Queen hearing all those extremes to grow from affection, was in such
sort by them captiuated, that vailing top-gallant, she returned to Eliosto this
final and comfortable resolution: The flax (gentle Eliosto) soon flameth,
and yeeldes but a flash; the kind mushrome soon ripens, and as soon rottes;
the best Emphemerum in the river Hippanis, is made in a moment, and marrd in a
minute: but contrariwise, it must be immoderate heat that engenders the
Salamander; which engendered, never dies until the fire be extinguished. Long
time it is before the Laurel flourishes, which flourishing, never fades with
summers blaze, or falls with winters blast. The Elephant is borne ten
years in the dammes belly, but once brought forth, lives three hundred.
Therefore think me not unworthy to be worn, Eliosto, because so long to be
wooed: For light beli^fe has commonly light love. The fish Alphya is engendered
with a small shower of rain, and therefore is counted no meat for a velvet
mouth* But good chaffer is not so soon cheapned; that which is dear of price,
is dear and precious: yea, that Castle which bears most brunt, is deemed most
worthy when it is scaled. Neither do I yet condescend to thy petition, unless
I were pushed thereto by thy p^mise, that thou will be as faithfull' as thy
protestations are fair; Not like the Lightning which flasheth, and presently
^adeth: Nor resembling the stone M^hrax, which is of a rose color, but
scorched with (...) beams, becomes chargeable: but rather immitating the jem
Thra^ias, most burning when thou (...) overwhelmed with roaring and raging
disasters* On which conditions thy promises placing, and reposing the
irremo^eable foundation of my faithsull refolution, I make thy person the
prison of my heart, and not only v^uchsafe thee of some gra^ts of grant, but
that thou may assure thy self the feeds of thy suit to have been sown in
a fertile soil: for every grain of Love buried in my breast, I will yield
thee an ear of fifty corns. With that the impatient Lovers (as if Mars had
combatted with D^me Cytherea, for ^uffring her Boy to make him the mark of his
game) rose in arms, where Love conquered Pleasure, Desire took incestuous
Delight captive, and little Cupid, like a valiant carpet knight, flew into Uenus
his mothers bosom. Lucilla suspecting no less, was thunderstricken with that
sod^ine and sorrowful imagination, that bursting out of an ecstasy wherein she
had long stood, like one beholding (...) head, lamenting as if she would
have died, and in dying, made an atonement with Death: she sat weeping and
wailing for that outrageous accident, wringing her lili^ white hands, and
fixing her blubbered eyes on the comfortless ground, clad in sable habit,
witnessing her hearts sadness, and sti^l crying on the names of Eliosto and
Cleodora, still casting out woeful inuectiues against the Destinies, calling her
self a most accursed wretch, born under such unfortunate planets: with that
she might hear certain trumpets sound, whereby she gathered (as it was
indeed) that the King was returning from hunting, giving therefore these
Lou^rs dren^ht in the full channel of Pleasure this advertisement, for that
time they parted. Now Eliosto after this was more impatient in his passions.
For love so fiercely assailed him, that neither Company nor Music could
mittigate his ma^yrdome, b^t did rather far increase his malady. Shame would
not let him crave counsel in this case, nor fear of his fathers displeasure
reveal it to any friend, but was feign to make a Secretary of himself, and to
participate his thoughts with his own troubled mind.

Living thus a day or two distracted, he called to mind, the counsel of
Cleodora, which was, that he should insinuate himself into the favor of her
maid Lucilla, who both could and would pleasure them in their loves. Her
therefore he determined to make one of his c^mplices, not for that he
certainly thence expected help, neither meant desperately to detect his
int^mate secrets without some hope; but as the Merchant, when with the cruel
confederacy of the rock and surges rage, the ship, like to a weak stickler,
having all his plancke-ribs rent and riuen asunder, commits his wearied body
to the conuoy of a floating boorde: as the soldier, who being hemmed in on
every side with his enemies ranks, neither stands amazed with fear, yielding
his naked breasts to the merciless jaueline, nor desperately rusheth against
the point of the pike, which is not fortitude, but folly; but to perform
Natures injunctions, gathers him self wisely within his weapon, and strives
with courage to acquit him self valiantly. Or as the wise physician, which
forsakes not his patient, though he can not find any sovereign medicine for
his malady, but ministers such as mere conjectures teach him, lest he
discoraged, should deliver to death, his patient discomforted: Even so Eliosto,
thinking to prove Lucilla, though not sure to prevail, sent for her, who
speedily coming, he courteously entertained, and with these persuasions
endeavored to make her a favorite to his purposes. To whom, as they sat
together in his lodging; Friend Lucilla (quoth the Prince) for so your
courtesy in speedy coming at my request wills me to call you; I am to
imparte a matter unto you, of no small importance, in which I must first
desire your diligence, faith, and secrecy: Long since I had laid these
affairs in your faithful bosom, but that I scarce knew your nature, which
since the dearest of mine acq^aintance, being the most familiar of your
friends, the most friendly of my familiars, have with no small commendations
delivered unto me; saying also, that you deserved to be inscribed in the
catalogue of my acquaintance: I ever soght to join hands with you in
friendship, which now willingly breaks forth into a flame, and displaieth it
self unto your sight; and if it shall please you to accept the same, you shall
henceforth find me as forward to show my self grateful, as at this time, I am
desirous you should gratify me in this action. To these Lucilla bowed her
self, and Eliosto proceeded. Since the matter is to be unfolded between
friends* I need not use any glozing phrase, flowers of Rhetoric, or colors
of eloquence; thou know, gentle Lucilla, how di^ficult it is to love, and
how much difficult not to love: Is the iron faulty, because it cleaves to the
forcible Adamant? the needle because it is drawn by the virtue of the
Loadstone? gold, in that it cannot withstand the hidden strength of the
Chrysocol? or the rush, because it moves to the jeate or Amber? or is flesh
and blood to be blamed, because subject to Beauty? No, no, gentle Lucilla: It
is the attractiue force of flowering beauty, which bewitcheth the wisest, encl
anteth the seuerest, curses Sobriety from her Court, and dislodgeth Virtue
from her castle. The conquered must obey by constraint: for me to strive against
the stream, is fury; to bear a sail against the wind, frenzy. Wherefore
exiling all mistrust, from the bottom of mine heart, I will briefly display
unto thee the whole shrine of my secrets; then will I unfold both our ensuing
profits, and also the means of eschewing our peril. I love my mother
Cleodora, neither is the fault (if any fault be) to be fathered by me, but by
Fortune, who holds the helm or stearne of al humane life. I was not erst
acquainted with mothers manners, nor inuitiated in the elements of her country
courtesies. I thought that women's eyes had ever been true ambassadors of their
hearts, I took their looks for their suitors, and their glaunces to be tokens
of their special good-wil: alas, herein I failed in my physiognomie; for
noting Cleodora often sweetly to smile on me, and gathering thereby (as I
thought) infallible signs of her favor toward my self: and on the other
side, supposing that I should show my self to be but of a very cold
constitution, in that I could not love, or prove my self an haggard, or
faint-hearted fool, to expect any further at a woman's hands, whose modesty
restrains her from opening her mind any otherwise, than by her eyes only:
Wherefore, I mo^e forward* than fortunate, first set my fort into the field,
thinking my self a worthier personage, because loved of such a Lady; and then
first thinking my self unworthy, at least unworthy of such a creature: so, not
suspecting otherwise, than that all was sure on my side, with the better
courage I marched thither; where I found contrary to expectati^n* the gates of
Lou^ fast locked, and my passage to Affection gaine-said: but shame it was to
retire, nay it was impossible to return; for by dealing with the flame, I had
so seared and singed my wings, that I was safe enough for flying further.
Therefore now pitying my self, who was erst so pitiful for her sake, I
fought by all means I could, by often rubbing, to force out some fire, in the
hard flintie walls of her heart, whereby in time I found her so tractable;
yea, and her entire love, shining forth in such abundance, that I could not
without much diligence and industry, devise how to cover the light thereof;
our love was still let, but so far from being lessened, that now, if thou
vouchsafest not thine helping hand, it will deface with the fowlest blot, our
whole family, to the ruin both of thy Mistress, and my self. Although for
the honorable love which my soul bears to our famous house, I could
persuade my self to abandon the Court, my Country, to leave my father; yea,
which thing is greatest, and most grievous, to forgo my dearest mother, hoping
that Time might wear out the Impressa of her image from mine heart, if thus
much I were not acquainted with her determinate resolution, that she will
either fly with me, or follow me: yet if she be intercepted, she will tear
the prison of her dainty body, with her naked hands, so that her soul freed
from earthly fetters, will still accompany me. Then what loud laughter would
this affoard to our envious foes? what lamentation would it bring to our
friends? who the more the envious should triumph umphat her grief, the more
would she grieve at her triumph. Therefore (sweet Lucilla) we commit to thee,
the reins of our coach, hoping thou will with as great speed as we both
exspect, guide us to the height of our desires: what prejudice can arise, for
that I once or twice enter commons with my father, especially when his eyes see
naught whereat they may grieve, nor any perceive whereat they may grudge: which
done, we shall begin to love with reason, who now are led with rage, and
after our heat is mitigated, call our selves to account, and counsel how we
may break off our commenced course. Thou know how our wishes may be
comp^ssed, how our wills may be accomplished; thou art acquainted with the
rooms and lodgings of the Court, thou can procure me access without
suspicion, and regresse without danger: this cannot be done without thy
help, and cannot be left undone without our mishap. Now, what profit may
hereby proceed, what discommodity you shall prevent, I appeal to none other
Judge than to thine own dis^retion; for hereby thou shall preserve our houses
fame, and deserve me thy eternal friend. Be not merciless, good Lucilla,
because I entreat thee, nor void of pity, because I pray thee: I have
committed to thee my body, which is my self; and Cleodora who is my soul, use
them faithfully, who doubted not to conceive of thee friendly: let it suffice
that thou could as well hurt as help, kill as cure, as well sincke as save
us.

Hereupon Lucilla somewhile deliberating, and in deliberation making fair
weather in her face, which betokened the like to betide E^sosto in his love.
And although Eliosto (quoth she) as you pretend the yro^ naturally cleaves to
the forcible Adamant, and nature can not be exanthorated, yet the adamant
leeseth his power when the iron is rubbd over with the Sideritie: though the
needle be drawn unto the loadstone, yet the operation of the loadstone is
annihilated by opposition of the more virtuous Theomedes: the Chrysocoll being
steeped in the juice of garlike, leeseth his effect: the jeat cannot prevail
against the rush, unless your self voluntarily lend it artificial heat: to be
short, Humane flesh is not so feeble, as you paint it forth, unless Virtue the
prince and mistress be made slavish, subject to base affections: how can Beauty
bear sway, if you rule your bark with this rudder? If you use this excellent
gift as a preservative kept in your pocket, or a Pomander in your bosom,
without applying the one, or chafing the other: then is not virtue in the
fault, but the blame to be laid on your own folly: for wherefore do you we are
a Laurel branch, and yet are scorched with lightening? to what end do you
bear the hook, and yet suffer the mind to be ouergrowne with disordinate
weeds? what avails it to carry the Androdamant shield of Pallas, if not
able to shun the darts of Venus? But it is too late to cry Stand, to him that
lies in the dirt: to wish his present return, who has newly committed his
sails to the mercy of the wind: to teach him to know an Eele, who is already
bitten with a snake: for in such cases, we naught require how it happened, but
how the hap may be healed. Know therefore, worthy Eliost^, how far this
request is from news to Lucilla, which often Cleodora recited unto me, loading
mine ears with lamentations, redoubling blows on her naked breasts;
entreating me, either to take away her life, or else to make way for her love:
I resisted, not moved with her petitions, which I confuted with persuasions,
and would have confounded them with threats, had I not seen her desperate
resolution to be such, that she would rather, or sooner butcher her own
body, then renounce her dear love, Eliosto: how often being drowned in deep
remembrance of your self, she has called upon the name of Eliosto, and
espying me to per^eiue it, she presently ouercast her l^llie che^kes with a
crimson veil! But alas, how has Discontent altered her countenance? how has
Grief impaired her admired beauty? how have salt and brinie tears left their
stained paths where they erst trickled down, on that euer-flowring spring of
her sweet face? Ah Cleodora! Cleodora (and therewith shaking her head, fresh
tears brake forth their way) who ever saw a greater change? Cleodora I say,
in whose person Virtue marched arm in arm with Beauty, has blemished her
outward blaze, with an inward blotte. Cleodora, who was chaste, because she was
wise, and wise, in that she was chaste, has bleared the eye of her mind with
foul affection: finaly, Cleodora surpassing her sex as the Sunn^ does all
other planets, being Beauty it self, is Narcissus-like entangled with the
image of Beauty: for you also noble Eliosto are passing fair, excelling men
as far as the Moon does any Star, to our sight, and therefore I the less
marvel that such an eclipse should appear in our Sun, when such a Moon was
opposite to the same: But now since a dangerous sore requires an undaunted
physician, I here girde my self to the undertaking of this service, and
purpose to give you notice of convenient opportunity. This being said,
Lucilla took her leave, promising that Eliosto should hear from her ere long:
Be mindful then (good Lucilla) q^oth Eliosto, for I long to hear from thee.
I will deserve commendations (quoth she) and then she departed.

Not long after, through the vain conceit of factious spirits, desiring (as
many now-adayes) innovation, there grew in the Northern parts of Cyprus, a
sedition, which by reason of prejudicial proceedings seemed to be peremptory
in some fatal resolution. Amasias sovereign and king of that famous
Continent, pitying the sinister accidents of his people, being a man as just
in his censures, as royal in his possessions, as careful for the weal of his
country, as the continuance of his diadem, thought, That unpeopled cities were
corosiues to princes consciences, that the strength of his subjects, was the
sinews of his dominions, and that every crown must contain a care, not only
to win honor by foraine conquests, but in mainta^ning dignity with civil and
domestical insights. Wherefore grounding his arguments upon these premises,
coveting to be counted Pater patriae, determined with as great speed as might
be, to suppress, by his royal presence in those parts (if it were possible)
the principal means of that disordinate ^ebellion. Providing therefore all
things needful for such an expedition, forth he sets, no less honorably
accompanied, then strongly defended; unto whose events, for a time, we will
leave him. The Queen seeing Fortune to present her with Ball and Racket,
thought it not good, through remiss negligence, to tempt her Deity. Whereupon
she dispatched her maid to advertise the Prince, not of those accidents (for
with them he was thoroughly acquainted) but of the time when he should be
present before Cleodoraes window, which was at ^en of the clock in the night.
E^osto upon these tidings, being endued with vanity, and imbrued with vice,
did so nusle himself up in this his admiration, as that neither the dread of
Gods wrath, nor the fear of his fathers displeasure, could drive him to desist
from his detestable kind of living. Well, at length the heavy evening, heavy
for the departure of beautiful (...), began to put on her sable attire, and
mourning-like, to fix her saddest face on the sorrowful earth; her face I
say, yet black and sorrowful, though the golden stars, labour^d with their
twinkling light, to make her look somewhat more lively: when Eliosto
engulphed in an Ocean of Conceits, came staggering to the lodging, or rather
temple o^ his goddess, where he might epsy the beams of a c^ndle breaking
through a chinke of a moltred wall. The Prince peeping, perce^ued Cl^odora
sitting very solitari^, with her folding arms, embracing ea^h other, whom
after he had named, and delivered his watchword: Who, mine Eliosto (quoth
she?) I, answered he, I am here, truly in^ituled, Thine (...): since I am
altogether thine: open; open unto me, my sweet darling, for I long to enjoy thy
beloved company.

Cleo^ora with silent pace approached to the gates her self, endeavoring to
undo the bars, which indeed were too heavy to be removed by a weak woman's
arm; notwithstanding she opened them only for the space of half a foot,
which Eliost^ seeing, Desire making him think nothing impossible; first with
his right slender side, and consequently with his whole body, entered the
house: where embracing her, as he thought to have imprinted his heart in her
sweet lips, she fell into a swound: so did the ^xtremitie of either sudden
joy, or inopina^e fear exanimate her; the blood naturally retiring from her
palest face, to comfort the passionate heart, the trembling whites of her eyes,
skarce appearing through their almost closed shrines, so that she seemed
rather a senseless image, than a lively corpse: but only the pulses, as
messengers, and vital heat remaining, and yet retaining his course, gave
evidence, that the soul had as yet, not le^t the earthly confines of her
tabernacle. Eliosto hereat would have lost his wits, in the Laborynth of
perplexities, had not the sting of grief recalled and reclaimed his ^leeting
and fugitive spirits. Alas, if I should fly (quoth he) I were guilty of her
death, for leaving her destitute in such danger; if I remain, some one of her
guard may take me, and from me, my life. O unfortunate love, which minglest my
sugar with salt, my sirrope with aloes, my gladness with grief; thou give me
a nosegay of nettles, hid amongst a few roses, thou show me a fair picture
drawn with infectious paint, thou offerest to kiss me, and in kissing, to
stabbe me. Into how many dangers have thou drawn me? Into how many deaths
have tho^ driven me? with how many blows have thou annoyed my ^orrowfull
head? what plague now remained for thee to exercise upon my vnfort^nate self
but this? the worst and wo^ullest, to murder a Lady in mine arms? why had
thou not rather tried thy cruelty, and tired thy self with tyranny first on
Eliosto? why had thou not first butchered my body, and stanched thy thirst
with my blood? happ^er had I ^ied, laying mine head in he^ lap, than living to
have held her dy^ng in my bo^ome This sa^d, he being overcome with pity, and
kindness, cast away all care of his own (...), and often bowing up her
speechless body, often kissing her, and more often watering the garden
(sometimes a fair garden fairly decked with freshest flowers) of her face
with deaw from his distillant eyes: Ah Cleodora, quoth he, where art thou? why,
hear thou not? Or hearing, why answerest thou not? Open thine eyes, and see
thy Eliosto, and seeing, smile on him, and smiling as thou art wont, kiss
him; it is thy Eliosto who is present with thee, speaks to thee, and kisseth
thee; alas, and art thou dead, my heart? soon shall my sword make passage
for my soul, that it might meet thee again in the fair Elizian fields. Ah
my life, my delight, blessed hope, my dearest joy, shall I so leese thee? Yet
unfold those beautiful carbuncles of thine eyes, yet heave up thine head, or at
least, bid me farewell: I see thou art not yet departed, thou yet retainest
vital heat, thou yet breathest, thy heart yet beats. O Cleodora, leave not
thy Love in so lamentable distress; are these the joys unto which thou bidst
me? these the delights to which thou bring me? these the pleasures to which
thou inuitest me? is this the night which thou affoordest me? Ah blackest
night, fit witness of my woes, because best resembling my sorrows: Therewith
fixing his eyes on Cleodoraes face, he rained forth tears in such abundance,
that they washing her temples somewhat pierced and quickened the surprised
senses; whereby weakly starting up, and garishly staring about, especially on
the face of Eliosto; Ah, where have I bin (said she) why did thou not rather
suffer me quietly to depart? blessed had I died in thy embracings, and happy
to have breathed forth my soul into thy mouth, but now must I live to be left
of thee, and now must I die for being left of thee. But within a while, she
being appeased, they entered their bed chamber, and having laid aside their
apparel (as some men use to do their friends) until they had need to use
them again, they reposed their dainty bodies in the prepared bed. In which bed
it might seem that Cupid had taken up his lodging, and yet not to rest: he
came naked, and without all armor, and yet not without his dart: He was her
Mars, Paris, Ganymedes, she his Venus, Helena, Polixena, Aemilia. Now he
praised her fair eyes, commended her soft cheeks, her full swelling pappes;
and yet not satisfied with delight, he often lifted up the sheet, to make the
sense of his sight partaker of those ioies, which his feeling had before
possessed. And what disaster (said he) so desperate, that could deter me from
ventring for such a conquest? Now is my fortune in the pride of her estate, now
am I placed in the height of felicity, now am I seated upon the throne of
happiness. But alas, why flies th'enuious hour away so fast? why fleets the
winged night so hastily? why does Apollo gather his starued steedes so soon to
their daily labor? Give me a night, such as thou did to Hercules, and
Alcmena; certes if aged Tithon were as much delighted with the company of
Aurora, as I with Cleodora, he would longer detain her in her watery couch.
Neither was the queen all this while silent, who repayed him his own, both in
word and action. By this time the blackest night had his jeaty beard changed
into an hoary gray, whereby Eliosto perceived that he was waxen old and
departing, ready to resign his scepter to a better successor; Wherefore,
though detained with the love he bore to his mother, yet forced with fear of
both their ensuing infamies, he took his fainting farewell. Thus by these two
unfortunate lovers, (as in the progress of this History shall be showed) we
may see, How through our own will, and too much liberty, that small
inclination which we have to virtue, to be utterly extinguished and brought to
nothing. The palm tree pressed down, grows notwithstanding but too fast,
the herb Spattania, though trodden on, grows very tall; and youth, although
strictly restrained, will prove but too stubborn. The vessel sauoreth always
of that liquor, wherewith it was first seasoned, and the mind retains those
qualities in age wherein it was trained vp^e in youth. The tender twigge is
sooner broken than the strong branch, the young stem more brittle than the old
stock, the we^ke bramble shaken with every wind, and the waue^ing will of
youth tossed with every puff of vanity, ready to be wracked in the waves of
wantonness, unless it be cunningly guided by some wise and wary Pylot.
Whersore, seeing youth is so easily intrapped with the alluring train of
foolish delights, and so soon entangled with the trash of pernicious
pleasures; let us not pass away our time in idleness, least happily, being
taken at discouert, we become careless captives to Security: For when the
mind once floteth in the surging seas of idle conceits, then the puffes of
voluptuous delights, and the stifling storms of unbridled fancy, the raging
blasts of alluring Beauty, and the sturdie gale of glozing vanity, so shake
the ship of reckles youth, that it is daily in doubt to suffer most dangerous
shipwreck. But let us spend our time in reading such ancient Authors, as may
sharpe^ our wits by their pithy sayings, and learn us wisdom by their perfect
sentences. For where Nature is vicious, by Learning it is amended; and where it
is virtuous, by Skill augmented. The stone of secret virtue is of greater
price, if it be bravely polished: the gold, though never so pure of it self,
has the better color, if it be burnished: and the mind, though never so
virtuous, is more noble, if enriched with the gifts of Learning. But to my
purpose. Not long after, Amazias having quatted the quesy stomaks of the
rebels, and setting all things in order, returned with safety to Famogosta,
esteemed famous for his peaceable government; administering Justice with such
severity, and yet tempering the extremity of the law, with such lenity, as
he both gained the good will of strangers, in hearing his virtue, and won the
hearts of his subjects in feeling his bounty; counting him unworthy to bear
the name of a sovereign, who knew not according to desert, to cherish and
chastise his subjects: and had not in continent affection (which he used daily)
counteruailed his more royal disposition, the state of his sovereignty had bin
beutified with inequiualency. But the obliquity of this vice being firmly
fortified in the center of his heart, could neither by the honest society with
his Qu. any thing be mitigated, or through the immoderate and illicit
acquaintance with others, somewhat discouraged. For proof whereof, on a day,
after the Northern te^pests were quieted, as he rode a hunting with certain of
his Peers, he stumbled by chance at a Farmers house, where he espied a woman,
homely attired, of modest countenance, her face imported both love and
gravity; who seeing the King approach, dying her crystal cheeks with a
vermilion hue, after humble reverence, brought him in a country Cruise, such
drink as their cottage did afford. Amazias narrowly marking her proportion,
courteously took his leave and departed; but the sparks of lust that had
kindled a flame of Desire in his fancy, perplexed his mind with sundry
passions: For calling to his consideration, not only her exterior beauty,
adorned with sundry graces; but also her inward perfection, bewraiing she was
both wise and honest, he fell into this discourse with himself. For shame
Amazias let not thy thoughts wander in a Laborinth, to be endless, seeing the
flower of thy youth has bin spent in vice, let the fruit of thine age only
savor of virtue: if the goods had not the Firstlings of thy years, yet let
the^ have thy gray head in pawn of a sacrifice. Time is a retrait from vanity
and vice; thy foot is stepping to the grave, and Opportunie bids thee take hold
of repentance. Venus is printed without wrinckles, as signifying she is the
goddess of youth: What of this fond fool? suppose thou were young, shall thou
therefore wallow in intemperance? do not the gods forbid thee to crave another
man's due? are not voluptuous desires to be suppressed as well in the young sien,
as in the old tree? is thy fancy so fickle, as every face must be viewed with
affection? Fond man, think this, that the poor man makes as great account of
his wife, as the greatest Monarch in the world does of an Empress; that
honesty harbors as soon in a cottage, as in the court; that their minds
oppressed with want, are freed from the vanities of love. The^ Amazias, cease
these frivolous suppositions, and seek not so much as in thought, to offer
wrong to so modest a woman, whose honest behavior foreshewes, that as she is
poor, so she is chaste, and holds as dear the price of her fame, as the
state of her life. No doubt Amazias thou art become a very holy Prelate, that
have so many precepts to refell that thou have always followed. Is not Love a
Lord, as well amongst Beggars as Kings? Cannot Cupid as soon hit a shepherds
hook, as a scepter? Does not Poverty by natural in-sight yield to the
desires of Majesty? Are women's faces always Kalenders of Truth, or are their
looks (as Ovid affirms) ever Mind-glasses? No, the thoughts of women hang
not always in their eyes, Dissimulation is sister to Ianus, and wanton
appetite, oftentimes jetteth under the mask of Chastity. Have thou hitherto
not bin repulsed with any resolute denials, and shall thou now be overthrown
with a look? No, forward Amazias in thy purpose, triumph man, and say as
Caesar did in his Conquests, Veni, Vidi, Vici. The King resting upon this
wicked resolution, met by chance the husband of the wife coming from Plough,
who seeing Amazias, did his duty in most humble manner. The King thinking to
take opportunity at the rebound, thought now he had very good means to know
the disposition of the woman, and her husbands name, that he might make
repair thither, to prosecute his wicked purpose. He began therefore to inquire
of the man where he dwelt: the poor Farmer, calling to mind that he had a
fair wife, was not willing to tell the place of his abode, made answer, Upon
the Forest side. What is he (quoth Amazias) that dwells at yonder Grange place
(for they were in view of the house,) and if thou can (quoth he, go so
far) tell me what your neighbors say of his fair wife? The man was amazed
at this question, suspecting that, which indeed proved true; though his
apparel was simple, yet having a subtle wit, made him this answer. The man
(my Liege) is poor, but honest; his name Lew^sohiln, a Farmer by profession,
loved of his neighbors, for that he never enuieth his superiors, nor grudgeth
at his equals; favored of the gods, in that amidst his poverty, he has a
contented mind, and a wife that is beautiful, wise, and honest: whose life is
so virtuous, that our Country wives take her actions as a President, whereby
they may govern their fame and credit: in so much, that she is not so much
praised for her beauty, as she is reverenced for her chastity. Amazias
contented with this reply, rode his way, and the poor man in a dumpe went home
to his wife, to whom he revealed the effect of the Kings demand: she willing
her husband to repose his wonted trust in her good behavior, quieted his mind
with the hope of her constancy; but the like rest happened not unto the King.
For he, incensed by the praises of her virtues, fell into such a restless
Chaos of confused passions, that he could take no rest till the night was
passed in broken slumbers. The next morning, taking Love only for his guide,
privately he went to the Farmers house, where finding her with one of her maids
in the midst of her huswiferie, he stood a pretty while, taking a view of her
exquisite perfection; till at the last, the good wife espied him, (who, nothing
dismayed with his presence, for that being forewarned, she was fore-armed)
gave him after her homely fashion, a Country welcome. The King sat down, and
finding some talk, began to discourse with her, about her well ordered house,
and other matters, that by a long insinuation, he might the better fall to his
purpose. The poor woman, whose name was Ballinea, was as busy as a Be, to
set before Amazias such rural junkets, as the Plough affoards, making few
answers; till at last the King, after he had tasted of her delicates, taking
her by the hand, framed his speech in this manner.

Ballinea, I will not make a long harvest, for a small crop; nor go about to
pull Hercules shoe, upon Achilles foot; Orations are needelesse, where
necessity forces, and the shortest preamble is best, where Love puts in his
plea: therefore, omitting all frivolous prattle, know, that as well at the
sight of thy Beauty, as by the report of thine Honesty, affection has so
fettered me in the snares of fancy, that formy best refuge, I am come to thy
sweet self, to crave a salve for those passions, which no other can appease. I
deny not, but thou have both Love, and Law, to withhold thee from this
persuasion: and yet we know, women have their several friends. Venus, though
she loves with one eye, yet she can look with the other. Cupid is never so
unprovided, but he has two arrows of one temper. Offenses are not measured by
proportion, but by secrecy: Sinon cast tamen caute. If not chastely; yet
charily: thou may both win a frind, and preserve thy fame, yea Ballinea,
such a friend whose countenance shall shroud thee from envy, and whose plenty
shall free thee from penury. I will not stand longer upon this point, let it
suffice, that in loving me, thou shall reap preferrement, and in denying my
suite purchase to thy husband, and thy self, such an hateful enemy, as to
requite thy denial, will seek to prejudice thee with all mishaps. Ballinea,
who knew the length of his arrow, by the bent of his bow, (resolved rather to
taste of any misery, than for lucre to make shipwreck of her chastity)
returned him this sharp answer. Indeed, my Liege, a less harvest might have
served for so bad corn, that how warily soever you gleane, it will scarce
prove worth the reaping. True it is, that preambls are frivolous, that persuade
men to such follies: therefore, had you spared this speech, your credit had bin
the more, and your labor less. If on the sudden my beauty has inueagled you
(for as for my virtue you hazard but a suppose, since ofttimes report has a
blister on her tongue) I must blame your eye that is bleer'd with every object,
and accuse such a mind as suffers honor to be suppressed with affection, and
(my Lord) soon ripe soon rotten, hot love is so one cold. Men's fancies are
like fire in straw, that flames in a minute, and cease in a moment: But to
return you a denial with your own objection: true it is that I am tide to my
husband both by love and law, which to violate, both the gods and nature
forbids us, unless by death. Venus may love and look as she list, and at last
prove hirselfe but a wanton; her inordinate affections, are no presidents
whereby to direct my actions. And whereas you say Offenses are measured by
secrecy; I answer, Every thing is transparent to the sight of the gods, their
divine eyes pierce into the heart and thoughts; and they measure not revenge by
dignity, but by justice. For preferrement, know (mighty prince) there are no
greater riches than content, nor no greter honor than quiet: I esteem more of
fame than of gold, and rather choose to die chaste than live rich, threatenings
are small persuasions, and little is her honesty that preferres life before
credit. Therefore may it please you, this is my determined resolution, which
take from me as an Oracle, that as preferment shall never persuade me to be
unchaste, so death shall never dissuade me from being honest. Amazias hearing
this rough reply of the woman, was driven into a marvelous choler, so that
skarce affording her a farewell, he flung out of doors, and going to horse, he
hied home to the court. The good wife glad that he took the matter so in
snuff, commanded her maid to say nothing to her master, lest it should
disquiet his mind. But the King impatient of this denial, thought that the
City which would not yield at the parley, might be conquered by an assault;
and that which entreaty could not command, force would constrain: therefore he
commanded one of his Peers, whom he made privy to his practice, to give him
warning to depart out of his house, but with this prouiso, that if his wife
were found tractable, then she should remain there still. The Noble man
fulfilling his Sovereigns command, proved straight by experience, that it was
as possible to force the stream against his course, or the earth to ascend
from his center, as to draw her mind from virtue and honesty: and therefore,
contrary to all law and conscience, charged them to leave their livings. The
poor man, after his wife had made him privy to the cause of their sudden
calamity, took it very patiently, and chose rather to live poorly content,
then richly discredited: so that the prefixed time of his departure being come,
he quietly departed from the farm to a cottage, where his wife and he lived as
perfect lovers in unfeigned affection. Amazias seeing his policy took small
effect, impatient still in his restles passions, accompanied one day with 5 or 6
of his nobles, taking the advantage of the time, perforce brought Ballinea
away, and privily left two of his guard in ambush to kill Lewesohiln. The
neighbors hearing of this mischief, secretly sent to Lewesohiln, where he was
at plow, and forewarnd him of all that Amazias had done, and intended.

The poor man seeing, that to strive with him, was to shoot against the
Heavens, preferring life before wealth, even as he was apparrelled, went far
from the place of his residence; and as a man in distress, seeking service,
went to a Collier, who entertained, and gave him such wages, as he deserved:
where quietly, although disquieted in mind for the absence of his wife, he
passed away a few days. Diverse were poor Lewesohilns thoughts, for when he
considered the Chastity of his wife, Suspicion hid her face for shame; but
when he saw that women's thoughts are aspiring, and gape after preferment, and
that the greatest assault to honesty, is Honor; he began to frown: so that
thus between Dread and Hope, he lived disquieted. But poor Ballinea, whose
misery was redoubled, by hearing of her husbands mishappe, powered out such
continual fountains of tears, as not only Amazias, but all men took pity
of her plaints. But the unbridled fury of Lust, that while it runs headlong
into a Laborynth of mischiefs, feels no remorse, had no consideration of her
daily sorrows, but resolved, if not by entreaty, at least by force, to come
to the end of his lascivious desire. Which resolution being known to
Ballinea, from Prayers she went to Policy, and therefore on the sudden
became more courteous, desiring Amazias, that he would give her some space to
forget her old Love, and entertain a new choice. He, whose fancy was somewhat
appeased with this good speech, granted her the term of a Month, with free
liberty to walk in the garden, and elsewhere at her pleasure. Ballinea
enjoying her wish, so fortunately taking Time by the forehead, early in a
morning stole secretly from the Palace, and fled into the Country; where, in
the day time hiding her self amongst bushes, and in the night traveling as
fast as she could; at last she came to the place where her husband was with
the Collier: and there changing her apparel into the attire of a man, and her
head bravely shorn, she became an handsome stripling. The next day, coming
to the Cole-pits, she demanded service; The master Collier, seeing the youth
well faced, had pity of his want, and entertained him: and for that
Lewesohiln his man wanted one to drive his cart, he appointed Ballinea to
attend upon him. She thanking the gods that blessed her with so favorable a
service, was brought to the sight of Lewesohiln, and committed to his charge.
Lewesohiln pitying the poor estate of such a young youth, noting narrowly the
lineaments of her face, fell into sighs, and from sighs to tears, for the
remembrance of his sweet Ballinea: who pitying her husbands plaints, in that
she was a true deuiner of his thoughts, could not (as women's secrets often hang
at the tip of their tongues) but bewray to her husband what she was: who, when
he perfectly knew his wife, so strangely metamorphised; what for joy of her
presence, and sorrow that Fortune had made them both thus unhappy, he fell into
deeper complaints, till appeased by his wife, they went merrily to work. But
Amazias missing Ballinea, and after diligent search, perceiving she was stole
away, fell into such a melancholy humor, that his subjects thought him half in
a frenzy. He commanded horse to be made out into every high way, all passages
to be stopped, every woman to be examined: but in vain; which so increased his
surie, that he enjoined an officer of his Court, (as well qualified as himself)
to search out (if it were possible) by his extraordinary industry, the
inauspicate conueiance of his love. Who taking horse, rode up and down the
country, as one half mad; but found not that he sought for. At last,
Fortune envying the happiness of Lewesohiln, and his wife, brought him where the
Colliers were at work: and a pretty space before he came at the Pit, he met
Ballinea; who seeing him, although he had disguised himself, because he would
ride unknown, yet perfectly perceived what he was; and therefore would
willingly have been out of his company.

But he calling unto her, and she having her leather coat all dustie, and
her sweet face all besmeared with coals, was the bolder to go; and demanded
of him what he wanted? Rawcikew (for so was the man's name) inquired if such a
woman passd not that way? yes mary (quoth Ballinea) there passd by such a one
indeed, who as she reported, fled from Amazias, for that the King would have
deprived her of her chastity. Can thou tell me (quoth he) whither she is
gone? if I could (quoth Bal^inea) think not so little courtesy in me, as to
betray her; for by thy strait inquiry, I perceive thou art servant to that
dishonorable Prince, that spares neither wife nor widow, to satisfy his
unbridled lust. Rawcikew not brooking these hard speeches, alighted from his
horse, thinking to have well bumbasted the boy; who, as fast as he could, fled
to the Colepit. The colliers seeing their boy, (whom for his good behavior,
they all generally affected) to be misused by a Seruingman, took their whips
in their hands, and demanded of Rawcikew, what he meant to offer violence to
any of their company? For that (quoth he) the boy has greatly abused the King.
Ballinea told them all the whole matter: which known, the Colliers wished him,
if he were well, to be packing. Rawcikew seeing amongst such an unruly company,
he could not mend himself, went his way with a slay in his ear; and as he
rode, perceived where Lewesohiln lay asleep; who was not so disguised, but he
knew him perfectly: thinking therefore, when he did awake, to learn something
out of him; and so turning his horse into a close hard by, rested himself
behind a bush. Long he had not sat, before Ballinea came merrily whistling
with her cart, and told her husband all what had happened; who both smiled that
the officer had such rough entertainment, as also, that so cleanly she had
deceived him. Rawcikew, who ouerheard them, and perceived that the youth whom
he took for a stripling, was Ballinea the poor man's wife; felt such a
remorse in his conscience, that the King should offer violence to so virtuous
and chaste a mind, that as soon as they were gone, he posted as fast as he
could to the Court, and revealed unto Amazias the whole matter: who greatly
pleased with the discourse, desirous again to see so honest a wife, presently
dispatched a Purseuant to command the Collier to bring his man Lewesohiln, and
his boy before him. The Purseuant sparing no horseflesh, came so fast from the
court, that he found them al at dinner: who, after they heard his message, were
amazed; especially poor Ballinea, who feared some new misfortune: yet cheering
her self, the better to comfort her husband, they went with the Purseuant to
the Court: where being brought before Amazias, Rawcikew complained of the
Collier, how he had abused his Majesty, in maintaining his boy to give him
evil language. The Collier (as a man amazed) confessed his fault, and therefore
desired the Nobles which were standing by, to be his good Lords and Masters.
Amazias, who all this while had his eye upon Ballinea, asked her what he was?
May it please your Grace (quoth she) I am servant to this man, who is owner of
the pit, but under this other, who is ouerseer of my work: so then (quoth the
King) you serve two masters, the one by day, and the other by night. Nay my
Liege (quoth Ballinea) but one master, for we make small account of any
service that is done in the night. How say you sir (quoth the king to
Lewesohiln) is not this boy your man? No my Lord (quoth he) only my
bedfellow, and that is all the service I crave at his hands. At this answer,
the King and the Noble men smiled, and Ballinea fearing she was discovered,
began to blush: which Amazias perceiving, demanded of her, of what age she was?
About 18. my Liege (quoth she). Amazias willing to try then, what the event
would be, told the collier that he and his man, for that their faults were
through ignorance* might get them home: but for your boy (quoth the King)
seeing he is so young, and well faced, I mean to make him my Page. The Collier
was glad he was so dispatched; but poor Lewesohiln, through abundance of
grief was almost driven into an ecstasy; so that changing color, he could
skarce stand on his legs: which Ballinea perceiving, seeing now Fortune had
done her worst, resolved to suffer all miseries whatsoever: falling down
therefore upon her knees, she unfolded to the King what she was, and from point
to point, discoursed what had happened between her and Rawcikew, intermedling
her speeches with such a fountain of tears, as the King pitying her plaints,
willed her to be of good cheer; for neither he, nor any other in all his
kingdom, should offer her any violence. Moved therefore with a certain
compunction, he was not only content to bridle his affections, but to indowe
her with such sufficient lands, and possessions, as might very well maintain
her in the estate of a gentlewoman; who with her husband, long after lived in a
most prosperous and happy estate.

These and such like irregular proceedings of the King, did without doubt,
occasionate a far greater presumption of offending to Cleodora and Eliosto,
after that inexpiable manner then unto which by their own inclination, they
would have bin instigated. But we must not look what men do, but what men
ought to do: it is ill going to Hell, though with a thousand companions. Well,
Eliosto was at length so intricated in the gins of affection, and so entangled
with the trappe of fancy, so perplexed in the laborynth of pinching love, and
so enchanted with the charms of Venus sorcerie; that as the Elephant rejoices
greatly at the sight of a Rose, as the birds Halciones delight to view the
feathers of the Phae^ix, and as nothing better contenteth a Roe bucke, than to
gaze at a red cloth; so was there no object that could allure the wavering eyes
of Eliosto, as the surpassing beauty of his mother Cleodora: yea, his only
bliss, pleasure, joy, and delight, was in feeding his desires, with staring on
the heavenly face of his goddess. But alas, her beauty in the end wrought
his bane; her looks, his woe; her sight, his misery; her exquisite
perfections, his utter overthrow: that as the Ape, by seeing the Snaile is
infected; as the Leopard falls in a trance at the sight of the Locust; as the
Cockatrice dies with beholding the Chrysolite; so poor Eliosto was pinched
(as the consequence of this History manifests) to the heart, with viewing
her comely countenance, was griped with execrable calamity, and tortured with
insupportable torments, by gazing on the gallant beauty of so gorgeous a dame.

Neither did Cleodoraes mishaps fail to accompany Eliostoes extremities with
correspondencie: for she so framed in her imaginations the form of his face,
and so imprinted in her heart the perfection of his person, that the remembrance
thereof would not suffer her (exempted from his company) to take any rest: but
then passed the day in dolor, the night in sorrow, no minute without mourning,
and no hour without heaviness, till at length the vengeance of the gods,
issuing forth like thunder eclipsed the bright sunshine of their felicity
with the Cimmerian blackness of confusion. In the mean time, Fortune willing
to advance them to the top of her inconstant wheel, sundry times presented
them with opportunity for the fruition of their desires, and conueniencie for
the discourse of their mutual affections: which thing Eliosto, tbrough
consonancie found most true: for on a day as he espied his Lady and Love
walking alone in the Garden, his senses, by that soddaine sight, was so
revived, that without any dread or doubt, he manfully marched toward her, and
was as hastily as heartily encountered by Cleodora, who embracing him in her
arms, welcomed him with this salutation. As the whale ( Eliosto) makes
always sign of great joy at the sight of the fi^h called Talp^ Marina, as the
lion fawneth at the view of the unicorn, and as he which drinks of the
fountain Hypanis in Scythia feels hismind so drowned in delight, that no
grief, though never so great, is able to assuage it; so Eliosto I conceive
such surpassing pleasure in thy presence, and such heavenly felicity in the
sight of thy perfection, that no misery, though never so violent, is able to
astonish me; no distress, though never so hateful, is able to amaze me^; nor
any mis-happe, though never so perilous, is able to make me sincke in sorrow,
so long as I enjoy thy presence, which I account a sovereign preservative
against all careful calamities: that as he which tastes of the herb
Hyacinthus is never (...) with trouble; and as he which wears the stone
(...) about him, is surely defenced against all ensuing (...) so enjoying the
aspect of thy seemly self, and (...) eyes with the form of thy feature, I
think my self sufficiently shrouded against all the tempestuous showers of
sinister Fortune: and to prove these my promises to be no fained vanities, but
faithful verity, I commit my self and state into thy ^ands, to dispose of
me at thy pleasure; wishing rather to live with thee in most opprobrious
penury, than to linger here in most fortunate prosperity. Eliosto histning
attentively to this sugared harmony, was so enthralled with the sight of her
sweet face, and so rapt into a trance with the contemplation of her beauty,
that as the lion tasting of the gum Arabicke, becomes senseless; as the bull
by browsing on the bark of a juniper tree, falls asleep; as the camel
stands astonished at the sight of a rat, so Eliosto seeing in his arms the
Saint whom in heart he did honor, and embracing the goddess whom with most
deep devotion he did adore, was so amazed, that he was not able to utter one
word, or witness of his happiness, until at last, gathering his wits
together, he began thus to reply.

Cleodora (quoth he) it is an axiom in Philosophy, that the color joined
hard to the sight, hinders the sense; the flower put into the nostrill
stops the smelling; the wine vessel being full, lets pass no wine, though
never so well vented; the water-pot being filled to the brimme, yields forth
no liquor, though having a thousand holes; so where the mind is surcharged
with overmuch joy, or too much pleasure, there the tongue is both tied, and the
senses so restrained, that the heart is neither able to conceive the joy, nor
the tongue of power to express the pleasure, which Cleodora I now speak by
proof, and know by experience; for I am so drowned in delight by enjoying that
princely ^emme, which I esteem the rarest and richest jewel, not only in
Cyprus, but in all the world, so am I puffed up in pleasure by thy divine
presence. Yea thy faithful and unfeigned affection, the promise of thy
constancy, and the hope of thy loyalty, the force of thy beauty, and the fame
of thy virtue; but above all, thy prodigal bounty, in bestowing these
heavenly perfections on thy poor Eliosto, so surchargeth my seely heart with
excessive joy, that my tongue not being able in part to express the extreme
pleasure of my mind, I am with Philistion the Comicall Poet constrained by
silence to unfold that affection, which in words the siled phrase of
Demosthenes were not able to descipher. But this assure thy self Cleodora,
that if Juno would advance me to be Monarch of the world, if Palla^ would
prefer me to exceed hauty Hercules in valor, if Venus would present me with
some princely peer of heavenly complexion, yet would I not so gladly receive
their proffers, as I do gratefully accept the promise of thy love and loyalty.
No, I do gladly account the treasure of Croesus to be but trash, in respect of
the guerdon of thy good will, I account the fortu^e of Caesar but folly,
respecting the fruits of thy favor, I do esteem the dignities of (...) as
d^egs in respect of thy divine perfection. Yea Cleodora, I am so snared with
thy beauty, and so entangled in the trappe of thy bounty, as I shall never
leave to love, nor ever begin to like any other. It is easy Eliosto (quoth
Cleodora) to purchase credit where the party is already persuaded, and to
infer belief, where every word is esteemed as an Oracle. Therefore omitting
these frivolous protestations, thus I say touching the purpose. Cecillius
Metellu^ was wont to say, that as it was necessary that old men should be
grave in counsel, so it was expedient young men should be se ret in love; and
therefore when the contract was made between Fuluius and his daughter, he
sealed up their lips with his signet, meaning, that to violate the secret
conference of Lovers, was to commit a second sacrilege. I speak this of
Eliosto, as one careful of thy state: for if Amazias thy father should but
once hear of our love, or suspect our liking, it would breed thy everlasting
misery, and my eternal calamity.

Dispose of our affairs at thy pleasure, but discover not our purposes, if
thou have won the castle, vaunt not on the conquest, if thou have made a good
market, brag not of thy gains, lest by boasting of thy booty, thou
hereafter be deprived of thy expectation, and in the mean time be deemed a
pratler. And Eliosto, above all men beware of Rawcikew, lest under the shape of
a friend he prove in time thy mortal foe, lest his fained amity prove
faithless enmity, that in trusting too much without trial, thou find not
treason, and then, though thou repent, yet had-I-wist comes too late, and so
thou wish thou had never loved, and I never liked: for his suspicious
speculations pretends mistrust, and his praestigious actions discover
infidelity. I tell thee Eliosto, in the fairest sands is most fickleness,
out of the brauest blossom, most commonly springs the worst fruit, the
finest flower seldom has the best smell, the most glittering stone has
oftentimes the least virtue, and in the greatest show of good will, lies
ofttimes the smallest effect of friendship; in most flattery, least faith; in
the fairest face, the falsest heart; in the smoothest tale, the smallest
truth; and in the sweetest gloses, most sour ingratitude. Yea I see that in
trust lies treason, that fair words make fools feign, and that the state of
such men, is like unto the marygold, which as long as the Sun shines,
opens her leaves; but with the least cloud begins to close, like the
Violets in America, which in summer yield an odoriferous smell, and in winter a
most pestilent savor: so these parasites in prosp^ritie profess most, but in
adversity perform least. When Fortune favors, they laugh, when she
frowneth, they lowre, at every full sea they flourish, but at every dead neape
they fade; like to the fish Palerna, which being perfectly white in the calm,
yet turns passing black at every storm; to the trees in the deserts of
Africa that flourish but while the south wind blows; or to the Celedonie
stone, which retains his virtue no longer than when it is rubbed with gold.
Since then (...) (quoth she) there is such falsehood in friendship, and such
(...) deeds in such painted speeches, shake both Rawcikew off, and other
fawning curres, with the flagge of Defiance, and from hence forth, try ere
thou trust. Tush Cleodora (quoth Eliosto) he that is afraid to venture on the
buck, because he is tapisht in the briars, shall never have Hunters hap; and he
that puts his doubt in love for every chance, shall never have lovers luck.
Can not the Cat catch mice, without she have a bell hanging at her ear? Can
not the Hobbie seize on his prey, but he must check? cannot the Spaniel
retriue the Partridge, but he must quest? and cannot we deal so warily, but
all the world must wonder at it? Yes, it is a subtle bird that builds among the
aerin of hawks, and a shifting sheep that lambs in the Foxes den; and he
shall look narrowly that spies me halting. Let my father, not only weigh our
works, but our words; and let Rawcik^w both deem our deeds, and divine our
thoughts; and yet I hope we will deal so secretly in our affairs, as neither
the one shall have cause to suspect our familiarity, nor the other to detect
our affection. And therefore Cleodora, lest (if we be spied) the time and place
give occasion of mistrust, I will leave you as I found you, and so farewell.

Well, these t^o Lovers plac^d thus by Fortune in the palace of earthly
prosperity, floated so securely in the streams of bliss, as they thought no
chippes of mischance, might change their present happiness to future heaviness,
as long as their privy meetings were kept so secret to themselves. But as they
which ca^no (...) fire in the straw are st^ne blind, so he that cannot see the
flame of fancy is a fool. It is hard to cover smoke, but more hard to
conceal Love; which these two lovers in tract of time found verified; who as
closely as they kept their cloak, yet it was most easy to epsy the lining:
for fancy secretly restrained, is like the spark covered with ashes, which at
length bursteth into a flame. For there passed between Eli^sto and Cleodora,
such amorous glaunces, such loving looks, such courteous co^gies, such
countenances, and such friendly familiarity, such often meetings, such open
salutations, such sighs, such sobbes, and such str^nge passions, as not only
Rawclkew, but all the Court (though they poor souls thought to dance in a
net, and not be seen) perceived how entirely they loved, and liked each other.
Which thing by Rawcikew being discried, as a man whose mind either greatly
laboring with the inconstant wind of voluble promotion, or not a little
suffocated with the pestilent sting of virulent malice, vowed the contemplation
of their proceedings with serpentine vigilancie. Whose determinate intention,
by unhappy occasion of the intercedencie of more weighty occurrences, for a
season we will not interrupt.

THE SECOND BOOK.
WHen the Ambition of aspiring governors obscu^ed the glory of the Cyp^ian
kingdom, and the Majesty of so famous a Monarchy was rent into petty
Regiments: When M^cedonia, the nurce of Factions, was more infected with inward
mutinies, than infested with outward hostility; then Cyprus, still the wonder,
erst of immeasurable greatness, now of incomparable baseness; ears^ the joy
full receiver of triumphing soldiers, and pompous harbor of renowned
Conquerors, now the sorrowful spectacle of Times in constancy, Fortunes
spite, and Honors incertaintie: More famous for the ruins of her former
dignity, than fortunate in the relics of ambitious fury, was no less
troubled with tumults in the wane of her glory, than in the height of her
praise; warring with her self, within the compass of her own walls; and
moist with the blood of men, streaming through the channels, which renewed the
lamentable memory of former miseries: but the greatest extremes are least
permanent. Mars thus rufling in this martial Isle, was crossed by
counter-working of some other god: for Cupid grieved that he could fasten no
shafts in their flintie hearts, whose ears were stopped from loves in^icing,
by the continual clattering of Armor, a melody not fitting his mothers
humor; swear solemnly to alter this, or spend all the shafts in his quiver.
Each part wearied with daiely massacres, did for a certain time conclude a
Truce from Arms.

Thus had the wily wagge means to effect his stratageme: The two chief of
these two Factions, had each a child; the one a son, the other a daughter;
both so graced with rare qualities of the mind, ^o endued with perfections of
the body, that they seemed the mirror of that age, and wonder of their time.
To these ornaments was added the f^iendly favor of smiling Fortune, so largely
bestowed, that the sum of Aristotle's felicity might seem to be in them
accomplished. Dihnohin (for so was he named) passing often in this time of truce
by the house of his fathers enemy, and viewing Gatesinea, (so was she called)
felt himself surprised with a sudden change; and so long he carried love in
his eyes, that at last it sunk down to his heart: and his affection was so
much the more vehement, how much the less his love seemed possible to be
obtained. Gatesinea seeing Dihnohin young and fair, began first earnestly to
look, then secretly to like; and lastly, so deeply to love; that as her hap
was without hope, so were her passions without patience.

Thus these two lovers united with an unknown sympathy of affections,
smothering their secret thoughts in hateful silence, lived discontent, not
knowing how to cure so dangerous a disease. She void of comfort revealed her
love to her nurce, praising Dihnohin and complaining of her hard fortune, and
the unhappy discord of those two noble families, whose dissension was the
only obstacle of her desire. The old nurce, though sorry that her young
mistress was so affected, yet thinking it impossible to alter her settled
resolution, did apply a medicine of comfort, to mitigate the extremity of her
sorrow; not using disswasions, for well she knew, that striving to quench the
fire, she should more increase the flame.

But Dihnohin seeking access unto his mistress, found (for what ^a^not Love
atchieue) that the chamber of Gatesinea being in the back part of her fathers
house, stood toward a garden, having one window looking into a little narrow
lane, through which none, or very few, and they very seldom did pass.

When Titan hasting to plunge his fiery chariot in The^is lap, had gladded
Oceanus with his return, the tor^ented L^uer taking a Lute in his hand, went
to the place, which so late he found, and there did in sad melody sound forth
his sorrows.

Gat^sinea wondering to hear music at her window, looked out, and discerned
her beloved Dihnohin; whose affections when she saw like her own, she was
ravished with incredible joys, and had presently uttered some sign of her
content, had not maidenly modesty, and the presence of her nurce staid her:
who persuaded her, that having Dihnohin at the advantage, she should not so
easily offer her love, lest he might little esteem it, having so lightly got
it. The perplexed Lover repairing often to his accustomed place, with more
pleasure to Gatesinea, than content to himself, resolved in the end, to make
a full trial of his good or badde fortune, and no more to use such dumb
demonstrations. Coming therefore late, as he was wont, to the window, he
tarried till he perceived by some signs, that his mistress was come into her
chamber, accompanied only with her nurce: then fingring his Lute, and framing
his voice, he vtter'd this passionate Dittie, making every rest, a
deepe-fetched sigh.

Dihnohins S^nnet.
I rashly v^w'd (f^nd wretch why did I so?)
When I was free, that Love should not inthrall me:
Ah f^lish b^ast, the cause of all my woe,
And this misfortune that does now b^fall me.
Loves God i^cens'd, did (...) that I should smart,
That done, he shot, and str^cke me to the heart.
Sweet was the wound but bitter was the pain^
Sweet is the bondage to so fair a creature,
Ifcoie thoughts d^e not Beuties brightness stain,
Nor cruelty wrong so divine a feature.
Lou^, pity me, and let it quite my cost,
By Love to find, what I by Love have lost.
Heavens pride, Earths wonder, Natures p^erelesse choice,
Fair harbor of my souls dec^ying gladness,
Yield him some ease, whose fa^nt and trembling voice,
Does sue for pitti^ ouerwhelm'd with sadness.
In thee it rests, fair Saint, to save or spill
His life, whose love is led by Reasons will.
Scarce had he finished this sorrowful Sonnet, when Gatesinea opening the
casement, cast him down a Garland, compacted of sundry sweet smelling flowers,
which she had gathered in her fathers garden, making that her afternoons task.
Dihnohin taking up the favor which his Mistress had thrown him, and redoubling
many kisses on that e^e-pleasing object, departed the happiest alive, proud
that she had applauded his humor, and graced his conceit with so ^ire a
guerdon. But Gatesinea restless in her passions, could not be satisfied, till
she had conceived some possible means of Dihnohins, and her meeting. Love the
whetstone of wit, brought this possibility to a plain likelihoode; and
proceeding a step farther, made this likelihoode seem a certainty, and thus
it was: she had a door out of her chamber into the garden, and out of the
garden there was a little door that opened into the narrow lane, whither
Dihnohin was accustomed to come, who being that way let in, they might, as she
thought, there safely confer of their love. This doubt only rested, how
Dihnohin might be certified of Gatesineas devise; which task the Nurse
undertook, promising such care in the delivery of he^ message, that no
suspicion should thence arise. Which promise she fully performed, and knowing
that great trouble might grow of that enterprise, if she (...) the enemy of
Dihnohi^s father, and waiting on his daughter, were seen openly to talk with
Dihnohin, she used such wariness and secrecy, that he was by her cer^ified of
Gatesinaes purpose, without suspicion or discovery of her intent. Dihnohin
liberally rewarded the nurse for her lucky tidings, willing her to do his
humble duty to his mistress, and assure her of his diligent attendaunce at the
appointed time and place. The two lovers longing for nights approach, thought
Phoebus envying their bliss, did slack his course more than he was wont,
declining too slowly. But when a general darkness had ouerspread the earth,
and days light was eclipsed by Titans departure to the other Hemisphere,
Dihnohin coming to the garden door, was let in by the Nurse, and lovingly
received of Gat^sinea. What greetings were used when the two lovers met, they
can best conceive that have known like fortune. But when common ceremonies of
courtesy had passed between them, they retired into the Arbor, and the Nurse
withdrew herself from them: there they discoursed their love each to other,
and finding their affections equal, they mutually rejoiced.

Dihnohin folded in the arms of his mistress, and kissing her at his pleasure,
thought himself in a second heaven: but presuming to proceed further:
Gatesinea, whether pleased, or offended with his amorous attempts, I know not,
half in anger thrust back his hand, saying, that as she loved him, so she
regarded her honor. Whereto Dihnohin replied, that he tendered her honor more
than his own life; protesting that if she would vouchsafe to accept him ^or
her husband (the only means to establish their love, and preserve her name
from blemish) that then there should want in him no endeavors to do her
service, with more affection than he could express. This fell out as Gat^sinea
wished, and therefore she granted that which so much he desired; the Nurse was
called for a witness, in whose presence Dihnohin gave Gatesinea a ring.

Thus were the Nuptials secretly finished, not graced with the presence of
Hymen, the President of marriage rites, but thwarted with the fatal influence
of some unlucky Planet, comically begun, tragically ended, and both in the
dreadful silence of the darkesome night. Thus they being Man an Wife, or at
least, so seeming to themselves, Gatesinea with her new spouse, returned into
her bedchamber, and the nurce departing; both dis-robing them^elues, entered in
one bed, and did freely possess the full frui^ion of that, which he so
earnestly pursued, she so willingly granted, and both so much desired.

When day appeared, and Phoebus posting from the Antip^des, had remounted the
Eastern hill, and burnished Heaven with his glittering beams, Dihnohin leaving
his mistress, departed that way by which he came. In this sort they long
enjoyed each others company, till Fortune, Loves sworn enemy shadowed their
bliss, with a cloud of mishap. Dihnohins father, secing him well grown in
years, having past the spring time of his childhood, told him on a time, he
had provided him a wife, worthy his better, both for birth and wealth.

Dihnohin astonished at these words, stood like one of those whom Perseus with
his Gorgons head transformed into stones: but being forced to answer, he told
his father that he had settled his fancy, and made his choice in another place:
his father furiously demanding where, he fearfully, though with many delays,
revealed his love to Gatesinea. The old man being in a rage, commanded him
forthwith to depart his house; threatening besides, to dispossess and
dis-inherit him. Dihnohin seeing his father in these terms, thought it best to
dissemble; and craving pardon, submitted himself wholly to his direction: who
glad to see his son in such a vain of obedience, thought it not good to use
delays, but presently dispatched the marriage, fearing a sudden change of so
sudden a conformity.

Thus Dihnohins second espousals being finished, he furcharged with sorrow,
wro^e a letter to Gatesinea, containing a sad ^ehearsall of that unlucky
accident, imputing all to the ^orce o^ his fathers threats, still promising and
protesting that she only had the possession of his heart; and vowing, that no
sooner the breath should be out of his fathers body, but he would reject his
new loathed wife, and receive her, and so ending all discord, join the two
factions in one. Lastly, he advertised her, what time she should exspect his
coming. This letter Dihnohin causd to be conveyed to her by a trusty
messenger. Gatesinea having received and perused it, was overwhelmed with such
unwonted sorrow, that she swowned presently, and hardly could the sorrowful
Nurse recall her fainting spirits: but when she was come again to herself,
jealousy the mother of extreme hate, turned her tears into threats, and
converted her feminine anger into flat fury. Thus resolving on revenge, she
awaited a fit time to effect her tragical purpose. Dihnohin failed not to come
at the appointed time, and being let into the garden by the Nurse, was received
at the chamber door by Gatesinea, to whom he made a long excuse of his fault
committed, attributing it to the fear of his fathers menaces: she, though
griped with grief, used such moderation in her outward gesture, that Dihnohin
could not guess her thoughts by her looks, nor conjecture her passions by her
speeches. Night being far spent, they went both to bed, where Dihnohin
desirous to renew his woonted sports, was hindered by Gatesinea, who told him
that he should no more have the fruition of that favor, till he had made her
a sufficient recompen^e for the fault committed: he half discontent with this
repulse, turned aside to take his last and longest sleep; whereinto when he was
entered, she perceiving him so soundly settled, that he could not easily be
awaked, rose up, and taking a knife which for that purpose she had laid under
the beds head, she stabbed him cruelly to the heart, saying thus; Most
treacherous heart, the faithless harbor of disloyal thoughts, receive the
fatal guerdon due to thy deserts, I will not die unrevenged as Dido, nor live
discontent as Medea, who failed in the sex, and therefore in the certainty of
her revenge, Qui fecit patitur. That said, she redoubled her bloody stroke,
casting a steerne aspect on poor Dihnohin, which lay weltring in his blood*
What temorceless^ Scythian, or savage Tartarian, nourished in the deserts
beyond Tanais, could have beheld so ruthful a spectacle, and not be pierced
with compassion? Yet she, whose heart was more impenetrable than the adamant,
seemd to triumph in his tragedy, loading his dying ears with reproachful
terms, and accusing him of disloyalty: at which word Dihnohin lifting up his
eyes (though scarce he could lift them) seemd with a mild countenance to sue
sor pardon, in the extreamitie of his punishment: but when she still frownd, he
fetched a deep sigh from the bottom of his grieved heart, making that the last
period of his love and life. Scarce had the long imprisoned soul leaving the
senseless mould of earthly dross, returned to the blisfull harbor whence it
descended, when she the ruthlesse revenger of her own cruelty, did with that
knife which deprived Dihnohin of loves joy, bereave her self of lives comfort,
and inflicting a deadly wound, fell backward on the bed, fetching a grievous
groan. The watchful Nurse whose ears were open to this unwelcome sound,
fearing that which was too true, and doubting the welfare of her young mistress,
came hastily into the chamber, where seeing Gatesinea in that pitiful plight,
she stood astonished at so tragical a chance; yet hoping that the stroke was
not mortal, nor the danger past recovery, she came to her, endeavoring to
stop the wound. But Gatesinea drawing near her end, violently thrust her
back, saying thus; Wonder not, for ^e has his desert, and I my desire; which
words being spoken, she gave up the ghost. The aged Nurse which did more than
hear, for she plainly saw (though wishing s^ee had not seen) this unlucky
accident, did screech so loud, that all they of the house awaked by her sudden
outcry, rose from their rest: and first Gatesineaes father started up, whose
troubled thoughts presaged some future mishap. Nor is it marvel that he did
darkely foreknow, though he could not plainly foresee so hard a chance: for as
the smoke issues before the fire flames, the lightning is seen before the
thunder be heard, the Sea swell before a tempest arise, so the mind of man,
whose continual motion, is an infallible argument of a divine and immortal
essence, droopes before danger. The dismayed old man slipping on his
night-gowne, hastened his aged steps toward his daughters chamber; where
finding her dead, holding the bloody knife in her hand, and seeing his enemies
son in the same bed with her, slain likewise; what he thought, I refer to
those that having one only jewel, their lives solace, and souls comfort, are
thereof deprived by the malice of fortune.

But he distracted with sundry passions, sometimes lamented his daughters
misfortune, sometimes he threatened the trembling nurce, then he bewailed the
downfall of his house, wanting an heir, and the extinguished memory of his
name for lack of succession. The silly woman falling on her knees before him,
besought him to defer his pretended revenge on her, till she had unfolded
the cause and manner of that sorrowful event: which granted, she rehearsed
their loves, meetings, secret nuptials, his second marriage enforced by his
angry fathers threats, and her desperate resolution of revenge. This short and
sorrowful discourse thus finished, she half dead with age before, now
clean dead with fear, yielded her spirit to him which gave it. The next
morning, when the report of this rare misfortune was bruted through the city,
the street wherein Gatesineaes father dwelt, was so pestered with the
concourse of people, that scarce any passage could be found. This thus passing
for current news through every man's mouth, Dihnohins father was soon
advertised of it by the general rumor; who, though astonished ^ so rare a
chance, yet suffered this misfortune with more courage than his years could
affoard, knowing that his enemies fortune was no better than his own.

Thus did the parents bear the childrens hap, whose ghosts are now met in
the shadie grove of Myrtle trees, fronting the Elyzian fields; that dreadful
grove, the eternal mansion of those unhappy lovers, which witness their
loyalty to Loves hestes, by sacrificing their own blood, and making their
own bodies oblations: and it was time, for till then his Deity was despised,
his Altars empty, his Temples not frequented.

This grove planted is in Hell,
Darker grove was never seen:
Where life-loathing Lovers dwell,
Hapless have those Lovers been:
Such oblations beauties treasure,
Love receives with joy and pleasure.
But this only chance did mollify their indurate hearts, which were before so
inflamed with private malice, that they loathed public agreement, But seeing
in this unfortunate couple, the lamentable effects of their dissension, they
suddenly left Arms, and joining their hands, whose hearts had been so long
disioyned, they let fall their weapons, and embraced concord, the sovereign
stay of commonweals. These two sorrowful fathers, earstfoes, and now by this
misfortune made friends, were chief mourners at their childrens funerals; who
being united by Loves laws, had Loves right: for though their minds were at
their deaths divided, yet were their bodies both in one tomb enclosed. Amazias
was not so much perplexed at the information of these tidings, as well pleased,
that at length these seditious storms of ambitious envy, were through an
inviolable league of amiti^ qualified, and quietly ended. The King, as he
himself thought thus blessed with earthly favors, doubted no misfortune, for he
could see no way for him to mishap: nay if he had been wise, he might the
more have feared misery; in that he was so fully pampered up with felicity.
Fortune, yea fortune in favoring him, made him most unfortunate. Syren-like,
hiding under music, misery; under pleasure, pain; under mirth, mourning:
like the sugared honie-combe, which while a man touches, he is stung with
Bees. She presents fair shapes, which prove but fading shadows; she
proffereth mountains, and perhaps keeps promise: but the gains of these
golden mines, is loss and misery. None rode on Seianus horse, which got not
some mishap: none touched the gold (...) Tholossa, whom some disaster chance
likewise did not assail: neither has any bin advanced by Fortune, which in
time has not bin crossed with some hapless calamity. These things the King
found answerable unto verity, the issue whereof, brought no less unto him,
than the utter ruin, and sudden confusion of his kingdom. For Rawcikew
living in his court, noting (as I said before) Eliostoes entertainment by
Cleodora, his more than ordinary observation of duty, her affectionate
opinion of him, and his assiduate repair unto her lodging, and his long abode
with her; gathered by these circumstances, how that the conuoy of their
proceedings, was but for the obscurity of affection, with whom beyond credit,
it was most brutish, and out of measure unreasonable.

Wherefore continuing his vigilant observations, in the end he discovered the
very secrecy of their attempts, to the great satisfaction of his
blood-thirstie spirits. Now (quoth he) since their sins are come to the
ripeness of their abomination, I vow by that bright Lamp Heavens ornament,
that speedy information shall be given to the King, that so their wanton and
lascivious incontinencie, may be liable to the punishing rack of justices
severity: and for this purpose, he attending the benign leisure of
opportunity, it chanced as Amazias two or three days after walked toward the
stable, for the view of his horse, that then the unfortunate Prince, blinded
with the folly of impetuous concupiscence, assailed his mother after the
inordinate pleasures which have been heretofore sufficiently declared.

But their Argus which slept not at all, in a furious ecstasy posting to the
king, presently co^ducted him to such a place, where he was the perfect
spectator of their most vicious and d^ested practices. The king hardly
moderating the vehemence of his rage from breaking the door upon them, betook
himself to his closet, where being cumbered with cholerike cogitations, and
perplexed with despitefull passions, inflamed with wrathful fury, he fell into
these terms. Now (quoth he) I prove by experience the saying of Sophocles to
be true, that the man which has many children shall never live without some
mirth, nor die without some sorrow, for if they be virtuous, he shall have
cause whereof to rejoice, if vicious, whereof to be sad; which saying by this
spectacle I try performed in my self: for I have but one child (which should
have been the inheritour of my kingdom) I see so addicted unto vanity, that
he is a fretting corrasiue to my wounded heart. For what grief is there more
pinching? what cross more pernicious? what pain more griping? what plague
more combersome? yea, what trouble can torment me worse, than to see my son
to have consumed his time in riot after this manner, following wilfully the fury
of his own frantike fancy. O that the date of his birth had been the day of
his burial! or that by some si^ister storm of fortune he had been stifled
on his mothers knees, so that his untimely death might have prevented my
ensuing sorrows, and his future calamities: For I see that the young fry will
always prove old frogs, that the crooked twig will prove a crabbed tree, how
that which is bred in the bone, will not easily out of the slesh, that he
which is careless in youth, will be less careful in age, that where in prime
of years vice reigns, there in mature age iniquity bears sway. Why
Amazias if thou see the ^ore, why do thou not apply the salve? and if thou
perceiuest the mischief, why do thou not prevent it with a sublimatum? Take
away the cause, and the effect fails; if Eliosto be the cause of thy ruth,
cut him off betimes, lest he bring thee to ruin, better had thou want a
son, than never want sorrow. Perhaps thou will suffer him so long till he
fall sick of the father, and then he will not only seek thy lands and
possessions, but life and all, if thou in time p^euent not his purpose: yea,
and after thy death he will be, through his lascivious life, the oue^throw of
thy house, the consumer of thy kingdom, the wrack of thy commonweal, and
the very man that s^al bring the state of Cyprus to mischief and misery. S^th
then thy son is such a sincke of sorrows, in whose li^ lies hid a loathsome
mass of wretched mishappes, cut him off as a graceless graft, unworthy to
grow out of such a Stock. Alas, most miserable and lamentable case! would to
God (as I said) the Destinies had decreed his death in the swadling-clowts, or
that the Fates had prescribed his end in his infancy; then should not I my
self have been (as I will be) so unnatural, as to seek the spoil of mine
own child; or more savage than the brute beasts, in committing such cruelty.

Hereupon Amazias stumbling as fast as he could to his Peers, revealed unto
them the whole cause of his distress, requiring their favorable assistance in
these his determinate proceedings. Who with rage incensed, promising in what
thing soever, their allegiance: he commanded that his wife, and Eliosto should
be carried to strait prison, until they heard further of his pleasure. The
Gua^d unwilling to lay their hands upon their Queen and Prince, and yet
fearing the Kings fury, went very sorrowful to fulfill their charge. Coming
to the Queens lodging, they found her playing with her son, and other
Ladies, at Cards; unto whom, with tears doing their message, Eliosto and
Cleodora were astonished at such a hard censure; and finding their galled
consciences sure advocates to plead in their cases, went to Lymbo most
willingly: where with sighs and tears they past away the time till they might
come to their trial. Especially Cleodora, who after she had almost blubbered
out her eyes for grief, fell at length into this passion. Unfortunate
Cleodora; and therefore unfortunate, because thy sorrows are more then thy
years, and thy distress too heavy for the prime of thy youth. Are the
Heavens so unjust, the Stars so dismal, the Planets so injurious, that they
have more contrary oppositions, than favorable aspects? that their influence
does infuse more prejudice, than they can infer profit? Then no doubt, if
their motions be so malign, Saturn conspiring with all balefull signs,
calculated the hour of thy birth full of disaster accidents. Ah Cleodora, thou
may see, the birds that are hatched in winter, are nipt with every storm,
such as fly against the Sun, are either scorched or blinded, and those that
repugne against nature, are ever crossd by Fortune. Thy faithful servant
Lucilla foresaw these evils, and warned thee by experience, thou reiectedst
her counsel, and therefore art bitten with repentance: Such as look not
before they leap, often fall into the ditch, and they that scorn admonition,
can not possibly avoid punishment. The young tygres follow the braying of
their old sire, the tender fawnes choose their food by the old Bucke. These
brute beasts, and without reason, stray not from the limits of nature; thou a
woman and endued with reason, art therefore thus sorrowful, because thou have
been unnatural. Better had thou been borne a Beggar than a Prince, so
should thou have brideled Fortune with want, where now she sporteth her
self with thy plenty. Ah happy life, where poor thoughts, and mean desires
live in secure content, not fearing fortune because too low. For fortune thou
see now Cleodora, that Care is a companion to Honor, not to Poverty, that
hie Cedars are frushed with tempests, when low shrubs are not touched with the
wind: precious diamonds are cut with the file, when despised pearls lie
safe in the sands; Delphos is sought by Princes, and not by Beggars, and
Fortunes Altars smoke with Kings presents, not with poor men's gifts. Happy
are they Cleodora, that curse Fortune for contempt, not for fear; and may wish
they were, not sorrow they have been. Thou art a Princess, and yet a
prisoner, borne to the one by descent, assign^d to the other by despite;
accused not without cause, and therefore ought to die without care; for
patience is a shield against fortune. Ah but infamy galleth unto death, and
lives after death: Report is plumed with Times feathers, and Envy oftentimes
sounds Fames trumpet; thy detected incest shall fly in the air, and thy
known virtues shall lie hid in the earth: One moale staineth a whole face, and
what is once spotted with infamy, can hardely be worn out with Time. Die then
Cleodora, Cleodora die; for if the gods should say, thou art guiltless, yet
Envy would hear the gods, but never believe the gods. After that, she had many
sighs, and sobs, and most bitter tears, passd over many melancholy thoghts;
one while seeing death ready to execute the last part of sorrow, another while
seeing sorrow increasing; now looking toward heaven, and anon seeing the
kind of hell that she lived in; now reviving with a hope of some unlooked for
happiness, and by and by stroke dead with the despair of all hope almost
whatsoever. In fine, so beset with sorrow, as she had almost no thought of
comfort, in the midst of all this misery, throwing herself upon her bed, after
she had lain a while, musing upon her incomparable crosses, she took pen,
and incke, and paper, and as a woman half bestraught, wrote this issue of her
humor, being indeed a fancy which that learned Author N. B. has dignifi^d
with respect.

Among the gro^s, the woods and thickes,
The bushes, brambles, and the briers,
The shrubbes, the stubbes, the thorns, and pricks,
The ditches, plashes, lakes and miers.
Where fish nor foul, nor bird nor beast,
Nor living thing may take delight,
Nor reasons rage may look for rest,
Till heart be dead of hateful spite.
Within the ca^e of cares unknown,
Where hope of comfort all decays,
Let me with s^rrow sit alone,
In dole^ull thoughts to end ^y days.
And when I hear^ the storms ari^e,
That troubled Ghosts do leave the grave;
With hellish ^ounds of horr^rs ^ries,
Let m^ g^c look o^ of my ca^.
And when I feel what pains they bide,
That do the greatest torm^nts pro^e,
Then let not me the sorrow hide,
That I have sufferd by my love.
Where losses, crosse^ c^re and g^iefe,
With (...), (...) h^full hate,
Witho^t all hope of haps relief,
D^e tugge and tear the heart to naught:
B^ sigh^ and (...) and si^g, and sw^are,
It is too much for one to bear.
When she had ended thus her passion, I mean in writing, carelessly she left
it in her chamber; where-t^e Ia^lor finding it fallen on the floor, as a thing
of little account; when he had perused and taken a true copy of it, he
secretly lost it where he found (...) that if the King knew her extremities,
he would somewh^t a^pease his fury, and release her from prison Cleodora was
not more distressed with dolor, than poor Eliosto was combred with care, to
see so strange ^ chance, and so sudden a change; that he, who of late was a
royal Prince, was now a distressed captive; that his liberty was turned to
^etters; his dignity, to misery; and his happy state, to a most hellish
condition* that after floods of tears which fell from his crystal e^es, he
burst forth into these tea^mes Alas (quoth he) what humane creature was ever
driven into such doubtful calamities? what Prince was ever perplexed with such
doleful^ passions? what man was ever crossed with such aduer^tie? nay, what
wight ever was clogged with the like (...) have the spightfull D^stinies
decreed my destruction, or the (...) Pl^nets conspired my bitter overthrow?
does perverse Fortune mean to make me a mirror of mutabil^e, ^r is this the
reward that Cupid bestows upon his Clients? is every one that does fancy,
maimed with the like misf^rtune? or is Love always accompanied with such (...)
luck? Alas, no, for their Love is lawful, and mine le^d and lascivious; their
fancy is fixed upon ve^tue, and min^ upon vanity; they make their m^tch wit^
eq^lity, and (...) ^arket with my fathers (...): so that I ^m ^ike ^n choosing
such chaffer, to chop and change, and live by the loss; ye^ to buy re^entance
at an unreasonable rate. But no^ I s^e the Sun being at the highest,
declineth; the Se^ (...) at the full tide, ^bbeth; calm continues not lo^
^out a storm, neither is happiness had long wit^out mo^rning, bliss wit^out
woe, weal without (...)* (...) without sorrow. For who o^ late so floated in
the ^loods of prosperity as I which now by the sin^ster means o^ frowning
Fortune, am sowsed in theseas of oppression? exalted of late to the highest
degree of felicity, am now driven to the greatest extremity of e^ill; of late
puffed up with prosperity, and now pushed down with adversity; yea o^ late
placed in Paradise, and now plunged in perplexity Oh E^, if thy f^indes
fatherly precepts might have persuaded thee, if their aduices had been thy
aduertisements, and thou had car^fully kept their counsels; then by their
forewarning, thou had been fore armed against all mishap and misery. The
force offick^e fancy had not then gi^en t^ee the f^ile; Love had not so
lightly procured ^hy loss, nor the painted show of beauty had ^o soon
procured ^hy destruction. With that taking a Lute in his and, upon a deep
consideration of his former follies, and pr^sent fortunes, (...) sung this
Roundelay, which it seems his dignity had borrowed of a worthy w^iter.

Eliost^s Roundelay.
Sitting (...) sigh^ng in my secret muse,
As onc^ Apollo did, (...) with Love,
No^ing the (...) ^aies young year^s do^ vs^,
(...) fond affect^ (...) p^ime of youth does (...):
With (...), de^pairing I d^e cry,
Wo^ worth the ^aulis and (...) of mine (...).
When wanton age, the blossom of my time,
Drew me to gaze upon the gorgeous sight,
That Beauty pompous in her highest prime,
Presents to tangle men with sweet delight:
Then with despairing tears my thoughts do cry,
Woe worth the fau^ts and follies af mine ei^.
When I suruaid the riches of her looks,
Where-out flew flames of never quenched desire,
Wherein lay baires, that Venus snares with hooks,
Or where proud Cupid sat, all armed with fire:
Then touched with Love, my inw^rd soul did cri^,
Woe worth the faults and follies of mine eye.
The milk white Galaxia of her browe,
Where Love does dance Lauoltaes of his skill,
Like to the Temple where true Lovers vow,
To follow what shall please their mistress will:
Noting her Iuorie front, now do I cry,
Woe worth the faults and follies of mine eye.
Her face like filuer Luna in her shine,
All tainted through with bright vermillian strains,
Like Lillies dipped in Bacchus choicest wine,
Powdered and inter-seam'd with azur'd veins:
Delighting in their pride, now may I cry,
Woe worth the faults and follies of mine eye.
The golden wyers that checkers in the day,
Inferior to the tresses of her hair,
Her Ambertrammels did my heart dismay,
That when I look^, I durst not ouer-dare:
Proud of her pride, now I am forced to cry,
Woe worth the faults and follies of mine eye.
These fading Beauties drew me on to sin, Disce sen^ virtutem ex me M. Ed. ex
Coll. Reg. in Ox.

Natures great riches framed my bitter ruth,
These were the traps that Love did snare me in,
Oh these, and none but these have wract my youth!
Misled by them, I may despairing cry,
Woe worth the faults and follies of mine eye.
By those I slipped from Virtues holy (...),
That leads into the highest crystal (...),
By these I fell to vanity and wrack,
And as a man forlorn with sin and fear:
Despair and sorrow does constrain me cry,
Woe worth the faults and follies of mine ei^.
After that Eliosto had uttered this Sonnet in the bitterness of mind, word was
brought him by certain Officers, that the King having thoroughly canuased, with
his Counsel, the notorious dislike of his incestuous transgressions, has
found it unpardonable; and so my Lord (quoth they) you must prepare your self
for death, for to morrowes light must consummate the period both of yours, and
Cleodoraes days.

I embrace the sentence (quoth Eliosto) most willingly: and now thou Saturnes
black son, do thy worst; for I am altogether unable to sustain any longer
so grievous a burden as I do. I perceive that the more with patience I strive
to allay the heat of my exulcerate torments, the more the smothered cindars
revive in quenchlesse flames, flames that Aetna-like boil in my breast,
resembling the horrors of mount Chibelloes fiery rage, which vomites millions
of vapors, and darts heaps of sulphre from the glowing center. In a word,
when the dark night had ouer-spread the earth with ^er black mantle, Amazias
ouercharged with sorrow, could take no rest, but passing the time in brinish
tears, lamented the exceeding great folly of his son, in that he would
after so licentious a manner so desperately precipitate himself into danger;
but neither the ardent persuasions of his Nobles, nor yet fatherly affection
could diue^t him from his bloody determination. The next morning, the people
leaving their lodgings betimes, went to the place where the execution should
be, and there pro^ded themselves an easy rowme without the (...); for within
them none might stand, (the Nobles and their necessary Attendants excepted:)
with them infinite troops of the assemb^ed strangers, hasted to prevent Tuan,
who shaking his dewie locks on the mountains, posted from the watrie cabbi^
of Nereus, to be an early viewer of these tragi^all spectacles. But ere he
had measured a tenth proportion of ^is daily pace, the Peers suited in long
sable robes, with wreathes of Cyprus branches, consecrated to Cypar^ssus,
encompassing their temples, came forward, and with them other inferior
assistants, clad in their mourning garments, each attending upon his several
charge. Next these came Eliost^ and Cleodora, consisting of the fairest of both
^indes, flowrishing in the prime of their youth, and in the^ ride of their
beauty, attired all in long black ornaments trailing after them, wearing on
their heads, garla^ds of odoriferous flowers. Who being arrived upon the
scaffold, after the finishing of the ceremonial rites, yielded up their lives
unto the fatal stroke of Justice.

These two patients being thus executed; during the time for the preparation
of rich and solemn funerals, they were for a public observation brought into
the base court of the Palace, to the great grief of all the beholders. After
this, the King caused a royal and sumptuous furniture to be celebrated for
their obsequies, and with such honor as their dign^ties required; whom burying
in the (...) of Saint Lawren^, he erected a stately Mau^olaenm to ^ee the
common bed of those bodies, whose hearts (when they were alive) were so
firmly conjoined together. And lest the^e should be left any thing (...) in
this trag^al accident, Lucilla for the unspeakable (...) of her mist. esse, did
drown herself, for whom a stately bath was prepared in ever burning Phlegeton.

The Conclusion.
SVch was the success of this rare oft-thwarted love, which my over bold pen
has presumed thus rudely to descipher. If any decorum be omitted, or indecorum
committed, I cannot otherwise excuse it (cu^teous Readers) then by your
favors; which will, I hope, bear with such imperfections, and not impute it
to mine own desert, which was loath to pollish a toie, whereon I never
bestowed more labor, than ^ometimes an idle hour of recreation.

Gratias Deo vni and trino.

