Three SERMONS.

1. The good Fight. Preached at the Funeral of Henry Sommaster of PENS-FORD in
the County of Deuon, Esquire. Ian. 1606. 2. The worth of the water of Life. 3.
David's Longing, and David's Love.
Greg. in Ezech. Hom. 3. The Preacher should be like the Smiths burning Iron,
which not only heateth those that are near, but casts sparks far off.

By SAM. HIERON.

printer's or publisher's device HINC ^ LVCEM ^ ET ^ POCVLA ^ SACRA
ALMA MATTER CANTA BRIGIA



AT CAMBRIDGE Printed by JOHN LEGATE. Anno 1607.

To the right Worshipful, Sir WILLIAM STRODE of Newingham in the County of
Deuon. Knight.
SIR, what, and how great my debt is to your Worship, it is very meet for me to
remember, though it be not necessary to acquaint the world with particulars.
My desire has been, and is, to give some testimony of thankfulness. Rich
presents, such as in this craving and catching age, do (as the Wiseman says,
Pro. 18.16.
Enlarge a man, and lead him before great men, as you need not, so (I know)
you expect not: sure I am, I for my part am very unable to bestow. But (as S.
Peter said to the cripple at the temple gate, Act. 3.6.
Such as I have I give, even a few blotted leaves; such perhaps, as in this
itching-eared 2. Tim. 4.3.
generation, (wherein the most do more affect toys then truth, and a flourish
of words, rather then substance of matter) few will take notice of: yet such as
I doubt not but you, out of your love to me, but chiefly out of your affection
to Gods holy truth, will vouchsafe kindly to accept. For me, to commend (as
deceitful hucksters do their wares) either to you or to others, that which I
here make tender of, were to proclaim to the world mine own vanity. Let
another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth, says the Scripture: Pro.
27.2.
neither yet will I any way disparage it: for that might be thought a secret
begging of commendation. I submit it to trial, if either to your self, or to
any other of the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16.
it shall bring any little increase, either of sound knowledge, or sweet feeling
in the mystery of Christ, Ephesians. 3.4.
I have my reward, and shall think my labor well bestowed. And so heartily,
wishing the true good unto your Worship, your good Lady, your whole line and
family, I take my leave. Modbury in Deuon.

Your Worships respectively, SAM. HIERON.

2. TIM. 4.7. I have fought a good fight.


THE beginning of this chapter v. 1.2.3.4.
presents unto us a very grave and soleme charge given as in the name of God
and his most glorious presence by the Apostle unto his Son ver. 5.
Timotheus, The occasion of the words.
that considering the euilnes of the times, and the aptnes of men to turn
their ears from the truth unto Fables, he should show forth an extraordinary
and unwearied industry in the faithful execution of his public Ministry. The
reason inducing Paul to be at this time especially so vehement in this kind of
persuading, and which should also move Timothy to be as apt to entertain the advice, was the neeere approaching of the time of his final dissolution; I am
now ready to be offered, etc. v. 6.
as if he had said: I am uncertain how soon the thread of my life may be cut
eff, sure I am, it cannot be stretched out long, and therefore, whilst I have
time, (and for ought I know this may be the last time (I cannot but advertise
thee: And seeing that which I now speak, I speak as one ready to lay down
this Tabernacle, in the depth of my affection to thee, and in the sincerity of
my heart to God, (before whom I exspect hourly to appear) thine cares ought
with the greater greedines even to drink in these my last words, and they
should so far forth affect thee, that thou should lay them up, and hide Ps.
119.11.
them, and keep them in the midst of thy heart. Pro. 4.21.


Now the mentioning of death, albeit it works little with Evil men, unless
it be either to the deading of their hearts, like Nabals (he was like a stone,
1. Sam. 25.37
says the Text), or to the making of them more desperate secure, ( Let us eat
and drink, for to morrow we shall die, i. Cor. 15.32.
yet in such a fleshy Ezech. 11.19.
melting 2 Kin. 22.19.
renewed Ps. 51.10.
heart as Paul's was, it could not choose but leave some impression. For how
could it be, that Paul, knowing, that when man returns to his earth Ps. 146.4.
his spirit is eftsoons either received into everlasting Habitatio^s Luke 16.9.
, or else dismissed to be reserved in chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day, Iud. 6.
should not also cast with himself, which of these two should be the final
issue of his soul? Now then, beholding with the eyes of his mind, the Glory
that shall be showed hereafter Romans 8.18.
on the one side, and the Burning Lake which is the second Death Reu. 21.8.
on the other side, and knowing that each of them is by the ordinance of God,
(as with a chain of Adamant) tied to the holiness or profanes of the former
course, therefore for the securing of his own soul, for the encouraging his
pupil Timothy, and for a saving and comfortable direction to us all, he
joyfully looks back into his life by past, that from thence he may derive a
hopeful inference for the time to come: I have fought a good fight etc, From
henceforth is laid up for me etc. Thus with as much fidelity and plainenes as
I could, I have let you see, the course, and order, and dependence of this
Text. It is a notable and a pregnant proof of the saying of the wise man, (
Pro. 14.32.
) The wicked shall be cast away for his malice, but the Righteous has hope in
his death. That Paul's Hope was not in this life only ( Cor. 15.19.
) appears by the following verse: what were the grounds of his hope, by which
it became a Hope not making ashamed ( Romans 5.5.
) is declared in this verse. It is borne up with three supporters. 1. A Good
fight well discharged: 2. a holy Course well finished. 3. a sound Faith well
preserved. This is like Salomons threefold cord ( Ecc. 4.12.
) which is not easily broken. It may be compared to that Skarlet cord ( Ios. 2.
) by which Rahab let down the spies, and which she left hanging in her
window. For as that was the mark by which her house was known, and she saved
from the destruction of Jericho, so this holy Twine, is a pledge to that soul
where the Lord has tied it, that it shall be freed from the wrath that is to
come. Time will not give leave to untwist every specialty. I will proceed as I
may, and begin with the first, praying you all that inasmuch as the same
dissolution of nature awaites us all, which has long since brought Paul to his
exspected Rest, we would yield our selves to be so far forth persuaded by
that, which by Gods assistance I shall speak, that by seeking to imitate Paul's
hope, we may at last partake the same happiness which Paul does.

Before I come to the more exact discovery of the hid Treasure of this my
Text, Doctrine out of the order of the place.
I must commend unto you this general observation, grounded upon the course
and order of this Place, namely, That the most solid comfort to a Christian
soul, beholding the greisly and ghastly countenance of approaching Death, is
the Testimony which the Heart bears to it self, of the former steady care to
walk in all good conscience before God. I would be loath to be charged with
offering violence to my Text, therefore I will let you see how this doctrine
arises kindly and vn-enforced from this scripture. We see first our Apostle,
in a resolved expectation of his now very near at hand departure: that is
express, we see him also assuring himself of no smaller honor then a Crown
of Righteousness: so much the verse following will not suffer us to deny. If it
be demanded now, whence it was, that his thoughts of death were so full of
comfort, and his hopes of happiness so full of confidence, the truest answer is
this, it came even from hence, that the witness in his bosom, speaking the
truth before the Witness in heaven, Job. 16.19.
testified with him and for him, that in all his course from the very first
instant of his conversion, unto this last conclusion and shutting up of his
days, his whole drift was, in simplicity and godly pureness to have his
Conversation in the World Cor. 1.12.
. I have fought a good fight. I have finished my course, etc. So that, this
considered, there is very sufficient footing for this doctrine, in this Text.
Give me leave to show you in an example or two, how others of Gods holy ones,
being guided by the same spirit, have in the like case, grounded their hopes
upon the like foundation. Note well the example of Hezekiah Is. 38.1. etc.
. He knew generally by natures instinct, that he must die; but at this time (I
now speak of) the prophet of the Lord, even the prophet Isaiah came unto him
with this doleful message. Put thine house in order, for thou shall die and
not live. Whom would not these tidings have stricken to the heart, and what
could Hezakiah expect but present death? well then, all things threatening his
end, the common condition of nature, the mortality of present sickness (being,
as it is thought, the plague) and above all, the doom come from the Lord by
the hand of such a prophet, where was the staff of Hezekiahs comfort, but even
as our Apostles was in the secret witness of his own soul, testifiing unto him
the sincerity and holiness of his former course? O Lord remember now how I have
walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which
was good in thy fight. Who so compares this of Paul, with that of Hezekiah,
must needs say that they were both even the very breathings of one and the same
spirit. Think we that Eliiah, sitting under the Juniper tree 1. Kin. 19.4.10.
could with any comfort have desired the Lord, to take his soul, if he had not
had his assurance written upon the table of his heart Pro. 3.3.
that he had been always very jealous for the Lord God of hosts? Could old
Simeon with a glad spirit have besought the Lord even instantly to dismiss
him, if his conscience had not told him, that all his life past had been an
intentive awaiting for the Consolation of Israel Luc. 2.2.25.26.
. But what should I search the scripture for more examples? Look to Jesus the
author and finisher of our Faith, Heb. 12^2.
and see whether, when he a as man made sin for us 2. Cor. 5.21.
was to drink that bitter Cup Mat. 26.39.
and to taste death for us all Heb. 2.9.
, his constant expectation of partaking with his fathers glory, came not by the
same degrees unto the due perfection? Examine that effectual prayer composed
by him the night before his sufferings, when he knew that his hour was come
that he should depart out of this world unto the Father Ioh. 13.1.
. Read Ioh. 17.5.6. I have glorified thee, now glorify me, etc.

If you demand a reason of this Doctrine, The reason of the Doct.
you may thus conceive it, and I pray you to mark it, least I should be
mistaken and thought to place man's hope of comfort in himself. A man which
iourneyeth, builds his assurance of safe arriving at the place he aims at,
upon his diligence to enquire, and his care to keep the right path leading
thereunto. The place I intend, I know, the way I am well advised of, in it I
am sure I am, I have traueiled in it as was fit, therefore I am sure I shall
not fail in my intent. This is a kind of reasoning which cannot deceive. So
is it in this case. The way to heaven is Christ. I am the way. Ioh. 14.6.
by his blood he has tracked out for us a new and living way Heb. 10.^0.
: For the help of his chosen in this way, he has given his word: He has
showed thee, O man what is good, etc. Mic^ 6.8.
. to his word he has annexed Ministers, as Guides Act. 8.31.
for understanding it: with the voice of his word he has coupled the Teaching
of his spirit: Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying. This is the
way, etc. Is. 30.21.
. He has set marks also in the way, by which to know it; as namely, 1.
Antiquity Stand in the ways and ask for the old way, which is the good way,
etc. Ier. 6.16.
. 2. Purity. There shall be a path and a way, and the way shall be called Holy,
etc. Is. 35.8.
. 3. Fruitfulnes. He has ordained good works that we should walk in them Ephesians.
2.10.
. 4. Straitnes, and the fewnes of passengers. The gate is strait and the way
narrow which leads to life, and few there be that find it Math. 7.14.
. So then, the mark I have always aimed at is heaven, even the Price of the
high calling of God in Christ Phil. 3.14.
: the way to it I have sought, not in mine own heart, nor in the guises and
humors of the world, but in the Scripture: I have found it to be Faith in
Christ working by love Gal. 5.6.
and making a man zealous of goodworks Tit. 2.14.
: to this way my heart has been set Deu. 32.46.
, it has been my continual and instant suite to be directed in this Path Ps.
119.36.
and though with much weakness, and limping Heb. 12.13.
, yea and falling Ps. 37.24.
sometimes, yet to it I have striuen Luc. 13.24.
continually: How then without calling Gods truth and faithfulness into
Question, can I doubt of the End, when my conscience is witness with me, that my
steady respect Ps. 119.6.
has been unto the way guiding thereunto? you see then the truth of the
doctrine, and the reason of it, and withal that in it there is no building
upon our selves, but a hopeful resting upon the Lord, who having taught Ps.
119.33.
me the way, and inclined my heart Ver. 36.
unto it, and established me in it Ver. 116.
, I know him to be so far from denying himself 2. Tim. 2.13.
that I cannot miss of the end of my course, the salvation 1. Pet. 1.9.
of my soul. This the piety, the Purity, the sincerity of my former course,
secureth me of the Glory to come, not because of any connection betwixt work
and wages, which I trust unto, but because the Lord, of his own will Iam. 1.18.
and free grace, has vouchsafed the singlenes of my heart Ephesians. 6.5.
, purged from dead works by the blood of Christ Heb. 9.14.
even amidst many weaknesses to be the way to lead me unto life. So that my
title is the promise Gal. 3.18.
of God, and not mine own performance: the conscience of my former course, is
the assurer, not the deseruer of my happiness. Some great man out of his bounty
gives the an inheritance of some pounds by the year, thou must pay a pepper
corn for thy Rent; when thou have paid it, indeed thou may claim the
profits, yea and by law thou may recover them: but what will thou plead?
what? that thou art worthy of it, that thou have paid well for it? no: the
bargain is thy plea, the covenant is all which thou can allege, for
betwixt the rent and the revenue there is no proportion: so, for thy Grain of
musterdseed Math. 17.20.
thy Smooking Js 42.3.
and scarce appearing Faith, thy scant Obedience, thy Cup of cold water Math.
10.42.
thou may challenge heaven, and God will not, God cannot deny it thee, yea
he loves to be so urged: but yet thou can not say, It is mine, I have
deserved it: (for what is all this to that surpassing, exceeding, eternal
weight of Glory 2. Cor. 4.17.
, but, O Lord it is mine, thou have promised it. Thus you see how without any
preiudicing, nay rather how with the enlarging of the Riches of Gods grace, the
comfort of a dying Christian, depends upon the witness of his conscience
touching the sincerity of his heart, and the unblameable carriage of his life.

The use of this doctrine is plain and obuious to every man's conceiving, and
it must needs be this, The use.
even to warn us all, as we tender our own souls comfort at the instant of
Natures dissolution, so to be very regarding of our present course, that out of
it we may raise our hopes, that when our earthly house of this tabernacle
shall be destroyed, we shall have a building given us of God, eternal in the
heavens 2. Cor. 5.1.
, that the conscience of our unlawful deeds and uncleanly conversation 2 Pet.
2.7.8.
may not fill our faces with shame and our hearts with horror, making death to
be unto us The King of fear Job. 18.14.
and the thought of Gods presence, (before whom we shall then understand, that
we are shortly to appear) as a preamble unto eternal misery. Certain it is,
that whatsoever we now in our security (through Satan's bewitching) do imagine
blessing our selves secretly, and saying we shall have peace Deu. 29.19.
, yet as sure as God lives, who has said in his word, that the light of the
wicked shall be quenched Job. 18.5.
and the hope of the unjust perish Pro. 11.7.
, so surely such as has been our course, such shall be our end, if we have
lived without conscience, we shall surely die without comfort. And to set the
better edge upon this advertisement, give me leave to draw you a little into
the consideration of that thing, as if it were now present, which ere long will
indeed be present. We are met here together at this time (by Gods providence)
men of sundry fashions and of diverse ranks, but (howsoever differing
otherwise) all by profession, Christians and by condition, mortal. All our
teeth are set on edge, with the fruit which Adam eat, and the law of death,
is heavens decree and cannot be revoked. Well, put case we were instantly
arrested with some killing sickness, (the herald of approaching death) and were
to look back into that part of the wallet (as the proverb says) which is
behind, to see what hopes for future quiet, we are able to derive out of our
former conversation: let us (I say) consider well and deal faithfully with our
selves, whether our fashion of life bypast, be not more like to fill us with
discouragements, and to breed in us a fearful looking for of Judgment Heb.
10.27.
then to embolden us with a holy resolution to exspect a gracious admittance
into our Masters Joy Math. 15.2^.
. And indeed when men in the records of their own consciences, shall read
written in great letters, the profanesse, the Atheism, the contempt of
religion, the scorn of Gods word, the ignorance, the Monstrous oaths, the
vicious speakings, the cruelties, the oppressions, the whoredoms, the abuse of
Gods creatures, and the whole troops of gross sins, which have been in a
manner the very business of their days, what can they exspect, but that their
death, should be like the man's estate of whom the prophet Amos. 5.19.
speaks, who did flee from a Lion and a Bear met him, so should their dying
also be, a discharge from a wretched world, but withal an entrance into
another woe, even an endless, easles, hopeles misery? It is a sure Maxim in
divinity, that the future, both happiness and Misery, are begun in this
present world: sanctification and holmes are the first fruits of the one:
impiety and profanes the beginnings of the other. The Saints by election are
Saints by calling 1. Cor. 1.2.
: their conversation is now in heaven Phil. 3.20.
whose future portion is in heaven. That which God has coupled together let no
man put asunder Math. 19.6.
. you will plead against me, that so much abused example of the converted
theife at the point of execution Luke 23.39
. I answer. First, he began to work, as soon as he was called: he bewailed
his sin v. 4^.
, he confessed Christ verse. 41.42.
, he advised his fellow Thief ver. 40.
: secondly, the example was extraordinary (for the gracing of Christ's then
debasement) showing what God can do, not what ordinarily he will do. I have
seen a pardon given to a man upon the gallows, but who so emboldeneth
himself thereupon, perhaps the rope may be his hire: it is not good to put it
upon the Psalm of Miserere, and the neck-verse, for sometime he proves no
clark. God once made an Ass to speak Numb. 23.28.
, but he that should therefore spur his beast, till he spoke also, all men
would condemn him for unwise. Let then this be the conclusion. The refreshing
of Paul's spirit, when his departing approached, was the conscience of his
well-run course: a Christian by calling, a Christian by conversation, could not
but have a Christians inheritance. Go and do thou likewise Luke 10.37.
. Let the life of the religious be thy study, and the death of the righteous
Number. 23.10.
shall be thy sure reward; where there has been the first resurrection there
can be no second death Reu. 20.6.


Hitherto we have considered generally of the grounds of Paul's hope, his
carriage past: now let us examine it more particularly: and first, of the first
supporter. I have fought a good fight. What then (will some man say to me) was
Paul a soldier, that he speaks here of fighting? yes, he was a soldier, and
the same no fresh water, or white-liuered soldier, but a valiant, experienced,
and beaten champion, one that had passed the hazard of many skirmishes, and (as
testimonies of his hardy courage,) was able to show the ska^res of many
received wounds, I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus Gal 6.17.
. But as the things we now discourse of are spiritual things, so this fighting
must be understood in a spiritual sense. Paul a spiritual man 1. Cor. 2.16.
, his adversaries spiritual, or for spiritual respects, his weapons
spiritual 2. Cor. 10.4.
, his victories spiritual. Let me acquaint you with particulars, that so the
use of this Scripture may be the more full.

Paul's fights.
Paul undergoes a double consideration: 1. either as a Christian, or secondly,
as an Apostle and Minister of Christ Jesus: some of his fightings, more
properly concern his estate as a Christian: some again he was more especially
tried in by virtue of his calling. As he was a Christian, I find in his own
writings the report of two especial conflicts: the one Romans 7. betwixt Nature
and Grace, the Spirit and the flesh, the law of his members, and the law of
God. Who so reads and examineth the place, shall see first the quality of the
combatants, secondly the grounds and terms of the quarrel, thirdly, the hazard
(as might seem for the time) and doubtfulnesse of the event, together with
some foyles taken on either part, and lastly the certainty and comfort of the
victory, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord Ver. 25.
. The second combat is, 2. Cor. 12. and that was more direct and immediate with
Satan, although he therein cunningly (as his use is) wrought upon the
advantage of Paul's corruption. In this, Paul was much tossed, and goared, and
buffeted, and glad to fly once, and again, and the third time for refuge to
the Lord. Howbeit, though the assault was sharp, yet the conquest was great.
My grace shall be sufficient for thee Ver. 9.
, and Very gladly will I rejoice in mine infirmities.

Now his fightings (as an Apostle) were diverse, and the same not idle or
causeless, about needless Questions and strife of words 1. Tim. 6.4.
, for so fight I, says he, not as one beating the air 1. Cor. 9.26.
: but they were grave and weighty, even for the success of his ministry,
and the enlargement of the Gospel of Christ Jesus. They may (for teachings
sake) be thus distinguished: to have been either against the oppositions and
unsound cavillings, or against the violences and cruelties of those which were
adversaries to the truth. Of the former sort, we have his combat with Elimas
at Paphus Act. 13.
, with the reuiuers of the legal ceremonies at Antioch Act. 15.
, with the Stoickes and Epicures at Athens Act. 17.
, with those Beasts 1. Cor. 15.32
, Demetrius and his faction at Ephesus Act. 19.
, with Hy^^^^^s and Philetus 2. Tim. 2.14
, with Alexander the Smith 2. Tim. 4.1
. With all these, and with many besides these he combated, and over all these
through the help of Christ Phil. 4.13.
, he had the victory. For it may be truly said of them all, which himself
speaks of some, their madness was made evident unto all man, and they
prevailed not long. 2. Tim. 3.9.
His fightings with the violences and cruelties of evil men, it were long to
particularize. I refer you to his own report 2. Cor. 11.23. etc.
. In all these he was more then Conqueror Romans 8.37.
, and by none of these was either his comfort impeached, his ministry and
cause endammaged, or the Church of God damnified. Not his comfort impeached,
for We faint not, but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is
renewed daily 2. Cor. 1.16.
. Not his ministry and cause endammaged: for, albeit I suffer unto bonds, yet
the word of God is not bound 2. Tim. 2.9.
, and the things which have come unto me are turned to the furtherance of the
Gospel Phil. 1.12.
; lastly, not the Church of God damnified, for, I suffer all things for the
elects sake 2. Tim. 2.10
, and many of the brethren are emboldened through my bands, and dare more
frankely speak the word Phil. 1.14.
. Thus I have given you a brief of Paul's fightings, and of Paul's victories;
sharp encounters, glorious conquests. These were they, the remembrance whereof
made the face of death even lovely unto him, and confirmed his inward
certainty of the Recompense of reward Heb. 11.26.
, even because he was able to say in truth of conscience, I have fought a good
fight.

This far for the opening of the text, and the laying the grounds of that
which I would say, I have reported to you things done, I come now to speak of
things to be done. For this clause (as all other holy Scripture) is for our
learning Romans 15.4.
, and is profitable to teach 2. Tim. 3.16
. I will bound my whole speech within the compass of these two points: first,
I will show that all Christians are called to the like fight: secondly, I will
draw to an inquitie by way of application of the whole, Every Christian called
to the like fight, that Paul fought.
how far forth we have fought this fight.

For proof of the former, if men were (as they ought to be) experienced in the
Scriptures, I need allege no more then the Apostles exhortation to the
Philippians, where he calls them to the having of the same fight, which
(says he) you have seen in me, and now hear to be in me Phil. 1.30.
. But for the satisfaction of all, I will show you the truth of it by points
and parcels. First, touching the fight, in a man's own bosom, even in his own
heart, with his own corruption. Paul delivers this general rule couching
all Gods chosen, that in them the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh, etc. Gal. 5.17.
And S. Peter accords, that the lusts of the flesh do fight against the soul
1. Pet. 2.11.
. The gift of Regeneration (meant by spirit) and the corruption of nature
(understood by Flesh) are mixed together (like the light and darkness in the
air, in the dawning, Quod tu nec tenebras, nec possis dicere lucem. Ovid.
so throughout in all the powers of the soul,) and these two being in a direct
line of opposition and contrariety each to other, there must needs follow a
continual combat, like the struggling which Rebecca felt in her womb Genesis
25.22.
making a Christian cry in a kind of astonishment as she did, why am I thus?
Happy he which feels this combat, who is ever wrestling with his own
corruption, laboring and endeavoring himself to have a clear conscience
toward God Act. 24.16.
. The victory is certain: For as it was said to Rebecca when upon the striving
she felt, she asked of God, that the elder should serve the younger, so in
this case we are ascertained that the old man, (our old natural corruption)
shall be cast of and killed, and the new man (the grace wrought by Gods spirit)
created in righteousness and true holiness Ephesians. 4.22.24.
shall be more and more established. Secondly touching the Fight with Satan, the
scripture is express. He has desired you to win now you Iuc. 22.31.
said Christ to Peter, and he walks about seeking to devour, says Peter to
us 1. Pet. 5.8.
well resist him we must: it is S. James his rule Chapter 4.7.
and that cannot be without fighting: and it is not flesh and blood, we wrestle
with, says our Apostle, but principalities and powers, etc. and we had need to
provide, that we may stand fast Ephesians. 6.12 13.
. He is but a titular Christian, and has but a show of godliness 2. Tim. 3.5.
, who has not had personal experience of the Stratagemes of Satan, now
puffing up to presumption, now pulling down to despair, one while working to
security, another while pressing to dismayednesse, sometimes extenuating, and
hiding, and painting sin, that before it is committed it may beguile,
sometimes opening and aggravating it, that when it is performed, it may
affright: turning himself into many shapes, sometimes like an industrious
agent to advance our profit, sometimes like a pleasant companion, to further
our delight, sometimes like a true-hearted friend, to respect our good name,
but always a venomous adversary to empoyson our soul. These are no new
things to the children of God: the mercy of God, and the malice of Satan,
they know them well to be undivided companions. Neither is the Scripture
wanting to assure us of the conquest. It was said of old, that the serpent, his
head being broken, could but bruise the heel Genesis 3.15.
, and it has been a fresh renewed, that Greater is he which is in us, then he
which is in the world 1. Job. 4.4.
, and we all, so many as are now in the lists against this assaylant have this
warrant, sealed (seeing it is a part of the new Testament) with the blood of
Christ, that the God of peace shall tread Satan under our feet shortly Romans
16.20
. The third fight is for the maintenance of the cause of Religion, against both
the cunning of opposers, and the malice of persecutors. That every Christian is
to fight with a holy zeal for the purity of religion, S. Jude shall witness
for me, It was needful for me (says he) to write unto you, to exhort you that
you should earnestly contend for the faith which was once given to the Saints
Jude 3.
. The kingdom of heaven (says our Savior) suffers violence, and the
violent take it by force Mat. 11.12.
There is force in getting the truth, there must be a kind of force also in
maintaining it. David chose religion for his heritage Isa. 119.111
. He is not worthy to have it, which will not strive to preserve it. Now for
this kind of fight there are two things required: First, skill: and secondly,
courage. Skill, because every corner is so full of cunning and subtle
underminers of religion: Atheists, Jesuits, Seminaries, Sectaries: these fight
not with violence and professed enmity, but with plausible reasons, with
smooth persuasions, and with all the glozing pretenses which hell can devise to
entangle. What need have men then of exercised wits Heb. 5.14.
, and understanding hearts 1 King. 3.9.
, knowing how wisely to handle that same sword of the spirit Ephesians. 6.17.
to resist them? How requisite is it, that Christian soldiers should be daily
practicing the feats of spiritual arms, that they may know how to grapple
with the adversary at every kind of weapon, and to make their part good
against every encounter? As skill is required, so courage and resolution also:
for know you, what the Apostle said to the converted Hebrews Heb. 10.32.
, After ye received light, (that is, some saving knowledge and feeling of the
truth) ye endured a great fight of afflictions: Is not be^^ need of courage?
what think we of the Mockings of Ismael Genesis 21.9.
, the disdain of Herod Luke 23.11.
, the scourgings of Pilate Mat. 27.26.
, of spoilings of goods, of being made a gazing stock by reproaches Heb.
10.33.34.
, nay, of resistance to blood Heb. 12.4.
? Do not these things require a resolution? were it not fitting that, we should
be well provided, who must go through all these bickerings, lest when we have
struck a stroke or two, we should be wearied and faint in our minds Heb. 12.3.
, and so be like the children of Ephraim, of whom the Psalm says Is. 78.9.
, that being armed and shooting with the bow, they turned back in the day of
battle?

As the necessity of this kind of Eight for the Maintenance of the cause of
Religion, lies upon all, so upon two degrees especially, Magistrates and
Ministers. They are both called Leaders 1. Sam. 9.16. Vnges eum antecessorem.
Hebr. 13.7. (...).
of the people, and therefore as of Leaders, whose experience must instruct,
and whose valor must encourage and put heart into others, there is twice so
much required. It is their office to stand in the breach Psa. 106.23.
, and to go out and in 1. King. 3.7.
before the people, and to bear the shock and brunt of the first grapling. If
they be sound and sincere, instant and resolute in the cause of God, oh, what
life and courage shall they put into the multitude which do even depend upon
their conduct? if they be cold and dastardly and give ground in the day of
battle, how will they make the hearts of the people even to die within them,
and what hope will Satan have to set up his standard in the midst of Gods
church? But as the egernes in this combat is required of Magistrates and
Ministers more then of others, so of us who be Ministers most of all. In the
old Law things in the sanctuary were double to that which was common, the
Shekell of the sanctuary twice so weighty as the common shekell Ex. 30.13.
, the cubit of the sanctuary twice so long as the common cubit Compare 1 Kin.
7.15. with 2. Chro 3.15.
. The Minister had need to wish as Elisha did of Eliah, his spirit 2. King.
2.9.
, that the spirit of understanding and courage may be doubled and trebled upon
him. If he be the man, as he should be, Satan owes him a double spite, and in
many combats with the Church of God, he seems to give like charge to his
Instruments, which the king of Aram gave to his soldiers 1. Kin. 22.31.
Eight neither with small nor great, save only against the King of Israel: For
he thinks that if he can smite the shepherd, with a spirit either of Error,
or of drowzines, or of ambition, or of avarice, the sheep of the flock shall
be quickly scattered Math. 26.31.
. He knows by long experience, that from the Prophets of Jerusalem wickedness
goes forth into all the Land Ier. 23.15.
, and that if the Light which God has set in his Church be darkness, the
darkness cannot but exceed Math. 6.23.
. Thus I have showed you the particulars of Paul's Fightings, and the necessity
of the same Fight, in every one of us that would be (as we are called)
Christians: now let us come to the next points, the Inquiry how on our parts
this Fight has been performed, viz. how we have fought against Corruption,
how we have fought against Satan, how we have striuen and fought for the
upholding and maintenance of Gods Truth.

An enquiry how we have fought this fight.
And here, in the very first entry of my Meditations, when I did in my thoughts
compare together those which do Fight this good Fight under the banner of the
Lord of Hosts, with those, who (whatsoever their profession is) do indeed
and intruth fight against him, it brought into my mind, that which the spirit
of God reports touching the Israelitish troops, and the armies of the Aramites
their adversaries 1. Kin. 20.27.
. The children of Israel pitched before them, like two little flocks of Kids,
but the Aramites filled the Country: the very like comparison may be truly
made betwixt those which fight on the Lords part, and those which fight against
him, or at the least, (which by our saviors rule Luke 11.23.
is all one) fight not with him: the one side (the better part I mean) are but
even a handful in respect, one of a city, two of a Tribe Ier. 3.14.
, the other a numberless number, and may well be titled with the name of the
possessed Marc. 5.9.
, Legion, for indeed they are Many. And therefore true will that be which was
spoken of old by Isaiah Is. 10.21.22.
and has been since renewed by Paul Romans 9.27.
, Though the number of the children of Israel (men professing Religion) were as
the sand of the Sea, yet shall but a remnant be saved. It will not be enough to
have said thus, unless it be confirmed also, I will therefore show you how
true it is by degrees.

Touching fighting against men's own personal corruptions, there are (that out
of many I may cull out the chief) three things, which do show the number of
such Fighters to be but small: The first is, the general Ignorance of this
point of holy doctrine, concerning the combating together of these two,
Corruption and Holiness, nature and grace in every true Christian. I am not so
well acquainted with your spiritual estate that are here present, as to be
able peremptorily to determine ought: yet perhaps) if a man should deal with
the particulars of this assembly by polle, and should examine them as straightly
as the Gileadites did the Ephraiimites, touching shibboleth and sibboleth Iud.
12.
, demanding of each this question, How fares it with thee, touching the
Rebellion of thine own heart, prevails it or yields it to the power of
Gods spirit? How goes on the quarrel betwixt the law of sin, and the law of
God? perhaps ( I say) this demand would be quitted with such an answer, as was
that of Paul's. to the lately converted disciples at Eph^sus Act 19.2.
Have ye received (says he) the Holy Ghost since ye believed? And they said,
We have not so much as heard whether there be an Holy Ghost. So in this case,
they would say; you make a strange motion, we have not so much as heard
whether there be any such contention: And it may be also, such as have some
better understanding then the multitude, if in this particular they were well
pressed, would but make such a confused answer as Ahimaaz did to David 2. Sam.
18.29.
, Is the young man Absalom safe, said David? I saw a great tumult, but I knew
not what, said Ahimaaz; so they would be forced to say, Truth is, I have heard
or read something of such a matter, but I do not distinctly and experimentally
understand it. Thus (as it was Math. 26.73.
said to Peter) men's very speech bewrays them, and their dumbness when they
are asked the Word (as the soldiers call it) shows them to be but straglers
and hangbies upon the Lords camp, and no good Fighters: well, without judging
I leave you, to to the accusing or excusing of your own Thoughts Romans 2.15.
: Only this I say, that he which is unacquainted with this point of doctrine,
can no more be said to be a Fighter in the good Fight against corruption and
sin, then he can be reputed a party in a case of difference betwixt two, who
has not so much as heard of the quarrel. The 2. proof that the Fighters on
this side against corruption are but few is the universal yielding of the most
unto corruption. When men come with bended knees, offering up their weapons,
yielding themselves to be ordered by those whom they should withstand, there is
no likelihood that they have an intent to Fight. So in this case, when men
generally have (as it were) booked their names, and entered into pay, and even
(as a man would think) sworn their service to gross sins, who will take
them to be the Lords soldiers, or conceive that there is any meaning in them
to Fight against corruption. And surely this is the common state. I remember
what Deborah in her song Iud. 5.29.30.
reports of the mother of Sisera, how that she and her ladies in their
expectation of Sisera and his followers their return in triumph, said either
to other (in their assurance of the victory) Have they not gotten and divided
the spoil? I may say more truly (for that was spoken only out of
Imagination, either as they thought it was, or as they wished it might be) of
these foul enormities, which the word of God has branded with the hateful
name, that they are the works of darkness Ephesians. 5.11.
Have they not gotten and divided the spoil? Do they not lead captive, I say
not as they did of Sisera, a maid or two, or (as Paul does of the wily
workmen of his time) a few simple women 2. Tim. 3.6.
, but even whole multitudes, of all ranks, of all callings, of all degrees? So
often as I read those places of scripture. The earth was corrupt before God and
filled with cruelty Genesis 6.11.
, The men of Sodom compassed the house round about from the young even to the
old, all the people from all quarters Genesis 19.4.
, They assembled themselves by companies into the harlots houses Ier. 5.7.
, From the least even to the greatest of them, every one is given to
coueteousnes Ier. 6.11.
, Then they stopped their ears, and ran upon Stephen all at once Act. 7.57.
, Then arose a shout almost for the space of two hours of all men crying,
Great is Diana of the Ephesians Act. 19.34.
, All seek their own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's Phil. 2.21.
, so often (I say) as I read these and the like places, in which mention is
made of swarms of people banding themselves together in evil, I cannot but
reckon them as fore-tellings of these times, and these times as commentaries
and expositions of those places. Those master-sinnes, Ignorance, Contempt of
the word and godliness, Security, and want of awe unto Gods majesty, Neglect of
the worship of God, swearing, abuse of the Sabbath, Whoredom, Drunkeness,
Oppression, Pride, Cruelty, Contention, Malice. etc. mark how in every town
in every society, in every family almost, they do even ride in a kind of
Triumph: if there be any better disposed, laboring to be no longer the slaves
of sin but to become the servants of righteousness Romans 6.20.
, they are as Isaiah speaks of himself and such as himself Is. 8.18
as signs and wonders among the people: and how the world entertaineth them it
is known well enough: you know what David says Ps. 35.15.
, the abiects assembled themselves, the false scoffers at banke^s ^are me and
ceased not; and again, They that sat in the gate spoke of me, and the
drunkards sung of me Is. 69.12.
. This is the kindness of this generation to those who love the Lord Jesus in
sincerity Ephesians. 6.24.
. Thus the universal yielding to corruption, men obeying sin in the Lusts
thereof Romans 6.12.
, and drawing it as with cartropes Isa. 5.18.
argues that they fight not against sin. Evil reigns Romans 6.12.
in them and over them, they do willingly give up their members ver. 13.
to follow it, and (as the Apostle speaks) they take thought Romans 13.14.
for it and study to fulfill it. The third proof in this part is, the Fight
which is in the world for corruption: men do not only not fight against it,
but they do fight and strive and labor to maintain it. I remember what I
read of Iehu 2. Kin. ^.31.32.
the instrument of the Lords vengeance upon Ahabs house; as he entered in at the
gate of Izreel, and lifting up his eyes to the window, saw that painted Iezebel
the wife of Ahab, he cried out, who is on my side, who? presently two or three
of her attendants looked out, as it were offering their service. Cast her down
(says he) and they did so: so also in the chapter following, when he sent to
the guardians of Ahabs children, willing them, if they thought it good to
create one of their masters sons King, and to stand upon their guard, and they
returned him answer, we are thy servants and will do all that thou shall bid
us, what said Iehu? If yea be mine and will obey my voice, take the heads of
your masters sons, and come to me to Izreel by to morrow this time. After the
same sort, we professing our selves, by our outward shows to be on the Lords
side, and to be ready to do all that he shall bid, his charge is, that if we
be his, we cast Iezebel out at the window, we renounce and disclaim, we cast
of Ephesians. 4.22.
and crucify Gal. 5.24.
our sweettest, our dearest, our profitablest our best-pleasing corruptions:
Mortify your members which are on earth Col. 3.5.
. If we now shall not only (contrary to command) preserve the life (which may
be imputed to a kind of nicenes and pity) but shall fight for the life and
state of Iezabel, and shall set up one of Ahabs sons, some gross sin to
reign over us, professing our selves always ready to defend it, how shall the
Lord account us to be his? And yet thus it fares in these evil times. What
sin, what gross corruption almost is there, which shall want a patron to
defend it, either that it is no sin, or that it is but a little sin? This
glauering and glozing age, which has devised an art to make deformed faces
seem fair, old wrincled visages, to look young and smooth, has learned also
to set a color upon naughtines, the devil helping forward least sin
appearing in it own proper likeness should affright the conscience. Thus the
adulterous woman, wipeth her mouth, and says, I have committed noe Iniquity
Pro. 30.20.
. Every vice does now go armed; if you do touch it never so gently, yet (like
the nettle) it will sting you; if you deal with it thoroughly and directly, it
swaggreth like the hebrew with Moses, who made thee a man of Authority Exo.
2.14.
? what? is this so great a matter? I trust, this and this is lawful, or if
not, what need you be aggreeued? Thus men sometimes like Saul 1. Sam. 15.13.
are not ashamed to say they have kept the commandment of God, when they have
foulely broken it, sometimes like the stubborn Jews Mal. 3.7.13.
cry wherein shall we return, wherein have we trespassed, what have we spoken
against God, when the very stones in the street are ready to testify against
them, and the earth is weary in bearing their sins. And thus it appears by
three undeniable evidences, that if we be endited before the Lord, for not
fighting that Good fight which Paul fought, and which every Christian ought to
fight against sin and corruption, we shall never be able to plead Not-guilty.
I wish that which has been said may so convict us, that it may convert us,
least going on in rebellion against God, that doom befall us which is foretold
Luc. 19.27
Those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring them
hither and slay them before me.

Now as touching our failing in the second fight which is against Satan,
considering what I have already said, I shall need to speak the less: for
where corruption and sin are not withstood, there Satan is not fought against:
where they are entertained, there Satan is served: so that the proof of the
former point, is a confirmation of this also. Nevertheless, I will a little
insist upon one specialtie, an apparent testimony that there is little thought
or resolution amongst the most to fight against Satan: and that is this, the
neglect of one of the principal weapons whereby to encounter him. Think you
that he means to fight, who goes unarmed? nay, who when a weapon is tendered
to him, casts it from him, or who seems not to care, though it were with the
land, as it was once with the state of Israel under the Philistines 1. Sam.
13.19.22.
, of which it is said, There was no Smith found throughout all the land, and,
neither sword nor spear found in the hands of any of the people: he to whom
this nakedness were a pleasure, or a matter of in differencie, would you
imagine him to mean well, or to be a friend to his country? I am sure you
would not. Now Paul, speaking of the combat we are to have with the devil,
and describing by parcels, that holy armor wherewith he must be withstood,
mentions among other things, the sword of the spirit, which is the word of
God Ephesians. 6.27.
. This we see was our Saviors weapon in that conflict which is storied in the
Gospel Mat. 4.
: with this two edged sword Reu. 1.16.
of It is written, he cut asunder all those knots, wherewith Satan's purpose
was to entangle him. Who so then shall despise this weapon, shall cast it
behind Psalm. 50.17.
them, shall hate Prou. 1.22.
the knowledge of it, shall say to God, as the wicked are reported to do,
Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways Job 21.14.
, shall think preaching to be (as was said Ier. 23.33.
of old) The burden of the Lord, shall wish of it as the Gadarens did of Christ
Mat. 8.34.
, that it might depart out of their coasts: who so (I say) shall be thus
affected, the charitablest censure, and the most favorable verdict which can
be given of them is this, that they are wilful betrayers of their own souls
into the power of the devil. Now it is no hard matter, to show, how
deservedly, this Imputation may be laid upon our times; I have written unto
them (said the Lord, of old, to the Jews) the great things of my law, but they
were counted as a strange thing Hos. 8.12.
. I do not see how it can be denied, but that God may justly complain so now,
Great has his kindness been to these times, in enlarging and improuing the
free use of his word: and yet (alas) what a world of people is there amongst
us, to whom the Scripture remains as a book that is sealed up Isa. 29.11.
, nay, (which is even fearful to think on) who seem to be of that careless
and neglecting humor, as though it were all one to them, though there had been
never any Bible written, nor any such book by the special providence of God,
preserved to his Church? Again, although the Scriptures of God be entertained
into some houses, as a kind of needful implement, to fill up some corner,
which otherwise might lie void, yet with many they are used like their harness
in these peaceful times, made a pray to the rust and dust, or laid up like the
sword of Goliath which David took from him 1. Sam. 21.9.
, like a monument, that it may be said upon occasion, There they be. Few there
be that do make them their Councellers Psa. 119.24.
, or that do endeavor to host them in their best room, even to let them dwell
plenteously Col. 3.16.
in their hearts. Furthermore, for the opening and explaning thereof by those
whom God has deputed thereto, (which is, as it were, certain rules and
precepts of defense, teaching us how to handle this weapon against our
spiritual adversary) how is it reckoned of? Where it is had, it is little
esteemed; where it is wanting, it is less desired. Few do reverence it as
Gods ordinance, few depend upon it as upon the arm Is. 53.1.
, and power of God unto salvation Romans 1.1^.
. What fighting can there be against Satan, when this sword of the spirit is
in disgrace? what spoil of souls will the devil make, when men are not thus
armed to resist? Consider the story of Sampson Iud. 16.
. When the Philistines had taken him and put out his eyes, then they might do
with him what they would, though he were a strong man, and a noble man, yet
they bound him with fetters, and made him grind like a horse in a mill: and so
when as the light of Gods holy ordinance is wanting, Satan has opportunity
to work his will: men may be drawn to any thing; no opinion so gross, no
worship of God so superstitious, no fashion of life so vile, but they will
soon embrace it. So then if our consciences tell us, that Gods word is not to
us, as it was to Jeremy Ier. 15.16.
, the joy joy and rejoicing of our heart, that we are not like the Samaritans,
of whom it is said, that when Philip came and preached among them, there was
great joy in the city Act. 8.8.
, nor like the man of Macedonia, which appeared to Paul in a vision, and
because of the want of teaching which was there, prayed him to come to
Macedonia and help Act. 16.^.
them, certainly we are no enemies unto Satan's kingdom, but friends unto it
rather, if we labor not by all good means for the enlargement and propagation
of Gods truth.

The last part of the inquiry concerns the Fight for the maintenance of the
common cause of true religion, both with skill against cunning and subtle
underminers, and with courage against the wrongs and indignities which the
world offers to sincerity: I cannot now use that largeness in this point,
which I could wish, and which (the times considered) were very fitting. I will
only in a word touch two common evils, which shall serve to justify this
proposition, that the number of those which fight that part of that goood fight
here spoken of, which concerns the upholding and defense of Gods truth, is but
small and thin, even like the Summer gatherings, which the Prophet speaks of
Mic. 7.1.
. The one evil, is the want of judgment and soundness of knowledge in the
doctrine of religion. This is an universal and farre-spreading disease,
according as every Pastor can witness with me, who according to the Wise man's
counsel Pro. 27.23.
, is diligent to know the estate of his flock, and to understand the
particular conceits and dispositions of the people. The multitude is woefully
to seek in matters of salvation, resting to this day upon that old Popish
rule, to follow the droane, and to believe as the Church believes. I remember
what is said of a meeting of the people at Ephesus by Demetrius his procurement
Act. 19.32.
, The more part knew not wherefore they were come together: it may be truly
said so of many assemblies for holy services, the more part know not wherefore
they come: they will say in general terms to serve God; but, what he is, who
he is, how to be served, wherein to be served, and in whom to be served, I
believe you shall find them to be ignorant: So that the devotions of many are
like the Altar at Athens, To an unknown God Act. 17.23.
many are of Gallio his religion, of whom it is said that he cared not for
matters of that nature Act. 18.17.
. If the belly may be filled, and the back fitted, like the Epicure in the
poet Siventri^ene, silateri etc. Hora.
, if with the fat-hearted Israelites, they may sit by the fleshpots Exo. 16.3.
, and with those whom David speaks of Ps. 4.7.
their wheat and their wine may abound, they are at a point for religion. Few
there be whose Hearts are stablished Heb. 13.9.
and which know Christ's voice. from the voice of a stranger Ioh. 10.4.5.
: whether Baal be God, or Jehovah be God 1. Kin. 18.21.
their meaning is never to put it to inquiry, How shall these stand to defend
Religion, who know not what that is which we call Religion. When we shall see
men caring and studying and taking pains to find out that which Luke calls
The Certenty Luc. 1.4.
and not to be led by coniecturall suppositions, but (as he speaks) to be
fully persuaded v. 1.
, then there will be some hope, that the Lords part will increase, in the mean
time, while they make either the Times, or tradition, or their own Humor to
be the measure of their religion, we may be sure, the cause of God shall from
them receive very small upholding. The second Evil, is the cowardice and
faint-hartednes of the most Professors that I may follow the Phrase of my Text;
they are like to some unexperienced and lately-ptessed soldiers, who, while
the training and muster is near home upon a fair green, where they are
neither scanted for victuals, nor straitened for lodging, nor in any hazard of
life, march with some show of resolution, a man would think they would even
eat up the enemy, but when they come to behold the face of war in his true
proportion, the battle pitched, and a furious enemy in fight even now
instantly to be charged; their hearts fail them, and the sound of the drum
is unto them as their passing bell and they would give a world to see the smoke
of their country chimnies: Even so, many professors of Religion, while the
world applaudes their forwardnes, and when the people before, and they that
follow Mat. 21.9.
cry Hosanna unto Christ, who but they? a man would think (that I may use
Salomons phrase) can. 8.7
that much water could not quench their Love, neither the Floods drown their
zeal, but when it comes to blows, the world frowns, profit is abridged,
pleasure is limited, credit and fame is a little eclipsed, their names put out
as Evil Luke 6.22.
, then they are nipt: like an ouerforward budde with an untimely frost, then
begin they to grow to a demurre, and in fine, either run away in the plain
of field, or else (under a color of discretion) fall back into the rereward,
the battle is sharp, and it is not good to be too forward. Thus like as in
Gedeons enterprise Iud. 7.
, of two and thirty thousand which took arms, when proclamation was made in
the camp (the assault approaching) who so is timorous let him return, at one
clap, there went away two and twenty thousand; so of troops of professors
which at the first entrance give in their names, when it comes to trial, the
greatest part will retire, and they will be but a few, that will stand unto it
to the end. Hereby you may see, that when we have (as Jeremy saih Ier. 5.
) run to and fro, through our streets, and made enquiry, we shall find but
few, who if they were now to end their days, and to look back into their
course past to see how they have demeaned themselves in this holy warfarre, are
able to say, without an inward check, I have fought that good fight, and now I
exspect the crown of righteousness.

To conclude, we have all heard what Paul did, he fought that good fight: how
comfortable it was that he had done it, it emboldened him to expect a Crown of
Righteousness: we have seen our own carelesnes, and what will be the issue if we
continue it: the second death is provided for the Fearful Reu. 21.8.
, but such as overcome, shall inherit all things v. 7.
. If we desire comfort in death and happiness after death, let us henceforth
arm our selves for this spiritual fight, against our own Corruption, against
Satan's temptation, against Satan's instruments which fight against Religion.
This is the only war, which is the way unto eternal Peace.

Let God alone have the Glory.
The end of the first Sermon.
The second Sermon. The worth of the water of Life.
IOH. 4.13.14. Jesus answered and said unto her, Whosoever drinks of this
water, shall thirst again,

14. But whosoever drinks of the water, that I shall give him, shall never be
more a thirst: but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of
water, springing up into everlasting life.


THE story of Christ's conference with the woman of Samaria, cannot be unknown
unto any, which is of any ordinary knowledge in the Scripture: yet partly to
give light unto my Text, partly to help those which are not so careful to
search the book of God, as they ought to be, it is expedient for me to repeat
it.

It fell out, as our savior iournyed through Samaria into Galilee, that he,
(being a man in all Heb. 4.13.
things like unto us, yet without sin) was both hungry and weary. To relieve
hunger, he sent his Disciples into the city to make provision; to ease his
wearied limbs, he sat him down upon a well side, in those times and in those
Coasts very famous, in respect of the Author thereof, whose name it still
carried, being called, Jacobs Well. He sitting there, out comes me, a woman of
the adjoining city Sichar, to draw water from thence, for her household uses.
Christ, partly to refresh his bodily thirst, but especially (as I take it) to
satisfy that his neuer-ceasing desire to do good, made a motion to her, to
afford him some of the water, that he might drink. She, (being as appears
by her aunswers something a shrewd-tongued woman) by and by cut him up short;
what, (quoth she) you Jews, be so fine and proud, that you scorn us, the
poor Inhabitants of Samaria: How is it then, that thou being a Jew, ask
drink of me, a forlorn and despised Samaritane? Our savior (to give us an
instance of the accomplishment of that ancient promise, that he would be Isa.
65.1.
(found of them, that sought him not) does neither forbear to commune with
her, nor yet (as the manner of the world is) does frame an untoward speech to
her cross answer; but seeming to pity her Ignorance, and blindenes, tells
her; Alas, good woman, if thou knew the great mercy of God toward thee, and
the excellency of his person and office which requesteth thee, thou would
become a suter to him rather, and he would give thee another manner of water
then this, even the water of life. The woman answers him with a scoff, well
enough understanding his meaning, but yet she iestes it out, as though she
knew it not: what art thou (quoth she) that talkest of the water of life?
can thou be better then our father Jacob who first founded this well? or can
there be any better water, then this well affords? thou seem therefore to me
to brag of more then thou art any way able to perform. Mark now Christ's
answer. Oh woman (says he) thou art very ignorant, or very froward: I speak
not to thee, of any visable water serving for the bodies nourishment, but of a
matter of far more infinite worth, if thy heart were opened to apprehend it.
I know the water of this well is excellent, and Jacob in his time, was a holy
man; but behold here another fountain, behold a greater then Jacob is here,
even the staff of the hope of thy father Jacob. This stream here, relieueth
the body for a time, but cannot afford a perpetual filling: the water which I
have to give shall everlastingly satisfy the thirst of the receivers of it,
and it shall be in their bowels, as a neuer-dryed fountain, springing up to
everlasting life. Thus have you the course of the communication betwixt Christ
and the Samaritane thus far. By which you may perceive, that the maine scope
of this Text, is, to show the difference betwixt the things of this present
life, and the things of a better life: the weakness of the one, and the worth
of the other. The former is set down, verse. 13. Whosoever drinks of this
water, etc. the latter, ver. 14. But whosoever drinks of the water which, etc.

Concerning the former, I know, that Christ expressly and by name speaks of
water only; yet considering the chief drift of the place is, to draw men from
the things which are seen, to the things which are not seen, The doctrine.
from things temporal, to things eternal, from the things which are on earth,
to the things which are above: therefore we may safely from hence draw this
doctrine: That nothing in this present world, is able to afford any true
satisfying, any filling as it were, unto a man's soul. For that which Christ
said here of the water of this well, whosoever drinks thereof shall thirst
again, may truly be said of all things else whatsoever, which the men of this
world do aim at in their courses, viz. they do rather increase then kill the
desire, rather inflame then quench the appetite: they are all like to cold
drink taken by a man laboring of a hot Ague, which though it seem to
satisfy for the present, yet indeed it increases the former drought, and
makes both the need and the desire of moisture greater then before. It were no
hard thing to show this to be true, by the enumeration of particulars: but my
meaning is, not to insist upon this point, but only to use it as a preparatiue
to the rest. This is all I will say, (and I will therein crave no better
witness, then each man's own experience:) If a man, living here in the world,
should do as Solomon did, namely, Whatsoever his Eccl. 2.10.
eyes desire, should not withhold it from them, nor withdraw his heart from any
joy: but should even study, as it were, to glut himself with the things of
this life, yet in the end, he should find his heart like the sea, of which the
same Wise man says, that though Eccl. 1.7.
All the rivers go into it, yet it is not full: so neither shall his eye be
satisfied with seeing, nor his ear with hearing, nor his heart with enjoying:
but he shall be like to a man in a maze, wherein when he has labored long,
yet at last, he is as far from that which he sought for, as he was at the
beginning. And the reason hereof is express: the mind is immortal, but all
these things are transitory: so that it is impossible for the mind to be
filled with earthly things, as it is for a chest of wood to be filled with
spiritual things. It is wittily said, and to good purpose, by those which
reason from the form of the world, and the fashion of the heart; the world is
round, and the heart three cornered. As therefore it cannot be, that a round
thing should fill that which is three squared, because the corners must needs
remain empty: so neither can the things of this world, (which John divides
into three kinds, 1. Ioh. 2.16.
The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, replenish
a man's soul, but some one corner (as it were) or other thereof will remain
vnfilled. This brief discourse serves to show the truth of this point: let us
as briefly make use of it.

The use.
I remember the speech of the Prophet Isaiah, cap. 55. whereby solemn
proclamation provoking all men to come to Christ, that they may enjoy that same
gracious favor which our Savior makes offer in this place, he does notably
reprove the folly of the greatest part of men in these Words, Is. 55.2.
wherefore do you lay out silver and not for bread, and your Labor without
being satisfied? as if he had said: what folly is this, or what madness is it,
which possesses your hearts, O ye sons of Men, that you do so busy your
selves, and spend your best Endeauours, about such things which cannot
satisfy? think you it is a possible Thing to be fed with the Wind, or will
you cast your affections upon that which is Nothing? This is the effect of the
Prophets reproof: If he were alive now, he would (as he well might) use the
same words. There is indeed much to do in the world at this day much
travailing, much plotting, much contending, and we do all bestir our selves as
though the Dust of the earth were not sufficient for every man to take a
handful: one man buyeth and purchases and Isa. 5.8.
joins House to House, and Field to Field, that he may be placed by himself,
to be a little King in his own Territories: another couets Mic. 2.2.
fields, and takes them by Violence, and houses, and takes them away, and so
oppresses a man and his house, even a man and his heritage: a third, he Am.
2.7. and ca. 3.10.
gapeth over the Heads of the poor, and does even store up violence. In a
word each man almost has enlarged his Desire as the Hell, and is as Death, and
cannot be satisfied, and is never well in his Conceit, till he has even Hab.
2.5.
laded himself with thick Clay: and we are all trudging like this woman with
v. 6.
our pitchers in our necks, to some one well or other, and if it be never so
deep, it shall go very hard, but we will get it out. But (alas) fools that
we be, when we have done all, we do but even weary our selves v. 13,
for very vanity: when we have drunk of this Well again and again, yet in
the End, our desire is as it was, rather stretched out to receive more, then
filled with that which it has obtained: when we have reached even to the
utmost of our first desires, we are then but like the Is. 29.8.
Hungry man, who dreameth, and behold he eats, and when he awaketh his soul
is empty: or like the thirsty man, who dreameth, and lo he is drinking, and
when he awaketh behold he is faint, and his soul longs: So it is but an
imagination of comfort which comes by all these things, and no true
contentment. I beseech you, let this short and yet full discovery of our common
folly, (who for the mpst part, do nothing but Hos. 8.7.
sow the wind, and if we so continue shall reap nothing but Corruption) make
us to say as John Baptists hearers did, when they perceived by his preaching
they were clean out of the way Luke 3.10.
, what shall we do then? If hitherto we have aimed at a wrong Mark in our
desires, show us I pray you, how to reform it: and let your hearts, I pray you
say now to me, as Cornelius said to Peter Act. 10.33.
, We are all here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded
thee of God: which I do wish so much the rather, because that which I am now
next to speak of is that which Solomon in one place calls Prove. 8.18.
Durable Riches in another Ecc. 12.13.
, the End of all; which Christ terms the Luke 10.42.
One needful Thing: for which the soul of David panted; Ps. 42.1.
in comparison whereof Paul Phil. 3.8.
counted all things but as Dung. Mark first the words, then see the order of
them. But whosoever drinks of this water, etc. The points to be in order
opened in the handling of this verse are these: 1. What this water is: 2. that
there is both power and will in Christ to bestow it: 3. by what means he
conferreth it: 4. to whom he gives it: 5. the Benefit of enjoying it: 6. the
means by which each man may know himself to have received it. All these
points as they are needful, so in the several handling of them you shall
find them to arise directly from the Text.

what is meant by the water which Christ gives.
First, what is meant by the water here mentioned. It is a true saying, that the
Scripture is the best interpreter of it self, and one place must be expounded
by another. We see the Light by the Light, and we do understand the true
meaning of the scripture by the scripture. We can therefore have no better
exposition upon this place then Christ's own words else where, to which the
Spirit of God has annexed an explanation of the true meaning Ioh. 7.38.39.
. He that believes in me, as says the scripture out of his belly shall flow
rivers of water of life. This spoke he (says Saint John) of the Spirit which
they that believed in him should receive; so that by water here, are
understood the gifts and graces of the spirit which the Lord is pleased to
bestow upon his children.

It is not enough for me to tell you thus much in general Terms, but I must
proceed a little further, least I should leave you uncertain, in that which my
chief desire is to resolve you. This therefore I must tell you: that though it
be true, that by water are here meant the gifts of the spirit, yet there are
certain gifts and graces of the spirit, which a man may have, Some gifts o^
the spirit are common, some proper only to Gods children.
and yet be a Reprobate. So that you must learn to put a difference, betwixt
the common gifts of the spirit, and those gifts which are proper only to Gods
children. The world is as it were Gods great House, in which there are both
servants and sons, the one (as Christ says) Ioh. 8.35.
to be cast out, the other to abide ever. Now in a family, we know, there be
some common favors, which the servants and drudges do enjoy as well as the
heir: and so some graces there be, which eue^ the reprobate have, which is
meet we should know, least we be deceived, and they are these. The first is,
The common-gifts.
the gift and dexterity of practizing a particular calling: For, whatsoever,
men careleslly and profanely do imagine that the skill and art which they have
in any knowledge, as husbandry, merchandise, etc. is from their own industry,
yet certain it is, that the cunning which any man has in any faculty
whatsoever, is the sole and only gift of Gods spirit: and therefore the power
which Bez^aleel and Aholiab had to work in blue silk and purple and carved
work, is called, a Exodus 31.3
filling by the spirit of God. The second common gift, is the gift of
enlightening, whereby a man being naturally ignorant in the things of God, is
enabled to conceive the will of God revealed in the scripture, yea even the
sweetest points thereof, as of salvation and grace in Christ Jesus. A third
common gift, is the power of preaching and expounding the scripture for the
common good and behoof of Gods Church. A fourth, is an ability to restrain
and temper the affections, so that they shall not break forth into outrage and
notorious evils in the behavior. A fifth, is a power to hear the word with
joy, and to seem to take some delight, and to find some sweetness in it. All
these are gifts and graces of the spirit of God; but yet they are not those
graces which Christ means by water here in this place: because these be such
as may befall those who notwithstanding shall never be saved. Many a reprobate
is gifted with admirable skill in crafts and sciences. Demetrius seemed to be a
cunning workman, yet was he no small enemy to the preaching of the Gospel.
Secondly, the Apostle seems to make it a thing possible, to be once
enlightened, and to Heb. 6.4.5.
have tasted of the heavenly gift, yet so to fall away as to be past all hope
of being renewed again by repentance. Thirdly, at the day of Judgment Math.
7.22.
. Many will say to Christ, Lord, have we not by thy name prophesied? yet it
shall be said to them ver. 13.
, Depart from me. Fourthly, many wicked men have power to conform themselves
and to bridle many sins, and to carry themselves in an outward ciuility: so
Abimelech the heathen Genesis 20.6.
abstained from committing folly with Abraham's wife: and many aamong the
gentiles excelled in moral virtues; and diverse we see (whom we call civil
men) demean themselves in the eyes of the world unblameably, who yet give
small hope of any true conversion. Lastly, Christ in the parable shows, that
many hearers for a time believe Mat. 13.21.
, but as soon as tribulation comes because of the word, by and by they are
offended.

Now there are besides these, other special graces of the spirit, which are
proper only to Gods children. Paul says that 1. Tim. 4.10.
God is the savior of all men, specially of those that believe: so it may be
said, he gives graces to all, but in special manner to elect. Christ is
pleased, in scripture to term the church his love, his spouse. The day of
Judgment, is the marriage day: and the time present, is the wooing time, in
which he is as it were a suter to his church: and the ministers are appointed,
to prepare the church for her husband 2. Cor. 11.2.
, and to present her as a pure virgin unto Christ. Now he which is a suter to a
woman, himself being a man of worship and ability, howsoever, to testify his
bounty, and to make known his love to his beloved, he will bestow gifts upon
the servants of the family, yet if he have any ^ewell of worth and price, that
he reserueth for her, on whom his love is fixed: so Christ Jesus conferreth
common favors, even upon the reprobate, to make known his riches, and
withal, for the good of his chosen, but the special, and choice and selected
graces, these he keeps only for the true members of his church. And these
are the graces meant by christ in this place; and they are in order these which
follow

1. The gift of regeneration, which is that, whereby a man of a Limme of
Satan, is made a member of Christ; of a child of the devil, The proper gifts.
is become the son of God. That this is a work of Gods spirit appears by
Christ his words: Except a man be borne of water and of the spirit Ioh. 3.5.
, etc. And therefore fitly is the holy Ghost compared to Water, because as
water does moisten that which is hard: So the holy Ghost does supple and
soften, and put the sap of Grace into the dry and dead and rotten Heart of
Man: So that where the spirit of God is, there the Heart is renewed, the nature
changed, the delight in sin assuaged, and a love of holiness, and godliness, as
it were a new juice begun in the soul. This is the first proper gift.

2. The knowledge of a man's own Reconciliation to God by the means of Christ
Jesus. Hereof speaks the Apostle, The spirit bears witness with our spirit
that we are the Children of God. It is true, Romans 8.16.
the nature of man cannot attain to this knowledge, But we 1. Cor. 2.12.
have received the spirit which is of God. That we might know the things that
are given to us of God. And indeed it cannot be, but, that if God have been
pleased of his goodness to make any man or woman his Child, he will likewise
make known the same favor (...) him or her: especially seeing it is so greatly
for our comfort. For as, on the one side it is the greatest misery for a man,
to be in continual suspense, not knowing whether his sins are forgiven him:
so, what greater comfort can there be to a man to be assured of Gods favor
toward him?

3. The gift of obedience: for, as a man that dwells in a house as the owner
of it, orders it, and governs it, at his pleasure: so the Holy Ghost,
governs all those in whom he abides Romans 8.14.
: they are all led by the spirit, which are the Lords. The spirit represseth
all badde motions drawing unto sin, springing from the Corruption of our
Nature, suggested by Satan and occasioned by the beguiling entisements, of
this evil world, and withal it stirs up good desires and holy Thoughts,
inclining to Piety and godliness.

4. Prayer: that is, a will and ability in some good measure, to have recourse
unto the Lord by Prayer upon all occasions, and to pour out a Man's wants and
necessities before him. For this is a general and a certain rule, that as,
naturally every child, being pinched with want, acquainteth the Father, with
his necessities, building upon his love, and willingness to do him good: so he
which is the child of God, has always this Property, to make Prayer unto God
his first means whereby to obtain that which he does desire, and to be freed
from that wherewith he is oppressed. Now that which works this in us is Gods
spirit: For seeing we of our selves do neither know our necessities, nor
knowing them can tell how to bemoane them, therefore Gods spirit is given to
help our Infirmities, to assist us in the framing of our suites, that so our
prayers may be pleasing unto God and comfortable to our souls. And for this,
the spirit of God is called the Zach. 12.10.
spirit of supplications, because it furnishes a man, both with will and
knowledge also to power out his soul unfeignedly to the Lord.

5. Comfort in distress. For whereas the children of God are subject to
manifold greeuances, partly in regard of inward conflicts with sin and the
terrors of their own Conscience, partly in respect of outward annoyances, the
spirit of God is given unto them, to relieve them, to minister comfort unto
them, to uphold them, to make them able with cheerfulnes to hold out in the
midst of the greatest extreamities whatsoever. For this cause, the spirit is
called the Ioh. 15.26.
Comforter, and Psalm. 45.7.
Oil of gladness, because he does refresh and cheer the poor distressed
souls of Gods children.

6. Strength. There are many things which the profession of Christianity
requires at the hands of a Christian, which a Christian of himself, is not
able to perform: as for example, when a man seeeth the hideousnes of sin,
yet in the midst of this sight to lift up the hand of his faith, and to lay
hold upon the mercy of God in Christ Jesus: when a man is tempted to sin, to
resist the Temptation; in persecution to endure; in penury to trust upon Gods
Providence: these and such like are beyond the Reach of Man's power: yet the
spirit of God makes Gods children able to effect them Phil. 4.12.
, I am able to do all Things (says the Apostle) through the Help of Christ
which strengthens me: and the spirit for this cause is termed Isay. 11.2.
the spirit of strength.

These are the graces of the spirit peculiar to the elect, and signified by
water in this place: briefly thus: 1. The gift of Regeneration to become Gods
Child: 2. The gift of faith to believe Gods promses: 3. The gift of obedience
to do Gods will: 4. The gift of Prayer to seek Gods Presence: 5. The gift of
comfort, to endure Gods Trials: 6. The gift of strength to hold out and
continue gods servant.

How these things savor with you I know not, how sweet they ought to be unto
you, I know well. It is said of Christ, that to the eyes of the world, Is. 53.2.
he had neither form nor beauty, there seemed to be nothing in him, why men
should desire him: yet all the children of God, Ioh. 1.14.
saw his glory, as the glory of the only begotten Son of God, full of
grace and truth. So though these things happily do no whit affect those, Romans
8.5.
which are after the flesh, but do seem even vile in their eyes; yet they
whose hearts God has touched, to them they seem exceeding precious, and I
doubt not but they say in their hearts, as Mephibosheth did to David after his
return from the battle, when David bad him, and Ziba divide the goods betwixt
them, nay (says he) to testify his joy for the Kings victory,) 2. Sa. 19.30.
) Let him take all, seeing my Lord the King is come home in peace: so I say,
all that fear God, say in the truth of their souls, comparing the base things
of the world with these graces, Take all for me who will, so that my barren
soul may be replenished with these sweet graces of Gods spirit. Well, hoping
the best (as in charity it becomes me) of you all, and that as you do prize
these graces, this water of life, as it does deserve, so you will be glad to
know the means of obtaining them, I come now to the next point. Which is, that
Christ has both power and will to bestow them. He says here, Christ is able
and willing to give this water
he will give them, it is meet therefore that we do enquire into his ability,
whether it be in his power to make good that which he promises in this place.

Touching his power the Scripture is a plentiful witness: Is. 36.9.
With thee says David) is the well of life. He is the Zach. 13.1.
fountain opened in the house of David for sin and for uncleanness. It
has pleased the Father, that Col. 1.19.
in him all fullness should dwell: In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge Col. 2.3.
: and it is ordained, that Ioh. 1.16.
of his fulness, we should receive grace for grace. What better witness would we
of his power? His will is no less then his power, Math. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary, etc. He made an open Proclamation, he
stood and cried, saying Ioh ^7.37.
, If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink: and he has renewed his
offer, Reu. 22.17.
Let him that is a thirst come, and let whosoever will, take of the water of
life freely: nay, Is. 55.1. The use
without silver and without money. What reason have we (I pray you) but upon
his word to believe him?

Well then, what follows upon this? We that are Ministers of the Gospel, are
appointed by him that has sent us, to do as John Baptist, to point with the
finger, and to say to you, Ioh. 1.3^.
Behold the Lamb of God: see the man that has the treasures of all grace,
run ye to him, that as was prophesied of old, you may with joy draw waters
out of the Isa. 12.3.
wells of salvation. Take heed you forsake not him who is the Iere. 2.13.
fountain of living waters, to dig you pits, even broken pits which can hold
no water. Get you to Christ, seek to him, if you wish to be relieved. This is
the end of our preaching, this is the drift of all our Sermons. You will say
unto me, (perhaps) this is a needles exhortation: you talk of going to Christ,
but where is he? If he were preaching in our Churches, and working miracles in
our streets, you should see how we would flock about him, how much we would
make of him, and how we would run to him: here be good words, I pray God the
performance be according. Hearken therefore in the fear of God: I say to thee
as Paul spoke in a case not much unlike, Romans 10.6.7.
Say not in thine heart, Where Christ, is to be found.
who shall ascend into heaven, that is, to bring Christ from above, or who
shall descend into the deep, that is, to bring Christ again from the dead?
There is no such difficulty in the matter: for behold he is near thee, Pro.
8.2.
he stands in the top of the high places, (says Solomon.) John saw him in
Reu. 1.13.
the midst of the golden candlestickes. He is in the middle of his Church, he
dwells in the congregation of the faithful: Math. 18.20
where two or three are gathered together in his name, there is he. It is no
such hard matter to find Christ, Pro. 8.33.
Watch daily at the gates of the Lords house, and give attendance at the posts
of his doors, there thou shall find him. When Joseph and Mary having been
lately at Jerusalem, had (as it were) lost him, Luc. 2.45.46.
they went back to the Temple, and there they found him. Go thou and do
likewise: seek him in his word, there thou shall have him: We (says the
Apostle, speaking of himself and of his fellow Ministers) stand among you in
Christ's stead 2. Cor. 5.20.
, and God does beseech you through us. Thou will say unto me, yet again it may
be, thou art little the nearer, thou will yield that Christ is the Well of life,
and that the congregation is the place where to find him, but thou will add
withal, as this woman did in scorn to Christ, the Well is deep, and thou
have nothing to draw with. Mark therefore (I pray thee) the next point,
namely, the means how Christ bestows these graces.

How Christ bestows this water.
There are three pipes or conduits, (as I may so call them) by which Christ
Jesus the fountain of life conueyeth the graces of his spirit into the hearts
of his children. First, the preaching of the word; secondly, the Sacraments:
thirdly, prayer.

The use.
If thou would drink of this well of living water, I do especially commend
to thy godly care the Public ministry of the word, not shutting out the other
two, but chiefly urging this, because I know that if thou be a careful and
conscionable hearer, the exercises of prayer and communicating cannot but be
delightful unto thee. Observe this I pray thee, if thy heart be affected with
these spiritual graces issuing out of the fountain of grace, get thee to the
word of grace, I mean, (to use Paul's words and to cut of ambiguity) Romans 10.8.
the word of faith which we preach: open thy ears, that it may run down to
the refreshing of thy heart. If thou have by the goodness of God, a cisterne of
thy own, and a skillful drawer, that is (as Elihu speaks) Job. 33.23.
an interpreter, who knows how to give thee thy Luc. 12.42.
portion of water in season, then I say to thee as Solomon does Pro. 5.^15.
. Drink of the rivers out of the midst of thine own well: but if thou
dwell (as David says) in a barren and dry land where no water is, or have
cause to say as the citizens of Jericho did to Elisha 2. King. 2.19.
The situation of thy dwelling is pleasant, but the water is naught, why should
I for any by respects betray thy soul, and spare to tell thee, that which I
know to be the truth? what should thou do in such a case but seek it where
it is, and labor else where to supply thine own necessity. This is the means
of Gods appointing, this is the ordinary conduit of salvation. The seeming wise
men of this world, hearing this course commended to them, as it were a living
stream flowing from the well of life Christ Jesus, think it incredible, and
imagine it to be a base a means to beget grace in a man's heart. I will tell
you to whom they are very like in this case: to Naama^ the Sirian, who
travailing to the prophet Elisha to be cleansed by him of his leprosy, when he
had word sent him, to wash himself in Jordan seven times, he was by and by in
a rage, he looked for some greater matter. 2 king. 5.
Behold (says he) I thought with my self, he will surely come out and stand,
and call on the name of the Lord his God, and put his hand in the place etc.
This is a jest (thought he) am I come so far to wash my self in Jordan, as
though there were not as good waters of Damascus: Even so, many, think scorn
of this as of too mean a means, and imagine it to be but an idle thing, by
hearing to be saved. But to all so minded, I say as the servants of the same
Naaman said to him Father (said they) if the prophet had commanded thee a
great thing, would thou not have done it, How much rather then, when he
says to thee, Wash and be clean? So say I, If the Lord had imposed some
greater thing upon us, of more charge, and of more difficulty, ought we not to
have done it? How much more now, when he says unto us, Hear and be saved. The
weaker means, the greater is his glory: the easier it is, the more is our
shame, and the deeper will our condemnation be if we despise it. To conclude
this point then: The water of life which is originally in Christ is derived to
us by preaching: Learn thou then to come by the streams of Preaching to the
the fountain of grace, the Lord Jesus. And though (it may be) thou have
depended upon it many years, as long as Ioh. 5.^.
the lame man lay by the poole of Bethesda, and have not yet gained that full
comfort which thou did expect, yet assure thy self that the good hour is
coming, in which thou shall find rest and peace unto thy soul. So much for
this point.

To whom Christ does give it.
The next follows: viz. the Parties to whom Christ will give this water. It is
not expressed, but yet it is implied, For mark: He that drinks of this water,
shall never thirst again, says Christ: therefote before he received it he
thirsted for it; So that it is plain by the Text, that they to whom Christ
will give this water of life, are those which thirst after it, which long for
it, which feel the want of it: and thereto agrees the Scripture in many
places: He Is. 55.1.
(says the prophet) come ye to the waters: but who, Every one that thirsts
Math. 516.
. Blessed are they which thirst for righteousness. If any man thirst, Ioh. 7 37.
let him come to me and drink. I Reu. 21.6.
will give to him that is a thirst of the well of the water of life freely: And
Reu. 21.18.
Let him that is a thirst, come. If there be no thirsting, there shall be no
refreshing; if no longing, no enjoying: God will give his graces, where they
shall be esteemed, and esteemed they cannot be, till the want thereof be known,
and he which feels the want of them cannot choose but unfeignedly desire them.

The use.
The use of this is very expedient. It teaches us how and in what manner we
must be prepared to the receiving of the graces of Gods spirit: until our
souls do even thirst after Christ, as Ps. 42.1.
the Heart after the rivers of Water so that we seem to our selves the happiest
men alive if we might have but one drop of Christ's blood to refresh us, until
(I say) it be thus with us, Christ can never be ours, he will never dwell in
that soul that has not even panted after him, and cried out in the anguish
thereof as Hezekiah did Is. 38.14.
, O Lod it has afflicted me, comfort me. And therefore it is no marvel
though there be every where so many empty souls, because there be so few
thirsting souls; no wonder though so many are without grace, seeing there be
so few that long after grace. True it is, that by nature our selves are
destitute of all goodness, neither is there so much as a shadow of grace within
us: but yet all feel not this; among other graces which we want, this is not
the least, that we do not feel the want of grace. We are (the greatest part
of us) like those Laodiceans spoken of Revel. 3. we say we are rich, and have
need of nothing, and know not how we are wretched and miserable and blind and
naked. This our supposed fulness breeds in us a lothing of Gods graces; they
seem unto us, when they are liberally offered not worth the entertaining. So
that (me thinks) I may not unfitly compare the state of Gods heavenly graces,
in respect of the cold entertainment that they have with the most, unto the
case of a poor man, which has liberty to go through the church to gather
every man's devotion for his relief. He comes to one, and he makes wise not
to hear; to another, and he bids him come again another time; to a third,
and he says he has no money about him; to a fourth, and he would give if he
had wherewith to exchange: to a fifth, and he says he is a poor man himself,
and has as much need to ask as he: And thus every unwilling mind finding an
excuse, he picketh out but a few poor pence out of a great and populous
congregation. So it fares with the graces of God offered to us in the
ordinary Ministry of the word. They pass (as it were) from seat to seat,
from pue to pue, from one end of the church unto another, humbly suing and
forcibly persuading, to be entertained: But (alas) there is such a general
benummednes, and frozen deadnes, possesses the hearts of the greatest part,
that (I know not how) Grace, the more kindly it is offered, the less it is
esteemed, and though the water of life do run (as it were) thorough our
streets, yet men will scarsely stoop to receive it. I am even woe to think
upon it, how men and women, that now think all is well enough, and do Cor.
7.1.
receive the grace of God in vain, and Heb. 2.3.
neglect so great salvation, shall one day with tears of blood be suitors for
one drop of grace, and yet shall not be able to obtain it. Well then if we
would drink of the water which Christ has to give us, let us labor to thirst
after it: you will say unto me, How to be brought to thirst for Christ.
how shall we come to this spiritual thirst. I will show you how. There be two
things especially beget thirst: the one is Labor. I need not prove it, yoe
know it well enough by experience: so then a spiritual labor will beget a
spiritual thirst. But what is this spiritual Labor, It is this: a travailing
under the wait and burden of a man's own sins: If thou can once say with
David, Ps. 38 4.
My sins are like a sore burden too heavy for me to bear, thou will quickly
thirst after the righteousness of Christ Jesus. Another occasion of thirst is
salt, you know that by experience also. Now mark what Christ says, he
tells the Apostles and their successors, that in respect of their Ministry,
Math. 5.13.
they are the salt of the Earth. salt has a kind of biting nature, so has the
word well applied; it is sharp and eager, and he who is well exercised under
it, and well schooled, by the urging of the law upon his conscience he will
soon thirst after the salvation offered in Christ Jesus The Gospel will be
glad tidings to him, and Pro. 25.25.
as cold waters to a weary soul. Take this course which I have prescribed
thee, learn to feel the wait of sin, frequent the powerful ministry of
the word, and thou shall soon thirst for the water of life.

The next point is the benefit of enjoying this water. He that drinks of it
shall never be more a thirst. And the reason is, because the water shall be in
him, a well of water springing up into everlasting life. This is warily to be
understood: for it is not so to be taken, as though the children of God being
once seasoned with grace, were glutted (as it were) and had no more desire for
the increase of grace: for it is clean otherwise; the more grace a man has,
the more he longs to have grace to be even heaped (if it were possible) upon
his soul. But the meaning is this; that whereas this outward clement of water,
which we daily use, is soon wasted and turned to nothing, and a man that has
used it, is within a while as new to seek, as if he never had had thereof,
this water of life is of another nature; being once received, it is never dried
up again, it is like to a living spring which shall perpetually stream, and
as it were bubble out unto eternal life: it is a fountain that can never be
drawn dry, an everlasting stock that can never be wasted, a store which can
never be spent, as a lamp fed with oil of immortality which can never be
consumed. We learn an excellent point from hence, and it is this: Romans 11.29.
The gifts and calling of God are without repentance, that is, God never
alters his purpose touching the bringing of any man into the state of grace
Ioh. 13.
. Whom he loves, he loves to the end, for a moment, Is. 54.8.
I hide my face from thee for a little season, but with everlasting love I had
compassion on thee says the Lord thy redeemer. Ier. 31.3.
I have loved thee with an everlasting love. Phil. 1.16.
I am persuaded (says Paul) that he that has begun this work in you will
perform it. It is a general rule; where God begins a good work of grace,
he goes one always to finish it. I give unto my sheep eternal life, and
they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. Ioh.
10.28.
There is no point plainer in the scripture; Christ does not bring us into a
good course, and then leave us to our selves, but he guides us in it by his
grace unto the end; therefore he is called both Heb. 12.2. The use
the author, and the finisher of our faith.

The use is twofold: first, to quicken and stir up our desires to make us
labor after these heavenly graces, seeing they are the only things of
perpetuity. All things else are subject to uncertainty, only 2. Tim. 2.19.
the foundation of the Lord remains sure. Oh then, choose the Luc. 10.42.
better part which shall not be taken away from us. Secondly, this is a point
of infinite and unspeakable comfort to all Gods children. For consider I pray
you, is it not a comfortable thing, when a man with great charge and industry
has gotten a commodity, to be assured of the continuance, and to be freed
from the fear of loosing it? what a joy must it then needs be to a Christian
soul, to consider that the Lord having begun, in some measure to be gracious
unto him: will never alter his favor, that grace being once bestowed, shall
never be withdrawn, that his soul having once been moistened with the dew of
heaven, shall never be wholly dried up again. It is possible I know for the
dear child of God, sometimes to seem to himself and to others, empty and
barren of all goodness, and these graces may be thought for a time, utterly to
be consumed. So the sap lies hid in the root of the tree the whole winter,
and makes no show; and in a very dry and hot Summer, you shall see many
springs as it were clean gone, without any appearance of moisture: yet in
Summer the sap mounteth aloft into all the branches of the tree, and in a
convenient season, the veins of the earth are opened, and the dried spring
returns to his former streaming: so, though the children of God may seem
sometimes utterly to be fallen back to their former hardness, yet (as Saint
John says) 1. Ioh. 3.9.
there is a certain seed behind; there is a hidden moisture which at last
breaks out, and shows it self in the fruits of righteousness as before.
So then, if thou have never so little grace, (as thou think) though it be
but as yet a desire of grace, a longing after faith, a thirsting after
righteousness, yet make much of it, rejoice in it, thank God for it, take it
as a pledge that the Lord has some further work to work in thee: be sure,
that he which has begun it, will cherish it, yea and that in his time he will
also increase it.

The signs of having this water.
The last point remains, which is the life of all, that has been said, viz.
how may I for my part know that I have tasted of this water. Hearken a little
and I will tell thee: thou shall know the certainty of it by these signs. The
first is, a clear fight of thine own souls estate. In a clear well, a man
shall see a penny in the bottom of it: so if a man have the well of life in his
heart, he shall behold in it the full proportion (as it were) of his own
soul. And assure thy self of this, that the more full sight thou have of
thine own imperfections, of thine own corruptions, of the rebellions of thy
heart, of the crookedness of thy nature, the greater portion thou have of this
grace. The second sign, is the cleanenesse of the heart: it is the nature of
the water to cleanse and scour: so is it the property of this heavenly water:
no soap, no nitre, has that scouring power that it has. Ier. 17.9.
The heart is wicked above all things: fraughted naturally with corruption,
ignorance, unbelief, hardness, security, frowardness, vntovvardnesse to
good services. Look therefore how thy heart is cleansed, thy soul purged from
this filthiness. Thou vvilt say to me (perhaps) the Scripture says, Pro. 20.9.
Who can say, I have made my heart clean: how shall I then think to find a
clean heart? I answer, clean from all blemish I know thou shall never find
it, yet thou must Math. 5.4
have a pure heart, for else thou shall never see God. A pure heart, is a heart
purged from the bondage of sin, a heart Heb. 9.14.
cleansed from dead works, to serve the living God: more plainly, a heart
Heb. 13.18.
which desires in all things to live honestly. If thou would therefore be
sure of a clean heart, look for a clean conversation, such a conversation as
S. Paul speaks of, Phil. 1.27.
which becomes the Gospel, which adorneth the doctrine of God our Savior
in all things, which makes our enemies and the enemies of our profession Tit.
2.10. verse. 8.
ashamed when they have nothing concerning us to speak evil of. The water of
life does always bring forth such fruit: therefore a good man is said to be
Psalm. 1.3.
as a tree planted by the rivers of water, that will bring forth her fruit in
due season. And it is said again, Ezekiel. 47.9.
that every thing shall live, whither that living river, which flows out of
the Sanctuary, comes. Try thy self by this mark, see whether this water
has quenched the boiling heat of thine own inordinate lusts, and has
begotten a new life, even the life of righteousness within thee. The third
sign, is increasing in grace: water which is but a small stream at the well
head, going further waxes broader and deeper, and parts it self into many
branches: so these waters that flowed out of the Sanctuary, were first Ez.
47.3.4.5.
to the ancles, then to the knees, then to the loins, then a river which could
not be passed over. If there be a care to increase in grace, in knowledge, in
feeling, in zeal, in obedience, the well of life is in that soul: if there be
a resting satisfied, as though all were well, and we had religion enough, that
is a dry soul, the graces of Gods spirit are not in it. The fourth sign, is a
care to do good to the souls of others: we know nothing is more free in use
then the water. David says, Ps. 104.10.11.
God sends out springs into the valleys, to give drink to all the beasts of
the field. And Christ says, Ioh. 7.38.
that out of his belly, which drinks of this water, shall flow rivers of
water of life, by which many shall be comforted. Have thou a desire and a care
to be helpefull to other men's souls? it is a sign, thy soul is watered, and
shall be more bedewed: for Pro. 11.25.
he that waters shall have rain: have thou no such care, no disposition to
be a means of salvation unto others? thou have a barren heart, and a
graceless spirit. These be plain and familiar marks, and they be such as
will not deceive us. The daily use of water, may daily mind us of them, let us
daily try our selves how it fares with us in these things. If we be
traveling by the way, and it be told us, that by such a tree, or gate, or
village, we shall know our selves to be in the right course, we will carefully
remember it, and heedfully observe it as we journey. If we see the marks we
will be glad, if we see them not, we will be afraid we are out, and return to
make inquiry. Let us do so in this case, by these tokens we shall understand
how it goes with out souls, and in which way we are traveling; let us labor
to remember them, let us mark daily whether in our course and carriage we can
find them. If we do, let us bless the name of God, and hold on our course with
cheerfulness; if we do not, let us be ^. Cor. 11.2
be jealous over our selves with a godly jealousy, let us know it is not well
with us, let us speedily enter into a new course, for fear of going on in the
Mat. 7.^3.
broadway which leads to destruction. And thus an end of this text.

The end of the second Sermon.
The third Sermon. David's Longing, and David's Love.
PSALM. 119.174. I have longed for thy salvation, and thy Law is my delight.


IT is truly said, that this 119 Psalm is the lively representation of a
regenerate man: in regard that it so fully, and so effectually makes known
what ought to be the meditations of his soul, the thoughts and affections of
his heart, the courses and exercises of his life. So that the liker, by viewing
the inward parts, a man shall find himself to be, to David in this Psalm:
the more he may assure himself, that he is a new creature; and the further he
shall perceive himself to come short of this pattern, the farther he is to
think that he is, from newness of life. Of this worthy Psalm (the true
image of a renewed soul) I have chosen one almost of the lowest, but not of
the basest branches to treat of unto you: which, as for the general meaning
thereof, it is agreeing to the rest of the holy and heavenly matter of the
Psalm, so in particular, The division.
it is an express witness unto us of two things: first, David's longing:
secondly, David's love. His longing was for salvation, O Lord I have longed for
thy salvation: his love was the law, And thy law is my delight. Of these two
in order.

In the former we are briefly to examine two things: The first part.
first what is salvation: secondly what it is to long for salvation. By
salvation is meant here no other thing, but that which in the Scripture is
sometime called Math. 19 29.
life eternal, sometimes the Math. 5.3.
kingdom of heaven, sometimes Romans 8.18.
the glory which shall be showed hereafter, sometimes Psalm 27.13.
the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living, sometimes Phil. 3.14.
the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, sometimes 1. Pet. 1.4.
an inheritance immortal and undefiled which fades not, in a word, 1. Cor.
2.9.
those unspeakable, and not to be conceived blessings, which God has prepared
for those that love him. This was (as we say) the object, the mark of David's
longing. This salvation he calls the Lords (thy salvation) because as for us,
it is neither an inheritance which we are borne unto, nor a purchase which by
any desert we can compass, so it is the Lords every way: it is he which has
1. Cor. 2.9.
first prepared it: it is he which has freely disposed it according to the
Mat. 11.26.1.
God pleasure of his own will: it is he which 1. Pet. 1.4.
reserueth it in heaven, for those, who are Iud. 1.
reserved unto Jesus Christ. Now what it is to long, we do all well enough
conceive, either by experience in our selves, or by observation in others, we
know it to be the stretching of the desire unto the highest strain; it
affects the heart in that measure, that all delays are even a very killing
to the soul, neither can there be any contentment or true satisfaction, but
only in the fruition of that which is longed for. David himself describes
this affection of his by very passionate and effectual terms. Psalm. 4.2.
My soul thirsts for God, as the Heart brayeth for the rivers of water, Ps.
84.2.
My soul faints for the courts of the Lord Ps. 119. ver. 20.
. My heart breaks for the desire it has: ver. 131.
I opened my mouth and panted. He was as one who needs to gape for a new
supply of breath, such was the heat and egernes of his perfult. These things
show, that David's longing was no slight desire, arising in some passion, which
kind of desire many times, is as soon quenched as kindled; but it was an
ardent affection, springing from a deed apprehension of the good of the thing
desired, and being in a manner impatient of delays, till the thing it self
were enjoyed. Add hereto, that whereas there are in salvation two things; the
one the possession of it in heaven, which S. Peter calls, 1. Pet. 1.9.
the end of our faith, the other the assurance of it here on earth, which S.
Paul terms, Romans 8.23.
the first fruits of the spirit, David's longing was extended unto both: for
(to use Paul's phrase) he did even 2. Cor. 5.2.
sigh in himself, desiring to be clothed with that house which is from heaven,
and he longed also for Ephesians. 1.13.14.
the earnest of the spirit, to be a pledge to his soul of the future
inheritance. Thus have I briefly and truly opened to you the true sense of
David's longing, the first part of my text. Let us now come to see, what this is
to us that David's desire was so fervent for salvation.

The doctrine.
It does teach us thus much, and this is the point which I will insist upon:
viz. That in the hearts of all that shall be saved, there is a vehement desire,
and an unfeigned longing to be saved. I pray mark well this point, and be not
ready to think it a slight observation, till you have heard it well proved
and well pressed. First of all, touching the sense thereof, it must be
understood with this caution and limitation, namely that I do not extend it to
such infants and little ones, which do belong unto the election of grace, but
only to such as are of years of discretion, which are of power and ability to
conceive and understand, and are come to have the use of these natural powers
of desiring and longing which are in all. For as touching the rest, as God has
his part in many such ( Moth. 19.14.
for of such is the kingdom of God) so his manner of drawing them into the
state of grace, and of their apprehending it, is known only to himself. This
is the meaning of the Doctrine. Now for proof of it this one example of David
is a sufficient ground: for, seeing al Gods children are guided by one spirit,
and like the children of one family, sprung of one father, and bred up after
one fashion, are of one disposition in respect of spiritual things, it must
needs follow that the longing after salvation which was in David, is (though not
happily in the same measure, yet for the general nau^e thereof) in all that
shall be saved, and they are able in the witness of a good conscience to say as
he did here, O Lord I have longed for thy salvation. Yet, left ignorance in the
course of holy Scripture, should make us to behold David in this mood, like a
Pellicane in the wilderness, supposing him to be alone herein, and so should
become negligent to frame our selves to so good a Pattern, let us see whether
the like affection be not to be found in others of gods saints. Begin first
with Abraham the father of the faithful, without likeness to whose faith there
can be no salvation: what says Christ of him Ioh. 8.56.
? your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it and was glad. We
know what our Savior means by (his Day) to wit, his coming in the flesh
for the redemption of mankind. This day of Christ, Abraham Heb. 11.13.
saw a far off, and as he rejoiced to be assured of it, so we may resolve,
that it was the principal desire of his soul, to be interressed into the
salvation which was procured by it in due time. The more Abraham rejoiced in
it, the more he longed for it, and with the greater desire he expected it, with
the greater gladness of spirit he entertained it. Come down a little lower from
him, to Jacob: that one voice of his uttered by him in great vehemency upon
his deathbed, while he was telling the future estate of his progeny, shall
witness the disposition of his Heart in this case Genesis 49.19.
: O Lord I have waited for thy salvation. He saw by the spirit of prophecy
many troubles and miseries like to come upon his children, therefore as a man
weaned from outward things by this means, and taught to rely only upon the
Lord he cries out, O Lord I have waited for thy salvation. Was it not the
longing after Christ, which made Heb. 11.26.
Moses esteem the rebuke of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt?
was not Hezekiah his heart full of longing, and was he not even ready to faint
in his desires after the mercy of God, when he cried out in the Anguish of his
soul, Is. 38.14.
O Lord it has oppressed me, Comfort me? Was not Jobs desire earnest, when
feeling himself to be even overcome of sorrow, he brast out into these words,
Job. 10.20.
Let the Lord cease and leave of from me, that I may take a little comfort? In a
word, let our savior, testimony be sufficient for the longing of all the
prophets and righteous men that lived in those elder times, Math. 13.17.
I say unto you that many Prophets and righteous men have desired to see those
things which you see, etc. If we consider the times of Christ's visible being
on earth, and after, we shall see the spirit of God like himself, and bringing
forth the same fruits, in others of Gods children. Old Simeon a holy man, here
is his style, Luc. 2.25.
He waited for the consolation of Israel, and he desired life but only to
satisfy this longing Joseph an honorable counselor, yet here was his glory,
Luc. 23.51.
He waited (or longed) for the kingdom of God. Paul may stand insteede of many
examples: what (think we) did he long for, when he uttered those words, Rom
7.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death: add
to this, his Romans 8.23.
sighing in himself, his Phil. 1.23.
desiring to be with Christ. The Jews that heard Peter preach and were pricked
by his stinging sermon, called to them, Act. 2.37.
Men and brethren what shall we do? was not there longing? The poor
perplexed Iaylor which came to Paul and Silas with a cry, Sirs Act. 10.30.
what must I do to be saved, was not his desire fervent? I might bring in a
cloud of witnesses, but these may suffice to show the general disposition and
affection of all Gods Children; All their souls be hungry souls, all their
hearts be longing hearts, the maine thing affected by them is salvation. If you
will have a reason for it, it is no heard matter to yield a very sufficient
one. There are three things required of a christian: 1. By a feeling of sin
to seek Christ. 2. By a holy faith to find Christ. 3. By newnes of life to
dwell with Christ. The first of those three, is this same longing for salvation
which I entreat of: and therefore, as in a ladder there is no coming to the
upper step, but by the nethermost, so there is no dwelling with Christ which
is the height of happiness in this life but by finding him, found he cannot be
but by seeking; to seek him and to long for him are all one: no man seeks him
but he which longs for him, and no man longs for him, but he will care to seek
him. Taking this point therefore for granted, because I see no reason why it
should be denied, I will apply my self to the applying of it.

I pray you in the fear of God observe it. There is nothing which concerns a
Christian more, The use.
if either we respect the strait charge given for it, or the great comfort
rising out of it, then to seek to assure his soul that he is in the number of
those that shall be saved. What true comfort can a man take in any thing, who
is unresolved in a matter of this consequence? he may have a kind of slight and
deceitful gladness, but (as Job says, of the Joy of Hipocrites) Job. 20.7.
it is but for a moment, and Pro. 11.7.
when he dies, his hope perishes, and Job. 18.6.
his candle shall be put out with him. Well then, it being a matter of that
behoof to every man, to make his future estate sure unto his soul, know this
of a truth (I speak it not as desiring to deceive, but as laboring to
resolve) that there is no more certain course then this, to try thy self and
to examine thy self by this worthy pattern, compounded of so many worthy
examples; assure thy self the liker thou art to them in this Affection, the
nearer art thou to life and happiness, and the less thou art transformed into
this Image, the more of the corrupt old man abides in thee, and if thou hold
on so, when the day comes in which eternal life, shall be shared out unto
those for whom it is prepared, Christ shall dismiss thee with that
comfortless speech which was sometime used to Simon Magus, Act. 8.21.
thou have no part nor fellowship in this business. Let it not be greiuous unto
thee, that I ask thee a few Questions, and be thou persuaded, that it is a
matter that behooves thee much, well to answer them: what is the principal
desire of thy soul? what is the thing which thou most affectest; what is that
which thou do truly think thy self most happy if thou might once obtain?
what is it which has most exercised thy thoughts, and for the procuring
whereof thou have been most pensive? what is it, the discourses and discoueries
whereof, have been with the greatest appetite received by thee? what is it, for
the thinking whereon, thy soul has even languished within thee? speak the
truth in the presence of God who cannot be deluded: Is it the Salvation of thy
soul? is it the forgiveness of thy sins? is it the favor of God in Christ
Jesus? is it to be assured in thy soul that the Handwriting which was against
thee is cancelled, and that there is peace in heaven for thee, and a place
provided in that Kingdom which cannot be shaken? is it that, when this earthly
house of this Tabernacle shall be destroyed, thou may be received into
everlasting habitations? How say thou? Are these things strangers to thy
thoughts, or do they take up a chief room in thy Affections? Are they
deeply apprehended, or are they but slightly and cursorily entertained? Are
thy meditations touching these, settled, and such as hold thee long or are they
but like flying motions, which are as soon vanished as perceived? Though thy
tongue, if thou should now speak for thy self, happily would dissemble,
yet I am sure that if thou talk earnestly with thy conscience, that will not
fllatter thee. Howsoever it be, this I must tell thee, that such as thy desires
are herein such is thy estate: do thou long with David? thou shall be saved
with David. Is salvation (If thou will speak the Truth) lest in thy longing?
then stand forth and hear thy Judgment; thou shall be called the lost in the
Kingdom of God. The longing soul shall be filled, the careless and full gorged
spirits shall be sent empty away. This is the true use of this doctrine.

Howbeit, this be the general use of this point, yet because Ier. 17.9.
the heart of man is deceitful above all things, and there is a Ps. 32.2.
spiritual Guile which cleaves close unto us, so that thou may both make
me believe by protestations, and thy self think by idle persuasions, that
thou truly longest for salvation, when there is no such matter, therefore I
pray thee to pardon my fear, and suffer me to be jealous ever with a godly
jealousy, and to tell thee, which art so ready upon the first hearing of this
point, to answer for thy self, to tell thee I say, that I do much doubt, it is
not so well with thee as thou do suppose. If thou ask a reason of me, why
I should be so hard of belief, as not to credit thee, when thou say and
protestest, that thou longest for salvation, I answer thee, that I am
suspicious, that the ground of true longing is altogether wanting in thee, I
will tell thee what that is, and so leave thee to be thine own judge. It is
this; a lively feeling of thine own wretchedness and misery through sin.
This is the thing which will make a man long to be saved, which will make the
message of the Gospel to be glad tidings: the feeling of sin cannot choose
but bring forth a desire to have the pardon of sin. And indeed, in reason it
must needs be so. For as a man which has offended the law, and is appointed
to death, (ordinarily, except he be a man desperate) would rather have a
pardon, then any thing in the world besides, because without it, he knows he
can have joy in nothing: so he which has offended God, and finds himself in
the rigor of Gods justice, to be the child of death, cannot choose but more
highly prize the favor of God in the remission of his sins, then all the
treasures and riches under heaven. When men are secure, and without feeling of
sin, though the grace of God in Christ, be never so plentifully offered unto
them, yet they esteem it not, it seems to them as a base thing, they regard
it not; but if once a man feel the sting of sin, then he would give the
world for one little drop of Gods mercy. The prodigal son, when he lived at
home with his father, and had meat and drink enough, and knew no want, then
he was weary of his abundance, and would needs adventure further to try a
better fortune: but when he had felt the smart of hunger, he would have been in
the state of one of his fathers hired servants, Luc. 15.19.
Make me as one of thy hired servants. David being well humbled, would take it
in good worth to be a Psalm. 84.10.
door keeper in the house of the Lord: and the poor Canaanitish woman, when
our Savior had well schooled her, was content even with mat. 15.27.
Crummes of mercy. Pro. 27.7.
The person that is full, despises an honey comb (says Solomon) but unto the
hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet. Though a man have formerly been
obstinate and stubborn, and Psa. 50.17.
hating to be reformed, having Is. 48.4.
a neck as an iron sinew, and a brow as brass, yet if he be once brought to
see himself as it were at the brinke, and hell gaping to receive him, and the
eternal weight of Gods displeasure, ready to ceaze upon him, then you shall
find him tractable, mourning like Ephraim, Ier. 31.18.
O Lord convert me, and I shall be converted, yielding meekely with Paul, Act.
9.6.
Lord what will thou that I do? running to the Minister like the people to
Samuel, 1. Sam. 12.19.
O pray to the Lord thy God that I dye not. And they which now count every
Sermon to be the burden of the Lord, and are ready to say to the Seers, See
not, and to Prophets, prophecy not unto us, would then run about us and hang
upon us as they did of old upon Moses, when they saw the glory of Gods majesty,
talk Exodus 20.10.
thou with us and we will hear; they would importune us, and call upon us, as
the rulers of the Sinagogue did upon Paul and Barnabas, Act. 13.15.
that if we have any word of exhortation, we would say on, These would be the
fruits of this feeling, and all shows of longing are but shows, which fetch
not their first beginning from this deep apprehension of the woeful and
distressed estate of a man's own soul. So then, now thou see, there is some
cause that I should be suspicious of thy pretended longing. For if when I look
into thee, if when I confer with thee, if when I observe thy course, I see
thee to be such an one as the greatest part, a man Zeph. 1.12.
Frozen in the dregs, one that Deu. 29.19.
blessest thy self in thy heart, one that know not how thou art poor and
Ro^. 3.17.
wretched and miserable, and blind, and naked, one who stand in no awe of
Gods justice, one whose Ps. 119.120.
flesh trembles not for fear of God, neither art afraid of his judgment, one
that yet understand not what it is to be a sinner, and how Heb. 10.31.^.
fearful a thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God, one that
Mal. 3.14.
deemest it vain to serve God, and a mere folly to be so religious as some
would be: in a word, one 2. Tim. 3.5
who contentest thy self with a show of godliness, without any power of
religion. How should I suppose it possible for thee to long to be saved, when
thou can not tell out of thine own feeling what it is to need salvation?
Shall I think he longs to be cured, who though it may be he is sick, yet
feels it not? Shall I imagine, he desires to be rich, who though he be in
want, yet perceives it not? Reason it self is clean against it. I pray thee
therefore learn this lesson, which though perhaps it may now be learned, yet
it will find thee work for thy life, though thou should live yet many
years. All Gods children long unfeignedly for salvation, if thou have not the
same affection with them, thou can not have the same salvation with them:
thou will say, I know, if thou be asked, O God forbid, I were a wretch if I did
not long to be saved: I pray thee be not deceived: A slight wish to Number. 2^.10.
dye the death of the righteous, as Balaam had, thou may have and yet no
longing. It is a matter longer in coming, then thou, which feel it not, art
yet aware of. Thy heart must first be softened, before salvation can be longed
for: and I tell thee, it is a hard thing to circumcise the heart, and to make
it bleed, it has a skin grown over it, which is not easily removed.
Therefore pray the Lord Number. 20.
which made waters flow out of the rock, to smite thy flintie heart, to Eze.
11.19.
take the stony heart out of thy body, to open thy heart as he did Act. 16.14.
Lydiaes, to put a new spirit within thy bowels, to Reu. 3.18.
annoint thine eyes with eye-salue, that so thou may see and feel thy own
wretchedness, and may feelingly acknowledge with Paul, that in thy Romans
7.18.
Flesh there dwells no goodness, with David, Ps. 38.4.
that thine iniquities are as a weighty burden, too heavy for thee, with
Jacob. Genesis 32.10.
that thou art less then the least of all Gods mercies, with Daniel, Dan 9.7.
that open shame belongs to thee, with Job. ^.3.
Job, that thou can not answer him one thing of a thousand, that so thou
may have, if it be possible, but even a glimpse of that woeful score which
the Lord has against thee, against the day of reckoning, and a taste of the
horror of hell then, and never till then, will thou long to be saved; then, and
never till then, will the mercy of God be sweet unto thee: when thou feel
the intolerable burden of a Pro. 18 14.
wounded spirit, thy soul will Math. 5.6.
thirst after righteousness, and all things will be but Phil. 3.8.
dung unto thee, that thou may win Christ, the ti^ngs of him will make thy
very heart Luc. 1.41.
to leap with in thee, as the greeting of Mary did the babe in the womb of
Elizabeth, they will come down upon thy perplexed soul, Ps. 72.6.
like the rain upon the mowne grass, and as the showers that water the earth.
So much for the first part, David's longing.

The second part.
Now follows the second part, David's love. Thy law is my delight. Many words
of like effect David uses in this Psalm, yet we may not account them any idle
repetitions, but rather repute them as testimonies of abundance of zeal, the
heart of a religious man being like the fire which in the strength thereof
breaks forth into many sparcles, so that also, out of the inward abundance,
bursteth out into many speeches. Touching the thing it self, the matter (you
see) of David's love it is the law. By which word he does not here understand
that part of Gods revealed will, which with a respect and reference had unto
the Gospel, is called the law, the use whereof is (as Paul teaches) to Romans
4.15.
cause wrath, to Romans 3.19.
stop every mouth, that all may be culpable before God; but here it is taken in
a larger sense, for the whole word of God, and for the entire body of the holy
doctrine, which is 2. Tim. 3.16.17.
given by inspiration of God; to make us perfect, unto all good works. This
was that which was David's delight, the joy of his heart, and gladding of his
soul, the very quickening and enliuing of his spirits. And it is by the way
worthy to be observed in David, that still, look what affection he professes
to carry to God himself, the same he also professes to carry to his word: as
he says, he Ps. 116.1.
loves God, so he says also, Ps. 116.97.
he loves his law, ver. 120.
as he fears God, ver. 161.
so his heart stood in awe of the word, as he said, ver. 57.
O Lord that art my portion, so he said ver. 111.
thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever, which is meet to be
noted, both for the better illustration and manefestation of David's heart, and
for the discovery of the idle protestations, which many make, who if they be
dealt with, concerning the true knowledge of God and the way of salvation, will
answer, what tell you me of these things, say what you can, I am sure you can
tell no more but this, that I must love God above all things, etc. And I trust
I shall always love God as well as you, or the best learned. But now here is
their hypocrisy descried, in that they have so small love unto the word. This
by the way, though not unprofitably. David's joining these two together, I long
for salvation, and thy law is my delight, is this, that it is not enough for a
man to say, he longes and desires to be saved, unless he make conscience to
use the appointed means to bring him thereunto. It had been but hypocrisy in
David, to say he longed for salvation, if his conscience had not been able to
witness with him that the law was his delight. It is mere mockery, for a man
to say he longs for bread, and prays to God every day to give him his daily
bread, if he yet either walk in no calling, or else seek to get by fraud and
rapine, not staying himself at all upon Gods providence. Who will imagine that
a man wishes for health, who either despises or neglects the means of his
recovery. God has in his wisdom appointed a lawful means for every lawful
thing: this means, being obediently used, the comfortable obtaining of the
end, may be boldly looked for; the means being not observed, to think to
attain to the end, is mere presumption. God would deliver Noah from the
flood, but Noah Heb. 11.7.
must be moved with reverence, and prepare the Arc, or else he could not have
escaped. He would save Lot from Sodom, but yet Lot Genesis 19.
must hye him out quickly, and not look behind him, till he have recovered
Zoan. Is. 38.21.
He was pleased to cure Hezekiah of the plague, but yet Hezekiah must take a
lump of dry figs, and lay it upon his boil. He vouchsafed to preserve Paul
and his company at sea, Act. 27.31.
yet the mariners must abide in the ship, else ye cannot be safe, says
Paul. The Lord could have done all these things otherwise, but he was not so
pleased, and his power must not be ventured upon, when his will, by appointing
an honest and easy means, is apparent to the contrary. Now that Gods word is
the ordinary and appointed outward means of salvation I hope we doubt it not.
If it were not, why should it be called as it is, Ioh. 6.68.
The word of life, Act. 20.32.
the word of grace, Romans 10.8.
The word of Faith, 1. Pet. 1.23.
The seed of Immortality, The Luc. 11.52.
key of knowledge, Ps. 119.105.
the Lantern of Gods people, Gal. 3.24
the schoolmasters of man kind, the Iam. 1.25.
Glass of our life, Ps. 2.9.
the Scepter of Christ's kingdom, Is 11.4.
the Kingdom of Heaven, the Math 13.
Conuerter of the soul, the Ps. 19.7.8.
Enlightener of the Eyes, 2. Tim. 3.15.
the maker of men wise unto Salvation. I commend you to God (says Paul Act.
20.32.
in his fare well to those of Ephesus) and to the word of his grace: he puttes
both together: 1. Th. 5.19.20.
Quench not the spirit, despise not prophesying: there is the means: 2. Th.
^.15.
standfast, and keep the instructions: that is the way to stand. Ioh. 15.20.
Christ directing his disciples how to preserve their own comfort, when he was
gone from them; lays this special charge upon them. Remember the word that I
said to you. No word, no comfort. O Ps. 119.^^.
(says David) take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth.

This is an excellent point, The use.
worthy to be taken notice of, because it discovers to us the cunning and
sophistry of the devil, which is this: In good things he seuereth the means
from the End, and in evil things he separateth the End from the means. As for
example, in evil things he bears men in hand that they may safely adventure
to use the means of damnation, and go the way that leads to Hell, and yet
for all that, they shall not be damned. He makes a young man believe that he
may rejoice in his youth, and walk in the ways of his heart, and yet for all
that, escape that which Eccl. 11.^.
Solomon says must needs come after, namely, that for all these things God
will bring him to judgment. And yet the Lord has so joined these together,
that neither the subtilty of youth, nor any wit of man, nor all the devils in
hell can not sever them to wit, the Pleasures of sin, and the Judgments of
God. Thus the Devil beguiled our first parents. God has coupled these two,
Eating and dying with an Adamant chain, he which did the one, must needs have
the other, Genesis 3.4.
yet he brought them into this conceit, that they might Eat, and yet not Die.
Oh the world of souls which Satan at this day deceives with this subtilty.
Well, as in Evil he cutteth the End from the Means, he tells thee, thou
may run on in sin, and yet be saved, so in good things he cutteth the
means from the End; He persuades men, that they may be saints in heaven
though they be devils on earth, that they may have the L. salvation, yet never
delight in the L. law: that they may be citizens of the new Jerusalem, and
yet be no new creatures, that they may for ever dwell with God, though his
word do never dwell with them. Hence is it, that many will profess to seek
Gods kingdom, but care not for the righteousness of his kingdom, will cry
with Balaam Number. 23.10.
, Let me die the death of the righteous, but never say with David Ps. 119.5.
, Oh that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes. I beseech you let not
the Devil cozen us any longer, if he have thus hitherto deluded us. Let us not
think to be saved by other means then David was, his way to salvation was
Gods law, if thou leave this way, thou shall never come to that mark. If the
word of God be not sweet unto thee, if it be not to thee, as Jeremy says
Ier, 15.16.
it was to him the joy and rejoicing of thy Heart, thou exercising thy soul
therein, and framing thy heart and life thereto, know it for a certainty, it
is a matter of mere impossibility for thee to be saved. Ephesians. 4.18.
Strangers from the life of God, through Ignorance, says the Apostle. Art thou
a stranger to the word, thou art a stranger to God; Heaven cannot be thy
portion, except thou claim the word as an Heritage. That I may press this
point further, and with the Ier. 23 29.
Hammer of Gods blessed word drive home the nail of this exhortation even to
the Head. Paul says that 2. Tim. 3.13.
evil men wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. Therefore least
we should (as in deed without very great care we will) deceive and beguile our
selves, thinking that we do both long to be saved, and also love the word of
salvation, give me leave to teach you that, which the word of God has taught
me, namely how and by what signs it shall appear, that we do indeed love the
Word, and that the Law is our delight. There is no body almost, but if he be
asked, for shame he will say he loves Gods word, and that he were a very
wretch if he should not. But come to the undeceivable marks and inseperable
signs of this love, The marks of Love to the word of God.
it will then appear that Gods word has but a very few friends.

The first sign of love to the word of God, is, love to the public Ministry
thereof in Gods church: The 1. mark
the reason is plain. He which loves the word unfeignedly, must needs love the
means by which the word shall become most profitable unto him. It is an idle
thing for a man to say he loves the word, and yet not to care to understand
it, not to desire to know it, not to make conscience to apply it. The word of
God is called a Mat. 13.44.
Treasure, of which, if it be kept together in a Hord there is no use. If thou
feed thee, cloth thee, minister to others with thy treasure, then it is used
as it should be: take away this from it, what difference is betwixt it (setting
aside the opinion of a wordly man,) and a thing of nothing? If thou then do
love the treasure of the word, thou will love the dispensing of it, the right
dividing of it, the sharing it out by Gods steward to every man's necessity.
Thou do hear David here say the Law is his delight; in another place thou
shall hear him say Psalm. 26.8. and Ps. 27.4.
that the Habitation of the Lords House is his delight, and protesting, that to
dwell there and to behold the Beauty thereof is his chief desire. And why
(think we) were the Tabernacles of the Lord so dear unto him? was access
thither desired by him as an idle complement? or went he like a Time-seruer to
escape law? or like an Athenian Act. 17.21.
to hear news? Or why went he? Sure his love to the Law, drew him to the
place where they were, which could teach him the Law. It was with him, as it
was with those whom himself speaks of, who going to the Temple had the Ps.
84.5.
Ways of the Lord in their Heart, and as with those, Is. 2.3.
which provoke one another, Come let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, he
will teach us his ways. So then, thou which say thou love Gods word, let
me try thee by this rule: when I look upon thy profession, thou art pretty and
strait without, let me see now, whether thou be also sound within: thou live
in a place where the word of God is diligently and soundly taught, God has
blessed the Congregation of which thou art a member, with a wise steward, Luc.
12.12.
who knows how to give every one his portion of meat in season. How do
thou like this? does it content thee or does it burden thee? do thou thank
for it, or will not thy froward Heart, suffer thee to repute it as a benefit?
Is this Manna as gross unto thy Taste as Horse-bread or Ps. 119.103.
is it more sweet then Honey to thy Mouth? If thou take no comfort in it, if
like the Gaderens, Math. 8.^4.
thou would account it a commodity, if Christ were departed thy coasts, thou
must give me leave to tell thee, thou neither love the word, nor love God,
no nor yet truly love thy own soul. A gain, do thou live in Jericho,
where 2. Kin. 2.19.
the situation is pleasant but the water naught, that is, where there are good
outward commodities, but the true Treasure cannot be had, where when thou
come to Church thou beholdest one, who has got on Elias mantle, but thou
may say to him, where is the spirit of Elias? who is able to say nothing to
thee to rouse thee up, nothing to admonish thee, nothing to comfort thee: How
does this please thee? Art thou well enough satisfied herewith, does thy Heart
never mourn within thee to consider this? Art thou not afraid of Salomons
Rule, Pro. 29.18.
Where there is no vision there the people decay? or do thou groan under
this heavy burden, and does thy soul pant after a better blessing? Look unto
it, count not thy self a Friend to the Word, a Friend to God, a Friend to thy
own soul, if thou art not affected with this Misery. This is the first sign.

The second sign of love to the word, is the private use of it Ps. 119.97.
: O how I love thy Law, it is my Meditation continually. The 2. mark.
There is the Trial of his Love. The reason is manifest; where we love thither
does love draw our affections. The Rich man meditateth of gathering goods,
natural Lovers of their love, ambitious men of their preforments: so the man
of God having no greater riches nor glory then in the word, cannot choose but
meditate in the word. It is but small pleasure, so long as we are in a garden
to be delighted with the smell of Herbs unless we carry of every kind some,
that so we may have some benefit of the garden when we be far from it: So it
is but a flattering Joy, no longer to be affected with the word then we are in
the Church, therefore something must be gathered here, which may work on our
affections when we be gone. He which hears, and joins not this, with his
hearing, is but like a man colored in the sun, so he gets some
superficial knowledge, but it is such as can afford him no comfort. And this
is the cause why there is so much preached and so little practiced, even
because there is so little private exercise. I know there are other private
duties, as Prayer and conference, but I do specially stand upon this, because
this is, the most general, and the most effectual; All cannot read, all
cannot have opportunity to confer, but every man is, or ought to be, master
of his thoughts, to apply to himself that which he hears, and to vow the
obedience of it to the Lord. This is a needful point to be stood upon, either
because it is not known, or it is not practiced. Many may be said to be
sermon-sicke, as there are some said to be sea-sicke. They which are
sea-sicke, as long as they are upon the water, are of a very feeble stomach,
faint, and even (as it were) ready to die; but coming once a land, and having
paused some little time, they begin to forget the trouble, and to recover
their former strength: After the same manner many there are, who being at the
sermon, are tossed to and fro by the power of the word, their hearts are sick,
their consciences melt, and they are much troubled, but when they are gone, and
have a little acquainted themselves with the Air of the world, they forget
what they heard and wherewith they were moved, and return back again to
their ill courses as before. Remember this therefore, if thou will be thought
to love the word, to bestow some private exercising of thine own thoughts, in
and about the word. If a man should be stinted to one meal a week, he would
have a pined body at the weeks end: what shall then become of our souls, if
we think it enough, that they once a week, be fed with the word of God, and
do not give them some other private refreshing.

The third mark.
The third sign of love to the word, is love to the obedience of the word Ioh.
14.25.
. If ye love me (says Christ) keep my commandments: so if we love the
word, we cannot but make conscience to do that which is commanded by the
word. The reason is this. He which truly loves the word, must needs tender
the credit of it, and labor by all means to maintain it. Now it is the
greatest honor to the word of God, that may be, when men which profess it,
are ruled by it, and walk according to it Phil. 1.27.
. Paul commends to the Philippians a conversation which may become the
Gospel. He urges the like three times in one chapter; Tit. 2.5.
sobriety in elder men and women, and subjection and chastity in younger women,
that the word of God be not evil spoken of: ver. 8.
again, gravity and integrity in young men, chiefly in young ministers, that
he which with stands may be ashamed, having nothing to speak evil of ver.
10.
. Thirdly, truth in servants, that they may adorn the doctrine of God our
savior in all things. Now the principal fruit of obedience stands in two
things. The one is, the laboring by often and diligent examination of a man's
self, and earnest prayer unto God, and by observing the checkes of conscience,
to find out what are his especial sins, whereunto he is most inclined, and
to crucify them. This is, Math. 5.29.30.
to pluck out the right eye, and to cut of the right hand; To renounce those
sins, which we think it were some outward inconvenience unto us to forgo.
The other thing in which obedience chiefly stands, is the making conscience
of every sin, and not for by-respects of profit, or pleasure, or reputation,
to retain a secret determination of continuing in some one or more special
evils. Sin is such a canker, that it spreads secretly, and there is such a
chain of sins, that he which pulls one, draws with it a great many.
Grant a little one, and a great one will follow. Wherefore as it is good
wisdom not only to avoid the plague, but even every ragge that may seem to
carry the plague, so it is heavenly wisdom not only to avoid gross sins,
but all such shows of sin, as may beget other sins. This mark is meet to
be urged. First because there be so many hipocrites in the church, many like
the Ephraimites, Iud. 8.1.
who were much offended with Gedeon, because he called not them to the battle
against Midian, they would have had the credit of it: so many would have the
credit of religion, that do not care to bring credit to religion, they would
be thought to be some body, yet make no conscience of their life, or else they
pinch with the Act. 5.
Lord as Ananias, and reform Mar. 6.20.
some things like Herod, but not all. Secondly, there are many profane ones,
whose lives are a blemish and stain unto the gospel, through Romans 2.24.
whom the name of God is blasphemed among papists and enemies to the truth, as
though the gospel did set open a window unto carnal licentiousnes. Remember
this therefore also, to try thy self by this sign, if the credit of the word
be dear unto thee, if thou professing it, labourest to adorn it, then indeed
thou love it, but if thy life be a scandal unto the gospel, and a shame to
religion, thou living more like to a heathen then a Christian, be thy
profession what it will be, thou art an enemy to the word.

The fourth sign of love to the word, The fourth mark.
is hatred of all false religion which is contrary to the word. I Ps. 119.113.
hate vain inventions (says David) and again, I esteem ver. 9.128.
all thy precepts most just, and hate all false ways. We must learn to beware
of a favorable and tolerable and remitting conceit of erroneous doctrine, as
of Popery, etc. It is just with God, to turn a slacknes of zeal against
falsehood, into a professed enmity against his truth: as Saul not punishing
wicked Agag, grew after, to persecute holy and guiltless David.

The fifth mark.
The last sign of our love to the word, is to love it when the profession of it
is most despised. This is noted as a special fruit of David's love. Examine
but this one Psalm. ver. 23.
Princes did sit and speak against me, but thy servant did meditate in thy
statutes. ver. 51.
The proud has had me exceedingly in derision, yet have I not declined from
thy law. ver. 61.
The bands of the wicked have robbed me, but I have not forgotten thy law. ver.
69.
The proud have imagined a lie against me, but I will keep thy precepts with
my whole heart. ver. 110.
The wicked have laid a snare for me, but I swarued not from thy precepts. ver.
141.
I am small and despised, yet do I not forget thy precepts. Here was love. No
injuries could weary him, no contempt discourage him, no slanders daunt him,
no subtle policies or dangers quail him, no cunning allurements could draw
him from the true worship of God, this was an infallible token, that unfeignedly
he loved the law. It is a rare blessing, when Religion is generally hated,
even then to love religion: when manners are every where corrupted then to be of
good conversation: to live uprightly with Noah, Genesis 6.9.2.
when all flesh had corrupted his way, to live justly with Lot, in the midst of
the filthy Sodomites, to keep pure religion with Eliah, when none can be found
that has not bowed to Baal. Many can be content with Jacobs vow, Genesis 28.20.
the Lord shall be their God, if he will give them bread to eat, and clothes
to put on, but are loath to endure any hardship for the Gospel. Genesis 25.22.
Rebecca being barren desired children, but when she was conceived, and the
children strove together within her, then was she troubled, and said, Why am I
thus? So there be some, who wish to be religious, but when they feel some
burden to the flesh to go with it, eftsoons they are weary. Well then, he
that will adventure his life, credit and reputation for the word, he loves the
word. These be the chief signs of love. And so much touching David's love.

FINIS.

